Unpacking the toolbox of two-dimensional nanostructures derived from nanosphere templates  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9MH00065H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9MH00065H
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1380-1408Unpacking the toolbox of two-dimensional nanostructures derived from nanosphere templates

        
          
            Yujie 
            Ke†
a, 
      
        
          
            Shunsheng 
            Ye†
b, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Hu
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shancheng 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bai 
            Yang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Junhu 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Long
          
          
        
      *ad
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798, Singapore. E-mail: longyi@ntu.edu.sg
bState Key Lab of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: zjh@jlu.edu.cn
cSchool of Physics, Northwest University, Xi’an, 710069, P. R. China
dSingapore-HUJ Alliance for Research and Enterprise (SHARE), Nanomaterials for Energy and Energy-Water Nexus (NEW), Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE), 1 Create Way, 138602, Singapore
Received 
      14th January 2019
    , Accepted 10th April 2019First published on 10th April 2019AbstractControlled fabrication of micro-/nanostructures has been a long-standing research focus. The surface patterning technique via templates consisting of monolayer nanospheres is well recognized as an efficient, reliable, and inexpensive method to fabricate two-dimensional (2D) structural arrays. Recent rapid development in the synthesis of 2D patterned nanostructures via this method has led to diverse configurations, intriguing structure-induced properties, as well as novel functionalities for a broad range of applications. This review systematically summarizes the recent progress in 2D nanostructures from fabrications to applications. Particular emphasis is put on the rational design of structure-related functionalities for different applications. The diverse configurations derived from monolayer colloidal crystal templates are firstly introduced. Then, we classify the applications by discussing how the properties are benefited from the well-controlled nanostructures. We conclude the review by elaborating the promising functionalities in specific applications including sensors, solar cells, light-emitting diodes, field-effect transistors, photocatalysis, surface-enhanced Raman scattering, biological manipulation techniques, smart windows, photodetectors, transparent electronic devices, triboelectric nanogenerators, and so on, followed by perspectives on potential challenges and the future development.
Yujie Ke
Yujie Ke obtained his BEng and Master degrees from Wuhan Institute of Technology, China, in 2013 and the University at Buffalo, the State University of New York (SUNY-Buffalo), US, in 2015, respectively. Currently, he is a PhD candidate in Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore. His research interest includes micro-/nanoscale fabrication and related applications.
Shunsheng Ye
Shunsheng Ye is currently a postdoctor at the Department of Macromolecular Science, Fudan University. He received his PhD degree in chemistry from Jilin University under the supervision of Prof. Junhu Zhang and Prof. Bai Yang in 2017. His recent research interests include directed assembly and interfacial self-assembly of plasmonic nanoparticles and their applications in diverse fields.
Junhu Zhang
Junhu Zhang is currently a professor in the State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials. He received his PhD degree in chemistry from Jilin University under the supervision of Prof. Bai Yang. His recent research interests focus on biomimetic and functional microstructures on surfaces and interfaces, and their application on functional surfaces and devices.
Yi Long
Yi Long is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at NTU. She obtained her PhD degree from the University of Cambridge, UK. She has successfully implemented technology transfer from lab to industry for a hard-disk Company and a car grooming Company. Her recent research is to develop thin-film coatings and micro/nanostructures for functional devices.
1. Introduction
Rational design and fabrication of micro-/nanostructures are fundamental to modern technologies and crucial for commercial applications due to the strong structure–property correlation.1,2 As an important building block unit, two-dimensionally (2D) ordered arrays, including 2D ordered nanostructural arrays, surface-patterned nanostructures, and free-standing 2D patterned films have been paid considerable attention because of their promising application in extensive areas.3 It is interesting that the properties of these 2D ordered arrays are strongly dependent on their feature structures, allowing great possibilities of tuning their properties via controllable growth and fabrication methods. Some reported fabrication methods have focused on surface patterns on the micro-/nanoscale, such as dip-pen lithography,4,5 electron beam lithography,6–8 nano/microcontact printing,9–11 photolithography,12,13 and so on.14–16 Though many of them can fabricate the high-quality morphological arrays, they are limited by some weak points such as the low throughput, high cost, tedious procedure, and so on. For example, electron beam lithography and dip-pen lithography require expensive precision operating systems, such as a focus electron beam system or an atomic force microscope, limiting their application universality for extensive fields. In contrast, the surface patterning technique using colloidal templates is recognized as an efficient, inexpensive, fast, and facile method to make large area 2D microstructural arrays.17–20 This method is characterized by masks consisting of arrayed monolayer nanospheres which are commonly made of silica or polymers and are assembled into periodic arrays through interfacial and convective self-assembly methods.21 It is also called “natural lithography”, “nanosphere lithography”, or “colloidal lithography” due to its assembly feature.22–25
So far, diverse 2D micro-/nanostructures made of various materials have been successfully produced via nanosphere templates. A variety of materials, including metals, semiconductors, and organic molecules, were explored on some certain substrates, such as silica-, silicon-, and polymer-based surfaces. The library of nanostructural morphologies has been significantly enriched in the past few decades. A variety of morphologies were successfully developed, including simple geometries of nanotips, nanonets and so on,26–33 as well as complex binary and ternary arrays.21,34–40 Similar to other patterning methods, the produced nanostructures or patterns inherit the geometric features of lattice structures and periodicity from the masks. Commonly, nanospheres ranging from 200 nm to several microns were used, resulting in the same periodicity and a precise geometric feature control that can be scaled down to sub-100 nm. The technique of oxygen plasma etching can be used to shape the polymer-based templates further.31,41–44 In addition, the colloidal templates are easily removed. For example, a hexagonal-patterned polystyrene sphere monolayer is one of the most used colloidal masks as it can be easily removed by solvent washing, peeling off, or high-temperature annealing.45,46 Here, we would like to refer to several comprehensive review works that focus on the preparation of 2D nanostructures via nanosphere templates.18–20,47,48
2D nanostructures with controllable geometric structures exhibit attractive structure-dependent properties and have aroused interest in extensive explorations in a broad range of applications. These 2D nanostructures have experienced a rapid development in the last decade. One of the most investigated fields is their optical properties and related applications. For example, sub-wavelength nanostructure arrays can promote the transmittance of electromagnetic waves (antireflection) by generating an index gradient between two media. This has been widely applied in the fields of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), solar cells, smart windows, and so on. Besides, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and structure-induced photonic bandgaps (PBGs) are also extensively studied in these arrayed nanostructures and widely applied in sensors, surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), solar cells, smart windows, and so on. In addition, 2D arrays offer a larger surface area than the planar ones, allowing a series of properties, including the promotion of wettability, increased active reaction sites, as well as enhanced roughness-induced friction. These properties contribute to the applications of photocatalysis, smart windows, triboelectric nanogenerators, sensors, and so on.
In this review, we systematically summarize the recent progress in nanosphere-templated materials from fabrication to applications with particular emphasis on the recent progress in their applications (Fig. 1). Particular emphasis is put on the rational design of structure-correlated functionality for each application (Fig. 1). We start with the briefing of the diverse configurations derived from monolayer colloidal crystal templates. Then, we classify the properties by discussing how the various properties benefit from the well-controlled nanostructures and elaborating the promising functionalities in specific applications including sensors, solar cells, LEDs, field effect transistors (FETs), photocatalysis, SERS, biological manipulation techniques, smart windows, photodetectors, transparent electron devices, triboelectric nanogenerators and so on (Fig. 1). Finally, we provide a perspective on the future development in this area.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the diverse properties and applications derived from the toolbox of 2D nanostructures derived from nanosphere templates. The property and application are distinguished by the red and blue hexagons, respectively. 
2. Template preparation and emerging structures
Controllable synthesis of 2D nanosphere templates (also called “colloidal crystals” or “colloidal templates”) and various kinds of intriguing structures emerging from 2D colloidal crystals have been reviewed by several previous review articles.18–20,47,49–59 Therefore, in this section, we will only give a brief summary about the template preparation, covering some of the most recent advances in this field. A typical 2D colloidal crystal template comprises an array of monodisperse colloidal spheres with diameters ranging from hundreds of nanometers to several micrometers. The colloidal spheres are commonly made of silica and polymers, e.g., polystyrene (PS) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). Additionally, microgel and hybrid microgel spheres have drawn much attention in recent years and have also been employed as building blocks of 2D colloidal crystals for further applications.60–73
The library of template structures has been significantly enriched in the last decade. Generally, the commonly used template structures can be classified as (a) close-packed, (b) non-close-packed, and (c) bilayer nanosphere templates, as well as (d) bilayer templates which are templates composed of two kinds of nanospheres with different sizes (Fig. 2a). Moreover, the diversity can be further enriched by, for example, (a) preparing on surfaces with pre-patterned structures, (b) preparing on curved surfaces, and (c) even directly patterning the templates on substrates for hierarchical designs (Fig. 2a). Much more complex templates may also be achieved by integrating two or several methods mentioned above, which are not enumerated here and can be referred to in several reviews that put significantly more focus on the preparation of nanosphere templates.18–20,47,49–59
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the commonly used methods for the preparation of the nanosphere templates, including the planar convective assembly, dip-coating, spin-coating, electrophoretic deposition, and interfacial-assembly. (b) Illustration of the diverse templates, which can be classified as close-packed, non-close-packed, binary, and bilayer templates, as well as the templates on a patterned surface, on a curved surface, and in a patterned array. 
Thus far, a number of assembly strategies have been developed, of which generally three mechanisms are employed. Assembly of nanospheres based on solvent evaporation is one of the most common mechanisms. More specifically, a solution with well-dispersed nanospheres is pre-prepared and coated on substrates with careful control of the solvent evaporation process. Thus, the nanospheres are driven to assemble on the air–liquid interface where the maximum evaporation happens. In this process, the evaporation speed has to be carefully controlled to eliminate the formation of multiple layers and non-continuous films. Based on the mechanism, strategies have been developed, such as the commonly used planar convective assembly, dip-coating, spin-coating, and so on (Fig. 2b). Assembly on interfaces is another common mechanism. In this mechanism, nanospheres are confined on the interface to easily form a monolayer. Air–liquid interfaces are widely applied because they are simple and reliable, e.g., the water–air interface was demonstrated to be very efficient for the assembly of monolayer PS nanospheres (Fig. 2b). Compared to air–liquid interfaces, liquid–liquid interfaces are also efficient but are relatively less used, which may be due to the involved complex processes and sophisticated equipment. The third mechanism can be described as the assembly in an electric or a magnetic field. In these cases, the nanospheres are driven by either electric or magnetic fields unidirectionally to finally assemble on the target substrates. The utilization of electrophoretic deposition is a typical example (Fig. 2b). Strategies based on this mechanism may require certain equipment and significant efforts are needed to avoid the formation of multiple layers.
Toward bringing the 2D colloidal crystal-templated materials into real-world applications, the priority is to prepare large-area, high-quality 2D colloidal crystals at low cost and high efficiency. Nevertheless, the scaling-up of highly ordered 2D colloidal crystals, single crystals in particular, is still of great challenge to meet the needs of industrial-scale mass production. Only a handful of previous research studies have claimed the capability of synthesizing high-quality 2D colloidal crystals with large areas. Here we give three representative examples. Jiang and co-workers firstly reported the fast fabrication of non-close-packed (NCP) monolayer silica colloidal crystals with high crystalline quality and wafer-scale size using a simple spin-coating technique (Fig. 3a and b).74,75 A viscous mixture of silica colloids, a monomer and a photoinitiator was used for the spin-coating process. The ordered arrangement can be assembled by shear force and the subsequent photopolymerization leads to NCP colloidal crystals embedded in a polymer matrix which can be selectively removed by oxygen plasma etching for the subsequent templating procedures. This scalable process is compatible with the standard semiconductor microfabrication. Recently, Park et al. introduced a quick, simple, and inexpensive route to assemble spherical spheres into single-crystal monolayers by unidirectionally rubbing the dry powder of colloidal spheres between two rubbery substrates (Fig. 3c–f).76 By optimizing the adhesion energy of the substrates, the rubbing speed, and the normal pressure, single-crystal monolayers can be routinely prepared over large areas on both flat and curved surfaces. More recently, Ye and co-workers demonstrated a low-cost micropropulsive injection (MPI) method based on the self-assembly of colloidal nanospheres at the water–air interface and the subsequent transfer process.77 They claimed that well-organized 2D colloidal crystals with large areas, even beyond the size of a few square meters, can be fabricated through careful control of several key parameters, including contact states between the injectors and the water surface, injection speed, injector number, nanosphere concentration, and so forth. Besides, this process presents a mass-production throughput of 250–3000 wafers per h, which is compatible with the high-volume photovoltaic manufacturing (Fig. 3g and h).
 Fig. 3  (a) Wafer-scale NCP silica 2D colloidal crystals made by spin-coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2006, AIP Publishing LLC. (b) Typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of NCP silica 2D colloidal crystals prepared by spin-coating. The upper inset showing a higher-magnification image and the bottom inset showing a Fourier transform of a 40 μm × 40 μm region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration showing the rubbing process. (d) Photography of the resulting monolayer assembly of PS beads (1 μm in diameter) on the entire surface (20 cm × 20 cm) of the poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) rubber substrate. (e) Monolayer particle assembly processed by rubbing on a glass bottle and a 100 mL flask. The glassware had been coated with PDMS before the particles were rubbed. (f) Wafer-scale single-crystal monolayer of closely packed particles formed by repeated unidirectional rubbing and micropatterning of the colloidal monolayer. Inset: Diffraction pattern obtained by projecting a commercial laser pointer through the monolayer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (g and h) Photographs of PS 2D colloidal crystals prepared by the micropropulsive injection method on (g) 36 wafers and (h) a 1 m2 glass substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Among the various kinds of micro-/nano-fabrication methods, 2D colloidal crystal templating distinguishes itself with its exceptional compatibility with a variety of preparation technologies, including dry/wet etching, physical/chemical vapor deposition, solution growth, self-assembly, electrochemical/electroless deposition, solution/sol dipping deposition, polymerization, soft lithography, photolithography, and so forth.18–20,50,52,58 It is worth mentioning that not only the 2D colloidal crystals themselves but their derivative architectures can also serve as templates or masks for patterning materials. As a result, numerous structures with diverse morphologies have been successfully prepared, from discrete particles of different shapes (e.g., dots, triangles, disks, rings, crescents, and so on), to one-dimensional structures (e.g., wires, pillars, tubes, rods, etc.), to patterned two-dimensional surfaces and films (e.g., holes, pores, cones, bowls, wells, etc.), to three-dimensional porous networks and hierarchical architectures. The geometric parameters of these structures, such as periodicity, diameter, height, and so on, can be readily adjusted through the control of sphere diameter and other fabrication conditions, which makes it easy to study their size-dependent properties. In addition to various morphologies, the materials of these 2D colloidal crystal-templated structures also cover a wide spectrum, including metals, metal oxides, semiconductors, (bio)macromolecules, carbon materials, ceramics, and so on.18–20,49,50,52–54,56,58,78 The abundance in morphology and constitutive materials has given birth to a lot of fascinating properties, functions, and applications, which are the main points in the following parts.
3. Properties
3.1 Antireflection
Antireflective surfaces with 2D nanostructure arrays have aroused great interest and were extensively studied due to the enhancement of light transmission, capturing of more incident light to promote the performances of optical and electro-optical devices in practice. The nanostructure-induced antireflection is typically observed in insect compound eyes that consist of periodic nipple arrays with a sub-wavelength nanostructure (Fig. 4a).79 Generally, these arrays can eliminate the abrupt refractive index gap on the interface by providing a continuous refractive index gradient (Fig. 4b).80
 Fig. 4  (a) The high-magnification photograph of compound eyes of Calliphora and the SEM image of its ommatidium surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2003, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematics of (1) light propagation through the nanostructure array and (2) its refractive index gradient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM images of the silicon (1) nanocone and (2) nanowire arrays. (d) The photograph of samples of the silicon thin film, nanowires, and nanocones. (e) Absorption spectra of these three samples at a normal incident angle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (f) The photograph of (left) the planar silica substrate and (right) the substrate with double-sided nanocone arrays. (g) Transmittance spectra of the planar, single-sided, and double-sided silicon samples. Insets are the illustrations of these three samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH. 
With regard to antireflective surface fabrication, lithography based on monolayer colloidal templates is demonstrated as a powerful technique for various materials.83,84 For instance, antireflective surfaces based on silicon and silica were produced by applying monolayer colloidal crystals as etching masks.85 The silicon nanopillar arrays displayed broadband antireflection, a reflection as low as 2.5% over visible to near-infrared (NIR) spectrum. Compared with nanowires (Fig. 4c), silicon nanocone arrays with a more gradual change in refractive index showed better reflection suppression, which suggested the necessity for a gradual reduction of refractive index on the interface for antireflective surfaces (Fig. 4d and e).81,86 On the other hand, Yang and co-workers developed a simple and time-efficient way to prepare silica cone arrays on fused silica via colloidal sphere lithography and demonstrated that the sample with double-sided nanocone surfaces displayed a better antireflection performance than the planar and single-sided ones (Fig. 4f and g).82 Beyond widely studied silicon and silica, composite-based antireflective surfaces have attracted significant research interest more recently. Si3N4-coated SiC nanodome arrays were successfully prepared by a reactive ion etching (RIE) process with a monolayer nanosphere mask followed by a thin film deposition process.87 The coated array presented a reduced reflectance as low as 0.99% in the visible range (390–785 nm), while it was 20.5% in the plain sample. As a result, a fluorescence enhancement of 138% was observed on SiC. Considerable photoluminescence enhancement was achieved on Al/CdS/SiO2 composites.88 An interesting hierarchical structure consisting of perforated domed Ag/polystyrene was produced by applying RIE with a monolayer colloidal template twice.89 This plasmonic antireflection surface presented a broadband omnidirectional antireflection that is a reflection of 0.6% over the spectrum of 400–1000 nm under normal view and a lower reflection of 0.05% under an oblique incidence angle. Electric field simulation confirmed that both the plasmonic absorption and diffractive losses contributed to the low reflection property.
Omnidirectional antireflection was achieved by Yang and co-workers.90 Inspired by leafhoppers, they produced intricate brochosome-like architectures through bilayer colloidal templates, and demonstrated that such coatings displayed low reflectance for a wide range of incident angles varying from 8 to 45°. They further produced silica-based hierarchic nanocap arrays using templates with two different sizes of nanospheres,91 which also exhibited omnidirectional antireflection with a <2.5% reflectance at an incident angle of 60°.
Among numerous preparation methods toward antireflective surfaces, the method using colloidal templates demonstrates highly reproducible, facile, and efficient traits. We keep the discussion short by outreaching to several reviews that presented more insightful and comprehensive views on antireflection.80,92 With the fast development in this field, low-cost, high-performance, and multifunctional antireflective surfaces based on colloidal templates are expected.
3.2 Photonic band gap
Photonic crystals (PCs) are a significant class of chromotropic materials consisted of periodic dielectrics, which induce PBGs to forbid propagation of certain wavelengths of light. By adjusting the periodicity, dielectric constant, configuration etc., PBGs can be tuned to selectively forbid propagation of specific wavelengths to produce distinct structural colors. Among the numerous fabrication methods, the template-assisted method based on self-assembly of colloidal crystals is intensively studied. The synthesis–structure–property relationships of colloidal-lithography-based photonic crystals (PCs) with periodicity down to the sub-micron range are well developed.
The PBG identified as the reflection peak in an optical spectrum (so-called “stop band”) usually can be characterized as the transmittance valley on an optical spectrum. In 2D PCs, its position mainly depends on three parameters: the medium refractive index, the lattice parameter, and the filling factor.96 For example, in 2D ZnO hollow half-shell arrays, a transmittance valley red-shift from 500 to 540 nm was observed with increasing shell thickness of ZnO from 110 to 260 nm.97 Under fixed shell thickness, increasing the colloidal sphere size also caused the stop band shift to a longer wavelength. Similar phenomena were found on Ni(OH)2 hollow sphere arrays, where the size of the hollow spheres and the shell thickness could fine tune the forbidden band positions, respectively.98 Qi and co-workers investigated the PBG of Ag2S nanonets (Fig. 5a) and found a linear relationship between the lattice parameter and the stop band position on Ag2S nanonets (Fig. 5b).93 In addition, structure-induced PBGs were also demonstrated on hexagonally patterned carbon nanotubes (CNTs) (Fig. 5c), which displayed an iridescent color while showing a dark appearance in the bulk (Fig. 5d).94 Moreover, a single CNT could also be vertically aligned as 2D PCs through the predeposited periodic catalyst of Ni nanodots.99 Recently, responsive 2D PCs have attracted increasing interest. A promising way is to construct 2D periodic nanostructures using phase transition materials. Vanadium dioxide (VO2) exhibits thermo-induced metal–insulator transitions, accompanied by a large change in the infrared transmittance. This material was coated on 2D hexagonally-close-packed silica nanospheres (Fig. 5e) to fabricate 2D SiO2/VO2 PCs, which generated the stop band in the visible range while was dynamically responsive to the surrounding temperature in the near-infrared range (Fig. 5f).95 The method separated the optical controls in the visible and near-infrared ranges by the structure and the temperature, respectively. Another way is by applying an electrochemical process. TiO2 changes to LixTiO2 in a reversible way during the intercalation/deintercalation process of lithium ions (Li+). Yahia Djaoued et al. utilized this process to fabricate electrochromic devices by constructing a sandwiched structure composed of an indium tin oxide (ITO)/Li+ conducting layer/TiO2 inverse opal/ITO configuration.100 The absorption edge shift was observed from 337 to 422 nm upon coloration at 3.5 V. This study might provide an inspiration for dynamically tuning the stop band on 2D PCs derived from colloidal templates.
 Fig. 5  (a) Transmittance spectra of the Ag2S nanonet arrays with different pitch size from 500–1000 nm, determined by the colloidal crystal monolayer (CCM) particle diameter. (b) The PBG position (λ) versus the CCM particle diameter. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of the patterned CNT arrays. (d) The photograph of the CNTs with and without patterning on a polycarbonate substrate. The patterned CNT arrays on the top display colorful appearance due to coherent diffraction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e) Photographs of the samples with monolayered silica nanosphere arrays on quartz substrates. Diameters of the silica nanospheres are 400, 600, and 700 nm from figures on the top to the bottom. (f) Calculated transmittance spectra of the monolayered SiO2–VO2 core–shell nanosphere arrays with nanosphere diameters of 400–700 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In regard to 2D patterned nanostructures based on colloidal templates, the synthesis was intensively studied across various materials from metals to semiconductors. This facile and reliable method is expected to be a promising technique in the future study of PCs.
3.3 Surface plasmon resonance
As a fundamental excitation of condensed matter, surface plasmons (SPs) have aroused interest in in-depth investigations of fundamental properties for both localized plasmons and propagation plasmon polaritons, providing insight into novel electro-optical device designs and applications.101 Localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs) can be excited in isolated or discrete metal nanostructures.102 In contrast, surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), which are electro-magnetic waves propagating along continuous metal–dielectric interfaces, can be excited on nanoscale metallic gratings.103 The plasmon energy and its dispersion characteristics relative to the configuration on the nanoscale are critical for plasmonic investigations. As a versatile nanofabrication technique, lithography based on colloidal templates offers an efficient platform to study SPRs.
The LSPR is a signature optical property of noble metal nanoparticles. It occurs when the light with a certain wavelength strikes a metallic nanoparticle, causing the collective oscillation of conduction electrons.104 Noble metal nanocrystals with a size range from 20 to a few hundred nanometers exhibit distinct extinction enhancements, presenting as extinction peaks in the visible or IR regions of the spectrum. Van Duyne's group pioneered the study of LSPR on colloidal-templated Ag nanoparticles.24,25 They reported the precise change in extinction peak positions from the visible to NIR range by changing a number of parameters including the size, shape, interparticle spacing, nanoparticle–substrate interaction, and the surrounding medium. Crescent-shaped Au nanohole antennas were produced and observed with a local field enhancement on its sub-10 nm tip.105 Moreover, Yang et al. developed binary and ternary patterns using colloidal templates by controlling the plasma etching and thermal treatment processes.106 Due to the complex patterning, multiple LSPR peaks were detected on one sample and their positions were individually shifted according to the excitation angle.
The SPP is a transverse magnetic polarized optical surface wave (typically a visible or infrared wavelength) that propagates, for example, along a flat metal–dielectric interface.107 Structures supporting SPPs include plain films and stripes, holes, corrugations, curved surfaces on nanocrystals and so on. Thus, the physical property of interfaces is a significant parameter for SPPs. With regard to this, Wang et al. achieved the tuning of the SPP property on patterned Au films deposited on top of hexagonal-close-packed polystyrene sphere monolayers.108 They observed a clear transition from the localized to extended SPP mode upon increasing the deposition thickness of Au films. The delocalized SPs were also observed by introducing Au films with elastomeric substrates such as PDMS.109 In addition, it was demonstrated that the SPP mode could coexist with the waveguided mode induced by the 2D photonic structures suggested by Li and co-workers.112 They clearly depicted multiple optical resonance modes on a hybrid plasmonic–photonic structure composed of inverse opal silica monolayers coated on plain Au films.
Based on the colloidal template method, diverse plasmonic nanostructures were developed and displayed a series of potential applications. The group of Zhang successfully produced a series of Ag-based nanostructures via colloidal templates, including arrays of nanoholes,113,114 nanowells,110 nanocrescents,115 nanorings,116 and graded structures.117 These plasmonic Ag structures found applications in plasmonic sensors and color generation.110,113,114 For example, they prepared the controlled fabrication of Ag nanowell arrays via colloidal templates (Fig. 6a) and investigated the electric field distributions (Fig. 6b). They demonstrated that the coupling between Bragg wave SPP and Raleigh anomalies occurs and significantly contributes to the narrowing of the linewidth. They further demonstrated that the position of reflectance dip is responsive to the surface reflective index change (Fig. 6c), which can be applied as a plasmonic sensor, for example, to detect the capture of the antibody.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of Ag nanowell arrays and the cross-section of the nanowells (x–z plane). (b) The time-averaged electric field distribution on the x–z plane of the Ag nanowells with an incident light of λ = 512 nm. (c) Normalized reflectance spectra of the nanowells in a series of solutions with different reflective indexes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the fabrication process of VO2 nanoparticle arrays. (e) Temperature-dependent extinction spectra of the VO2 nanoparticle array, which displays an LSPR switch-on property at elevated temperatures. (f) Effects of the particle diameter of VO2 and the medium reflective to the LSPR position. Insets are the SEM images of the VO2 nanoparticle arrays with diameters of 67, 125, 287 nm, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Beyond the conventional noble metals, emerging plasmonic nanomaterials including semiconductors and metal oxides have attracted increasing interest.118,119 SPRs on these nanocrystals were also demonstrated to strongly correlate with the size, shape, surrounding medium and so on.120 In this regard, Yang et al. explored the SPR on 2D patterned Al nanostructures by a bottom-up colloidal-template-assisted method.121 They developed various structures including dome-rings, disks, and rings that displayed the plasmonic colors from green to blue to pink. These colors were demonstrated to come from the reflection induced by the complex resonant modes among the structures. Moreover, the SPRs on semiconductors and metal oxides presented distinct behaviors that were not revealed on noble metals. An interesting example is reported on VO2, being well-known for its metal–insulator transition (MIT) at a critical temperature (∼68 °C). Recently, the LSPR was observed on its metal phase (above 68 °C) while quenched on the insulator phase (below 68 °C).122,123 The group of Long detailed the LSPR during the MIT on 2D periodic VO2 nanoparticle arrays (Fig. 6d).111 On thermo-hysteresis, both the LSPR intensity and position were observed to be tuned reversibly. In the heating procedure, its intensity increased gradually accompanied by a red-shift of the peak position (Fig. 6e), of which the temperature range typically matched the range of transition from the insulating to the metallic states. Similar to other plasmonic structures, these particle arrays also exhibited a size- and reflective index-dependent LSPR shift (Fig. 6f).
In summary, colloidal-template patterning with high efficiency and flexibility presents a promising platform to explore the structure–property relationship as well as practical applications of SPRs. In the future, diverse nanostructures and materials derived from the colloidal-template method are expected to give rise to more new physical phenomena.
3.4 Wettability
Wettability, a centuries-old concept, is significant to numerous fields from biological processes to engineering and industrial technologies. This concept has been rediscovered in the past few decades, largely attributed to a new understanding of the mechanisms inspired by the wetting phenomena in nature.126 Generally, the wettability of a surface depends on two parameters: (a) the configuration of nanostructures and (b) the physical and chemical properties of materials. It was revealed that micro-/nano-hierarchical structures play an important role in determining the wettability properties. Also, the arrangement and orientation of these structures may control the wetting state. According to the Wenzel model, surface roughness can largely change the wettability that is to change hydrophilicity to superhydrophilicity and hydrophobicity to superhydrophobicity. The superhydrophilic and superhydrophobic properties of a liquid on a roughness-enhanced surface are determined by the intrinsic wetting threshold of the liquid, also known as the intrinsic contact angle on an ideal surface.
In this regard, the colloidal-template method is a promising candidate for the fabrication of surfaces with superwettability. Because the solid surfaces fabricated via colloidal templates display high controllability of structures over the micro- to nano-range as well as the relatively low requirement for the intrinsic physical and chemical properties of target materials, which make diverse structures and materials applicable. So far, a great number of superwettability surfaces have been explored.127 For example, inspired by the superhydrophobicity of the compound eyes of mosquito, Jiang's group developed a hierarchical structure made of closed packed silica nanospheres on HCP PDMS micro-hemispheres.128 This artificial compound-eye analog presents decent superhydrophobicity as well as a self-cleaning behavior in humid habitat. Monolayer colloidal nanospheres with surface modifications by Ag nanoparticles (NPs) or CNTs were also demonstrated to have superhydrophobicity.129,130 An Ag NPs/PS-coated glass tube displayed remarkable supporting force on the water surface that remain floating when supporting 4.3 times the weight of itself. Beyond the direct usage of monolayer colloidal nanospheres for structures targeting wettability, colloidal templates were also successfully applied to a number of materials including Si,85 Co3O4,131 ZnO,132 poly-4-vinyl pyridine (P4VP),133 and so on. For example, Li and co-workers found that colloidal-templated Co3O4 hierarchical nanorod arrays via a colloidal-template-assisted pulsed laser deposition (PLD) process exhibited stable superhydrophilicity lasting for half a year without ultraviolet (UV) irradiation.131 Moreover, they achieved the tuning of wettability by surface modification with fluoroalkylsilane from superhydrophilic to superhydrophobic accompanied by a water contact angle change from 5° to 154°.134 By applying two-step micro/nanosphere lithography, Park et al. developed an interesting SiO2 hierarchical structure composed of nanorod arrays on top of microrod arrays, presenting an optimized contact angle of 160°.135 Ordered scallion-like ZnO arrays were prepared by Xu et al. through hydrothermal growth of ZnO on colloidal patterned ZnO seeds.132 The superhydrophobic property (water contact angle was larger than 150°) was demonstrated on the ZnO array after the hydrophobic surface coating. Recently, the group of Zhang developed anisotropic wetting based on the asymmetric nanostructures made of Janus silicon cylinder arrays.136 The two sides of cylinders are modified by molecules with distinct surface energies (Fig. 7a), which could be applied as microfluidics to control the flow direction in microchannels (Fig. 7b).124 These arrays can also control the wetting behavior of water or oil liquid under a series of media, including oil, water, and air.137 Combining the colloidal templates with the inclined reactive ion etching, geometric gradients of graded silicon cones are produced on a slide (Fig. 7c), which can serve as a wettability “library” to study anisotropic wetting surfaces.125
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the anisotropic wetting surface for liquid direction in microfluidics. The surface consists of chemistry-asymmetric “Janus” silicon cylinder arrays with hydrophobic (–R) and hydrophilic (–OH) coating on each side. (b) Photographs of the liquid behavior in the T shape microchannel. The top and bottom outlets are along the hydrophilic and hydrophobic directions. The arrows indicate the liquid flow directions; surface tension of the injected liquid is illustrated below the images. The scale bar is 1 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the wettability “library” consisting of gradient silicon cone arrays and the contact measurements of sessile droplets on a different position of the “library”. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
In this field, most conventional studies of colloidal-templates focus on optimizing the superwettability. However, exploration of its applications is still at the early stage considering that the emerging applications of superwettability surfaces extend to anti-icing, anti-fogging, liquid–liquid separation, sensors, printing and so on.126 Thus, the explorations of the 2D-colloidal-template method on wettability targeting extensive applications are expected.
4. Applications
4.1 Chemical and biological sensors
The topic of chemical and biological sensors is one of the most studied applications of colloidal-templated 2D nanostructures. An ideal chemical or biological sensor possesses two fundamental characteristics: (a) high selectivity and (b) appropriate sensitivity to the analyte concentrations of interest. Meanwhile, additional characteristics also have attracted growing interest such as the rapid response, the portable design, low cost, the easy sample preparation process, signal visualization, good durability, and so on. The design and utilization of 2D nanostructure arrays for sensors mainly rely on the structure-induced optical properties from PBG to plasmonics (SPR/SPP). Emerging efforts were also put to non-optical-based sensors. This part summarizes recent progress in the field by classifying based on the different mechanisms.
SPR on a certain nanomaterial is responsive to the reflective index change induced by the surrounding medium near its surface. Based on such a response, chemicals that are close to the plasmonic materials can be detected as the SPR shifting signal in a spectrum. A typical example is the hybrid plasmonic-PCs composed of 2D PS nanospheres on a flat Au surface reported by Braun and co-workers.138 On the hybrid nanostructure, both the photonic and plasmonic propagating resonance modes were demonstrated to be of high quality with factors exceeding 100. Sensors based on such nanostructures presented atomic layer sensitivity to detect ethanol in the gas phase via its physisorption on the sensor surface. Another example is a surface-modified 2D ordered porous Ag film.139 The Ag film with its surface modified by biotin was proved to efficiently detect captured avidin, presenting a remarkable trough shift in the reflectance spectrum. SPP is also very sensitive to the surrounding reflective index. Using colloidal templates, the group of Ren successfully narrowed down the resonance linewidth to 3 nm to reduce the radiative loss, achieving an extremely high value of figure of merit.140
Sensors based on the PBG change commonly relied on the local reflective index change and more importantly the pitch size change of the periodic nanostructures. Based on the sensitivity of PBG to the local reflective index, the group of Qi further demonstrated a biological sensor to detect avidin based on such a local reflective index change.143 Another more efficient design is to integrate 2D PCs with stimuli-responsive substrates that can swell or shrink in response to a specific analyte in a very low concentration. The group of Asher has developed a series of sensors based on this method.141,144–148 The produced sensors consisted of 2D PCs embedded on the surfaces of responsive hydrogels (Fig. 8a).141,148 These sensors consisted of different hydrogels and can detect a variety of analytes, including pH,141,149 metal ions,141 glucose,141,150 the serum albumin ligand binding,144Candida albicans,146 avidin,147 lectin concanavalin A,145 and so on. One significant advantage of these sensors is the visual determination of the analyte. For example, the sensor targeting glucose detection displays different colors in response to different glucose concentrations (Fig. 8b). To improve the output signals, the group of Li developed enhancement methods, such as coating the 2D PCs on both sides of hydrogels,151 or replacing the colloidal crystals by Au nanosphere arrays.152 Using the Au arrays, the diffraction intensity of the sensor was demonstrated to be increased 88 times compared to the one based on PS spheres.152
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the sensor constructed from 2D colloidal crystals on stimuli-responsive hydrogel surfaces. The hydrogel containing recognition groups can react with the analytes and swell, resulting in the reflective color change. (b) Photographs of a glucose sensor based on such a design that display different colors at different glucose concentrations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the non-optical NO2 sensor based on 2D porous electrodes. The NO2 reduction reaction happens on the cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Non-optical sensors commonly rely on the increase of surface areas as well as the reaction active sites to enhance the sensitivity. For example, Wang et al. developed 2D porous electrodes by sacrificial colloidal templates (Fig. 8c). A sensor based on these porous electrodes displayed enhanced sensitivity for NO2 detection.142 Dai et al. also developed a sensor for NO2 detection through the self-assembly of monodispersed Nb2O5 microspheres.153 Detection of formaldehyde was achieved by Rao et al. through 2D SnO2 hollow sphere arrays.154 Besides increasing the surface area, the fabrication strategy of SnO2via sacrificial templates is relatively mild, which ensures that the sensing materials are on the active heated area, leading to high sensitivity, fast response and recovery times. Besides these, colloidal templates were also applied for the fabrication of sensors for the detection of hydrogen, hydrogen peroxide and heavy metals.155–157 For example, Sabri and co-workers explored the detection of low-concentration Hg vapor by sensors constructed of Au- or Ag-coated PS sphere monolayers on quartz crystal microbalance transducers.156 In addition to the sensitivity enhancement, the sensors displayed high repeatability, accuracy, and stability.
4.2 Surface-enhanced Raman scattering
With superb sensitivity, SERS has been developed to be a powerful spectroscopic technique in the past few decades and widely applied to extensive areas, from chemicals and materials, to life science. Compared with normal Raman spectroscopy, SERS integrated plasmonic substrates composed of noble metal nanostructures and was described by Schlucker in a simple way as the “equation”: SERS = high molecular specificity of Raman spectroscopy + metal nanostructures supported LSPR + high sensitivity.161 Highly spatial localized regions, the so-called “Hotspot”, are preferred in the design of SERS substrates. These regions are commonly observed on tiny structures such as shape tips, narrow gaps and so on.162 Moreover, increased density of hot spots is preferred because the possibility is quite low that a target molecule is on a hot spot.
A typical material for SERS is Au.163 The group of Li fabricated Au-based SERS substrates by applying a chemical and physical deposition process to sacrificial colloidal monolayer templates.164–166 Through this technique, a number of nanostructures with Au coating were produced including semi-hollow, inverse opal, honeycomb, regular network, nanoparticle, and hierarchically micro/nanostructured arrays. They observed that the following physical deposition process could strengthen the stability of SERS performance. The electromagnetic coupling in the produced 10 nm gaps enhanced the sensitivity, which successfully achieved a detection limit of 10−12 M R6G. As demonstrated by Hong et al.,158 trapping Au NPs near the center of nanosphere-lithography-derived nanobowtie arrays was also a way to enhance the SERS performance (Fig. 9a). They found that the increasing numbers of trapped Au NPs near the tip area could enhance the Raman shift intensity (Fig. 9b). A repeatable and facile fabrication method for SERS substrate is a challenge. Yang et al. developed binary “island” shaped arrays with high-density hot spots, which enabled more installation of Au NPs, resulting in an enhanced performance, than the Au NPs on planar substrates.167 Wang and co-workers provided an alternative for repeatable SERS substrates by peeling off the deposited Au films from templated silicon wafers,168 which were fabricated by anisotropic etching on selected crystal phases with masks of monolayer nanosphere templates. The free-standing Au film with dense tips and gaps displayed a maximum enhancement factor of 107.
 Fig. 9  (a) Pseudocolored SEM image of the Au NPs trapped near the tips. Au NPs and nanobowties are indicated as yellow and red, respectively. (b) Schematic of enhanced Raman spectroscopy and the Au NP trapping process near the tips. Corresponding measured Raman spectra are illustrated below for the detection of 10 μm R6G solutions. The figures display an increasing number of trapped Au NPs from left to right. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of an annular cavity with geometric dimensions indicated. The compositions are indicated using different colors. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the produced annular cavity. (e) Simulated electric field enhancement distributions of an annular cavity from the cross-sectional (figure on the left) and top views (figure on the right) at λ = 1416 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f and g) SEM images of the plasmonic nanoring cavity arrays in low and high magnifications. Inset of (f) is the illustration of the Ag nanoring cavity with a 10 nm gap. (h) Photograph of the produced plasmonic nanoring cavity arrays in a circular area with a diameter of 2 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
Another typical material is Ag. Instead of processing on solid surfaces, the group of Qi applied nanosphere lithography on the solution surface where a reaction of the two reagents, N2H4/NH3 in the vapor phase and AgNO3 in solution, occurred.139 When used as SERS substrates, the free-standing Ag macroporous films presented an enhancement order of 107 for 4-aminothiophenol (4-ATP). Inverse Ag nanocup arrays were developed by Zhang et al. by transferring the nanocup arrays upside down onto a glass substrate,169 which was demonstrated with a frustum-like and void-like plasmon mode, leading to the improvement of SERS sensitivity. Cavity arrays composed of annular Ag were successfully fabricated by the assistance of colloidal templates (Fig. 9c and d), presenting surface plasmons propagating along the cylindrical metal/dielectric interfaces, a potential candidate for SERS (Fig. 9e).159 A high enhancement with a factor of 108 was observed by the group of Oh on periodic Ag nanoring cavities with 10 nm gaps (Fig. 9f).160 The enhancement was attributed to the excitation of plasmon resonances alongside the ring shape cavities, promoting the enhancement factor of an order of magnitude. The fabrication process was subtle that integrated 2D colloidal templates with atomic layer deposition (ALD) and ion milling, which produced highly uniform arrays (Fig. 9f and g). The produced film could reach up to the scale of several centimeters (Fig. 9h).
Beyond Au and Ag, large research efforts were also devoted to other plasmonic metals as well as composites. For example, an Au–Ag composite was prepared by the group of Fan with a periodic particle-in-bowl Ag-in-Au nanostructure by treating 2D colloidal templates with atomic layer deposition (ALD) and a post-annealing process.170 The composite demonstrated an optimizing SERS enhancement factor of 107. A study by Jeong et al. reported a SERS enhancement benefiting from the nanofluidic channels on HCP monolayer silica nanospheres with Ag-coated on the top half.171 Materials other than Au and Ag can introduce additional properties. For instance, multilayered Ag and Si coatings on closed-packed monolayer polystyrene nanospheres were proved to significantly promote the electromagnetic fields at the air–dielectric interface,172 benefitting Raman enhancement. Abdelsalam and co-workers reported stable SERS substrates based on honeycomb-like Pd and Pt nanostructures, prepared through colloidal-templated electrodeposition.173 Pd and Pt with widely-known catalytic activity provided SERS with the advantages of studying reactive intermediates and species. Kang and co-workers produced close-packed ZnO hollow nanospheres with Ag nanoparticles hanging inside.174 SERS substrates based on ZnO with such nanostructures displayed self-cleaning properties. Studies of graphene in this field proved that it could contribute to additional chemical enhancement of SERS sensitivity by stabilizing, for example, R6G via π–π interactions.175 The enhancement was demonstrated to coexist with electromagnetic enhancement of materials on SERS substrates made by graphene–Cu and –Au composites.175,176
4.3 Solar cells
Solar cells, or photovoltaics (PVs), which convert the unlimited solar radiation into clean electrical power, could be one of the emerging solutions to the issue of fossil-fuel energy exhaustion that the whole world is going to face in the future.177 At present, crystalline Si (c-Si) solar cells with thicknesses of hundreds of micrometers and efficiency up to 22% have dominated the solar-cell market although the price is high due to their substantial silicon material consumption and costly processing. Thin-film solar cells, which have thicknesses within several micrometers and can be deposited on cheap module-sized substrates (e.g. glass, plastic, and so on) have emerged as a feasible way towards the goal of reducing materials usage and manufacturing cost. However, a significant drawback of most thin-film cells is their relatively low energy-conversion efficiency owing to the small light absorbance, especially near the bandgap. Therefore, one ultimate goal of the research and development in the PV community is the realization of ultrathin, low-cost solar cells that do not compromise on energy-conversion efficiency. A viable strategy to trap more light inside the thin devices is to build nanostructures for effective photo-management.182–188 The nanostructures could play different roles in solar cells, which depend on their morphologies, materials, and locations. For example, they can be antireflection coatings that reduce reflection losses,81,189,190 resonators that prolong optical pathways,181,191 or antennas that guide more light into the active layers.185
Among a variety of nanofabrication techniques, 2D colloidal crystal templating fits quite well for nanostructuring thin-film solar cells thanks to its low cost, scalability, and ease of optimizing geometric parameters.192,193 2D colloidal crystals themselves and their derivative nanostructures can be located at different positions. Firstly, these structures can be placed on the front of thin cell devices.178,194–196 For example, Wang and co-workers deposited a PS 2D colloidal crystal of 800 nm in diameter atop a c-Si thin-film solar cell (Fig. 10a).178 Their experiments and simulations demonstrated that power-conversion efficiency was improved by 26.5% and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) was almost doubled at several wavelengths. The PS nanospheres here can couple light into strong whispering gallery modes and thus substantially increase light absorption in the c-Si thin cell. Another prominent benefit of this light harvesting scheme is its spherical geometry that naturally accepts light from large angles of incidence, which was previously proven in a numerical simulation work by Grandidier and co-workers.194 Secondly, nanostructuring at the back surface of a cell may afford a high-performance back reflector.179,193 Ding et al. incorporated plasmonic silver nanodomes in solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells (ss-DSCs) as the back contact (Fig. 10b and c).179 The silver nanodome arrays were fabricated through a direct nanoimprint lithography (NIL) patterning of mesoporous TiO2 and subsequent thermal evaporation. The quartz master template was fabricated by reactive ion-etching using a silica 2D colloidal crystal as a mask. As a result, the metallic nanodome back reflector that greatly enhanced the light absorption through light scattering and coupling into surface plasmon polaritons led to increased EQE, particularly in the long wavelength region of the dye's absorption band. Lastly, the active layer can be nanostructured as well.81,180,181,197–200 For example, instead of using nanocones for antireflection, Zhu et al. created nanodome solar cells by conformally depositing the active material on nanocone-structured substrates (Fig. 10d).180 Based on this geometry, a 280 nm thick hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) layer can absorb 94% of the light in the 400–800 nm range, much higher than the 65% absorption of flat film devices. Such excellent performance could be attributed to the strong antireflection effect in the short-wavelength regime and the efficient in-plane guided mode in the long-wavelength regime. Yao and co-workers used low-quality factor (low-Q) whispering gallery modes in spherical nanoshells to dramatically enhance broadband absorption (Fig. 10e).181 They took nanocrystalline silicon (nc-Si) nanoshells templated by silica nanospheres as a model system. Consequently, a nanoshell absorber of 50 nm thickness exhibited absorbance equivalent to a 1 μm-thick planar nc-Si film. Such a remarkable light-trapping efficiency was enabled by the low-Q whispering gallery modes which coupled light in the nanoshells and circulated it in the active material with a considerably long pathway. Notably, the low-Q not only facilitated the coupling of light into resonant modes but also broadened the resonant band and made the absorption enhancement region wider.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the dielectric nanosphere solar cell. The ultrathin film crystalline silicon (c-Si) has ITO as the front contact and Ti/Ag as the back contact. A hexagonal close-packed (HCP) monolayer of PS 2D colloidal crystal lies on top of the solar cell device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration and (c) the cross-sectional SEM image of the configuration of the plasmonic ss-DSC with a 2D array of silver nanodomes in the back contact. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic showing the cross-sectional structure of nanodome solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM cross-sectional image of a monolayer of spherical Si nanoshells on a quartz substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2012, Springer Nature. 
4.4 Photocatalysis
Heterogeneous photocatalysis such as photocatalytic degradation and photoelectrochemical (PEC) catalysis offers great potential to decompose organic contaminants and convert solar energy into chemical energy, which promises a possible solution to the global environmental and energy issues.201–205 Taking the most widely investigated TiO2 as an example, a general mechanism for heterogeneous photocatalysis is demonstrated in Fig. 11a. The mechanism mainly covers four processes, i.e., charge-carrier generation, charge-carrier trapping, charge-carrier recombination, and interfacial charge transfer.206,207 Specifically, when a photon with an energy that matches or exceeds the band gap energy of the semiconductor, an electron in the valence band (VB) is excited into the conduction band (CB), leaving a positive hole in the VB. The photoinduced electron–hole pairs can recombine and dissipate the input energy as heat, become trapped in metastable surface states, or react with electron donors and electron acceptors on the semiconductor surfaces or interfaces. Apparently, increasing the rate of the last step is the key to improve the photocatalytic efficiency.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the photoexcitation of a semiconductor (e.g., TiO2) and the subsequent generation of an electron and a hole, which are trapped by an oxidant (Ox) and a reductant (Red), respectively. For TiO2 photocatalysis, “Ox” is a surface-adsorbed oxygen molecule, and “Red” is a surface-bound hydroxyl group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Side-view SEM image of the TiO2 nanocolumn array obtained by PLD using a PS colloidal monolayer as the substrate. (c) TEM image of a single TiO2 nanocolumn from the side. The inset is the corresponding electron diffraction pattern. (d) Photocatalytic activity evaluation of different substrates based on the absorbance ratio A/A0 as a function of UV irradiation time. A and A0 are the absorbance after UV irradiation and that from the initial surface, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM image of the urchin-like TiO2 array. (f) Linear sweep voltammetry measurements of the urchin-like TiO2 and TiO2 microsphere electrodes, collected both in the dark and under 100 mW cm−2 simulated sunlight illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Tilted-view SEM image of a TiO2 NR@NB array obtained after 5 h of hydrothermal growth. (h) Linear sweep voltammograms of TiO2 NB, NR, and NR@NB array electrodes recorded in a 1 M NaOH solution under simulated one sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
2D colloidal crystals have been employed to prepare high-performance photocatalysts based on nanostructured semiconductors for photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants.208,211–215 Most of these nanostructured photocatalysts are typically based on 1D nanocolumn arrays and hemispherical nanobowl/shell arrays, which exhibit high specific surface area, superior light harvesting capability, and extended light absorption edge. For example, Li et al. fabricated hexagonal-close-packed, hierarchical amorphous TiO2 nanocolumn arrays by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) using 2D PS colloidal crystals as templates (Fig. 11b).208 Nanobranches in each nanocolumn grew in a radiation-like manner, emanating from a center point on the PS sphere (Fig. 11c). Compared with the amorphous TiO2 film and anatase nanocolumn arrays, the amorphous TiO2 column arrays exhibit superior degradation performance for stearic acid (Fig. 11d), which, respectively, can be attributed to the higher specific area of the hierarchical amorphous nanocolumn arrays and enhanced light harvesting due to photonic crystal structures and multiple light scattering within nanobranches. A similar hierarchical architecture was also adopted in a hematite system to improve its photocatalytic performance.213 Wang et al. extended the transmission edge of ZnO into the visible region by constructing ZnO nanoshell arrays on 2D PS colloidal crystal templates.215 Thus they realized photocatalysis under monochromatic visible light by utilizing the two-photon induced electron–hole pairs in ZnO. In addition to nanostructures with only one kind of material, 2D colloidal crystals were also used to fabricate heterogeneous nanostructures with coupled semiconductors. Zhang et al. prepared a coupled photocatalyst comprising a wide-band-gap TiO2 film covered by a narrow-band-gap Cu2O microgrid.212 Due to the efficient charge transfer between the two phases, and each phase has an equal opportunity to be exposed to irradiation and adsorbates, the coupled photocatalyst showed higher photocatalytic activity for degrading methylene blue (MB) under UV-vis, visible, and UV light irradiation than pure Cu2O and TiO2 films, respectively.
Semiconductors textured by 2D colloidal crystal templates have also proven to act as promising high-performance photoanodes for PEC water splitting.209,210,216–219 For example, Cheng et al. reported the hierarchical urchin-like TiO2 nanostructure arrays with improved PEC water splitting performance due to the benefits of omnidirectional anti-reflection properties and enhanced charge collection efficiency (Fig. 11e and f).209,216 In recent years, Qi's group have reported a series of work on developing 2D colloidal crystal-templated photoanodes to boost the efficiency of PEC water splitting.210,218,219 They achieved the facile fabrication of Ag2S–Ag heterostructured nanobowl arrays consisting of Ag2S nanonets lying on Ag nanobowl arrays via two-step nanosphere lithography at the gas–liquid interface.218 This heterostructured nanobowl array showed a much higher photocurrent density than a pure Ag2S nanonet under both visible light irradiation and simulated AM 1.5G solar light, which promises advantages for PEC water splitting. This remarkably enhanced current density could be related to the enhanced charge separation and light harvesting enabled by the Ag nanobowl array under the Ag2S nanonet. More recently, the same group demonstrated two kinds of hierarchical, heterostructured nanorod@nanobowl (NR@NB) arrays, namely rutile TiO2 NR@anatase TiO2 NB arrays210 and CdS NR@SnO2 NB arrays.219 Such a structure consisted of NRs grown on the inner surfaces of NB arrays through interfacial nanosphere lithography followed by hydrothermal growth (Fig. 11g). Both NR@NB arrays were used as the photoanodes for PEC water splitting. The TiO2 NR@NB arrays and the CdS NR@SnO2 NB arrays produced photocurrent densities 2 and 2.5 times as high as that of the TiO2 NR arrays and the CdS NR arrays, respectively (Fig. 11h). Therefore, the heterostructured NR@NB arrays hold great promise for PEC water splitting owing to the increased active surface area for contact with the electrolyte, multiple light scattering arising from the hierarchical structure for improving light harvesting capability, and the band alignment between two kinds of materials for efficient charge separation and transfer processes. Since CdS has stronger visible light absorption and SnO2 has higher carrier mobility than TiO2, the CdS NR@SnO2 NB arrays exhibited an even superior PEC performance for hydrogen generation compared to the TiO2 NR@NB arrays.
4.5 Triboelectric nanogenerators
The technique of triboelectric nanogenerators has undergone a fast development in the past five years, while the output performance is limited.220,221 One of the significant methods for the performance enhancement is to control the surface morphology of friction layers.222 The group of Yan successfully applied a colloidal crystal monolayer onto the surface of the friction layers.223 They developed a triboelectric nanogenerator constructed by two arch-shaped friction layers and coated the top surface of the bottom layer with polystyrene spheres (Fig. 12a). The nanogenerator works when pressed and released repeatedly, resulting in an output voltage as high as 220 V per cycle (Fig. 12b). Moreover, the nanogenerator is highly stable and maintains its output voltage after 1000 cycles (Fig. 12c).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the triboelectric nanogenerator consisting of two arch-shaped friction layers. (b) The measured output voltage of the nanogenerator under finger tapping five times. (c) The durability test of the nanogenerator under a continuous tapping of 1000 cycles at a frequency of 3 Hz. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.6 Smart windows
Two-dimensional colloidal crystals are demonstrated as an effective method toward the fabrication of VO2-based thermochromic films targeting energy-saving smart window application due to the benefits of (1) the temperature-dependent LSPR,111,224,225 (2) the colourful PCs,95 (3) enhanced transparency,226,227 and (4) the antireflective properties emerged from the structured VO2.228
An architectural window can significantly reduce the energy-consumption of air-conditioners by smartly regulating the indoor solar irradiation, for example, by letting the sunlight through in winter while blocking the infrared part in summer (Fig. 13a).229–232 VO2 is one of the dominant materials in this field because of its reversible phase transition between the low-temperature monoclinic and the high-temperature rutile phase (inset of Fig. 13b),233–235 accompanied by a drastic transmittance change in the infrared range (Fig. 13b).229,231 However, several challenges remain on VO2-based thermochromic glazing including the limited solar modulation, low visible transmittance, undesired yellow-brown appearance and so on.231,233,236
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the thermochromic smart window toward architectural energy-conservation by selectively blocking infrared (IR) light at high temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) A typical example of temperature-dependent transmittance spectra of a VO2-based thermochromic film. The spectra are from 160 nm VO2 nanodome arrays. The inset is the corresponding crystallographic diagrams of the monoclinic and rutile phases VO2 at low (20 °C) and high (95 °C) temperature, respectively. (c) Illustration of the VO2 nanoparticle arrays derived from PS sphere templates. The VO2 particles crystallize and the PS template acts as a sacrificial template under high-temperature annealing. (d) The SEM image of 160 nm patterned VO2 nanoparticle arrays. The hexagonal patterns with ∼160 nm in periodicity are indicated as yellow hexagons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Illustration of the 2D core–shell SiO2–VO2 PCs characterized by a VO2 shell thickness of 20 nm. (f) TEM image of the 2D core–shell SiO2–VO2 PCs and an amplified image as the inset. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (g) Illustration of the antireflective moth-eye structures. (h) SEM image of the biomimetic moth-eye nanostructure consisting of VO2-overcoated SiO2 nipple arrays with a periodicity of ∼400 nm. The inserted TEM image of (h) presents a uniform VO2 coating of ∼40 nm on the structured SiO2 substrates with ∼200 nm periodicity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Periodic VO2 films prepared from 2D colloidal templates promise the solutions. For example, periodic VO2 nanoparticles arrays are produced through high-temperature annealing using the sacrificial 2D PS templates (Fig. 13c).111 The periodicity can be controlled down to 160 nm with an average particle size of 67 nm (Fig. 13d). By varying the PS size in templates, the diameter of VO2 particles can be controlled and presents the size- and temperature-dependent LSPR. It is suggested that tuning the LSPR valley position to the spectrum range with dense solar energy can significantly promote the solar modulation properties. Periodic nanonet and nanodome arrays are also achieved by adjusting the physical property of vanadium precursors.111,237 Another example is to address the intrinsic yellow-brown appearance of VO2 by coating the VO2 (20 nm) on 2D close-packed SiO2 PCs (Fig. 13e).95 The hexagonally close-packed structure is maintained after VO2 overcoating as indicated in the TEM image in Fig. 13f. By changing the size of the silica sphere and the diameter of the individual core–shell structure, final samples display tunable colors covering from red and green to blue. However, the sol–gel method can only produce VO2 nanoparticles attached to the SiO2 spheres instead of uniform VO2 shells. Integration of antireflection to thermochromic films can promote both the visible transmittance and the solar modulation properties. This is demonstrated on VO2-films with biomimetic moth-eye structures, composed of closed-packed nipple arrays (Fig. 13g). Qian et al. produced such structures by coating ∼40 nm thick VO2 on the pre-fabricated SiO2 nipple arrays with different periodicities from 200 to 1000 nm (inset of Fig. 13h).228Fig. 1h represents the SEM image of VO2/SiO2 nipple arrays with a periodicity of 400 nm. They found that the optimized thermochromic performance is achieved on 200 nm arrays, which is smaller than the visible light wavelength and suggested that further decreases in the periodicity will enhance the thermochromic performance. In addition, they found that the 200 nm patterns provide an increasing contact compared with the planar one, leading to the potential functionality of self-cleaning for smart windows.
4.7 Light-emitting diodes
GaN-based LEDs have been widely used in the area of solid-state lighting, which are gradually replacing conventional light bulbs and changing the way we light the world. For general lighting purposes, high brightness, i.e., high light output power (LOP), is definitely required. The LOP is mainly determined by internal quantum efficiency (IQE) and light extraction efficiency (LEE). For GaN-based LEDs, the IQE is always degraded by the high threading dislocation density, resulting from the strain-induced piezoelectric field, the nonradiative recombination, and the large lattice mismatch and thermal expansion between the epitaxial GaN films and sapphire substrates. The LEE is limited by the total internal reflection (TIR) at the interface of the semiconductor and air. The large contrast in the refractive indices between GaN (n = 2.5) and air (n = 1)238 prohibits the majority of photons generated in the active layer from escaping the LED beyond a critical angle of 23.5°. Thus, the emission is reabsorbed by semiconductors and electrodes and the performance of the LEDs is degraded.
2D colloidal crystals have been demonstrated to effectively improve LEE and IQE.57,58 One of the most feasible strategies to enhance LEE is to incorporate PCs based on 2D ordered nanostructures into the LED structure. Here PCs serve as diffraction gratings that are able to efficiently couple the waveguided light within dielectric layers into the air, therefore boosting the LEE. Besides, PC-assisted LEDs usually exhibit a better light focusing effect, compared to those without PCs since radiation through PCs can be redirected to the top escape cone, thus resulting in smaller divergent angles.52,57,58Fig. 14a shows the profile of a conventional InGaN/GaN multiple quantum well (MQW) LED structure. Researchers have demonstrated that 2D PCs emerged from 2D colloidal crystals can be constructed at different positions of the LED devices. PCs on the top surface were most frequently adopted. PCs on LED top surfaces with diverse geometries have been fabricated using 2D colloidal crystal templates, including nanocones,243,244 nanopyramids,245 nanoholes,239,246,247 nanodisks,239 nanopillars,248 and other complex nanostructures,249,250 all of which were proven to have superior LOP. For example, Wei et al. fabricated SiO2 nanodisk PCs mounted in p-GaN and corresponding air-hole PCs to improve the LEE of GaN-based LEDs.239 The SiO2 nanodisk PCs (Fig. 14b) were realized by nanospherical-lens photolithography and selective area growth of p-GaN. The corresponding air-hole PCs (Fig. 14c) were obtained by etching away SiO2 nanodisks. By using PS nanospheres with different diameters, PCs with periods of 900 nm and 700 nm and a similar diameter of 450 nm were investigated. According to the light output power–current–voltage (L–I–V) curves shown in Fig. 14d, the LOPs of SiO2 PC-assisted LEDs with periodicities of 900 nm and 700 nm and corresponding air-hole PC-assisted LEDs are enhanced by 71.3%, 83.8%, 49.3%, and 67.7%, respectively, compared to that without PC at 350 mA injection current. Fig. 14e shows the angular emission profiles of the LEDs with and without PCs operated at 200 mA. For LEDs with PCs, the light is effectively redirected to the top escape-cone of the LED through SiO2 and air-hole PCs, resulting in smaller divergent angles. PCs can also be embedded in the n-GaN layer.251,252 Recently, Wei et al. investigated the InGaN/GaN LEDs with bottom PCs of SiO2 nanodisks embedded in n-GaN, top PCs mounted in p-GaN, and double PCs in both n- and p-GaN layers. The authors found that the LED with double PCs exhibited not only the highest LOP, compared with that without PCs, but produced the most significant focusing effect, showing a view angle (136.9°) 14.4° smaller than that of the planar LED (151.3°).252 Instead of direct nanostructural semiconductor layers, Kim et al.246 and Choi et al.253 demonstrated that PCs of ITO nanopillar arrays fabricated by dry etching using 2D colloidal crystals as etch masks were capable of improving LEE. The introduction of 2D PC coatings of high-index materials was proposed without modifying any parts of the as-grown LEDs.240,254–257 Do et al. constructed a 2D SiNx nanohole PC layer on a Y3Al5O12:Ce3+ (YAG:Ce) yellow ceramic plate phosphor (CPP) in order to enhance the forward emission of YAG:Ce CPP-capped high-power white LEDs (Fig. 14f).240Fig. 14g shows the electroluminescent spectra of two different white LEDs at an identical current of 350 mA. As a result of introducing 2D PC on top of the CPP, the intensity of the yellow emission of the 2D PC-assisted YAG:Ce CPP-capped white LED became higher than that of the flat CPP-capped white LED while the intensity of the transmitted blue light became lower. These phenomena significantly lowered the correlated color temperature with the aid of the 2D PC layer. Besides, the correlated color temperature of the 2D PC-assisted CPP-capped white LED remained almost unchanged at ∼5500 K independent of the applied current or the viewing angle. The luminance of the white LED with 2D PCs was also higher than that without the 2D PC layer (Fig. 14g). Though the luminous efficacy of the conventional and 2D PC-assisted CPP-capped LEDs decreased with increased applied current, the enhancement ratio of luminous efficacy by the 2D PC layer was almost constant over all applied current ranges (Fig. 14h). They further demonstrated that a higher efficacy could be realized by replacing the 2D SiNx nanohole PC layer with the 2D TiO2 nanobowl PC layer, which benefited from the higher refractive index of TiO2.255,256 A similar strategy was also employed to the LEE of the polymer LED.258
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of a conventional InGaN/GaN MQW LED structure. (b) Tilted SEM image of a SiO2 PC structure with a periodicity of 700 nm and a diameter of 450 nm regrown on p-GaN. (c) Corresponding air-hole PC after removing SiO2 disks in (b). (d) Forward voltages and light output power of LEDs with and without PC structures as a function of injection current. (e) Far-field emission patterns of the LEDs with and without PCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2012, AIP Publishing. (f) Schematic diagram of a YAG:Ce CPP-capped LED with a 2D SiNx PC coating. (g) The blue-conversion-white electroluminescent spectra and (h) luminous efficacy of a conventional YAG:Ce CPP-capped LED and a 2D SiNx PC-assisted YAG:Ce CPP-capped LED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240. Copyright 2011, Optical Society of America. (i) Ag nanodisk array formed after the temperature reaches the p-GaN growth temperature. The inset sketches the configuration of the SP-enhanced blue LED with Ag nanodisks embedded in the p-GaN layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (j) The optical output power of Ag nanodisk array-enhanced LEDs as a function of injection current. (k) Cross-sectional SEM image of AlN grown on nano-PSS. The inset is the SEM image of nano-PSS obtained via wet etching. (l) LOP–I–EQE curves of the deep UV LEDs grown on the nano-PSS and the flat sapphire substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2013, AIP Publishing. 
The IQE can be improved by utilizing the coupling of SPs and InGaN MQWs and patterned sapphire substrates (PSS).57,58 The strong local electromagnetic field around metal nanostructures can increase the radiative efficiency of a nearby radiating dipole.259,260 Therefore, when metal nanostructures that support SPs are located in close proximity to the InGaN MQW, the IQE can be enhanced due to the contribution from radiative recombination rate enhancement. It is noteworthy that the SP-MQW coupling can occur only if the metal nanostructures are adjacent to the MQWs. Generally, the spacing should not be larger than 40–50 nm.261 Wei et al. reported InGaN/GaN LEDs with Ag nanodisk arrays embedded in the p-GaN layer, which was realized through nanospherical-lens photolithography and subsequent selective regrowth.241Fig. 14i shows an SEM image of an Ag nanodisk array formed after being annealed at the p-GaN growth temperature. The spacing between Ag nanodisk arrays and InGaN/GaN MQWs was controlled by the time of dry etching of the AlGaN film. In this work, two spacings of 20 and 35 nm were investigated. As shown in Fig. 14j, compared with LEDs without Ag nanodisks, the optical output power of the SP-enhanced LEDs with spacings between Ag nanodisk arrays and MQWs of 20 and 35 nm is increased by 26.7% and 31.1%, respectively, at an injection current of 350 mA. Additionally, the LED with an Ag nanodisk array exhibits a reduced emission divergence compared to the conventional LED, which might benefit from the PC embedded in the p-GaN layer. Apart from nanodisks, Ag nanotriangles fabricated by using 2D colloidal crystals as deposition masks were also presented by Kao et al. to enhance the LOP of GaN-based LEDs.262
PSS can improve IQE and LEE simultaneously. On the one hand, PSS can give rise to high-quality epitaxial GaN films with low dislocation density, resulting in an improved IQE by decreasing the nonradiative recombination rate. On the other hand, PSS can serve as PCs that efficiently couple the waveguided light into the air. PSS featuring hemispheres,263–265 concave triangular nanocones,242,266 periphery-rounded nanoprisms,267 nanovolcanoes,268etc. have been successfully prepared using 2D colloidal crystals and other materials nanostructured by them as masks for dry/wet etching. For instance, Dong et al. presented AlGaN-based deep ultraviolet LEDs (UV-LEDs) grown on nano-PSS fabricated via the combination of nanospherical-lens photolithography and wet chemical etching.242 The patterns on the nano-PSS surface are concave triangular cones (see the inset in Fig. 14k) as a result of the anisotropic etching of the sapphire crystal in a mixture solution of H2SO4 and H3PO4. As shown in Fig. 14k, the AlN film grown on the nano-PSS completely coalesces after 3 μm growth, which is much shorter than that of 10 μm for AlN grown on micro-strip substrates. X-ray rocking curves further confirm that the AlN film on the nano-PSS is of high quality, the screw and edge dislocation densities of which were estimated to be 1.6 × 107 cm−2 and 1.2 × 109 cm−2. According to light output power–current–external quantum efficiency (LOP–I–EQE) curves in Fig. 14l, both the LOP and EQE of the nano-PSS-based deep UV-LED are 98% higher than those of the LED with a flat sapphire substrate at an injection current of 20 mA. It is noteworthy that though the IQE enhancement of the NPSS LED was estimated to be 60%, the LEE benefiting from light scattering at the AlN/nano-PSS interface made a great contribution to the large EQE enhancement. Su et al. proved that the feature size of the PSS is related to the LED performance.264,265 They compared the performance of GaN-based LEDs grown on nano-PSSs and micro-PSSs fabricated via nanosphere lithography and photolithography, respectively. They found that micro-PSSs with a large aspect ratio led to a GaN film with better crystalline quality while NPSS exhibited better capability of light extraction. Consequently, the nano-PSS-based LED was found to have larger LOP.
4.8 Field effect transistors
Using 2D colloidal crystals using as a template is an effective way to fabricate nanopore or nanorod array structures to improve the performance of electrical and electronic devices, such as FETs, field emitters, and so on.269,270
FETs have served as a versatile tool for the electrical characterization of nanostructure performance.271 The bottom-gate, bottom-contact configuration in FETs is considered as the simplest way to manufacture organic circuits.272 The applications of bottom-contact devices are limited by the small injection area and the disadvantageous injection path limit.273 Fuchs et al. reported that nanopore-structured electrodes could tremendously improve the grain structure of the semiconductor. Such a nanopore-structured semiconductor reduces the contact resistance and accordingly enhances charge carrier injection, which results in the improved mobility of charge carriers.269 Polystyrene nanospheres are used as templates to form pores on the electrodes, as shown in Fig. 15a. A 30 nm pentacene active layer is employed to investigate the FET properties. Fig. 15b shows the typical transfer curves of the transistor based on source/drain electrodes with and without nanopores. The device without the nanopore structure shows a mobility of about 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1, while higher performance is observed from the device with nanopore structures with a mobility of 0.22 cm2 V−1 s−1. The mobility of charge carriers in a FET with nanopore structures is about 20 times higher than that in those without nanopore structures. The porous electrode facilitates the formation of nanopore structured active layers with small grain boundaries at the electrode interface. Subsequently, it not only reduces the contact resistance but also affects the growth of the semiconductor, thus further improving the performance of the device.
 Fig. 15  (a) The structure of FET with (I) and without (II) nanopore-structured electrodes. (b) Typical transfer characteristics of the transistor based on source/drain electrodes with and without a nanopore structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of the nanorod array fabrication. PS: polystyrene. (d) SEM images of a nanorod array by PLD using a colloidal template monolayer with 350 nm PS spheres in O2 at a pressure of 6.7 Pa for 60 min and subsequent annealing in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH. 
Golberg et al. prepared a series of hexagonal NCP, periodic anatase TiO2 nanorod arrays through a PLD process by using PS monolayers as templates (Fig. 15c).270 The SEM images indicate that TiO2 has an ordered and well-structured array with a HCP arrangement (Fig. 15d). This method is much cheaper compared to optical lithography, X-ray lithography, electron beam lithography, and soft lithography.274,275 They found the periodicity of a nanorod array can easily be controlled by using PS templates with different sphere sizes. The results showed that the prepared nanorod array with an HNPC arrangement exhibited enhanced field effect properties compared to particle films. Furthermore, the field-enhancement factor decreased and the turn-on field increased with increasing periodicity of the hexagonal NCP array.
4.9 Photodetectors
Photodetectors utilizing semiconducting materials to convert incident light into photocurrent signals have shown promising applications in optical communication, medical diagnostic, environmental detection and other imaging areas.276–278 There are several figures of merit that are routinely used to characterize the performance of photodetectors, such as responsivity, dark current, response speed, quantum efficiency (QE), EQE, stability, etc.276 2D colloidal crystals are distinguished as an effective tool for templating semiconductor nanostructures. Such nanostructures can greatly contribute to photodetectors’ performance, which may benefit from (1) enhanced light harvesting capability favored by specific geometries, (2) improved material quality, and (3) large surface-to-volume ratio. Lin and co-workers fabricated Au nanocrystal array/Si nanoantennas comprising hexagonally arranged single crystalline Au nanocrystal arrays inlaid in Si substrates through the combination of 2D colloidal crystal templating and metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE) (Fig. 16a and b).279 The Au nanocrystal array inlaid Si nanoantennas exhibited wavelength-selective photocurrent enhancement by tuning the depth of immersion of Au nanocrystals in Si via a MACE process. Such a feature was enabled by the dielectric environment sensitive LSPR of the Au nanocrystal arrays. When the device was illuminated with the light close to the LSPR band in wavelength, the incident electromagnetic waves could be confined to the Au nanocrystals and greatly enhanced local electric field, leading to increased light absorption in Si and photocurrent as well. In contrast, without the wavelength matching between detected light and LSPR band, the local electric field amplification and strong light absorption did not occur. In this circumstance, the shielding effects of Au nanocrystal arrays gave rise to a negative enhancement of photocurrent. Wang and co-workers reported the facile fabrication of organometal halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) nanonets using 2D colloidal crystal arrays as templates (Fig. 16c).280 Compared to the conventional compact films CH3NH3PbI3 photodetectors, the nanonet-based photodetector has a high responsivity of 10.33 A W−1 (under 700 nm light illumination), six times higher than that of the compact film counterpart (Fig. 16d), faster response speed, and better stability. The excellent photodetection performance can be ascribed to three key characteristics of the device. Firstly, the nanonet geometry can strongly scatter the incident light, thereby considerably enhancing light harvesting and increasing photocurrent. Secondly, the nanonets with thin walls afford direct carrier transport pathways which favors the diffusion and collection of photogenerated charge carriers. Thirdly, the 2D colloidal crystal templates offer a suitable environment for the perovskite crystallization process, resulting in large grain sizes with superior crystallinity. The high-quality materials ensure efficient and fast charge carrier transportation across the perovskite nanonets and good stability under ambient conditions. The authors further demonstrated that this strategy could be applied to fabricating flexible photodetectors with excellent bending durability. Notably, a similar porous geometry was previously adopted by Wu's group for nanostructure SnO2 and Mg2+ doped NiO achieved via a one-step oil–water interface self-assembly process.281,282 Both photodetector devices based on these two nanostructures exhibited impressively high enhancements of photocurrent. The enhanced light harvesting ability was also found in the photodetectors based on hollow spherical nanoshell arrays of MoSe2 and MoS2 fabricated via 2D colloidal crystal templating and chemical vapor deposition.283 It is worth mentioning that the exceptional “SP–SP” junction barrier conducting mechanism resulting from the close packing of nanoshells significantly contributed to carrier tunnelling and transport processes, thus increasing the response and recovery speed.
 Fig. 16  Enhancement of the photocurrent of (a) the Au nanocrystal array on a Si substrate and (b) semi-inlaid Au nanocrystal array in Si under 532 and 655 nm laser illumination at 10, 100, and 200 mV. Insets show tilted SEM images of corresponding samples. The enhancement of photocurrent is defined as the difference between the photocurrent increment of Au nanocrystal array/Si nanoantennas and bare Si divided by that of bare Si. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of the CH3NH3PbI3 nanonet formed on a Si substrate. The periodicity of the nanonet is 1 μm. (d) Photocurrent–time (I–t) curves of the CH3NH3PbI3 photodetectors based on nanonets and compact films illuminated under monochromatic light at 700 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
4.10 Transparent conductors
Transparent conductors with good optical transmittance and high electrical conductivity act as essential top electrodes of various optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells, touch screens, flat panel displays, organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), smart windows, bioimaging and sensing devices, etc.284–289 For decades, ITO, one of the transparent conductive oxides, has always been the primary choice of transparent electrodes for current optoelectronic devices, due to its outstanding transparency in the visible and near-UV window and good electrical conductivity.290 But the scarcity of indium (In) and sophisticated fabrication conditions undoubtedly increase manufacturing costs.291 Besides, the brittleness of ITO hinders its applications in emerging flexible devices, such as wearable electronics, implantable sensors, foldable displays, flexible photovoltaic devices, etc.287 Substitutes that can be fabricated in a low-cost, scalable way are therefore highly desired. Both the scientific and industrial communities have made efforts to seek alternative solutions, among which 2D mesh-based structures of conductive materials (e.g., metals, carbon materials) are most frequently adopted.292,293 The voids in a mesh allow light to pass through while the continuous network affords pathways for charge carriers, enabling the combination of sufficient transparency and conductivity.
2D colloidal crystals have already proven to be inherently ideal templates for mesh-like micro-/nanostructures owing to uniform, ordered arrangements.18,19 A typical route to 2D nanomeshes with circular apertures comprises etching of colloidal spheres, vertical materials deposition, and removal of colloidal crystal templates. Based on this process, several transparent conductors were successfully fabricated.294–299 Zhu et al. incorporated a gold nanomesh electrode into a poly(3-hexylthiophene) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) organic solar cell, resulting in a high fill factor of 61% and a considerable PCE of 3.12% for that time.294 Gao et al. demonstrated the fabrication of Cu nanomeshes using 2D colloidal crystals and comprehensive simulation and experimental studies on their optical and electronic properties (Fig. 17a).296 The Cu nanomeshes showed 80% diffuse transmission at 17 Ω sq−1, which is comparable to ITO (80–90% transmittance, 8–15 Ω sq−1). Notably, using Cu, a cheaper metal compared to Au, Ag, and In, favors the reduction of costs. Moreover, the Cu nanomeshes showed application prospect in flexible devices since they can be prepared on flexible PET substrates and can endure repeated bending and abrasion, and long-time heating. Seo et al. investigated the electrochemical impedance properties and electrode sensing performances of Au nanomeshes on flexible parylene substrates.297 The Au nanomeshes showed better properties in terms of electrical impedance, transparency, cell viability, and flexibility than ITO and graphene electrodes, making them a potential candidate for high-performance electrophysiology electrodes. According to the findings of previous works, it can be concluded that transparency and conductivity are two contradictory parameters that show opposite dependence on geometric parameters, including thickness, void diameter, and periodicity. Normally, it is easier to obtain both high transmission and conductivity for nanomeshes with large periodicities. That is the reason why most of these highly conductive and transparent metallic meshes employed colloidal crystal templates with diameters larger than 1 μm.296,297,303 Kwon et al. even employed a 10 μm-diameter colloidal crystal to achieved 83% transmittance and 20 Ω sq−1 square resistance in an Ag honeycomb mesh.303 Alternatively, meshes with novel shapes produced by modifying the deposition process may also lead to high-performance transparent conductors.300,301,304 Lee et al. took advantage of large cast shadows during oblique deposition to fabricate Ni/Au (20 nm/100 nm) meshes with metal occupying merely 10% of the substrate surfaces (Fig. 17b).300 When the thin metal film electrode was replaced by such a mesh electrode, the photoresponsivity, quantum efficiency, UV-visible rejection ratio, and detectivity are elevated from 0.135 A W−1, 50.75%, 1663 cm Hz0.5 W−1, and 2480 cm Hz0.5 W−1 to 0.248 A W−1, 93, 23%, 1.78 × 1010 cm Hz0.5 W−1, and 2.43 × 1010 cm Hz0.5 W−1, respectively. Qiu et al. demonstrated a novel Cu crosswire grid comprising two overlapping wire patterns fabricated through stepwise angle-resolved nanosphere lithography (Fig. 17c).301 The authors claimed that an average optical transmittance of 80% at a sheet resistance of 100 Ω sq−1 could be achieved using PS nanospheres with a relatively small diameter of 750 nm. In addition to metals, other conductive materials like CNTs also might be good choices for transparent conductors. Kim et al. reported the fabrication of CNT network-based transparent electrodes by concurrently assembling silica nanospheres and CNTs into complex 2D colloidal crystals and then etching the sacrificial silica nanospheres away (Fig. 17d).302 Though their square resistances were over 1.5 kΩ sq−1, the transmittance could exceed 90%. Interestingly, the authors found that the conductivity can be significantly enhanced by increasing the thicknesses of the CNT bundles of the networks and doping the CNT films with HAuCl4. More recently, Qiang et al. extended the application of colloidal-templated electrodes to the field of neuroscience.305 They prepared a composite nanomesh microelectrode through the colloidal templates and demonstrated its capability to simultaneously record the electrophysiology and two-photo imaging in the brain of an awake mice.
 Fig. 17  SEM images of 2D network-based transparent conductors with various geometries and materials. (a) Cu nanomesh with a periodicity of 1300 nm, width of 150 nm, and thickness of 40 nm on a quartz substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 296. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Nanomesh electrode fabricated through oblique deposition using a 1500 nm-diameter PS nanosphere array as a mask. Reproduced with permission from ref. 300. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) Cu crosswire grid comprising two overlapping nanowire arrays via stepwise angle-resolved nanosphere lithography. Reproduced with permission from ref. 301. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Network-structured CNT films using a 900 nm-diameter silica colloidal crystal as a template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 302. Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. 
5. Conclusions and perspectives
Controlled fabrication of structures on the nanoscale has been a long-standing research focus. The development in the synthesis of two-dimensional patterned nanostructures via nanosphere lithography has been rapid, bringing out diverse configurations, intriguing structure-induced properties, as well as decent functionalities in a broad range of applications. Here, we systematically summarize recent advances in colloidal-templated 2D nanostructures. We start with a briefing on the progress in the preparation methods. The technology is of high flexibility and is suitable for a variety of materials as well as numerious substrates, such as silica-, silicon-and polymer-based surfaces. Colloidal templates are successfully prepared on arbitrary surfaces and the scale up to several square meters is feasible. The library of nanostructure morphology has been significantly enriched, including simple repetitive arrays as well as binary and ternary complex arrays. Particular emphasis is put on outlining the rational design of structure-induced functionality for each application. We discussed the structure-dependent properties, covering the PBG, antireflection, SPR, and wettability, which have aroused interest in extensive explorations in a broad range of applications. We further demonstrate the applications and focus on the structure-dependent properties that benefit certain applications. This field has experienced rapid development in the last decade with significant attention on optical properties and related applications. For example, devices such as LEDs, solar cells, smart windows, etc. benefit from the antireflection properties, enhanced by the sub-wavelength nanostructure arrays that promote the transmittance of the magnetic wave by generating a gradual index gradient. The other optical properties of the SPR and the PBG are also extensively studied in these arrayed nanostructures and widely applied in sensors, SERS, solar cells, smart windows, and so on. Besides the investigation of optical properties, the increase of surface areas of 2D arrays compared to the planar one leads to the promotion of wettability, active reaction sites, as well as roughness-induced friction. These factors contributed to the performance enhancement in technologies of photocatalysis, smart windows, triboelectric nanogenerators, sensors, and so on.
Though the surface patterning technique based on colloidal templates is considered as a facile, time-saving, reliable, and inexpensive method, shortages remain and are worthy to be improved. Defects of grain boundaries are commonly observed on the colloidal templates especially in large-scale samples. So far, it has been challenging to prepare single crystalline colloidal templates on the centimeter scale and these defects inevitably form during the self-assembly process. These defects significantly limit the patterning method in some applications and usually lead to deviations between the produced and the expected results in most applications. Improvements are expected for developing large-area and defect-free colloidal templates. In addition, the applicable templates offer limited configurations and most of the studies rely on colloidal templates with a hexagonal packed configuration. Hexagonal packing is widely observed as the most thermodynamically stable configuration in the self-assembly process. To break the packing trend, additional techniques are necessary to control the self-assembly process, while they commonly sophisticate the preparation process, leading to the reduction of reliability as well as the increase in cost. Development of simple and reliable ways to provide colloidal templates with configurations beyond the hexagonal packing is expected. Moreover, the methods to remove the colloidal templates after lithography are limited, narrowing the capable materials and applications. Taking a polystyrene (PS) sphere template as an example, common methods for removal are based on the high-temperature annealing or wet-chemistry method using solvents with high polarity. These methods are suitable for some inorganic materials, while not applicable to most organic materials. Broadening the methods for template removal is also highly desirable. Lastly, it is worth mentioning that the production of structures with their feature size less than 100 nm is still challenging by this method, which is due to the difficulty in preparing high-quality templates using sub-100 nm nanospheres.
Compared to the fruitful achievements in preparation, we believe that the exploration of the application of colloidal-templated nanostructures is still in the early stage. Considering the extensive fields of applications and their rapid development as well as the increasing attention on the nano/microscale in future, we envision a plentiful contribution to the applications of colloidal-based surface patterning in a broader range of devices and applications. A better understanding of the properties of colloidal templates is critical to their application. Though the optical properties including the SPR, PBG, and antireflection are well-established, there remains many uncertainties and unrevealed properties. For example, the mechanical properties of colloidal templates are relatively rarely investigated. The group of Yan turns their attention to the field recently using an atomic force microscope (AFM) with a peak-force quantitative nanoscale mechanical (QNM) mode.306–308 Nano/micromechanics plays a significant role in flexible and stretchable devices, such as triboelectric nanogenerators.223 Moreover, integration of colloidal-based surface patterning with other lithography/patterning methods may be widely applied.309 Thus, the rational design of the integration method for specific materials, nanostructures, or devices is important. With great advances achieved, it is expected that colloidal-based surface patterning will be applied in extensive fields with the aid of improved template quality, preparation methods, and emerging properties.
Abbreviations

4-ATP4-Aminothiophenol
a-Si:HAmorphous silicon
ALDAtomic layer deposition
CNTCarbon nanotube
CPPCeramic plate phosphor
CBConduction band
CCMColloidal crystal monolayer
c-SiCrystalline Si
EQEExternal quantum efficiency
FETField effect transistor
HCPHexagonal closed-packed
ITOIndium tin oxide
IRInfrared
IQEInternal quantum efficiency
LEDLight-emitting diode
LEELight extraction efficiency
LOPLight output power
LSPRLocalized surface plasmon resonance
Low-QLow-quality factor
MACEMetal-assisted chemical etching
MITMetal–insulator-transition
MBMethylene blue
MPIMicropropulsive injection
MQWMultiple quantum well
NBNanobowl
nc-SiNanocrystalline silicon
NILNanoimprint lithography
NPNanoparticle
NRNanorod
NIRNear-infrared
NCPNon-close-packed
OLEDOrganic light-emitting diode
PSSPatterned sapphire substrates
PECPhotoelectrochemical
PBGPhotonic bandgap
PCPhotonic crystal
PDMSPoly(dimethylsiloxane)
PVPhotovoltaic
P4VPPoly-4-vinylpyridine
PMMAPoly(methyl methacrylate)
PSPolystyrene
PLDPulsed laser deposition
QEQuantum efficiency
RIEReactive ion etching
SEMScanning electron microscope
ss-DSCSolid-state dye-sensitized solar cell
SERSSurface-enhanced Raman scattering
SPSurface plasmon
SPPSurface plasmon polariton
TIRTotal internal reflection
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
2DTwo-dimensional
UVUltraviolet
VBValence band

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
J. Z. acknowledges the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 21774043 and 21474037). Y. L. acknowledges the support from the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) Academic Research Fund Tier one, RG124/16 and RG200/17, and the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister's Office, Singapore, under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) programme.
References
Y. Xia, J. A. Rogers, K. E. Paul and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1823–1848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, M. Retsch, C.-A. Fustin, A. del Campo and U. Jonas, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6265–6311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huo, Z. Zheng, G. Zheng, L. R. Giam, H. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2008, 321, 1658–1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Garcia, A. W. Knoll and E. Riedo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 577–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Drost, F. Tu, L. Berger, C. Preischl, W. Zhou, H. Gliemann, C. Woll and H. Marbach, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3825–3835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bishop, M. Fronzi, C. Elbadawi, V. Nikam, J. Pritchard, J. E. Froch, N. M. H. Duong, M. J. Ford, I. Aharonovich, C. J. Lobo and M. Toth, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2873–2882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Schnauber, J. Schall, S. Bounouar, T. Hohne, S. I. Park, G. H. Ryu, T. Heindel, S. Burger, J. D. Song, S. Rodt and S. Reitzenstein, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2336–2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qin, Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Nat. Protoc., 2010, 5, 491–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, X. Wang, W. Lu, X. Wu and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2137–2211 RSC .
J. J. Dumond, H. Y. Low, H. P. Lee and J. Y. H. Fuh, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 152–160 RSC .
A. Revzin, R. J. Russell, V. K. Yadavalli, W.-G. Koh, C. Deister, D. D. Hile, M. B. Mellott and M. V. Pishko, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 5440–5447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, K. E. Paul, R. J. Jackman and G. M. Whitesides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 2658–2660 CrossRef CAS .
P. Van Assenbergh, E. Meinders, J. Geraedts and D. Dodou, Small, 2018, 14, 1703401 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ye, Y. Ding, Y. Duan, J. Su, Z. Yin and Y. A. Huang, Small, 2018, 14, 1703521 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yu, F. F. Yun and X. Wang, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 36–40 RSC .
Y. Huang, W. Li, M. Qin, H. Zhou, X. Zhang, F. Li and Y. Song, Small, 2017, 13, 1503339 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zhang and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4249–4269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye and L. Qi, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 608–631 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, G. Duan, G. Liu and W. Cai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3614–3627 RSC .
M. Xue, X. Cai and G. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 548–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Deckman and J. H. Dunsmuir, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1982, 41, 377–379 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Deckman, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 1983, 1, 1109–1112 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Jensen, M. D. Malinsky, C. L. Haynes and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10549–10556 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Haynes and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 5599–5611 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dev, B. Dev Choudhury, A. Abedin and S. Anand, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4577–4583 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kang, Y. J. Heo, D. J. Kim, J. H. Kim, T. Y. Jeon, S. Cho, H. M. So, W. S. Chang and S. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37201–37209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Toma, A. Belu, D. Mayer and A. Offenhausser, Small, 2017, 13, 1700629 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Y. Wang, D. T. Bennetsen, M. Foss, T. Ameringer, H. Thissen and P. Kingshott, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4979–4989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Chen and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5332–5338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Alhmoud, B. Delalat, R. Elnathan, A. Cifuentes-Rius, A. Chaix, M.-L. Rogers, J.-O. Durand and N. H. Voelcker, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1137–1145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Elnathan, L. Isa, D. Brodoceanu, A. Nelson, F. J. Harding, B. Delalat, T. Kraus and N. H. Voelcker, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23717–23724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, G. Duan, Y. Li, G. Liu and W. Cai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9207–9213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schaffner, G. England, M. Kolle, J. Aizenberg and N. Vogel, Small, 2015, 11, 4334–4340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vlad, A. Frölich, T. Zebrowski, C. A. Dutu, K. Busch, S. Melinte, M. Wegener and I. Huynen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1164–1171 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, X. Li, W. Wang, F. Zhou, G. Duan, Y. Li, Z. Xu and W. Cai, Small, 2014, 10, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bley, J. Semmler, M. Rey, C. Zhao, N. Martic, R. N. Klupp Taylor, M. Stingl and N. Vogel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706965 CrossRef .
G. Singh, H. J. Griesser, K. Bremmell and P. Kingshott, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 540–546 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, Y. Cao, Y. Cai, J. Yang, X. He, P. Nordlander and P. S. Cremer, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6594–6604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, L. de Viguerie, U. Jonas, C. K. Weiss and K. Landfester, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3064–3073 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Wendisch, R. Oberreiter, M. Salihovic, M. S. Elsaesser and G. R. Bourret, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3931–3939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chang, B. Du, H. Huang and T. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 22705–22713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kong, X. Wang, T. Luo, Y. Yao, L. Li and S. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19345–19353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fang, Y. Li, Z. Chen, W. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Xiang, H. Shen, Z. Li and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19951–19957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, F. Xu, S. Ostendorp, G. Wilde, H. Zhao and Y. Lei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2446–2455 CrossRef CAS .
H. Van Gorp, P. Walke, A. M. Braganca, J. Greenwood, O. Ivasenko, B. E. Hirsch and S. De Feyter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12005–12012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ai, H. Möhwald, D. Wang and G. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600271 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Lai and L. Chi, Nano Today, 2018, 22, 26–61 CrossRef .
Y. Li, W. Cai and G. Duan, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 615–624 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, N. Koshizaki and W. Cai, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 357–373 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, S. Yang, M. Wu and G. Wilde, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1247–1258 RSC .
L. Li, T. Zhai, H. Zeng, X. Fang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 40–56 RSC .
S. Y. Lee, H. C. Jeon and S.-M. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5900–5913 RSC .
P. Colson, C. Henrist and R. Cloots, J. Nanomater., 2013, 2013, 948510 Search PubMed .
T. Kraus, D. Brodoceanu, N. Pazos-Perez and A. Fery, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4529–4541 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ai, Y. Yu, H. Mohwald, G. Zhang and B. Yang, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 206, 5–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Geng, T. Wei, X. Wang, D. Shen, Z. Hao and Q. Yan, Small, 2014, 10, 1668–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, C. Geng, Z. Hao, T. Wei and Q. Yan, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 228, 105–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Lotito and T. Zambelli, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 246, 217–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tsuji and H. Kawaguchi, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8439–8442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, D. Wang, Z.-Z. Gu, J. Hartmann and H. Möhwald, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5268–5274 CrossRef CAS .
M. Horecha, V. Senkovskyy, A. Synytska, M. Stamm, A. I. Chervanyov and A. Kiriy, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 5980–5992 RSC .
S. B. Quint and C. Pacholski, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 3735–3738 RSC .
K. Geisel, W. Richtering and L. Isa, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 7968–7976 RSC .
B. M. Rey, R. Elnathan, R. Ditcovski, K. Geisel, M. Zanini, M. A. Fernandez-Rodriguez, V. V. Naik, A. Frutiger, W. Richtering, T. Ellenbogen, N. H. Voelcker and L. Isa, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 157–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Weng, Y. Guan and Y. Zhang, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 3977–3982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Weng, X. Li, Y. Guan, X. X. Zhu and Y. Zhang, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 12876–12884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Karg, T. Hellweg and P. Mulvaney, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4668–4676 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Müller, C. Kuttner, T. A. F. König, V. V. Tsukruk, S. Förster, M. Karg and A. Fery, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9410–9421 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Volk, J. P. Fitzgerald, M. Retsch and M. Karg, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7332–7337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Volk, J. P. S. Fitzgerald, P. Ruckdeschel, M. Retsch, T. A. F. König and M. Karg, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600971 CrossRef .
N. Vogel, C. Fernandez-Lopez, J. Perez-Juste, L. M. Liz-Marzan, K. Landfester and C. K. Weiss, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8985–8993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Clara-Rahola, R. Contreras-Caceres, B. Sierra-Martin, A. Maldonado-Valdivia, M. Hund, A. Fery, T. Hellweg and A. Fernandez-Barbero, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 463, 18–27 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, T. Prasad, M. J. McFarland and V. L. Colvin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 011908 CrossRef .
P. Jiang and M. J. McFarland, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3710–3711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Park, T. Lee, Y. Xia, T. J. Shin, J. Myoung and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4633–4638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, J. He, S. Zhou, X. Yang, S. Li, J. Sheng, D. Wang, T. Yu, J. Ye and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4591–4598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-D. Liu and B. Yang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 675–690 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vukusic and J. R. Sambles, Nature, 2003, 424, 852–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cai and L. Qi, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 37–53 RSC .
J. Zhu, Z. Yu, G. F. Burkhard, C.-M. Hsu, S. T. Connor, Y. Xu, Q. Wang, M. McGehee, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 279–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Li, J. H. Zhang, S. J. Zhu, H. P. Dong, F. Jia, Z. H. Wang, Z. Q. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Li, H. B. Li, W. Q. Xu and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4731–4734 CAS .
J. Li, J. Zhu and X. Gao, Small, 2014, 10, 2578–2582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Brodoceanu, R. Elnathan, B. Prieto-Simon, B. Delalat, T. Guinan, E. Kroner, N. H. Voelcker and T. Kraus, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1160–1169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-L. Min, B. Jiang and P. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3914–3918 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Sun, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 061112 CrossRef .
Y. Ou, X. Zhu, V. Jokubavicius, R. Yakimova, N. A. Mortensen, M. Syvajarvi, S. Xiao and H. Ou, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4662 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, S. Wang, S. He, J. Wang, Y. Guo and Y. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11375 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ai, P. Gu, H. Mohwald and G. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15473–15478 RSC .
S. Yang, N. Sun, B. B. Stogin, J. Wang, Y. Huang and T.-S. Wong, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1285 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Lin, Z. Liu, S. Feng, Y. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Liu and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40180–40188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 117–127 CrossRef .
C. Li, G. Hong and L. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 476–481 CrossRef CAS .
K.-C. Hsieh, T.-Y. Tsai, D. Wan, H.-L. Chen and N.-H. Tai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1327–1336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ke, I. Balin, N. Wang, Q. Lu, A. I. Tok, T. J. White, S. Magdassi, I. Abdulhalim and Y. Long, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33112–33120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. López-García, J. F. Galisteo-López, Á. Blanco, C. López and A. García-Martín, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4338–4343 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, A. D. Li, Z. B. Gu, Q. J. Wang, Y. Zhang, D. Wu, Y. F. Chen, N. B. Ming, S. X. Ouyang and T. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 031910 CrossRef .
G. Duan, W. Cai, Y. Luo and F. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 644–650 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kempa, B. Kimball, J. Rybczynski, Z. P. Huang, P. F. Wu, D. Steeves, M. Sennett, M. Giersig, D. V. G. L. N. Rao, D. L. Carnahan, D. Z. Wang, J. Y. Lao, W. Z. Li and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 13–18 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, G. Vienneau, M. Jones, B. Subramanian, J. Robichaud and Y. Djaoued, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7804–7810 RSC .
W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2003, 424, 824–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Busch, G. von Freymann, S. Linden, S. F. Mingaleev, L. Tkeshelashvili and M. Wegener, Phys. Rep., 2007, 444, 101–202 CrossRef .
W. R. Ko, J. Zhang, H. H. Park, J. Nah, J. Y. Suh and M. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20516–20521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3908–3920 RSC .
L. Y. Wu, B. M. Ross and L. P. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1956–1961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, D. Slotcavage, J. D. Mai, W. Liang, Y. Xie, Y. Chen and T. J. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6432–6438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Berini and I. De Leon, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 6, 16–24 CrossRef .
P. Zhan, Z. L. Wang, H. Dong, J. Sun, J. Wu, H. T. Wang, S. N. Zhu, N. B. Ming and J. Zi, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1612–1616 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, L. Shi, X. Liu, J. Zi and Z. Wang, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 807–812 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, X. Zhang, L. Chang, T. Wang, Z. Li, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 779–787 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ke, X. Wen, D. Zhao, R. Che, Q. Xiong and Y. Long, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7542–7551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lan, S. Wang, X. Yin, Y. Liang, H. Dong, N. Gao, J. Li, H. Wang and G. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13454–13462 RSC .
X. Zhang, S. Ye, X. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Wu, J. Zhang, T. Wang and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 933–940 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Ye, S. Wu, J. Zhang, L. Cui, A. Li, T. Wang, S. Li and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8903–8910 RSC .
Z. Li, X. Zhang, S. Ye, J. Zhang, T. Wang, L. Fang, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 105307 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, S. Mu, L. Fang, H. Shen, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3346–3357 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xue, S. Ye, H. Su, S. Wang, J. Nan, X. Chen, W. Ruan, J. Zhang, Z. Cui and B. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6724–6733 RSC .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Ke, H. Pan, K. Ma, Q. Xiao, D. Yin, G. Wu and M. T. Swihart, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2534–2540 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Liu, D. Yin, Y. Ke and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3378–3388 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, R. J. H. Ng, S. Safari Dinachali, M. Jalali, Y. Yu and J. K. W. Yang, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 627–633 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, M. Duchamp, C. Xue, R. E. Dunin Borkowski, G. Liu and Y. Long, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600164 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, A. Huang, Y. Li, S. Ji, Y. Gao and P. Jin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9208–9213 RSC .
P. Ge, S. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Liu, N. Yu, J. Zhang, H. Shen, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 7248–7255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xue, J. Nan, T. Wang, S. Wang, S. Ye, J. Zhang, Z. Cui and B. Yang, Small, 2017, 13, 1601807 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17036 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, J. Zhao, W. Liu, B. Yang, J. Wei and Y. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25522–25528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, X. Yan, X. Yao, L. Xu, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Yang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213–2217 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, D. Wang, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 9018–9025 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. J. Huang, S. H. Heo, C. C. Li, Y. K. Choi, W. P. Cai and S. O. Cho, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 2169–2174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Li, S. Gao and N. Koshizaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8366–8371 RSC .
Y. Wu, C. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Xu, Z. Yang, H. Zhang, L. Liu and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5943–5951 RSC .
M. Ghezzi, P.-Y. Wang, P. Kingshott and C. Neto, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500068 CrossRef .
Y. Li, W. Cai, B. Cao, G. Duan, F. Sun, C. Li and L. Jia, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 238–243 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Park, S. W. Yoon and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14035–14041 RSC .
P. Ge, S. Wang, W. Liu, T. Wang, N. Yu, P. Xue, H. Chen, H. Shen, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700034 CrossRef .
P. Ge, S. Wang, W. Liu, T. Wang, N. Yu, S. Ye, H. Shen, Y. Wu, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 2177–2184 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, L. Shi, D. Han, J. Zi and P. V. Braun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1910–1916 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hong, C. Li and L. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3774–3783 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, S. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Yao, J. Zhong, H. Lin, T. Huang, Z. Yang, J. Zhu, S. Liu, C. Lienau, L. Wang and B. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706031 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cai, N. L. Smith, J. T. Zhang and S. A. Asher, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5013–5025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, F. Liu, X. Yang, Y. Guan, C. Ma, X. Hao, X. Liang, F. Liu, P. Sun, T. Zhang and G. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16752–16760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, Y. Li, J. Dong, J. Xiao, Y. Ma and L. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6112–6119 RSC .
Z. Cai, J. T. Zhang, F. Xue, Z. Hong, D. Punihaole and S. A. Asher, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4840–4847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, Z. Cai, D. H. Kwak, X. Liu and S. A. Asher, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 9036–9041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, D. H. Kwak, D. Punihaole, Z. Hong, S. S. Velankar, X. Liu and S. A. Asher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13036–13040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, X. Chao, X. Liu and S. A. Asher, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6337–6339 RSC .
J. T. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Luo, A. Tikhonov, N. Kornienko and S. A. Asher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9152–9155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6169–6171 RSC .
F. Xue, Z. Meng, F. Wang, Q. Wang, M. Xue and Z. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9559–9565 RSC .
D. Men, H. Zhang, L. Hang, D. Liu, X. Li, W. Cai, Q. Xiong and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3659–3665 RSC .
D. Men, F. Zhou, L. Hang, X. Li, G. Duan, W. Cai and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2117–2122 RSC .
Z. Dai, H. Dai, Y. Zhou, D. Liu, G. Duan, W. Cai and Y. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500167 CrossRef .
A. Rao, H. Long, A. Harley-Trochimczyk, T. Pham, A. Zettl, C. Carraro and R. Maboudian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2634–2641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, L. Hang, D. Men, H. Li, D. Liu, X. Li, L. Wen and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9864–9871 RSC .
Y. M. Sabri, A. E. Kandjani, S. J. Ippolito and S. K. Bhargava, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1491–1499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, M. Cho, H.-J. Han, Y. S. Jung and I. Park, Small, 2018, 14, 1703691 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hong, O. Shim, H. Kwon and Y. Choi, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 7633–7638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ni, M. Wang, T. Shen and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1913–1925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Im, K. C. Bantz, S. H. Lee, T. W. Johnson, C. L. Haynes and S. H. Oh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2678–2685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schlucker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4756–4795 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Farcau and S. Astilean, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11717–11722 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kuhler, M. Weber and T. Lohmuller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8947–8952 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, F. Zhou, M. Liu, D. Liu, D. Men, W. Cai, G. Duan and Y. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500031 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, M. Liu, F. Zhou, D. Liu, G. Liu, G. Duan, W. Cai and Y. Li, Small, 2015, 11, 844–853 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, G. Duan, G. Liu, Y. Li, L. Xu and W. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5709–5714 RSC .
W. Zhao, S. Xiao, Y. Zhang, D. Pan, J. Wen, X. Qian, D. Wang, H. Cao, W. He, M. Quan and Z. Yang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14220–14229 RSC .
C. G. Wang, X. Z. Wu, D. Di, P. T. Dong, R. Xiao and S. Q. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4672–4680 RSC .
L. Wang, B. Ai, H. Möhwald, Y. Yu and G. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 906–916 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Small, 2012, 8, 2548–2554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Oh, S. G. Park, M. H. Kang, J. H. Choi, Y. Nam and K. H. Jeong, Small, 2011, 7, 184–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X.-J. Zhang, J. Ye, L.-M. Chen, S.-P. Lau, W.-J. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3027–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Abdelsalam, S. Mahajan, P. N. Bartlett, J. J. Baumberg and A. E. Russell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7399–7406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, J. Yin, X. He, C. Yue, Z. Wu, J. Li and J. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7747–7753 RSC .
H. Zhu, A. Liu, D. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Yang, J. J. Gooding and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3273–3276 RSC .
S. Xu, S. Jiang, J. Wang, J. Wei, W. Yue and Y. Ma, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 222, 1175–1183 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bildirir, V. G. Gregoriou, A. Avgeropoulos, U. Scherf and C. L. Chochos, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 546–556 RSC .
B. Wang, T. Gao and P. W. Leu, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 471–475 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Ding, J. Zhu, W. Cai, S.-J. Moon, N. Cai, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 52–57 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, C. M. Hsu, Z. Yu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1979–1984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, J. Yao, V. K. Narasimhan, Z. Ruan, C. Xie, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 664 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2011, 105, 329–339 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 451–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hua, Q. Lin, Q. Zhang and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6627–6640 RSC .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Garnett, M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and M. D. McGehee, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 269–295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 198–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. Cao, R. Xu, S. Qu, Z. Wang and Y. Lei, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 328–362 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koynov, M. S. Brandt and M. Stutzmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 203107 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y.-J. Jen, C.-Y. Peng, T.-A. Liu, Y.-K. Hsu, C.-L. Pan, H.-C. Lo, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-H. Chang, C.-S. Lee, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770–774 CrossRef CAS .
E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baek, S. J. Ha, H. Lee, K. Kim, D. Kim and J. H. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37006–37012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yin, M. Song, S. Duan, P. Manley, D. Greiner, C. A. Kaufmann and M. Schmid, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31646–31652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Grandidier, D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1272–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang and P. W. Leu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Z. Wei, H. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. He, S. Xiao, Z. Fan, K. S. Wong and S. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6393–6402 RSC .
S. Jeong, L. Hu, H. R. Lee, E. Garnett, J. W. Choi and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2989–2994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeong, E. C. Garnett, S. Wang, Z. Yu, S. Fan, M. L. Brongersma, M. D. McGehee and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2971–2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Hörantner, W. Zhang, M. Saliba, K. Wojciechowski and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2041–2047 RSC .
K. Meng, S. Gao, L. Wu, G. Wang, X. Liu, G. Chen, Z. Liu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4166–4173 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef CAS .
O. Legrini, E. Oliveros and A. M. Braun, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 671–698 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, G. Li and J. C. Yu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3031–3039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Djurišić, Y. H. Leung and A. M. Ching Ng, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 400–410 RSC .
S. T. Martin, H. Herrmann, W. Choi and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1994, 90, 3315–3322 RSC .
S. T. Martin, H. Herrmann and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1994, 90, 3323–3330 RSC .
Y. Li, T. Sasaki, Y. Shimizu and N. Koshizaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14755–14762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren, H. Zhang, D. Kong, B. Liu, Y. Yang and C. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22953–22957 RSC .
W. Wang, J. Dong, X. Ye, Y. Li, Y. Ma and L. Qi, Small, 2016, 12, 1469–1478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. W. Zhang, Y. J. Wang, H. Y. Cheng, W. Q. Yao and Y. F. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1286–1290 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Zhu, S. Zheng, F. Pan and T. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2111–2114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li and N. Koshizaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2972–2978 RSC .
Y.-H. Chen, W.-S. Li, C.-Y. Liu, C.-Y. Wang, Y.-C. Chang and L.-J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1345–1351 RSC .
F. Wang, D. Zhao, Z. Xu, Z. Zheng, L. Zhang and D. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9132–9137 RSC .
C. Cheng, H. Zhang, W. Ren, W. Dong and Y. Sun, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 779–786 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and D. Bahnemann, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 283–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Ye, Y. Ma and L. Qi, Small, 2015, 11, 1183–1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, C. Jin and L. Qi, Small, 2018, 14, 1801352 CrossRef PubMed .
F. R. Fan, Z. Q. Tian and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283–4305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. Chen and L. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2250–2282 RSC .
H. Fang, Q. Li, W. He, J. Li, Q. Xue, C. Xu, L. Zhang, T. Ren, G. Dong, H. L. Chan, J. Dai and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17306–17311 RSC .
Y. Ke, Y. Yin, Q. Zhang, Y. Tan, P. Hu, S. Wang, Y. Tang, Y. Zhou, X. Wen, S. Wu, T. J. White, J. Yin, J. Peng, Q. Xiong, D. Zhao and Y. Long, Joule, 2019, 3, 858–871 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, S. Cao, T. Zhang, Q. Yao, A. Fisher and J. Y. Lee, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 291–297 RSC .
C. Liu, Y. Long, S. Magdassi and D. Mandler, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 485–490 RSC .
C. Liu, I. Balin, S. Magdassi, I. Abdulhalim and Y. Long, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A124–A132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qian, N. Wang, Y. Li, J. Zhang, Z. Xu and Y. Long, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10766–10771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, S. Magdassi, Y. Gao and Y. Long, Small, 2017, 13, 1701147 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, M. Layani, S. Wang, P. Hu, Y. Ke, S. Magdassi and Y. Long, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705365 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, Y. Ke, C. Liu, Z. Chen, N. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, Y. Gao and Y. Long, Joule, 2018, 2, 1707–1746 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Li, C. Liu, S.-P. Feng and N. X. Fang, Joule, 2018, 3, 290–302 CrossRef .
Y. Ke, C. Zhou, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, S. H. Chan and Y. Long, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800113 CrossRef .
Y. Ke, S. Wang, G. Liu, M. Li, T. J. White and Y. Long, Small, 2018, 14, 1802025 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Cai, X. Hu and Y. Long, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1121–1126 RSC .
S. Wang, K. A. Owusu, L. Mai, Y. Ke, Y. Zhou, P. Hu, S. Magdassi and Y. Long, Appl. Energy, 2018, 211, 200–217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, J. Bao, M. Tao, R. Zhu, Y. Lin, X. Zhang and Y. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6021–6023 RSC .
A. I. Zhmakin, Phys. Rep., 2011, 498, 189–241 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wei, K. Wu, D. Lan, Q. Yan, Y. Chen, C. Du, J. Wang, Y. Zeng and J. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 211111 CrossRef .
H. K. Park, J. R. Oh and Y. R. Do, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 25593–25601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wei, K. Wu, D. Lan, B. Sun, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Huo, Q. Hu, J. Wang, Y. Zeng and J. Li, AIP Adv., 2014, 4, 067119 CrossRef .
P. Dong, J. Yan, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Geng, T. Wei, P. Cong, Y. Zhang, J. Zeng, Y. Tian, L. Sun, Q. Yan, J. Li, S. Fan and Z. Qin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 241113 CrossRef .
C. B. Soh, B. Wang, S. J. Chua, V. K. Lin, R. J. Tan and S. Tripathy, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 405303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-M. An, J. I. Sim, K. S. Shin, Y. M. Sung and T. G. Kim, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2012, 48, 891–896 CAS .
C. Du, T. Wei, H. Zheng, L. Wang, C. Geng, Q. Yan, J. Wang and J. Li, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 25373–25380 CrossRef PubMed .
T. S. Kim, S.-M. Kim, Y. H. Jang and G. Y. Jung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 171114 CrossRef .
C.-H. Hou, S.-Z. Tseng, C.-H. Chan, T.-J. Chen, H.-T. Chien, F.-L. Hsiao, H.-K. Chiu, C.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Tsai and C.-C. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 133105 CrossRef .
W. N. Ng, C. H. Leung, P. T. Lai and H. W. Choi, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 255302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Wei, Z. Xiong, L. Shang, Y. Tian, Y. Zhao, P. Zhou, J. Wang and J. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 013108 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Li, X. Yi, J. Wang, G. Wang and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7021–7026 RSC .
T. Wei, Z. Huo, Y. Zhang, H. Zheng, Y. Chen, J. Yang, Q. Hu, R. Duan, J. Wang, Y. Zeng and J. Li, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, A1093–A1100 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wei, X. Ji, K. Wu, H. Zheng, C. Du, Y. Chen, Q. Yan, L. Zhao, Z. Zhou, J. Wang and J. Li, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 379–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Li and H. W. Choi, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 053104 CrossRef .
C. Du, C. Geng, H. Zheng, T. Wei, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, K. Wu, Q. Yan, J. Wang and J. Li, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 52, 040207 CrossRef .
H. K. Park, S. W. Yoon, D. Y. Choi and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1732–1738 RSC .
S. W. Yoon, H. K. Park, K.-Y. Ko, J. Ahn and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7513–7522 RSC .
H. K. Park, J. H. Oh, H. Kang, J. Zhang and Y. R. Do, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4549–4559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Hyun, H. K. Lee, S. S. Oh, O. Hess, C. G. Choi, S. H. Im and O. O. Park, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1846–1850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Okamoto, I. Niki, A. Scherer, Y. Narukawa, T. Mukai and Y. Kawakami, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 071102 CrossRef .
D.-M. Yeh, C.-F. Huang, C.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Lu and C. C. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 171103 CrossRef .
C. Y. Cho, M. K. Kwon, S. J. Lee, S. H. Han, J. W. Kang, S. E. Kang, D. Y. Lee and S. J. Park, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 205201 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Kao, Y. K. Su, C. L. Lin and J. J. Chen, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2010, 22, 984–986 CAS .
J. J. Chen, Y. K. Su, C. L. Lin, S. M. Chen, W. L. Li and C. C. Kao, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2008, 20, 1193–1195 CAS .
Y. K. Su, J. J. Chen, C. L. Lin, S. M. Chen, W. L. Li and C. C. Kao, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 2973–2976 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Su, J. J. Chen, C. L. Lin and C. C. Kao, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2010, 7, 1784–1786 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, C. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Ding, L. Li, B. Wei and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10213–10219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chan, C.-H. Hou, S.-Z. Tseng, T.-J. Chen, H.-T. Chien, F.-L. Hsiao, C.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Tsai and C.-C. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 011110 CrossRef .
C. Geng, L. Zheng, H. Fang, Q. Yan, T. Wei, Z. Hao, X. Wang and D. Shen, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 335301 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ji, Y. Wang, L. Chi and H. Fuchs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3855–3859 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Fang, N. Koshizaki, T. Sasaki, L. Li, S. Gao, Y. Shimizu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2467–2473 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reese and Z. Bao, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Moss, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, Sect. B, 1954, 67, 775–782 CrossRef .
C.-A. Di, Y. Liu, G. Yu and D. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1573–1583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Wallraff and W. D. Hinsberg, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1801–1822 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ito and S. Okazaki, Nature, 2000, 406, 1027–1031 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, M. P. Edgar, R. Bowman, L. E. Vittert, S. Welsh, A. Bowman and M. J. Padgett, Science, 2013, 340, 844–847 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, W. Tian, M. Liao, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1400–1422 RSC .
Y. K. Lin, H. W. Ting, C. Y. Wang, S. Gwo, L. J. Chou, C. J. Tsai and L. J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2723–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Ma and L. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603653 CrossRef .
H. Chen, L. Hu, X. Fang and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1229–1235 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. Hu, S. Gao, M. Liao, L. Sang and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3256–3263 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H. Yang, G. Liu, F. Gao, M. Dai, Y. Hu, H. Chen, W. Cao, P. Hu and W. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705153 CrossRef .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-P. Xu, Y.-Q. Li and J.-X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9116–9142 RSC .
K. Zilberberg and T. Riedl, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14481–14508 RSC .
T. Q. Trung and N.-E. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2202–2222 RSC .
D. Kuzum, H. Takano, E. Shim, J. C. Reed, H. Juul, A. G. Richardson, J. de Vries, H. Bink, M. A. Dichter, T. H. Lucas, D. A. Coulter, E. Cubukcu and B. Litt, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5259 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Park, A. A. Schendel, S. Mikael, S. K. Brodnick, T. J. Richner, J. P. Ness, M. R. Hayat, F. Atry, S. T. Frye, R. Pashaie, S. Thongpang, Z. Ma and J. C. Williams, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Minami, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 5822–5828 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Granqvist and A. Hultåker, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 411, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
M. Layani, A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5581–5591 RSC .
S. Ye, A. R. Rathmell, Z. Chen, I. E. Stewart and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6670–6687 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, X. Zhu, R. Hoekstra, L. Li, F. Xiu, M. Xue, B. Zeng and K. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 143109 CrossRef .
A. J. Morfa, E. M. Akinoglu, J. Subbiah, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 054502 CrossRef .
T. Gao, B. Wang, B. Ding, J. K. Lee and P. W. Leu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2105–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Seo, Y. Qiang, I. Bilgin, S. Kar, C. Vinegoni, R. Weissleder and H. Fang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4365–4372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cheng, Z. Cui, Q. Li, S. Wang and Z. Du, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 425303 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Stelling, C. R. Singh, M. Karg, T. A. Konig, M. Thelakkat and M. Retsch, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Lee, H. Y. Lin and C. Y. Tseng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13705 CrossRef .
T. Qiu, E. M. Akinoglu, B. Luo, M. Giersig, M. Liang, J. Ning and L. Zhi, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2017, 34, 1600262 CrossRef .
M. H. Kim, J. Y. Choi, H. K. Choi, S. M. Yoon, O. O. Park, D. K. Yi, S. J. Choi and H. J. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kwon, K. Kim, S. Sung, I. Yi and I. Chung, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 235205 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Oddone and M. Giersig, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2017, 11, 1700005 CrossRef .
Y. Qiang, P. Artoni, K. J. Seo, S. Culaclii, V. Hogan, X. Zhao, Y. Zhong, X. Han, P.-M. Wang, Y.-K. Lo, Y. Li, H. A. Patel, Y. Huang, A. Sambangi, J. S. V. Chu, W. Liu, M. Fagiolini and H. Fang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0626 CrossRef .
P. Huang, L. Zhang, Q. Yan, D. Guo and G. Xie, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 13187–13192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, G. Pan, P. Huang, D. Guo and G. Xie, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 8225–8232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Zheng, X. Wang and Q. Yan, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 451–459 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cai, Q. Meng, H. Zhao, M. Li, Y. Dai, Y. Lin, H. Ding, N. Pan, Y. Tian, Y. Luo and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20189–20195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Yujie Ke
	Yujie Ke obtained his BEng and Master degrees from Wuhan Institute of Technology, China, in 2013 and the University at Buffalo, the State University of New York (SUNY-Buffalo), US, in 2015, respectively. Currently, he is a PhD candidate in Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore. His research interest includes micro-/nanoscale fabrication and related applications.

Shunsheng Ye
	Shunsheng Ye is currently a postdoctor at the Department of Macromolecular Science, Fudan University. He received his PhD degree in chemistry from Jilin University under the supervision of Prof. Junhu Zhang and Prof. Bai Yang in 2017. His recent research interests include directed assembly and interfacial self-assembly of plasmonic nanoparticles and their applications in diverse fields.

Junhu Zhang
	Junhu Zhang is currently a professor in the State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials. He received his PhD degree in chemistry from Jilin University under the supervision of Prof. Bai Yang. His recent research interests focus on biomimetic and functional microstructures on surfaces and interfaces, and their application on functional surfaces and devices.

Yi Long
	Yi Long is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at NTU. She obtained her PhD degree from the University of Cambridge, UK. She has successfully implemented technology transfer from lab to industry for a hard-disk Company and a car grooming Company. Her recent research is to develop thin-film coatings and micro/nanostructures for functional devices.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the diverse properties and applications derived from the toolbox of 2D nanostructures derived from nanosphere templates. The property and application are distinguished by the red and blue hexagons, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the commonly used methods for the preparation of the nanosphere templates, including the planar convective assembly, dip-coating, spin-coating, electrophoretic deposition, and interfacial-assembly. (b) Illustration of the diverse templates, which can be classified as close-packed, non-close-packed, binary, and bilayer templates, as well as the templates on a patterned surface, on a curved surface, and in a patterned array.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Wafer-scale NCP silica 2D colloidal crystals made by spin-coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2006, AIP Publishing LLC. (b) Typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of NCP silica 2D colloidal crystals prepared by spin-coating. The upper inset showing a higher-magnification image and the bottom inset showing a Fourier transform of a 40 μm × 40 μm region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration showing the rubbing process. (d) Photography of the resulting monolayer assembly of PS beads (1 μm in diameter) on the entire surface (20 cm × 20 cm) of the poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) rubber substrate. (e) Monolayer particle assembly processed by rubbing on a glass bottle and a 100 mL flask. The glassware had been coated with PDMS before the particles were rubbed. (f) Wafer-scale single-crystal monolayer of closely packed particles formed by repeated unidirectional rubbing and micropatterning of the colloidal monolayer. Inset: Diffraction pattern obtained by projecting a commercial laser pointer through the monolayer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (g and h) Photographs of PS 2D colloidal crystals prepared by the micropropulsive injection method on (g) 36 wafers and (h) a 1 m2 glass substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The high-magnification photograph of compound eyes of Calliphora and the SEM image of its ommatidium surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2003, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematics of (1) light propagation through the nanostructure array and (2) its refractive index gradient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM images of the silicon (1) nanocone and (2) nanowire arrays. (d) The photograph of samples of the silicon thin film, nanowires, and nanocones. (e) Absorption spectra of these three samples at a normal incident angle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (f) The photograph of (left) the planar silica substrate and (right) the substrate with double-sided nanocone arrays. (g) Transmittance spectra of the planar, single-sided, and double-sided silicon samples. Insets are the illustrations of these three samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Transmittance spectra of the Ag2S nanonet arrays with different pitch size from 500–1000 nm, determined by the colloidal crystal monolayer (CCM) particle diameter. (b) The PBG position (λ) versus the CCM particle diameter. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of the patterned CNT arrays. (d) The photograph of the CNTs with and without patterning on a polycarbonate substrate. The patterned CNT arrays on the top display colorful appearance due to coherent diffraction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e) Photographs of the samples with monolayered silica nanosphere arrays on quartz substrates. Diameters of the silica nanospheres are 400, 600, and 700 nm from figures on the top to the bottom. (f) Calculated transmittance spectra of the monolayered SiO2–VO2 core–shell nanosphere arrays with nanosphere diameters of 400–700 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of Ag nanowell arrays and the cross-section of the nanowells (x–z plane). (b) The time-averaged electric field distribution on the x–z plane of the Ag nanowells with an incident light of λ = 512 nm. (c) Normalized reflectance spectra of the nanowells in a series of solutions with different reflective indexes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the fabrication process of VO2 nanoparticle arrays. (e) Temperature-dependent extinction spectra of the VO2 nanoparticle array, which displays an LSPR switch-on property at elevated temperatures. (f) Effects of the particle diameter of VO2 and the medium reflective to the LSPR position. Insets are the SEM images of the VO2 nanoparticle arrays with diameters of 67, 125, 287 nm, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the anisotropic wetting surface for liquid direction in microfluidics. The surface consists of chemistry-asymmetric “Janus” silicon cylinder arrays with hydrophobic (–R) and hydrophilic (–OH) coating on each side. (b) Photographs of the liquid behavior in the T shape microchannel. The top and bottom outlets are along the hydrophilic and hydrophobic directions. The arrows indicate the liquid flow directions; surface tension of the injected liquid is illustrated below the images. The scale bar is 1 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the wettability “library” consisting of gradient silicon cone arrays and the contact measurements of sessile droplets on a different position of the “library”. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the sensor constructed from 2D colloidal crystals on stimuli-responsive hydrogel surfaces. The hydrogel containing recognition groups can react with the analytes and swell, resulting in the reflective color change. (b) Photographs of a glucose sensor based on such a design that display different colors at different glucose concentrations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the non-optical NO2 sensor based on 2D porous electrodes. The NO2 reduction reaction happens on the cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Pseudocolored SEM image of the Au NPs trapped near the tips. Au NPs and nanobowties are indicated as yellow and red, respectively. (b) Schematic of enhanced Raman spectroscopy and the Au NP trapping process near the tips. Corresponding measured Raman spectra are illustrated below for the detection of 10 μm R6G solutions. The figures display an increasing number of trapped Au NPs from left to right. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of an annular cavity with geometric dimensions indicated. The compositions are indicated using different colors. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the produced annular cavity. (e) Simulated electric field enhancement distributions of an annular cavity from the cross-sectional (figure on the left) and top views (figure on the right) at λ = 1416 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f and g) SEM images of the plasmonic nanoring cavity arrays in low and high magnifications. Inset of (f) is the illustration of the Ag nanoring cavity with a 10 nm gap. (h) Photograph of the produced plasmonic nanoring cavity arrays in a circular area with a diameter of 2 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the dielectric nanosphere solar cell. The ultrathin film crystalline silicon (c-Si) has ITO as the front contact and Ti/Ag as the back contact. A hexagonal close-packed (HCP) monolayer of PS 2D colloidal crystal lies on top of the solar cell device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration and (c) the cross-sectional SEM image of the configuration of the plasmonic ss-DSC with a 2D array of silver nanodomes in the back contact. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic showing the cross-sectional structure of nanodome solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM cross-sectional image of a monolayer of spherical Si nanoshells on a quartz substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2012, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the photoexcitation of a semiconductor (e.g., TiO2) and the subsequent generation of an electron and a hole, which are trapped by an oxidant (Ox) and a reductant (Red), respectively. For TiO2 photocatalysis, “Ox” is a surface-adsorbed oxygen molecule, and “Red” is a surface-bound hydroxyl group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Side-view SEM image of the TiO2 nanocolumn array obtained by PLD using a PS colloidal monolayer as the substrate. (c) TEM image of a single TiO2 nanocolumn from the side. The inset is the corresponding electron diffraction pattern. (d) Photocatalytic activity evaluation of different substrates based on the absorbance ratio A/A0 as a function of UV irradiation time. A and A0 are the absorbance after UV irradiation and that from the initial surface, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM image of the urchin-like TiO2 array. (f) Linear sweep voltammetry measurements of the urchin-like TiO2 and TiO2 microsphere electrodes, collected both in the dark and under 100 mW cm−2 simulated sunlight illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Tilted-view SEM image of a TiO2 NR@NB array obtained after 5 h of hydrothermal growth. (h) Linear sweep voltammograms of TiO2 NB, NR, and NR@NB array electrodes recorded in a 1 M NaOH solution under simulated one sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the triboelectric nanogenerator consisting of two arch-shaped friction layers. (b) The measured output voltage of the nanogenerator under finger tapping five times. (c) The durability test of the nanogenerator under a continuous tapping of 1000 cycles at a frequency of 3 Hz. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the thermochromic smart window toward architectural energy-conservation by selectively blocking infrared (IR) light at high temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) A typical example of temperature-dependent transmittance spectra of a VO2-based thermochromic film. The spectra are from 160 nm VO2 nanodome arrays. The inset is the corresponding crystallographic diagrams of the monoclinic and rutile phases VO2 at low (20 °C) and high (95 °C) temperature, respectively. (c) Illustration of the VO2 nanoparticle arrays derived from PS sphere templates. The VO2 particles crystallize and the PS template acts as a sacrificial template under high-temperature annealing. (d) The SEM image of 160 nm patterned VO2 nanoparticle arrays. The hexagonal patterns with ∼160 nm in periodicity are indicated as yellow hexagons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Illustration of the 2D core–shell SiO2–VO2 PCs characterized by a VO2 shell thickness of 20 nm. (f) TEM image of the 2D core–shell SiO2–VO2 PCs and an amplified image as the inset. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (g) Illustration of the antireflective moth-eye structures. (h) SEM image of the biomimetic moth-eye nanostructure consisting of VO2-overcoated SiO2 nipple arrays with a periodicity of ∼400 nm. The inserted TEM image of (h) presents a uniform VO2 coating of ∼40 nm on the structured SiO2 substrates with ∼200 nm periodicity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of a conventional InGaN/GaN MQW LED structure. (b) Tilted SEM image of a SiO2 PC structure with a periodicity of 700 nm and a diameter of 450 nm regrown on p-GaN. (c) Corresponding air-hole PC after removing SiO2 disks in (b). (d) Forward voltages and light output power of LEDs with and without PC structures as a function of injection current. (e) Far-field emission patterns of the LEDs with and without PCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2012, AIP Publishing. (f) Schematic diagram of a YAG:Ce CPP-capped LED with a 2D SiNx PC coating. (g) The blue-conversion-white electroluminescent spectra and (h) luminous efficacy of a conventional YAG:Ce CPP-capped LED and a 2D SiNx PC-assisted YAG:Ce CPP-capped LED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240. Copyright 2011, Optical Society of America. (i) Ag nanodisk array formed after the temperature reaches the p-GaN growth temperature. The inset sketches the configuration of the SP-enhanced blue LED with Ag nanodisks embedded in the p-GaN layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (j) The optical output power of Ag nanodisk array-enhanced LEDs as a function of injection current. (k) Cross-sectional SEM image of AlN grown on nano-PSS. The inset is the SEM image of nano-PSS obtained via wet etching. (l) LOP–I–EQE curves of the deep UV LEDs grown on the nano-PSS and the flat sapphire substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2013, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The structure of FET with (I) and without (II) nanopore-structured electrodes. (b) Typical transfer characteristics of the transistor based on source/drain electrodes with and without a nanopore structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of the nanorod array fabrication. PS: polystyrene. (d) SEM images of a nanorod array by PLD using a colloidal template monolayer with 350 nm PS spheres in O2 at a pressure of 6.7 Pa for 60 min and subsequent annealing in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Enhancement of the photocurrent of (a) the Au nanocrystal array on a Si substrate and (b) semi-inlaid Au nanocrystal array in Si under 532 and 655 nm laser illumination at 10, 100, and 200 mV. Insets show tilted SEM images of corresponding samples. The enhancement of photocurrent is defined as the difference between the photocurrent increment of Au nanocrystal array/Si nanoantennas and bare Si divided by that of bare Si. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of the CH3NH3PbI3 nanonet formed on a Si substrate. The periodicity of the nanonet is 1 μm. (d) Photocurrent–time (I–t) curves of the CH3NH3PbI3 photodetectors based on nanonets and compact films illuminated under monochromatic light at 700 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM images of 2D network-based transparent conductors with various geometries and materials. (a) Cu nanomesh with a periodicity of 1300 nm, width of 150 nm, and thickness of 40 nm on a quartz substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 296. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Nanomesh electrode fabricated through oblique deposition using a 1500 nm-diameter PS nanosphere array as a mask. Reproduced with permission from ref. 300. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) Cu crosswire grid comprising two overlapping nanowire arrays via stepwise angle-resolved nanosphere lithography. Reproduced with permission from ref. 301. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Network-structured CNT films using a 900 nm-diameter silica colloidal crystal as a template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 302. Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH.	 
4-ATP	4-Aminothiophenol
a-Si:H	Amorphous silicon
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
CNT	Carbon nanotube
CPP	Ceramic plate phosphor
CB	Conduction band
CCM	Colloidal crystal monolayer
c-Si	Crystalline Si
EQE	External quantum efficiency
FET	Field effect transistor
HCP	Hexagonal closed-packed
ITO	Indium tin oxide
IR	Infrared
IQE	Internal quantum efficiency
LED	Light-emitting diode
LEE	Light extraction efficiency
LOP	Light output power
LSPR	Localized surface plasmon resonance
Low-Q	Low-quality factor
MACE	Metal-assisted chemical etching
MIT	Metal–insulator-transition
MB	Methylene blue
MPI	Micropropulsive injection
MQW	Multiple quantum well
NB	Nanobowl
nc-Si	Nanocrystalline silicon
NIL	Nanoimprint lithography
NP	Nanoparticle
NR	Nanorod
NIR	Near-infrared
NCP	Non-close-packed
OLED	Organic light-emitting diode
PSS	Patterned sapphire substrates
PEC	Photoelectrochemical
PBG	Photonic bandgap
PC	Photonic crystal
PDMS	Poly(dimethylsiloxane)
PV	Photovoltaic
P4VP	Poly-4-vinylpyridine
PMMA	Poly(methyl methacrylate)
PS	Polystyrene
PLD	Pulsed laser deposition
QE	Quantum efficiency
RIE	Reactive ion etching
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
ss-DSC	Solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell
SERS	Surface-enhanced Raman scattering
SP	Surface plasmon
SPP	Surface plasmon polariton
TIR	Total internal reflection
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
2D	Two-dimensional
UV	Ultraviolet
VB	Valence band
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
