Hybrid dual-function thermal energy harvesting and storage technologies: towards self-chargeable flexible/wearable devices  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1DT01568K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1DT01568K
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 9983-10013Hybrid dual-function thermal energy harvesting and storage technologies: towards self-chargeable flexible/wearable devices

        
          
            Joana S. 
            Teixeira
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rui S. 
            Costa
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ana L. 
            Pires
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            André M. 
            Pereira
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Clara 
            Pereira
          
          
        
      *a
aREQUIMTE/LAQV, Departamento de Química e Bioquímica, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre s/n, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal. E-mail: clara.pereira@fc.up.pt;  Fax: +351 220402659;   Tel: +351 220402576
bIFIMUP – Instituto de Física de Materiais Avançados, Nanotecnologia e Fotónica, Departamento de Física e Astronomia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal
Received 
      14th May 2021
    , Accepted 1st July 2021First published on 1st July 2021AbstractThe worldwide energy scarcity arising from the massive consumption of nonrenewable energy sources raised a global awareness of the need for cleaner and affordable energy solutions to mitigate climate change and ensure the world sustainable development. The rise of the Internet of Things and the fast growth of the groundbreaking market of wearable electronics boosted a major quest for self-powered technologies merging energy harvesting and energy storage functionalities to meet the demands of a myriad of market segments, such as healthcare, transportation, defense and sports. Thermoelectric devices are a green energy harvesting solution for wearable electronics since they harness the low-grade waste heat from ubiquitous thermal energy sources and convert it into electrical energy. However, these systems generate electrical energy in an intermittent manner, depend on the local heat release availability and require an additional unit to store energy. Flexible and wearable supercapacitors are a safe and eco-friendly energy storage solution to power wearables, offering advantages of security, longer cycle life, higher power density and faster charging over batteries. However, an additional unit that generates energy or that is able to charge the storage device is required. More recently, a new class of all-in-one thermally-chargeable supercapacitors blossomed to meet the requirements of the next generation of autonomous wearable electronics and ensure an endurable energy supply. This self-chargeable hybrid technology combines the functionalities of thermal energy harvesting and supercapacitive energy storage in a single multitasking device. In this Perspective, the advances in the burgeoning field of all-in-one thermally-chargeable supercapacitors for flexible/wearable applications will be critically examined, ranging from their structure and working principle to the rational design of the composing materials and of tailor-made architectures. It will start by introducing the foundations of single flexible/wearable thermoelectric generators and supercapacitors and will evolve into the pioneering venture of fully-integrated thermal energy harvesting/storage systems. It will end by highlighting the current bottlenecks and future pathways for advancing the development of this sophisticated smart technology.Joana S. TeixeiraJoana S. Teixeira is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the Doctoral Programme in Sustainable Chemistry, shared between the research centers REQUIMTE/LAQV at the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department, and IFIMUP – Institute of Physics for Advanced Materials, Nanotechnology and Photonics at the Physics and Astronomy Department, both at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal. She obtained her BSc. and MSc. degrees in Chemistry at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal. Her current research is focused on the production of novel wearable and flexible self-powered hybrid energy harvesting/energy storage textiles and devices based on hybrid nanomaterials and solid-state polyelectrolytes.Rui S. CostaRui S. Costa is a Ph.D. student of Physics on the MAP-fis doctoral programme at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto in Portugal. He obtained his M.Sc. degree in Physical Engineering from the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto. His current research is focused on the development of new nanomaterials for energy storage, textile-based supercapacitors, as well as novel thermionic supercapacitors for self-powered wearables.Ana L. PiresAna L. Pires is a postdoctoral researcher at IFIMUP – Institute of Physics for Advanced Materials, Nanotechnology and Photonics, Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto in Portugal. She has a Ph.D. degree in Physics (2019) from the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal. Currently, her work involves developing inorganic and composites thermoelectric materials for waste heat harvesting and wearable devices.André M. PereiraAndré Pereira received his Ph.D. in Physics from the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal (2010), was a Post-doctoral researcher at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA (2010–2012) and a Research Associate at Imperial College London, UK (2013). Since 2015, he has been Auxiliary Professor at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto in the Physics and Astronomy Department. His research focuses on the innovation of flexible and versatile devices, particularly in the field of energy harvesting, storage or energy transfer, and for quantum sensors, magnetostrictive sensors and others.Clara PereiraClara Pereira received her Ph.D. in Chemistry from the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal, in 2011. She has been Auxiliary Researcher at the Associate Laboratory LAQV-REQUIMTE, Chemistry and Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Portugal, since 2013. Her research interests include the design and fabrication of hybrid nanomaterials and their application in functional and smart textiles and devices, electrochemical energy storage, thermal energy harvesting, radiation protection, photochromism, thermochromism and eco-sustainable catalysis.
1. Introduction
The worldwide energy scarcity arising from the uncontrolled management and massive consumption of non-renewable fossil fuel resources raised a global awareness of the need for greener energy solutions.1 The development of cost-effective, cleaner and safer energy harvesting and storage technologies became a priority action to mitigate climate change and ensure long-term energy needs for a more sustainable world. Moreover, ensuring the affordability of these technologies is a key challenge on the pathway to innovation.2
The transition from fossil to renewable and ubiquitous energy sources that do not emit greenhouse gases, including solar, thermal, mechanical, wind, geothermal and biomass, became a crucial target in the design of the new generation of energy harvesting solutions.2,3 In the case of energy storage, the core milestone is the preparation of high-performance technologies combining high energy density and power density, long cycle life and fast charging, through the use of eco-friendly and cost-effective components and manufacturing processes.
In the era of the Internet of Things (IoT) and with the boost in the market of flexible and wearable electronics, a demand for energetically efficient alternatives to power these systems emerged.4,5 According to IDTechEx, the total market for printed, flexible and organic electronics is expected to grow from $41.2 billion in 2020 to $74 billion in 2030.6 Energy harvesting and storage thus became major drivers that are shaping the new generation of electronic clothing. In the field of energy harvesting, innovative flexible and wearable technologies assembled on flexible substrates, such as textiles and plastics, are being developed to scavenge electrical energy from renewable energy sources (e.g., triboelectric, piezoelectric and thermoelectric generators).3,7 In particular, thermoelectric energy harvesters are of special interest to scavenge the waste heat released from low-grade heat sources (<250 °C), such as from industrial processes, vehicle engines, domestic use, transportation and human metabolism, to power low-consumption e-devices.5,8,9 However, these devices still generate electrical energy in an intermittent manner, are highly dependent on local heat release availability and variability of temperature gradients, and have low power generation (μW–mW). Moreover, the requirement for an additional energy storage unit and the high cost of semiconducting thermoelectric materials are major barriers.1,7,10
On the other hand, rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors have been the prime energy storage options to power wearable electronics.4,11,12 Although supercapacitors present limited energy density when compared with batteries, they are a safer and more eco-friendly energy storage solution, with faster charging, higher power density and longer lifetime.4,13–15 In this sense, supercapacitors are a promising energy storage technology to cope with the intermittent energy production fluctuations of thermoelectric devices.16 Nevertheless, an additional unit that generates energy or that is able to charge the storage device is required.
The development of more advanced all-in-one smart technologies integrating both energy harvesting and storage functionalities is a promising breakthrough to overcome the bottlenecks of thermoelectric generators and supercapacitors, and to ensure a sustainable and endurable energy supply. This endeavor represents a major leap in the field of wearable IoT technologies to address the key requirements of self-powered miniaturized electronics, namely for healthcare, defense, transportation, sports and fashion applications.7,15,17
In this sense, a new generation of thermally-chargeable supercapacitors or thermal self-charging supercapacitors (TCSCs) emerged, that are able to simultaneously capture thermal energy released from low-grade heat sources, and convert it into electrical energy, which is then stored within the same device during the downtime operation, to be released during the active mode.1,7–9,17–19 TCSCs are thus multitasking standalone devices that integrate two distinct functions in a single unit.
Within the field of wearables, TCSCs can be used to power low-consumption IoT sensors that can be integrated into garments or clothing accessories, namely biometric, temperature and humidity sensors, by taking advantage of the temperature gradient between the human body and the external environment. The operating potential and power demand of typical IoT sensors are summarized in Fig. 1.7,20
 Fig. 1  (A) Operating potential and (B) power demand of several IoT sensors (reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2021). 
In this Perspective, the advances in the burgeoning field of dual-function flexible/wearable TCSCs will be critically reviewed. Firstly, an overview of the structure, working principles and most recent developments in flexible/wearable thermoelectric generators and supercapacitors will be provided. Special attention will be devoted to the strategies that are being envisaged to boost their performance, ranging from the rational design of fine-tuned functional materials to the tuning of the device configuration. Afterwards, the breakthroughs in the flourishing generation of TCSCs will be presented, starting from the first prototypes of two separate units assembled in a “power pack” up to more sophisticated fully-integrated all-in-one systems. The underlying working principles of TCSCs, the metrics for the evaluation of their performance and the state-of-the-art evolution will be explored, featuring the key factors governing their performance. The remarkable progress in the development of these technologies will be highlighted, comprising the advances in the fascinating building block (nano)materials that compose them and the architectural design of the devices’ structure. Finally, the current challenges and future directions for the next generation of high-performance and cost-effective flexible/wearable TCSCs will be presented.
2. Wearable/flexible thermoelectric systems
New energy harvesting technologies have been emerging to power low-consumption wearable electronics (power demand from nW to hundreds of mW).21 The main challenges for research remain in the materials engineering, device design, and manufacturing optimization. Several energy sources can be considered within the energy harvesting field, namely based on piezoelectric, triboelectric, electromagnetic induction, and thermoelectric phenomena. In particular, the recycling of dissipated waste heat is pointed out as a promising energy harvesting solution because of its abundance in our ecosystem. Within the segment of thermal energy harvesting, thermoelectric (TE) devices are considered a promising green technology for low-power generation with a wide range of applications, namely in microelectronics, wearable electronics and wireless sensor networks.3 TE harvesters present several advantages, namely the capability to directly convert waste thermal energy into electricity, the possibility of operating up to high temperatures (up to 250 °C), eco-friendliness, low maintenance costs (when considering compact solid-state devices), and the possibility to harvest power from both hot and cold surfaces, among others.3,22 The most used TE materials are chalcogenides, skutterudites, clathrates, half-Heusler alloys and, more recently, polymer-based materials.23
2.1. Main working principles of thermoelectric technology
In this sub-section, the basic principles of TE materials and devices will be presented aiming to understand the theoretical pillars for the enhancement of their thermoelectric performance. Solid-state TE devices or generators (TEGs) consist of an array of pairs of semiconductor materials, namely TE couples, which are electrically wired in series and thermally connected in parallel.24 The TEGs’ working principle is grounded on the Seebeck effect.22 The Seebeck effect in solid materials involves the transport and exchange of thermal energy between the electrons and phonons (or lattice vibration). When a temperature gradient is applied to a material, it leads to a difference in the thermodynamic chemical potential of the charge carriers. In this thermodynamic process, particles flow from the high chemical potential to the low chemical potential region. From this motion, an electromotive force is generated, enabling the flow of charge carriers in a closed circuit (the electric current). By definition, the Seebeck coefficient or thermopower, S, expressed in V K−1, is given by the following equation:25 (1)more commonly simplified as:26 ΔV = SΔT(2)where ΔT is the temperature variation (in K) and ΔV is the potential difference generated by the electromotive force (in V).
The S sign is directly related to the nature of the charge carriers, with the electrons being n-type materials and leading to negative S values, while the holes are p-type materials leading to positive S values. Besides the nature of the charge carriers, S depends on the relative direction between the temperature gradient () and the electromotive force vectors (): in the case of p-type materials, since the direction of  opposes the direction of , a minus sign is applied to eqn (1) and (2); in the case of n-type materials, both vectors have the same direction, leading to a plus sign in eqn (1) and (2) (Fig. 2A).
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of: (A) the TE phenomenon in n- and p-type materials, showing the charge carriers diffusing from the hot side to the cold side; (B) the standard configuration of a thermoelectric device and its operating principle. 
In this sense, TEGs can be used to power an electric load on an external circuit using the waste heat flow across a temperature gradient. By establishing an electrically-conductive connection between the two types of material (p and n), as shown in Fig. 2B, electromotive forces are established in a certain direction (see arrows), forcing a stream of charges to generate an electric current. The stacking of these pairs of TE materials leads to the so-called vertical configuration, as represented in Fig. 3A. There is another widely used configuration called the planar configuration, in which the TE stripes and the electrical contacts layer are drawn on the surface of the substrate, as illustrated in Fig. 3B. The planar configuration allows the production of flexible, thinner, and lower cost devices by using techniques such as printing or lithography. Moreover, it leads to miniaturized devices (reduced spatial dimensions and thickness). The images of two planar TEGs produced by our group based on Bi2Te3 material are presented in Fig. 3C.
 Fig. 3  Different configurations of a TEG: (A) typical vertical configuration – the heat flows perpendicularly to the longer direction of the legs; (B) typical planar configuration – the temperature gradient flows in parallel to the substrate (adapted from ref. 26 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019); (C) examples of planar TEGs produced by our group through photolithography (top image: flexible TEG based on n-type Bi2Te3 TE material and sputtered Au electrical contacts) and printing process (bottom image: flexible TEG based on n-type Bi2Te3 mixed with an organic binder and Ag ink electrical contacts). 
2.2. Thermal energy harvesting performance metrics
The performance of TEGs depends on the properties of the selected material. However, it does not exclusively rely on the Seebeck coefficient of the TE material, but also on its electrical and thermal properties and on the working operation temperature of the device.27 In this sense, the evaluation of the TE material performance is carried out by estimating the dimensionless figure of merit, the so-called ZT, which can be defined by the following equation:28 (3)where σ (S m−1) and k (W m−1 K−1) are the electrical and thermal conductivity values of the material, respectively, S is the Seebeck coefficient (V K−1) and T is the absolute temperature (K).
Although S and σ are straightforward properties to quantify, measuring k is not an easy task and can be very tricky to determine (for instance, in thin films). Thus, the power factor (PF) property is also used to assess the efficiency of the TE material and to provide insights into its band structure. PF is given by the following equation:28 PF = S2σ(4)
Concerning the thermoconductivity (k), this quantity stems from the sum of two inputs (k = ke + kl): the electronic thermoconductivity (ke) arising from the electrons’ or holes’ transport heat, and the phonons’ lattice heat propagation (kl). The electronic thermoconductivity is dominant in metals, with this class of materials primarily being the core compound for investigating the design of TEGs. However, metals are limited by the Wiedemann–Franz law, given by σLT = ke, where the proportionality constant L is known as the Lorenz number. L was firstly theoretically derived by Sommerfeld using the Fermi–Dirac distribution function for degenerate metals and was later experimentally demonstrated.26 The phonon component, meanwhile, relies on the free mean path of phonons, which plays a key role in tuning the performance of the material.
The energy conversion efficiency (η) of a TE material depends on its ZT value and can be written as a function of the temperatures of the hot and cold sides as follows:26,29 (5)where TC is the cold-side temperature, TH is the hot-side temperature, and ZT is the effective figure of merit of the TE material at T = (TH + TC)/2, which is the mean temperature of the module.30 The first multiplication term is the Carnot factor, which corresponds to the maximum efficiency limit of the TEG.

Eqn (5) is often used to determine the efficiency of a TE device considering the ZT of such a device, which is not necessarily equal to the ZT of the TE material.31 Nevertheless, the simplest way to determine the efficiency (η) of a TE device is through the following equation:26 (6)which indicates the percentage of the effective energy conversion and is independent of the material.

Fig. 4 presents the evolution of the energy conversion efficiency of a TE device as a function of the applied temperature gradient for different ZT values, in which it is possible to observe the dependence of the device efficiency on the ZT factor.
 Fig. 4  Typical behavior of the energy conversion efficiency of a TE device as a function of the temperature difference for different ZT values (reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012). 
Inorganic semiconductor materials are the most promising and used TE compounds due to their combination of S, σ, and k coefficients.33 Within this large group, bismuth telluride (Bi2Te3) has been the most used since 1954, due to its excellent TE properties resulting from its tetradymite crystal structure, namely high electrical conductivity upon doping, high figure of merit, band degeneracy and carrier mobility, low effective mass and low lattice thermal conductivity.34,35 Furthermore, Bi2Te3 presents a lower cost than other TE materials due to its higher mass production and widespread use.34 PbTe, CoSb3 and SiGe have been also selected as TE materials.36–38Fig. 5 presents the ZT vs. T curves of the most common n- and p-type TE materials that present higher ZT values in the bulk form. As can be observed from the ZT vs. T curves, bulk TE materials have a limitation concerning their maximum ZT values that are around 1.
 Fig. 5  
ZT vs. T curves for different inorganic TE materials: (A) n-type materials; and (B) p-type materials (TAGS stands for Te–Ag–Ge–Sb alloys; reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2008). 
With the advent of nanotechnology and the ability to manipulate materials in a nanoscale fashion, the limitations of the ZT values of bulk TE materials can be surpassed. In fact, nanostructured TE materials are being developed in order to reach higher energy efficiency values, namely superlattices, quantum dots, nanowires and nanocomposites.32 These nanomaterials exhibit significant improvements in their thermal energy harvesting performance owing to a decrease of k arising from phonon scattering.40 Remarkably, an impressive ZT of 2.4 was reached for Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 superlattices.41,42 Moreover, a notable 100-fold increase of ZT was reported for Si nanowires when compared with their bulk counterpart.43 Currently, the maximum ZT reported so far is around 5 and was recently achieved by Hinterleitner and co-authors.44 In their work, the authors achieved a higher ZT for a temperature of ∼400 K using a thin film of Heusler alloys based on Fe2V0.8W0.2Al prepared by magnetron sputtering (thickness of 1 μm), being a significant breakthrough in this area. The multivalley structure of electronic bands near the Fermi energy of the material was the reason for the enhanced performance.
Another strategy to boost ZT is to decouple the electronic and phononic components of the thermal conductivity of the TE material.27 As abovementioned, the total thermal conductivity results from the sum of the electronic (kel) and the phononic (kph) components. Both components directly depend on the mean free path (λ) of the particles, the electron (λel) and the phonon (λph), which in the case of the electron is approximately <1 nm, and for the phonon ranges from 1 to 100 nm. The different nature of the mean free paths of both particles allows acting independently on the λph parameter through the size control preparation of the particles in the range of 1–100 nm, without compromising the electronic contribution. Since λph is of the nanosize order, the ability to tune its value (namely by reducing it) through the use of nanomaterials constitutes a major achievement in the last two decades in the field of TEGs.
The heat conversion efficiency, as can be seen from eqn (6) and Fig. 4, depends on the temperature gradient. To date, the best reported efficiency was η ∼ 14% for GeTe compounds, for a temperature gradient of 440 K. For near room temperature and mid-range temperature gradients (ΔT < 100 K), the efficiency is reduced by up to ∼4%, for instance for Bi2Te3 materials.45
2.3. State-of-the-art for flexible/wearable thermoelectric generators
In recent years, flexible TEGs emerged as promising energy harvesting devices for wearable electronics by taking advantage of the heat dissipated from human metabolism and transforming it into useful electrical energy. From Fig. 5, it is clear that for room temperature applications, bulk chalcogenide materials are the best TE candidates since they present higher ZT values. However, their rigid mechanical properties and brittleness limit their practical application. Wearable energy harvesting applications require a higher degree of flexibility and deformability to be applied in different geometric shapes.46 Thus, printable TE materials emerged to address these drawbacks, enabling the manufacturing of TEG devices by scalable printing techniques, such as screen-printing, roll-to-roll printing and inkjet-printing.
The printed electronics research field is developing at a fast pace and there are already several prototypes of flexible TEGs for wearable systems. For instance, in the literature, Jung and co-authors reported the use of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and bismuth telluride powder mixed in polydimethyl siloxane (PDMS) to develop a flexible vertical TEG (Fig. 6A).47 In their work, the authors used a perforated aluminium plate (holes with a diameter of 5 mm and a depth of 330 μm) to produce the pillared shaped TEG through a doctor blade technique. The n- and p-type TE materials were sequentially connected via 300 nm thick aluminium interconnected electrodes at the top and bottom of the TE legs. Besides being used to produce the inks, PDMS was also applied as a substrate. The device achieved an output voltage of 950 mV and a generated power of 570 μW cm−2 for ΔT = 60 °C using fifty pairs of p- and n-type TE columns.
 Fig. 6  Flexible TE devices reported in the literature by: (A) Jung et al. (reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016); (B) Pires et al. (reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from The American Chemical Society, ACS, copyright 2019); (C) Chen et al. (reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, RSC, copyright 2019); and (D) Bae et al. (reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016). 
Our group produced a planar flexible TEG device based on a TE ink of n-type Bi2Te3 microparticles (<50 μm) and H3PO4-doped polyvinyl alcohol (PVA).48 The flexible TEG was prepared by stencil printing the n-type TE ink on a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate and using silver ink for the electrical contacts (Fig. 6B). The device only containing 10 stripes (of 0.2 × 2.5 cm2 each, in a one-leg configuration) produced a power output of ∼9 μW cm−2 for ΔT = 46 K. The flexibility of the TEG and the straightforward preparation process opened promising prospects for environmental health monitoring. Another example is the flexible inkjet-printed TEG produced by Chen et al.49 In that work, Bi2Te3 and Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 nanowires were inkjet-printed on polyimide to form n- and p-type legs for the TEG, respectively (Fig. 6C). A maximum power of 127 nW was achieved for ΔT = 32.5 K for a TEG built with five pairs of legs.
Within the context of electronic textiles, out-of-plane TE devices have been also developed, producing a strong interest within the materials and technological science community.51,52 In this framework, Lund et al. prepared an out-of-plane polymer-based TEG by hand-embroidering an electrically conductive silk sewing thread coated with the p-type conductive polymers poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) and polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS).53 A silver-plated polyamide thread was also used. The legs were electrically connected in series by the application of silver paste on the surface of the fabric to form the TEG. The produced device generated a power of 1.2 μW for ΔT = 65 K.
Bae et al. produced a flexible TEG by printing 32 TE legs, arranged in two rows, on a flexible PET substrate using a Te-PEDOT:PSS hybrid composite (Fig. 6D).50 The device achieved a maximum power output of 10.59 nW for ΔT = 10 °C and 2 mV in response to human body heat. The flexible TEG could be embedded in a textile glove, demonstrating its potential for application in both flexible and wearable electronics.
The low ZT of printed films based on TE-containing ink formulations is still a major drawback to their implementation in the market. In this sense, the major challenge of the printable TEG research area relies on the optimization of TE-based inks to produce films with higher performance, i.e., higher ZT values through low-temperature scalable processes. The fast shift from the lab to industry will strongly depend on the TE materials’ performance, the thermal cycling stability of the devices and the manufacturing process optimization.54 On the other hand, the remaining components (e.g., electrodes and substrate) of the TEG should be carefully selected in order to avoid decreasing the TE materials’ performance (thermal expansion, electrical conductivity and mechanical stretchability).
In recent years, the field of thermoelectrics has gained increased relevance, with a huge development in the efficiency and applicability of TE materials and devices. New strategies to improve the TE performance, such as nanostructuring or the modification of phonon propagation through the insertion of nanoinclusions are currently being explored. The emergence of new materials will also bring significant advances in the area in the near future. Moreover, as printing technologies become more popular in many fields, namely in wearable and flexible devices, new polymers or combination of polymers with inorganic materials are being developed.
3. Wearable/flexible supercapacitor systems
The demand for high-performance smart wearable devices combined with the growth of electrical energy production from renewable energy sources and the current awareness of climate changes has boosted the development of efficient, cheaper and environmentally friendly electrochemical energy storage systems (EESS).15,55 To accomplish the requirements of wearable electronics, EESS must be thin, flexible/wearable, and lightweight.
EESS can be organized into four general categories, namely fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors and electrolytic capacitors, which are classified in terms of their energy density and power density outputs. The Ragone plot presented in Fig. 7 displays the energy density vs. power density of the different types of EESS.56,57 Among the different EESS, batteries and supercapacitors (SCs) are the most promising candidates to power wearable electronics. Nowadays, batteries dominate the electronics market, due to their extremely high energy density.58,59 However, they suffer from a limited cycle life (up to 1000 cycles) and moderate power density. Furthermore, their energy density outputs quickly decrease with a reduction of the battery size, limiting their use in miniaturized wearable devices.57,60 Environmental and safety issues are also a major concern.11 On the other hand, SCs present higher power density, faster charging (from seconds to minutes) and longer cycle life (>10000 charge/discharge cycles) than batteries. Moreover, they possess a simpler design and their miniaturization (micro-supercapacitors) has been successfully achieved without compromising their performance, making them a safer and more eco-friendly EESS technology for wearable applications.57,60–62
 Fig. 7  Ragone plot comparing the energy storage performance of fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors (electric double-layer capacitors, pseudocapacitors and hybrid supercapacitors) and electrolytic capacitors. The slashed diagonal red lines represent the typical charging time of each EESS. 
3.1. Types of supercapacitors, main working principles and electrode materials
Traditional SCs are composed of two rigid electrodes (positive and negative) separated by a liquid electrolyte in a sandwich-type configuration.56,57 Additionally, a separator (ion-permeable material/porous membrane) is required between the electrodes, and the whole device must be sealed to avoid the occurrence of short circuits and self-discharge between the electrodes as well as electrolyte leakage during the SC operation.
SCs can be classified into three main classes (Fig. 8) according to the type of electrode material as well as the charge storage mechanism (capacitive, pseudocapacitive and/or battery-like) into:57,60–64 electric double-layer capacitors, pseudocapacitors and hybrid supercapacitors.
 Fig. 8  Different types of SCs and the electrode materials that compose them: CNTs – carbon nanotubes; PEDOT – poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene); PPy – polypyrrole; PANI – polyaniline; BP – black phosphorous; LDHs – layered double hydroxides; MOFs – metal–organic frameworks; MXenes – transition metal carbides and carbonitrides; POMs – polyoxometalates; TMDCs – transition metal dichalcogenides; TMPs – transition metal phosphides; TMTCs – transition metal trichalcogenides (adapted from ref. 63 (top images) and ref. 65 (bottom right: central image) with permission from RSC, copyrights 2019 and 2014, respectively). 
Electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) are typically composed of carbon-based electrode materials, such as activated carbon, ordered mesoporous carbon, carbon black, graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon aerogels because of their high porosity and specific surface area (1000–3500 m2 g−1), high electrical conductivity (except for activated carbon), chemical stability, high abundance and low toxicity.55,57,64 In EDLCs, the energy storage process occurs through adsorption/desorption of electrolyte ions at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces (electrical double-layer) without any charge transfer phenomenon taking place, as illustrated in Fig. 8.61,63 During charging, when a potential difference is applied across the electrodes, the electrons flow from the positive electrode to the negative electrode through an external circuit, leading to a deficit of electric charges on the positive electrode and to an accumulation of electric charges on the negative electrode. In order to reach charge neutrality, the electrolyte ions (cations and anions) of opposite sign diffuse through the electrolyte medium towards the surface of the electrode with opposite charge, giving rise to two electrical double-layers, one at each electrode–electrolyte interface.
This type of SC is characterized by a very fast energy uptake/delivery (from seconds to minutes), high power density and long cycle life (>106 cycles for bulk EDLCs), with almost no volume or morphology change of the electrode materials.57,63 However, EDLCs present limited energy density and specific capacitance.55,57
Contrary to EDLCs, the energy storage mechanism of pseudocapacitors (PCs) is pseudocapacitive, involving the charge transfer between the electrodes and the electrolyte, as schematized in Fig. 8. This pseudocapacitive behavior can take place by three different mechanisms:63,66–68 occurrence of (quasi-)reversible oxidation–reduction reactions on the surface or near surface of the electrode materials, ion intercalation/deintercalation and underpotential deposition. A deeper understanding of these energy storage processes can be found in several reviews.63,66–69 The electrodes of PCs are composed of metal oxides/hydroxides (e.g., RuO2, MnO2, NiO, Fe3O4, Co3O4, and V2O5),64,67 metal sulfides/nitrides (e.g., FeS2, MoS2, CoS2, WS2, SnS2, Mo2N, TiN, VN, FeN, and CoN)64,70 and/or conducting polymers (e.g., polypyrrole (PPy), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and polyaniline (PANI)).71,72
Typically, PCs exhibit higher specific capacitance and energy density than EDLCs owing to the nature of the electron-transfer mechanism.63 However, since redox reactions are involved, PCs often exhibit lower cycling stability as a result of sluggish ion diffusion (metal oxides/sulfides) and/or swelling/shrinkage or even cracking of the electrode material framework (conducting polymers) during cycling.63,66,68,69 Moreover, PCs have lower power density than EDLCs due to the slower nature of the faradaic-type process, in contrast to the non-faradaic-based one.63,66
Since both EDLCs and PCs do not simultaneously present high energy and power densities or a long cycle life, a new generation of hybrid SCs (HSCs) emerged. HSCs can either combine an EDLC-type electrode with a PC-type or a battery-type electrode (e.g., Li4Ti5O12, LiFePO4, LiPF6 Na4Mn9O18) or contain electrodes composed of hybrid or composite materials containing an electrically conductive EDLC-type component and a pseudocapacitive or battery-type component, as illustrated in Fig. 8.63 In this sense, HSCs are expected to reduce the gap between high energy density batteries and high power density SCs, benefiting from the best features of EDLC- and PC- or battery-type electrodes. The ultimate target envisaged for HSCs is to reach a similar amount of stored energy as batteries without compromising the high power density and long cycle life of conventional SCs.57,61–63,69
Regardless of the type of SCs (EDLC, PC or HSC), they can be also classified as symmetric or asymmetric, depending on the composition of both electrodes. Symmetric SCs are composed of two identical electrodes (the same active material and energy storage mechanism), while asymmetric SCs are constituted by two different electrodes (different active materials and different energy storage mechanisms occurring on both electrode/electrolyte interfaces).64
The demand for flexible and wearable electronics boosted the development of innovative 0D, 1D, 2D and 3D nanomaterials, such as carbon onions,73 transition metal carbides and carbonitrides (MXenes),74–76 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs),77–79 quasi-1D transition metal trichalcogenides (TMTCs),80 transition metal phosphides (TMPs),81,82 metal organic frameworks (MOFs),77,83 covalent-organic frameworks (COFs),77 layered double hydroxides (LDHs),77,84 polyoxometalates (POMs)61 and black phosphorus (BP).85 Among those emerging materials, MXenes, TMDCs, MOFs, POMs, TMPs and BP are the most promising for the preparation of flexible, wearable and miniaturized SCs with superior performance because of their unique 2D layered structure, high electrical conductivity, tunable chemical composition and excellent electrochemical and mechanical properties (MXenes and TMDCs), open pore structure and chemical versatility (MOFs), good redox activity and electronic transfer ability (POMs) and unique optoelectronic and electrical properties (TMPs and BP).13,57,61,62
3.2. Supercapacitors performance metrics
The performance of SCs in real operation conditions is mainly evaluated through the determination of their energy density, power density and cycling stability. For the calculation of the energy density and power density of SCs, it is necessary to determine their specific capacitance, working potential and equivalent series resistance firstly.
The specific capacitance is defined as the ability of a system to store electrical energy. This parameter is normally used to assess the performance of either a single electrode material or the whole SC cell.66,86 However, in the published scientific literature, in many cases the authors do not explicitly distinguish whether the specific capacitance is from the electrode itself or from the whole device, making it difficult to establish an accurate state-of-the-art comparison. Ideally, for practical applications, the specific capacitance of the whole device (i.e., the capacity normalized to the mass, area or volume of the entire device) should be stated. This is especially important in the case of asymmetric SCs composed of electrodes with different compositions.
The energy density (E) provides information on the amount of energy stored in the SC per mass, area or volume unit (expressed in W h kg−1, W h cm−2 or W h cm−3, respectively), while the power density (P) translates how fast the stored energy can be delivered in the discharge process per mass, area or volume unit (expressed in W kg−1, W cm−2 or W cm−3, respectively).63,66,86 These parameters can be calculated by the following equations:66,86 (7) (8)where C is the specific capacitance of the SC (in F g−1, F cm−2 or F cm−3), V0 is the working potential of the device (in V), Π can be the mass, area or volume of the whole cell (expressed in g, cm2 or cm3) and RES is the equivalent series resistance of the SC (in Ω). In a significant number of published articles, it is not clear whether the authors determined the energy and power densities of the SCs considering the mass, area or volume of the whole device or simply the mass of the electrode materials, the active area or volume. This information should be always specified since its absence may lead to misleading conclusions about performance when establishing comparisons with the existing literature. In practical applications, the whole SC is composed of other components besides the electrodes (e.g., electrolyte, current collectors, separator and sealing container) that influence its real operation performance. For this reason, the energy and power densities of SCs should consider not only the electrodes but also all the remaining components.
The SC cycling stability consists of the evaluation of the performance of SCs upon consecutive charge and discharge cycles.63 In the case of flexible and wearable SCs, it is also important to evaluate the performance and cycling life of the devices upon bending, stretching and folding, in order to assess their mechanical robustness.
3.3. State-of-the-art for flexible/wearable supercapacitors
Flexible and wearable SCs (FWSCs) comprise electrodes produced on flexible substrates (e.g., metal sheets, carbon paper, Ni or carbon foams, carbon-based hydrogels and aerogels, cellulose paper and textiles)13,55,61 and a flexible all-solid-state electrolyte (e.g., PVA/H2SO4, PVA/H3PO4, PVA/LiClO4, poly(propylene oxide)/LiClO4 and poly(methyl methacrylate)/LiClO4).13,15 The use of an all-solid-state electrolyte is extremely important in FWSCs because it solves most of the working and safety problems of liquid electrolytes, such as leakage, corrosion and high flammability or even potential explosion risk.13,55,66
FWSCs can be classified into three distinct groups depending on the electrode configuration, as shown in Fig. 9:13,15,61,62,87 1D fiber-like architectures (e.g., parallel,88,89 twisted90,91 and coaxial92,93); 2D planar architectures (e.g., sandwich of two thin-film electrodes,94,95 interdigitated finger-type96,97 and array of micro-supercapacitors98,99); and 3D architectures (e.g., kirigami/origami,99–101 sponge102–104 and textile structure105,106).
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of three main typical architectures of FWSCs: (A) 1D fiber-like architectures; (B) 2D planar architectures; and (C) 3D architectures. The orange and green colors represent individual electrodes while the grey color represents the electrolyte (adapted from ref. 13 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020). 
1D fiber-type FWSCs are composed of wire electrodes assembled in different arrangements: (i) parallel configuration – positive and negative electrodes assembled in parallel, separated by a solid-gel polymer electrolyte; (ii) twisted configuration – positive and negative electrodes twisted between themselves and electrically isolated by a polymeric electrolyte coating; and (iii) coaxial (core–sheath): a core electrode and an outer electrode layer separated by an intermediate layer of solid-gel electrolyte.13,62 These FWSCs are lightweight and flexible, making them very attractive for wearable electronics. Furthermore, due to their fiber shape they can be easily converted into fabrics by weaving and knitting processes, giving rise to 3D structures.62 As an example of this type of FWSC, Cao et al. reported a coaxial fiber-shaped asymmetric SC with an inner core electrode of carbon fibers (bunch of 3000) coated with a well-aligned Mn and Ni co-substituted Co carbonate hydroxide nanoneedle array (positive electrode), an intermediate thin layer of solid-gel PVA/KOH electrolyte film and an outer electrode layer of activated carbon/N-methyl pyrrolidone slurry (AC/NMP, negative electrode); the preparation of the fiber SC was concluded by its coating with an external layer of PVA–polyethylene oxide (PEO)/KOH solid-gel film (Fig. 10A).93 The resulting fiber SC exhibited a large specific capacitance of 96.13 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, a high energy density of 30.04 W h kg−1 at a power density of 749.97 W kg−1 and a very good capacitance retention of 83.86% over 8000 charge/discharge cycles. The authors also electrically supplied LEDs and an LED electronic display by stitching seven fiber SC units to a cotton fabric and connecting them in a combination of series and parallel.
 Fig. 10  Examples of FWSCs with different architectures: (A) 1D fiber-type (adapted from ref. 93 with permission from RSC, copyright 2020); (B) 2D planar (adapted from ref. 98 with permission from RSC, copyright 2014); (C) 3D structure (adapted from ref. 103 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015). 
FWSCs with 2D planar architectures can be prepared in three different configurations: (i) a sandwich configuration – using vertically staked thin-film electrodes separated by a solid-gel electrolyte; (ii) an interdigitated configuration – electrodes in the same plane (side-by-side) coated by an electrolyte layer; and (iii) an array configuration – composed of several interconnected 2D planar SCs. 2D FWSCs can be easily produced with reduced size, booting their integration on micro/nano devices. In particular, 2D FWSC arrays emerged as a potential solution to satisfy the energy needs of electronic textiles, due to their increased outputs when compared with single 2D FWSCs.62,87 Normally, these arrays are composed of several planar SCs displayed in series and/or in parallel interconnected by serpentine bridge–island connections.13
For instance, Kim et al. developed an on-chip flexible planar microsupercapacitor (MSC) array directly on a PET substrate. Each MSC unit was composed of two finger-type electrodes of MWCNT/V2O5 nanowire (NW) composites spray-coated on the PET substrate pre-patterned with Ti/Au current collectors, and PVA/LiCl solid-gel electrolyte (drop-cast; Fig. 10B).98 An array of nine MSC units connected in parallel exhibited an excellent volumetric capacitance of 80 F cm−3 at 10 mV s−1, a high energy density of 6.8 mW h cm−3 and an ultrahigh power density of 80.8 W cm−3 at 1.8 mW h cm−3 energy density. Moreover, the device preserved 82% of the capacitance after 10000 cycles at a current density of 11.6 A cm−3 and showed excellent flexibility, maintaining 94% of the initial capacitance after being repeatedly bent for 1000 times. The authors also prepared four arrays of nine MSC units each, which were able to electrically supply a UV sensor based on SnO2 nanowires integrated in the same circuit. Moreover, the set of four arrays of MSCs allowed powering a 1.8 V red LED.
Finally, FWSCs can be also prepared in 3D architectures featuring great flexibility, stretchability or compressibility, which have the remarkable advantage of withstanding deformation in all directions, without compromising the energy storage performance. These devices can be prepared: (i) in kirigami/origami configurations by cutting/folding the FWSCs into customized 3D structures; (ii) in sponge-like configurations using 3D porous substrates (e.g., Ni foam, commercial and carbon-based sponges, carbon-based hydrogels or aerogels (based on CNTs or graphene)); and (iii) in textile substrates by weaving or knitting stretchable 1D fiber SCs or by depositing electrode materials and electrolytes on natural/synthetic fabrics.13,62,87 The sponge-type structure is a promising configuration to design highly compressible 3D FWSCs because of the intrinsic porous structure, high internal specific surface area and compressible behavior (i.e., tensile stretching reverse through application of a negative strain) of the sponge substrate, thus increasing the electrodes' active surface area and wettability.13,102 In this sense, Niu et al. reported a highly compressible FSC prepared by assembling two nanostructured PANI-single-walled carbon nanotube sponge electrodes (placed on PET substrates coated with Au film as current collectors) saturated with PVA/H2SO4 solid-gel electrolyte and separated by filter paper saturated with PVA/H2SO4 (Fig. 10C).103 The all-solid-state FSC exhibited a specific capacitance of 216 F g−1 (3.4 F cm−3) at 10 mV s−1, a good energy density of 8 W h kg−1 at a power density of 1.5 kW kg−1 and excellent capacitance retention of 92% after 1000 charge/discharge cycles (only a loss of 8% of the maximum capacitance in the first 200 cycles). Moreover, it maintained the electrochemical performance after compression with a strain of up to 60%, with only 3% loss of the specific capacitance. Nevertheless, there was a slight decrease of the specific capacitance in the first cycles upon multiple charging/discharging (13% loss after 200 cycles and then remaining almost constant). As proof-of-concept, the authors assembled four sponge FSCs in series, increasing the potential window to up to 3.2 V (4× higher than that of a single device), which was enough to power a red LED. The integrated SC unit continued working after compression and subsequent release process (Fig. 10C, bottom).

Table 1 presents other examples of promising 1D fiber-type, 2D planar and 3D FWSCs reported in the literature and their electrochemical performance. It does not intend to provide an exhaustive analysis of the literature on flexible/wearable SCs, but to highlight representative demonstrations of the accelerated development and enormous potentialities of this technology.
Table 1 Examples of 1D fiber-type, 2D planar and 3D-type FWSCs




SC architecture
Electrode materialsa
Substrate
Electrolyte
Capacitance
Energy density
Power density
Capacitance retention (number of cycles)
Ref.





a AC – activated carbon; CNT – carbon nanotubes; MnNiCo–CH – Mn, Ni co-substituted Co carbonate hydroxide; MWCNT – multiwalled carbon nanotubes; NF – nanoflower; NMP – N-methyl pyrrolidone; NP – nanoparticle; NS – nanosheet; NW – nanowire; PAM – poly(acrylamide); PANI – polyaniline; PET – polyethylene terephthalate; PPy – polypyrrole; rGO – reduced graphene oxide; SWCNTs – single-walled carbon nanotubes; VN – vanadium nitride.
b Charge/discharge cycles.
c Bending cycles.
d Elongation cycles.
e Array of nine MSC units connected in parallel.





1D parallel fiber
NiCo2S4 NS/3D porous Ni film//N–rGO (asymmetric)
Ni wire
PVA/KOH
9.6 mF cm−1@0.2 mA
2.613 μW h cm−1
420.1 μW cm−1
92% (1000)b

88



120 mF cm−2@0.2 mA
32.67 μW h cm−2
5.353 mW cm−2




19.57 F cm−3@0.2 mA
5.33 mW h cm−3
855.69 mW cm−3




1D parallel fiber
MnO2 (symmetric)
Carbonized cotton yarn
PVA/KOH
182.94 mF cm−2@20 mV s−1
16.88 μW h cm−2
4.770 mW cm−2
∼100% (5000)b

89



92% (100)c


1D twisted fiber
MoS2 NS/rGO NS (symmetric)
Free-standing
PVA/H3PO4
134.38 F g−1@50 mA
32.24 mW h cm−3 (3 parallel-connected units woven in cotton fabric)
1.179 W cm−3 (3 parallel-connected units woven in cotton fabric)
∼73% (800)c (3 parallel-connected units woven in cotton fabric)

112



332.85 mF cm−2@50 mA


221.9 F cm−3@50 mA


1D coaxial fiber
CNT/PMo12O403−/PANI (symmetric)
Free-standing
1 M H2SO4
210 F g−1@5 A g−1
18.7 W h kg−1
2 kW kg−1
72.4% (10000)b

92



1D coaxial fiber
MnNiCo–CH//AC/NMP (asymmetric)
Carbon fiber core
PVA–PEO/KOH
96.13 F g−1@1 A g−1
30.04 W h kg−1
749.97 W kg−1
84% (8000)b

113



2D sandwich-type
Au NP/CNT/PAM/PPy (symmetric)
Free-standing
Au/PAM/Na2SO4
885 mF cm−2@1 mA cm−2
123 μW h cm−2
0.5 mW cm−2
93% (10000)b

94



82% (1000)c


2D sandwich-type
NiCo2O4 NS/CNT buckypaper (symmetric)
Free-standing
PVA/KOH
268.4 F g−1@0.1 mA cm−2
1.17 mW h cm−3
2430 mW cm−3
95.6% (2000)b

95



337.3 mF cm−2@0.1 mA cm−2


2D sandwich-type
Ti3C2Tx//RuO2 (asymmetric)
Carbon fabric
1 M aqueous H2SO4 (pouch cell)
93 F g−1@50 mV s−1
29 W h kg−1
3.8 kW kg−1
86% (20000)b

114



2D interdigitated finger-type
Ti3C2Tx//RuO2 (asymmetric)
Interdigitated carbon fabric fingers
PVA/H2SO4
60 mF cm−2@5 mV s−1
37 μW h cm−2
40 mW cm−2
—

114



45 μW h cm−2
6 mW cm−2


2D interdigitated finger-type
VN NS//Co(OH)2 NF (asymmetric)
Nylon membrane
PVA/KOH
21 mF cm−2@0.2 mA cm−2
5.5 mW h cm−3
1750 mW cm−3
84% (10000)b

97



39.7 F cm−3@0.2 mA cm−2
12.4 mW h cm−3
n.d.


2D interdigitated finger-type
MWCNT/V2O5 NW (symmetric)
PET
PVA/LiCl
80 F cm−3@10 mV s−1e
6.8 mW h cm−3e
80.8 W cm−3e
82% (10000)b

115



94% (1000)c


2D array/3D origami
PPy/graphene (symmetric)
Paper
PVA/H2SO4
2.75 F g−1@0.4 mA cm−2
6.11 μW h cm−2
0.4 mW cm−2
82.15% (1000)c

116



22 mF cm−2@0.4 mA cm−2


3D kirigami
Porous graphitic electrodes (symmetric)
Polyimide sheet
PVA/H3PO4
3.654 mF cm−2@20 mV s−1
0.32 μW h cm−2
11.4 μW cm−2
—

100



3D kirigami
Ti3C2Tx flakes/bacterial cellulose (symmetric)
Free-standing
PVA/H2SO4
111.5 mF cm−2@2 mA cm−2 (4 units connected in parallel)
0.00552 mW h cm−2
—
72.2% (5000)d (4 units connected in series)

101



3D sponge
PANI/SWCNTs (symmetric)
4 mm sponge placed on PET coated with Au film
PVA/H2SO4
216 F g−1; 3.4 F cm−3@10 mV s−1
8 W h kg−1
1.5 kW kg−1
92% (1000)b

103



3D sponge
NiCo2S4 NS//AC (asymmetric)
Ni foam
2 M aqueous KOH
1.23 F cm−2@8 mA cm−2
0.47 mW h cm−2
6.59 mW cm−2
80.1% (5000)b

104



0.18 mW h cm−2
65.88 mW cm−2


3D textile
Ti3C2Tx (symmetric)
Cotton yarn (2-ply)
PVA/H3PO4
519 mF cm−2@2 mV s−1
25.4 μW h cm−2
0.47 mW cm−2
>100% (10000)b

105





The large-scale production of FWSCs is an important milestone for their industrialization and commercialization aiming to satisfy the energy-consumption needs of present and next-generation IoT devices. However, it remains seldom explored in the literature, with only a few publications discussing the scale-up or industrial production of FWSCs.106–108 For instance, Thekkekara et al. produced a large-scale waterproof textile SC based on in-plane laser-printed reduced graphene oxide electrodes (Hilbert fractal pattern), using PVA/H2SO4 as a solid-gel electrolyte and a Spandex Nylon Lycra Matte fabric coated on the other side with waterproof PDMS elastomer as a substrate.106 The authors showed that it was possible to produce a device with a total area of 100 cm2 in only 3 minutes. The large-scale SC presented an areal capacitance of 49 mF cm−2 and an energy density of 6.73 mW h cm−2 at a power density of 2.5 mW cm−2. The authors also proved the good washing fastness of the SC, which exhibited a capacitance retention of 80% after 50 washing tests in a commercial laundering machine, although no information on the use of detergent or temperature was provided.
To further explore the advances in the field of FWSCs and for a more comprehensive overview on FWSCs architectures, the reader is referred to several excellent reviews.13,15,87,108–111
4. Thermally-chargeable supercapacitors (TCSCs)
As aforementioned, TE devices are being pointed out as a clean energy harvesting technology to power low-consumption electronic devices. However, they can only generate electricity in an intermittent manner. Moreover, thermal energy harvesting systems present reduced energy conversion efficiency (between 5–10%), which is a major barrier for their implementation.32 On the other hand, flexible/wearable SCs are being developed to be used as energy storage technologies in flexible and/or wearable electronics. Although SCs have the capability to cope with the intermittent nature of energy production fluctuations of TEGs, they are only able to store energy, requiring an energy production source connected to them.17
In these circumstances, sustainable and autonomous self-powered sources that harvest and store energy at the same time are required for the continuous operation of low energy consumption smart electronic devices. Significant efforts have been undertaken to develop these all-in-one devices. The first prototypes that were developed consisted on two independent modules assembled in a “power pack”, i.e., a TE energy harvesting unit and an energy storage unit (SC or battery), that were electrically connected by an external circuit or internal connection.14 In this sense, the traditional setup for a TE energy harvesting/energy storage system is composed of a TEG module, two external temperature sources, a DC-load, and a SC or a battery unit.3 However, these modular systems are still bulky due to the presence of the two separate and interconnected units. Furthermore, they present integration problems since they are connected through an external circuit, which causes low energy efficiency (low energy use and high energy losses).3,14
With the progression in thermal energy harvesting and electrochemical energy storage solutions, the hybridization of both technologies in a single all-in-one multi-tasking device has recently blossomed as an innovative and disruptive concept. This advance gave rise to a new generation of thermally-chargeable supercapacitors (TCSCs) that can capture the waste heat from low-grade heat sources (<100–200 °C) and convert it into electrical energy, which is then stored within the same device during the downtime operation mode and released during the active mode.7 Presently, the existing TCSCs still generate a low power output (from μW to mW).
4.1. Main working principles of TCSC technology
The structure of a TCSC resembles that of a SC, being constituted by two electrodes separated by an electrolyte medium composed of ionic TE materials and, when required, a separator.117 The concept of TCSCs arises from the combination of two distinct mechanisms: thermal-to-electrical energy conversion under a temperature gradient, and supercapacitive energy storage.8 In the case of thermal-to-electrical energy conversion, a new mechanism of energy harvesting has been explored in TCSCs, based on the Soret effect. The Soret effect involves the diffusion of ionic charge carriers in an electrolyte (cations and anions) towards the surface of conductive electrodes, driven by a temperature gradient (ionic thermodiffusion effect).20,118 The main principle of operation of TCSCs thus differs from that occurring in traditional TEGs, since the latter are based on the Seebeck effect, involving the thermodiffusion of electronic charge carriers (electrons and holes) in semiconductors, semimetals, or metals, instead of ionic charge carriers (Soret effect). Moreover, traditional TEGs are composed of electronic TE materials, while TCSCs contain ionic TE compounds. In TCSCs, when cations and/or anions from the electrolyte medium reach the electrodes, they cannot pass to an external circuit,118 in contrast to TEGs, but accumulate on the surface of the electrodes instead, resulting in the formation of electric double-layers at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces.
When heat is applied to one of the two electrodes of a TCSC, a temperature gradient is established between both electrodes, causing the diffusion of ions provided by the electrolyte from the hot to the cold electrode due to the Soret effect (Fig. 11).119
 Fig. 11  Soret effect in a TCSC: diffusion of ions provided by the electrolyte when a temperature gradient is established between both electrodes of the TCSC. 

Fig. 12 presents in more detail the working mechanism of a TCSC.120 In the initial state 1, the cations and anions are evenly distributed in the electrolyte medium (ΔT = 0 K). When a temperature gradient is established between the two electrodes of the device, the electrolyte cations, which are more mobile than the anions due to their smaller size, diffuse from the hot to the cold electrode. This motion results in an increase of the concentration of electrolyte cations on the cold electrode side, leading to a potential difference between both electrodes (thermovoltage). The cold electrode can thus be considered as the negative electrode and the hot electrode can be regarded as the positive one. The charging process (state 2) occurs when a resistor is inserted in the external electric circuit between the electrodes, allowing the motion of electrons from the hot to the cold electrode through the external circuit (to counterbalance the electrolyte cation accumulation on the cold electrode side). After turning off the resistor and the temperature gradient, the energy storage process occurs (state 3) through the retention of the charge on the electrodes’ surface. Finally, in state 4, the TCSC is connected to an electronic device to power-supply it, which leads to a disequilibrium of the electrolyte ions, generating an electric current in the external circuit. The unloading of the TCSC occurs, i.e., the discharging state, causing the migration of the electrolyte ions towards the bulk of the electrolyte until completely returning to their random distribution within the electrolyte.120–122
 Fig. 12  Working mechanism of a TCSC, where (1) is the initial state, (2) the charged state, (3) the storage state and (4) the discharged state. The “+” and “−” symbols correspond to the electrolyte cations and anions, respectively (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from ACS, copyright 2021). 
In the charged state 2, the potential difference (U) that is created between the two electrodes as a result of the accumulation of mobile electrolyte cations on the cold electrode side can be determined by the Nernst equation:119 (9)where Ucell is the potential difference between the cold and hot electrodes (in V), U0cell is assigned to the standard cell potential (in V), R is the universal gas constant (8.314 J mol−1 K−1), T is the absolute temperature (in K), F is the Faraday constant (96485.338 C mol−1), and [Cationshot] and [Cationscold] are the molar concentrations of electrolyte cations near the hot and cold electrodes (in mol L−1), respectively.
4.2. TCSC performance metrics
TCSCs are in the early stages of development, with the metrics for the evaluation of their performance still being established based on the current knowledge. Consequently, it is important to understand and to develop methodologies to correctly evaluate the performance of TCSCs, involving both the measurement of the thermal harvesting outputs (Soret coefficient, figure of merit, charging efficiency) and the electrochemical energy storage parameters (working voltage, specific capacitance, energy density, power density).
The distinct nature of the energy harvesting phenomenon in TCSCs when compared with TE devices, based on the Soret effect (ions as charge carriers) instead of the Seebeck effect (electrons and holes as charge carriers) that occurs in the latter, boosted a need to develop new metrics to compare the performance of both types of systems and to establish comparisons between different TCSCs. In this sense, the so-called Soret coefficient of the electrolyte, αi (in V K−1), was introduced to express the Soret effect, which can be obtained through the following equation:118 (10)where Q is the transport heat (in J mol−1), T corresponds to the absolute temperature (in K), ci is the ions’ charge (in C) and NA is the Avogadro's number (mol−1).
The efficiency of a TCSC system can be evaluated by determining its ionic figure of merit (ZTi, where “i” stands for ionic to differentiate it from the figure of merit ZT of TE systems based on the Seebeck effect), given by:118 (11)where σi is the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte (in S m−1), αi corresponds to its Soret coefficient (in V K−1), k is the thermal conductivity of the electrolyte (in W m−1 K−1) and T is the absolute temperature (in K).
The expression to determine the ZTi figure of merit of TCSCs thus resembles that to determine the ZT of TEGs (eqn (3)) but involves the Soret coefficient, the ionic and the thermal conductivity of the electrolyte, instead of the Seebeck coefficient, and the electrical and the thermal conductivity of the electronic TE material.118
As previously mentioned, a TCSC can be charged using intermittent heat sources. Firstly, the heater is switched on to establish a ΔT between the two electrodes and across the electrode/electrolyte interfaces, resulting in a thermovoltage value after a certain stabilization time, which is given by:118 Vthermo = αiΔT(12)where αi is the Soret coefficient of the electrolyte (in V K−1) and ΔT is the temperature gradient established between the electrodes (in K).
The thermopower output of a TCSC can be enhanced by regulating the interactions between the ions and the solvent that compose the electrolyte since these interactions can change the difference between the thermally-induced mobility of cations and anions.20
The charge stored (Qch) on the TCSC is calculated through the following equation:118 Qch = CVthermo = CαiΔT(13)where Vthermo is the thermovoltage (in V), C corresponds to the capacity of the device (in F), αi is the Soret coefficient of the electrolyte (in V K−1) and ΔT is the temperature gradient (in K).
Furthermore, the electrical energy stored in the device can be obtained through:118,122 (14)which clearly demonstrates that the stored electrical energy increases quadratically with the Soret coefficient of the electrolyte. For a situation in which current leakage occurs, the equation to determine the stored electrical energy needs to be reformulated, being expressed as a function of the Soret coefficient of the electrolyte:122 (15)where ΔT is the temperature gradient (in K), αi is the Soret coefficient of the electrolyte (in V K−1), C is the specific capacitance of the device (F kg−1, F m−2 or F m−3, in SI units), Vs is the potential drop over the internal series resistance (in V) and Vload is the potential across the load resistance (in V).
The maximum charging efficiency (ηΔTch, in %) of a TCSC can be determined by:118 (16)where TH represents the absolute temperature of the hot electrode (in K), ΔT is the temperature gradient, and k, σi and αi are the thermal conductivity, the ionic conductivity and the Soret coefficient of the electrolyte, respectively.
4.3. Factors that govern the performance of TCSCs
The thermal energy harvesting and supercapacitive performance of TCSCs is influenced by several factors, namely by the type and work function of the selected electrode materials, the type of electrolyte, including the solvent medium (i.e., aqueous or organic) and the size of the electrolyte anions and cations.123–125
Considering the types of material used as electrodes in TCSCs, the selection of sustainable options has been a concern. As a requirement, TCSC electrode materials should present high specific surface area, fine-tuned porosity, high electrical and thermal conductivity, and high thermal and mechanical stability.7 EDLC-type carbon-based materials have been the prime choices, including MWCNTs,8,119 graphene119 and graphene oxide/reduced graphene oxide.126 The porous structure and electrical conductivity of carbon-based materials enable a higher capability to accumulate electrolyte ions on the surface of the corresponding electrodes, as well as their faster adsorption/desorption, improving the energy storage outputs of the TCSCs.20 Moreover, their high thermal stability is crucial to guarantee the preservation of the TCSC performance upon multiple thermally-induced charging and discharging cycles.
Another factor that can significantly influence the performance of TCSCs (through the change of the ionic figure of merit, Soret coefficient, thermal/electrical conductivity, energy density and power density) is the type of electrolyte. The traditional electrolytes used for TCSCs have been liquid, such as NaCl/H2O36 and PEO treated by NaOH,122 leading to Soret coefficient values of up to ∼11 mV K−1.122 However, similarly to SCs, TCSC systems based on liquid electrolytes require bulky packaging to prevent leakage, present complex preparation steps and may suffer degradation processes, being difficult to use for practical applications.126,127 Moreover, liquid electrolytes present undesirable low ionic conductivity.122 To overcome these issues, solid-gel electrolytes have been proposed as a safer alternative, facilitating the manufacturing process of flexible devices due to their solid-gel nature. Furthermore, this type of electrolyte behaves not only as an ionic conductor, but also as a separator between both electrodes, preventing the occurrence of a short circuit in the devices. Solid-gel polyelectrolytes have been reported as promising building blocks for flexible TCSC systems, namely polystyrene sulfonic acid (PSSH),119 poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDAC)25 and PVA/K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 redox couple,128 owing to their extremely high thermally-induced potential. Until now, the maximum Soret coefficient achieved so far for this type of electrolytes was 19 mV K−1 for PDDAC.127
On the other hand, the relative humidity (RH), i.e., the percentage value that indicates the absolute humidity relative to the maximum humidity at the same temperature, can also greatly influence the outputs of TCSCs, especially concerning thermal energy harvesting. For instance, Kim et al. reported a study of the RH-dependency of the TE behavior of three different solid-state polyelectrolytes at room temperature: the cation conductors Nafion (sulfonated tetrafluoroethylene based fluoropolymer–copolymer) and sulfonated polyether ether ketone (S-PEEK); the anion conductor poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDAC), and the binary ion (cation and anion) conductor PVA doped with NaOH or H3PO4.127 The PDDAC polyelectrolyte, which contains mobile anions and an immobile positively-charged backbone (anion conductor), presented the highest Soret coefficient values, of 10 mV K−1 at 30% RH and of ∼19 mV K−1 at 70% RH. The authors assigned its outputs to the more extensive dissociation of the Cl− anions on the hotter side than on the colder side, instead of their thermodiffusion.
In contrast, the binary ion conductors PVA/NaOH and PVA/H3PO4 presented the lowest Soret coefficient values of 1 mV K−1 and 1.6 mV K−1, respectively. In these two polyelectrolytes, both cations and anions were mobile, resulting in a negligible variation of the thermopower with the RH variation.
In the case of the proton conductors bearing negatively-charged immobile structures, Nafion and S-PEEK, they presented intermediate Soret coefficient values, which were highly dependent on the RH: at 30% RH (room temperature) the values were 4.2 mV K−1 and 3.1 mV K−1 for Nafion and S-PEEK, respectively; at 70% RH, a slight decrease of this property was observed for Nafion, reaching 3.6 mV K−1, whereas for S-PEEK the opposite trend was verified upon the increase of RH, reaching 6.1 mV K−1. The opposite variation of the thermopower with the RH conditions observed for both cation conductor electrolytes can be explained by the directions of the thermodiffusion of water and proton transport: in the case of S-PEEK, both phenomena occur in the same direction, from the hot to the cold side, leading to the enhancement of the thermopower upon the increase of RH (higher water content and higher concentration of dissociated protons); in Nafion, water thermodiffusion takes place in the opposite direction, from the cold to the hot side, restraining the proton transport through the water channels.
Concerning the electrical conductivity of all polyelectrolytes, it increased with the increase of the RH. PVA/H3PO4 presented the highest electrical conductivity of 0.3 S m−1 at 30% RH and 3.0 S m−1 at 70% RH. Although this study provided interesting data on transport mechanisms and TE characteristics of polyelectrolytes, the thermal conductivity and respective ionic figure of merit values of these materials were not determined.
4.4. Types of architecture
The sandwich-type configuration has been the most widely adopted for the preparation of TCSCs owing to the simplicity and scalability of the design and of the processes used to prepare the electrodes (e.g., drop-casting).129 This configuration consists of two electrodes, one above the other, with the electrolyte sandwiched in the middle and, in some cases, requiring a separator (Fig. 13A). However, some disadvantages are assigned to this configuration, including the relatively large interface resistances between the electrodes and the electrolyte and between the current collectors and the electrodes, and the existence of long electrolyte ion diffusion paths.130 These issues lead to limited specific capacitance, energy density and power density. Moreover, the different layers of the sandwiched TCSCs can suffer a displacement, especially when bent, which is a negative aspect for flexible electronics.
 Fig. 13  (A) Sandwich-type and (B) and (C) planar-type configurations of TCSCs (reproduced from ref. 130 (A and B) and ref. 131 (C) with permission from RSC and Springer Nature, respectively, copyrights 2019 and 2011). 
On the other hand, in the planar-type configuration, the electrodes are side by side, coated by an electrolyte layer (Fig. 13B). This configuration involves an interdigitated electrode design (e.g., parallel columns, concentric circles and hairbrush, Fig. 13C) that is considered very useful for 2D-type electrode materials (e.g., graphene). The narrow interspace between the interdigitated electrodes shortens the electrolyte ion diffusion distance towards the electrodes’ surface, thus reducing the transport resistance of the electrolyte ions.130–132 This type of configuration is more versatile than the sandwich-type one, since numerous design patterns can be developed. Planar-type TCSCs can provide higher thermoelectric potentials than sandwich-type-based devices as a result of the relatively larger in-plane temperature gradient promoted by the longer distance between the hot and cold sides.133 In contrast, in sandwich-type TCSCs, the temperature gradient is imposed in the out-of-plane direction. Moreover, the in-plane configuration enables the reduction of displacement between different layers and improves the mechanical flexibility of the device, due to the unique interdigitated electrode configuration, which are crucial characteristics for flexible/wearable and miniaturized electronics.130 Nevertheless, planar-type TCSCs often store a lower amount of charge and yield lower current intensities because the electrolyte ion transport occurs in a smaller cross-sectional area (in-plane direction).133
To prepare flexible and wearable sandwich and/or planar TCSCs, the manufacturing processes are inspired and extrapolated from those previously adopted in the preparation of SC devices, namely conventional dyeing/coating and advanced processes, such as screen-printing (that presents high reproducibility and versatility) and lithography (photolithography, scanning probe lithography).129 It is important to note that printing methods have been gaining space in the field of preparation of TCSCs, since they are compatible with roll-to-roll processes and offer feasible manufacturing techniques for low-cost and mass production of devices, when compared with other abovementioned methods (such as photolithography, vacuum vapor deposition, among other).130
4.5. State-of-the-art for TCSCs
The literature has reported the combination of different types of electrode materials and electrolytes in order to boost the thermal energy harvesting and energy storage performance of TCSCs. In this sub-section, the progress in TCSCs will be reported, starting from the first works on multi-unit power packs based on liquid electrolytes up to all-solid-state fully-integrated systems. The evolution in the configuration of the devices from bulkier towards more sophisticated and miniaturized architectures will be highlighted. Table 2 summarizes the outputs for the reported TCSC devices.
Table 2 Summary of TCSCs recently reported in the literaturea




Type of configuration
Electrode
Substrate
Electrolyte
Electrolyte ionic conductivity
Electrolyte thermal conductivity
Soret coefficient
Output thermally-induced voltage
Harvested capacitance
Harvested energy density
Harvested power output

ZT
i

Overall heat-to-electricity conversion efficiency
Ref.





a CNT – carbon nanotubes; EMIM:DCA – 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide; MWCNT – multiwalled carbon nanotubes; PANI – polyaniline; PDAQ-BC – conjugated conducting polymer based on 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone and 3,6-dibromo-9-(4-bromo-phenyl)carbazole; PEO – polyethylene oxide; PET – polyethylene terephthalate; PSSH – polystyrene sulfonic acid; PTFE – polytetrafluoroethylene; PVA – poly(vinyl alcohol); PVDF-HFP – (poly(vinylidene fluoride)-co-hexafluoropropylene; rSGO – reduced graphene oxide intercalated by sulfate ions; SGO – graphene oxide intercalated by sulfate ions; SWCNT – single-walled carbon nanotubes.





Sandwich-type
MWCNT-coated Au electrodes (thicker electrodes)
Glass
NaOH-treated PEO
8.13 × 10−5 S cm−1 (RT)
0.216 W m−1 K−1 (RT)
11.1 mV K−1
180 mV (ΔT = 16 K)
—
1.35 μJ cm−2 (ΔT = 4.5 K, Rload < 20 kΩ)
—
—
6 × 10−6% (ΔT = 4.5 K, low Rload)

122



















9.4 W h kg−1 (extrapolated for ΔT = 10 K)










PANI-coated graphene/CNT
PTFE
PSSH
9 S m−1 (70% RH)
0.38 ± 0.05 W m−1 K−1 (RT, 65%–70% RH)
7.9 mV K−1 (70% RH)
38 mV (ΔT = 5.3 K)
120 mF cm−2@0.01 mA cm−2 (ΔT = 5.3 K)
—
—
∼0.4 (70% RH)
—

119



Carbon cloth
Free-standing
PVA/K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6
5.44 mS cm−1 (RT)
—
0.86 mV K−1
22.2 mV (ΔT = 30 °C)
—
973.6 μJ cm−2 (ΔT = 10 K)
—
—
5 × 10−5%

128















40.4 mV (ΔT = 50 °C)














Au
Glass
PSS:Na
1.18 S m−1 (100% RH)
0.49 ± 0.03 W m−1 K−1 (100% RH)
4 mV K−1 (100% RH)
—
—
0.6 μJ (ΔT = 10 K; 100% RH)
—
0.012 (RT, 100% RH)
0.004% (100% RH)

118



PDAQ-BC/acetylene black (weight ratio: 85:15)
Au-coated polyimide
PSSH
—
—
8.27 mV K−1 (ΔT = 5.2 °C)
43 mV (ΔT = 5.2 °C)
—
—
—
—
—

146













6.67 mV K−1 (ΔT = 10.8 °C)
72 mV (ΔT = 10.8 °C)














SWCNT coated over Ag
Glass
EMIM:DCA/PVDF-HFP (80 wt% EMIM:DCA)
6.7 mS cm−1 (RT, 67–75% RH)
0.176 W m−1 K−1 (RT, 67–75% RH)
26.1 mV K−1
—
—
12300 μJ m−2 (ΔT = 0.6 K, Rload = 47 kΩ)
—
0.75 (RT, 67–75% RH)
—

148



Sandwich-type
Au
Cu foils
Ionic gelatin/KCl/Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63−
—
0.15 W m−1 K−1
12.7 mV K−1
25 TCSC modules: 2.2 V (ΔT = 10 K)
—
7.4 J m−2 (ΔT = 8.5 K)
0.66 mW m−2 K−2 (ΔT = 8.5 K)
—
—

140



















25 TCSC modules: 3.5 × 10−5 J (ΔT = 10 K)
25 TCSC modules: 5.0 μW (ΔT = 10 K)








Planar-type
rSGO
PET film attached to a DVD disk
SGO
0.4 S m−1 (70% RH)
—
∼5.7 mV K−1 (70% RH)
58 mV (ΔT = 10.5 K, 70% RH)
—
TCSC module containing 17 rSGO/SGO pairs connected in series: 3.68 × 10−5 J (ΔT = 14 K)
TCSC module containing 17 rSGO/SGO pairs connected in series: 1.23 W m−2 (ΔT = 14 K)
—
TCSC module containing 17 rSGO/SGO pairs connected in series: 0.31% (ΔT = 14 K; 0.53% (ΔT = 30 K)

126















8 TCSC modules: 2.1 V (ΔT = 30 K)






























1.34 × 10−4 J (ΔT = 30 K)




























4.47 W m−2 (ΔT = 30 K)








TCSC module with 50 rSGO/SGO pairs
PET
SGO
—
—
4.53 mV K−1 (50% RH)
∼20 mV (ΔT = ∼4 °C, ∼50% RH)
∼7.4 mF (ΔT = ∼4 °C, ∼50% RH)
∼3 μJ cm−2 (ΔT = ∼4 °C, ∼50% RH)
—
—
—

133



MWCNT
PET
PVA/H3PO4 (50 wt% H3PO4)
7.85 × 10−5 mS cm−1 (50 wt% H3PO4)
—
2.35 mV K−1
45 mV (ΔT = 20 K)
—
∼118 nW h cm−2 (ΔT = 10 K)
—
—
—

120









0.082 mS cm−1 (75 wt% H3PO4)























4.5.1. Multi-unit pack systems based on liquid electrolytes. 
In the early stages of the development of thermal energy harvesting/energy storage technologies, the devices were multi-unit pack systems containing two separate modules, each performing one single function of energy harvesting or storage, that were connected through a salt bridge; the electrolytes were liquid. For example, Lim et al. reported a system composed of two electrodes of conductive carbon black (CCB; Cabot BP2000; specific surface area: 1200 m2 g−1; nanopore size range: 2–100 nm) pressed on platinum sheets (current collectors) placed on two separate polypropylene containers filled with an aqueous solution of LiCl (0.1–3.7 M) as electrolyte; the containers were connected by a salt bridge (Fig. 14A).134 One container cell was kept at room temperature (21 °C), while the temperature of the other cell was raised to 60 °C. This system presented a Soret coefficient of ∼0.8 mV °C−1, which was significantly higher than the Seebeck coefficient of TE materials, and an output potential of a few tens of mV for ΔT = 50 °C. Furthermore, concerning energy storage outputs, the authors reported an energy density of more than 0.1 J g−1 (corresponding to a specific capacitance of ∼55 F g−1) and a specific power output of nearly 2.3 mW g−1.
 Fig. 14  Schematic representation of multi-unit pack systems composed of two cell modules based on: (A) two electrodes of conductive carbon black (CCB) pressed on platinum sheets immersed in two polypropylene containers filled with an aqueous solution of LiCl electrolyte and connected by a salt bridge (reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from IOP Publishing, copyright 2013); (B) commercial SC composed of porous AC electrodes and tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate solvated in acetonitrile electrolyte immersed in a hot water bath (left) or ice/water bath (right) (reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from RSC, copyright 2015); (C) two electrodes of CCB/PVDF/carbon black pressed onto nickel net collectors immersed in two containers filled with a formaldehyde solution of anhydrous sodium acetate containing Cu nanoparticles as the electrolyte and connected by a salt bridge (reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020). 
Later on, the same group developed a similar system based on two nickel-coated CCB electrodes pressed on platinum foils (current collectors) and a formamide solution of anhydrous sodium acetate (NaC2H3O2; 1 M) electrolyte.136 The device presented a Soret coefficient of ∼2.1 mV °C−1, which was higher than that obtained in their previous work,134 and a specific energy of 1.8 mJ g−1 for ΔT = 50 °C. Nevertheless, the power density was lower than that achieved in their previous work (∼0.1 mW g−1vs. 2.3 mW g−1).
Yang et al. developed a thermal energy harvesting and storage pack system encapsulated in a home-made plastic cell and composed of one electrode of a slurry of Prussian blue particles (PB, [KFeIIFeIII(CN)6])/carbon black/poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF; weight ratio: 7:2:1) drop-cast onto a carbon cloth disk current collector, and another electrode of carbon cloth that also served as a current collector.137 The PB-based electrode was immersed in KNO3 aqueous electrolyte (2.5 M), while the carbon cloth electrode was immersed in 0.5 M K4Fe(CN)6/0.3 M K3Fe(CN)6 catholyte. Both electrolytes were separated by a Nafion 115 membrane pretreated with concentrated sulfuric acid and stored in 0.5 M KNO3 aqueous solution. The system exhibited a full-cell Soret coefficient of −1.45 ± 0.03 mV K−1 and an open circuit potential of 49 mV at 20 °C, which became negative upon heating to 60 °C, reaching a stabilization value of −57 mV. The specific discharge capacitance was 23 mA h gPB−1, which was maintained after 24 charge/discharge cycles (for discharges both at 20 and 60 °C). Finally, the cell presented an overall heat-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 2.0% when cycled between 20 and 60 °C.
Härtel et al. evaluated the performance of a commercial SC (10 Farad SC, YEC Pl series) based on porous activated carbon (specific surface area: 1200 m2 g−1; pore size distribution: 0.56–37.5 nm) electrode material and tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate solvated in acetonitrile (1 M) electrolyte (Fig. 14B).135 The increase of the temperature from 0 °C to 65 °C resulted in a maximum thermal potential of 39 mV, leading to a Soret coefficient of 0.6 mV K−1 and an experimental ZTi of 0.0039, which was one order of magnitude lower than the ZTi obtained from the theoretical model when considering a thermal voltage rise of 1.7 mV K−1 (ZTi = 0.066).
Meng and Xuan developed a thermal energy harvesting and storage system based on two identical electrodes of porous carbon/PVDF/carbon black (weight ratio: 8:1:1; porous carbon specific surface area: 1824 m2 g−1; pore size range: 0.5–5 nm) pressed onto nickel net collectors and placed in two containers connected by a U-salt bridge (Fig. 14C).123 Three different electrolytes were tested: a formaldehyde solution of anhydrous sodium acetate (1 M) containing C nanoparticles or Cu nanoparticles and an undoped solution. The introduction of nanoparticles into the electrolyte led to the enhancement of the performance of the device when a temperature gradient was established, due to a significant enhancement of the ionic conductivity and diffusion coefficient of the electrolyte. In this sense, the doping of the electrolyte with C or Cu nanoparticles promoted the migration of a higher amount of cations to the cold electrode induced by the temperature gradient, resulting in a higher thermal-induced voltage. The system with the best performance was based on the electrolyte containing Cu nanoparticles (1.9 wt%) since, for the same mass fraction of nanoparticles, the number of Cu particles within the electrolyte was much lower than that of C particles, thus facilitating the free motion of Brownian particles and the diffusion of the electrolyte ions, also giving rise to higher ionic conductivity (lower viscosity of the electrolyte). The Cu-based system reached a Soret coefficient of 5.3 mV K−1, which was significantly higher than the Seebeck coefficient of TE materials (in the range of 100–200 μV K−1).123,138 Furthermore, the Cu-based system presented a higher thermal-induced open-circuit potential of 265 mV for ΔT = 50 K, which was 6× higher than the value obtained for the system based on the undoped electrolyte (40 mV). The maximum obtained power density was ∼4.2 W m−2 (Rload = 20 Ω).
Recently, the same group developed a hybrid multi-pack thermal energy harvesting and storage system based on battery-type and capacitor electrodes.139 The battery-type electrode (positive electrode) was composed of a hierarchical composite material of LiMn2O4, graphene and MWCNT, which was mixed with carbon black and PVDF (weight ratio of 10:5:85). The capacitor-type electrode (negative electrode) was based on a slurry of carbon black, PVDF and a carbon material prepared from carbonized peanut shells without or with subsequent activation with KOH (C-500, H–C-500 or H–C-700, where 500 and 700 correspond to the carbonization temperatures of 500 °C and 700 °C, respectively). The electrodes were placed in two containers separated by a diaphragm and a 1 M Li2SO4 solution was used as the electrolyte in both containers. The best thermal charging performance and the highest temperature coefficient were achieved for the system based on H–C-700 negative electrode active material, leading to an open circuit voltage of 500 mV for ΔT = 50 °C. The thermal charging performance of the H–C-700-based device was further improved through the addition of Cu nanoparticles in different weight fractions to the electrolyte in order to enhance the diffusion coefficient and conductivity of the electrolyte. Upon the addition of 0.09% of Cu nanoparticles to the electrolyte, the device generated a 1.2× higher open circuit voltage of 604 mV for ΔT = 50 °C when compared with the device based on the undoped electrolyte, reaching a Soret coefficient of up to 12.1 mV K−1. Moreover, a maximum output power density of 20.4 W m−2 was achieved.
Despite these advances, these systems still present several limitations, namely the use of liquid electrolytes, the multi-unit cell configuration requiring complicated packaging and the bulkiness and inflexibility of the resulting devices, which restrain their applicability for flexible/wearable applications.123,140 In contrast, solid-gel electrolytes present easy handling, improved safety, low internal corrosion, lightness, versatility of shape and simplicity of preparation, being considered a promising option to prepare flexible and wearable TCSC devices in sandwich- and planar-type configurations.128


4.5.2. Sandwich-type TCSCs. 
Significant efforts are being undertaken for the development of flexible/wearable all-solid-state TCSCs. Several examples of TCSCs with a sandwich-type configuration have been reported in the literature. To the best of our knowledge, the first ionic TCSC was reported by Zhao and co-authors, in 2016.122 The group prepared three sandwich-type TCSCs composed of MWCNT-coated (in two different amounts: denoted as thick and thin; diameter: 5–9 nm; length: 5 μm) Au electrodes or bare Au electrodes patterned on a glass substrate and a liquid polyelectrolyte of NaOH-treated PEO, as schematized in Fig. 15A. A Soret coefficient of +11.1 mV K−1 was obtained for the NaOH–PEO electrolyte, which was significantly higher than the Seebeck coefficient reported for Bi2Te3 (190 μV K−1). The TCSC device based on the thicker CNT-coated Au electrodes presented a specific capacitance of 1.031 mF cm−2 at 22 °C (determined by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy), a stored energy per area of 1.35 μJ cm−2 for ΔT = 4.5 K and Rload < 20 kΩ, and an extrapolated energy density of 33.8 kJ kg−1 (9.4 W h kg−1) for ΔT = 10 K. The overall heat-to-electricity conversion efficiency of the TCSC for a full cycle was 6 × 10−6% at ΔT = 4.5 K and low Rload. Although this value was low, it was 2500× higher than that of a circuit composed of a SC connected in series to a conventional TEG of similar area and volume as the TCSC, but composed of Bi2Te3 and submitted to a similar ΔT = 4.5 K. Moreover, the authors predicted an improvement of the total efficiency to ∼0.1% through the hypothetical optimization of the device design and application of a significantly higher ΔT = 100 K.
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of: (A) a sandwich-type TCSC composed of CNT/Au electrodes and a liquid NaOH–PEO electrolyte (reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from RSC, copyright 2016); (B) a sandwich-type TCSC based on carbon cloth electrodes and PVA/K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 redox-active solid-gel electrolyte (left) and a photograph of the device (centre) (reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018); (C) a sandwich-type TCSC based on Au electrodes and a PSS:Na solid-gel electrolyte (chemical structure on the left; adapted from ref. 118 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017). 
Shortly afterwards, Kim et al. developed a TCSC with a more straightforward design and using more advanced electrode nanomaterials. The authors prepared a solid-state TCSC with a sandwich-type configuration based on PANI-coated graphene/CNT films deposited on polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membranes as electrodes and polystyrene sulfonic acid (PSSH) as electrolyte.119 The electrodes were prepared through vacuum-filtration of the graphene/CNT solution onto the PTFE membrane, followed by the deposition of PANI through the oxidation of aniline. Concerning the thermal harvesting properties, the authors reported an open circuit potential of 38 mV at ΔT = 5.3 K, a maximum Soret coefficient for the PSSH film of 7.9 mV K−1, a ZTi of up to ∼0.4 and good ionic conductivity of 9 S m−1 at 70% RH. Moreover, the device presented an areal capacitance of 120 mF cm−2 at 0.01 mA cm−2 for ΔT = 5.3 K, which corresponded to ∼25% of the specific capacitance of the device when charged by an external source (i.e., working only as an energy storage system). The lower capacitance value upon thermal charging was assigned to the lower charging voltage (∼38 mV) and varying charging currents during the thermal charging process arising from the use of a fixed load resistor. In the case of the energy storage performance, the device presented a rectangular-shaped i–V cycle, which was characteristic of an ideal capacitive behavior and high areal capacitance values of 487 mF cm−2 at 1.0 mA cm−2 and ∼500 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2. These capacitance values were considered very high when compared with the literature (e.g., flexible sandwich-type solid-gel SCs based on conductive polymers).141–143 Furthermore, the TCSC presented a highly stable performance, with only a small decay of 6% of the specific capacitance after 1000 charge/discharge cycles and then almost preserving the performance for up to 5000 cycles (at 5 mA cm−2). Although this device presented a relatively lower Soret coefficient than the system previously reported by Zhao et al. (7.9 mV K−1 for PSSH film vs. 11.1 mV K−1 for NaOH–PEO electrolyte), the energy storage areal capacitance was significantly higher (∼500 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2vs. 1.031 mF cm−2), with the additional advantage of being a solid-state device.119,122
Kundu et al. prepared a flexible sandwich-type TCSC using carbon cloth electrodes and a redox-active solid-gel electrolyte of PVA doped with K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 (Fig. 15B).128 In the case of the TE performance, the TCSC presented a Soret coefficient of 0.86 mV K−1 (vs. 1.21 mV K−1 for the K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 redox couple), a stored energy of 973.6 μJ cm−2 and a stored charge of 160.90 mC cm−2 for ΔT = 10 °C. Concerning the energy storage performance, the device reached an areal specific capacitance of 13.3 F cm−2, which was 12900× and 27× higher than those of the previously reported PEO–NaOH- and PSSH-based devices (1.031 mF cm−2 and ∼500 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2, respectively).119,122 This improvement was assigned to the pseudocapacitive contribution of K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 species to the charge storage mechanism, beyond the electric double-layer behavior. Nevertheless, the TCSC presented a 25% loss of the capacitance after 2000 charge/discharge cycles. When compared with the previous literature, although the energy storage performance was quite promising, the Soret coefficient was significantly lower than those of the reported PEO–NaOH- and PSSH-based devices (0.86 mV K−1vs. 11.1 mV K−1 and 7.9 mV K−1, respectively).119,122 Additionally, the overall efficiency was only 5 × 10−5% (when compared with a circuit composed of a conventional TEG connected in series to the same SC), which was assigned to the low ionic conductivity of the electrolyte (5.44 mS cm−1 at room temperature).
Wang et al. reported a device based on sodium polystyrene sulfonate (PSS:Na) solid-gel electrolyte film and Au electrodes pre-patterned on non-flexible glass substrates, assembled in a sandwich-type configuration (Fig. 15C).118 The authors investigated the ionic TE properties of the PSS:Na film at different RH and correlated those properties with the charging efficiency when the electrolyte was used in a TCSC. By alternating the temperature gradient from −4 to +4 K, the PSS:Na electrolyte reached a positive Soret coefficient of +4 mV K−1 at 100% RH, which was about 40× higher than the values obtained for electronic TE materials. The positive sign of the Soret coefficient indicated that the PSS:Na electrolyte acted as a cation selective conductor, since the polymer anions were practically immobile due to their larger size. Furthermore, an ionic conductivity of 1.18 S m−1 was obtained as well as a PF of 19 μV m−1 K−2 and a thermal conductivity of 0.49 ± 0.03 W m−1 K−1 at 100% RH. The achieved figure of merit ZTi was 0.012 at 100% RH and room temperature, which was 7742× higher than the value obtained at 50% RH (ZTi = 1.55 × 10−6). Furthermore, the stored energy increased from 0.004 to 0.6 μJ upon the increase of RH from 50 to 100% at ΔT = 10 K; the value achieved at 100% RH was 500× and 3000× higher than those of Bi2Te3 and PEDOT, respectively. Finally, the maximum heat-to-stored electricity conversion efficiency also increased with the increase of the RH from 5 × 10−7% at 50% RH to 0.004% at 100% RH owing to the increase of the ionic conductivity.


4.5.3. Planar-type TCSCs. 
Interdigital planar structures remain almost unexplored in the TCSC research field. Kim et al. developed a flexible planar-type TCSC based on reduced graphene oxide intercalated by sulfate ions (rSGO) electrode material using PET film attached to a DVD disk as the substrate (Fig. 16A).126 The device was produced through a simple and scalable preparation process that did not require any polymer-based or liquid-based electrolytes. Firstly, a dispersion of graphene oxide intercalated by sulfate ions (SGO) was prepared by mixing a GO aqueous dispersion (2 mg mL−1) with 0.5 M H2SO4. Afterwards, the electrodes were prepared by drop-casting the resulting SGO dispersion on the PET substrate and then reducing alternated stripes of SGO to rSGO by a laser irradiation process using a LightScribe DVD burner. Remarkably, no electrolyte was required in the device, since the SGO layers acted both as electrolyte and separator owing to their excellent electrical conductivity (0.4 S m−1 at 70% RH). The increased mobility and concentration of dissociated protons from H2SO4 arising from the intercalation of the sulfate ions between the GO layers were responsible for the improved electrical conductivity, giving rise to Soret coefficients of ∼4.3 mV K−1 and ∼5.7 mV K−1 at 50% and 70% RH, respectively, for SGO. Concerning the thermovoltage outputs, the TCSC reached a potential of 58 mV with a stored charge of 154 μC cm−2 at ΔT = 10.5 K and 70% RH. In terms of electrochemical energy storage performance, the TCSC displayed a capacity of 3.2 mF at 10 mV s−1 and 70% RH and 91% capacity retention after 10000 charge–discharge cycles at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. Afterwards, to demonstrate the scalability of the process, TCSC modules containing seventeen rSGO/SGO pairs connected in series were batch-prepared by laser irradiation using a 3D printer modified with a blue diode laser (Fig. 16B). The ends of each module were painted in black (to absorb solar radiation) and silvery white colors to create a temperature difference under solar radiation (Fig. 16C).
 Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of an in-plane TCSC based on rSGO electrodes on a PET film/DVD substrate and SGO electrolyte produced by laser irradiation using a LightScribe DVD laser; (B) 3D printer-assisted batch-preparation of TCSC modules (3D printer modified with a blue diode laser); (C) photograph of an array of eight TCSC modules; (D) electrochromic device powered by an array of eight TCSC modules under solar irradiation (adapted from ref. 126 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 
The TCSC module presented energy conversion efficiencies of 0.31% and 0.53% for ΔT = 14 K and 30 K, respectively, as well as power density values of 1.23 W m−2 and 4.47 W m−2 for ΔT = 14 K and 30 K. Subsequently, eight TCSC modules were electrically connected in series and thermally in parallel (array). The array presented an improved output potential of 2.1 V at ΔT = 30 K, which was sufficient to power a Prussian white-based electrochromic device. When the array was irradiated with simulated solar light, a ΔT = 14 °C was created, generating an increase of the output voltage of the TCSC array that led to a gradual change of the color of the electrochromic device from transparent to dark blue in 20 min. More remarkably, for ΔT = 25 °C, the color change was faster (12 min; Fig. 16D).
Later on, in a continuation of this work, the same group studied the influence of the thickness of the SGO layer, the concentration of H2SO4 during the preparation of the SGO layer and the RH on the performance of the planar rSGO-based TCSC.133 In this case, each TCSC module prepared using the modified 3D printer contained fifty rSGO/SGO pairs instead of the seventeen pairs reported in the previous work. The TCSC module reached a thermopower of 4.53 mV K−1 at 50% RH and a maximum stored charge per unit area of 894 μC cm−2 for ΔT = 14 °C, which was at least 5× higher than that reported in their previous work.126 Concerning the energy storage performance, the increase of the thickness of the SGO electrolyte (from 20 to 40 μm) and the concentration of H2SO4 (i.e., proton concentration, from 59 to 88 mM) led to higher current intensity and charge storage features. On the other hand, for the best SGO thickness and H2SO4 concentration, the capacity values increased from 5.2 mF to 10.4 mF when the RH increased from 38% to 82%, resulting in an areal capacitance along the in-plane direction of 20.5 mF cm−2 at 82% RH. The improvement of the capacitance upon the increase of RH was assigned to the enhanced proton dissociation in the electrolyte and the opening of more ion transport pathways. Nevertheless, a decrease of the capacitance was observed upon 2000 charge/discharge cycles, of ∼10% and ∼25% for current densities of 10 mA cm−2 and 20 mA cm−−2, respectively. Finally, the authors simulated the temperature distribution in the TCSC placed on a forearm, through the variation of the convective heat transfer coefficients of TCSC and skin and of the heat conduction through the device. Moreover, the temperature distribution in the TCSC was experimentally tested. It was observed that, when mimicking the device operation on human skin, it was possible to obtain a ΔT = ∼4 °C across the device, generating an output potential of ∼20 mV at ∼50% RH and affording a stored energy of ∼3 μJ cm−2 (capacity of ∼7.4 mF).
Very recently, our group prepared a planar and flexible TCSC using MWCNTs deposited on pre-patterned PET as interdigitated electrodes with a hairbrush geometry, which were coated with PVA doped with H3PO4 (1:1 weight ratio) solid-gel electrolyte (Fig. 17).120 The device reached a Soret coefficient of 2.35 mV K−1, a generated output voltage of up to 45 mV (ΔT = 20 K) and a harvested energy density of ∼118 nW h cm−2 for ΔT = 10 K (stored charge of 128 mC cm−2). In terms of energy storage performance, a non-faradaic electrostatic charge storage mechanism was observed for the device, reaching a maximum volumetric capacitance of 1.70 F cm−3 (1.36 mF cm−2; 802.36 F kg−1) at 1 mV s−1 and an energy density of 1.05 mW h cm−3 (0.84 μW h cm−2 or 0.50 W h kg−1) at a power density of 1.21 W cm−3 (0.97 mW cm−2 or 573.25 W kg−1). Furthermore, the TCSC presented a specific capacitance retention of 96.4% after 6000 charge/discharge cycles. The simplicity, cost-effectiveness and scalability of the preparation process, combined with the engineered interdigital configuration, high flexibility and energy performance of the device, were highlighted. These achievements were a promising and sustainable advance in the field of flexible electronics for low-grade applications towards the next generation of self-powered devices.
 Fig. 17  Planar TCSC based on MWCNTs deposited on PET as electrodes and PVA/H3PO4 as a solid-gel electrolyte (adapted from ref. 120 with permission from ACS, copyright 2021). 

4.6. Emerging strategies for the improvement of TCSC performance
The practical applications of TCSCs have been limited by several factors including the selected electrode materials and electrolytes. Focusing on electrode materials, those combining high electrical conductivity and redox properties are of special interest. In particular, conjugated conducting polymers (CCPs, including polyindole, poly(3-4-ethylenedioxythiophene, polyaniline and polypyrrole) are promising solutions for harvesting and energy storage applications.144,145 CCPs consist of a π-conjugated system easily doped with ions, presenting a high specific surface area and high contact area with the electrolyte, leading to an improvement of the energy storage efficiency of the resulting device.146
One example of their applicability was presented by Wu et al., that reported a sandwich-type TCSC produced using a slurry of a CCP based on 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone and 3,6-dibromo-9-(4-bromo-phenyl)carbazole (PDAQ-BC) mixed with acetylene carbon (weight ratio = 85:15) as electrode material, deposited on a Au-coated polyimide substrate.146 The selected solid electrolyte was PSSH. The TCSC reached output potential values of 43 and 72 mV when submitted to small ΔT values of 5.2 and 10.8 °C, respectively. Although the device generated a lower potential at a lower temperature gradient, the Soret coefficient was higher: 8.27 mV K−1 for ΔT = 5.2 °C vs. 6.67 mV K−1 for ΔT = 10.8 °C. The device presented stable potential retention over 30 h. Additionally, it presented a high specific capacitance of 180.5 F g−1 at a current intensity of 1 A g−1, justified by the additional pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism arising from the presence of PDAQ-BC CCP. Moreover, it retained 84% of the capacitance upon 5000 cycles.
Concerning the progress in the development of electrolytes for TCSCs, ionic liquids and ionogels have been flourishing as remarkable alternatives with enormous potentialities for applications in TCSCs.140,147,148 Ionogels are an emerging class of electrolyte materials with outstanding potential in the field of wearable technologies, resulting from their flexibility, stretchability and the lack of leakage risk. One example was reported by Cheng et al.,148 that developed environmentally benign flexible quasi-solid state ionogels featuring giant Seebeck coefficients and remarkable TE properties. The ionogels were prepared by spin-coating an acetone solution of an ionic liquid (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide – EMIM:DCA; 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium – EMIM:TFSI; 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate – BMIM:BF4) and a polymer (poly(vinylidene fluoride)-co-hexafluoropropylene – PVDF-HFP, PVDF, PVA, agarose or gelatin) on glass. The ionogel with the best TE performance was EMIM:DCA/PVDF-HFP (80 wt% EMIM:DCA loading) featuring a giant Soret coefficient of 26.1 mV K−1, which was the highest among the electronic and ionic conductors, owing to the ion–ion interactions and ion–dipole interactions between the ionic liquid and the PVDF-HFP. Moreover, it presented a high ionic conductivity of 6.7 mS cm−1 and a low thermal conductivity of 0.176 W m−1 K−1, leading to a PF of 455 μW m−1 K−2 and a ZTi of 0.75 at room temperature and 67%–75% RH.
The authors then prepared TCSCs by sandwiching the ionogel with the best performance, working as an electrolyte, between two Ag-coated glass or SWCNT/Ag-coated glass electrodes. The device containing Ag-based electrodes generated a total electrical energy of 3360 μJ m−2 at ΔT = 0.6 K and an external load resistance of 47 kΩ. When the electrodes were replaced by SWCNT-based ones, the total energy delivered increased to 12300 μJ m−2 due to the higher specific surface area of the electrodes.
Finally, a recent and pioneering approach was reported by Han et al. involving the use of an ionic gelatin matrix for energy harvesting.140 The authors prepared flexible quasi-solid-state ionic TE materials based on an organic gelatin matrix containing ion providers, namely KCl, KNO3 and NaCl, and a redox couple of Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63−. The highest Soret coefficient of 12.7 mV K−1 was achieved for the ionic gelatin containing 0.8 M KCl and 0.42 M/0.25 M of Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63−, owing to the synergy between the thermodiffusion effect imparted by the mobile ions of the KCl ion provider and the thermogalvanic effect of the redox couple. Moreover, that ionic TE material presented a low thermal conductivity of 0.15 W m−1 K−1, which enabled it to maintain a temperature gradient for power generation. A TCSC device with a sandwich-type structure was then prepared using ionic gelatin–0.8 M KCl–0.42/0.25 M FeCN4−/3− as the electrolyte and copper foils or Au-coated copper foils as the electrodes. A maximum power density of 0.66 mW m−2 K−2 and a total energy density of 7.4 J m−2 for ΔT = 8.5 K were achieved for the Au-based device (vs. 1.5 J m−2 for the Cu-only device) due to the higher surface area of the corresponding electrodes. As proof-of-concept, a flexible device containing twenty-five TCSC modules based on copper-only electrodes and connected in series was produced. One of its sides was pasted on the back of a human hand to harvest the body heat, while the other side was exposed to a cold environment, resulting in ΔT = ∼10 K. The device generated an output potential of 2.2 V, a pulsed power output of 5.0 μW and a total output energy of 3.5 × 10−5 J, which were sufficient to power different IoT sensors, including humidity (1.6–3.6 V), pressure (1.5–3.6 V) and gas sensors for monitoring indoor air quality (1.8–3.6 V). Additionally, the authors reported that the cell could also work in a continuous mode, affording a maximum energy density of 12.8 J m−2. This work was more focused on the energy harvesting features of the high-performance device, with the energy storage outputs not being explored.
Despite these advances, presently, the existing TCSCs still exhibit a low power generation output (from μW to mW), which is a limitation for their implementation in autonomous systems. In this sense, many efforts still need to be undertaken to develop new electrode and electrolyte materials in order to improve the energy harvesting and storage outputs and mechanical robustness and enable the production scale-up.123
5. Conclusions and future directions
With the miniaturization of electronics and the quest for all-in-one clean, sustainable and affordable energy solutions, TCSCs have been opening new horizons for versatile, compact and cost-effective autonomous wearable/flexible technologies. Several advances have been conquered, ranging from the development of sophisticated materials prone to thermoionic effects to advanced device configurations. Several key issues, however, still need to be tackled for the viable implementation of these devices. Research has been more focused on the electrolyte side and on the mechanism that takes place in the electrolyte medium upon the establishment of the temperature gradient, with scarce exploration of the role of the electrode materials, which is another crucial building block of these devices. Electrodes have been mostly based on electrically-conductive materials lacking redox properties, leading to a non-faradaic charge storage mechanism. Moreover, most devices have been produced on plastic-based substrates, which is a still limitation for fully-wearable electronic clothing. Concerning the TCSCs’ performance, the evaluation of the overall efficiency of the device is often lacking, which is essential to establish comparisons between different TCSCs and with other types of off-grid systems in an accurate manner. The overall heat-to-electricity conversion and energy storage efficiencies of these devices, when reported, continue to be limited and lower than those of their individual counterparts due to the mismatch between the output of the energy harvester and the input of the supercapacitor component, leading to low energy transfer between both integrating components. The maximum thermovoltage output reported so far is still in the order of mV (∼100 mV scale), which is a small fraction of the maximum storing ability of the device and insufficient for practical applications. The reported works have been more focused on the demonstration of the concept itself rather than the performance enhancement (proof-of-concept prototypes). In this sense, the assembly of new flexible/stretchable architectures that meet the demands of the ever-growing market for wearable electronics continues to be a technological bottleneck.
Despite these limitations, considering the remarkable progress in energy harvesting and storage in past years, new pathways are foreseen to advance this technology, concerning both the materials and the device architecture, as highlighted in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  Overview of envisaged strategies for the enhancement of the performance of TCSCs (spray coating and inkjet printing images reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020; roll-to-roll image reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2010; sandwich-type architecture reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from RSC, copyright 2019). 
On the electrode side, the emergence of new families of advanced nanomaterials with unprecedented textural, electrical, thermal and chemical features is expected to enhance the performance of TCSCs by imparting an additional pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism to the devices. The rational design of conductive electrode materials presenting hierarchical and interconnected porous structures and redox properties may bring great benefits. These materials should be produced by scalable preparation processes grounded on the pillars of sustainable chemistry to ensure their feasibility.
Concerning the electrolytes’ progress, the development of redox-active electrolytes that are stable in wider potential windows, have high ionic conductivity and low thermal conductivity, while being eco-friendly, cost-effective and safe is urgently needed. Ionogels have been conquering new horizons in the field of wearable technologies due to their flexibility, stretchability, lack of leakage risk and possibility of withstanding high temperature gradients without degradation. Significant advances have been achieved concerning their thermoionic properties.
Since the overall efficiency of the system is dependent on both the conversion and storage processes, the role of the different device components (electrodes and electrolyte materials, separator, etc.) should not be analyzed in an isolated fashion, but in an integrated manner during harvesting and storage processes. The thorough understanding of the possible interactions and synergies between the different building blocks of the device should be pursued in order to reduce the gap between the conversion and storage efficiencies and to boost the overall performance. In particular, it is fundamental to ensure the ideal match between the properties of the electrode materials (e.g., composition, morphology, pore geometry and size, etc.) and electrolytes (ionic conductivity, electrolyte ions size, electrochemical stability) and the improvement of the electrode/electrolyte interfacial contact. These are key issues to ensure an effective heat transfer towards simultaneously-enhanced thermoionic and supercapacitive performances.
On the other hand, the charge storage contribution from the electrodes when submitted to temperature gradients needs to be considered since the electrodes’ properties are highly dependent on the temperature, namely their electronic structure, electrical conductivity, work function, and type and strength of interfacial interactions with the electrolyte ions. Additionally, the temperature-dependence of the reactions that may take place within the electrolyte and on the electrode/electrolyte interfaces (in the case of redox-active electrodes) should be carefully investigated, since they can contribute alongside the Soret effect to tune the thermocapacitive properties of the devices.
Complementary in situ characterization of the devices (e.g., in situ Raman spectroscopy, diffuse-charge dynamics studies, in situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Kelvin probe force, electrochemical force microscopy) is of paramount importance for the in-depth understanding of the underlying mechanisms during thermal charging and energy storage, by tracking in real-time the local structural and electronic changes occurring on the electrodes’ surfaces/interfaces. In parallel, theoretical simulations and modeling are fundamental tools for the optimization of the device configuration at the electrode and electrolyte levels and for improvement of its performance. Those studies are helpful to shed light on the synergy between the energy harvesting and energy storage components and to predict the outputs of the devices.
The establishment of standardization methods for the evaluation of the TCSCs’ performance is mandatory, since it is difficult to compare the performance reported in distinct works. The outputs are largely dependent on several factors, namely the temperature gradient, capacitance, internal resistance, and ionic dynamics, among others. In this sense, standard conditions should be established to allow a direct comparison between devices. In particular, information concerning the relative humidity, applied current intensity and/or potential range during measurements, the dimensions and thickness of the device, the loading of the active materials within the device, the active area/volume of the device, among others, should be specified.
Reproducibility studies should be also undertaken. The evaluation of the washing fastness, flexibility/stretchability and possible self-discharge need to be taken into account in order to allow the design of fully-wearables.
The manufacturing processes for the preparation of flexible/wearable TCSCs should be extrapolated from those used in the textile industry to accelerate the technological transfer. New opportunities are envisaged for high-tech processing and manufacturing processes compatible with nanomaterials, including printing technologies (in particular, 3D printing), spray painting and roll-to-roll assembly. Scalability, cost and eco-sustainability are prime factors that need to be assessed at all stages of device production. In many cases, a trade-off between enhanced performance vs. manufacturing cost/sustainability may need to be reached. Safety is another core requirement of the utmost importance for wearable applications to ensure the safe operation of the device, especially when in contact with the user's body.
Finally, in light of the remarkable progress that has been witnessed in past years in TCSCs in terms of materials, manufacturing techniques and design strategies, exciting developments are foreseen in the upcoming years that will shape the future of self-sustaining and self-chargeable wearable electronics.
Conflicts of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work received financial support from the European Union (ERDF funds through the Operational Competitiveness Program COMPETE 2020-POCI) and Portuguese national funds (FCT/MCTES, Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia and Ministério da Ciência, Tecnologia e Ensino Superior) through project PTDC/CTM-TEX/31271/2017. This work was also supported by the projects UIDB/50006/2020 and UIDB/04968/2020 with funding from FCT/MCTES through Portuguese national funds. J. S. T. and C. P. thank FCT for PhD scholarship SFRH/BD/145513/2019 and FCT Investigator contract IF/01080/2015, respectively. R. S. C. thanks the MSc. grant funding from ERDF through POCI-01-0247-FEDER-039833 in the framework of the project RFProTex. A. L. P. gratefully acknowledges the funding from European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement no. 863307, Ref. H2020-FETOPEN-2018-2019-2020-01, for the contract.
References
B. Luo, D. Ye and L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700104 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Alanne and S. Cao, Appl. Energy, 2019, 238, 284–302 CrossRef .

          D. Enescu, in Green Energy Advances, IntechOpen,  2019, vol. 32, pp. 137–144 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, C. Jiang, J. Liang and W. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8099–8128 RSC .
G. Chen, Y. Li, M. Bick and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 3668–3720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Das, X. He and K. Ghaffarzadeh, Flexible, Printed and Organic Electronics 2020-2030, Forecasts, Technologies, Markets,  2020 Search PubMed .
M. Falk and S. Shleev, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 126, 275–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al-zubaidi, X. Ji and J. Yu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1457–1474 RSC .
Z. Fan, Y. Zhang, L. Pan, J. Ouyang and Q. Zhang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 137, 110448 CrossRef .
K. V. G. Raghavendra, R. Vinoth, K. Zeb, C. V. V. Muralee Gopi, S. Sambasivam, M. R. Kummara, I. M. Obaidat and H. J. Kim, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 31, 101652 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3560–3573 RSC .
W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600539 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, N. S. Villa, Y. Zhuang, L. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Li and T. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, S. Li, B. Lan, Y. Wu and P. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–35 Search PubMed .
K. Keum, J. W. Kim, S. Y. Hong, J. G. Son, S. Lee and J. S. Ha, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002180 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar, S. Park, K. Parida, V. Bhavanasi and P. S. Lee, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 4, 41–57 CrossRef .
X. Pu, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1–19 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yan, S. Li, B. Lan, Y. Wu and P. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1902564 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Boruah, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 34, 53–75 CrossRef .
W. Liu, X. Qian, C.-G. Han, Q. Li and G. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 118, 020501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khalid, I. Raouf, A. Khan, N. Kim and H. S. Kim, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. Technol., 2019, 6, 821–851 CrossRef .
R. He, G. Schierning and K. Nielsch, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700256 CrossRef .
T. M. Tritt, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 433–448 CrossRef CAS .
D. Champier, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 140, 167–181 CrossRef .
K. Biswas, J. He, I. D. Blum, C. Wu, T. P. Hogan, D. N. Seidman, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 489, 414–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Mele, S. Saini and E. Magnone, in Thermoelectric Thin Films, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2019, pp. 139–156 Search PubMed .
S. Twaha, J. Zhu, Y. Yan and B. Li, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 65, 698–726 CrossRef CAS .

          D. M. Rowe, CRC Handbook of Thermoelectrics, CRC Press, 1st edn,  1995 Search PubMed .
P. Sundarraj, D. Maity, S. S. Roy and R. A. Taylor, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 46860–46874 RSC .
G. Min and D. M. Rowe, IEEE Trans. Energy Convers., 2007, 22, 528–534 Search PubMed .
G. J. Snyder and A. H. Snyder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2280–2283 RSC .
Z.-G. Chen, G. Han, L. Yang, L. Cheng and J. Zou, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2012, 22, 535–549 CrossRef .
M. N. Hasan, H. Wahid, N. Nayan and M. S. Mohamed Ali, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 6170–6222 CrossRef CAS .
B. Orr, A. Akbarzadeh, M. Mochizuki and R. Singh, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2016, 101, 490–495 CrossRef .
I. T. Witting, T. C. Chasapis, F. Ricci, M. Peters, N. A. Heinz, G. Hautier and G. J. Snyder, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800904 CrossRef .
Y. Qiao, V. K. Punyamurtual, A. Han and H. Lim, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 403–405 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikeda, L. A. Collins, V. A. Ravi, F. S. Gascoin, S. M. Haile and G. J. Snyder, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 763–767 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Liu, B.-P. Zhang, L.-D. Zhao and J.-F. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7526–7531 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 105–114 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Hicks and M. S. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 16631–16634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Venkatasubramanian, E. Siivola, T. Colpitts and B. O'Quinn, Nature, 2001, 413, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Harman, J. P. Taylor, M. P. Walsh and B. E. LaForge, Science, 2002, 297, 2229–2232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Boukai, Y. Bunimovich, J. Tahir-Kheli, J.-K. Yu, W. A. Goddard III and J. R. Heath, Nature, 2008, 451, 168–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinterleitner, I. Knapp, M. Poneder, Y. Shi, H. Müller, G. Eguchi, C. Eisenmenger-Sittner, M. Stöger-Pollach, Y. Kakefuda, N. Kawamoto, Q. Guo, T. Baba, T. Mori, S. Ullah, X.-Q. Chen and E. Bauer, Nature, 2019, 576, 85–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bu, X. Zhang, B. Shan, J. Tang, H. Liu, Z. Chen, S. Lin, W. Li and Y. Pei, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabf2738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Bahk, H. Fang, K. Yazawa and A. Shakouri, J. Mater. Chem.
C, 2015, 3, 10362–10374 RSC .
K. K. Jung, Y. Jung, C. J. Choi, J. M. Lee and J. S. Ko, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2016, 16, 1442–1448 CrossRef .
A. L. Pires, I. F. Cruz, J. Silva, G. N. P. Oliveira, S. Ferreira-Teixeira, A. M. L. Lopes, J. P. Araújo, J. Fonseca, C. Pereira and A. M. Pereira, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8969–8981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, M. Kruse, B. Xu, R. Tutika, W. Zheng, M. D. Bartlett, Y. Wu and J. C. Claussen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 5222–5230 RSC .
E. Jin Bae, Y. Hun Kang, K.-S. Jang and S. Yun Cho, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18805 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. Guo, B. Wu, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33297–33304 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, B. Zhou, Q. Zheng, L. Wang, W. Jiang and G. J. Snyder, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lund, Y. Tian, S. Darabi and C. Müller, J. Power Sources, 2020, 480, 228836 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yusupov and A. Vomiero, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002015 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Benzigar, V. D. B. C. Dasireddy, X. Guan, T. Wu and G. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002993 CrossRef CAS .
W. Raza, F. Ali, N. Raza, Y. Luo, K. H. Kim, J. Yang, S. Kumar, A. Mehmood and E. E. Kwon, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 441–473 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1151–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Qi, H. Wang, J. He, J. Liu, C. Cui, M. Wu, F. Li, Y. Feng and J. Ma, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 685–693 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, J. He, J. Liu, M. Wu, Y. Hou, H. Wang, S. Qi, Q. Liu, J. Hu and J. Ma, Angew. Chem., 2021, 60, 6600–6608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, H. Ning, S. Song, C. Xu and N. Hu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 192, 108102 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D.-H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
R. Hou, G. S. Gund, K. Qi, P. Nakhanivej, H. Liu, F. Li, B. Y. Xia and H. S. Park, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 212–241 CrossRef .
A. Noori, M. F. El-Kady, M. S. Rahmanifar, R. B. Kaner and M. F. Mousavi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1272–1341 RSC .
S. Kumar, G. Saeed, L. Zhu, K. N. Hui, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 403, 126352 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, M. Peng, X. Yu, Y. Fu and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1168 RSC .
Z. Wu, L. Li, J. Yan and X. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600382–1600430 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Shi, L. Li, X. Wang, C. Gu and J. Tu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41910–41921 RSC .
D. Tie, S. Huang, J. Wang, J. Ma, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 22–40 CrossRef .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, A. Mahmood, Q. Khan, Y. Zhang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 58, 100254 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Liu, S. Wang, H.-K. Liu and L. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 122–145 CrossRef .
R. Chen, M. Yu, R. P. Sahu, I. K. Puri and I. Zhitomirsky, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903848 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bryan, L. M. Santino, Y. Lu, S. Acharya and J. M. D'Arcy, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5989–5998 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pomerantseva, F. Bonaccorso, X. Feng, Y. Cui and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2019, 366, eaan8285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, H. Zhang, T. Hu, B. Fan, X. Wang and Z. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6666–6693 RSC .
Q. Zhu, J. Li, P. Simon and B. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 35, 630–660 CrossRef .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cherusseri, N. Choudhary, K. Sambath Kumar, Y. Jung and J. Thomas, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 840–858 RSC .
Q. Yun, L. Li, Z. Hu, Q. Lu, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Patra and C. S. Rout, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 36413–36438 RSC .
L. Feng and H. Xue, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 20–34 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zong, C. Liu, H. Yang, Q. Zhang and G. Cao, Nano Today, 2021, 38, 101201 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pei, M. S. Choi, X. Yu, H. Xue, B. Y. Xia and H. S. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8832–8869 RSC .
X. Li, D. Du, Y. Zhang, W. Xing, Q. Xue and Z. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15460–15485 RSC .
J. Pang, A. Bachmatiuk, Y. Yin, B. Trzebicka, L. Zhao, L. Fu, R. G. Mendes, T. Gemming, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1702093, 1–43 Search PubMed .
S. Zhang and N. Pan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401401–1401420 CrossRef .
K. Jiang and Q. Weng, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1420–1446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Saravanakumar, S. S. Jayaseelan, M. K. Seo, H. Y. Kim and B. S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18819–18834 RSC .
S. Ullah, J. Yu, H. Liu, W. Iqbal, B. Yang, C. Li, C. Zhu and J. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 180–188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Shao, P. Jiang, Q. Zhang, C. Hou, Y. Li and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3143–3149 RSC .
T. Chen, R. Hao, H. Peng and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 618–622 CAS .
P. Yang, J. Xie, L. Wang, X. Chen, F. Wu and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000949 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. Zhong, L. Cui, A. Zhang, J. M. Razal, W. Yang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1837–1848 RSC .
C. Chen, H. Qin, H. Cong and S. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900573 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Z. Lin, W. Chen, B. Liang, H. Du, R. Yang, X. He, Z. Tang and X. Gui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5886–5894 RSC .
Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, M. Alhabeb, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–10 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, Z. S. Wu, F. Zhou, X. Shi, S. Zheng, J. Qin, H. Xiao, C. Sun and X. Bao, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 7 CrossRef .
D. Kim, J. Yun, G. Lee and J. S. Ha, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12034–12041 RSC .
C. Gao, J. Gao, C. Shao, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19750–19756 RSC .
R. Xu, A. Zverev, A. Hung, C. Shen, L. Irie, G. Ding, M. Whitmeyer, L. Ren, B. Griffin, J. Melcher, L. Zheng, X. Zang, M. Sanghadasa and L. Lin, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2018, 4, 36 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jiao, A. Zhou, M. Wu and H. Hu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900529 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, R. B. Rakhi and H. N. Alshareef, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14394–14402 RSC .
Z. Niu, W. Zhou, X. Chen, J. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6002–6008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ren, Y. Ji, S. Tan and F. Chen, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 72–78 RSC .
A. Levitt, D. Hegh, P. Phillips, S. Uzun, M. Anayee, J. M. Razal, Y. Gogotsi and G. Dion, Mater. Today, 2020, 34, 17–29 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Thekkekara and M. Gu, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 11822 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, S. Ji, R. Wang, D. J. L. Brett and H. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 810, 151871 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Gür, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2696–2767 RSC .
D. Chen, K. Jiang, T. Huang and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1901806, 1–19 Search PubMed .
R. Jia, G. Shen, F. Qu and D. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 169–186 CrossRef .
R. Guo, J. Chen, B. Yang, L. Liu, L. Su, B. Shen and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702394 CrossRef .
J. Li, Y. Shao, P. Jiang, Q. Zhang, C. Hou, Y. Li and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3143–3149 RSC .
X. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. Zhong, L. Cui, A. Zhang, J. M. Razal, W. Yang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1837–1848 RSC .
Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, M. Alhabeb, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703043 CrossRef .
D. Kim, J. Yun, G. Lee and J. S. Ha, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12034–12041 RSC .
C. Gao, J. Gao, C. Shao, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19750–19756 RSC .
Poonam, K. Sharma, A. Arora and S. K. Tripathi, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 21, 801–825 CrossRef .
H. Wang, D. Zhao, Z. U. Khan, S. Puzinas, M. P. Jonsson, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700013 CrossRef .
S. L. Kim, H. T. Lin and C. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600546 CrossRef .
A. L. Pires, R. S. Costa, C. Pereira and A. M. Pereira, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3, 696–703 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Z. Li, J. Jiang, J. Wu, N. Shu and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 465, 228263 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, H. Wang, Z. U. Khan, J. C. Chen, R. Gabrielsson, M. P. Jonsson, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1450–1457 RSC .
T. Meng and Y. Xuan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000934 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lim, C. Zhao and Y. Qiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12728–12730 RSC .
H. Lim, Y. Shi, M. Wang and Y. Qiao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 223901 CrossRef .
S. L. Kim, J. Hsu and C. Yu, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 582–589 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Kim, J.-H. Hsu and C. Yu, Org. Electron., 2018, 54, 231–236 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kundu and T. S. Fisher, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 357–369 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Pereira, A. M. Pereira, C. Freire, T. V. Pinto, R. S. Costa and J. S. Teixeira, in Handbook of Functionalized Nanomaterials for Industrial Applications, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 611–714 Search PubMed .
Y.-Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, L.-Q. Yao, X. Li, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3229–3264 RSC .
W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. Leela, M. Reddy, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, T. M. Dinh, K. Armstrong, J. Gaudet and D. Guay, J. Power Sources, 2013, 230, 230–235 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. A. Mageeth, S. J. Park, M. Jeong, W. Kim and C. Yu, Appl. Energy, 2020, 268, 114975 CrossRef .
H. Lim, W. Lu, X. Chen and Y. Qiao, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 465401 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Härtel, M. Janssen, D. Weingarth, V. Presser and R. van Roij, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2396–2401 RSC .
H. Lim, Y. Shi and Y. Qiao, Int. J. Green Energy, 2018, 15, 53–56 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. W. Lee, H. Ghasemi, J. Loomis, X. Li, D. Kraemer, G. Zheng, Y. Cui and G. Chen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 17011–17016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. T. Huang, C. Liu, K. Mu, K. H. Li, S. Wang, Y. Yang, L. Wang, C. H. Su and S. P. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4151 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Meng, Y. Xuan and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4(6), 6055–6061 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Han, X. Qian, Q. Li, B. Deng, Y. Zhu, Z. Han, W. Zhang, W. Wang, S.-P. Feng, G. Chen and W. Liu, Science, 2020, 368, 1091–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Feng, L. Ren, Q. Piao, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4920–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, X. Xiao, T. Ding, J. Zhong, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, B. Hu, Y. Huang, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4934–4938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anothumakkool, R. Soni, S. N. Bhange and S. Kurungot, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1339–1347 RSC .
Y. Liao, J. Weber and C. F. J. Faul, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8002–8005 RSC .
Y.-G. Wang, H.-Q. Li and Y.-Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2619–2623 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, B. Huang, Q. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 493–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bonetti, S. Nakamae, B. T. Huang, T. J. Salez, C. Wiertel-Gasquet and M. Roger, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 244708 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cheng, X. He, Z. Fan and J. Ouyang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901085 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, F. Wang, S. Yang, G. Wang, M. Yu and X. Feng, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 160–187 CrossRef .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. Ri Kim, Y. Il Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Özyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Joana S. Teixeira	Joana S. Teixeira is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the Doctoral Programme in Sustainable Chemistry, shared between the research centers REQUIMTE/LAQV at the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department, and IFIMUP – Institute of Physics for Advanced Materials, Nanotechnology and Photonics at the Physics and Astronomy Department, both at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal. She obtained her BSc. and MSc. degrees in Chemistry at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal. Her current research is focused on the production of novel wearable and flexible self-powered hybrid energy harvesting/energy storage textiles and devices based on hybrid nanomaterials and solid-state polyelectrolytes.
Rui S. Costa	Rui S. Costa is a Ph.D. student of Physics on the MAP-fis doctoral programme at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto in Portugal. He obtained his M.Sc. degree in Physical Engineering from the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto. His current research is focused on the development of new nanomaterials for energy storage, textile-based supercapacitors, as well as novel thermionic supercapacitors for self-powered wearables.
Ana L. Pires	Ana L. Pires is a postdoctoral researcher at IFIMUP – Institute of Physics for Advanced Materials, Nanotechnology and Photonics, Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto in Portugal. She has a Ph.D. degree in Physics (2019) from the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal. Currently, her work involves developing inorganic and composites thermoelectric materials for waste heat harvesting and wearable devices.
André M. Pereira	André Pereira received his Ph.D. in Physics from the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal (2010), was a Post-doctoral researcher at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA (2010–2012) and a Research Associate at Imperial College London, UK (2013). Since 2015, he has been Auxiliary Professor at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto in the Physics and Astronomy Department. His research focuses on the innovation of flexible and versatile devices, particularly in the field of energy harvesting, storage or energy transfer, and for quantum sensors, magnetostrictive sensors and others.
Clara Pereira	Clara Pereira received her Ph.D. in Chemistry from the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Portugal, in 2011. She has been Auxiliary Researcher at the Associate Laboratory LAQV-REQUIMTE, Chemistry and Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Portugal, since 2013. Her research interests include the design and fabrication of hybrid nanomaterials and their application in functional and smart textiles and devices, electrochemical energy storage, thermal energy harvesting, radiation protection, photochromism, thermochromism and eco-sustainable catalysis.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Operating potential and (B) power demand of several IoT sensors (reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2021).	 
	(1)
ΔV = SΔT	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of: (A) the TE phenomenon in n- and p-type materials, showing the charge carriers diffusing from the hot side to the cold side; (B) the standard configuration of a thermoelectric device and its operating principle.	 

 	Fig. 3  Different configurations of a TEG: (A) typical vertical configuration – the heat flows perpendicularly to the longer direction of the legs; (B) typical planar configuration – the temperature gradient flows in parallel to the substrate (adapted from ref. 26 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019); (C) examples of planar TEGs produced by our group through photolithography (top image: flexible TEG based on n-type Bi2Te3 TE material and sputtered Au electrical contacts) and printing process (bottom image: flexible TEG based on n-type Bi2Te3 mixed with an organic binder and Ag ink electrical contacts).	 
	(3)
PF = S2σ	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 4  Typical behavior of the energy conversion efficiency of a TE device as a function of the temperature difference for different ZT values (reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012).	 

 	Fig. 5  
ZT vs. T curves for different inorganic TE materials: (A) n-type materials; and (B) p-type materials (TAGS stands for Te–Ag–Ge–Sb alloys; reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2008).	 

 	Fig. 6  Flexible TE devices reported in the literature by: (A) Jung et al. (reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016); (B) Pires et al. (reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from The American Chemical Society, ACS, copyright 2019); (C) Chen et al. (reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, RSC, copyright 2019); and (D) Bae et al. (reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 7  Ragone plot comparing the energy storage performance of fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors (electric double-layer capacitors, pseudocapacitors and hybrid supercapacitors) and electrolytic capacitors. The slashed diagonal red lines represent the typical charging time of each EESS.	 

 	Fig. 8  Different types of SCs and the electrode materials that compose them: CNTs – carbon nanotubes; PEDOT – poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene); PPy – polypyrrole; PANI – polyaniline; BP – black phosphorous; LDHs – layered double hydroxides; MOFs – metal–organic frameworks; MXenes – transition metal carbides and carbonitrides; POMs – polyoxometalates; TMDCs – transition metal dichalcogenides; TMPs – transition metal phosphides; TMTCs – transition metal trichalcogenides (adapted from ref. 63 (top images) and ref. 65 (bottom right: central image) with permission from RSC, copyrights 2019 and 2014, respectively).	 
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of three main typical architectures of FWSCs: (A) 1D fiber-like architectures; (B) 2D planar architectures; and (C) 3D architectures. The orange and green colors represent individual electrodes while the grey color represents the electrolyte (adapted from ref. 13 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 10  Examples of FWSCs with different architectures: (A) 1D fiber-type (adapted from ref. 93 with permission from RSC, copyright 2020); (B) 2D planar (adapted from ref. 98 with permission from RSC, copyright 2014); (C) 3D structure (adapted from ref. 103 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015).	 


1D parallel fiber	NiCo2S4 NS/3D porous Ni film//N–rGO (asymmetric)	Ni wire	PVA/KOH	9.6 mF cm−1@0.2 mA	2.613 μW h cm−1	420.1 μW cm−1	92% (1000)b	
88

120 mF cm−2@0.2 mA	32.67 μW h cm−2	5.353 mW cm−2	

19.57 F cm−3@0.2 mA	5.33 mW h cm−3	855.69 mW cm−3	

1D parallel fiber	MnO2 (symmetric)	Carbonized cotton yarn	PVA/KOH	182.94 mF cm−2@20 mV s−1	16.88 μW h cm−2	4.770 mW cm−2	∼100% (5000)b	
89

92% (100)c
1D twisted fiber	MoS2 NS/rGO NS (symmetric)	Free-standing	PVA/H3PO4	134.38 F g−1@50 mA	32.24 mW h cm−3 (3 parallel-connected units woven in cotton fabric)	1.179 W cm−3 (3 parallel-connected units woven in cotton fabric)	∼73% (800)c (3 parallel-connected units woven in cotton fabric)	
112

332.85 mF cm−2@50 mA
221.9 F cm−3@50 mA
1D coaxial fiber	CNT/PMo12O403−/PANI (symmetric)	Free-standing	1 M H2SO4	210 F g−1@5 A g−1	18.7 W h kg−1	2 kW kg−1	72.4% (10000)b	
92

1D coaxial fiber	MnNiCo–CH//AC/NMP (asymmetric)	Carbon fiber core	PVA–PEO/KOH	96.13 F g−1@1 A g−1	30.04 W h kg−1	749.97 W kg−1	84% (8000)b	
113

2D sandwich-type	Au NP/CNT/PAM/PPy (symmetric)	Free-standing	Au/PAM/Na2SO4	885 mF cm−2@1 mA cm−2	123 μW h cm−2	0.5 mW cm−2	93% (10000)b	
94

82% (1000)c
2D sandwich-type	NiCo2O4 NS/CNT buckypaper (symmetric)	Free-standing	PVA/KOH	268.4 F g−1@0.1 mA cm−2	1.17 mW h cm−3	2430 mW cm−3	95.6% (2000)b	
95

337.3 mF cm−2@0.1 mA cm−2
2D sandwich-type	Ti3C2Tx//RuO2 (asymmetric)	Carbon fabric	1 M aqueous H2SO4 (pouch cell)	93 F g−1@50 mV s−1	29 W h kg−1	3.8 kW kg−1	86% (20000)b	
114

2D interdigitated finger-type	Ti3C2Tx//RuO2 (asymmetric)	Interdigitated carbon fabric fingers	PVA/H2SO4	60 mF cm−2@5 mV s−1	37 μW h cm−2	40 mW cm−2	—	
114

45 μW h cm−2	6 mW cm−2
2D interdigitated finger-type	VN NS//Co(OH)2 NF (asymmetric)	Nylon membrane	PVA/KOH	21 mF cm−2@0.2 mA cm−2	5.5 mW h cm−3	1750 mW cm−3	84% (10000)b	
97

39.7 F cm−3@0.2 mA cm−2	12.4 mW h cm−3	n.d.
2D interdigitated finger-type	MWCNT/V2O5 NW (symmetric)	PET	PVA/LiCl	80 F cm−3@10 mV s−1e	6.8 mW h cm−3e	80.8 W cm−3e	82% (10000)b	
115

94% (1000)c
2D array/3D origami	PPy/graphene (symmetric)	Paper	PVA/H2SO4	2.75 F g−1@0.4 mA cm−2	6.11 μW h cm−2	0.4 mW cm−2	82.15% (1000)c	
116

22 mF cm−2@0.4 mA cm−2
3D kirigami	Porous graphitic electrodes (symmetric)	Polyimide sheet	PVA/H3PO4	3.654 mF cm−2@20 mV s−1	0.32 μW h cm−2	11.4 μW cm−2	—	
100

3D kirigami	Ti3C2Tx flakes/bacterial cellulose (symmetric)	Free-standing	PVA/H2SO4	111.5 mF cm−2@2 mA cm−2 (4 units connected in parallel)	0.00552 mW h cm−2	—	72.2% (5000)d (4 units connected in series)	
101

3D sponge	PANI/SWCNTs (symmetric)	4 mm sponge placed on PET coated with Au film	PVA/H2SO4	216 F g−1; 3.4 F cm−3@10 mV s−1	8 W h kg−1	1.5 kW kg−1	92% (1000)b	
103

3D sponge	NiCo2S4 NS//AC (asymmetric)	Ni foam	2 M aqueous KOH	1.23 F cm−2@8 mA cm−2	0.47 mW h cm−2	6.59 mW cm−2	80.1% (5000)b	
104

0.18 mW h cm−2	65.88 mW cm−2
3D textile	Ti3C2Tx (symmetric)	Cotton yarn (2-ply)	PVA/H3PO4	519 mF cm−2@2 mV s−1	25.4 μW h cm−2	0.47 mW cm−2	>100% (10000)b	
105


 	Fig. 11  Soret effect in a TCSC: diffusion of ions provided by the electrolyte when a temperature gradient is established between both electrodes of the TCSC.	 

 	Fig. 12  Working mechanism of a TCSC, where (1) is the initial state, (2) the charged state, (3) the storage state and (4) the discharged state. The “+” and “−” symbols correspond to the electrolyte cations and anions, respectively (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from ACS, copyright 2021).	 
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
Vthermo = αiΔT	(12)
Qch = CVthermo = CαiΔT	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 13  (A) Sandwich-type and (B) and (C) planar-type configurations of TCSCs (reproduced from ref. 130 (A and B) and ref. 131 (C) with permission from RSC and Springer Nature, respectively, copyrights 2019 and 2011).	 


Sandwich-type	MWCNT-coated Au electrodes (thicker electrodes)	Glass	NaOH-treated PEO	8.13 × 10−5 S cm−1 (RT)	0.216 W m−1 K−1 (RT)	11.1 mV K−1	180 mV (ΔT = 16 K)	—	1.35 μJ cm−2 (ΔT = 4.5 K, Rload < 20 kΩ)	—	—	6 × 10−6% (ΔT = 4.5 K, low Rload)	
122


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	9.4 W h kg−1 (extrapolated for ΔT = 10 K)	
	
	
	

PANI-coated graphene/CNT	PTFE	PSSH	9 S m−1 (70% RH)	0.38 ± 0.05 W m−1 K−1 (RT, 65%–70% RH)	7.9 mV K−1 (70% RH)	38 mV (ΔT = 5.3 K)	120 mF cm−2@0.01 mA cm−2 (ΔT = 5.3 K)	—	—	∼0.4 (70% RH)	—	
119

Carbon cloth	Free-standing	PVA/K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6	5.44 mS cm−1 (RT)	—	0.86 mV K−1	22.2 mV (ΔT = 30 °C)	—	973.6 μJ cm−2 (ΔT = 10 K)	—	—	5 × 10−5%	
128


	
	
	
	
	
	40.4 mV (ΔT = 50 °C)	
	
	
	
	
	

Au	Glass	PSS:Na	1.18 S m−1 (100% RH)	0.49 ± 0.03 W m−1 K−1 (100% RH)	4 mV K−1 (100% RH)	—	—	0.6 μJ (ΔT = 10 K; 100% RH)	—	0.012 (RT, 100% RH)	0.004% (100% RH)	
118

PDAQ-BC/acetylene black (weight ratio: 85:15)	Au-coated polyimide	PSSH	—	—	8.27 mV K−1 (ΔT = 5.2 °C)	43 mV (ΔT = 5.2 °C)	—	—	—	—	—	
146


	
	
	
	
	6.67 mV K−1 (ΔT = 10.8 °C)	72 mV (ΔT = 10.8 °C)	
	
	
	
	
	

SWCNT coated over Ag	Glass	EMIM:DCA/PVDF-HFP (80 wt% EMIM:DCA)	6.7 mS cm−1 (RT, 67–75% RH)	0.176 W m−1 K−1 (RT, 67–75% RH)	26.1 mV K−1	—	—	12300 μJ m−2 (ΔT = 0.6 K, Rload = 47 kΩ)	—	0.75 (RT, 67–75% RH)	—	
148

Sandwich-type	Au	Cu foils	Ionic gelatin/KCl/Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63−	—	0.15 W m−1 K−1	12.7 mV K−1	25 TCSC modules: 2.2 V (ΔT = 10 K)	—	7.4 J m−2 (ΔT = 8.5 K)	0.66 mW m−2 K−2 (ΔT = 8.5 K)	—	—	
140


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	25 TCSC modules: 3.5 × 10−5 J (ΔT = 10 K)	25 TCSC modules: 5.0 μW (ΔT = 10 K)	
	
	

Planar-type	rSGO	PET film attached to a DVD disk	SGO	0.4 S m−1 (70% RH)	—	∼5.7 mV K−1 (70% RH)	58 mV (ΔT = 10.5 K, 70% RH)	—	TCSC module containing 17 rSGO/SGO pairs connected in series: 3.68 × 10−5 J (ΔT = 14 K)	TCSC module containing 17 rSGO/SGO pairs connected in series: 1.23 W m−2 (ΔT = 14 K)	—	TCSC module containing 17 rSGO/SGO pairs connected in series: 0.31% (ΔT = 14 K; 0.53% (ΔT = 30 K)	
126


	
	
	
	
	
	8 TCSC modules: 2.1 V (ΔT = 30 K)	
	
	
	
	
	


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	1.34 × 10−4 J (ΔT = 30 K)	
	
	
	


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	4.47 W m−2 (ΔT = 30 K)	
	
	

TCSC module with 50 rSGO/SGO pairs	PET	SGO	—	—	4.53 mV K−1 (50% RH)	∼20 mV (ΔT = ∼4 °C, ∼50% RH)	∼7.4 mF (ΔT = ∼4 °C, ∼50% RH)	∼3 μJ cm−2 (ΔT = ∼4 °C, ∼50% RH)	—	—	—	
133

MWCNT	PET	PVA/H3PO4 (50 wt% H3PO4)	7.85 × 10−5 mS cm−1 (50 wt% H3PO4)	—	2.35 mV K−1	45 mV (ΔT = 20 K)	—	∼118 nW h cm−2 (ΔT = 10 K)	—	—	—	
120


	
	
	0.082 mS cm−1 (75 wt% H3PO4)	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	


 	Fig. 14  Schematic representation of multi-unit pack systems composed of two cell modules based on: (A) two electrodes of conductive carbon black (CCB) pressed on platinum sheets immersed in two polypropylene containers filled with an aqueous solution of LiCl electrolyte and connected by a salt bridge (reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from IOP Publishing, copyright 2013); (B) commercial SC composed of porous AC electrodes and tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate solvated in acetonitrile electrolyte immersed in a hot water bath (left) or ice/water bath (right) (reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from RSC, copyright 2015); (C) two electrodes of CCB/PVDF/carbon black pressed onto nickel net collectors immersed in two containers filled with a formaldehyde solution of anhydrous sodium acetate containing Cu nanoparticles as the electrolyte and connected by a salt bridge (reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of: (A) a sandwich-type TCSC composed of CNT/Au electrodes and a liquid NaOH–PEO electrolyte (reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from RSC, copyright 2016); (B) a sandwich-type TCSC based on carbon cloth electrodes and PVA/K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 redox-active solid-gel electrolyte (left) and a photograph of the device (centre) (reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018); (C) a sandwich-type TCSC based on Au electrodes and a PSS:Na solid-gel electrolyte (chemical structure on the left; adapted from ref. 118 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of an in-plane TCSC based on rSGO electrodes on a PET film/DVD substrate and SGO electrolyte produced by laser irradiation using a LightScribe DVD laser; (B) 3D printer-assisted batch-preparation of TCSC modules (3D printer modified with a blue diode laser); (C) photograph of an array of eight TCSC modules; (D) electrochromic device powered by an array of eight TCSC modules under solar irradiation (adapted from ref. 126 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 17  Planar TCSC based on MWCNTs deposited on PET as electrodes and PVA/H3PO4 as a solid-gel electrolyte (adapted from ref. 120 with permission from ACS, copyright 2021).	 

 	Fig. 18  Overview of envisaged strategies for the enhancement of the performance of TCSCs (spray coating and inkjet printing images reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020; roll-to-roll image reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2010; sandwich-type architecture reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from RSC, copyright 2019).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
