Solution processing of transparent conductors: from flask to film  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CS15065K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CS15065K
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5406-5441Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSolution processing of transparent conductors: from flask to film

        
          
            Robert M. 
            Pasquarelli
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            David S. 
            Ginley
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Ryan 
            O'Hayre
          
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: robert.pasquarelli@gmail.com
bNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA
Received 
      11th March 2011
    First published on 17th June 2011AbstractThis critical review focuses on the solution deposition of transparent conductors with a particular focus on transparent conducting oxide (TCO) thin-films. TCOs play a critical role in many current and emerging opto-electronic devices due to their unique combination of electronic conductivity and transparency in the visible region of the spectrum. Atmospheric-pressure solution processing is an attractive alternative to conventional vacuum-based deposition methods due to its ease of fabrication, scalability, and potential to lower device manufacturing costs. An introduction into the applications of and material criteria for TCOs will be presented first, followed by a discussion of solution routes to these systems. Recent studies in the field will be reviewed according to their materials system. Finally, the challenges and opportunities for further enabling research will be discussed in terms of emerging oxide systems and non-oxide based transparent conductors (341 references).
Robert M. Pasquarelli
Robert Pasquarelli is currently a PhD candidate in Materials Science at the Colorado School of Mines. Robert is conducting research on solution deposited transparent conducting oxides at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) under Ryan O'Hayre and David Ginley. He received his BS in Chemistry from the Rochester Institute of Technology in 2007 under Dr Marvin Illingsworth. He held undergraduate internships at the University of Georgia under Dr Gregory Robinson in 2005 and at NREL in 2006 and 2007. His research interests include the development of inks and solution deposition processes for photovoltaic materials, metals, and transparent conductors.
David S. Ginley
Dr David S. Ginley is currently a Research Fellow and Manager of the Process Technology and Advanced Concepts Group at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in the National Center for Photovoltaics. He received his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry from MIT and his BS in Chemistry from the Colorado School of Mines. Current work focuses on advancing solar energy conversion and storage specifically in the development and application of transparent conducting oxides, organic electronics materials, nano-materials and the development of process technology for materials and device development including combinatorial methods, direct-write, composite materials and non-vacuum processing.
Ryan O'Hayre
Dr Ryan O'Hayre (PhD Materials Science, Stanford University, 2004) is an associate professor of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering at the Colorado School of Mines (CSM). Ryan's research group investigates energy materials, emphasizing aspects of electronic and ionic oxides, catalysis, and electrochemistry. Ryan has received several young-investigator research awards including the Presidential Early Career Award in Science and Engineering (PECASE). Ryan collaborates with CSM's NSF-funded Renewable Energy Materials Research Center, the Colorado Fuel Cell Center, and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory on a variety of research projects and teaches courses on electrical properties of materials, materials kinetics, and fuel cells.
1 Introduction
Transparent conductor (TC) materials, including transparent conducting oxides (TCOs), play a critical role in many current and emerging opto-electronic devices due to their unique combination of electronic conductivity and transparency in the visible region of the spectrum. Their ability to collect and deliver electricity while allowing light in and out of a device makes these metal oxide thin films ideal for applications in photovoltaics and displays. Given the current rapid growth of the display and photovoltaic industries, there will be an increasing demand for new TC materials and low-cost methods of depositing them. This review examines the use of solution processing as an alternative method for the deposition of transparent conductors with a particular focus on transparent conducting oxide thin-films.
TCOs have evolved since Badeker first observed in 1907 that an evaporated film of cadmium oxidized after exposure to air, becoming transparent while maintaining its conductive properties. Two key trends are apparent upon inspection of Table 1, which provides a select history of TCO materials and their processing. First, these materials have historically been dominated by a small set of materials including tin oxide (SnO2), indium oxide (In2O3), indium tin oxide (In2O3:Sn or ITO), and zinc oxide (ZnO). However, the past two decades have seen an expansion with more diverse material combinations being explored. Additionally, the 2000's saw a strong push in the community towards amorphous TCO materials with the advent of amorphous indium zinc oxide (a-IZO) and amorphous indium gallium zinc oxide (a-IGZO). Amorphous TCO materials can have comparable electrical and optical properties to traditional crystalline TCOs with the additional fabrication benefits of homogenous films with very smooth surfaces (RRMS < 0.5 nm) at low temperatures (as low as room temperature). These features are favorable for plastic substrates and flexible electronic applications. Second, the reader should note that many of the traditional TCO materials actually got their start using chemical solution processes such as spray pyrolysis. With the advent of vacuum-based physical vapor deposition (PVD) technologies, methods such as sputtering and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) became the primary tools for research and industry. PVD methods remain ideal for exploring new material systems because of their ability to yield dense films with benchmark properties. However, there is now a drive for industrial applications to bring TCO processing back to its roots—chemical solution deposition. Atmospheric-pressure solution routes are an attractive alternative to conventional high-vacuum techniques due to their ease of fabrication, scalability, and potential to lower device manufacturing costs. However, this potential can be a double-edged sword. While costs associated with equipment and operation for solution deposition are projected to be lower than vacuum deposition methods, the costs associated with chemical precursors (depending on their synthetic complexity), solvents, additives, and post-processing criteria may be prohibitive.1,2 Research and insight into the chemistries of these systems is important to overcome these potential drawbacks.
Table 1 Select history of transparent conductor processing




Year
Material
Process
Reference




1835

                  Ag
                
Chemical Bath Reduction
J. Liebig3


1907
CdO
Thermal Oxidation
K. Badeker4


1947

                  SnO2:Sb

Spray Pyrolysis

J. M. Mochel (Corning)5


1947

                  SnO2:Cl

Spray Pyrolysis

H. A. McMaster (Libbey-Owens-Ford)6


1951

                  SnO2:F

Spray Pyrolysis

W. O. Lytle and A. E. Junge (PPG)7


1951

                  In2O3:Sn

Spray Pyrolysis

J. M. Mochel (Corning)8


1952
CdO

                  Sputtering
                
G. Helwig9


1955

                  In2O3:Sn

                  Sputtering
                
L. Holland and G. Siddall10


1967

                  SnO2:Sb

Chemical Vapor Deposition

H. F. Dates and J. K. Davis (Corning)11


1974

                  Cd2SnO4

                  Sputtering
                
A. J. Nozik (American Cyanamid)12


1976

                  Cd2SnO4

Spray Pyrolysis

A. J. Nozik and G. Haacke (American Cyanamid)13


1979

                  SnO2:F

Chemical Vapor Deposition

R. G. Gordon14


1981

                  a-CdSnO
                

                  Sputtering
                
F. T. J. Smith and S. L. Lyu15


1984

                  ZnO:In

Spray Pyrolysis

S. Major et al.16


1984

                  ZnO:Al

                  Sputtering
                
T. Minami et al.17


1987

                  ZnO:In

                  Sputtering
                
S. N. Qiu et al.18


1990

                  ZnO:Ga

                  Sputtering
                
B. H. Choi et al.19


1991

                  ZnO:F

Chemical Vapor Deposition

J. Hu and R. G. Gordon20


1992

                  Zn2SnO4

                  Sputtering
                
H. Enoki et al.21


1994

                  ZnSnO3

                  Sputtering
                
T. Minami et al.22


1995

                  Cd2SnO4

Pulsed Laser Deposition

J. M. McGraw et al.23


1995

                  Zn2In2O5

                  Sputtering
                
T. Minami et al.24


1999

                  In2O3:Ti

                  Sputtering
                
I. Safi et al.25


2001

                  a-InGaZnO
                

Pulsed Laser Deposition

M. Orita el al.26


2001

                  In2O3:Mo
Thermal Reactive Evaporation
Y. Meng et al.27


2004

                  a-ZnSnO
                

                  Sputtering
                
T. Moriga et al.28


2005

                  TiO2:Nb

Pulsed Laser Deposition

Y. Furubayashi et al.29


2005

                  In2O3:Mo

Spray Pyrolysis

D. J. Seo et al.30


2009

                  InGaZnO
                

Spin Coating

G. H. Kim et al.31


2010

                  In2O3:Ti

Spray Pyrolysis

Martins et al.32




The aim of this article is to serve as a launchpad for researchers entering the TC field, to summarize recent achievements of chemical solution techniques in the preparation of these materials, and to present some thoughts about future prospects. The review is organized as follows: Section 2 provides background information about the basic properties of transparent conductors. Next, section 3 outlines the solution deposition process from precursor selection through thermal processing. Section 4 surveys several TCO systems that have been deposited by solution processing, which are organized according to their classification as either intrinsic, doped, binary, ternary, or p-type oxides. Lastly, section 5 provides an outlook into emerging systems, including nanowire and graphene TC materials.
1.1 Applications
Transparent conducting oxides play a critical role in flat-panel monitors, televisions, and other display technologies.33 Light-emitting diodes (LED) and liquid crystal display (LCD) technologies consist of pixels that are turned on and off with application of an electric signal. A transparent conducting oxide layer allows for this signal to be sent to each pixel while remaining transparent to the light produced. ITO and IZO are used by the majority of the flat-panel display market. As the demand for display technologies grows,34 so will the demand for high performance TCOs.
While TCOs are used to let light out for display application, they are used to allow light in for photovoltaic devices. Silicon solar cells use a grid of silver lines as front contacts, but these can mask the light-absorbing layer and thus reduce efficiency. Using a TCO for the collection layer allows for photocurrent collection while still allowing light to reach the absorber. Since the TCO is transparent and can thus cover the entire solar cell surface, it can also collect current from the entire device area. With about 125000 terawatts of solar power striking the earth at any given moment, solar energy has enough capacity to meet a major portion of our future energy needs.35,36 Given the world’s increasing demand for energy and the environmental concerns involving fossil fuels, the photovoltaic industry is expected to grow. TCOs can be employed to increase efficiency of current silicon solar cells and are required in emerging thin film and organic photovoltaic technologies.37 Habas et al. provide a recent overview of the solution processing and printing of inorganic solar cell devices, including the absorber and metal contact materials.38
Another common application is in functional glasses. In electrochromic (EC) windows, which darken or become opaque upon application of a voltage, an absorber layer is sandwiched between two TCO layers.33 While the active layer darkens with the applied voltage through the conducting oxide, the oxide must also be highly transparent to visible light when the absorber is not active and functioning as a traditional window. While EC windows are still in a nascent market stage, architectural window glass is a large current market for TCO coatings, typically fluorine-doped tin oxide (SnO2:F). Since TCOs reflect in the infrared region and absorb in the ultraviolet region, glass can be coated with a TCO to create low-emissivity (low-e) windows that can reduce radiant heat loss and minimize exposure to harmful UV radiation.33 This can improve the energy efficiency of a building and cut heating and cooling energy costs.
Lastly, an emerging application for TCOs is in transparent thin-film transistors (TTFTs). In 2004, Nomura et al. demonstrated a TTFT that employed an amorphous oxide semiconductor, a-InGaZnO, as the active channel layer in a field effect transistor on a flexible plastic substrate (PET).39 A field effect transistor (FET) is an electric switch in which current flows between a source and a drain by passing through a channel layer. Current that pass through the channel can be controlled by applying voltage to a gate, thus acting like a switch. The speed at which the transistor can switch between “on” and “off” states (which can affect refresh rates in displays) depends on the carrier mobility in the channel. Compared to current a-Si channel layers with mobilities <1 cm2 (V s)−1, TCO channel layers can exhibit much higher mobilities of 10–50 cm2 (V s)−1 and thus faster switch rates.39–41 Hence, new amorphous TCO materials can enable new applications like transparent flexible electronics and electronic paper.
2 
        TCO properties for consideration
The following subsections provide background information about the basic electronic and optical properties of TCOs for the general reader and new researchers to the field. Additionally, these summaries will provide a useful baseline for comparison and discussion of the recent achievements in the chemical solution preparation of these materials (Section 2.1.3). For more comprehensive information about TCO systems and their properties, readers are directed to the Handbook for Transparent Conductors by Ginley et al.42 and Transparent Conductive Zinc Oxide by Ellmer et al.43
2.1 Electronic properties
As electrical conductivity is an important property of TCOs, a general understanding of electronic properties in materials is required. Electrical conductivity (σ) is defined in units of S cm−1 as: σ = Neμ(1)where N is the carrier concentration (# cm−3), e is the carrier charge (C), and μ is the mobility (cm2 (V s)−1). The fundamental charge of an electron is 1.602 × 10−19 C. Crystalline ITO can be routinely produced with electrical conductivities up to ∼5000 S cm−1. Conductive amorphous InZnO has exhibited conductivities of 1000–3000 S cm−1. For comparison, pure copper (a metal conductor) and quartz (an oxide insulator) are ∼105 S cm−1 and ∼10−18 S cm−1 respectively.44 It is apparent from eqn (1) that the conductivity is a function of two parameters: mobility and carrier concentration. Typical carrier concentrations for a-InZnO are 1019–1021 cm−3 compared to 1022–1023 cm−3 for metals. Electron mobility in a-InZnO ranges 10–50 cm2 (V s)−1,45–48 which is similar to that of Cu (59 cm2 (V s)−1).49 Recently, very high mobilities up to 600 cm2 (V s)−1 have been observed in CdO.50

2.1.1 Mobility. 
Mobility can be described as the ease in which carriers can move through the material. It is defined in terms of the average scattering time (τ) and the carrier effective mass (m*) as: (2)Eqn (2) shows that in order to increase the mobility, the scattering time must be increased or the effective mass must be decreased. The latter involves new material development. The former relates to issues of film quality. In general, anything that inhibits the movement of carriers through a material (decreases τ) will result in a decrease in mobility and thus a decrease in conductivity. According to Matthiesens rule,49 resistivity (the inverse of conductivity) arises from independent scattering processes which are additive, such as scattering due to impurities, defects, and grain boundaries: (3)The most important sources of scattering in typical semiconductor materials are ionized impurity scattering and acoustic phonon scattering (also called lattice scattering). Grain boundary scattering is only significant when grains are smaller than the mean free path of the electron. Phase separation and porosity will result in further scattering. The latter is a particular concern in solution processing, as pores can form when solvent and gaseous decomposition products leave the material.
For crystalline TCOs, strict control over the crystalline properties is required. Large grain growth often requires high-temperature processing. However, high temperatures are not compatible with most flexible substrates such as polymers. Fortunately, a class of TCOs has been discovered in which crystallinity is not a necessity for high conductivity—these are the amorphous TCOs. Typically, an amorphous structure is undesirable because disorder in the periodic electrical potential of the crystalline lattice interferes with transport. However, Hosono has proposed that oxides composed of heavy post transition metal cations with electron configurations of (n−1)d10ns0 where n ≥ 5 can achieve conduction through their overlapping large s-orbitals.40,51,52 As the s-orbital is spherical and thus non-directional, the bonding directionality observed in crystalline materials is not required for transport. Thus, a conduction pathway exists even though there is no long-range order. Examples of amorphous transparent conducting oxides with high mobility (10–50 cm2 (V s)−1) include CdGeO, AgSbO, ZnSnO, InZnO, and InGaZnO.40,51,52


2.1.2 
            Carrier formation. 
Electronic carriers are generated both intrinsically and extrinsically. In a pure, defect-free material at 0 K, all lattice sites are occupied and all electrons occupy their ground-state energy levels. However, free carriers can be produced intrinsically at temperatures above 0 K by the thermal (entropically driven) introduction of defects such as interstitials and vacancies. Such a process for oxides can be illustrated with the following equilibrium reaction written in Kröger-Vink notation: (4)The resulting material is non-stoichiometric. In the case of free carrier generation due to oxygen vacancies as described in eqn (4), the equilibrium constant can be written in as: (5)where brackets denote the concentration (site fraction) of oxygen vacancies () and free electrons (e′) and pO2 is the partial pressure of oxygen. Given the substitution that  from eqn (4), the free electron concentration is given as: (6)Thus, the conductivity is inversely proportional to the oxygen partial pressure. Depositing or annealing in a reduced oxygen partial pressure environment (e.g. with N2 or forming gas) can increase the conductivity of the TCO by introducing more carriers.
Carriers can also by introduced extrinsically by doping with substitutional atoms of different valence. In the case of Al-doped ZnO (an n-type material), the presence of Al3+ occupying Zn2+ sites results in the generation of free electrons to maintain charge neutrality. The equilibrium reaction can be written as: (7)Strictly speaking, amorphous TCOs do not have lattice sites to substitute or oxygen vacancies. As such, the above reactions are not as well-defined in amorphous materials as they are in crystalline materials. Mason et al.53 and Fergus54 further summarize the effects of doping and defect interaction on the transport and electrolytic properties of oxide materials in the context of transparent conductor and oxygen sensor applications respectively.


2.1.3 
            TCO material systems. 
An electronic conductor can be classified as n-type or p-type depending on whether elections or holes are the majority carrier. As shown in Table 1, n-type TCO materials have evolved to include the individual oxides of Sn, Cd, In, Zn, and Ga, as well as their compound and alloy mixtures.55,56 Impurity-doping into these systems has also been achieved. The hexahedron in Fig. 1 illustrates this TCO composition space. Individual oxides are located at the corners, edges are lines of mixing between two oxides (binary systems), and faces are areas of mixing between three oxides (ternary systems).†Fig. 2 compares the abundance of these common TCO cations and dopants. Currently, there is great interest in non-indium based TCOs because of indium's rarity and thus high price.
 Fig. 1  Conventional TCO composition space. 
 Fig. 2  Mass fraction abundance of the elements in the Earth's crust as a function of atomic number. Common TCO cations are highlighted by colored circles and additional dopants by squares. Adapted from ref. 57 and 58. 
TCOs are predominately n-type due to their ability to form oxygen vacancies.59 Conversely, p-type TCOs suffer from low conductivity (σ ∼ 1 S cm−1, N ≤ 1018 cm−3, μ ∼ 1 cm2 (V s)−1). It is more difficult to obtain hole conduction because the O-2p orbitals, which form hole transport paths, are strongly localized in most metal oxides and occur at deeper energy levels than the valence orbitals of the metal atoms.60 The former results in a large hole effective mass and thus a low mobility; the latter makes hole doping difficult. Thus, even if a hole could be successfully introduced, it would be localized on an oxygen atom and unable to migrate easily within the material. Given these issues, it is not surprising that p-type TCOs were unknown before 1997 with the advent of delafossite-type CuAlO2 by Kawazoe et al.61 Spinel-type AB2O4 (A = Zn, Ni and B = Co, Rh, Ir) also show p-type conductivity.62–64 Attempts to make p-type ZnO have been largely unsuccessfully to date, as p-type behavior has not been stable or reproducible.65 Banerjee and Chattopadhyay provide a detailed review of p-type TCO materials.66


2.1.4 Band gap. 
In crystalline semiconductors, the allowed valence and conduction bands are separated by a forbidden energy region referred to as the band gap. The density of states is zero in the gap. The band gap of most metal oxides used for transparent conductors and semiconductors is greater than 3 eV. For example, ZnO has a direct band gap of 3.4 eV.43Fig. 3 depicts the band structure and density of states for ZnO. The density of states is slightly different for amorphous semiconductors, where mid-gap states exist and band tailing into the gap occurs. In these materials, the term mobility gap is instead used, as electrons with energy greater than the gap become mobile in the disordered structure.
 Fig. 3  (a) Calculated band structure of wurtzite ZnO using a local-density approximation with self-interaction correction (SIC-LDA) from Vogel et al. and (b) the corresponding density of states calculated using density-functional theory with a generalized-gradient approximation and self-interaction correction (GGA+U) from Erhart et al. Adapted with permission from ref. 67 and 68. Copyrights (1996, 2006) American Physical Society. 

2.2 Optical properties
The optical properties of a material are intimately related to its electronic properties, as the electric field component of light can interact with the electrons of the material according to the Drude free electron model.69 The transmission, reflection, and absorption spectra of a typical TCO are shown in Fig. 4. There are three characteristic regions in the spectra. First, a transparent conducting oxide must be transparent in the visible region of the spectrum, typically defined as λ = 400–750 nm (hν = 3.1–1.7 eV). Second, light with energy above the band gap is absorbed in band transitions. This occurs as an abrupt drop in transmission and increase in absorption at shorter wavelengths (<350 nm or 3.5 eV). As mentioned in the previous section, typical TCOs have a band gap greater than 3 eV. Lastly, a second decrease in transmission and increase in reflection is observed on the other end of the spectrum at longer wavelengths (>1500 nm). This transition, corresponding to a maximum in absorption, is referred to as the plasma wavelength (λp), where the frequency of the light is the same as the frequency of the collective oscillation of electrons in the material. The electrons oscillating in phase with the electric field component of the light results in absorption. When λ < λp the wavefunction is oscillatory and radiation can propagate, resulting in a transparent material. When λ > λp the wavefunction decays and no radiation can propagate, resulting in reflection. The carrier concentration is inversely related to the plasma wavelength as . Thus, there is a trade-off between transmission and carrier concentration. One approach to improving conductivity without adversely impacting visual transmission is to increase the mobility instead of the carrier concentration, which can be done by eliminating scattering mechanisms or by choosing a different material with improved mobility.70
 Fig. 4  Transmission, reflection, and absorption spectra of a typical TCO. 
2.3 Additional criteria
Beyond the core requirements of high conductivity and transparency, transparent conductors must satisfy other criteria, as detailed by R.G. Gordon.71 Certain materials possess better select properties over others, and material selection is governed by the requirements of the particular application. Table 2, adapted from R.G. Gordon, highlights several representative TCO materials for various applications.
Table 2 Criteria for choosing transparent conductor materialsa




Property application
Materials





a Adapted from R.G. Gordon.71





Highest transparency

                    ZnO:F, Cd2SnO4, Zn2SnO4


Highest conductivity

                    In2O3:Sn


Highest mobility
CdO, In2O3:Ti, In2O3:Mo


Lowest plasma frequency

                    SnO2:F, ZnO:F


Highest plasma frequency

                    Ag, TiN, In2O3:Sn


Lowest work function

                    ZnO:F


Highest work function

                    SnO2:F, ZnSnO3, ZnInSnO


Best thermal stability

                    SnO2:F, TiN, Cd2SnO4


Best mechanical durability
TiN, SnO2:F


Best chemical durability

                    SnO2:F


Easiest to etch

                    ZnO:F, TiN


Lowest deposition temperature

                    In2O3:Sn, ZnO:B


 

                    a-InZnO
                  


Least toxic

                    ZnO:F, SnO2:F


Lowest cost

                    SnO2:F



                    TTFT
                    channel
                  

                    ZnO
                  


 

                    a-InZnO, a-ZnSnO, a-InGaZnO




3 Solution processing routes
Observations of transparent films depositing on the surface of glass from solution were an unintended result for early chemists trying to perform gravimetric analysis viaprecipitation. L. Gordon and colleagues‡ observed that “a small fraction of the basic salts precipitated by the urea method may deposit on the glass surface of a beaker in the form of a thin, tenacious, and transparent film… The films cannot be removed by scraping with a policeman.”72 For those that find this imagery of a “policeman” amusing, it refers to a glass rod with a rubber scraper at the end used to transfer residues of precipitate from glass surfaces. Formation of these films was a nuisance, as they had to be removed and also weighed for accurate quantitative determination of the analyte. Interestingly, L. Gordon noted that “the existence of these films will always be a reminder of Willard's fond hope that he will some day find a way of making all the precipitate adhere to the beaker, so that it will only be necessary to dry and weigh the beaker after discarding the solution.”73 Ironically, this dream (and perhaps jest) of analytical chemists about the deliberate, controlled coating of glass from solution would be realized with the advent of chemical bath and other solution deposition techniques. Fig. 5 illustrates the typical solution deposition process along with other employed variations. The following subsections discuss each processing step in detail. Schwartz et al. outline similar processing routes in their review on the solution deposition of perovskite-based oxide thin-films.74
 Fig. 5  Flow chart of typical solution processing routes. Simplest route denoted by solid (—) line. Alternative pathways denoted by dotted (⋯) lines. Subsections to consult for each processing step are listed. 
3.1 Precursors

Chemical deposition routes start with a precursor, the chemical reagent that contains the cation of interest and reacts to form the desired material and phase. The selection of a precursor is dependent upon the choice of solvent, formulation, and desired processing route. A list of common precursors for Zn and In, sorted by their popularity in the literature, is provided in Table 3. It is apparent from the table that zinc acetate dihydrate is the preferred precursor for Zn; while there is no clear winner for In. Chloride salts are almost exclusively used for Sn, another common TCO cation. Solution routes to TCOs typically employ acetates, chlorides, or nitrates as precursors because these compounds are cheap and readily available from commercial suppliers. Metal–organic compounds are another option. Their solubility in polar or non-polar solvents can be adjusted by the choice of the organic substituent. Bloor et al. provide a recent, extensive review on the synthesis and usage of a large variety of Ga and In metal–organic compounds, ranging from polydentate coordination to multinuclear structures.75 Several other precursor candidates are outlined in the following subsections.
Table 3 Common Zn and In precursors for oxide films and nanostructures




Precursor
Number of Uses
References





a 
                      acac = aceylacetonate.
b hfa = hexafluoroacetylacetonate.





Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O

14+


31 and 76–90



Zn(NO3)2·xH2O
5

89 and 91–94




                    Zn(acac)2
3

95–97




                    Zn(C2H5)2
2

98 and 99




                    Zn(OPri)2
1

100




                    Zn(OH)x(NO3)(2−x)(NH3)y
1

101



Zn(hfa)2(diamines)
1

102




InCl3
7

81, 88, 96, 97 and 103–105



In(NO3)3·xH2O
5

31, 82, 83, 95 and 97




                    In(CH3COO)3
4

84–86 and 97




                    In(HCOO)3
3

106–108




                    In(acac)3
1

109




                    In(OH)(2-ethylhexanoate)2
1

110






3.1.1 Carboxylates. 
A carboxylate is the corresponding metal salt of a carboxylic acid of the form M(RCOO)n where R is the organic substituent. The negative charge of the carboxylate ion is delocalized between the two oxygen atoms in a resonance structure, which stabilizes the ion. It can bind to metal cations in various ways as a mono- or poly-dentate ligand. The formate ion (HCOO−) is the simplest carboxylate form, thus having the smallest steric effect. Acetate (CH3COO−) is the most commonly used carboxylate. These short alkyl chain carboxylates are soluble in polar solvents like water. Longer alkyl chains, such as 2-ethylhexanoate, are soluble in non-polar solvents.
The high solubility of Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O contributes to its popularity as a precursor for ZnO-based TCOs. Conversely, while In(CH3COO)3 has been used to deposit In-poor TCOs, its low solubility compared to other indium salts makes it a poor choice for In-rich films. In(CH3COO)3 is only slightly soluble in water. Its solubility is higher in glacial acetic acid (0.1 M) and propionic acid (0.17 M).111 Low loading can lead to a volume contraction as solvent and organics are driven off, resulting in film stress, cracking, and delamination. Conversely, the trifluoroacetate (TFA, CF3COO−) salt is highly soluble and could be an attractive precursor. Its higher solubility is due to the influence of the more electronegative trifluoromethyl group. This group stabilizes the anion by withdrawing localized electron density away from the oxygen atoms. The more stable anion favors dissociation in solution. In fact, the dissociation constant (Ka) of trifluoroacetic acid (pKa = 0.5) is <20000X higher than acetic acid (pKa = 4.75). In(CF3COO)3 can be obtained through commercial suppliers. In(CF3COO)2(OH) is highly hydroscopic. A larger variety of solvent options allows for different solution deposition routes to be explored, such as spin coating and slot coating, which require the ability to adjust viscosity and evaporation rates to produce high quality films.


3.1.2 
            β-Diketonates. 
Organic molecules with two ketone groups separated by a methylene group are called β-diketones. These molecules undergo an internal reaction via the migration of a hydrogen atom and the accompanied switching of a single bond and adjacent double bond, referred to as keto-enol tautomerizaton (Fig. 6). Acetylacetone, formally named 2,4-pentanedione, is a common β-diketone. Its conjugate anion, acetylacetonate (acac), forms bidentate complexes with metal ions. Hexafluoracetylacetonate (hfa) compounds exhibit enhanced volatility and are used in metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).
 Fig. 6  
              Keto-enol
              tautomerization of acetylacetonate. 


3.1.3 Homometallic Alkoxides. 
An alkoxide (RO−) is the conjugate base of an alcohol (ROH). They are strong bases and good nucleophiles. A homometallic alkoxide of the form M(OR)n refers to an alkoxide consisting of only one type of metal atom. Okamura and Bowen summarize methodologies for synthesizing metal alkoxides.112
Compared to Si alkoxides, other metal alkoxides are generally more reactive toward hydrolysis. The lower electronegativity of the metal ion causes them to be more electrophilic and thus less stable toward nucleophilic reactions like hydrolysis: Ti (1.54) < Zn (1.65) < In (1.78) < Si (1.90). Chemical modification of metal alkoxides with chelating or sterically hindered ligands, such as acac, can slow hydrolysis and condensation reaction rates, which is important for producing dense films. Rapid hydrolysis is a particular concern for titanium alkoxides due to the metals low electronegativity. Titanium isopropoxide (Ti(OPri)4) can be stabilized with the addition of acetylacetone (Fig. 7). Yamamoto and Kambara discuss the properties of titanium dialkoxide bisacetylacetonate and bis(ethyl-acetoacetate) compounds, many of which are orange liquids at room temperature.113 Of these, Ti(OPri)2(acac)2 is commercially available. Hydrolysis of Ti(OPri)2(acac)2 leads to the preferential formation of one-dimensional polymers while hydrolysis of Ti(OPri)4 results in formation of particles.114
 Fig. 7  Stabilization of Ti(OPri)4 by addition of acetylacetonate. 


3.1.4 
            Oxo-alkoxides. 
Multinuclear oxo-alkoxides are unique precursors for metal oxide films because they already contain preformed metal-oxygen bonds. Several homometallic pentanuclear oxo-alkoxide clusters exist for (3+) valence metals in the form of M5O(OPri)13 (M = Sc, Y, Yb, In, Eu, Er, Nb).115–118 More accurately, these clusters can be described by the structural formula M5(μ5−O)(μ3−OPri)4(μ2−OPri)4(OPri)5. Depicted in Fig. 8, an oxygen-centered square pyramid of five metal atoms is bridged by four μ2-alkoxo groups around the equator and four μ3-alkoxo groups on the pyramid faces. These clusters are soluble in toluene and hexanes and retain their molecular structure in solution. The In cluster is particularly interesting as a TCO precursor. Bradley and Hursthouse et al. first prepared the In cluster and noted that the compound turned yellow near its melting point (160 °C).117,118Thermogravimetric analysis of the compound showed a decomposition range of 150–230 °C119 with an extrapolated decomposition temperature of 204 °C.120Crystallization of In2O3 occurred at ≥300 °C.119 This low decomposition temperature would be ideal for polymer substrates and organic or CIGS photovoltaics, which are sensitive to temperatures >200 °C. The temperature window between decomposition and crystallization may allow for processing regimes for both amorphous and crystalline TCO materials. As highlighted in section 4.3.1, Banger et al. have recently demonstrated a low-temperature, solution-processed a-IZO TFT using In5O(OPri)13.120
 Fig. 8  ORTEP diagram of the indium cluster In5(μ5−O)(μ3−OPri)4(μ2−OPri)4(OPri)5. The isopropyl groups have been omitted for clarity. The oxo-oxygen (O1) is at the center of the cluster in blue with indium atoms in yellow. Adapted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2011) Elsevier. 


3.1.5 Heterometallic alkoxides. 
A heterometallic alkoxide of the form M1xM2y(OR)n refers to an alkoxide containing more than one type of metal atom. Besides being interesting from a chemistry perspective, they could serve as potential TCO precursors. Traditionally, mixed metal TCOs prepared by solution deposition have used different precursors for each cation. However, a single-source precursor with both metal species present may be advantageous. In fact, several multi-metallic alkoxides have been prepared.121 The Westin group has synthesized several hetero-bimetallic alkoxide precursors for Lanthanide (Ln)-doped optical glass.115,116,122,123 A major problem that often arises when preparing these glasses is the formation of Ln-rich oxide clusters within the glass host, which causes a reduction in the optical activity due to energy transfer between neighboring excited ions, yielding non-radiative relaxation. The Westin group found that clustering can be avoided and higher doping levels achieved by isolating the Ln-atoms by surrounding them with ‘optically silent’ alumina. In order to achieve atomic isolation, they synthesized bimetallic alkoxide precursors of the form LnAl3(OPri)12 (Ln = Er, Eu).
In a similar fashion, bimetallic alkoxides of indium have been observed, e.g. InM3(OPri)12 (M = Al, Ga).124 A review on the homo- and hetero-metallic alkoxides of p-block metals has been published by Mehrotra et al.125 These bimetallic alkoxides may be applicable to TCOs, especially if zinc analogs can be synthesized. In one instance of such an approach, Aksu and Driess deposited ITO films from a single-source precursor of In–Sn (1:1) tert-butoxide.126 The precursor decomposed at a low temperature (185 °C). Films exhibited mixed valence states (Sn4+, Sn2+, Sn0) at 250 °C but only Sn4+ at 600 °C. Bimetallic methylzinc–magnesium alkoxide clusters [Me6MgZn6(OR)8] have also been synthesized for the preparation of ZnMgO.127
Heterometallic oxo-alkoxides have also been observed. It has been shown that, with metal ions having a higher electronegative character than the Ln3+ ions, substitution takes place at the apex position such as in Ln4TiO(OPri)14.128 Conversely, with less electronegative ions such as Sr2+, the substitution occurs at the base-plane positions.129 Westin has provided some general coordination trends for other heterometallic oxo-alkoxides under ‘Comparisons with Other Systems’.130
Unfortunately, the metals ratios of these single-source precursors often differ greatly from target material compositions. For example, the above mentioned In–Sn tert-butoxide possessed a 1:1 metals ratio, which is far from the ideal 9:1 ratio for ITO. Similarly, using In4TiO(OPri)14 as an ITiO precursor would yield excessive doping with 20 at% Ti rather than the desired 1–3 at% Ti. Higher indium ratio clusters have not been observed. Similar problems may exist for the heterometallic analogs of gallium and zinc with indium for IZO and IGZO. To address this problem, Veith et al. had to employ a quasi single-source, sol–gel approach using [Me2In(OBut)3Sn]x·[Me2In(OBut)]y to obtain the desired metals ratio for ITO.131 In such cases, it would be synthetically simpler to mix individual homometallic alkoxides rather than mix heterometallic alkoxides to achieve the desired metals composition.


3.1.6 Organometallics. 
Organometallics are compounds containing metal-to-carbon bonds. Many organometallic compounds are pyrophoric and will spontaneously ignite upon exposure to air. A low-temperature precursor for ZnO-based TCOs is the organometallic compound diethylzinc.132ZnO films for organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices have been deposited from diethylzinc in toluene/tetrahydrofuran (THF).98 Exposing the material to air or a controlled humidity environment results in the formation of ZnO at low temperatures (110 °C). Diethylzinc rapidly undergoes hydrolysis and condensation upon exposure to air; therefore, these reactions need to be regulated in order to obtain smooth and dense films. Controlling humidity is critical, with the best results observed at 40% RH. Similar humidity effects on morphology were observed for TiO2-based devices.133 It was also observed that the hydrolysis and condensation reactions can be slowed by the addition of THF to the solution.98THF stabilizes the diethylzinc by coordination to the zinc atom. It is well known that diethylzinc forms adducts with Lewis bases, such as amines and ethers like THF.134 The deposition of ZnO:(Al,Ga,In) thin films could be produced using a similar approach with diethylzinc as the Zn source and various alkoxides as dopant sources. Hu and Gordon were able to deposit GZO films (1000–4200 S cm−1) using CVD at 350–470 °C from diethylzinc, triethylgallium, and water vapor.99 Alkoxides are suggested for a solution route because of the hazards involved with the highly pyrophoric trimethyl-compounds of In, Al, and Ga and because of their slower hydrolysis rates.


3.1.7 
            Ammine
            hydroxy
nitrates
          . 
Another class of low-temperature ZnO precursors is based on zinc ammine and hydroxy nitrate compounds. Studies have shown that zinc ammine hydroxides (Zn(OH)2(NH3)x),101ammine hydroxy nitrates (Zn5(OH)8(NO3)2·2NH3),135hydroxy nitrate hydrates (Zn5(OH)8(NO3)2·2H2O),136 and related compounds possess very low decomposition and ZnO crystallization temperatures (<150 °C). As highlighted in section 4.1.2, Meyers et al. was able to successfully employ zinc ammine hydroxide as a solution precursor for the channel layer in a TFT.101 The hydroxy nitrate compounds typically decompose via formation of ZnO plus an intermediate (Zn3(OH)4(NO3)2) at 80–120 °C and fully decompose to ZnO at 120–170 °C.135,137 Conversely, zinc hydroxy chlorides only dehydrate at higher temperature (110–150 °C) and require even more heating to decompose residual chloride (165–265 °C for Zn5(OH)8Cl2·H2O and 225–310 °C for β-ZnOHCl).138 At these higher temperatures, conventional zinc acetate dihydrate might as well be used instead.

3.2 Coating solution formulation
Once the precursors are selected, a coating solution is formulated by addition of a solvent and other additives. Two main types of formulations are used: metal–organic deposition (MOD) solutions and nanoparticle suspensions. Each has their own advantages and disadvantages.

Nanoparticle routes may avoid excessive thermal processing temperatures as the material of interest has already been pre-synthesized. This is true for the deposition of metal nanowires and carbon nanotubes. Talapin et al. provide an excellent review of the preparation of colloidal nanocrystals for electronic and optoelectronic applications.139 Pinna and Niederberger have reviewed surfactant-free, non-aqueous synthetic routes for a large variety of metal oxide nanostructures.140 While nanoparticle routes typically have higher solid loadings, they suffer from the fact that they require stabilizers (capping agents) and that the particles may clog nozzles in certain printing methods. Additionally, if a dense film is desired rather than a network, higher temperature processing is required to sinter the particles and removing capping agents. Therefore, this approach is typically not used for the deposition of oxide thin films.

MOD solutions are the preferred route for oxide films. Their preparation is straight-forward. In its simplest form, the metal–organic compounds or salts are dissolved in a solvent and mixed in the desired stoichiometry. The species in solution strongly resemble the starting material if no oligomerization has taken place. Additional thermal processing is required to drive off the organics or counter-ions and yield the oxide phase. MOD routes lend to the formation of amorphous material, not just crystalline phases. This factor makes MOD particularly interesting given the strong push in the community towards amorphous TCOs.
Simple MOD solutions can be chemically reacted to build-up networks in solution via the sol–gel method. In sol–gel processing, the precursors (typically metal alkoxides) undergo hydrolysis (Fig. 9) and poly-condensation reactions in solution to produce a stable suspension of colloidal particles (a sol) and evolve towards a porous solid network in the liquid (a gel). The gelation process, commonly referred to as aging, involves linking metal centers with oxo (M–O–M) or hydroxo (M–OH–M) bridges viacondensation reactions involving alcohol or water elimination (Fig. 10). The gel can be colloidal141 or polymeric in nature depending on whether the reaction is base or acid catalyzed respectively. Forming metal–oxygen linkages in solution prior to deposition reduces the amount of organics that must be decomposed with thermal processing, thus minimizing shrinkage stresses. For more comprehensive information about the chemistries and physics of sol–gel processing, readers are directed to the Introduction to Sol–Gel Processing by Pierre142 and Sol–Gel Science: The Physics and Chemistry of Sol–Gel Processing by Brinker and Scherer.114 Additionally, Hector has reviewed the synthesis of non-oxide materials using sol–gel chemistry.143
 Fig. 9  
Hydrolysis of metal alkoxide via nucleophilic substitution. 
 Fig. 10  Condensation can occur by alcohol or water elimination. 
Another gel route is the Pechini method, which was developed by Pechini in 1967 for the preparation of titanates and niobates for capacitors144 and since then has been applied to TCOs.145 Metal ions from starting materials such as nitrates or carbonates are chelated in solution with a multicarboxylic acid, such as citric acid. The addition of ethylene glycol creates organic ester linkages upon heating. The multiple carboxylate groups of citric acid allow for multiple chelation and polyesterification reactions to occur. The resulting polymer consists of metal ions distributed in an organic matrix. While the starting materials for the Pechini process are cheaper than alkoxides, they contain a significantly larger fraction of organics that can lead to undesired carbon residues and shrinkage.
Alternatively, a hybrid MOD–nanoparticle system can be employed to combine the advantages of both routes. First, the presence of solid particles allows for increased solids-loading and minimizes shrinkage due to decomposition that can lead to film stresses and cracking. The dissolved components act as the binding medium for the particles, eliminating the need for organic binders. Lastly, the large contact area between the solution and solid phase allows for rapid, homogenous phase formation. While such a combined route has been successfully demonstrated for the preparation of Cu2ZnSn(Se,S)4 (CZTS) photovoltaic absorber layers by Mitzi and colleagues,146 it has not been investigated for TCO applications.

Solvent selection is a balance between solids-loading (solubility) and deposition requirements. Aqueous solutions are preferred because they are cost-effective and water has no detrimental environmental impact. However, organic solvents or mixtures are often used to increase solubility and tune the solution properties for deposition. For example, the surface-wetting properties of a polymer substrate or a silicon solar cell material will be entirely different than that of glass and thus require different solvents. There is also a tradeoff between solvent viscosity and volatility. High molecular weight solvents allow for increased viscosity but lack the volatility required for removal with mild heating. Conversely, highly volatile solvents are easily removed but can evaporate too quickly resulting in rough or porous film morphologies. The balance struck is dependent upon the deposition method used. For example, the high viscosity (1.71 cP) and boiling point (125 °C) of 2-methoxyethanol, which is widely used due to its ability to solubilize a variety of different precursors, make it an appropriate solvent choice for spin- and dip-coating. Lower viscosity (0.593 cP) and boiling point (65 °C) alcohols, such as methanol, are more applicable for spraying.147 For printing, formulation may also influence the way in which the solution wets nozzles and is jetted. As such, other additives may be included to independently tune the rheology, viscosity, surface-wetting, and stability of the ink for deposition.
3.3 Deposition of thin films
Solution techniques allow for the deposition of films at atmospheric pressure with minimal equipment cost. Scalable deposition methods that allow for uniform, large-area coverage are important for high through-put industrial applications. In this section, we highlight several solution coating and patterning techniques (Fig. 11). Coating techniques can be classified into two categories: direct growth of the material on the substrate during deposition or liquid coating that requires additional processing to remove solvent and yield the desired phase.
 Fig. 11  Depiction of various solution deposition methods. 
Direct growth methods include electrochemical and electroless chemical bath deposition (CBD). CBD methods rely on the controlled reaction and precipitation of reagents in solution. Nucleation and film growth occurs on the surface of a substrate immersed in the solution bath. The main drawback of CBD is the quantity of solution waste.1 Hodes provides further information on the CBD mechanisms and chemistries for a large variety of metal oxide and semiconductor materials.148 Additionally, Chapparro provides a thermodynamic analysis of the precipitation and deposition of zinc oxide and chalcogenides from aqueous solution.149
TCs are most commonly deposited by liquid coating methods. These techniques are sensitive to the characteristics of the solution formulation. Spin-coating is extensively used for smaller, laboratory-scale device processing due to its simplicity and high reproducibility. During the process,150 the substrate is secured to the spin-coater by a vacuum chuck, and an excess of solution is applied to the surface. Then the substrate is rapidly accelerated (typically to several 1000 RPM), which drives solution flow radially outward. A uniform, thin film is left after spin-off and solvent evaporation.151 Alternatively, dip-coating involves the entrainment of a solution layer on a substrate as it is withdrawn from a solution reservoir, either in batches or in a continuous roll-line. Brinker and Scherer provide an overview of the factors that influence the process.114
While dip-coating results in coverage on both sides of the substrate, other scalable methods exist for coating a single side.152 These methods involve application of a coating solution, which is then distributed, smoothed, and thinned across the surface of the substrate with a blade or rod. During doctor blading (knife-over-roll coating),153,154 the film thickness is controlled by gap between the blade and the substrate. Instead of a blade, a wire-wound metering rod (referred to as a Mayer/Meyer rod) can also be used. The amount of coating left on the substrate is determined by the diameter of the wire on the rod. Slit, slot, and die casting involve flowing the solution through a slotted head above the substrate. The line speed is frequently much faster than the speed of the extrusion, which enables coatings to be considerably thinner than the width of the slot. These methods can be used for high solids-loading solutions (5–50000 cP) and are easily scaled to a roll-to-roll production line.

Spray-coating is an attractive non-contact, large-area deposition method. It can be used as either a liquid coating method or for the direct growth of films if the substrate temperature is above the decomposition temperature of the precursors. This later method is commonly referred to as spray pyrolysis. In general, a atomized solution is generated pneumatically or ultrasonically and then directed onto the substrate with a carrier gas. For ultrasonic spray, the nozzle is configured such that excitation of piezoelectric crystals creates a standing wave transverse along the length of the nozzle. The nozzle tip must be located at an anti-node, where the vibration amplitude is the greatest. Therefore, the nozzle's length must be a multiple of a half-wavelength and is dependent upon operating frequency. In general, high frequency nozzles are smaller, create smaller drops, and have a smaller maximum flow capacity.155 Spraying requires low viscosity solutions (typically ≤10 cP). Perednis and Gauckler discuss the effects of spray parameters on film quality,156 and Patil has reviewed the use of spray pyrolysis for the deposition of oxide thin films.157
Many opto-electronic applications require patterned TC materials rather than continuous layers. Photovoltaic contacts typically use metal collection grids composed of narrow lines, displays require pixel definition, and electronics require patterned transistors and circuit paths. Patterning from solution has been traditionally performed by contact methods such as screen-printing with a mask or stamping. These methods require a degree of force for application and require high viscosity solutions. Direct-write methods such as inkjet printing158 and aerosol jet159 are attractive alternatives. These methods offer several advantages, including the ability to deposit multilayer structures without the need of photolithography and non-contact processing for use with fragile thin-film substrates. Furthermore, drop-on-demand (DOD) delivery allows for maximum material utilization. Unlike screen-printing, direct-write is a no-waste approach that is both environmentally- and cost-friendly. Piezoelectric inkjet printing allows for the DOD delivery of picolitre quantities of solution. Inkjets are capable of line resolutions less than 20 μm, which is two to four times better than screen-printing. Unfortunately, the small picolitre dropsize required for this fine resolution prevents the use of colloidal or nanoparticulate inks which can clog the nozzle. A review by Jabbour et al. highlights the capabilities and applications of inkjet technology.160 The aerosol jet process uses aerodynamic focusing for the high-resolution deposition of atomized suspensions and/or chemical precursor solutions. Aerosol-based printing is attractive due to its large processing window. It is capable of printing features ranging from microns to millimetres in width, can handle solutions with a large viscosity range (1–2500 cP), and is tolerant of particulate inks. DuPont Displays have recently utilized solution processing for the production of organic light emitting diode (OLED) displays by combining slot-coating for area coverage with jet printing to define pixels.161
Following deposition the film is in a wet state. The nature of the film at this stage is highly dependent upon the precursors and solvents used. Solvent evaporation at room temperature or with mild heating can lead to gelation of the film due to increased interactions between precursor species or particles. Condensation reactions analogous to sol–gel reactions in solution can occur in the film state. Prior to thermal processing, films can be intentionally aged to allow gelation to occur or gelation can be assisted by exposure to a controlled humidity environment in order to improve densification.
3.4 Thermal processing of films
Thermal processing is performed for three main reasons: to decompose the precursors and remove any organics, to induce crystallization or phase transformations (if desired), and to control electronic carrier concentration. For MOD-based systems, decomposition of the precursor-film into the final oxide phase typically requires a thermal processing step, with the exception of spray pyrolysis. Thermal decomposition is more correctly termed ‘thermolysis’ as heating is typically conducted in open atmosphere. ‘Pyrolysis’ instead refers to the high temperature decomposition of organics in the absence of oxygen. However, the terms are used interchangeably in the literature. Thermal processing can be performed on a hotplate or under more controlled environments in a tube furnace or with a rapid thermal processing (RTP) system. While tube furnaces work by resistive heating, RTP can achieve very fast heating rates (>100°/s) optically using high intensity lamps. Rapid heating delays the decomposition to higher temperatures where the kinetics are faster. Sufficient temperatures can induce crystallization in parallel with decomposition. For further information, Schwartz et al. discuss the effects of processing conditions on crystallization and final film morphology in the context of titanate materials.74
As discussed in section 2.1.3, the conductivity of a TCO is inversely dependent upon the oxygen partial pressure. Depositing or annealing in a reduced oxygen partial pressure environment (e.g. with N2 or H2) can increase the conductivity of the TCO by introducing more carriers. For consideration, even though spray pyrolysis can yield the desired phase directly during deposition, secondary annealing in a controlled atmosphere may still be required to produce the desired electronic properties.
In the thermal processing of nanoparticulate films, a distinction is often made between curing and sintering.162 The curing temperature is defined as the temperature where particles lose their organic capping shell and start showing conductivity by direct physical contact. If dense films are required rather than nanoparticulate networks, additional heating is required for sintering. Sintering takes place at a higher temperature when necks form between particles.
4 Solution deposited TCOs
Now that we have established the basic material properties, chemistries, and methodologies, we shall survey several classical and emerging TCO material systems that have been deposited by solution processing. The hexahedron in Fig. 1 divides traditional n-type TCO composition space into intrinsic, binary, and ternary systems. The following subsections have also been divided according to these classifications for organizational simplicity. However, readers should note that several TCOs share common cations, and as such, use common precursors and chemistries. This is especially true for the ZnO:In, IZO, and IGZO systems and the literature for these systems should be viewed collectively. Typical p-type oxides do not occur within this composition space and are discussed at the end of this section.
4.1 Intrinsic oxides

4.1.1 
            SnO2. 
Due to its use in architectural window glass, SnO2 is the most deposited commercial TCO by volume. SnO2 and SnO2:F are the only commercial TCOs for which solution deposition is the preferred method. Cheap raw materials and simple processing allow for inexpensive, large-scale production by spray pyrolysis on float glass lines. Typically, a water/alcohol solution of SnCl4, or sometimes SnCl2, is sprayed onto the glass at 340–540 °C in air to produce the oxide coating:163–167 (8) (9)SnO2 crystallizes in the tetragonal rutile structure with a direct band gap of 3.6–4.0 eV.37,168,169 Typical films demonstrate conductivities, carrier concentrations, and mobilities between 100–1000 S cm−1, 1019–1020 cm−3, and 5–30 cm2 (V s)−1 respectively.167,170 Conductivity is attributed to the non-stoichiometric nature of SnO2. Section 4.2.1 discusses doped SnO2 in further detail.


4.1.2 
            ZnO
          . 

            ZnO crystallizes in three polymorphs: hexagonal wurtzite, cubic zinc blende, and cubic rocksalt. Wurtzite ZnO is the thermodynamically stable phase under ambient conditions and has a direct band gap of 3.4 eV.43,171 Given its unique optical, semiconductive, and piezoelectric properties, research on ZnO has progressed for more than a half-century with cycles of lingering to avid interest. Recently, a large variety of ZnO nanostructures have been prepared, such as nano-wires, tubes, belts, helixes, and tetrapods. Films with various ZnO superstructures have also exhibited superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic wetting.89 While the authors acknowledge the work in nanostructuring, this review will focus on dense films for TCO applications. For the interested reader, several reviews are provided for further information on ZnO nanostructures.172–175 section 4.2.2 discusses doped ZnO in further detail.
As highlighted in Table 3, nearly all solution deposited ZnO-based TCOs use Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O as the Zn precursor with 2-methoxyethanol as a solvent and monoethanolamine (MEA) as a sol–gel stabilizer.76 Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O exhibits a modest decomposition temperature of ∼250 °C. The viscosity (1.71 cP) and boiling point (125 °C) of 2-methoxyethanol make it an appropriate solvent choice for spin- and dip-coating.147
Using this formulation, ZnO was spin-coated as the semiconducting channel layer in a bottom-gated thin-film transistor (TFT).176Annealing at 300–500 °C in ambient air for 30 min produced devices with a field-effect mobility of 5–6 cm2 (V s)−1 and current on-to-off ratio of 105–106. This mobility surpasses typical a-Si channel values (<1 cm2 (V s)−1). Top-gated TFTs with a solution deposited ZnO channel were also produced under 230 °C with >75% transmittance.177
Low-temperature routes to ZnO (discussed further in sections 3.1.7 and 3.1.6) are interesting for applications in flexible electronics. Meyers et al. employed a low-temperature solution deposited ZnO for the channel layer in a TFT.101 Their Zn(OH)x(NH3)(2−x)y + precursor was prepared by dropwise addition of 2.5M NaOH to aqueous 0.5M Zn(NO3)2·6H2O to form a hydroxide slurry (eqn (10)), which was then rinsed and redissolved in aqueous NH3 (eqn (11)). Zn(NO3)2(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → Zn(OH)2(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)(10) Zn(OH)2(s) + yNH3(aq) → Zn(OH)2(NH3)y(aq)(11)The product was stable in solution and decomposed at very low temperatures (<150 °C) via: (12)The solution was either deposited by spin-coating or diluted with isopropanol in order to decrease its surface tension for inkjet printing of devices. The device architecture and resulting dense film morphologies are shown in Fig. 12. The TFTs performed well when processed at 300 °C. Annealing under N2 at >400 °C produced highly conductivity ZnO to the extent that the channel could not be turned off. Beek et al. utilized another low-temperature precursor solution, diethylzinc in toluene/tetrahydrofuran, to deposited a ZnO hybrid OPV device.98ZnO formed upon heating to 110 °C at 40% relative humidity.
 Fig. 12  
Scanning electron microscope images of ink-jet printed ZnO thin films annealed at (a) 150 °C and (b) 300 °C viewed with 45° tilt. (c) Cross-section of spin-coated film annealed to 600 °C in air. (d) Schematic structure of the bottom-gate TFT. (e) Optical microscope image of a printed ZnO-channel TFT on SiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. 


4.1.3 
            In2O3. 
Two crystal structures have been reported for In2O3: the more common cubic bixbyite structure and the rhombohedral corundum structure. Few reports about the synthesis of corundum-In2O3 can be found in the literature. In particular, Shannon first produced corundum-In2O3 under high pressure (65 kbar) and high temperature (1250 °C).178 Recently, it has been observed under more ambient conditions. Wang et al. were able to grow corundum-In2O3 by metal–organic chemical-vapor deposition (MOCVD) with careful control of growth temperature and trimethylindium flow rate and with a judicious choice of substrate (sapphire).179 It has also been produced in doped and undoped forms from solution sol–gel routes, such as the precipitation of corundum-In2O3180 and the co-precipitation of solid solutions of corundum-In2O3:(Sn,Fe).181,182 The direct band gap of In2O3 has been typically taken as 3.75 eV and 3.0 eV for the bixbyite and rhombohedral phases respectively. However, recent work by has shown the more common bixbyite phase to be closer to 2.93 (±0.15) eV.179,183
Nanocrystalline In2O3 films deposited by spray pyrolysis from In(acac)3 in ethanol/water at 400 °C have demonstrated 1450 S cm−1 with 23–37 cm2 (V s)−1 and 1020 carriers cm−3.109 Higher mobility was achieved by optimizing the spray nozzle distance, which influenced the degree of droplet evaporation and substrate cooling. H. S. Kim et al. prepared a TFT by solution deposition of a In2O3 channel layer.184 Films were spin-coated from solutions of InCl3 in 2-methoxyethanol with MEA and annealed at 400 °C. It was noted that a key enabler of the process was a proper MEA/In molar ratio, which optimized the semiconductor film microstructure. As the MEA/In ratio was increased to 7.5–10, the In2O3 (222) XRD-reflection disappeared and the growth orientation associated with higher carrier mobility (004) became predominant. Devices on a SiO2 gate dielectric exhibited reasonable field-effect responses (μ = 0.7 cm2 (V s)−1, on-to-off ratio of 106). Interestingly, when the ratio was increased further (10–15), additional InOOH impurities formed and device performance dropped. Many doped and alloyed TCO material systems are In2O3-based and are discussed in later sections.

4.2 Impurity-doped oxides
Impurity-doped SnO2, ZnO, and In2O3 compose a class of important transparent semiconducting oxides. Minami highlights the electronic properties for TCO films doped with various impurities.185 The following includes a survey of several doped TCO systems that have been deposited by or are promising for solution processing.

4.2.1 
            SnO2:(F,Sb). 

            SnO2 is most commonly anion-doped rather than cation-doped. Fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) exhibits an increase in carrier concentration (∼1021 cm−3) due to F− substitution for O2−. It also exhibits an increase in band gap (4.1 eV).37 Doping is achieved by addition of NH4F to the SnCl4 spray solution.165,164,186–188 The decomposition of NH4F takes place at low temperature (100 °C): (13)Agashe et al. deposited FTO films by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C from a 0.2M SnCl4·5H2O solution in water/methanol (1:9 vol) with NH4F added to produce a F/Sn of 150 at%.188 The actual incorporation of fluorine into the film was relatively low due to the high volatility of fluorine compounds produced during deposition. The conductivity, carrier concentration, and mobility were 3300 S cm−1, 6 × 1020 cm−3, and 35 cm2 (V s)−1 respectively. Higher conductivity (4700 S cm−1) was achieved by Elangovan et al. from a similar solution containing 15 wt% NH4F with SnCl2 used instead as the tin source.165
For comparison, typical PVD deposited FTO exhibits much lower conductivities of 200–1000 S cm−1.189,190 For PVD, CF4 gas is commonly used as the fluorine source. Reactions with CF4 in the plasma may lead to different doping mechanisms. Fluorocarbon radicals may form in the plasma and polymerize rather than contribute to effective doping.
Cation-doping SnO2 with antimony has also been demonstrated with the addition of SbCl3 to the solution. While F-doping tends to produce mobilities of 20–30 cm2 (V s)−1 independent of the NH4F concentration,165,191,192 Sb-doping results in a lower mobility (∼15 cm2 (V s)−1) that further decreases with increasing Sb content (>1.4 at% Sb).163,166


4.2.2 
            ZnO:(Al,Ga,In,Mg). 
Since the 1980's (Table 1), transparent conducting ZnO films have been prepared by impurity doping (typically 0.5–5 at%) with Group 13 elements such as Al, Ga, and In. In particular, aluminum-doped ZnO (AZO) has been solution deposited using Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O as the Zn source with AlCl3,77,79,81Al(NO3)3,79,80 and Al(OPri)3193 as Al sources in various alcohols or ethylene glycol. Monoethanolamine (MEA) and diethanolamine (DEA) are common additives. One of the highest conductivities reported for solution deposited AZO films was achieved by Tang and Cameron.79 Their coating solution consisted of Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O in anhydrous ethanol/methanol with AlCl3/Al(NO3)3·9H2O (0.8 at% Al/Zn). The solution was hydrolyzed by adding water and 5 wt% lactic acid. Films with conductivities of 1000–1400 S cm−1 and >90% transmittance were achieved by dip-coating and annealing at 450 °C under vacuum. For comparison, AZO prepared by rf-sputtering17 and PLD194 have demonstrated ∼5200 S cm−1 and ∼11700 S cm−1 respectively at 400 °C.185 Solution processing yielded both fewer carriers and a lower mobility.
Maldonado and de la Luz Olvera et al. have published repeatedly on the spray deposition of the doped-ZnO system.88,95–97 Solutions of 0.2M Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O or Zn(acac)2 were dissolved in a mixture of water/methanol/acetic acid (2.5:6.5:1 vol). TCOs were prepared by spray pyrolysis on glass substrates at 475 °C. Doping was performed by adding Ga, Al, and In salts (3 at%). Following a post-anneal under vacuum, the ZnO:Al and ZnO:Ga films improved conductivity to 500 S cm−1 and the ZnO:In films reached near 1000 S cm−1.88 They have also explored the effect of different indium compounds (In(CH3COO)3, InCl3, In(NO3)3·5H2O, and In2(SO4)3). While the choice of indium precursor did not dramatically affect the conductivity, it did influence the surface morphology and grain structure.97 No significant effect was observed with the narrow range of alcohols studied (methanol, ethanol, isopropanol).95 Solution processing towards In2O3–ZnO is discuss further in section 4.3.1.
Routes to ZnO and ZnMgO are interesting for hybrid organic photovoltaics. Poly(3-hexylthiophene)/ZnO nanorod devices fabricated from solution deposition have demonstrated improved efficiency when compared to planar bilayer configurations.195 Nucleation layers of ZnO were spin-coated onto the ITO using a Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O solution in 2-methoxyethanol with ethanolamine and annealing at 300 °C in air for 5 min. Then, ZnO nanorods were grown hydrothermally from the nucleation layer in a aqueous solution of Zn(NO3)2 adjusted to pH 13 with NaOH at 70 °C. Using a similar method, Zn0.75Mg0.25O film devices were fabricated by spin-coating from a solution of zinc and magnesium acetates.196 Substitution of Mg into ZnO reduced the band offset between the electron donor and acceptor materials and resulted in a significant increase in the open-circuit voltage (VOC). Independent tuning of the band gap with Mg-substitution and conductivity with conventional doping could potentially improve the efficiency and performance of photovoltaic and light-emitting devices.197 The demonstrated benefits of ZnO nanostructures and ZnMgO are promising. A combined solution route to ZnMgO nanostructures could help improve hybrid organic device performance.


4.2.3 
            In2O3:Sn. 

            Tin-doped In2O3 (ITO) is the current TCO workhorse for the majority of display and opto-electronic applications. Tahar et al. have reviewed the electronic properties for ITO deposited by a variety of PVD and solution techniques.198 ITO with conductivities up to 6800 S cm−1, carrier concentrations of 1021 cm−3, and mobilities of ∼40 cm2 (V s)−1 can be sputtered at 400 °C with 5–10 wt% Sn.199Table 4 highlights some select works for solution deposited ITO. The electronic properties of the solution deposited material closely approach those deposited by PVD, with similar carrier concentrations but lower mobilities. One of the highest observed conductivities was achieved by Seki et al.107 ITO was dip-coated in an ethanol solution of In(HCOO)3 and SnCl2·2H2O (6 at% Sn) with MEA. It is one of the few cases in the literature using an indium formate precursor. Their process required heating at 600 °C for 30 min after each coat for a total of 30 coats. The films were then heated at 600 °C for 1 h under N2–0.1%H2 for a maximum conductivity of 4760 S cm−1. While their process required several steps to build up a film due to the dip-coating process, it still demonstrates the potential of solution deposited ITO. The speed of methods like ultrasonic spray coating can significantly reduce deposition time and are worth consideration.
Table 4 Properties of ITO films deposited by various solution methods




Process
Precursors

σ (S cm−1)

μ (cm2 (V s)−1)

N (# cm−3)
Reference





Dip-coating

In and Sn 2-ethylhexanoate
250
⋯
⋯
T. Furusaki et al.200



Spin-coating


                      In(CH3COO)3 and SnCl4·5H2O
800
⋯
⋯

                      A.-C. Dippel et al.111



Dip-coating

In(NO3)3·3H2O and SnCl4
2360
⋯
⋯
T. Maruyama et al.201



Dip-coating


                      In(CH3COO)3 and Sn(OPri)4
3000
21
1 × 1021
Y. Takahashi et al.202



Dip-coating

InCl3·3.5H2O and SnCl2·2H2O
4000
30
9.1 × 1020
R. Ota et al.105



Dip-coating


                      In(HCOO)3 and SnCl2·2H2O
4760
28
1.0 × 1021
S. Seki et al.107




H. S. Kim et al. prepared a TFT by solution deposition of an amorphous ITO channel layer.203 Films were spin-coated from solutions of InCl3 and SnCl4 in 2-methoxyethanol with MEA and annealed at 200–250 °C. As the indium content of the film approached that of conducting ITO, the saturation mobility increased from 0.05 (10 at% In) to 2.21 cm2 (V s)−1 (70 at% In) with an on-to-off ratio of ∼105. Even higher contents (80–90 at% In) exhibited similar mobilities but with deteriorating on-to-off ratios (from 105 to 101).
ITO nanofibers were successfully prepared viaelectrospinning of a solution of ITO nanoparticles and polyethylene oxide and annealing at 400 °C.204 The PEO decomposed during annealing to yield ITO fibers with average diameter of 380 nm and length on the order of a millimetre.


4.2.4 
            In2O3:(Mo,Ti). 
A high mobility material facilitates dual applications: for increasing conductivity without impacting transparency and for widening the transparency window without reducing conductivity (recall that the carrier concentration is inversely related to the plasma wavelength). Doping In2O3 with molybdenum (IMO) instead of tin results in very high carrier mobility (80–130 cm2 (V s)−1) with transmittance (>80%) extending into the near infrared (400–2000 nm).27IMO with 0.4–6 at% Mo has a higher doping efficency in In2O3 compared to commercial ITO (10 at% Sn). Table 5 compares the electronic properties of IMO deposited by various methods.
Table 5 Properties of IMO films deposited by various methods




Year
Process


σ
 (S cm−1)

μ (cm2 (V s)−1)

N (# cm−3)

                      Mo Doping
Reference




2001
Thermal Reactive Evaporation
5800
130
2.6 × 1020
4 wt%
Y. Meng et al.27


2003

                      RF Sputtering
                    
1000
44
1.3 × 1020
4 wt%
Y. Yoshida et al.205


2004

Pulsed Laser Deposition

3000
95
1.9 × 1020
2 wt%
C. Warmsingh et al.206


2005
DC Sputtering
1700
20
5.2 × 1020
2 wt%
X. Li et al.207


2005
DC Sputtering
2700
50
1.9 × 1020
3 wt%
X. Li et al.208


2005

Spray Pyrolysis

1400
20
4.5 × 1020
1.25 at%
D. J. Seo et al.30


2006
RF Combinatorial Sputtering
5000
65
4.3 × 1020
4 at%
M. F. A. M. van Hest et al.209


2008

Spray Pyrolysis

550
77
1.8 × 1020
0.5 at%
S. Parthiban et al.210


2009

Spray Pyrolysis

2500
149
1 × 1020
0.5 at%
S. Parthiban et al.211




Recent work by Parthiban et al. demonstrated IMO deposited by spray pyrolysis with a surprisingly higher mobility (149 cm2 (V s)−1) than the best films deposited by PVD.211 Conductivies were comparable to sputtered material. Films were sprayed in air from an ethanol/water (1:3) solution of InCl3 and MoCl5 (0.5 at% Mo) onto glass at 400 °C and annealed in vacuum (10−2 Pa) at 550 °C for 45 min. Spraying at the decomposition temperature resulted in opaque films. Fig. 13a summarizes the electronic properties of the films. The high mobility may be attributed to:
 Fig. 13  (a) Variation of electrical properties of post-annealed sprayed IMO thin films as a function of Mo doping. (b) FE-SEM images of post-annealed IMO thin films 0, 0.5, 0.6 and 1 at%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright (2010) Elsevier. 
(a) Increased crystalline grain size and texturing (Fig. 13b). The grain size was the largest at 0.5 at% Mo and showed strong (222) orientation. When the doping was increased to 0.6 at%, the grain size decreased and orientation shifted to (400) texture.
(b) The Mo-doping level in the study was lower than in PVD materials (Table 5). It also used a Mo5+ starting material rather than the Mo6+ oxide used in PVD. Yoshida et al. noted that the activated dopant is not Mo6+ () but rather Mo4+ ().205 Thus, the relatively smaller Mo concentration and choice of oxidation state may have reduced the number of ionized and neutral impurity scattering centers which can inhibit mobility.
Another high mobility TCO is titanium-doped In2O3 (ITiO).25,213,214ITiO films (1–3 at% Ti) sputtered by van Hest et al. showed high conductivity (6300 S cm−1) and high mobility (>80 cm2 (V s)−1) with >85% transmittance.213 Films deposited by PLD exhibited mobilities up to 199 cm2 (V s)−1 with very high conductivities (10200 S cm−1).214 Given the success with IMO, ITiO is a promising candidate for solution processing. However, there has only been one reported instance of solution deposited ITiO to date. The material could be prepared by combining the chemistries for indium from IMO or IZO and for titanium from TiO2 (discussed next). Using such an approach, Martins et al. deposited ITiO films by spray pyrolysis from an ethanol/water solution of InCl3 and Ti(OPri)4 onto glass at 400 °C.32


4.2.5 
            TiO2:(Nb,Ta). 

            Titanium dioxide (TiO2), which exhibits a high index of refraction (∼2.5) and a band gap of ∼3.2 eV, is primarily used a white pigment in paints, sunscreen, and in graded high-index optical coatings.215 Its photocatalytic ability to purify air or water by the photo-degradation of organic molecules, as illustrated in Fig. 14, is well established.216–218 The material even has applications in dye-sensitized solar cells (Grätzel cells).219,220
 Fig. 14  Photocatalytic activity of TiO2. Highly reactive OH and O2 radicals, which can break down organic compounds, form on the TiO2 surface upon exposure to UV radiation in the presence of water and oxygen. 
Recent work by Furubayashi et al. in 2005 demonstrated the potential of Nb-doped anatase TiO2 (TNO) as a new high performance TCO.29 The contribution of ∼1 electron per Nb5+ ion at low doping levels (up to 6 at%) yielded high conductivity films by PLD (σ = 4300 S cm−1, N ∼ 1021 cm−3, μ ∼ 20 cm2 (V s)−1) with ∼90% transmittance. Similar behavior was observed and theorized for Ta-doped TiO2.221–223 The material is a dramatic deviation from conventional TCO compositions (Fig. 1). Currently, there is great interest in non-indium based TCOs because of the high price of indium. Fig. 2 shows the rarity of indium in comparison to titanium. Indium, which composes 90 at% metals in commercial ITO, cost $500/kg in 2009. Compare this to the cost of titanium at <$0.53/kg, which makes up 95 at% metals in TNO, and the industrial driver is obvious.224

            TiO2 crystallizes in three polymorphs: anatase, brookite, and rutile. Each phase consists of TiO6 octahedra sharing either four edges (anatase), three edges and a corner (brookite), or two edges and two corners (rutile). Anatase and brookite transform into rutile when heated to 700–900 °C. The phases are distinguishable by XRD and Raman spectroscopy.225–228 For TCO applications, the anatase phase is desired because it allows for higher conductivity. The effective electron mass in anatase () is significantly lower than in rutile (), which accounts for the experimentally observed higher mobility of anatase over rutile. The effective mass also exhibits a large anisotropy in anatase, being 4–10 times larger along the c-axis than along the a-axis.229–232 Fortuitous for TCO applications, Nb- and Ta-doping has been observed to inhibited the anatase-to-rutile phase transformation for both PVD and solution deposition methods, stabilizing the higher mobility phase in addition to introducing electronic carriers.233,234
A quick history of the deposition of TNO reveals the potential of a solution route. As shown in Fig. 15 from Yamada et al., growing high conductivity anatase presents a problem for PVD methods because the low PO2 region needed for high carrier concentrations is also a region where the undesired rutile phase forms.233 The first solution to this problem was to deposit by PLD (σ = 4300 S cm−1)29 or sputtering (σ = 3000 S cm−1)222 onto single crystal substrates such as SrTiO3 and LaAlO3, which are lattice matched to anatase TiO2. However, lattice matched substrates are not practical for industrial applications. TCOs need to be deposited onto less expensive glass or plastic substrates. The next approach was to sputter an anatase seed layer onto glass at high PO2 and then grow high conductivity material on top under low PO2 (σ = 900 S cm−1).233 The third approach was to PLD amorphous material onto glass and then transform it into anatase with a reducing H2 anneal (σ = 2200 S cm−1).235 This last route demonstrated that anatase TNO could be prepared with a respectable conductivity via an amorphous intermediate. This is a critical result and is promising for the solution deposition of this system because solution processing also inherently goes through an amorphous stage before crystallization. Thus, TiO2:Nb may be the next potential success story for solution deposited TCOs, following in the footsteps of SnO2:F, if it can cross the 103 S cm−1 mark.
 Fig. 15  
              Growth parameter-based phase diagram of Ti0.94Nb0.06O2 film on (a) LAO(100) and (b) SiO2/Si substrates. Circle, cross, and triangle symbols denote pure anatase phase, pure rutile phase, and mixture of anatase and rutile phases respectively. The films were sputtered under a total pressure Ptot of 1.0 Pa. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233. Copyright (2009) American Institute of Physics. 
The literature on the solution deposition of TiO2 is quite extensive. Detailed reviews on solution routes to various TiO2 nanostructures are given by Chen and Mao236 and by Zhang and Cao.174 Samuneva et al. have identified the gel-formation, stable sol, and phase separation regions for the Ti(OBun)4–C2H5OH–H2O system.237 Phase-pure TiO2 nanoparticles in anatase, rutile, and brookite structures can be synthesized using amorphous TiO2 as a common starting material.238–240 The general reaction scheme is shown in Fig. 16. Anatase synthesis was generally achieved in solutions with pH > 1, where the amorphous TiO2 is insoluble. At lower pH values using HCl, the TiO6 are rendered soluble and can rearrange. This dissolution-precipitation mechanism yielded rutile and brookite. In general, the more dispersed the octahedra, the more likely they can corner-share rather than edge-share, forming rutile.§ Yin et al. also found that pure rutile phase could be directed with the addition of citric acid, which can chelate to and further disperse the octahedra.239 Reyes-Coronado et al. propose that rutile and brookite form via different chloro-complexes with chlorolysis-oxolation yielding brookite in the presence of the asymmetric [Ti(OH)2Cl(OH2)3]+ complex and rutile (itself higher symmetry) forming in the presence of the symmetric [Ti(OH)2Cl4]2− complex at higher HCl concentrations. In summary, the TiO2 phase can be directed for various applications. For the preparation of anatase TNO films, one should catalyze sol–gel reactions at a pH > 1.
 Fig. 16  
              TiO2 polymorphs and reaction schemes for the formation of phase-pure TiO2 materials. Adapted from ref. 239. 
Titanium alkoxides and chloride are typically precursors for TiO2. The former is more commonly used in deposition methods where it is important to control viscosity and rheology for dense coating or patterning because of the ability to tune its gelation. In one application, a titanium sub-oxide (TiOx) sol–gel prepared by refluxing Ti(OPri)4 in 2-methoxyethanol with ethanolamine was spin coated onto organic field-effect transistors.241 Devices demonstrated enhanced lifetimes, which was attributed to the TiOx serving as a barrier layer to and scavenger of deleterious H2O and O2. More complex alkoxides also exist. Yamamoto and Kambara published in 1957 on the properties of titanium dialkoxide bis-acetylacetonate and bis(ethyl-acetoacetate) compounds, many of which are orange liquids at room temperature.113 Of these, commercially available Ti(OPri)2(acac)2 (depicted in Fig. 17a) has been used for solution preparation of functional oxides. Duoss et al. prepared a direct-write TiO2 ink from Ti(OPri)2(acac)2 in ethanol by addition of H2O and NH4OH as a base catalyst and heating for 12 h at 80 °C.242 Polyvinly-pyrrolidone was added to tune the rheology, and the ink was fed through a micronozzle to direct-write a 3D micro-array with sub-micron features (Fig. 17d). The ink quickly dried leaving solid filaments and transformed to anatase TiO2 at 450–600 °C. One can imagine applications in direct-write TCO-patterned electronics using similar formulations modified with the simple addition of dopant precursors for TNO or other TCO materials. Alternatively, anatase TiO2 thin-films have been deposited at temperatures as low as 250 °C from aqueous titanium-peroxo solutions using ammonium bis(oxalato)oxotitanate or titanium oxysulfate and H2O2.243,244 Under acidic conditions, aging lead to gel formation and dense films (87% of single-crystal).
 Fig. 17  (a) Molecular structure of the Ti(OPri)2(acac)2 precursor, R = CH(CH3)2. (b) Image of the initial precursor solution (left) and ink after solvent evaporation (right). (c) Ink viscosity as a function of increasing solids content, defined as Ti+PVP (in wt%). Shaded region indicates printing regime for a 1 μm nozzle. (c, inset) Both the initial precursor solution (open squares, Ti+PVP = 6.6 wt%) and printable ink (filled squares, Ti+PVP = 23.4 wt%) exhibit Newtonian flow behavior. (d) Focused ion beam (FIB)-milled cross-section of the TiO2 structure shown after calcining at 715 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright (2007) John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Alquier et al. provide several different ways of preparing Nb2O5 gels.245 Commercial Nb precursors are almost exclusively NbCl5 and Nb(OEt)5 (a clear liquid at room temperature). While the chloride is almost half as expensive, it is prone to forming chloroalkoxides upon addition to an alcohol (a common solution processing solvent, especially if used in conjunction with Ti alkoxides). Chloride is a contaminate if not fully removed. Undesirable photoreduction of Nb5+ to Nb4+ (blue color) or Nb3+ (purple color) is also observed with these chloroalkoxides. These may adversely affect the doping efficiency and electronic properties of the TNO. Using the ethoxide avoids these potential complications.
Like much of the TiO2 literature, current solution preparation of TiO2:(Nb,Ta) is focused on nanopowders for catalysis and sensor applications234,246–250 rather than films for TCO applications.251 Traversa et al. prepared TiO2:(Nb,Ta) powders by the addition of Ti(OPri)4, Nb(OEt)5, and Ta(OEt)5 to a solution of ethanol/water and firing of the precipitate at 400–1050 °C for 2 h.234 Precursor decomposition occurred at 260 °C. Crystallization occurred at 400–440 °C. Phase-pure anatase remained up to 850 °C for 5 at% Nb and 10 at% Ta and up to only 650 °C for 10 at% Nb. Sensors screen printed from the doped powders showed increased sensitivity to CO in dry and wet air.
One of the few cases in the literature of solution-deposited anatase TNO films with TCO applications in mind is presented by Zhao et al.251HCl and H2O were added to a solution of NbCl5 in ethanol, which was then combined with a solution of Ti(OBun)4 in ethanol. The 6 at% Nb solution was dip-coated onto glass substrates with drying in air at 100 °C between coats. Annealing in air at 550 °C for 1 h yielded insulating polycrystalline anatase films. Subsequent annealing in vacuum (10−4 Pa) at 550 °C produced more conductive (σ = 0.05 S cm−1, N ∼ 1017 cm−3, μ ∼ 1 cm2 (V s)−1) films with ∼75% transmittance. Unfortunately, the electrical properties are significantly worse than films prepared by PLD and sputtering (σ ∼ 103 S cm−1, N ∼ 1021 cm−3, μ ∼ 10 cm2 (V s)−1). While the lower mobility of the solution-deposited TNO may be attributed to the degree of polycrystallinity, its carrier concentration is four orders of magnitude lower than PVD TNO. Further work in the solution-deposited TNO community should focus on addressing this problem of poor doping efficiency. Here we identified three possible causes and solutions:
(a) The film may not have been annealed at a sufficiently low PO2. Incorporation of Nb into TiO2 can result in both electronic (eqn (14)) and ionic (eqn (15)) compensation:223,252–256 (14) (15)These equations are interrelated by an equilibrium defect reaction (eqn (16)), which reveals a dependency on PO2 as to whether doping results in ionic defects versus electronic carriers dominating: (16)Titanium vacancies dominate at high PO2 while electrons dominate at low PO2. Annealing under forming gas or H2 should increase electronic carrier concentration.
(b) Zhao et al. proposed that solution processing may be prone to the formation of “electron killer” defects (VTi, Oi).
(c) The Nb precursor preparation route used by Zhao et al. can proceed through a chloroalkoxide and may suffer from the problems associate with this intermediate as previously discussed. Use of Nb(OEt)5 would resolve this concern. Likewise, the addition of acid and water to the Nb precursor solution could have initiated Nb–O–Nb bonding before introduction to the Ti solution and thereby inhibit atomic mixing and substitutional doping. Adding the water and acid after combining both precursors would eliminate this concern.

4.3 Binary systems

4.3.1 
            In2O3–ZnO. 
The In2O3–ZnO (IZO) system exhibits various crystalline and amorphous regions across its composition space. Taylor et al. used combinatorial sputtering to examine how the material properties of IZO change with metals content (Fig. 18a).47,48 First, a ZnO crystalline phase forms at indium contents less than ∼55 at%. Next, the system is amorphous between ∼55 and ∼85 at% In. The material is the most conductive (peaking at ∼3000 S cm−1) and the smoothest (RRMS < 0.4 nm) in this amorphous region. It is thought that depositing these two structurally different metal oxides at low temperature results in a structural frustration that produces the amorphous phase. The term amorphous is used here to refer to a non-crystalline solid with no long-range order. In addition to amorphous material, the In2O3–ZnO system can also form a series of homologous crystalline compounds of ZnkIn2Ok+3 for k = 1 to k = 29.257,258 They are composed of intermittent layers of InO−2 in a ZnO matrix, where the spacing between InO−2-layers increases with k. Lastly, compositions above 85% In yield a crystalline phase based on In2O3.
 Fig. 18  A comparison of the phase and electronic properties of In2O3–ZnO deposited by PVD and solution methods as a function of composition. (a) The conductivity, surface roughness, and index of refraction for IZO combinatorially sputtered at 100 °C by Taylor et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 Copyright (2008) John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) The resistivity, carrier concentration, and Hall mobility of solution deposited IZO films annealed at 650 °C by B.-O. Park and colleagues. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright (2005) Elsevier. (c) The mobility and hysteresis of solution deposited IZO TFTs annealed at 550 °C by Banger et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2011) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials. 
Amorphous IZO exhibits several unique properties:
(a) While sputtering IZO requires high vacuum, high conductivity material can be deposited at ambient temperatures and exhibits amorphous structural stability up to 600 °C.47
(b) a-IZO films with conductivity >2000 S cm−1 can be grown for metal compositions ranging from ∼60 to ∼85 at% In provided that a corresponding optimized oxygen level is used in the deposition.46 Thus, controlling the oxygen partial pressure during thermal processing may be critical in obtaining highly conductive a-IZOvia a solution route over a range of compositions. Lowering the required amount of indium can reduce materials cost.
(c) a-IZO exhibits a thermal- and photo-activated conductivity transformation. By controlling oxygen during deposition, both highly conductive (103 S cm−1) and highly resistive (10−5 S cm−1) can be produced. However, the properties of resistive IZO are unstable. Resistive IZO becomes persistently conductive after exposure to ultraviolet light.259 More surprising, it shows a persistent factor of 107 increase in conductivity after annealing in air for days at 120 °C to minutes at 170 °C.260
(d) a-IZO films are reported to have smaller compressive stresses, smoother surfaces, and superior wet etch properties compared to polycrystalline ITO films.261,262 These criteria are important for TFT, display, and organic light-emitting diode applications.
(e) Conductive a-IZO has recently demonstrated better resistance to degradation at 85 °C/85% relative humidity compared to ZnO.263 This is an important property for photovoltaic applications, as the performance of thin-film solar cell materials is sensitive to water.
Solution deposition of the IZO system has mostly focused on the crystalline phases. Wienke and Booij deposited conductive In-doped ZnO in a single-step spray pyrolysis approach.84,85 A 0.2M Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O solution in a water/isopropanol mixture (2:3 vol) with In(CH3COO)3 added as a dopant (1–5 at% In) was ultrasonically sprayed onto glass substrates heated at 370 °C. A maximum conductivity of 345 S cm−1 with a mobility of 12.5 cm2 (V s)−1 and carrier concentration of 1.7 × 1020 cm−3 was achieved using 3 at% In. It is interesting to note that such a conductive TCO was produced solely during deposition and did not require any post-processing. They also observed that spraying on top of a nucleation layer of intrinsic ZnO (i-ZnO) resulted in more columnar growth with improved transmittance in the visible spectrum. Fig. 19 compares the film morphologies of the sprayed ZnO:In films with and without the nucleation layer.
 Fig. 19  
              SEM cross-section of ZnO:In (a) and (i-ZnO)/ZnO:In (b) films spray deposited by Wienke and Booij. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2008) Elsevier. 
Byung-Ok Park and colleagues incrementally explored the whole composition range utilizing a modified sol–gel approach.82–83 Solutions of Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O and In(NO3)3·3H2O in 2-methoxyethanol with MEA as a stabilizer were stirred at 40 °C for 24 h and aged 2 days prior to spin-coating. After deposition, the film was dried at 350 °C for 10 min and the process repeated six times for a final thickness of 100–200 nm. Then, the films were annealed at 650 °C for 30 min. Compared to Wienke and Booij's single-step spray pyrolysis method, the Park group's spin-coat process required several more processing steps and took a significantly longer amount of time. Fig. 18b shows the electronic properties of the final films obtained by Park's group. Interestingly, they explored IZO compositions at 20, 33, 50, 66, and 80 at% In. However, only crystalline IZO was formed due to the high annealing temperatures used. Therefore, the highly conductive amorphous phase was never observed. Instead, the conductivity was highest (∼670 S cm−1) at compositions closer to 50 at% In, around which the homologous compounds of ZnkIn2Ok+3 were observed.83 Secondary anneals were also performed in O2, N2, and N2–5%H2 at 500 °C for 30 min. Annealing under reducing atmospheres only slightly increased carrier concentration but reduced mobility, resulting in no net change in conductivity. Annealing under O2 resulted in a decrease in carrier concentration and conductivity.
The solution deposited IZO films discussed thus far have only pertained to crystalline material. However, given its superior conductivity and unique properties, one of the Holy Grails of TCO research is a low-temperature, solution route to amorphous IZO. Pasquarelli et al. have demonstrated amorphous/nanocrystalline IZO films prepared by ultrasonic spray deposition from formate precursors with annealing at 300–400 °C.106,264 Solutions consisted of In(HCOO)2(OH) and Zn(HCOO)2·2H2O in a methanol-water-acid (6:1:0.2 vol) mixture. Films were amorphous at indium contents as low as 40 at% but with low conductivities of <50 S cm−1. Carrier concentrations were consistent with sputtered IZO (1020–1021 cm−3). However, the mobility (∼1 cm2 (V s)−1) was at least an order of magnitude lower, which was attributed to porosity and poor film microstructure. It was also demonstrated that the decomposition products could be directed toward oxidation or reduction (even to metallic indium) by controlling the decomposition atmosphere or with a judicious choice of solution acid additives.
Choi et al. successfully prepared a TFT by solution deposition of an a-IZO channel layer.86 Films were spin-coated from solutions of Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O and In(CH3COO)3 (50 at% In) in 2-methoxyethanol and annealed in air at 500 °C). Due to the insolubility of In(CH3COO)3 in the solvent, DEA and acetylacetone were added to stabilize the precursor solution. Devices exhibited field-effect mobilities up to 7.3 cm2 (V s)−1 with an excellent on-to-off ratio of ∼107. Similarly, D.-H. Lee et al. inkjet printed and spin-coated a-IZO channel layer TFTs from a solution of ZnCl2 and InCl3 (50 at% In) in acetonitrile with an ambient atmosphere anneal at 600 °C for 1 h.265 While this temperature may be excessive for many applications, the resulting IZO layer was amorphous by electron diffraction and devices achieved higher field-effect mobilities (7.4 cm2 (V s)−1 when inkjet printed and 16.1 cm2 (V s)−1 when spin-coated). One should note that neither of the IZO films used in these TFTs were prepared at the 70–80 at% In composition characteristic of highly conductive a-IZO.
As shown by the above examples, traditional solution precursors tend to require high-temperature processing (>250 °C). Low-temperature precursors to IZO enable applications utilizing temperature-sensitive materials such as plastic substrates. Banger et al. have recently demonstrated a low-temperature, solution-processed a-IZO TFT using a ‘sol–gel on a chip’ process and a novel molecular indium precursor, In5O(OPri)13.120Thermogravimetric analysis of the precursor showed a decomposition temperature of 204 °C. For more information on this precursor and its class of oxo-alkoxides, the reader is directed to section 6. Given the precursors’ sensitivity to moisture, anhydrous solutions of In5O(OPri)13 and Zn(OC2H4OCH3)2 in methoxyisopropanol/2-methoxyethanol were prepared and spin-coated under a N2 glovebox atmosphere. Films were then annealed in air at 45–50% relative humidity. Devices achieved field-effect mobilities of 7–12 cm2 (V s)−1 at very low processing temperatures (230–275 °C), and an array of 49 TFTs showed good device uniformity and yield. Fig. 20 shows the TEM cross-sectional image of a TFT device with an amorphous IZO channel layer.
 Fig. 20  
High-resolution TEM cross-sectional image of a TFT device with a solution deposited IZO channel layer. Inset shows no lattice fringes, indicating amorphous material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2011) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials. 
These latter highlighted examples from the literature only focused on utilizing a-IZO for the channel layer in TFTs, where semiconducting material is required. Little attention has been given in the literature to producing and studying highly conductive solution deposited a-IZO films for collection layers.


4.3.2 
            ZnO–SnO2. 
Solution processed zinc tin oxide (ZTO) TFTs have been demonstrated.266–268 Typical formulations use Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O with tin chlorides or acetates in 2-methoxyethanol and require processing above 400 °C to yield the amorphous oxide phase. It is interesting to note that amorphous material, confirmed by XRD and TEM, has been produced with processing up to 500 °C.


4.3.3 CdO–SnO2. 

            Cadmium stannate (Cd2SnO4) is a TCO used in CdTe photovoltaics. It has been deposited by spray pyrolysis from aqueous solutions of acetate and halide precursors at 400–950 °C.13,269,270 Films sprayed from Cd(CH3COO)2 formed crystalline Cd2SnO4 at 500 °C with a maximum conductivity of 280 S cm−1; whereas, films sprayed at 450 °C were amorphous.269 Nozik and Haacke claim crystalline films with >1000 S cm−1 by spray pyrolysis from aqueous SnBr4 and CdBr2 at 950 °C and amorphous material at 600 °C.13 For comparison, sputtered Cd2SnO4 has exhibited conductivities as high as 7800 S cm−1.271 Cd-containing TCOs are generally not preferred due to the toxicity of Cd.

4.4 Ternary systems

4.4.1 
            In2O3–Ga2O3–ZnO. 
As discussed in section 4.3.1, a-IZO exhibits a thermal- and photo-activated conductivity transformation. While this transition is beneficial for conducting thin film applications, the instability of resistive a-IZO inhibits the fabrication of TFTs. However, indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) does not exhibit this instability and has thus been a choice material for TFT channel layers. Therefore, many researchers have by-passed the solution deposition of a-IZO for a-IGZO. The only chemistry difference between the two materials the addition of a gallium precursor. Fig. 21 summarizes the phases and electronic properties of the In2O3–Ga2O3–ZnO system. IGZO typically employed in TFTs (In:Ga:Zn = 1:1:1) is amorphous with an electron mobility of ∼10 cm2 (V s)−1.
 Fig. 21  The amorphous formation region (top) and Hall mobility and carrier concentrations (bottom) in the In2O3–Ga2O3–ZnO system. The thin films were deposited on a glass substrate by pulsed laser deposition (PO2 = 1 Pa). Numbers in the parenthesis denote carrier electron concentration (×1018 cm−3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright (2006) Elsevier. 
Recently, G. H. Kim et al. reported on the formation mechanism of a solution-processed, nanocrystalline IGZO thin film in a TFT.31 Solutions of Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Ga(NO3)3·xH2O, and In(NO3)3·xH2O in 2-methoxymethanol with MEA and acetic acid were stirred at 60 °C for 1 h and aged for 24 h. Films were then spin-coated and annealed at 450 °C for 1 h. Decomposition occurred at 60–130 °C, with InGaZn2O5 forming at 196 °C and crystallization occurring at 305–420 °C. Nanocrystalline IGZO devices achieved a mobility of ∼1 cm2 (V s)−1 with an on-to-off ratio of 106. Incorporation of Ga into the InZnO compound system resulted in a decrease in the carrier concentration of the films.272 It is thought that the Ga ions form a stronger chemical bond with oxygen compared to the Zn and In ions, thus acting as a carrier suppressor.
Jeong et al. examined the role of Ga-addition in lowering the processing temperature for spin-coated amorphous IGZO TFTs.273 A similar formulation to G. H. Kim et al. was employed but films were deposited at lower temperatures (250–400 °C) to yield the amorphous phase. IZO (In:Zn = 70:30), GZO (Ga:Zn = 10:90), and IGZO (In:Ga:Zn = x:10:(90-x) where x = 63, 58, and 23) films were studied (Fig. 22). TFTs based on IZO and IGZO films annealed at 400 °C exhibited good field-effect characteristics (∼1 cm2 (V s)−1). However, when the films were annealed at 300 and 250 °C, the IGZO-based TFTs operated while the corresponding IZO-based TFTs were inactive. Inactivity was attributed to the presence of hydroxides, and Ga-addition was found to reduce their amount. In general, while the addition of Ga had the negative effect of reducing the field-effect mobility, it had the beneficial effect of reducing the required processing temperature for amorphous oxide formation.
 Fig. 22  Field-effect electron mobilities of transistors based on solution deposited IGZO films with the indicated In compositions (In:Ga:Zn = x:10:(90-x)) as well as for IZO and GZO films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright (2010) John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
The reader may notice an overlap between the crystalline IGZO region reported by G. H. Kim et al. (305–420 °C) and the amorphous IGZO region reported by Jeong et al. (250–400 °C). Though these authors do not specifically discuss this apparent contradiction, it can be addressed by a comparison of their compositions and methods. Principally, these two works examined significantly different IGZO compositions. The In:Ga ratio used by Kim et al. was fixed at 1:1, but the ratios used by Jeong et al. ranged from 2:1 to 6:1. These materials are not the same and care should be taken in drawing direct comparisons. Second, readers should note that the reported crystallization range by Kim et al. was defined by a DSC exotherm for the sol. The onset temperature of crystallization was never defined for the thin films. Conversely, the amorphous nature of the IGZO reported by Jeong et al. was only in the context of thin films. Thin films can exhibit different phase stability regions compared to bulk material and powders.
In an interesting demonstration of the capabilities of solution processing, S. K. Park et al. prepared all-solution-processed, high-resolution bottom-contact TFTs using a simple surface patterning and dip-coating process.274 The process is depicted in Fig. 23a for the Ag nanoparticle source/drain electrodes and the sol–gel processed IGZO semiconductor layer. The IGZO solution formulation was similar to that of Jeong et al. with an In:Ga:Zn = 3:1:6. Ethanol was added to a commercial Ag nanoparticle solution (Ag nanoparticles dispersed in an ethylene glycol/ethanol mixture) to produce the appropriate viscosity and polarity for wetting. Patterning was achieved using a self-assembled monolayer of octadecyl-trichlorosilane (OTS). Exposure to deep UV light induced a photochemical reaction in the OTS which rendered the patterned surfaces hydrophilic. The deposited Ag nanoparticle and IGZO solutions were directed into the desired hydrophilic areas due to their lower surface energy, resulting in patterned electrode and semiconducting structures. Fig. 23b and c show the resulting patterned electrodes. After deposition, the films were annealed at 300 °C for 1 h. Fig. 24a and b show images and a schematic of the final IGZO TFTs. The devices demonstrated 10 μm channel lengths with field-effect mobilities up to 0.2 cm2 (V s)−1 and an on-to-off ratio of 106. One could also invision inkjet printing similar TFT structures using IGZO and Ag precursor inks. Solutions of Ag trifluoroacetate in ethylene glycol printed onto heated substrates (∼200 °C) have directly yielded highly conductive Ag lines.38,275,276
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic diagram of TFT process flow, (b) optical microscope images, and (c) confocal microscope images of nanoparticulate Ag electrodes printed by surface patterning and simple dip-casting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright (2009) IOP Publishing Ltd. 
 Fig. 24  (a) Optical microscope images of solution processed IGZO TFTs from dip-coated nanoparticulate Ag electrode and IGZO solution with 10 μm channel length and (b) schematic diagram of bottom-contact IGZO TFT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright (2009) IOP Publishing Ltd. 


4.4.2 
            ZnO–In2O3–SnO2. 
Another candidate for TFT applications is zinc indium tin oxide (ZITO). Recently, solution-processed amorphous ZnIn4Sn4O15 has demonstrated field-effect mobilities exceeding 10 or even 100 cm2 (V s)−1 depending upon the gate dielectric used.277 These reported mobilities are an order of magnitude higher than those reported for solution deposited IZO and IGZO TFTs. Typical formulations use Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O with indium and tin chlorides in 2-methoxyethanol and require processing above 400 °C to yield the amorphous oxide phase.

4.5 p-Type systems

4.5.1 
            NiO
          . 

            NiO is a p-type intrinsic oxide that exhibits electrochromism. It is often non-stoichiometric with an excess of oxygen. Since extra oxygen cannot be accommodated in its rock salt crystal structure, Ni2+ vacancies () are instead created, resulting in hole formation via: (17)As a result of this Ni-deficiency, holes can interact with adjacent Ni2+ ions to produce Ni3+ ions (), resulting in a change in coloration via: (18)NiO is a common anodic oxide-based electrochromic material that changes from a transparent to a colored state upon extraction of H+ or insertion of OH− ions, transforming hydrated NiO into hydroxide and oxy-hydroxide phases on grain surfaces.278 Several reaction mechanisms have been proposed to describe this transition, including the Bode reaction scheme279 and intercalation.278,280,281

            NiO films have been sprayed,282,283 spin-coated,284,285 and dip-coated286–288 from solutions of NiCl2·6H2O,282,283,286 Ni(CH3COO)2·4H2O,284,285,287,288 Ni(NO3)2·6H2O,282 Ni(OH)2·6H2O,282 and NiSO4·4H2O.282 Solutions can be coated directly or after preparation of a sol–gel in 2-methoxyethanol with HCl as a catalyst.287,288Amines like ammonia,284ethanolamine,285 and ethylenediamine289,290 can be used as complexing agents. Films are typically annealed at 350–450 °C. Bernède and colleagues explored NiO films deposited by spray pyrolysis at 350 °C using different precursor solutions and processing conditions. Films exhibited p-type conductivity of 10−4–10−2 S cm−1.282
Bulk-heterojunction OPV devices often employ a hole transport layer (HTL) to modulate the interface between the TCO electrode and the active layer. The HTL aids in charge extraction by allowing hole transport but blocking electron transport. NiO is a promising candidate to replace traditional PEDOT:PSS HTLs.291 Solution-deposited NiO films were explored for this application.290 Films were spin-coated from a solution of Ni formate ethylenediamine289 and annealed at 250 °C. The NiO device exhibited lower series resistance and increased fill factor when compared to solar cells with PEDOT:PSS.


4.5.2 
            NiCo2O4. 

            NiCo2O4 is a p-type spinel oxide of the form AB2O4 or A1−xBxO4/3. The material has been spin-coated from solutions of Co(NO3)2·6H2O and Ni(NO3)2·6H2O in water/glycine for deposition on fused silica and sapphire and in ethanol/malonic acid for deposition on silicon.292 The films were annealed in air at 350–450 °C for 10 min to form the oxide. Fig. 25 compares the resistivity of the solution-deposited films to sputtered material.293 Resistivity decreases (conductivity increases) as x decreases from a value of 1.0 (Co3O4) down to 0.67 (NiCo2O4) for solution-deposited films or from a value of 1.0 to 0.5 (Ni1.5Co1.5O4) for sputtered films. These compositions correspond to maximums in conductivity: ∼17 S cm−1 and ∼333 S cm−1 for the solution-deposited and sputtered films respectively. It was found that at compositions with x < 0.67 for solution-deposited films or x < 0.5 for sputtered films, the spinel structure could no longer accommodate all of the Ni ions and phase separation of NiO occurred, which lowered the overall conductivity. For reasons that are not yet clear, more Ni ions were stabilized in the spinel lattice when they were introduced by sputtering than by solution processing.293
 Fig. 25  Resistivity of solution-deposited and sputtered Ni1−xCoxO4/3 films as a function of x. Reprinted with permission from ref. 293. Copyright (2002) Elsevier. 


4.5.3 
            CuCrO2:Mg. 
Undoped CuCrO2 is a p-type delafossite oxide with moderate conductivity (∼1 S cm−1). Its conductivity can be increased by doping with magnesium. CuCr0.95Mg0.05O2 sputtered at 400–700 °C has demonstrated 220 S cm−1 at 30% transmittance and ∼1 S cm−1 at 40% transmittance for 200–300 nm thick fims.294 Lim et al. have reported on CuCr0.93Mg0.07O2 deposited by spray pyrolysis in air.295 Solutions consisted of Cu, Cr, and Mg acetylacetonates in isopropanol/water. As-deposited films contained a mixture of spinel CuCr2O4 and delafossite CuCrO2 phases due to reactions of CuO and Cu2O with Cr2O3: CuO + Cr2O3 → CuCr2O4(19) Cu2O + Cr2O3 → 2CuCrO2(20)Single phase delafossite CuCrO2 was achieved by annealing at ≥700 °C in Ar. Post-annealed films showed high visible transmittance (≥80%) at 0.6–1 S cm−1. The solution-deposited CuCrO2:Mg exhibited higher transmittance but lower conductivity compared to the sputtered material.
The reader may recall that in section 2.1.2 the relationship between conductivity and oxygen partial pressure was presented, which indicated the use of an oxygen-poor atmosphere for the production of n-type materials. Following this simple model, one should expect annealing under an oxygen-rich atmosphere to be favorable for p-type materials. However, the synthesis conditions described immediately above include an Ar (oxygen-poor) anneal to obtain p-type behavior. This is because for Cu-based materials one must also consider the effect of oxygen partial pressure on the Cu oxidation state and its effect on phase formation reactions. Oxidation of copper(I) oxide particles in an oxygen-rich atmosphere can result in surface conversion or even complete conversion into copper(II) oxide. However, as shown in eqn (20), it is only copper(I) oxide that yields the desired delafossite CuCrO2 phase. Additionally, elimination of oxygen drives the following equilibrium reactions towards CuCrO2:296 Cu2O + 2CuCr2O4 → 4CuCrO2 + ½O2(g)(21) 2Cu2O + Cr2O3 + 2CuCr2O4 → 6CuCrO2 + ½O2(g)(22)Thus, an oxygen-poor rather than oxygen-rich atmosphere is required to prevent Cu oxidation and for favorable delafossite phase formation in order to obtain p-type behavior in these systems.

5 Outlook and emerging systems
Recently, there has been a strong push in the TC community towards low-temperature deposition due to the temperature sensitivity of certain optoelectronic devices during processing. Low-temperature is not only required for the deposition of back contacts onto plastic substrates, but also for the deposition of front contacts and channels onto sensitive device architectures. The solution deposition of TCOs will require the development of low-temperature precursors and processing conditions to meet this demand. Given the emergence of flexible plastic devices and the high cost of indium, great efforts have been made to develop new transparent conductors, such as metallic nanowire networks, graphene, and carbon nanotubes, to replace crystalline and indium-based TCOs all together. This section provides an outlook into these emerging systems and closes with a proposal on the potential of engineerable TC composites.
5.1 Novel precursor systems
Novel solution precursor systems for TCOs include compounds with low decomposition temperatures and heterometallic single-source compounds. Traditional oxide precursors tend to produce crystalline material and require high temperature processing (>250 °C) for conductive material. However, lower decomposition temperatures (<200 °C) are desired for certain opto-electronic applications, such as deposition on polymer substrates for flexible electronics or organic photovoltaics. Certain inorganic photovoltaic materials such as CIGS also exhibit sensitivity to high temperatures. Additionally, the ability to form amorphous oxides is important given the strong push in the community towards amorphous TCO materials. All these applications are facilitated by the development of low-temperature precursors.
Several low-temperature ZnO precursors exist. One choice is the metal–organic compound diethylzinc (Section 7). Exposing the material to air or a controlled humidity environment results in the formation of ZnO at ∼110 °C. ZnO films for organic photovoltaic devices have been deposited from diethylzinc in toluene/THF.98 An alternative class of low-temperature ZnO precursors is based on zinc ammine and hydroxy nitrate compounds (Section 3.1.7). Decomposition of these compounds and ZnO crystallization occur at <150 °C. As highlighted in section 4.1.2, Meyers et al. was able to successfully employ zinc ammine hydroxide as a solution precursor for the channel layer in a TFT.101
Low-temperature In2O3 precursors are rare. In5O(OPri)13 is a promising candidate (Section 6) with a low decomposition temperature of ∼200 °C and crystallization of In2O3 occurring above 300 °C.119,120 The temperature window between decomposition and crystallization may allow for processing regimes for both amorphous and crystalline TCO materials. As highlighted in section 4.3, Banger et al. have recently demonstrated a low-temperature, solution-processed a-IZO TFT using In5O(OPri)13.120
An alternative approach to low-temperature precursor selection is to employ conventional precursors in a combustion synthesis approach. The combustion process is highly exothermic compared to conventional endothermic decomposition. The principle advantage of combustion synthesis for thin-film device manufacturing is that this localized internal heating eliminates the need for high temperatures externally applied with a furnace. The required processing temperature serves instead as a reaction initiator rather than a temperature that must be applied to achieve and to maintain decomposition and phase formation. M.-G. Kim et al. have demonstrated fabrication of In2O3, IZO, ITO, and ZTO TFTs at temperatures as low as 200 °C using combustion synthesis with metal nitrates as oxidizers and acetylacetone/urea as a fuel.297 As shown in Fig. 26, lower applied temperatures are required for full decomposition and characteristic sharp exothermic peaks are observable for combustion synthetic routes compared to conventional routes. It should be noted that combustion synthesis involves the evolution of gaseous products. While this may not be a major concern for TFT applications that require thin channel layers (10–50 nm), it can be problematic for collection applications that require thicker films (100–300 nm). The longer transport distance required for the removal of gaseous byproducts in thicker films can lead to undesired porosity. Thus, the formation of thicker, denser films would require multiple depositions in certain applications.
 Fig. 26  (a) Energetics of combustion synthesis-based process versus conventional process. (b) DTA and TGA of In2O3, ZTO, IZO, and ITO precursors. Acetylacetone- and urea-based combustion precursors are denoted by red and green lines respectively. The conventional precursor is denoted by blue lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright (2011) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials. 
Traditionally, mixed metal TCOs prepared by solution deposition have used different precursors for each cation. However, a single-source precursor with both metal species present may be advantageous for fixed compositions and assuring atomic mixing. Several heterometallic alkoxides exist (Section 3.1.5). Unfortunately, the metals ratios of these single-source alkoxides often differ greatly from target material compositions. Thus, these precursors may find limited application.
To address this problem, Veith et al. employed a quasi single-source, sol–gel approach mixing [Me2In(OBut)3Sn]x·[Me2In(OBut)]y to obtain the desired metals ratio for ITO (9:1 In:Sn).131 The main advantage of this system is that a simple heat treatment (500 °C under N2) leads to the disproportionation of the bivalent Sn2+ precursor into Sn4+ and metallic Sn0, resulting in an overall reduced state of the final material. The measured conductivity of samples annealed in air and then under the forming gas (standard two-step processing) was 770 S cm−1. Samples taking advantage of the disproportionation reaction during a one-step anneal under N2 achieved 910 S cm−1 and exhibited a shift in the plasma edge consistent with increased carrier concentration. This effect makes secondary treatment of the crystallized material under reducing atmospheres redundant. Reducing the number of required processing steps is favorable for industrial production. Further work is needed to determine the exact contributing mechanism. No information is provided quantifying the amount of each Sn oxidation state in comparison to measured carrier concentrations as a function of air, N2, and forming gas processing. As suggested by their optical data, the effect may involve carrier activation. The Sn4+ oxidation state is expected to result in free electron formation. Disproportionation under N2 may simply generate more free Sn4+ than oxidation of Sn2+ with an air anneal. Alternatively, the reaction may be less prone to forming neutral  associates, which have been proposed for ITO.53 Typically once incorporated, Sn tied up in neutral associates must be freed for the production of additional Sn-donors by removal of oxygen interstitials via low-PO2annealing. Lastly, the improved conductivity could be explained by a higher mobility since the one-step anneal avoids the use of forming gas, which can over-reduce the surface and lead to film cracking.
The readers should also note that while this reported effect is interesting, its application is limited to Sn-doped TCOs because Sn is known to disproportionate while other common dopants like Ga and Zn do not. Additionally, there is no reason to believe that this effect is unique to the heterometallic nature of the precursor rather than simply due to the Sn2+ oxidation state. It has yet to be shown if using a homometallic Sn2+ alkoxide can also achieve a similar disproportionation effect. If so, it would be synthetically simpler to mix individual homometallic alkoxides rather than mix heterometallic alkoxides to achieve the desired final composition. Again, while single-source precursors are chemically interesting, they may find limited application due to practical considerations.
5.2 
          Nanowire
          TC materials
While silver is the most conductive metal (6.3 × 105 S cm−1), its high optical extinction coefficient means light will not travel far through the material. A silver film would have to be <3 nm thick to achieve a visible transmittance similar to conventional TCOs (≥80%).¶ On the other hand, a film of nanowires would allow one to combine the conductivity of the metal with an open structure that transmits light. Coleman and colleagues recently demonstrated that nanometre-thick films of silver nanowires (AgNWs) exhibit electrical and optical properties comparable to ITO.298 Furthermore, the films remained unchanged even after being flexed more than 1000 times! Such physical robustness is highly desirable for flexible substrate applications.

          Silver
          nanowires (45–100 nm diameter, 4–12 μm length) are typically synthesized using AgNO3, ethylene glycol (EG), and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) via the polyol process introduced by Fiévet299 and further developed by Xia.300,301 PVP serves as a surface absorbing agent to control the growth morphology and to stabilize the product in solution. EG serves as a mild reducing agent. KBr,302AgCl,302NaCl,303 and PdCl2304 can be added to control nucleation and tune the final nanowire dimensions (Fig. 27). Halide salts in particular generate colloidal AgX, which decreases the concentration of free Ag+ ions in solution by a buffer reaction. The reaction can be performed thermally (∼170 °C)300–302 or under microwave irradiation.303
 Fig. 27  Proposed mechanism showing that competition between halide ions and ethylene glycol for Ag ions retards the supply of Ag ions and results in more anisotropic nanowire growth (top). SEM confirmed that the addition of KBr helped grow longer and thinner Ag wires (bottom). SEM reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
Films can be deposited from suspensions of the AgNWs in methanol/ethanolvia spray,304 drop-casting,305 Meyer rod,302 filter membrane transfer,298 and the Langmuir–Blodgett method.306 Drying at room temperature or with moderate heating leads to solvent evaporation and leaves a randomly oriented mesh of AgNWs behind. These Ag nanowire films have demonstrated up to 80% transmisttance and sheet resistances of 10–100 Ohm/sq depending on the wire density.298,302,305Fig. 28 compares the sheet resistance and transmittance of AgNW films to other TC material options. Sheet resistance is typically reported instead of conductivity because of difficulty in determining the thickness of the nanowire films. Conductivity is mainly limited by charge transport across the junctions between overlapping nanowires. Improved connectivity has been demonstrated with gold alloying or mechanical pressing.302 In one application, organic light-emitting diodes with AgNWs demonstrated higher power efficiencies compared to ITO-based devices.307 The simple, room temperature coating processes of AgNWs can be easily scaled up to a roll-to-roll industrial process. Favorable processing, coupled with comparable electronic and optical properties, make AgNWs a strong competitor against TCOs.
 Fig. 28  Film transmittance spectra for selected AgNW films at a range of loadings (top). Also shown is the spectrum of a 35 nm thick silver film. Transmittance at 550 nm plotted as a function of film sheet resistance (bottom). The solid symbols represent films of AgNWs. For context, data is also given for films of evaporated silver, commercial ITO, and single-walled carbon nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 298. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
5.3 Graphitic TC materials

Graphene is a monolayer of carbon atoms sp2-bonded in a 2D honeycomb lattice. It forms the basic building block for other carbon allotropes: graphite, nanotubes, and fullerenes (Fig. 29). Graphene is the strongest measured material (130 GPa or ∼200X steel),308 exhibits ballistic thermal conductance,309 and has demonstrated ballistic electronic transport with remarkably high mobilities (>15000 cm2 (V s)−1).310 Electron transport in graphene is described by a Dirac equation rather than the Schrödinger equation, as electrons propagating in graphene have zero effective mass (charge carriers in graphene are called massless Dirac fermions).310,311Graphene has demonstrated so much promise that the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Geim and Novoselov for their experiments regarding graphene. Several reviews on graphene are available.310–313 Pang et al. likewise have recently reviewed graphene as a transparent electrode material for organic electronics.314
 Fig. 29  
Graphene is a 2D building material for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities. It can be wrapped up into 0D buckyballs, rolled into 1D nanotubes or stacked into 3D graphite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 310. Copyright (2007) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials. 

Graphene has been isolated by exfoliation via adhesive tape315 and sonication,316 formed by annealing SiC,317 grown by CVD on metal substrates,318–320 and prepared by reducing graphite oxide.321–325 The later two methods are promising for large-scale production. Graphene can be grown on metal foils viaCVD from CH4/H2 at 1000 °C. It is then adhered to a polymer, the metal is etched away, and lastly the graphene transferred to the target substrate. K. S. Kim et al. have demonstrated patterned graphene using Ni and a elastomeric polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp.319 Bae et al. have demonstrated films as large as 30 inches with sheet resistances as low as 125 Ohm/sq and 97% transmittance using Cu and a thermal release tape.319 Their method is highly adaptable to a roll-to-roll process as depicted in Fig. 30.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic of the roll-based production of graphene films grown on a copper foil. The process includes adhesion of polymer supports, copper etching, and dry transfer-printing on a target substrate. Photographs of the roll-based production of graphene films: (b) Copper foil wrapping around a quartz tube to be inserted into an 8-inch quartz reactor. The lower image shows the stage in which the copper foil reacts with CH4/H2 gases at 1000 °C. (c) Roll-to-roll transfer of graphene films from a thermal release tape to a PET film at 120 °C. (d) A transparent ultralarge-area graphene film transferred on a 35-inch PET sheet. (e) An assembled graphene/PET touch panel showing outstanding flexibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright (2010) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology. 
Suspensions of graphite oxide (GO) or graphene flakes are more adaptable to solution deposition. Graphite oxide,321 which can be readily formed into a paper,322 is an insulator and must be reduced to make conductive graphene. Conversion via thermal or chemical methods can take place before or after the film has been deposited. High-temperature (1100 °C) vacuum annealing has been shown to be more effective than chemical methods for reduction of deposited films.323 Even a modest increase in non-oxygenated carbon (10–20%) can result in a significant increase in conductivity (10–1000X). Thermal reduction must be performed under an oxygen-poor atmosphere to avoid film loss through oxidation. Complete loss of GO was not observed after treatment for 3 h at 400–800 °C under vacuum or for as long as 7 h at 400 °C under Ar flow.323 These findings show that GO materials can be thermally processed with a large degree of freedom. In a novel approach, Wei et al. have used a heated atomic force microscope tip to pattern nanoscale regions of reduced GO with speeds of several mm/s.324 This approach is promising for writing electronic device structures.
While thermal reduction may produce more conductive material, high-temperature processing is prohibitive for certain device architectures. It is not a problem when TC deposition occurs first in the fabrication. Temperature sensitive layers (such as absorbers or organic emitters) can be deposited on top of the GO post-reduction. This approach has been demonstrated for OLEDs.326 However, the method would not be applicable for depositing top contacts in which the whole device would have to be exposed to high temperature or for plastic substrates. For these applications, transfer methods of CVD graphene (as discussed previously) are more favorable. Alternatively, low-temperature annealing in the presence of a chemical reducing agent (such as hydrazine vapor or forming gas) may be employed. This method has been demonstrated in the fabrication of an all-carbon, graphene-based OFET.327 Lastly, reduction can be initially achieved in solution with hydrazine.325 These reduced graphene flakes can then be deposited. Chen and colleagues have provided an example on how to engineer a graphene ink for inkjet printed electronics.328

Graphene coatings are often suggested as a competitor for ITO. However, graphene films exhibit a higher resistivity of several hundred Ohm/sq for a typical transparency of 80–95% compared to ITO.319,320 Despite being only one atom thick, one layer of graphene absorbs 2.3% of white light.329 While this may limit some applications, advantages such as robustness and flexibility may allow for competition in touch screens and flexible electronics. Organic photovoltaic devices fabricated on flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates using graphene deposited by the metal transfer method have exhibited comparable efficiencies to ITO-based devices.330 Furthermore, the graphene-based devices demonstrated outstanding capability to operate under bending conditions up to 138°, whereas the ITO-based devices displayed cracks and irreversible failure under bending of 60°.
Alternatively, graphene in the form of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) can be used as a TC. The authors acknowledge the extensive work in the area of CNTs and direct the reader to several books and reviews for a more detailed study into their synthesis, properties, and applications.331–335 Here we highlight some examples of solution processed CNTs. Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) exhibit metallic (m) or semiconducting (s) behavior depending on the chiral vector along which the graphene sheet is folded. As synthesized, SWNT thin films contain roughly 1/3 m-SWNTs and 2/3 s-SWNTs.331 For TC applications, an abundance of m-SWNTs, long SWNTs (to minimize the role of junctions in transport), and relatively large diameters (to minimize the band gap of s-SWNTs) are preferred. Zhang et al. have reviewed ways of separation and selective enrichment of SWNTs based on their electronic properties.332
Since most CVD synthesis procedures require high temperatures (>800 °C), direct deposition onto materials of interest is not an option. Instead, CNTs can be synthesized separately and then transferred via stamping or solution suspensions. One such approach is the vacuum-filtration method. The process involves vacuum-filtering a surfactant-stabilized suspension of CNTs onto a membrane to form a homogenous film, washing away the surfactant, then dissolving away the filter membrane, and lastly transferring the remaining CNT film to the desired substrate.336 Films (50 nm) deposited by this method have exhibited high conductivity (∼6700 S cm−1) with >70% transmittance in the visible and >90% in the near-IR at 2 μm (Fig. 31a). An alternative method of solution deposition uses controlled flocculation (cF). In this approach, methanol is added to the SWNT suspension during spin-coating, disrupting the surfactant's ability to stabilize the SWNTs and thus yielding films in a single step.337 TTFTs prepared using transfer-printed aligned-SWNTs as the active channel and ITO for electrodes have shown high mobilities of 1300 cm2 (V s)−1, on-to-off ratios of 104, successful operation under bending up to 120°, and 80% transmittance.338Fig. 31b compares the mobility of this device to selected TTFT devices reported in recent years and to a-Si:H, showing that aligned nanotubes offer much higher mobility than competing materials. Cao et al. have demonstrated fabrication of flexible, “all-tube” TTFTs on PET using m-SWNTs for electrodes, s-SWNTs for the channel, and Al2O3 as an insulator (Fig. 31c).339 CNTs were transferred and patterned using a PDMS stamp. Solution-deposited and pattern-transferable graphene and SWNT films have clearly demonstrated promise for TCs in flexible electronic applications.
 Fig. 31  (a) Optical image of transparent, conductive SWNT film on a sapphire substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright (2004) AAAS. (b) Plot of the mobilities of select transparent transistors reported in the literature compared to an aligned SWNT TFT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 338. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. (c) Array of “all-tube” TTFTs on a plastic substrate with inset SEM image of the interface between a source/drain electrode (left) and the semiconductor (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 339. Copyright (2006) John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
5.4 Composite TC materials
The lack of large contacting surface area for collection and poor charge transport across junctions are problems for AgNW and CNT TC systems. These problems may be mitigated by incorporating them in a TCO matrix. These hybrid systems are referred to as composite TCs. In addition to aiding in current collection and transport, composite TCs have other advantages. For photovoltaic applications, it is critical that as much light as possible is allowed to reach the absorber material. However, as discussed in section 2.2, TCOs possess a fundamental tradeoff between electrical conductivity and transparency. Increasing conductivity by increasing carrier concentration can result in an undesired cut-off in IR transmittance. Alternatively, a low carrier concentration TCO could be used if conduction was aided by the addition of a metal NW or CNT mesh, thus allowing for transmittance over a wider spectral range. If the net conductivity of the transparent electrode can be increased while maintaining or improving the solar transmittance, net cell efficiency can be increased. In addition to conductivity and transparency, the work function of the electrode is important for enhancing current collection while reducing losses in VOC. Ideally, the work function and conductivity of the electrode would be independently tunable. However, as the carrier concentration increases and the conduction band fills, the Fermi level energy increases and work function decreases for a TCO. Again, implementing a composite TC could resolve this issue. For example, combining a AgNW mesh for charge transport with a lower carrier concentration (thus higher work function) TCO at the device interface should improve hole extraction in an OPV device while maintaining conductivity and transparency. Examples of solution-deposited composite TCs are rare in the literature. In one instance, an ITO/Ag composite has been prepared by spin-coating a Ag-containing sol–gel solution of InCl3 and Sn(CH3COO)4 in isopropanol/MEA. Films with 0.05 M Ag exhibited ∼5000 S cm−1 with 80% transmittance, whereas films with 0.1 M Ag exhibited conductivities up to 12200 S cm−1 with a drop in transmittance to 60%.340 Additionally, solution-based IGZO/SWNTs composite channel layer TFTs have been spin-coated from a sol–gel solution of Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Ga(NO3)3·3H2O, and In(NO3)3·xH2O in 2-methoxyethanol with MEA and acetic acid. A lower leakage current, higher mobility, and higher on-to-off ratio were observed for TFTs with SWNTs.341 Higher performance, engineerable TC materials may be realized by employing TC composites, and solution processing is a viable method for exploring these new material systems.
6 Conclusions
This review has introduced the basics of transparent conductor material properties and highlighted a variety of solution deposition techniques with insight into precursor selection and solution formulation. Foremost, it has summarized the achievements of the last two decades in the solution deposition of both oxide and non-oxide TC materials in the context of competing PVD processes. Scalable and direct-write solution deposition methods have facilitated the implementation of solution-deposited TCs into industrial applications. Solutions can be engineered to directly produce desired morphologies ranging from fully-dense, large-area films to patterned three-dimensional structures for opto-electronics.
In addition to the deposition of a large variety of classical crystalline TCOs, solution processing has demonstrated the ability to produce amorphous materials such as IZO and IGZO which have recently gained favor in the TCO community. The literature on solution-deposited amorphous TCOs has most focused on utilization in TFT channel layers, where semiconducting material is required. However, the production and study of highly conductive solution-deposited amorphous TCO films for collection layers has received little attention. We believe this to be an open area for further research. Additional future opportunities in the arena of solution-deposited TCOs include the preparation of indium-free materials such as TNO, high mobility materials such as ITiO, and the development of low-temperature routes for flexible electronics and photovoltaic applications.
Non-oxide TC materials such as metal nanowires, graphene, and carbon nanotubes are becoming viable competitors against TCOs in many applications. The robustness and flexibility of these systems make them ideal for flexible electronics. Their simple, room temperature coating processes can be easily scaled up to a roll-to-roll industrial process. In the end, there may not be a ‘Holy Grail’ TC material. Each material has its own unique advantages and physical properties for niche applications. Composite TC materials may allow for the combination of conducting metal/carbon nanowire networks with a wide range of TCOs to produce a TC with properties that cannot be attained otherwise. Regardless of the particular system, solution processing has positioned itself as a viable method for incorporating these materials into opto-electronic devices.
References

Solution Processing of Inorganic Materials, ed. D. B. Mitzi, John Wiley and Sons,  2009 Search PubMed .
K. Zweibel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 59, 1–18 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liebig, Ann. Pharmaz., 1835, 14, 134 Search PubMed .
K. Badeker, Ann. Phys., 1907, 22, 749 Search PubMed .

          J. M. Mochel, U.S. Pat., 2564706,  1947 Search PubMed .

          H. A. McMaster, U.S. Pat., 2429420,  1947 Search PubMed .

          W. O. Lytle and A. E. Junge, U.S. Pat., 2566346,  1951 Search PubMed .

          J. M. Mochel, U.S. Pat., 2564707,  1951 Search PubMed .
G. Helwig, Z. Phys., 1952, 132, 621 Search PubMed .
L. Holland and G. Siddall, Vacuum III, 1955 Search PubMed .

          H. F. Dates and J. K. Davis, U.S. Pat., 3331702,  1967 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Nozik, U.S. Pat., 3811953,  1974 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Nozik and G. Haacke, U.S. Pat., 3957029,  1976 Search PubMed .

          R. G. Gordon, U.S. Pat., 4146657,  1979 Search PubMed .
F. T. J. Smith and S. L. Lyu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1083 Search PubMed .
S. Major, A. Banerjee and K. L. Chopra, Thin Solid Films, 1984, 122, 31 Search PubMed .
T. Minami, H. Nanto and S. Takata, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 23, L280 .
S. N. Qiu, C. X. Qiu and I. Shih, Sol. Energy Mater., 1987, 15, 261 Search PubMed .
B. H. Choi, H. B. Im, J. S. Song and K. H. Yoon, Thin Solid Films, 1990, 193, 712 Search PubMed .
J. Hu and R. G. Gordon, Sol. Cells, 1991, 30, 437 Search PubMed .
H. Enoki, T. Nakayama and J. Echigoya, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1992, 129, 181 Search PubMed .
T. Minami, H. Sonohara, S. Takata and H. Sato, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 33, L1693 Search PubMed .

          J. M. McGraw, P. A. Parilla, D. L. Schulz, J. Alleman, W. Xuanzhi, W. P. Mulligan, D. S. Ginley and T. J. Coutts, Mater. Res. Soc. Sym. Proc., Pittsburgh, PA USA,  1995 Search PubMed .
T. Minami, H. Sonohara, T. Kakumu and S. Takata, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 34, L971–L974 CrossRef CAS .
I. Safi and R. P. Howson, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 343–344, 115–118 Search PubMed .
M. Orita, H. Ohta, M. Hirano, S. Narushima and H. Hosono, Philos. Mag. B, 2001, 81, 501–515 Search PubMed .
Y. Meng, X. liang Yang, H. xian Chen, J. Shen, Y. ming Jiang, Z. jian Zhang and Z. yi Hua, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 394, 219–223 Search PubMed .
T. Moriga, Y. Hayashi, K. Kondo, Y. Nishimura, K. Murai, I. Nakabayashi, H. Fukumoto and K. Tominaga, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2004, 22, 1705 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Furubayashia, T. Hitosugi, Y. Yamamoto, K. Inaba, G. Kinoda, Y. Hirose, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 252101 CrossRef .
D. J. Seo and S. H. Park, Physica B, 2005, 357, 420–427 Search PubMed .
G. H. Kim, H. S. Shin, B. D. Ahn, K. H. Kim, W. J. Park and H. J. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, H7–H9 Search PubMed .

          R. F. Martins, E. Elangovan, S. Parthiban, G. Goncalves and E. M. Fortunato, Mater. Res. Soc., Fall Meeting, Boston, MA USA,  2010 Search PubMed .
B. G. Lewis and D. C. Paine, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 22–27 CAS .
D. S. Ginley and C. Bright, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 15–18 CAS .
A. Slaoui and R. T. Collins, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 211–214 .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fortunato, D. S. Ginley, H. Hosono and D. C. Paine, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 242–247 CAS .
S. E. Habas, H. A. S. Platt, M. F. A. M. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571–6594 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nomura, H. Ohta, A. Takagi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Nature, 2004, 432, 488–492 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hosono, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2006, 352, 851–858 Search PubMed .
N. L. Dehuff, E. S. Kettenring, D. Hong, H. Q. Chiang, J. F. Wager, R. L. Hoffman, C.-H. Park and D. A. Keszler, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 064505 Search PubMed .

Handbook of Transparent Conductors, ed. D. S. Ginley, H. Hosono and D. C. Paine, Springer,  2011 Search PubMed .

Transparent Conductive Zinc Oxide, ed. K. Ellmer, A. Klein and B. Rech, Springer-Verlag,  2008 Search PubMed .

          S. O. Kasap, Principles of Electronic Materials and Devices, McGraw-Hill Science Engineering, 3rd edn,  2005 Search PubMed .
A. J. Leenheer, J. D. Perkins, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, R. P. O'Hayre and D. S. Ginley, Phys. Rev. B, 2008, 77, 115215 Search PubMed .
J. D. Perkins, M. F. van Hest, M. P. Taylor and D. S. Ginley, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2009, 6, 850–859 Search PubMed .
M. P. Taylor, D. W. Readey, M. F. A. M. van Hest, C. W. Teplin, J. L. Alleman, M. S. Dabney, L. M. Gedvilas, B. M. Keyes, B. To, J. D. Perkins and D. S. Ginley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3169–3178 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Taylor, D. W. Readey, C. W. Teplin, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. L. Alleman, M. S. Dabney, L. M. Gedvilas, B. M. Keyes, B. To, J. D. Perkins and D. S. Ginley, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2005, 16, 90–94 Search PubMed .

          R. E. Hummel, Electronic Properties of Materials, Springer-Verlag, New York, 3rd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
M. Yan, M. Lane, C. R. Kannewurf and R. P. H. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2342–2344 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nomura, T. Kamiya, H. Ohta, T. Uruga, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 035212–5 Search PubMed .
H. Hosono, N. Kikuchi, N. Ueda and H. Kawazoe, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1996, 198–200, 165–169 Search PubMed .
T. O. Mason, G. B. Gonzalez, D. R. Kammler, N. Mansourian-Hadavi and B. J. Ingram, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 411, 106–114 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Fergus, J. Mater. Sci., 2003, 38, 4259–4270 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Coutts, D. L. Young and X. Li, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 58–65 Search PubMed .
T. Minami, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 38–44 CAS .
CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 2005.

          A. Earnshaw and N. Greenwood, Chemistry of the Elements, Butterworth-Heinermann, 2nd edn,  1997 Search PubMed .
S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 045501 CrossRef .
H. Kawazoe, H. Yanagi, K. Ueda and H. Hosono, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 28–36 CAS .
H. Kawazoe, M. Yasukawa, H. Hyodo, M. Kurita, H. Yanagi and H. Hosono, Nature, 1997, 389, 939–942 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dekkers, G. Rijnders and D. H. A. Blank, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 021903 CrossRef .
R. R. Owings, G. J. Exarhos, C. F. Windisch, P. H. Holloway and J. G. Wen, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 483, 175–184 Search PubMed .
G. J. Exarhos and X.-D. Zhou, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 7025–7052 Search PubMed .
M. Joseph, H. Tabata and T. Kawai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, L1205–L1207 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Banerjee and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 2005, 50, 52–105 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vogel, P. Kruger and J. Pollmann, Phys. Rev. B, 1996, 54, 5495–5511 CrossRef CAS .
P. Erhart, K. Albe and A. Klein, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 73, 205203 CrossRef .

          C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 7th edn,  1996 Search PubMed .
S. Calnan and A. N. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 1839–1849 Search PubMed .
R. G. Gordon, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 52–57 CAS .

          L. Gordon, M. L. Salutsky and H. H. Willard, Precipitation from Homogeneous Solution, John Wiley and Sons,  1959 Search PubMed .
L. Gordon, Anal. Chem., 1952, 24, 459–462 Search PubMed .
R. W. Schwartz, T. Schneller and R. Waser, C. R. Chim., 2004, 7, 433–461 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Bloor, C. J. Carmalt and D. Pugh, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 1293–1318 Search PubMed .
M. Ohyama, H. Kozuka and T. Yoko, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1996, 104, 164–68 Search PubMed .
M. Ohyama, H. Kozuka and T. Yoko, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1998, 81, 1622–32 CAS .
F. D. Paraguay, W. L. Estrada, D. R. N. Acosta, E. Andrade and M. Miki-Yoshida, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 350, 192–202 Search PubMed .
W. Tang and D. C. Cameron, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 238, 83–87 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuchiya, T. Enomoto and T. Sei, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1994, 178, 327–332 Search PubMed .
J.-H. Lee and B.-O. Park, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 426, 94–99 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kim, J.-H. Lee and B.-O. Park, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2004, 449–452, 469–472 Search PubMed .
S.-Y. Lee and B.-O. Park, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 484, 184–187 Search PubMed .
J. Wienke and A. S. Booij, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4508–4512 Search PubMed .
J. Wienke, B. van der Zanden, M. Tijssen and M. Zeman, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 884–890 Search PubMed .
C. G. Choi, S.-J. Seo and B.-S. Bae, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, H7–H9 Search PubMed .
X. Hu, J. Gong, L. Zhang and J. C. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1–6 .
M. de la Luz Olvera, H. Gomez and A. Maldonado, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1449–1453 Search PubMed .
S. Yin and T. Sato, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4584–4587 RSC .
R. J. Winfield, L. H. K. Koh, S. O'Brian and G. M. Crean, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 254, 855–858 Search PubMed .
D. Verardou, G. Kenanakis, S. Couris, E. Koudoumas, E. Kymakis and N. Katsarakis, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 8764–8767 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Qian, J. Yin and Z. Zhu, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 2144–2149 CrossRef CAS .
M. Izaki and Y. Saijo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, C73 Search PubMed .
T. Shinagawa, M. Izaki, H. Inui, K. Murase and Y. Awakura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, G736–G741 Search PubMed .
A. Maldonado, M. de la Luz Olvera, S. Tirado Guerrab and R. Asomozaa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 82, 75–84 Search PubMed .
M. A. Lucio-Lope, M. A. Luna-Arias, A. Maldonado, M. de la Luz Olvera and D. R. Acosta, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 733–741 Search PubMed .
M. A. Lucio-Lope, A. Maldonado, R. Castandeo-Perez, G. Torres-Delgado and M. de la Luz Olvera, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2362–2376 Search PubMed .
W. J. E. Beek, L. H. Slooff, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1703 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu and R. G. Gordon, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 5381–5392 Search PubMed .
T. Isago, S. Sonobe, T. Ohkawa and H. Sunayama, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1996, 104, 1052–1055 Search PubMed .
S. T. Meyers, J. T. Anderson, C. M. Hung, J. Thompson, J. F. Wager and D. A. Keszler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17603–17609 CrossRef .
J. Ni, H. Yan, A. Wang, Y. Yang, C. L. Stern, A. W. Metz, S. Jin, L. Wang, T. J. Marks, J. R. Ireland and C. R. Kannewurf, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 127, 5613–5624 Search PubMed .
J. J. Prince, S. Ramamurthy, B. Subramanian, C. Sanjeevirajae and M. Jayachandranc, J. Cryst. Growth, 2002, 240, 142–151 Search PubMed .
S. M. Rozati and T. Ganj, Renewable Energy, 2004, 29, 1665–1669 Search PubMed .
R. Ota, S. Seki, M. Ogawa, T. Nishide, A. Shida, M. Ide and Y. Sawada, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 411, 42–45 Search PubMed .
R. M. Pasquarelli, C. J. Curtis, A. Miedaner, M. F. A. M. van Hest, R. P. O'Hayre and D. S. Ginley, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 5424–5431 Search PubMed .
S. Seki, Y. Sawada, M. Ogawa, M. Yamamoto, Y. Kagota, A. Shida and M. Ide, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2003, 167–170, 525–527 Search PubMed .
J. Su, Y. Wang, S. Yang, G. Li, F. Liao and J. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 8403–8409 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moses Ezhil Raja, K. C. Lalithambikab, V. S. Vidhyac, G. Rajagopalc, A. Thayumanavand, M. Jayachandranc and C. Sanjeevirajae, Phys. B, 2008, 403, 544–554 Search PubMed .
E. Shigeno, S. Seki, K. Shimizu, Y. Sawada, M. Ogawa, A. Shida, M. Ide, A. Yajima and A. Yoshinaka, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2003, 169–170, 566–570 Search PubMed .
A.-C. Dippel, T. Schneller, P. Gerber and R. Waser, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 3797–3801 Search PubMed .
H. Okamura and H. K. Bowen, Ceram. Int., 1986, 12, 161–171 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamamoto and S. Kambara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1957, 79, 4344–4348 CrossRef CAS .

Sol–Gel Science: The Physics and Chemistry of Sol–Gel Processing, ed. C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Academic Press Inc.,  1990 Search PubMed .
G. Westin, M. Kritikos and M. Wijk, J. Solid State Chem., 1998, 141, 168–176 CrossRef CAS .
G. Westin, M. Moustiakimov and M. Kritikos, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 3249–3258 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Bradley, H. Chudzynska, D. M. Frigo, M. B. Hurthouse and M. A. Mazid, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 1258–1259 RSC .
D. C. Bradley, H. Chudzynska, D. M. Frigo, M. E. Hammond, M. B. Hurthouse and M. A. Mazid, Polyhedron, 1990, 9, 719–726 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Pasquarelli, M. van Hest, A. Miedaner, C. Curtis, J. Perkins, R. O'Hayre and D. Ginley, Mater. Res. Soc. Fall Meeting, Boston, MA USA,  2010 Search PubMed .
K. K. Banger, Y. Yamashita, K. Mori, R. L. Peterson, T. Leedham, J. Rickard and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 45–50 Search PubMed .

          F. D. Gnanam, Sol–Gel Processing of Advanced Ceramics, Science Publishers Inc., Lebanon,  1996 Search PubMed .
M. Wijk, R. Norrestam, M. Nygren and G. Westin, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 1077–1079 CrossRef CAS .
G. Westin, A. Ekstrand, E. Zangellini and L. Borjesson, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2000, 61, 67–74 CrossRef .
A. Mehrotra and R. C. Mehrotra, Inorg. Chem., 1972, 11, 2170 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Mehrotra, A. Singh and S. Sogani, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 1643–1660 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Aksu and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1–6 CrossRef .
S. Heitz, Y. Aksu, C. Merschjann and M. Driess, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3904–3910 Search PubMed .
M. Moustiakimov, M. Kirtikos and G. Westin, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1998, 54, 29–31 CrossRef .
M. Moustiakimov, M. Kirtikos and G. Westin, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 1499–1504 CrossRef CAS .
G. Westin, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1998, 12, 203–212 Search PubMed .
M. Veith, C. Bubela and M. Zimmer, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 6028 RSC .
A. P. Roth and D. F. Williams, J. Appl. Phys., 1981, 52, 6685–6692 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Slooff, J. M. Kroon, J. Loos, M. M. Koetse and J. Sweelssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 689–694 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Denisov and Y. P. Kuznetsov, Russ. Chem. Bull., 1975, 24, 2595–2597 Search PubMed .
P. Benard, J. P. Auffredic and D. Louer, Thermochim. Acta, 1994, 232, 65–76 CrossRef CAS .
T. Biswick, W. Jones, A. Pacula, E. Serwicka and J. Podobinski, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 1171–1179 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Auffredic and D. Louer, J. Solid State Chem., 1983, 46, 245–252 Search PubMed .
O. K. Srivastava and E. A. Secco, Can. J. Chem., 1967, 45, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–485 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pinna and M. Niederberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2–15 CrossRef .
J. A. Lewis, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 83, 2341–2359 CAS .

          A. C. Pierre, Introduction to Sol–Gel Processing, Kluwer Academic Publishers,  1998 Search PubMed .
A. L. Hector, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1745–1753 RSC .

          M. P. Pechini, U.S. Pat., 3330697,  1967 Search PubMed .
U. Choppali and B. P. Gorman, J. Lumin., 2008, 128, 1641–1648 Search PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, K. B. Reuter and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E156–E159 CrossRef CAS .

          N. A. Lange and J. A. Dean, Lange's Handbook of Chemistry, McGraw-Hill, 11th edn,  1973 Search PubMed .

          G. Hodes, Chemical Solution Deposition of Semiconductor Films, Marcel Dekker, Inc.,  2003 Search PubMed .
A. M. Chapparro, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4118–4124 Search PubMed .
D. E. Bornside, C. W. Macosko and L. E. Scriven, J. Imaging Tech., 1987, 13, 122–129 Search PubMed .
D. P. Birnie, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 1145–1154 CrossRef CAS .

Coatings Technology Handbook, ed. A. A. Tracton, CRC Taylor and Francis,  2006 Search PubMed .

Tape Casting: Theory and Practice, ed. R. E. Mistler and E. R. Twiname, Wiley-American Ceramic Society,  2000 Search PubMed .
H. Yang and P. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13173–13182 Search PubMed .
Sono-Tek Corporation Ultrasonic Spray Overview, http://www.sono-tek.com.
D. Perednis and L. J. Gauckler, J. Electroceram., 2005, 14, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Patil, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1999, 59, 185–198 CrossRef CAS .

The Chemistry of Inkjet Inks, ed. S. Magdassi, World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.,  2010 Search PubMed .

          B. King and M. Renn, Aerosol Jet® Direct Write Printing for Mil-Aero Electronic Applications, Optomec, inc. technical report,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chesterfield, A. Johnson, C. Lang, M. Stainer and J. Ziebarth, Information Display, 2011, 27, 24–30 Search PubMed .
J. Perelaer, P. J. Smith, D. Mager, D. Soltman, S. K. Volkman, V. Subramanian, J. G. Korvinkd and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8446–8453 RSC .
E. Shanthi, V. Dutta, A. Banerjee and K. L. Chopra, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 6243–6251 Search PubMed .
S. Shanthi, C. Subramanian and P. Ramasamy, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1999, 57, 127–134 Search PubMed .
E. Elangovan and K. Ramamurthi, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 476, 231–236 Search PubMed .
S.-Y. Lee and B.-O. Park, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 510, 154–158 Search PubMed .
K. L. Chopra, S. Major and K. Pandya, Thin Solid Films, 1983, 102, 1–46 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Jarzebski and J. P. Marton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 199C–205C CAS .
Z. M. Jarzebski and J. P. Marton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 333C–346C CAS .
Z. M. Jarzebski and J. P. Marton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 299C–310C .
Ü. Özgür, Y. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Doğan, V. Avrutin, S.-J. Cho and H. Morkoc, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 041301 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 33–71 CrossRef .
G.-C. Yi, C. Wang and W. I. Park, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20, S22–S34 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang and G. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–109 Search PubMed .
M. C. Newton and P. A. Warburton, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 50–55 CrossRef CAS .
C.-s. Li, Y.-n. Li, Y.-l. Wu, B.-S. Ong and R.-O. Loutfy, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1626–1634 RSC .
H.-C. Cheng, C.-F. Chen and C.-Y. Tsay, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 012113 CrossRef .
R. D. Shannon, Solid State Commun., 1996, 4, 629–630 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Wang, V. Cimalla, H. Romanus, T. Kups, G. Ecke, T. Stauden, M. Ali, V. Lebedev, J. Pezoldt and O. Ambacher, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 011904–3 Search PubMed .
M. Epifani, P. Siciliano, A. Gurlo, N. Barsan and U. Weimar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4078–4079 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, D. Wang, J. Lu and Y. Qian, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2002, 5, 475–477 Search PubMed .
A. Gurlo, M. Ivanovskaya, N. Barsan and U. Weimar, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2003, 6, 569–572 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. C. King, T. D. Veal, F. Fuchs, C. Y. Wang, D. J. Payne, A. Bourlange, H. Zhang, G. R. Bell, V. Cimalla, O. Ambacher, R. G. Egdell, F. Bechstedt and C. F. McConville, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 79, 205211–10 CrossRef .
H. S. Kim, P. D. Byrne, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12580–12581 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20, S35–S44 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Moholkar, S. M. Pawar, K. Y. Rajpure, C. H. Bhosale and J. H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 9358–9364 Search PubMed .
M. A. Aouaj, R. Diaz, A. Belayachi, F. Rueda and M. Abd-Lefdil, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1458–1461 Search PubMed .
C. Agashe, J. Hupkes, G. Schope and M. Berginski, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1256–1262 Search PubMed .
B. Stjerna, E. Olsson and C. G. Granqvist, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 76, 3797–3816 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Liao, C.-C. Kuo, P.-J. Chen and C.-C. Lee, Appl. Opt., 2011, 50, C106–C110 Search PubMed .
E. Shanthi, A. Banerjee, V. Dutta and K. L. Chopra, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 1615–1621 CrossRef .
C. Agashe and S. S. Major, J. Mater. Sci., 1996, 31, 2965–2969 Search PubMed .
Y. Ohya, H. Saiki and Y. Takahashi, J. Mater. Sci., 1994, 29, 4099–4103 Search PubMed .
H. Agura, A. Suzuki, T. Matsushita, T. Aoki and M. Okuda, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 445, 263–267 Search PubMed .
D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16670–16678 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, M. S. White, W. J. Mitchell, M. F. A. M. van Hest, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matsubara, H. Tampo, H. Shibata, A. Yamada, P. Fons, K. Iwata and S. Niki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 1374–1376 Search PubMed .
R. B. H. Tahar, T. Ban, Y. Ohya and Y. Takahashi, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 2631–2645 CrossRef .
Y. Shigesato, S. Takaki and T. Haranou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1991, 48/49, 269–275 Search PubMed .
T. Furusaki, K. Kodaira, M. Yamamoto, S. Shimada and T. Matsushita, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 803–806 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maruyama and A. Kojima, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 27, 1829–L1831 Search PubMed .
Y. Takahashi, H. Hayashi and Y. Ohya, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1992, 271, 401 Search PubMed .
H. S. Kim, M.-G. Kim, Y.-G. Ha, M. G. Kanatzidis, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10826–10827 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Munir, F. Iskandar, K. M. Yun, K. Okuyama and M. Abdullah, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 145603 Search PubMed .
Y. Yoshida, T. A. Gessert, C. L. Perkins and T. J. Coutts, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2003, 21, 1092–1097 Search PubMed .
C. Warmsingh, Y. Yoshida, D. W. Readey, C. W. Teplin, J. D. Perkins, P. A. Parilla, L. M. Gedvilas, B. M. Keyes and D. S. Ginley, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 3831–3833 Search PubMed .
X. Li, W. Miao, Q. Zhang, L. Huang, Z. Zhang and Z. Hua, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20, 823–828 Search PubMed .
X. Li, W. Miao, Q. Zhang, L. Huang, Z. Zhang and Z. Hua, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 1404–1407 Search PubMed .
M. F. A. M. van Hest, M. Dabney, J. Perkins and D. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 70–74 CrossRef .
S. Parthiban, K. Ramamurthi, E. Elangovan, R. Martins, E. Fortunato and R. Ganesan, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 2117–2119 Search PubMed .
S. Parthiban, K. Ramamurthi, E. Elangovan, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 212101 Search PubMed .
S. Parthiban, E. Elangovan, K. Ramamurthi, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 406–412 Search PubMed .
M. F. A. M. van Hest, M. S. Dabney, J. D. Perkins, D. S. Ginley and M. P. Taylor, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 032111 CrossRef .
R. K. Gupta, K. Ghosh, S. R. Mishra and P. K. Kahol, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 9422–9425 Search PubMed .
J.-Q. Xi, M. F. Schubert, J. K. Kim, E. F. Schubert, M. Chen, S.-Y. Lin, W. Liu and J. A. Smart, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 176–179 CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemannt, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jose, V. Thavasi and S. Ramakrishna, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 289–301 CrossRef .
T. Hitosugi, Y. Furubayashi, A. Ueda, K. Itabashi, K. Inaba, Y. Hirose, G. Kinoda, Y. Yamamoto, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 1063–L1065 Search PubMed .
M. A. Gillispie, M. F. A. M. van Hest, M. S. Dabney, J. D. Perkins and D. S. Ginley, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 033125 Search PubMed .
J. Osorio-Guillen, S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 036601 CrossRef .

Mineral Commodity Summaries, U.S. Geological Survey.
H. Chang and P. J. Huang, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1998, 29, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Hong, N. T. H. Le, N. C. Thuan, N. D. Thanh, N. X. Nghia and N. X. Phuc, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2005, 36, 946–949 CrossRef .
W. F. Zhang, Y. L. He, M. S. Zhang, Z. Yin and Q. Chen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2000, 33, 912–916 CrossRef CAS .
R. Baddour-Hadjean, S. Bach, M. Smirnov and J.-P. Pereira-Ramos, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2004, 35, 577–585 Search PubMed .
H. Tang, K. Prasad, R. Sanjinès, P. E. Schmid and F. Lévy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 2042–2047 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hitosugi, H. Kamisaka, K. Yamashita, H. Nogawa, Y. Furubayashi, S. Nakao, N. Yamada, A. Chikamatsu, H. Kumigashira, M. Oshima, Y. Hirose, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 111203 Search PubMed .
Y. Hirose, N. Yamada, S. Nakao, T. Hitosugi, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 79, 165108 Search PubMed .
R. Asahi, Y. Taga, W. Mannstadt and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 61, 7459–7465 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yamada, T. Hitosugi, J. Kasai, N. L. H. Hoang, S. Nakao, Y. Hirose, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 123702 Search PubMed .
E. Traversa, M. L. Di Vona, S. Licoccia, M. Sacerdoti, M. C. Carotta, L. Crema and G. Martinelli, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2001, 22, 167–179 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hitosugi, A. Ueda, S. Nakao, N. Yamada, Y. Furubayashi, Y. Hirose, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 212106 Search PubMed .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 906–925 CrossRef CAS .
B. Samuneva, V. Kozhukharov, C. Trapalis and R. Kranold, J. Mater. Sci., 1993, 28, 2353–2360 CAS .
K. Yanagisawa and J. Ovenstone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7781–7787 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, Y. Wada, T. Kitamura, S. Kambe, S. Murasawa, H. Mori, T. Sakatac and S. Yanagida, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1694–1703 RSC .
D. Reyes-Coronado, G. Rodriguez-Gattorno, M. E. Espinosa-Pesqueira, C. Cab, R. de Coss and G. Oskam, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 145605 CrossRef .
S. Cho, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1941–1944 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Duoss, M. Twardowski and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3485–3489 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, A. Zakutayev, J. Stowers, M. D. Anderson, J. Tate, D. H. McIntyre, D. C. Johnson and D. A. Keszler, Solid State Sci., 2009, 11, 1692–1699 Search PubMed .
J. Muhleback, K. Muller and G. Schwarzenbach, Inorg. Chem., 1970, 9, 2381–2390 CrossRef .
C. Alquier, M. T. Vandenborre and M. Henry, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1986, 79, 383–395 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiranow and K. Matsushima, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 110–117 Search PubMed .
S. Phanichphant, C. Liewhiran, K. Wetchakun, A. Wisitsoraat and A. Tuantranont, Sensors, 2011, 11, 472–484 Search PubMed .
E. Sotter, X. Vilanova, E. Llobet, M. Stankova and X. Correig, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2005, 7, 1395–1398 Search PubMed .
N. Bonini, M. C. Carotta, A. Chiorino, V. Guidi, C. Malagu, G. Martinelli, L. Paglialonga and M. Sacerdoti, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 68, 274–280 CrossRef .
R. K. Sharma, M. C. Bhatnagar and G. L. Sharma, Sens. Actuators, B, 1998, 46, 194–201 CrossRef .
L. Zhao, X. Zhao, J. Liu, A. Zhang, D. Wang and B. Wei, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2010, 53, 475–479 Search PubMed .

Physical Ceramics: Principles for Ceramic Science and Engineering, ed. W. D. K. Yet-Ming Chiang, Dunbar Birnie III, John Wiley and Sons,  1997 Search PubMed .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. K. Nowotny and L. R. Sheppard, J. Aust. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 44, 63–67 Search PubMed .
J. Nowotny, T. Bak, M. K. Nowotny and L. R. Sheppard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 602–610 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Sheppard, T. Bak and J. Nowotny, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 611–617 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Baumard and E. Tani, J. Chem. Phys., 1977, 67, 857–860 CrossRef CAS .
M. Toshihiro, D. D. Edwards, T. O. Mason, G. B. Palmer, K. R. Poeppelmeier, J. L. Schindler, C. R. Kannewurf and I. Nakabayashi, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1998, 81, 1310–1316 CAS .
L. Dupont, C. Maugy, N. Naghavi, C. Guery and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Solid State Chem., 2001, 158, 119–133 Search PubMed .
P. Barquinha, A. Pimentel, A. Marques, L. Pereira, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2006, 352, 1756–1760 Search PubMed .

          A. N. Cavendor, Masters Thesis, Colorado School of Mines,  2007 Search PubMed .
T. Sasabayashi, N. Ito, E. Nishimura, M. Kon, P. K. Song, K. Utsumi, A. Kaijo and Y. Shigesato, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 445, 219–223 Search PubMed .
C.-Y. Lee, C. Chang, W.-P. Shih and C.-L. Dai, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 3992–3998 Search PubMed .

          T. Gennett, D. T. Gillaspie, M. O. Reese, L. J. Simpson, F. J. Pern, J. D. Perkins and D. Ginley, 34th IEEE PVSC, Philadelphia, PA USA,  2009 Search PubMed .

          R. M. Pasquarelli, Masters Thesis, Colorado School of Mines,  2009 Search PubMed .
D.-H. Lee, Y.-J. Chang, G. S. Herman and C.-H. Chang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 843–847 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Seo, C. G. Choi, Y. H. Hwang and B.-S. Bae, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 035106 Search PubMed .
S. Jeong, Y. Jeong and J. Moon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11082–11085 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Lee, B. Cobb and A. Dodabalapur, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 203505 Search PubMed .
V. Krishnakumar, K. Ramamurthi, Kumaravel and K. Santhakumar, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2009, 9, 467–471 Search PubMed .
A. O. R., J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1982, 20, 7–12 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, W. P. Mulligan and T. J. Courts, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 286, 274–276 Search PubMed .
G. H. Kim, W. H. Jeong and H. J. Kim, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2010, 207, 1677–1679 Search PubMed .
S. Jeong, Y.-G. Ha, J. Moon, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1346–1350 Search PubMed .
S. K. Park, Y.-H. Kim and J.-I. Han, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 125102 CrossRef .
C. J. Curtis, T. Rivkin, A. Miedaner, J. Alleman, J. Perkins, L. Smith and D. S. Ginley, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2002, 730, 79–84 Search PubMed .
R. Pasquarelli, C. Curtis and M. van Hest, U.S. DOE Journal of Undergraduate Research, 2008, 8, 91–96 Search PubMed .
M.-G. Kim, H. S. Kim, Y.-G. Ha, J. He, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10352–10364 Search PubMed .
G. A. Niklasson and C. G. Granqvist, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 127–156 RSC .
H. Bode, K. Dehmelt and J. Witte, Electrochim. Acta, 1966, 11, 1079–1087 CrossRef CAS .
E. Avendaño, A. Azens, G. A. Niklasson and C. G. Granqvista, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, F203–F212 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Wruck and M. Rubin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cattin, B. A. Reguig, A. Khelil, M. Morsli, K. Benchouk and J. C. Bernede, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 5814–5821 Search PubMed .
B. A. Reguig, M. Regragui, M. Morsli, A. Khelil, M. Addou and J. C. Bernede, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1381–1392 Search PubMed .
Y.-M. Lee and C.-H. Lai, Solid-State Electron., 2009, 53, 1116–1125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Park and K. J. Kim, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 258, 380–384 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiao, M. Wu, Z. Qin and H. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 458–461 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Purushothaman and G. Muralidharan, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2008, 46, 190–194 Search PubMed .
Z. He, Z. Ji, S. Zhao, C. Wang, K. Liu and Z. Ye, Sol. Energy, 2006, 80, 226–230 CrossRef CAS .

          D. S. Ginley, C. J. Curtis, A. Miedaner, M. F. A. M. van Hest and T. Kaydanova, U.S. Patent No. 0003364 A1,  2008 Search PubMed .
K. X. Steirer, J. P. Chesin, E. Widjonarko, J. J. Berry, A. Miedaner, D. S. Ginley and D. C. Olson, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1414–1418 Search PubMed .
J. J. Berry, N. E. Widjonarko, B. A. Bailey, A. K. Sigdel, D. S. Ginley and D. C. Olson, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1649–1655 Search PubMed .
C. F. Windisch, K. F. Ferris and G. J. Exarhos, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2001, 19, 1647–1651 Search PubMed .
C. F. Windisch, K. F. Ferris, G. J. Exarhos and S. K. Sharma, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 420–421, 89–99 Search PubMed .
R. Nagarajan, A. D. Draeseke, A. W. Sleight and J. Tate, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 8022–8025 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lim, S. Desu and A. C. Rastogi, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 2047–2056 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Jacob, G. M. Kale and G. N. K. Iyangar, J. Mater. Sci., 1986, 21, 2753–2758 CAS .
M.-G. Kim, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 382–388 Search PubMed .
S. De, T. M. Higgins, P. E. Lyons, E. M. Doherty, P. N. Nirmalraj, W. J. Blau, J. J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fievet, J. P. Lagier and M. Figlarz, MRS Bull., 1989, 14, 29–34 CAS .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 833–837 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Y. Yin, B. T. Mayers, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4736–4745 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955–2963 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gou, M. Chipara and J. M. Zaleski, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1755–1760 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lu and K. S. Chou, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 215707 Search PubMed .
J.-Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689–692 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tao, F. Kim, C. Hess, J. Goldberger, R. He, Y. Sun, Y. Xia and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zeng, Q.-K. Zhang, R.-M. Yu and C.-Z. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4484–4488 Search PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saito, J. Nakamura and A. Natori, Phys. Rev. B, 2007, 76, 115409 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Sarma, A. K. Geim, P. Kim and A. H. MacDonald, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143 Search PubMed  , Special Edition Issues 1–2.
S. Pang, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011 DOI:10.1002/adma.201100304 .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Emtsev, A. Bostwick, K. Horn, J. Jobst, G. L. Kellogg, L. Ley, J. L. McChesney, T. Ohta, S. A. Reshanov, J. Röhr, E. Rotenberg, A. K. Schmid, D. Waldmann, H. B. Weber and T. Seyller, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Zhu, W. Cai, M. Borysiak, B. Han, D. Chen, R. D. Piner, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4359–4363 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Özyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, D. Wang, S. Kim, S.-Y. Kim, Y. Hu, M. K. Yakes, A. R. Laracuente, Z. Dai, S. R. Marder, C. Berger, W. P. King, W. A. de Heer, P. E. Sheehan and E. Riedo, Science, 2010, 328, 1373–1375 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, M. J. Allen, Y. Yang and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, M. Agrawal, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Xu, K. Zhao, X. Wan, J. Deng and W. Yan, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 714–721 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, Y. Huang, J. Liang, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Nano Res., 2011 DOI:10.1007/s12274–011–0123–z .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 6, 1308 Search PubMed .
L. G. De-Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cao and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 29–53 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, B. Wu, W. Hu and Y. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1324–1336 RSC .

          M. Daenen, R. D. de Fouw, B. Hamers, P. G. A. Janssen, K. Schouteden, M. A. J. Veld, X. E. E. Reynhout, J. C. Reijenga, P. H. L. Notten and R. A. H. Niessen, The Wondrous World of Carbon Nanotubes ‘A review of current carbon nanotube technologies’, Eindhoven University of Technology,  2003 Search PubMed .

Carbon Nanotubes: Synthesis, Structure, Properties and Applications, ed. M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus and P. Avouris, Springer-Verlag,  2001 Search PubMed .

Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes, ed. R. Saito, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Imperial College Press,  1998 Search PubMed .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Meitl, Y. Zhou, A. Gaur, S. Jeon, M. L. Usrey, M. S. Strano and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1643–1647 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Ishikawa, H.-K. Chang, K. Ryu, P.-C. Chen, A. Badmaev, L. G. De-Arco, G. Shen and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cao, S.-H. Hur, Z.-T. Zhu, Y. Sun, C. Wang, M. A. Meitl, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 304–309 CrossRef CAS .
B. Houng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 251922 CrossRef .
K. W. Lee, K. Y. Heo, S. H. Oh, A. Moujoud, G. H. Kim and H. J. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 4011–4014 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† In this article, binary systems refer to the mixture of two individual oxides. For example, IZO would be classified as the binary In2O3–ZnO. Other conventions may refer to an individual metal oxide such as In2O3 as a binary compound since it is composed of two species. In this case, IZO is classified as a binary–binary compound system consisting of an alloy of In2O3 and ZnO and discrete compounds such as Zn2In2O5 are referred to as ternary compounds. Accordingly, IGZO would be considered a binary–binary–binary compound system, within which Zn2In2O5–GaInO3 can be considered a ternary–ternary compound system and ZnInGaO4 is a discrete quaternary compound.‡ Louis Gordon and Hobart H. Willard were pioneering chemists in the field of precipitation from homogeneous solutions.§ Ref. 238 and 239 incorrectly refer to and depict anatase as face-sharing and rutile as edge-sharing. Octahedra instead share four edges in anatase and share two edges + two corners in rutile.¶ IT/Io = exp(−4πkz/λ) where k = 3.34 for Ag at 550 nm.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Robert M. Pasquarelli
	Robert Pasquarelli is currently a PhD candidate in Materials Science at the Colorado School of Mines. Robert is conducting research on solution deposited transparent conducting oxides at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) under Ryan O'Hayre and David Ginley. He received his BS in Chemistry from the Rochester Institute of Technology in 2007 under Dr Marvin Illingsworth. He held undergraduate internships at the University of Georgia under Dr Gregory Robinson in 2005 and at NREL in 2006 and 2007. His research interests include the development of inks and solution deposition processes for photovoltaic materials, metals, and transparent conductors.

David S. Ginley
	Dr David S. Ginley is currently a Research Fellow and Manager of the Process Technology and Advanced Concepts Group at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in the National Center for Photovoltaics. He received his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry from MIT and his BS in Chemistry from the Colorado School of Mines. Current work focuses on advancing solar energy conversion and storage specifically in the development and application of transparent conducting oxides, organic electronics materials, nano-materials and the development of process technology for materials and device development including combinatorial methods, direct-write, composite materials and non-vacuum processing.

Ryan O'Hayre
	Dr Ryan O'Hayre (PhD Materials Science, Stanford University, 2004) is an associate professor of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering at the Colorado School of Mines (CSM). Ryan's research group investigates energy materials, emphasizing aspects of electronic and ionic oxides, catalysis, and electrochemistry. Ryan has received several young-investigator research awards including the Presidential Early Career Award in Science and Engineering (PECASE). Ryan collaborates with CSM's NSF-funded Renewable Energy Materials Research Center, the Colorado Fuel Cell Center, and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory on a variety of research projects and teaches courses on electrical properties of materials, materials kinetics, and fuel cells.

1835	
                  Ag
                	Chemical Bath Reduction	J. Liebig3
1907	CdO	Thermal Oxidation	K. Badeker4
1947	
                  SnO2:Sb	
Spray Pyrolysis
	J. M. Mochel (Corning)5
1947	
                  SnO2:Cl	
Spray Pyrolysis
	H. A. McMaster (Libbey-Owens-Ford)6
1951	
                  SnO2:F	
Spray Pyrolysis
	W. O. Lytle and A. E. Junge (PPG)7
1951	
                  In2O3:Sn	
Spray Pyrolysis
	J. M. Mochel (Corning)8
1952	CdO	
                  Sputtering
                	G. Helwig9
1955	
                  In2O3:Sn	
                  Sputtering
                	L. Holland and G. Siddall10
1967	
                  SnO2:Sb	
Chemical Vapor Deposition
	H. F. Dates and J. K. Davis (Corning)11
1974	
                  Cd2SnO4	
                  Sputtering
                	A. J. Nozik (American Cyanamid)12
1976	
                  Cd2SnO4	
Spray Pyrolysis
	A. J. Nozik and G. Haacke (American Cyanamid)13
1979	
                  SnO2:F	
Chemical Vapor Deposition
	R. G. Gordon14
1981	
                  a-CdSnO
                	
                  Sputtering
                	F. T. J. Smith and S. L. Lyu15
1984	
                  ZnO:In	
Spray Pyrolysis
	S. Major et al.16
1984	
                  ZnO:Al	
                  Sputtering
                	T. Minami et al.17
1987	
                  ZnO:In	
                  Sputtering
                	S. N. Qiu et al.18
1990	
                  ZnO:Ga	
                  Sputtering
                	B. H. Choi et al.19
1991	
                  ZnO:F	
Chemical Vapor Deposition
	J. Hu and R. G. Gordon20
1992	
                  Zn2SnO4	
                  Sputtering
                	H. Enoki et al.21
1994	
                  ZnSnO3	
                  Sputtering
                	T. Minami et al.22
1995	
                  Cd2SnO4	
Pulsed Laser Deposition
	J. M. McGraw et al.23
1995	
                  Zn2In2O5	
                  Sputtering
                	T. Minami et al.24
1999	
                  In2O3:Ti	
                  Sputtering
                	I. Safi et al.25
2001	
                  a-InGaZnO
                	
Pulsed Laser Deposition
	M. Orita el al.26
2001	
                  In2O3:Mo	Thermal Reactive Evaporation	Y. Meng et al.27
2004	
                  a-ZnSnO
                	
                  Sputtering
                	T. Moriga et al.28
2005	
                  TiO2:Nb	
Pulsed Laser Deposition
	Y. Furubayashi et al.29
2005	
                  In2O3:Mo	
Spray Pyrolysis
	D. J. Seo et al.30
2009	
                  InGaZnO
                	
Spin Coating
	G. H. Kim et al.31
2010	
                  In2O3:Ti	
Spray Pyrolysis
	Martins et al.32
σ = Neμ	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 1  Conventional TCO composition space.	 

 	Fig. 2  Mass fraction abundance of the elements in the Earth's crust as a function of atomic number. Common TCO cations are highlighted by colored circles and additional dopants by squares. Adapted from ref. 57 and 58.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Calculated band structure of wurtzite ZnO using a local-density approximation with self-interaction correction (SIC-LDA) from Vogel et al. and (b) the corresponding density of states calculated using density-functional theory with a generalized-gradient approximation and self-interaction correction (GGA+U) from Erhart et al. Adapted with permission from ref. 67 and 68. Copyrights (1996, 2006) American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Transmission, reflection, and absorption spectra of a typical TCO.	 


Highest transparency	
                    ZnO:F, Cd2SnO4, Zn2SnO4
Highest conductivity	
                    In2O3:Sn
Highest mobility	CdO, In2O3:Ti, In2O3:Mo
Lowest plasma frequency	
                    SnO2:F, ZnO:F
Highest plasma frequency	
                    Ag, TiN, In2O3:Sn
Lowest work function	
                    ZnO:F
Highest work function	
                    SnO2:F, ZnSnO3, ZnInSnO
Best thermal stability	
                    SnO2:F, TiN, Cd2SnO4
Best mechanical durability	TiN, SnO2:F
Best chemical durability	
                    SnO2:F
Easiest to etch	
                    ZnO:F, TiN
Lowest deposition temperature	
                    In2O3:Sn, ZnO:B
 	
                    a-InZnO
                  
Least toxic	
                    ZnO:F, SnO2:F
Lowest cost	
                    SnO2:F

                    TTFT
                    channel
                  	
                    ZnO
                  
 	
                    a-InZnO, a-ZnSnO, a-InGaZnO

 	Fig. 5  Flow chart of typical solution processing routes. Simplest route denoted by solid (—) line. Alternative pathways denoted by dotted (⋯) lines. Subsections to consult for each processing step are listed.	 


Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O	
14+
	
31 and 76–90

Zn(NO3)2·xH2O	5	
89 and 91–94


                    Zn(acac)2	3	
95–97


                    Zn(C2H5)2	2	
98 and 99


                    Zn(OPri)2	1	
100


                    Zn(OH)x(NO3)(2−x)(NH3)y	1	
101

Zn(hfa)2(diamines)	1	
102


InCl3	7	
81, 88, 96, 97 and 103–105

In(NO3)3·xH2O	5	
31, 82, 83, 95 and 97


                    In(CH3COO)3	4	
84–86 and 97


                    In(HCOO)3	3	
106–108


                    In(acac)3	1	
109


                    In(OH)(2-ethylhexanoate)2	1	
110


 	Fig. 6  
              Keto-enol
              tautomerization of acetylacetonate.	 

 	Fig. 7  Stabilization of Ti(OPri)4 by addition of acetylacetonate.	 

 	Fig. 8  ORTEP diagram of the indium cluster In5(μ5−O)(μ3−OPri)4(μ2−OPri)4(OPri)5. The isopropyl groups have been omitted for clarity. The oxo-oxygen (O1) is at the center of the cluster in blue with indium atoms in yellow. Adapted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2011) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  
Hydrolysis of metal alkoxide via nucleophilic substitution.	 

 	Fig. 10  Condensation can occur by alcohol or water elimination.	 

 	Fig. 11  Depiction of various solution deposition methods.	 
	(8)
	(9)
Zn(NO3)2(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → Zn(OH)2(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)	(10)
Zn(OH)2(s) + yNH3(aq) → Zn(OH)2(NH3)y(aq)	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 12  
Scanning electron microscope images of ink-jet printed ZnO thin films annealed at (a) 150 °C and (b) 300 °C viewed with 45° tilt. (c) Cross-section of spin-coated film annealed to 600 °C in air. (d) Schematic structure of the bottom-gate TFT. (e) Optical microscope image of a printed ZnO-channel TFT on SiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society.	 
	(13)


Dip-coating
	In and Sn 2-ethylhexanoate	250	⋯	⋯	T. Furusaki et al.200

Spin-coating
	
                      In(CH3COO)3 and SnCl4·5H2O	800	⋯	⋯	
                      A.-C. Dippel et al.111

Dip-coating
	In(NO3)3·3H2O and SnCl4	2360	⋯	⋯	T. Maruyama et al.201

Dip-coating
	
                      In(CH3COO)3 and Sn(OPri)4	3000	21	1 × 1021	Y. Takahashi et al.202

Dip-coating
	InCl3·3.5H2O and SnCl2·2H2O	4000	30	9.1 × 1020	R. Ota et al.105

Dip-coating
	
                      In(HCOO)3 and SnCl2·2H2O	4760	28	1.0 × 1021	S. Seki et al.107

2001	Thermal Reactive Evaporation	5800	130	2.6 × 1020	4 wt%	Y. Meng et al.27
2003	
                      RF Sputtering
                    	1000	44	1.3 × 1020	4 wt%	Y. Yoshida et al.205
2004	
Pulsed Laser Deposition
	3000	95	1.9 × 1020	2 wt%	C. Warmsingh et al.206
2005	DC Sputtering	1700	20	5.2 × 1020	2 wt%	X. Li et al.207
2005	DC Sputtering	2700	50	1.9 × 1020	3 wt%	X. Li et al.208
2005	
Spray Pyrolysis
	1400	20	4.5 × 1020	1.25 at%	D. J. Seo et al.30
2006	RF Combinatorial Sputtering	5000	65	4.3 × 1020	4 at%	M. F. A. M. van Hest et al.209
2008	
Spray Pyrolysis
	550	77	1.8 × 1020	0.5 at%	S. Parthiban et al.210
2009	
Spray Pyrolysis
	2500	149	1 × 1020	0.5 at%	S. Parthiban et al.211

 	Fig. 13  (a) Variation of electrical properties of post-annealed sprayed IMO thin films as a function of Mo doping. (b) FE-SEM images of post-annealed IMO thin films 0, 0.5, 0.6 and 1 at%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright (2010) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Photocatalytic activity of TiO2. Highly reactive OH and O2 radicals, which can break down organic compounds, form on the TiO2 surface upon exposure to UV radiation in the presence of water and oxygen.	 

 	Fig. 15  
              Growth parameter-based phase diagram of Ti0.94Nb0.06O2 film on (a) LAO(100) and (b) SiO2/Si substrates. Circle, cross, and triangle symbols denote pure anatase phase, pure rutile phase, and mixture of anatase and rutile phases respectively. The films were sputtered under a total pressure Ptot of 1.0 Pa. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233. Copyright (2009) American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 16  
              TiO2 polymorphs and reaction schemes for the formation of phase-pure TiO2 materials. Adapted from ref. 239.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Molecular structure of the Ti(OPri)2(acac)2 precursor, R = CH(CH3)2. (b) Image of the initial precursor solution (left) and ink after solvent evaporation (right). (c) Ink viscosity as a function of increasing solids content, defined as Ti+PVP (in wt%). Shaded region indicates printing regime for a 1 μm nozzle. (c, inset) Both the initial precursor solution (open squares, Ti+PVP = 6.6 wt%) and printable ink (filled squares, Ti+PVP = 23.4 wt%) exhibit Newtonian flow behavior. (d) Focused ion beam (FIB)-milled cross-section of the TiO2 structure shown after calcining at 715 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright (2007) John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 18  A comparison of the phase and electronic properties of In2O3–ZnO deposited by PVD and solution methods as a function of composition. (a) The conductivity, surface roughness, and index of refraction for IZO combinatorially sputtered at 100 °C by Taylor et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 Copyright (2008) John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) The resistivity, carrier concentration, and Hall mobility of solution deposited IZO films annealed at 650 °C by B.-O. Park and colleagues. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright (2005) Elsevier. (c) The mobility and hysteresis of solution deposited IZO TFTs annealed at 550 °C by Banger et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2011) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials.	 

 	Fig. 19  
              SEM cross-section of ZnO:In (a) and (i-ZnO)/ZnO:In (b) films spray deposited by Wienke and Booij. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2008) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  
High-resolution TEM cross-sectional image of a TFT device with a solution deposited IZO channel layer. Inset shows no lattice fringes, indicating amorphous material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2011) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials.	 

 	Fig. 21  The amorphous formation region (top) and Hall mobility and carrier concentrations (bottom) in the In2O3–Ga2O3–ZnO system. The thin films were deposited on a glass substrate by pulsed laser deposition (PO2 = 1 Pa). Numbers in the parenthesis denote carrier electron concentration (×1018 cm−3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright (2006) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  Field-effect electron mobilities of transistors based on solution deposited IGZO films with the indicated In compositions (In:Ga:Zn = x:10:(90-x)) as well as for IZO and GZO films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright (2010) John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic diagram of TFT process flow, (b) optical microscope images, and (c) confocal microscope images of nanoparticulate Ag electrodes printed by surface patterning and simple dip-casting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright (2009) IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Optical microscope images of solution processed IGZO TFTs from dip-coated nanoparticulate Ag electrode and IGZO solution with 10 μm channel length and (b) schematic diagram of bottom-contact IGZO TFT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright (2009) IOP Publishing Ltd.	 
	(17)
	(18)

 	Fig. 25  Resistivity of solution-deposited and sputtered Ni1−xCoxO4/3 films as a function of x. Reprinted with permission from ref. 293. Copyright (2002) Elsevier.	 
CuO + Cr2O3 → CuCr2O4	(19)
Cu2O + Cr2O3 → 2CuCrO2	(20)
Cu2O + 2CuCr2O4 → 4CuCrO2 + ½O2(g)	(21)
2Cu2O + Cr2O3 + 2CuCr2O4 → 6CuCrO2 + ½O2(g)	(22)

 	Fig. 26  (a) Energetics of combustion synthesis-based process versus conventional process. (b) DTA and TGA of In2O3, ZTO, IZO, and ITO precursors. Acetylacetone- and urea-based combustion precursors are denoted by red and green lines respectively. The conventional precursor is denoted by blue lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright (2011) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials.	 

 	Fig. 27  Proposed mechanism showing that competition between halide ions and ethylene glycol for Ag ions retards the supply of Ag ions and results in more anisotropic nanowire growth (top). SEM confirmed that the addition of KBr helped grow longer and thinner Ag wires (bottom). SEM reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Film transmittance spectra for selected AgNW films at a range of loadings (top). Also shown is the spectrum of a 35 nm thick silver film. Transmittance at 550 nm plotted as a function of film sheet resistance (bottom). The solid symbols represent films of AgNWs. For context, data is also given for films of evaporated silver, commercial ITO, and single-walled carbon nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 298. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  
Graphene is a 2D building material for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities. It can be wrapped up into 0D buckyballs, rolled into 1D nanotubes or stacked into 3D graphite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 310. Copyright (2007) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic of the roll-based production of graphene films grown on a copper foil. The process includes adhesion of polymer supports, copper etching, and dry transfer-printing on a target substrate. Photographs of the roll-based production of graphene films: (b) Copper foil wrapping around a quartz tube to be inserted into an 8-inch quartz reactor. The lower image shows the stage in which the copper foil reacts with CH4/H2 gases at 1000 °C. (c) Roll-to-roll transfer of graphene films from a thermal release tape to a PET film at 120 °C. (d) A transparent ultralarge-area graphene film transferred on a 35-inch PET sheet. (e) An assembled graphene/PET touch panel showing outstanding flexibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright (2010) Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Optical image of transparent, conductive SWNT film on a sapphire substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright (2004) AAAS. (b) Plot of the mobilities of select transparent transistors reported in the literature compared to an aligned SWNT TFT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 338. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. (c) Array of “all-tube” TTFTs on a plastic substrate with inset SEM image of the interface between a source/drain electrode (left) and the semiconductor (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 339. Copyright (2006) John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 
Footnotes
† In this article, binary systems refer to the mixture of two individual oxides. For example, IZO would be classified as the binary In2O3–ZnO. Other conventions may refer to an individual metal oxide such as In2O3 as a binary compound since it is composed of two species. In this case, IZO is classified as a binary–binary compound system consisting of an alloy of In2O3 and ZnO and discrete compounds such as Zn2In2O5 are referred to as ternary compounds. Accordingly, IGZO would be considered a binary–binary–binary compound system, within which Zn2In2O5–GaInO3 can be considered a ternary–ternary compound system and ZnInGaO4 is a discrete quaternary compound.
‡ Louis Gordon and Hobart H. Willard were pioneering chemists in the field of precipitation from homogeneous solutions.
§ Ref. 238 and 239 incorrectly refer to and depict anatase as face-sharing and rutile as edge-sharing. Octahedra instead share four edges in anatase and share two edges + two corners in rutile.
¶ IT/Io = exp(−4πkz/λ) where k = 3.34 for Ag at 550 nm.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
