Functionalization of nanomaterials by non-thermal large area atmospheric pressure plasmas: application to flexible dye -sensitized solar cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR01889J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR01889J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7825-7830Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFunctionalization of nanomaterials by non-thermal large area atmospheric pressure plasmas: application to flexible dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Heesoo 
            Jung
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jaeyoung 
            Park
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Eun Sang 
            Yoo
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Gill-Sang 
            Han
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hyun Suk 
            Jung
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Min Jae 
            Ko
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Sanghoo 
            Park
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Wonho 
            Choe
          
        
      *e
aAgency for Defense Development, 160, Bugyuseong-daero 488beon-gil, Yoseong-gu, Daejeon 305-152, Korea
b5771 La Jolla Corona Drive, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
cSchool of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066 Seobu-ro, Janan-gu, Suwon-si, Gyeongi-do 440-746, Korea. E-mail: hsjung1@skku.ac.kr;   Tel: +82-31-290-7403
dPhoto-Electronic Hybrids Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Hwarangno 14-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, Korea
eDepartment of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Korea. E-mail: wchoe@kaist.ac.kr;   Tel: +82-42-350-2539
Received 
      18th April 2013
    , Accepted 13th June 2013First published on 14th June 2013AbstractA key challenge to the industrial application of nanotechnology is the development of fabrication processes for functional devices based on nanomaterials which can be scaled up for mass production. In this report, we disclose the results of non-thermal radio-frequency (rf) atmospheric pressure plasma (APP) based deposition of TiO2 nanoparticles on a flexible substrate for the fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Operating at 190 °C without a vacuum enclosure, the APP method can avoid thermal damage and vacuum compatibility restrictions and utilize roll-to-roll processing over a large area. The various analyses of the TiO2 films demonstrate that superior film properties can be obtained by the non-thermal APP method when compared with the thermal sintering process operating at 450 °C. The crystallinity of the anatase TiO2 nanoparticles is significantly improved without thermal agglomeration, while the surface defects such as Ti3+ ions are eliminated, thus providing efficient charge collecting properties for solar cells. Finally, we successfully fabricated a flexible DSSC with an energy conversion efficiency of 4.2% using a transparent plastic substrate. This work demonstrates the potential of non-thermal APP technology in the area of device-level, nano-enabled material manufacturing.
Nanotechnology holds great promise for the development of new materials and devices for use in electronics, renewable energy generation, and medical and biological applications. During the past decade, many researchers have actively pursued the construction of nano-scale devices such as nanocrystal based solar cells, nanoscale memories, quantum dot light emitting diodes (QD-LEDs), and nano-biosensors.1–14 However, the transition from the laboratory to industrial production has been limited due to the technical challenges associated with the mass production of such devices while preserving the unique and superior properties of the underlying nanomaterials. For example, in the often-used bottom up approach, nanomaterials are pre-fabricated and applied to the substrate with the use of organic binders. Typically, heat treatment at high temperatures over 450 °C is required to remove the organic binders, in order to produce nanoparticle based devices such as dye-sensitized and quantum dot (QD) solar cells, QD-LEDs, and various nanosensors.11–14 High temperature treatment often results in the loss of functionality of the nanoparticles and limits the production throughput by preventing the use of flexible substrates and roll-to-roll processes.
Recently, non-thermal DC pulse plasma jet electrodes are used to improve the surface property of TiO2 of the sintered DSSC at a temperature of 450 °C.15 However, in this work, we present a non-thermal radio-frequency (rf) atmospheric pressure plasma (APP) based method of fabricating dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) on flexible substrates. While DSSCs have favorable device characteristics, such as simple fabrication process, low cost and non-toxicity, the high temperature treatment required to remove the organic binders has limited high throughput production of flexible DSSCs.16–19 Compared with low-pressure vacuum plasma technologies for nanodevice fabrication,20–27 the APP process is compatible with non-vacuum materials and can be easily scaled up to a large area, as it operates in an ambient environment. The APP sources have been shown to generate copious amounts of reactive radicals, such as atomic oxygen and vibrationally excited molecules, while maintaining low gas temperatures, because of the efficient energy coupling from rf power to the free electrons and poor kinetic energy transfer from the energetic electrons to heavy gas particles.28–35 These favorable attributes allow the APP method to remove the organic binders at low gas temperatures (∼190 °C), while controlling the crystallinity and phase of the TiO2 nano-particles, resulting in comparable or higher DSSC efficiencies than the heat treatment method. To our knowledge, this work represents the first successful application of the APP based method for the production of nano-enabled functional devices on a flexible substrate and demonstrates the full capacity of the APP system for nano-enabled device manufacturing.

Fig. 1a illustrates the side and bottom views of the APP source for the experiment. The plasmas were generated with rf power at a frequency of 13.56 MHz in ambient air with a nominal input power of 120 watt for a plasma area of 110 mm by 15 mm. The supply gas is argon buffer gas flowing at 6 slpm mixed with oxygen reaction gas flowing at 12 sccm, controlled by a mass flow controller. The gap distance between the powered electrode and the treatment sample was fixed at 2 mm to allow for uniform discharge generation over the treated substrate. The plasma plume has a low gas temperature (below 190 °C), as measured by a fiber-based thermocouple and the convective gas flow at 6 slpm was sufficient to maintain low temperatures on various substrates including glass and polyethylene naphthalate (PEN). Fig. 1b shows the emission spectrum of the Ar/O2 plasmas. Atomic oxygen lines are observed at 777 nm and 845 nm, while a number of argon lines are also observed. In addition, N2, N2+ and OH molecular bands are observed, corresponding to impurities from the ambient air. The N2 second positive system (C3Πu → B3Πg, 330–425 nm) in the emission spectrum was used to estimate the vibrational temperature (Tvib) of 3800 °C in the plasma plume. The intensities of the vibrational band heads enable the measurement of Tvib using the Boltzmann plot method.30,36–38 A more detailed description of APP characteristics is found in our previous reports.29,30 As shown in Fig. 1c, the APP system can be easily incorporated into roll-to-roll processing for high throughputs.39
 Fig. 1  Atmospheric pressure plasma (APP) equipment for the fabrication of flexible DSSCs. (a) Images of the APP source generating the Ar/O2 plasma from the side and bottom views. TiO2 nanocrystal films are coated onto rigid FTO/glass and flexible ITO/PEN substrates. (b) Oxygen related species (OH and O I) and N2, N2+ diatomic lines with Ar I atomic lines are observed. The vibrational temperature based on the N2 second positive system is 3800 °C. (c) Illustration of the low temperature sintering fabrication method using the APP equipment. This APP process enables the R2R process with high throughput. 

Fig. 2a shows the thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) curves for TiO2 powders obtained from untreated, APP treated, and heat treated (at 450 °C) TiO2 films. The weight losses for the APP treated and heat treated TiO2 powders are 3.5% and 2%, respectively, significantly less than that of untreated powder at 6%. This low weight loss corresponds to a high degree of oxidation of the organic binders. Fig. 2b shows the surface morphology of the TiO2 films after the heat and APP treatment. Unlike the heat treated film, the individual TiO2 nanoparticles in the APP treated film are clearly visible and maintain their spherical shape. In the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) measurements shown in Fig. 2c, the pore dimension distribution changes minimally for the APP treated film. In the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) measurements, the surface area of the APP treated film is comparable to that of the untreated film, while the heat treatment greatly reduces the surface area due to agglomeration. Fig. 2d shows the X-ray photoemission spectra (XPS) covering the Ti 2p1/2 and Ti 2p3/2 peaks to investigate surface defects such as Ti3+ ions that are detrimental to the charge transport properties of DSSC. A reduction in the number of Ti3+ defects (Ti 2p3/2, 457.5 eV) is clearly seen in both the APP treated and heat treated TiO2 films, as compared with the untreated film. Fig. 2e shows the FT-IR spectra of the TiO2 films. An increase in absorption of the O–H stretching modes (3600–3000 cm−1) in the APP treated film makes the TiO2 surface more hydrophilic, which increases the surface absorption of photo-sensitizing molecules which in turn enhances the light harvesting capability of the DSSC.
 Fig. 2  Characterization of raw (green), APP treated (red), and heat treated (blue) TiO2 nanocrystal films. (a) TGA curves. Low weight loss for the APP treated sample corresponds to APP capability of removing organic binders. (b) FESEM images of the surfaces of heat and APP treated TiO2 films. The apparent image for the spherical TiO2 nanoparticles indicates that the APP process prevents the agglomeration of the nanoparticles. (c) The N2 sorption isotherms and pore size distribution plot (inset) demonstrate the mesoscopic nanoporous structure of the APP treated TiO2 film. (d) The XPS spectra indicate that the APP process is able to heal the point defects such as Ti3+ on the TiO2 surface. (e) FT-IR spectra displaying the hydroxylation of the TiO2 surface by the APP process. 
The APP treatment relies on the non-thermal nature of the reaction chemistry in the plasma. For example, the copious oxygen atoms in the plasma plume can effectively remove the organic binders by oxidation due to their high potential energy of 249.2 kJ mol−1, which is equivalent to around 30000 °C.35,40 These highly reactive oxygen atoms can also eliminate oxygen vacancies in the TiO2 film surface, thus healing the defective nanocrystal surface, as indicated by the reduction in the intensity of the Ti3+ ion defect peak in the XPS spectra. On the other hand, the low gas temperature of the APP treatment preserves the spherical shape of the TiO2 nanoparticles favorable for fabricating mesoscopic functional films. The increased hydrophilic properties of the APP treated TiO2 film may be explained by the presence of OH radicals in the plasma plume. Since the APP system operates in ambient air, a small amount of water vapor can enter the plasma plume and form OH radicals by electron impact dissociation.28–37 It is also possible for OH radicals to be generated on the TiO2 film surface when the hydrogen in the organic binders interacts with the oxygen atoms.
As shown in Fig. 3a, the crystalline structure of the treated TiO2 film is measured by XRD. In the case of APP treatment, the intensities of the anatase (101) and (200) peaks are more than twice those of the untreated film, while there is no sign of any rutile phase. It is noted that the intensity of the FTO peaks remains the same. In the case where heat treatment is used, relatively small increases in the anatase peak intensities are observed and the formation of rutile phase (210) is shown. In Fig. 3b, the high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) micrograph results are shown for the APP treated, heat treated, and untreated TiO2 films. Compared with the untreated film, the APP treated film exhibits a well-defined crystal structure with minimal lattice imperfection. The heat treated film also exhibits improved crystallinity, but seems to contain some degree of imperfection.
 Fig. 3  Change in crystallinity of TiO2 polymorphs induced by the APP process and emission spectrum from the Ar/O2 plasma. (a) XRD patterns of raw (green), APP treated (red), and heat treated (blue) TiO2 films. Note that the APP process significantly improves the crystallinity of the anatase nanocrystals given the apparently increased peak intensity of anatase (101) in comparison with the FTO peaks. (b) HRTEM images of each TiO2 nanocrystal. The minimal lattice imperfection of the APP treated one supports the improved crystallinity. 
One possible explanation for the improved crystallinity is the effective energy transfer between the vibrationally excited O2 molecules and the TiO2 nanocrystal lattice. Past work has shown that APP is capable of generating vibrationally excited molecules with a vibrational temperature of up to 6000 °C, as compared to the rotational and kinetic gas temperature of about 190 °C.38 If the energy can be effectively transferred from these highly excited molecules in the plasma plume to the TiO2 lattice, the lattice atoms can rearrange themselves, resulting in the improved crystallinity of the anatase phase. The absence of the rutile phase in the APP treated film can be attributed to the presence of copious amounts of oxygen atoms during the crystal rearrangement. According to Shannon and Pask, the presence of oxygen vacancies in an anatase crystal can facilitate the transformation to the rutile phase.41 The copious amounts of reactive oxygen atoms eliminate the oxygen vacancies, hence retarding the phase transformation.41
The photovoltaic (PV) properties of the DSSC device are shown in Fig. 4 as a function of the film thickness for the DSSCs fabricated from the APP treated and heat treated TiO2 films. The APP treated DSSCs show higher short circuit current densities (Jsc) than heat treated ones of film thickness in the range of 1 to 4 μm, as shown in Fig. 4a. As the film thickness increases over 4 μm, the Jsc saturates toward the maximum values of 11–12 mA cm−2 for the APP treated DSSCs. The Jsc for the heat treated DSCCs shows the slight incremental trend over 10 μm. The open circuit voltage (Voc) starts at 0.8 V and gradually decreases toward 0.7 V with increasing film thickness for both treatments, as shown in Fig. 4b. As depicted in Fig. 4c, the fill factors (FFs) of the APP treated DSSCs are in the 71% and 74% range, which is higher than those of the heat treated ones (64–71%). Fig. 4d shows the energy conversion efficiency under 1 sun illumination. The DSSCs fabricated by APP show higher efficiencies compared to the heat treated ones of film thickness in the range of 1 to 4 μm. With increasing film thickness, the conversion efficiency saturates toward the 6% level for the APP treated DSSCs. The efficiency of both the APP and heat treated DSSCs shows similar behavior to the aforementioned Jsc, which is due to the decrease of dye uploading for thicker films and the difficulty in necking TiO2 nanocrystals by using APP treatment. Fig. 4e shows that the APP treated DSSCs adsorb much more dye molecules than the heat treated ones, especially when the film thickness is below 4 μm. For thicker films, the dye absorption properties are similar for the two methods. The superior PV performance exhibited by the APP treated DSSCs in Fig. 4 is consistent with the film properties observed in Fig. 2 and 3 for film thicknesses between 1 and 4 μm. The increased hydrophilic nature and reduced thermal agglomeration of the APP treated TiO2 film facilitate stronger interaction between the TiO2 nanoparticles and the carboxylic functional groups of the dye, resulting in better dye absorption and increased free charge carrier formation.42–44 Moreover, the highly porous structure of the APP treated films allows for easy access of electrolytes to most of the dye molecules coated on the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles. This pathway facilitates charge transport, thereby yielding high fill factors.42 The improved crystallinity and reduced surface defects of the TiO2 film produced by the APP treatment decrease the recombination process of charge carriers in the DSSC. We measured the electron life time and transport time of both APP and heat treated DSSCs composed of 4 μm thick TiO2 films by using the intensity modulated photovoltage and photocurrent spectroscopy (IMVS and IMPS). As shown in the plot of IMVS (Fig. 4f), the APP treated DSSC exhibits longer electron recombination times (τr) than the heat-treated one, which confirms that the improved crystallinity and the reduced surface defects induced by APP treatment retard the charge recombination. The IMPS data (Fig. 4f) demonstrate that the electron transport (τct) for the APP treated DSSC is faster than that for the counterpart, ascribed to the highly porous structure of the APP treated films. In the case of paste containing polymeric binders such as ethyl cellulose, the APP treatment shows the capability of fabricating DSSCs via non-thermal decomposition (Fig. S1 and Table S1†). These results, combined with its low process temperature, demonstrate the potential of the APP system for nano-enabled device fabrication.
 Fig. 4  Photovoltaic performance of DSSC containing APP treated (filled circle) and heat treated (vacant circle) TiO2 under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G). (a) Short circuit current density (Jsc), (b) open circuit voltage (Voc), (c) fill factor (FF), (d) overall energy conversion efficiency (η), and (e) amount of dye loading. (f) Comparisons of the charge recombination time constant (τr) from IMVS and the transport time constant (τct) from IMPS for APP and heat treated DSSCs containing 4 μm thick TiO2 films as a function of the incident light intensities. The DSSCs based on the APP treated films show higher efficiency than their counterparts (heat treated films) of the same thickness, which corresponds with the enhanced dye adsorption and facilitated charge transport. 
It is, however, noted that the performance benefits of the APP treated DSSC saturate with increasing film thickness over 6 μm. There are two possible reasons for this. In our previous DSSC studies using TiO2 nanoparticles produced by the current approach, the maximum energy conversion efficiency for the thermally sintered DSSC was 6%,42 which is attributed to the intrinsic properties of the TiO2 nanoparticles, such as their size, shape, surface area, etc., and the corresponding methodology of cell fabrication. Separately, the reactive radicals produced by the APP system have limited lifetime, due to their gas phase recombination.33,34 In addition, the surface reactions may be retarded by the thermal diffusion at low substrate temperatures. We plan to optimize the APP method for treating thick films in the future.
Finally, we successfully fabricated a flexible DSSC using an organic flexible substrate, PEN, as shown in Fig. 5. A flexible TiO2 photoelectrode was fabricated on an ITO/PEN substrate using the APP treatment. It was assembled with a Pt/ITO/PEN cathode and an electrolyte (Fig. 5a). Fig. 5b shows the PV characteristics of the flexible DSSC with a TiO2 film thickness of 3 μm. The obtained energy conversion efficiency of the DSSC is 4.2%, which is comparable to that of the APP treated DSSC on the FTO substrate.
 Fig. 5  Flexible photoelectrode and DSSC fabricated by the APP process. (a) Schematic illustrations and real photo images of the flexible TiO2 photoelectrode and DSSC based on the ITO/PEN substrate. (b) I–V characteristic of the flexible DSSC under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G). The photovoltaic properties are summarized in the inset of (b). 
In summary, we presented a method of fabricating flexible DSSC devices using a non-thermal APP technique. The APP process is capable of removing organic binders while preserving the mesoscopic structure of the TiO2 film at low temperatures. Moreover, the APP process can induce a change in the surface properties of the TiO2 nanocrystals, i.e., the highly reactive oxygen atoms in the plasma eliminate point defects such as Ti3+ ions and oxygen vacancies, as well as make the surface of the TiO2 nanocrystals more hydrophilic. The APP process can also enhance the crystallinity of the nanocrystals through an effective energy transfer from the highly excited molecules to the nanocrystal lattice. As a result, the APP treated DSSCs exhibit better photovoltaic performance than conventional heat treated ones due to the preservation of their mesoscopic nanostructure and the enhanced hydrophilic surface of the TiO2 photoelectrodes. We utilized a fabrication process of flexible DSSCs based on ITO/PEN substrates. The flexible DSSCs demonstrate an energy conversion efficiency of 4.2% with a TiO2 film thickness of 3 μm, which is comparable to the efficiency of 4.5% for the conventional heat treated DSSCs containing FTO glass substrates. We emphasize that the observations reported herein are not just limited to DSSCs. The atmospheric pressure, low temperature, and molecular level interaction with nanocrystals in the APP process should enable it to be used for other energy conversion and electronic devices based on nanocrystals.
Methods
Device fabrication
Anatase nanoparticles with uniform size distribution were synthesized using a two-step sol–gel process. The resultant slurry used for the fabrication of TiO2 films was prepared by mixing 1.0 g of TiO2 anatase nanoparticles, 0.1333 cm3 of acetyl acetone, 3.2 cm3 of distilled water, and 3.2 cm3 of ethanol. The detailed preparation method is described in our previous report.42 Nanocrystalline TiO2 films (0.5 cm × 0.5 cm) were coated on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO, SnO2:F, Pilkington, England) conductive glass substrates or tin doped indium oxide (ITO, In2O3:Sn) coated PEN (polyethylene naphthalate) substrates (Fig. 1a).
The coated nanocrystalline TiO2 films were pre-dried at 50–80 °C in ambient air, followed by either the APP treatment (30 min) or heat treatment (450 °C and 60 min). The film thickness for each cycle was approximately 1.4 μm. To control the TiO2 film thickness for the purpose of achieving high energy conversion efficiency, these cycles were repeated several times. The obtained TiO2 films were soaked in N719 dye at 50 °C for 2 hours and then washed in ethanol. Sandwich-type cells were fabricated by assembling dye-adsorbed TiO2 films and Pt-sputtered substrates followed by an iodide-based electrolyte solution (Iodolyte AN-50, Solaronix) injection into the sandwiched structure by capillary action.
Characterization
Thermogravimetric (TG, Model: TGA 92-18, Setaram) analysis in the temperature range of 50 to 500 °C was performed to check the removal of organic binders after the APP treatment. The specific surface areas of the TiO2 nanoparticles and sorption isotherms of TiO2 films were measured using a Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analyzer (Model: Tristar 3020, Micromeritics). The infrared (IR) transmittance spectra of the TiO2 samples were measured at room temperature in the range of 600–4000 cm−1 using an FT-IR spectrometer (Model: FT-IR 4100, Jasco). The electron binding energies of the TiO2 films were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Model: Sigma Probe, Thermo VG Scientific). The XPS spectra were acquired using a monochromatic Al–K source (100 W) and the binding energies of the Ti 2p peaks were calibrated with respect to the C 1s peak from TiO2 at 284.6 eV. The morphology of the TiO2 films was observed by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Model: JSM-6330F, JEOL) and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Model: JEM-3000F, JEOL). The crystalline structures were identified using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (Model: D/MAX-2500, RIGAKU). For the TG, BET, FT-IR, and HRTEM measurements, the nanocrystalline TiO2 particles were removed from each film. The photovoltaic properties of the fabricated solar cells under the illumination of an air mass of 1.5 (with Solar simulator; Peccell Technologies, Japan; intensity: 100 mW cm−2) were measured with the aid of a potentiostat (CHI 608C, CH Instruments, Austin, TX). All of the photovoltaic properties were characterized without shadow masks. The electron transport time and charge recombination time were characterized by intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) under a short-circuit condition and by intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) under an open-circuit condition, respectively (Zahner, Zennium). A red light-emitting diode (LED, 627 nm) was used as the modulated light source. The amount of dye loading was measured by using UV-Vis spectroscopy (PerkinElmer, Lambda 35) for the dye solution that was obtained by immersing the APP and heat treated TiO2 electrodes into a mixture of DI water, ethanol, and NH4OH.42–44
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MEST) (2012M3A7B4049967, 2012M3A6A7054864 and 2011-0017210). This work was also supported by the New & Renewable Energy of the KETEP grant (2010-T100100460) and funded by KIST internal project.
Notes and references
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ahn, K. M. Rabe and J. M. Triscone, Science, 2004, 303, 488 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Hu, M. W. Tian, B. Nysten and A. M. Jonas, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 62 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe, W. K. Woo, M. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nature, 2002, 420, 800 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Taton, C. A. Mirkin and R. L. Letsinger, Science, 2000, 289, 1757 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, F. Patolsky, E. Katz, J. F. Hainfeld and I. Willner, Science, 2003, 299, 1877 CrossRef CAS .

          G. A. Ozin and A. Arsenault, Nanochemistry: a chemical approach to nanomaterials, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  2005 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Jeong, L. B. Hu, H. Wu, S. W. Lee and Y. P. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 13013 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakajima, M. Isobe, T. Tsuchiya, Y. Ueda and T. Kumagai, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 735 CrossRef CAS .
M. Durr, A. Schmid, M. Obermaier, S. Rosselli, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 607 CrossRef .
T. Yuji, H. Akatsuka, N. Mungkunh, B. W. Park and Y. M. Sung, Vacuum, 2009, 83, 124 CrossRef .
S. Ito, N.-L. C. Ha, G. Rothenberger, P. Liska, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Péchy, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4004 RSC .
M. G. Kang, N. G. Park, K. S. Ryu, S. H. Chang and K. J. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 574 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kuang, J. Brillet, P. Chen, M. Takata, S. Uchida, H. Miura, K. Sumioka, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, D. K. Lee, J. Y. Kim, B. Kim, N. G. Park, K. Kim, J. H. Shin, I. S. Choi and M. J. Ko, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8950 CAS .
S. Moghaddam, E. Pengwang, Y. B. Jiang, A. R. Garcia, D. J. Burnett, C. J. Brinker, R. I. Masel and M. A. Shannon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 230 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Sun, M. Y. Timmermans, Y. Tian, A. G. Nasibulin, E. I. Kauppinen, S. Kishimoto, T. Mizutani and Y. Ohno, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 156 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saf, M. Goriup, T. Steindl, T. E. Hamedinger, D. Sandholzer and G. Hayn, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 323 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Lawrence, J. R. Brewer, L. Wang, T. S. Wu, J. Wells-Kingsbury, M. M. Ihrig, G. H. Wang, Y. L. Soo, W. N. Mei and C. L. Cheung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2666 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Holman, C. Y. Liu and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2661 CrossRef CAS .
M. Junkin, J. Watson, J. P. V. Geest and P. K. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, R. Yang, L. Xie, J. L. Qu, Y. Liu and X. G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1451 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, J. H. Kim and B. K. Kang, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8074 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Moon, D. B. Kim, B. Gweon, W. Choe, H. P. Song and C. Jo, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 4272 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Moon, W. Choe and B. K. Kang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 188 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schutze, J. Y. Jeong, S. E. Babayan, J. Park, G. S. Selwyn and R. F. Hicks, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 1998, 26, 1685 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tendero, C. Tixier, P. Tristant, J. Desmaison and P. Leprince, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B., 2006, 61, 2 CrossRef .
J. Y. Jeong, J. Park, I. Henins, S. E. Babayan, V. J. Tu, G. S. Selwyn, G. Ding and R. F. Hicks, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 8027 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, I. Henins, H. W. Herrmann, G. S. Selwyn, J. Y. Jeong, R. F. Hicks, D. Shim and C. S. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 288 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, I. Henins, H. W. Herrmann and G. S. Selwyn, Phys. Plasmas, 2000, 7, 3141 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Herzberg, Molecular spectra and molecular structure I. Spectra of diatomic molecules, Van Nostrand, Princeton, NJ,  1955 Search PubMed .
E. Stoffels, A. J. Flikweert, W. W. Stoffels and G. M. W. Kroesen, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 2002, 11, 383 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Moon, D. B. Kim, B. Gweon and W. Choe, Phys. Plasmas, 2008, 15, 103504 CrossRef .

          http://www.applasma.com/eng/product/plasma-cleaners.php
        .
M. W. Chase, NIST-JANAF Thermochemical Tables, Fourth Edition, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1998, 9, 1 Search PubMed .
R. D. Shannon and J. A. Pask, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1965, 48, 391 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, I.-S. Cho, J. H. Lee, D. H. Kim, D. W. Kim, J. Y. Kim, H. Shin, J.-K. Lee, H. S. Jung, N.-G. Park, K. Kim, M. J. Ko and K. S. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1958 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jung, J. K. Lee, M. Nastasi, S. W. Lee, J. Y. Kim, J. S. Park and K. S. Hong, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10332 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jung, J. K. Lee, S. W. Lee, K. S. Hong and H. Shin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8476 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr01889jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Atmospheric pressure plasma (APP) equipment for the fabrication of flexible DSSCs. (a) Images of the APP source generating the Ar/O2 plasma from the side and bottom views. TiO2 nanocrystal films are coated onto rigid FTO/glass and flexible ITO/PEN substrates. (b) Oxygen related species (OH and O I) and N2, N2+ diatomic lines with Ar I atomic lines are observed. The vibrational temperature based on the N2 second positive system is 3800 °C. (c) Illustration of the low temperature sintering fabrication method using the APP equipment. This APP process enables the R2R process with high throughput.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of raw (green), APP treated (red), and heat treated (blue) TiO2 nanocrystal films. (a) TGA curves. Low weight loss for the APP treated sample corresponds to APP capability of removing organic binders. (b) FESEM images of the surfaces of heat and APP treated TiO2 films. The apparent image for the spherical TiO2 nanoparticles indicates that the APP process prevents the agglomeration of the nanoparticles. (c) The N2 sorption isotherms and pore size distribution plot (inset) demonstrate the mesoscopic nanoporous structure of the APP treated TiO2 film. (d) The XPS spectra indicate that the APP process is able to heal the point defects such as Ti3+ on the TiO2 surface. (e) FT-IR spectra displaying the hydroxylation of the TiO2 surface by the APP process.	 

 	Fig. 3  Change in crystallinity of TiO2 polymorphs induced by the APP process and emission spectrum from the Ar/O2 plasma. (a) XRD patterns of raw (green), APP treated (red), and heat treated (blue) TiO2 films. Note that the APP process significantly improves the crystallinity of the anatase nanocrystals given the apparently increased peak intensity of anatase (101) in comparison with the FTO peaks. (b) HRTEM images of each TiO2 nanocrystal. The minimal lattice imperfection of the APP treated one supports the improved crystallinity.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photovoltaic performance of DSSC containing APP treated (filled circle) and heat treated (vacant circle) TiO2 under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G). (a) Short circuit current density (Jsc), (b) open circuit voltage (Voc), (c) fill factor (FF), (d) overall energy conversion efficiency (η), and (e) amount of dye loading. (f) Comparisons of the charge recombination time constant (τr) from IMVS and the transport time constant (τct) from IMPS for APP and heat treated DSSCs containing 4 μm thick TiO2 films as a function of the incident light intensities. The DSSCs based on the APP treated films show higher efficiency than their counterparts (heat treated films) of the same thickness, which corresponds with the enhanced dye adsorption and facilitated charge transport.	 

 	Fig. 5  Flexible photoelectrode and DSSC fabricated by the APP process. (a) Schematic illustrations and real photo images of the flexible TiO2 photoelectrode and DSSC based on the ITO/PEN substrate. (b) I–V characteristic of the flexible DSSC under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G). The photovoltaic properties are summarized in the inset of (b).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr01889j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
