TCO-free flexible monolithic back-contact dye -sensitized solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE24338A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE24338A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 824-829Show Chemical TermsTCO-free flexible monolithic back-contact dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Dongchuan 
            Fu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Patrick 
            Lay
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Udo 
            Bach‡
*ab
aDepartment of Materials Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia. E-mail: udo.bach@monash.edu
bCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Materials Science and Engineering, Clayton South, Victoria 3169, Australia
Received 
      11th December 2012
    , Accepted 7th January 2013First published on 8th January 2013AbstractA novel transparent conductive oxide (TCO)-free monolithic back-contact dye-sensitized solar cell (mBC-DSC) architecture is proposed, capable of achieving conversion efficiencies of 4.6%. The mBC-DSCs consist of two coplanar charge-collecting electrodes separated by a porous ZrO2 spacer layer. The mesoporous dye-sensitized TiO2 film is located on top of the upper electrode. This novel device architecture eliminates the need for TCO electrodes in DSCs, enabling the use of highly conductive metal electrodes to produce low-cost flexible dye-sensitized solar cells.

Broader context
For the first time, we have successfully demonstrated a novel type of flexible transparent conductive oxide (TCO)-free monolithic back-contact dye-sensitized solar cells. We fabricated the devices with simple printing and vacuum deposition techniques and achieved conversion efficiencies up to 4.2%. The back-contact geometry enables the use of two metal electrodes and thus eliminates the need for TCO layers. The feature allows to avoid the high cost and transmission losses associated with TCO materials. The monolithic nature (all active layers are located on the same substrate) of the novel device brings about major manufacturing advantages. Auxiliary wiring and interconnections can be integrated onto the solar cell backplane to facilitate the fabrication of interconnected solar cell modules and their integration into electronic circuits.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are low-cost photovoltaic devices that exhibit solar-to-electricity conversion efficiencies of up to 12.3%.1,2 A typical DSC consists of a working electrode (WE) coated with a dye-sensitized TiO2 film and a counter electrode (CE) coated with a Pt catalytic layer. The two electrodes are assembled in a sandwich-type fashion to form a sealed compartment which is filled with an electrolyte containing a redox couple. To date, most DSCs are based on this sandwich-type architectures in which either the WE or the CE needs to be transparent to visible light to allow the illumination of the TiO2 photoelectrode. This necessitates the use of transparent conductive oxide (TCO) electrodes that account for a considerable portion of the DSC module cost.3 Furthermore, for large area devices, the sandwich-type architecture is vulnerable to the change in cell gap, which potentially leads to shorting or an increase in electrolyte diffusion resistance.
Alternative architectures have been proposed to resolve the problems encountered in sandwich-type DSCs. A general strategy in these novel designs is to use monolithic or back-contact architectures comprising interdigitated fingers, metal mesh or porous electrodes to omit the need for TCO materials.4–10 The classic monolithic DSC reported by Kay and Grätzel4 employs a carbon-based CE instead of the conventional platinized TCO electrode to halve the usage of the TCO material. The gap between the WE and CE in the device was established by a porous rutile spacer layer. The ‘back-contact DSCs’ reported by Fuke et al.5 and Kashiwa et al.6 consist of a porous Ti WE on the backside of the TiO2 film. Although TCO electrodes are eliminated in these designs to avoid light transmission losses, these back-contact cells are essentially sandwich-type with the two charge-collecting electrodes located on two different substrates. Besides, the devices are still susceptible to issues arising from varying cell gaps. The dye-sensitized back-contact solar cells recently reported by our group7 employ a pair of interdigitated electrode arrays located on a single substrate. The device is monolithic and can be fabricated on opaque substrates. Recently, Cha et al. reported a TCO-free DSC consisting of a stainless steel mesh WE and a Pt CE bonded onto the two sides of an insulating glass paper. The TiO2 layer was deposited onto the stainless steel mesh of the bonded substrate.8 However, the width of the apertures on the stainless steel mesh is approximately 50 μm, which potentially reduces the efficiency of electron collection. Yun et al. reported a similar design using photochemically perforated Ti foils as the WE.9 Here, the photochemical etching process increased the complexity of fabrication. Pitch-sizes down to 60 μm were achieved, however the impedance of the device was substantially higher than that of conventional DSCs due to limited electrolyte diffusion through the perforated foil. The DSCs reported by Cha et al. and Yun et al. both achieved conversion efficiencies close to 2%.
Herein we report a novel TCO-free architecture consisting of two coplanar charge collecting electrodes co-located on a common substrate, separated by a ZrO2 spacer layer. Both the top metal electrode as well as the ZrO2 layer are porous, allowing electrolyte diffusion all the way to the buried bottom electrode acting as the CE. We define this device as a monolithic back-contact dye-sensitized solar cell (mBC-DSC). The key advantage of this device architecture is that it allows both WE and CE to be opaque, enabling the fabrication of TCO-free DSCs based on cost-effective and more conductive metal electrodes. Furthermore, the device is monolithic while most device components can be fabricated by simple printing and vacuum deposition techniques. We fabricated the novel device on FTO glass as well as flexible Ti foil (defined as FTO and Ti based mBC-DSCs in the following context), and achieved 4.6% and 4.2% conversion efficiencies for those two types of devices, respectively. These are the highest efficiencies reported for flexible TCO-free DSC architectures to date.8,9
The architectures of a sandwich-type DSC (ref-DSC) and a mBC-DSC are illustrated in Fig. 1(a) and (b). The most common DSC architecture shown in Fig. 1(a) consists of a FTO glass WE coated with a dye-sensitized mesoporous TiO2 layer and a platinized FTO CE constructed in a sandwich-type structure. The sealed cell compartment is filled with an electrolyte solution that contains a redox couple such as triiodide/iodide. An appropriate cell gap is important to avoid shorting and to ensure efficient ionic diffusion between the WE and CE. Dye excitation occurs when incident light reaches the dye-sensitized TiO2 photoelectrode. The excited dye molecules then inject electrons into the semiconductor TiO2 electrode, followed by the diffusion of the electrons within the mesoporous film. The oxidized dye molecules are regenerated by the triiodide/iodide redox mediator, which is then reduced at the platinized CE.
 Fig. 1  Schematic cross-sectional diagram of (a) a conventional sandwich-architecture DSC (ref-DSC) and (b) a monolithic back-contact DSC (mBC-DSC). The illumination directions for the two devices are also shown (blue arrows). Individual cell components are illustrated using color codes. The counter electrode in (b) can be either FTO glass or Ti foil. 
The cross-sectional scheme of an mBC-DSC shown in Fig. 1(b) preserves the key features of the most common DSC architecture. A pair of coplanar WE and CE are separated by a porous ZrO2 spacer layer. The dye-sensitized TiO2 film is located on top of the co-planar substrate. The CE, which is also the supporting substrate, is coated with a Pt layer for triiodide reduction. In this study, mBC-DSCs were fabricated on FTO glass as well as on Ti foil substrates, demonstrating the use of TCO-free electrode materials in the device architecture.
The FTO and Ti based mBC-DSCs were both produced via a layer-by-layer process. The Pt catalytic layer on top of the FTO counter electrode was produced by a thermal decomposition method as previously reported,11 whereas the Pt layer on top of the Ti foil counter electrode was produced by magnetron sputtering using a 100 W DC power source. The following fabrication procedures were applied to the mBC-DSCs on both FTO glass and Ti foil substrates. A ZrO2 spacer layer was screen-printed on top of the platinized CEs followed by sintering at elevated temperature (500 °C). The process results in the formation of a porous ZrO2 layer which allows electrolyte diffusion all the way to the buried bottom electrode. The thickness of the ZrO2 layer after sintering is 6 μm. Subsequently, a Ti working electrode with a thickness of approximately 350 nm was deposited onto the ZrO2 spacer layer by magnetron sputtering using 100 W DC power. A 12 μm thick TiO2 film (18 nm TiO2 particle size) was then screen-printed onto the Ti WE, followed by the standard sintering and dying process with the Ru sensitizer N719 as previously reported.12 The FTO based mBC-DSCs were then sealed with a thermoplast (Surlyn™) gasket and a transparent glass cover slide. The sealed compartment was then filled through an entry port with an electrolyte solution containing a triiodide/iodide redox couple. The Ti based mBC-DSCs were tested in an open-cell setup, where a drop of electrolyte was applied onto the TiO2 electrode and was covered by a glass slide. Reference DSCs (ref-DSCs) with the sandwich-type architecture shown in Fig. 1(a) were fabricated using identical TiO2 electrodes, dying procedures and electrolyte composition.
In mBC-DSCs the platinized CE is covered by a ZrO2 spacer layer and a Ti WE. The porosity of the two layers is therefore a critical factor that influences the diffusion of the triiodide/iodide redox couple through the two porous layers to the bottom CE. The morphology of the device was examined using SEM after the deposition of the ZrO2 layer and after 20 and 60 min sputter coating of the Ti WE. Similar morphologies were observed for the FTO and Ti based mBC-DSCs. Fig. 2(a) shows the porous ZrO2 layer that is deposited on top of the platinized CE. ZrO2 nanoparticles with a 50–100 nm particle size form an interconnected porous network. Fig. 2(b) shows the surface of the Ti-film produced by 20 min of DC Ti sputtering (equivalent to a 125 nm Ti coating thickness on a plain glass substrate). ZrO2 particles are fully covered by Ti deposits. After sputter coating for a total of 60 min (equivalent to 350 nm; Fig. 2(c)), micron-sized spherical aggregates can be identified. A sheet resistance of 10 Ω per □ on the porous Ti WE on ZrO2 was measured by a four-point probe resistivity meter, compared to a value of 4 Ω per □ for a Ti layer deposited under identical conditions onto a plain glass substrate.
 Fig. 2  Scanning electron micrographs showing the morphology of (a) a porous spacer layer made of 50–100 nm ZrO2 nanoparticles, and the same layer coated with Ti by sputter coating for (b) 20 and (c) 60 minutes (equivalent to 125 and 350 nm Ti coatings measured on plain glass substrates). The inset image in (c) shows an identical Ti coating on plain glass coated for 60 min at the same magnification. A cross-sectional image of an mBC-DSC on FTO glass after printing and sintering in the TiO2 layer is shown in (d). 
The morphology of the porous Ti coating on the ZrO2 spacer layer is similar to that of the porous Ti WE reported by Fuke et al.13 In comparison, the sputter coating of Ti under identical conditions onto a plain glass substrate yields a dense Ti film as shown in the inset of Fig. 2(c). Fig. 2(d) shows a cross-sectional image of the device after the printing and sintering of the TiO2 photoelectrode. The image shows clearly a porous ZrO2 spacer layer, a subsequent Ti coating as the WE and a TiO2 layer on top of the Ti WE.
To further investigate the diffusion of the triiodide/iodide redox couple through the Ti and ZrO2 layer to the platinized CEs, the diffusion resistance Rd of the electrolyte was measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) before and after Ti coating using the device setup shown in Fig. S1(a).† The devices were assembled using two backplates comprising a platinized FTO glass covered by a 6 μm ZrO2 spacer layer. An additional porous Ti layer (350 nm thick) was applied onto one of the backplates to investigate the electrolyte diffusion resistance before and after the Ti coating. The backplates were sandwiched using Surlyn gaskets. The cell chamber was then filled with the electrolyte for mBC-DSCs. The EIS results for devices with and without the use of the porous Ti layer are compared in Fig. S1(b).† It is shown that covering the ZrO2 layer by a 350 nm Ti coating results in a slight increase in Rd from 11.9 ± 0.6 to 15.6 ± 1.9 Ω. In comparison, Rd of the identical electrolyte between two platinized FTO glass electrodes with comparable cell geometry was 8.1 ± 0.6 Ω. The result indicates that both the ZrO2 and Ti layers are sufficiently porous to allow the free diffusion of the triiodide/iodide redox couple to and from the platinized CE.
The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) of FTO based mBC-DSCs, Ti based mBC-DSCs and ref-DSCs are shown in Fig. 3(a). The inset picture shows a flexible mBC-DSC fabricated on Ti foil. At wavelengths higher than 600 nm, the IPCEs of the two types of mBC-DSCs and the ref-DSCs almost superimpose. Below 600 nm, the IPCEs of the mBC-DSCs drop significantly relative to that of the ref-DSCs, due to the optical absorption of triiodide situated in the electrolyte layer between the TiO2 film and the glass cover slide. The ref-DSCs were illuminated through the FTO glass (see Fig. 1) and do not suffer from this inner filter effect. Similar IPCE peak values of around 67% were observed for the two types of mBC-DSCs, slightly lower than the 73% IPCE peak measured for the ref-DSCs.
 Fig. 3  (a) Spectral response (IPCE) and (b) photocurrent-density–voltage-characteristics of three types of DSCs, namely FTO based mBC-DSCs, Ti based mBC-DSCs and ref-DSCs. All DSCs shown comprise a 12 μm thick TiO2 electrode sensitized with Ru sensitizer N719 and infiltrated with a triiodide/iodide electrolyte (illumination directions as shown in Fig. 1). 
The photocurrent-density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the mBC-DSCs and the ref-DSCs are compared in Fig. 3(b). Key parameters including open-circuit voltage Voc, short-circuit current density Jsc, fill factor FF, and conversion efficiency η are summarized in Table 1. Under dark and one-sun illumination (AM1.5, 1 kW m−2), the J–V curves of the two types of mBC-DSCs show typical diode and photodiode behaviour. No obvious shunting is observed, indicating an effective electrical insulation between the WE and CE by the porous ZrO2 spacer layers. The short-circuit current density (Jsc) at one sun illumination for the two types of mBC-DSCs is 8.2 mA cm−2, compared to a photocurrent of 11.5 mA cm−2 for the ref-DSCs. This agrees with the IPCE results affected by the optical absorption by the triiodide contained in the electrolyte layer on top of the TiO2 film.
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance of the FTO based mBC-DSCs, Ti based mBC-DSCs and ref-DSCs (illumination directions for mBC-DSCs and ref-DSCs as indicated in Fig. 1)






FTO mBC-DSC
Ti mBC-DSC
ref-DSC





V
oc (mV)
776
791
751



J
sc (mA cm−2)
8.2
8.2
11.5


FF
0.72
0.64
0.74



η (%)
4.6
4.2
6.4




The open-circuit voltages (Voc) of the two types of mBC-DSCs are 776 and 791 mV respectively. These are higher than the Voc (751 mV) measured for the ref-DSCs. Correspondingly, the dark current onsets of the mBC-DSCs are shifted towards higher voltages compared to the ref-DSCs. The results can be attributed to the formation of an intrinsic dense oxide layer on the Ti WE in mBC-DSCs, blocking the back electron transfer from the WE to triiodide at the WE–electrolyte interface. In comparison, the recombination at the FTO–electrolyte interface in the ref-DSC is more pronounced, because no compact TiO2 layer is used for the device. It has been shown that a dense blocking layer deposited onto the FTO glass prior to printing the mesoporous TiO2 electrode can enhance the performance of a DSC by decreasing the electron–hole recombination at the substrate–electrolyte interface while enhancing the electronic contact between the TiO2 and the charge-collecting electrode.14 The formation of an intrinsic dense TiO2 coating upon sintering of the Ti WE eliminates the need to deposit a dense TiO2 layer,12 allowing the achievement of higher Vocvia simplified fabrication processes.
Fill factors (FF) of 0.72 and 0.64 are measured for the FTO and Ti based mBC-DSCs, lower than the FF of 0.74 measured for the ref-DSC, attributing mostly to the higher internal resistances of the mBC-DSCs. This is clearly illustrated by the smaller slope of the J–V curves of the mBC-DSCs when approaching the Voc points. A detailed analysis of the internal resistance obtained through impedance spectroscopy is provided below.
Overall efficiencies of 4.6% and 4.2% are measured for the FTO glass and Ti based mBC-DSCs, compared to an efficiency value of 6.4% measured for the ref-DSCs. This difference is mostly due to the lower photocurrent densities measured for mBC-DSCs. The lower photocurrent densities compared to the ref-DSCs attribute mostly to the optical filter effect by the electrolyte layer which can be eliminated by the use of thinner sealing gaskets15 or alternative electrolyte systems such as Co–polypyridyl complexes that show significantly lower light absorption.1
In mBC-DSCs, photocurrents are generated preferentially in the upper regions of the TiO2 film, away from the charge collecting Ti WE. The average electron transport length is therefore larger in mBC-DSCs than in conventional DSCs. Similar issues were studied in previous work which shows reduced charge collection efficiency when thick TiO2 films were used.18
In order to understand the electron transport properties of mBC-DSCs, EIS measurements were applied to the three types of DSCs in the dark at various bias potentials.16,19 The Nyquist plot in Fig. 4 shows the EIS results measured in the dark with a Fermi level voltage (VF) of −750 mV applied to each device (detailed results of recombination resistance Rrecvs. bias potential is shown in Fig. S2†). The Fermi level voltage can be calculated by subtracting the ohmic drop from the applied bias potential across the devices.16 Three typical arcs from high to low frequencies are observed, which can be assigned to the charge transfer at the Pt–electrolyte interface, the electron recombination within the devices and the finite Warburg diffusion of the redox couple.19,20 The impedance parameters of the electrochemical processes are obtained by fitting the result to the classic transmission-line model as shown in the insetted circuit diagram.19
 Fig. 4  Nyquist plot of the Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) results measured for mBC-DSCs (FTO and Ti based) and ref-DSCs in the dark with an applied VF16 of 750 mV. The components Rs, Z1, Z2 and Zd are assigned to the series resistance of electrode materials, impedance at the Pt–electrolyte interface, impedance for electron recombination and the Warburg diffusion resistance of the electrolyte. The inset image shows a simplified equivalent circuit of these solar cells. Key parameters, including, charge transfer resistance at the platinized CE (RPt), recombination resistance (Rrec, included in the transmission line) and redox couple diffusion resistance (Rd), are obtained by fitting the EIS results with the insetted equivalent circuit. 
Key parameters obtained from the EIS results are summarized in Table 2. It is shown that the series resistances (Rs), indicated by the first intersection points on the real (Z′) axis, are 20.4 and 67.1 Ω for the mBC-DSCs using FTO and Ti substrates, higher than the 6.9 Ω measured for the ref-DSCs. The higher series resistances of the mBC-DSCs can be rationalized partially by increasing the Ti WE resistance to around 20 Ω per □ after device sintering. The much higher Rs measured for the Ti based mBC-DSCs can also be attributed to the setup of the open-cell measurement. In comparison, the FTO glass electrode used in the ref-DSCs has a sheet resistance of 10 Ω per □ after sintering. Charge transfer resistances (RPt) at the Pt–electrolyte interface, indicated by the first semicircle on the Nyquist plot, are similar (3.7 and 4.3 Ω) for the ref-DSCs and the FTO based mBC-DSCs, indicating that covering the Pt coating with the ZrO2 spacer layer has only a slight influence on the accessibility of the electrolyte to the Pt catalytic coating. The higher RPt in the Ti based mBC-DSCs (46.6 Ω) attributes mostly to the less active Pt coating produced by magnetron sputtering. Furthermore, the third arc, assigned to the Warburg diffusion resistances (Rd) within the electrolyte, is also larger for the two mBC-DSCs. This is due to the increased tiiodide/iodide diffusion resistance through the porous ZrO2 spacer layer and the porous Ti WE. The observed trend is in agreement with the EIS date discussed above, comparing Rd for cells with and without porous Ti layers (Fig. S1†). Overall internal resistances17 are 37.2 and 128.5 Ω for the FTO and Ti based mBC-DSCs, higher than 17.6 Ω measured for the ref-DSCs, in agreement with the smaller slopes of the J–V curves for the two mBC-DSCs when approaching the Voc points (Fig. 3(b)).
Table 2 Series resistance Rs, charge transfer resistance at the Pt–electrolyte interface RPt, recombination resistance Rrec, and redox couple diffusion resistance Rd measured by EIS. Rtot refers to the total internal resistance of the devices, which is the sum of Rs, RPt, and Rd as described in ref. 15.17 All parameters in the table are measured in Ω






FTO mBC-DSC
Ti mBC-DSC
Ref-DSC





R
s

20.4
67.1
6.9



R
Pt

4.3
46.6
3.7



R
rec

318.9
289.1
113.5



R
d

12.5
14.8
7.0



R
tot

37.2
128.5
17.6




However, higher recombination resistances (Rrec) of 318.9 and 289.1 Ω are measured for the FTO and Ti based mBC-DSCs compared to the 113.5 Ω Rrec measured for the ref-DSCs, indicating decreased recombination in the two devices. The results of higher recombination resistances in the mBC-DSCs are also supported by the results in Fig. S2.† The figure shows an upper shift of the Rrecvs. VF plots for the two mBC-DSCs relative to the ref-DSCs. The electron recombination in a DSC proceeds via three main channels, namely the electron recombination from TiO2 to dye cations, the electron recombination from TiO2 to triiodide, and the back electron transfer from the WE material to triiodide. As the EIS measurements were performed in the dark, the back electron transfer to dye cations is negligible. On the other hand, identical TiO2, dye and electrolyte were used for all devices, so therefore similar recombination resistances at the TiO2–dye–electrolyte interface can be expected. The higher recombination resistances in mBC-DSCs can consequently be attributed mostly to the reduced recombination at the WE–electrolyte interface, due to the formation of an intrinsic oxide layer on the Ti WE, which performs similarly to the dense TiO2 blocking layer used in conventional DSCs.12 This correlates well with the higher Voc and the dark current onset shift observed in the J–V characteristics (Fig. 3(b) and Table 1).
Conclusions
In conclusion, novel TCO-free mBC-DSCs have been produced via simple fabrication techniques. The novel devices consist of two coplanar charge-collecting electrodes separated by a porous ZrO2 spacer layer. The devices are monolithic and can be produced on opaque electrode materials, such as the Ti foil used in this study. Efficiencies of up to 4.6% and 4.2% were measured for the mBC-DSCs fabricated on FTO glass and Ti foil substrates, showing similar photovoltaic performance achieved regardless of the electrode materials used. The successful fabrication of the Ti foil based mBC-DSCs demonstrates the potential of using roll-to-roll printing techniques to produce cost-effective TCO-free dye-sensitized solar cells on flexible metal substrates.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Australian Solar Institute, the Victorian State Government Department of Primary Industry Victorian Organic Solar Cells Consortium for financial support. The authors also thank the Monash Center for Electron Microscopy (MCEM) for their support on electron microscopy facilities.
Notes and references
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. Tsao, C. Yi, A. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kroon, N. J. Bakker, H. J. P. Smit, P. Liska, K. R. Thampi, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, A. Hinsch, S. Hore, U. Würfel, R. Sastrawan, J. R. Durrant, E. Palomares, H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, J. Walter, K. Skupien and G. E. Tulloch, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 1–18 CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fuke, A. Fukui, R. Komiya, A. Islam, Y. Chiba, M. Yanagida, R. Yamanaka and L. Han, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4974–4979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kashiwa, Y. Yoshida and S. Hayase, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033308 CrossRef .
D. Fu, X. L. Zhang, R. L. Barber and U. Bach, Adv. Mater., 2010, 38, 4270 CrossRef .
S. I. Cha, Y. Kim, K. H. Hwang, Y. J. Shin, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6071–6075 CAS .
H. G. Yun, M. Kim, M. Kang and I. H. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 6441–6444 RSC .
T. L. Zhang, H. Y. Chen, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1724–1730 CAS .
N. Papageorgiou, W. Maier and M. Grätzel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 876–884 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613–4619 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fuke, A. Fukui, Y. Chiba, R. Komiya, R. Yamanakay and L. Han, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, L420–L422 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Góes, E. Joanni, E. C. Muñiz, R. Savu, T. R. Habeck, P. R. Bueno and F. F. Santiago, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 23, 12415–12421 Search PubMed .
S. Ito, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Comte, P. Liska, D. Kuang and M. Grätzel, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 693–698 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Barea, C. Zafer, B. Gultekin, B. Aydin, S. Koyuncu, S. Icli, F. F. Santiago and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19840–19848 CAS .
L. Han, N. Koide, Y. Chiba, A. Islam, R. Komiya, N. Fuke, A. Fukui and R. Yamanaka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 1–3 Search PubMed .
N. Fuke, A. Fukui, A. Islam, R. Komiya, R. Yamanaka, L. Han and H. Harima, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 064307 CrossRef .
J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, L. Otero, D. Kuang, S. Zakeeruddin and F. F. Santiago, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6550–6560 Search PubMed .
J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 210–234 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1 and S2. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24338a‡ Tech Fellow, The Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication, 151 Wellington Road, Clayton 3168, Victoria, Australia.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
For the first time, we have successfully demonstrated a novel type of flexible transparent conductive oxide (TCO)-free monolithic back-contact dye-sensitized solar cells. We fabricated the devices with simple printing and vacuum deposition techniques and achieved conversion efficiencies up to 4.2%. The back-contact geometry enables the use of two metal electrodes and thus eliminates the need for TCO layers. The feature allows to avoid the high cost and transmission losses associated with TCO materials. The monolithic nature (all active layers are located on the same substrate) of the novel device brings about major manufacturing advantages. Auxiliary wiring and interconnections can be integrated onto the solar cell backplane to facilitate the fabrication of interconnected solar cell modules and their integration into electronic circuits.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic cross-sectional diagram of (a) a conventional sandwich-architecture DSC (ref-DSC) and (b) a monolithic back-contact DSC (mBC-DSC). The illumination directions for the two devices are also shown (blue arrows). Individual cell components are illustrated using color codes. The counter electrode in (b) can be either FTO glass or Ti foil.	 

 	Fig. 2  Scanning electron micrographs showing the morphology of (a) a porous spacer layer made of 50–100 nm ZrO2 nanoparticles, and the same layer coated with Ti by sputter coating for (b) 20 and (c) 60 minutes (equivalent to 125 and 350 nm Ti coatings measured on plain glass substrates). The inset image in (c) shows an identical Ti coating on plain glass coated for 60 min at the same magnification. A cross-sectional image of an mBC-DSC on FTO glass after printing and sintering in the TiO2 layer is shown in (d).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Spectral response (IPCE) and (b) photocurrent-density–voltage-characteristics of three types of DSCs, namely FTO based mBC-DSCs, Ti based mBC-DSCs and ref-DSCs. All DSCs shown comprise a 12 μm thick TiO2 electrode sensitized with Ru sensitizer N719 and infiltrated with a triiodide/iodide electrolyte (illumination directions as shown in Fig. 1).	 


V
oc (mV)	776	791	751

J
sc (mA cm−2)	8.2	8.2	11.5
FF	0.72	0.64	0.74

η (%)	4.6	4.2	6.4

 	Fig. 4  Nyquist plot of the Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) results measured for mBC-DSCs (FTO and Ti based) and ref-DSCs in the dark with an applied VF16 of 750 mV. The components Rs, Z1, Z2 and Zd are assigned to the series resistance of electrode materials, impedance at the Pt–electrolyte interface, impedance for electron recombination and the Warburg diffusion resistance of the electrolyte. The inset image shows a simplified equivalent circuit of these solar cells. Key parameters, including, charge transfer resistance at the platinized CE (RPt), recombination resistance (Rrec, included in the transmission line) and redox couple diffusion resistance (Rd), are obtained by fitting the EIS results with the insetted equivalent circuit.	 


R
s
	20.4	67.1	6.9

R
Pt
	4.3	46.6	3.7

R
rec
	318.9	289.1	113.5

R
d
	12.5	14.8	7.0

R
tot
	37.2	128.5	17.6
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1 and S2. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24338a
‡ Tech Fellow, The Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication, 151 Wellington Road, Clayton 3168, Victoria, Australia.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
