Towards solution processed all-carbon solar cells: a perspective  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE21587J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE21587J
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7810-7818Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsTowards solution processed all-carbon solar cells: a perspective

        
          
            Vincent C. 
            Tung
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jen-Hsien 
            Huang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jaemyung 
            Kim
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alexander J. 
            Smith
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chih-Wei 
            Chu
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jiaxing 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA. E-mail: jiaxing-huang@northwestern.edu
bResearch Center for Applied Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan 11529
Received 
      9th March 2012
    , Accepted 10th April 2012First published on 11th April 2012AbstractIn this perspective, we describe a new type of photovoltaic all-carbon composites, in which single walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and fullerenes are directly co-assembled and processed in water using graphene oxide (GO) as a surfactant. Solar cells made with C60/SWCNTs/reduced GO as the active layer and an additional evaporated C60 blocking layer yield a power conversion efficiency of 0.21%, which can be significantly increased to 0.85% by replacing C60 with the better absorber C70. These results suggest the possibility of making a new generation of solution processed all-carbon solar cells, in which all the functional layers are made of graphitic nanomaterials.Vincent C. TungVincent C. Tung received his M.S. degree in Chemistry from the National Tsing-Hua University, Taiwan in 2003 and Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from the University of California, Los Angeles in 2009 with honors. He continued on his postdoctoral research at the Northwestern University on solution-processed all-carbon hybrids for energy harvesting and storage. He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Engineering School, University of California, Merced (UCM) and is interested in the design and synthesis of novel carbon hybrid materials for energy conversion applications.Jaemyung KimJaemyung Kim received his B.S. degree from the Seoul National University, Republic of Korea in 2008. He is now a Ph.D. candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern University. His graduate research focuses on the development of an imaging technique for two-dimensional nanomaterials, interfacial activities of graphene-based sheets and their applications in organic solar cells, for which he has received a Materials Research Society (MRS) Graduate Student Silver Award and a Ryan Fellowship in Nanoscience at Northwestern University.Chih-Wei ChuChih-Wei Chu is a research fellow in the Research Center for Applied Sciences (RCAS) at Academia Sinica and an adjunct associate Professor in the department of Institute of Electro-Optical Engineering at National Chiao Tung University. He received his Ph.D. degree in the Department of Material Science and Engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles in 2006. He became an assistant research fellow in RCAS at Academia Sinica and was promoted to associate research fellow in 2010. Currently, Chu's research focuses on conjugated polymer and organic nanostructures for energy saving, conversion, and storage applications.Jiaxing HuangJiaxing Huang is an Assistant Professor of Materials Science and Engineering and the Morris E. Fine Junior Professor in Materials and Manufacturing at Northwestern University. He received a Ph.D. in chemistry from the University of California, Los Angeles in 2004, and became a Miller Research Fellow at the University of California, Berkeley before joining Northwestern in 2007. His main research interest is in the general area of material chemistry and processing. Some of the examples include 2D soft materials, organic nanocrystals and metal nanostructures. He is the recipient of an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, the NSF CAREER Award and the Inaugural Early Career Investigator Award by the Initiative for Sustainability and Energy at Northwestern.

Broader context
Graphitic nanomaterials such as zero dimensional (0D) fullerenes, one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes and two-dimensional (2D) graphene-based sheets have been extensively pursued as adducts for solution processed photovoltaics. If assembled together, they could form carbon-based heterojunctions for efficient light-to-electricity conversion. Because of their inherently poor solubility/processability, the assembly of dissimilar graphitic nanostructures into such heterojunctions typically involves extensive surface functionalization to impart processability. However, such strategies can adversely affect the functional carbon–carbon interfaces, thus hindering the transport of charge carriers. Using graphene oxide as a surfactant, single walled carbon nanotubes and fullerenes can be co-dispersed in water, leading to processable all-carbon composites with clean carbon–carbon heterojunctions that can generate photovoltaic responses. With the great varieties of fullerenes, carbon nanotubes and graphene derivatives, numerous types of all-carbon composites can be envisioned through this solution processing route. This could eventually lead to all-carbon solar cells, in which all the layers such as the transparent electrodes, interfacial layers, the active layer and the counter electrodes are made of graphitic materials.

Introduction: all-carbon heterojunctions
Carbon is among the oldest elements known to human beings and also one of the most abundant on earth. Graphitic nanomaterials including the zero-dimensional (0D), dot-like fullerenes (e.g., C60, C70),1 one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes (CNTs)2 and two-dimensional (2D) graphene-based sheets3 have long fascinated scientists across many disciplines.4 These carbon nanostructures are usually used as adducts to facilitate the separation, transport and collection of photo-dissociated charges in organic optoelectronic devices.5–11 However, when used collectively they could create novel all-carbon composite materials with new optoelectronic properties. For example, fullerenes are n-type semiconductors12 while semiconducting CNTs13,14 typically exhibit p-type behavior under ambient conditions. Therefore, nanoscopic p–n heterojunctions can be generated if they are brought together, which could lead to new carbon-based photovoltaic materials. Indeed, all-carbon or carbon-rich hybrid materials based on composites of fullerene–CNTs, fullerene–graphene and CNTs–graphene have started to attract significant interest.15–22
However, it is not a trivial task to prepare such all-carbon composites since these carbon materials are known to be hard to process, especially through solution routes. There are very limited choices of solvents that can dissolve or disperse graphitic nanostructures. For example, fullerenes are only soluble in a limited number of toxic organic solvents such as toluene, carbon disulfide, and 1-chloronaphthalene.4 CNTs and graphene sheets have only recently been found to be soluble in so-called “superacids” such as chlorosulfonic acid,23 and would typically bundle and aggregate in common solvents. To process these carbon nanomaterials in benign solvents, their surfaces have to be modified either covalently with solvent-liking functional groups or by coating with surfactant or solvent-liking polymers. Note the van der Waals interaction potentials (W) have a general form of distance (d) dependency of W ≈ (1/d)n, with n varying from 1 to 6 determined by the geometries and sizes of the interacting bodies.24 Therefore, surface functionalization also effectively lowers the self-attraction as it increases the separation (d) between the neighboring nanostructures. However, a fundamental tradeoff of such strategy is that it tends to sacrifice intrinsic material properties for enhanced processability. Surface coating introduces hard-to-remove and usually insulating surfactants and polymers while covalent functional groups inevitably break the π-conjugated carbon surfaces. Thus they not only require iterative material processing steps but could also compromise the overall electrical performances of the carbon materials. Alternatively, if the carbon building blocks are covalently connected with molecular linkers, the conjugated carbon atom networks would be damaged, resulting in compromised quality of the heterojunctions and photovoltaic performances. A green, surfactant-free, non-covalent, water-based processing strategy for these carbon nanostructures will be transformative as it can (i) eliminate or greatly reduce the use of toxic organic solvents to minimize the potential negative environmental impact; (ii) facilitate the integration of these carbon nanostructures with other materials such as in photovoltaic devices as it avoids the use of aggressive solvents that can damage other components and (iii) minimize the degree of damage or contamination of the functional surfaces of these carbon materials.
GO as a dispersing agent
Graphite oxide sheets, now called graphene oxide (GO), are made by exfoliation of graphite using century-old chemical reactions. Interest in this old material has resurged with the rapid development of graphene since 2004, as GO is considered a promising precursor for bulk production of graphene.25–29 Other than making graphene, GO itself can be viewed as a versatile 2D soft material30 such as for polymeric membranes, highly anisotropic colloids, liquid crystals31 and amphiphiles.32–35 For example, the structural models of GO36 shown in Fig. 1a and b suggest that its edge should be hydrophilic due to the ionizable –COOH groups. However, on its basal plane there are still many unoxidized hydrophobic graphitic nanopatches surrounded by the highly oxidized domains. This basal plane structure has been directly visualized by high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) (Fig. 1c).37 In this light, GO should effectively act as an amphiphile with a largely hydrophobic basal plane and hydrophilic edges. Indeed, we have found that GO sheets can adhere to interfaces and lower interfacial energy. For example, GO sheets can be directly spread on the water surface without the need for any surfactant and controllably tiled to form monolayers by the Langmuir–Blodgett technique.32,38 In aqueous solution, GO can accumulate at the air–water interface by flotation (i.e. bubbling)33 or during evaporation.39 In fact, due to its surface activity, a thin GO dome can be obtained by simply evaporating a droplet of GO dispersion supported by an aperture, which has been used as an electron-transparent and molecularly impermeable window for environmental scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies.40 GO sheets can also stabilize oil–water interfaces, generating Pickering emulsions of organic solvents by just gentle hand-shaking.33,34 Since the ionization of the edge –COOH groups is pH dependent, GO's amphiphilicity is also tunable by changing the pH value of solution.33 Moreover, the unique edge-to-center arrangement of hydrophilic and hydrophobic groups on GO suggests that its amphiphilicity is also size dependent. Indeed, spontaneous size separation of GO sheets has been observed at both air–water33 and oil–water interfaces.35 Small, sub-micron sheets were found to be more hydrophilic and tend to stay in water, while the larger ones tend to go to the interfaces.
 Fig. 1  (a) A three-dimensional structural model of GO. (b) GO can be viewed as a two-dimensional amphiphile, with hydrophobic π-conjugated domains (light green areas) spatially interspersed on its basal plane and hydrophilic –COOH groups on the edges (light orange area on the periphery) as shown in the structural model. (c) A false-colored, atomic resolution TEM image of a single suspended sheet of GO showing graphitic regions (light green), holes (blue) and disordered regions with oxygen functionality (purple).37 (c) is reproduced from ref. 37. 
The interfacial activity of GO suggests that it should be able to act as a surfactant to disperse hard-to-process materials, especially π-conjugated materials since GO sheets should be able to adhere to the solid–water interface well through π–π interaction. As shown in Fig. 2, graphite and single walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are not processable in water. They would settle down right after sonication. SEM images show that the size of sonicated graphite flakes is still in the range of microns (Fig. 2c) and the SWCNTs are still entangled and bundled (Fig. 2d). After sonication in GO water, both graphite and SWCNTs turn into colloidal dispersions that can remain stable for months.33 Even if sedimentation occurs, gentle shaking can readily redisperse it. SEM images reveal that graphite particles are broken down to largely sub-micron sizes (Fig. 2e) and the SWCNTs are disentangled and largely debundled (Fig. 2f). For both materials, they can adhere to GO sheets and thus be dispersed in water. Since GO's amphiphilicity is size dependent, its dispersing power is also affected by its size. Smaller GO sheets have higher colloidal stability, therefore, GO nanocolloids with lateral dimensions of sub-100 nm can create more stable colloidal dispersions of nanotubes than regular micron-sized ones.41 However, larger GO sheets have a planarizing effect when making thin films from the dispersions, which is critical for successful fabrication of multilayer thin film devices such as solar cells.
 Fig. 2  GO can act as a surfactant to disperse insoluble carbon materials such as (a) graphite or (b) carbon nanotubes in water. SEM studies revealed that (c) graphite powders are fractured into much smaller pieces (e). (d) SWCNTs are largely disentangled and debundled (f) after sonication with GO. 
After thermal or chemical reduction, GO can be cleanly converted to chemically modified graphene (a.k.a., reduced GO, r-GO) by gentle annealing without generating hard-to-remove byproducts,42,43 thus creating electrically addressable carbon–carbon interfaces in the final composites. This eliminates any adverse effects induced by the conventional surfactants and allows the exploration of the intrinsic properties of carbon–carbon junctions. In general, GO offers new opportunities as a dispersing agent for other graphitic materials or π-conjugated conductive polymers: the surfactant itself is now a functional component of the system.
Water processable fullerene/SWCNT/GO all-carbon composites
In our work, GO was synthesized by a modified Hummers' method.44 The crude product requires extensive washing and filtration to remove the metal ion byproducts, such as K+ or Na+, which if trapped in the GO product can cause potential fire risk in the solid state, and disrupt the colloidal dispersions. A two-step acid–acetone washing procedure has been developed for efficient purification.43,45 The resulting dry GO filtered cakes can then be re-dispersed in water to create quantitative “surfactant” stock solutions. Dispersions of the binary mixtures of C60, unfunctionalized SWCNT powders or GO (Fig. 3a) were made by blending the individual components in a mixture of water and methanol (10 to 1 volume ratio), followed by sonication for 2 h using a tip-sonicator. Typically the concentrations of C60, SWCNTs and GO are 0.5 mg ml−1, 1 mg ml−1 and 1 mg ml−1, respectively. To create the ternary composite, C60 and SWCNTs are first sonicated together to form a complex and then added into the GO dispersion. The cuvettes in Fig. 3b contain aqueous dispersions of GO, unfunctionalized SWCNTs, C60, and their binary and ternary mixtures after ultrasonication treatment, respectively. As expected, GO (C1) disperses very well in water but SWCNTs (C2) and C60 (C3) do not. The colloidal dispersion of SWCNTs–GO (C4) was found to be stable for at least months, and can be spin-coated onto a variety of substrates to create a smooth composite thin film (Fig. 2f), making them usable in solution processed multilayer thin film devices as the hole transport layer46 for polymer photovoltaic devices, and the interconnect47 for constructing solution processed tandem solar cells. C60 powders cannot be dispersed very well by GO (Fig. 3b, C5). After sonication, the majority of C60 powders remained in the precipitate, and the slightly darkened supernatant in the C60/GO dispersion is due to a small amount of GO-stabilized C60 microcrystals. It is interesting that although SWCNTs are insoluble in water, they can actually disperse C60 upon sonication (Fig. 3b, C6) as evidenced by the much-reduced amount of powdery C60 precipitates and the much-darkened supernatant, even though the C60/SWCNT complex itself is still unprocessable. The difference between C5 and C6 can be attributed to the different surface structures of GO and SWCNTs. Unfunctionalized SWCNTs can have strong π–π interactions with C60 molecules or clusters generated during sonication, thus effectively dispersing them on the nanotube scaffold. In contrast, GO is densely functionalized by oxygen containing groups, which effectively screens its interaction with fullerenes, except for their large microcrystals. To make the C60/SWCNTs complex solution processable, GO sheets can be introduced as a dispersing agent (Fig. 3b, C7).
 Fig. 3  (a) Chemical structural models of 0D C60, 1D SWCNTs and 2D GO, respectively. (b) Picture of cuvettes C1–C7 containing aqueous dispersions of 1 mg ml−1 GO, 1 mg ml−1 SWCNTs, 0.5 mg ml−1 C60, their binary mixtures and the ternary blend, respectively. The picture was taken 30 minutes after ultrasonication. GO can effectively disperse insoluble SWCNTs (C4) and C60–SWCNTs complex (C7) in water, forming colloid dispersions that are stable for months. (c) AFM and (d) SEM images of a spin-coated thin film from cuvette C7. The height profile, scanned along the light white line, shows a smooth morphology with peak-to-valley roughness of 3 nm. (e) High resolution TEM image of a SWCNT half-coated with C60 clusters of 1–2 nm. 
The colloidal dispersion of this ternary complex can readily produce smooth thin films by spin-coating as shown by the atomic force microscopy (AFM) and SEM images (Fig. 3c and d). The AFM image also reveals a peak-to-valley roughness of only 3 nm. High-resolution TEM studies on the dispersed SWCNTs reveal some half-coated nanotubes like the one shown in Fig. 3e. The coating thickness was found to be around 1–2 nm, which is presumably a layer of C60 clusters (Fig. 3e). Here the planarization effect of GO is the key for the fabrication of photovoltaic devices. SWCNTs thin films made by alternative approaches often have a far more rugged morphology, which is problematic for implementation in solar cells due to shorting or irreproducible performances. The UV/Vis spectrum (Fig. 4a) of the C60/SWCNTs/GO ternary hybrid in solution, as well as the Raman spectrum (Fig. 4b) of the corresponding thin film shows characteristic bands of the individual constituents.48–50 However, the overall spectra were red shifted in regard to the individual components, indicating intimate contact between these carbon nanomaterials.
 Fig. 4  (a) Solution phase UV/Vis spectra and (b) Raman spectra (excitation wavelength of 514 nm) of dried thin film of the ternary C60/SWCNTs/GO composite (top panel) and the individual constituents (bottom panel). Both the solution phase and solid state spectra of the all-carbon composite show all the characteristic signatures of the three individual components. Reproduced from ref. 53. 
Photovoltaic fullerene/SWCNT/r-GO all-carbon composite
Several groups have recently reported photoconductive or photovoltaic all-carbon junctions. For example, molecularly linked fullerene–nano graphene junctions have been reported,20,21,51,52 which showed photoconductivity upon illumination. Unfortunately, it has been hard to process such composites into smooth thin films, prohibiting the fabrication of regular photovoltaic devices. Carbon–carbon heterojunctions have also been made by evaporating C60 on top of a thin film of surfactant-wrapped semiconducting SWCNTs.53 It was found that surfactants add an additional energetic barrier for the transport of photo-dissociated charges. Using GO as a dispersing agent, it is now possible to obtain all-carbon heterojunctions without the need for molecular linkers or surface functionalization agents. Moreover, the soft 2D morphology of GO can help to greatly reduce the surface roughness arising from the unprocessable C60/SWCNTs complex. Thin films of spin-coated C60/SWCNTs/GO were found to exhibit a surface roughness of around only a few nanometres (Fig. 3c), which makes it possible to use them as the active layer in photovoltaic applications.54
To construct the devices, a C60/SWCNTs/GO thin film of 5–8 nm was spin cast onto an indium tin oxide (ITO) glass substrate, which had been coated with a smooth 20 nm film of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the hole transport layer. Note that the ease of solution processing of the all-carbon composites enables us to stack the layers in conventional configuration. Thermal annealing at 150 °C was found to activate the insulating composites by partially reducing GO. Next, an additional film of C60 (e-C60) was thermally evaporated as both a blocking layer to prevent carbon nanotubes from bridging opposite electrodes and as an electron-transport layer.55 Finally, 100 nm thick Al electrodes were deposited to complete the device. The final device architecture is illustrated in Fig. 5a. Energy levels of the individual components are depicted in Fig. 5b.54 The output current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the C60/SWCNTs/r-GO device are shown in Fig. 5c. The dark current exhibits a pronounced diode behavior with a rectification ratio of 104 at ±1 V as a result of sufficient energy offset at the C60/SWCNTs interfaces. The device showed a photoconductive response (AM 1.5G, 80 mW cm−2) with an on/off ratio of nearly 106, surpassing those of covalently linked, polymer-wrapped, or extensively surface-functionalized all-carbon composites.15,17,20,21,51 More significantly, the device displayed an unprecedented photovoltaic response for devices using all-carbon-based materials as the active layer, with a short circuit current (Jsc) of 1.23 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.59 V, and a fill factor of 0.29, giving rise to a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.21%. We attributed the much-improved photovoltaic output characteristics to the presence of numerous clean p–n junctions distributed throughout the all-carbon composites. Photogenerated excitons can thus undergo spontaneous dissociation and subsequent separation along the bi-continuous heterojunctions, thus improving the overall photovoltaic performance. Control devices made with the active material using (1) SWCNTs/r-GO plus the e-C60 layer and (2) only the e-C60 were also fabricated. In the former case, the devices did produce the photovoltaic effect since there are also heterojunctions generated between the e-C60 and SWCNTs. However, the resulting photocurrent was 2 orders of magnitude lower than the device made with ternary all-carbon composites. For e-C60 devices, they lack effective means for dissociation and separation of excitons, yielding a photocurrent 3 orders of magnitude lower than those using the all-carbon composite. These control experiments highlight the need for pre-assembled C60 within the SWCNTs/GO composites. Using GO as the surfactant also creates uninterrupted pathways between individual tubes, assisting hole transport towards the anode.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic drawing illustrating the device configuration of a solar cell with the all-carbon composite as the active layer. (b) Corresponding schematic energy level diagram of the device. The all-carbon active layer is highlighted within the dashed box. (c) J–V characteristics measured in the dark and under illumination. Adapted from ref. 53. 
Improving the PCE
In the preparation of all-carbon composite, GO's main function is in material processing. It acts as a dispersing agent to enable solution processing of C60/SWCNTs. In addition, its sheet-like morphology helps to lower the surface roughness of the spin-coated thin films, which is critical for making photovoltaic devices. Although the e-C60 blocking layer does contribute to the photocurrent, due to the formation of a small fraction of C60/SWCNTs junctions at its interfaces with the active layer, the main component for photocurrent generation is the pre-assembled C60/SWCNTs complex in the active layer. There is much room for improving the PCE. For example, replacing C60 with a more efficient fullerene absorber should also increase the PCE. Significant improvements in Jsc and PCE have previously been demonstrated by replacing C60 based fullerenes with C70 ones in bulk heterojunction type of polymer solar cells.56,57 For the all-carbon active layer, replacing fullerenes can be implemented conveniently since the materials are readily available and it does not need major alternation of processing conditions. Indeed, we are able to replace C60 with C70, which has much stronger absorption in the visible range.
Solid-state absorption measurements on thin films of e-C60 and e-C70 (25 nm) are compared in Fig. 6a. As expected, e-C70 thin films exhibit much enhanced absorption with two pronounced absorption characteristics at around 375 and 485 nm, respectively. Colloidal dispersions of C70/SWCNTs/GO can be created in an analogous manner as described in the previous section and were found to exhibit similar morphological features with surface roughness of only a few nanometres. Fig. 6b schematically illustrates the corresponding device architecture using C70/SWCNTs/r-GO as the active layer and an evaporated C70 thin film (e-C70, 25 nm) as both the blocking layer and electron transport layer. Compared to the C60 based all-carbon device (Fig. 6c, black line), replacing the C60 layer with C70 in both the active layer and blocking layer (Fig. 6c, red line), significantly improves the overall photovoltaic characteristics. The C70 device produced a nearly 4-fold increased Jsc from 1.23 mA cm−2 to 4.95 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.59 V, and a fill factor of 0.29, leading to a dramatic increase in PCE from 0.21% to 0.85%. The same trend was observed in Incident Photon-to-Current Efficiency (IPCE) measurement, which is used as a parameter to directly measure how efficiently the incident photons are converted to electrons. As shown in Fig. 6d, the C70 device (Fig. 6c, red line) indeed exhibits enhanced photo-response throughout the visible regions compared to the C60 device (Fig. 6c, black line). With the great variety of highly absorbing fullerene derivatives, further improvement in all-carbon photovoltaics can be envisioned in the near future. Other viable solutions for boosting the PCE of all-carbon photovoltaics include maximizing the fraction of C60/SWCNTs heterojunctions by optimizing processing conditions, using new modifying layers,58 exploring semiconductor enriched SWCNT samples to minimize problems of exciton quenching and shorting by metallic nanotubes.
 Fig. 6  (a) UV/Vis absorption spectra of C60 (black) and C70 (red) thin films prepared by thermal evaporation, showing stronger absorption of C70 in the visible range. (b) Schematic view of a photovoltaic cell consisting of a C70 based all-carbon active layer and a blocking layer. (c) J–V characteristics of devices made with C60 and C70, respectively. Device comprised of C70/SWCNTs/r-GO + e-C70 (red line) produced significantly improved photovoltaic output characteristics than the corresponding C60 devices, which is confirmed by (d) the IPCE measurements. 
Outlook and conclusion
The discovery of GO's amphiphilicity32–35 opens up new opportunities in creating new carbon based materials. With the great varieties of fullerenes, carbon nanotubes and graphene derivatives, numerous types of all-carbon composites can be envisioned through this solution processing route. With the all-carbon photovoltaic active layer demonstrated here, and the rapid development of graphene based transparent conductors and GO based interfacial layers, all-carbon solar cells with all the layers made of graphitic materials can be devised. Fig. 7 illustrates a conceptual, true all-carbon solar cell device. To start, a graphene based thin film transparent electrode can be made by chemical vapor deposition59 or solution processing.60,61 Alternatively a metallic SWCNT network62 can be used, too. If needed, a GO58,63 or GO/SWCNTs46 based modifying layer can be applied to promote hole transport. After the deposition of the fullerene/SWCNTs/r-GO active layer and the fullerene blocking layer, the device can be completed with n-doped SWCNTs or graphene as the top electrode.64,65 Using complementary absorbers, tandem all-carbon devices may be fabricated using graphene-based interconnects47,66 to achieve a higher PCE.
 Fig. 7  Prospective: all-carbon solar cells with all the layers made with graphitic carbon materials. 
The development of all-carbon photovoltaics is still in its infancy and there indeed are many hurdles to overcome before any practical integration can be carried out. However, its development can certainly benefit from the rich knowledge produced with the advancement in other solution processed photovoltaic materials such as quantum dots, chalcogenides, small organic molecules and conjugated polymers for improving device performance. The all-carbon solar cells should have higher environmental stability since all the graphitic components are mechanically and chemically robust. The idea of using one carbon nanostructure as the matrix to process another could also inspire new solution processing strategies for other materials in organic electronics.
Acknowledgements
Work presented in this perspective has been supported by a booster award from the Initiative for Sustainability and Energy at Northwestern University (ISEN) and the National Science Foundation (DMR CAREER 0955612 for GO interfacial assembly and CMMI 1130407 for all-carbon photovoltaics). Additional support was provided by a gift fund from the Sony Corporation. J.H. is an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellow, and C.-W.C. is grateful to the National Science Council (NSC), Taiwan (99-2221-E-001-012) and the Academia Sinica research program on nanoscience and nanotechnology for financial support. J.K. gratefully acknowledges support from Ryan Fellowship and the Northwestern University International Institute for Nanotechnology. We thank Prof. S. I. Stupp for the use of his device and characterization facilities. The authors would also like to thank I. Tevis, F. Kim, L. J. Cote, J. Luo, K. Sohn, T. H. Han, and W. W. Tsai for collaborative work and helpful discussions.
References
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. Obrien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–163 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .

          I. G. Gogotsi, Carbon Nanomaterials, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. W. Zhu, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang and D. H. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1461–1470 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hecht, L. B. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lee, J. S. Park, S. H. Lee, H. Kim, S. Yoo and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 629–633 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cataldo, P. Salice, E. Menna and B. Pignataro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5919–5940 CAS .
L. J. Brennan, M. T. Byrne, M. Bari and Y. K. Gun'ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 472–485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Hu, H. Wang and B. Hu, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 782–796 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wan, G. K. Long, L. Huang and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5342–5358 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS .
S. J. Tans, A. R. M. Verschueren and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 393, 49–52 CrossRef CAS .
T. Durkop, S. A. Getty, E. Cobas and M. S. Fuhrer, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 35–39 CrossRef .
T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, S. Seki, Y. Matano, M. Nishi, K. Hirao, H. Lehtivuori, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen, Y. Nakao, S. Sakaki and H. Imahori, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1767–1770 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kalita, S. Adhikari, H. R. Aryal, M. Umeno, R. Afre, T. Soga and M. Sharon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063508 CrossRef .
T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, M. Fujita, S. Hayashi, N. Kadota, Y. Matano and H. Imahori, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4875–4885 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. H. Chen, Y. B. Wang, Z. Iqbal, M. Chhowalla and S. Mitra, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2406–2411 RSC .
A. G. Nasibulin, P. V. Pikhitsa, H. Jiang, D. P. Brown, A. V. Krasheninnikov, A. S. Anisimov, P. Queipo, A. Moisala, D. Gonzalez, G. Lientschnig, A. Hassanien, S. D. Shandakov, G. Lolli, D. E. Resasco, M. Choi, D. Tomanek and E. I. Kauppinen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 156–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamamoto, G. X. Zhang, W. S. Jin, T. Fukushima, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, T. Minari, K. Tsukagoshi and T. Aida, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21051–21056 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, Y. Suna, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, M. Taniguchi, T. Kawai and T. Aida, Science, 2006, 314, 1761–1764 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Bindl, M.-Y. Wu, F. C. Prehn and M. S. Arnold, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 455–460 CrossRef CAS .
N. Behabtu, J. R. Lomeda, M. J. Green, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, D. V. Kosynkin, D. Tsentalovich, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, J. Schmidt, E. Kesselman, Y. Cohen, Y. Talmon, J. M. Tour and M. Pasquali, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .

          J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, Academic Press, Burlington, MA,  2011 Search PubMed .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2392–2415 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012 Search PubMed  , submitted.
J. E. Kim, T. H. Han, S. H. Lee, J. Y. Kim, C. W. Ahn, J. M. Yun and S. O. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3043–3047 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1043–1049 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim, W. Yuan, K. R. Shull and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8180–8186 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1954–1958 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, J. Kim, V. C. Tung, J. Y. Luo, F. Kim and J. X. Huang, Pure Appl. Chem., 2011, 83, 95–110 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lerf, H. He, M. Forster and J. Klinowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4477–4482 CrossRef CAS .
K. Erickson, R. Erni, Z. Lee, N. Alem, W. Gannett and A. Zettl, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4467–4472 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, J. Kim, Z. Zhang, C. Sun and J. X. Huang, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 6096–6101 RSC .
Y. G. Li and Y. Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5851–5857 CrossRef CAS .
M. Krueger, S. Berg, D. Stone, E. Strelcov, D. A. Dikin, J. Kim, L. J. Cote, J. X. Huang and A. Kolmakov, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10047–10054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Luo, L. J. Cote, V. C. Tung, A. T. L. Tan, P. E. Goins, J. S. Wu and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17667–17669 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, R. Cruz-Silva and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11027–11032 CrossRef CAS .
D. Krishnan, F. Kim, J. Luo, R. Cruz-Silva, L. J. Cote, H. D. Jang and J. Huang, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 137–152 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kim, J. Y. Luo, R. Cruz-Silva, L. J. Cote, K. Sohn and J. X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2867–2873 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, V. C. Tung and J. X. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1052–1057 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, J. Kim and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Ausman, R. Piner, O. Lourie, R. S. Ruoff and M. Korobov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8911–8915 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Hare, H. W. Kroto and R. Taylor, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 177, 394–398 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, N. Ishii and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9276–9277 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, W. S. Jin, T. Fukushima, A. Saeki, S. Seki and T. Aida, Science, 2011, 334, 340–343 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Bindl, N. S. Safron and M. S. Arnold, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5657–5664 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, J.-H. Huang, I. Tevis, F. Kim, J. Kim, C.-W. Chu, S. I. Stupp and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4940–4947 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Li, K. S. Kim, D. L. Jiang, H. Tanaka, T. Kawai, J. H. Kwon, D. Kim and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10527–10532 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, W. J. H. Verhees, J. Knol, J. C. Hummelen, P. A. van Hal and R. A. J. Janssen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3371–3375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pfuetzner, J. Meiss, A. Petrich, M. Riede and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 223307 CrossRef .
S. S. Li, K. H. Tu, C. C. Lin, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3169–3174 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. W. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef .
V. C. Tung, L. M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. J. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Tyler, R. E. Brock, H. J. Karmel, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 785–791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, H. L. Yip, S. K. Hau, K. M. O'Malley, N. C. Cho, H. Z. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 203306 CrossRef .
J. H. Huang, J. H. Fang, C. C. Liu and C. W. Chu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6262–6271 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Lee, K. H. Tu, C. C. Yu, S. S. Li, J. Y. Hwang, C. C. Lin, K. H. Chen, L. C. Chen, H. L. Chen and C. W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6564–6570 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, J. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9262–9265 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Vincent C. Tung	Vincent C. Tung received his M.S. degree in Chemistry from the National Tsing-Hua University, Taiwan in 2003 and Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from the University of California, Los Angeles in 2009 with honors. He continued on his postdoctoral research at the Northwestern University on solution-processed all-carbon hybrids for energy harvesting and storage. He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Engineering School, University of California, Merced (UCM) and is interested in the design and synthesis of novel carbon hybrid materials for energy conversion applications.
Jaemyung Kim	Jaemyung Kim received his B.S. degree from the Seoul National University, Republic of Korea in 2008. He is now a Ph.D. candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern University. His graduate research focuses on the development of an imaging technique for two-dimensional nanomaterials, interfacial activities of graphene-based sheets and their applications in organic solar cells, for which he has received a Materials Research Society (MRS) Graduate Student Silver Award and a Ryan Fellowship in Nanoscience at Northwestern University.
Chih-Wei Chu	Chih-Wei Chu is a research fellow in the Research Center for Applied Sciences (RCAS) at Academia Sinica and an adjunct associate Professor in the department of Institute of Electro-Optical Engineering at National Chiao Tung University. He received his Ph.D. degree in the Department of Material Science and Engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles in 2006. He became an assistant research fellow in RCAS at Academia Sinica and was promoted to associate research fellow in 2010. Currently, Chu's research focuses on conjugated polymer and organic nanostructures for energy saving, conversion, and storage applications.
Jiaxing Huang	Jiaxing Huang is an Assistant Professor of Materials Science and Engineering and the Morris E. Fine Junior Professor in Materials and Manufacturing at Northwestern University. He received a Ph.D. in chemistry from the University of California, Los Angeles in 2004, and became a Miller Research Fellow at the University of California, Berkeley before joining Northwestern in 2007. His main research interest is in the general area of material chemistry and processing. Some of the examples include 2D soft materials, organic nanocrystals and metal nanostructures. He is the recipient of an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, the NSF CAREER Award and the Inaugural Early Career Investigator Award by the Initiative for Sustainability and Energy at Northwestern.

Broader context
Graphitic nanomaterials such as zero dimensional (0D) fullerenes, one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes and two-dimensional (2D) graphene-based sheets have been extensively pursued as adducts for solution processed photovoltaics. If assembled together, they could form carbon-based heterojunctions for efficient light-to-electricity conversion. Because of their inherently poor solubility/processability, the assembly of dissimilar graphitic nanostructures into such heterojunctions typically involves extensive surface functionalization to impart processability. However, such strategies can adversely affect the functional carbon–carbon interfaces, thus hindering the transport of charge carriers. Using graphene oxide as a surfactant, single walled carbon nanotubes and fullerenes can be co-dispersed in water, leading to processable all-carbon composites with clean carbon–carbon heterojunctions that can generate photovoltaic responses. With the great varieties of fullerenes, carbon nanotubes and graphene derivatives, numerous types of all-carbon composites can be envisioned through this solution processing route. This could eventually lead to all-carbon solar cells, in which all the layers such as the transparent electrodes, interfacial layers, the active layer and the counter electrodes are made of graphitic materials.


 	Fig. 1  (a) A three-dimensional structural model of GO. (b) GO can be viewed as a two-dimensional amphiphile, with hydrophobic π-conjugated domains (light green areas) spatially interspersed on its basal plane and hydrophilic –COOH groups on the edges (light orange area on the periphery) as shown in the structural model. (c) A false-colored, atomic resolution TEM image of a single suspended sheet of GO showing graphitic regions (light green), holes (blue) and disordered regions with oxygen functionality (purple).37 (c) is reproduced from ref. 37.	 

 	Fig. 2  GO can act as a surfactant to disperse insoluble carbon materials such as (a) graphite or (b) carbon nanotubes in water. SEM studies revealed that (c) graphite powders are fractured into much smaller pieces (e). (d) SWCNTs are largely disentangled and debundled (f) after sonication with GO.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Chemical structural models of 0D C60, 1D SWCNTs and 2D GO, respectively. (b) Picture of cuvettes C1–C7 containing aqueous dispersions of 1 mg ml−1 GO, 1 mg ml−1 SWCNTs, 0.5 mg ml−1 C60, their binary mixtures and the ternary blend, respectively. The picture was taken 30 minutes after ultrasonication. GO can effectively disperse insoluble SWCNTs (C4) and C60–SWCNTs complex (C7) in water, forming colloid dispersions that are stable for months. (c) AFM and (d) SEM images of a spin-coated thin film from cuvette C7. The height profile, scanned along the light white line, shows a smooth morphology with peak-to-valley roughness of 3 nm. (e) High resolution TEM image of a SWCNT half-coated with C60 clusters of 1–2 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Solution phase UV/Vis spectra and (b) Raman spectra (excitation wavelength of 514 nm) of dried thin film of the ternary C60/SWCNTs/GO composite (top panel) and the individual constituents (bottom panel). Both the solution phase and solid state spectra of the all-carbon composite show all the characteristic signatures of the three individual components. Reproduced from ref. 53.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic drawing illustrating the device configuration of a solar cell with the all-carbon composite as the active layer. (b) Corresponding schematic energy level diagram of the device. The all-carbon active layer is highlighted within the dashed box. (c) J–V characteristics measured in the dark and under illumination. Adapted from ref. 53.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) UV/Vis absorption spectra of C60 (black) and C70 (red) thin films prepared by thermal evaporation, showing stronger absorption of C70 in the visible range. (b) Schematic view of a photovoltaic cell consisting of a C70 based all-carbon active layer and a blocking layer. (c) J–V characteristics of devices made with C60 and C70, respectively. Device comprised of C70/SWCNTs/r-GO + e-C70 (red line) produced significantly improved photovoltaic output characteristics than the corresponding C60 devices, which is confirmed by (d) the IPCE measurements.	 

 	Fig. 7  Prospective: all-carbon solar cells with all the layers made with graphitic carbon materials.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
