Silicon spectral response extension through single wall carbon nanotubes in hybrid solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC31038H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC31038H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6752-6758Silicon spectral response extension through single wall carbon nanotubes in hybrid solar cellsS. Del Gobbo*a, P. Castruccib, S. Fedeleb, L. Rieleb, A. Convertinoc, M. Morbidonib, F. De Nicolab, M. Scarsellib, L. Camillibd and M. De CrescenzibaSolar & Photovoltaics Engineering Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science & Technology, Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. E-mail: silvano.dgobbo@kaust.edu.sabDipartimento di Fisica, Università di Roma Tor Vergata, 00133 Roma, ItalycIstituto per la Microelettronica e i Microsistemi del CNR, via del Fosso del Cavaliere 100, 00133 Roma, ItalydCenter for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, 11973 Upton, NY (USA)Received 31st May 2013, Accepted 7th August 2013First published on 8th August 2013AbstractPhotovoltaic devices based on single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and n-silicon multiple heterojunctions have been fabricated by a SWCNT film transferring process. We report on the ability of the carbon nanotubes to extend the Si spectral range towards the near ultraviolet (UV) and the near infrared regions. Semiconducting and about metallic SWCNT networks have been studied as a function of the film sheet resistance, Rsh. Optical absorbance and Raman spectroscopy have been used to assign nanotube chirality and electronic character. This gave us hints of evidence of the participation of the metal nanotubes in the photocurrent generation. Moreover, we provide evidence that the external quantum efficiency spectral range can be modulated as a function of the SWCNT network sheet resistance in a hybrid SWCNT/Si solar cell. This result will be very useful to further design/optimize devices with improved performance in spectral regions generally not covered by conventional Si p–n devices.1 IntroductionTransparent conducting flexible networks of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been investigated for numerous applications, including light harvesting devices.1–14 In these applications, CNTs are used essentially as transparent electrodes when deposited as an ultra thin film2,11 and as charge collectors/transporters in polymeric blends.15,16 CNTs are often viewed as an unsuitable material for photon to electron conversion, rather than as a complementary material in photovoltaic devices. However, literature reports provide information about the intrinsic capabilities of CNTs.17–20 At the base of the photovoltaic effect in CNTs themselves there is the creation of electron–hole (e–h) pairs induced by the electronic transition between van Hove singularities upon light absorption, in a wavelength range between the ultraviolet (UV) region and the infrared (IR).17,18 The separation of these pairs at some local heterojunction on the nanotube, depending on its degree of twisting,21 bending or artificial induced doping,1 which produces a measurable current flowing into the individual single wall carbon nanotube.1,19 Also networks of entangled SWCNTs, where nanotubes touch and cross each other form many heterojunctions and/or Schotthy junctions, and the metal electrodes exhibit a sizeable photocurrent and interesting photovoltaic effects.19,20,22–24 However, the measured current is of the order of nanoamperes (in the case of an individual single wall nanotube)19 and up to several microamperes in the case of thin films.20In the last few years, several groups have reported hybrid solar cells based on a CNT/n-Si heterojunctions coupling the electronic peculiarities of CNTs with the well-established capabilities of silicon to produce an extended depletion layer where the electric field is able to split e–h pairs under illumination.2,11 In these cells the p-type Si layer (the so-called emitter in a conventional p–n Si solar cell) is replaced by a semitransparent CNT film deposited at room temperature on the n-doped Si wafer, thus leading to an overall reduction of the total Si thickness and to the fabrication of part of the device with inexpensive methods at a relatively low temperature. In particular, a CNT film deposited on Si functions as a conductive electrode and establishes at the CNT/Si interface a built-in voltage for separating photocarriers. In addition, the CNT electronic5 or chemical charge transfer doping permitted to notably improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of these devices is up to 12–14%.6,7,25 One of the effects of chemical p-doping is to increase the conductivity of the CNTs,26 by increasing the mobility and the number of charge carriers (holes) available at the Fermi level and therefore reducing the sheet resistance of the SWNCT network. Moreover, the alignment of CNTs has been reported to enhance the Photocurrent Efficiency (PCE) when compared to randomly distributed SWCNT networks.25 In fact, in random SWCNT networks it is more likely that nanotubes are superimposed one over the other and do not touch the Si substrate, thus leaving Si surface areas free from nanotubes and directly exposed to the impinging light. This is reflected in a reduction of the number of heterojunctions available on the silicon surface, in an increase of the e–h pair path along the Si substrate to reach the heterojunction and in an enhancement of the Si surface recombination. Despite the good and very promising results achieved in this research field, many scientific issues still remain to be addressed to exploit all the capabilities of such a novel approach to solar cells. Among them, the nature of the carbon nanotube/silicon heterojunction and the contribution of the SWCNT to the photocurrent generation are fundamental, but still debated questions, mainly because of the intrinsic polychirality of the as-produced and purified SWCNT networks. In this regard, some papers5,27,28 have suggested that the SWCNT/Si junction behaves like a metal/semiconductor Schottky junction, whose performances may be improved by the formation of a metal/insulator/semiconductor junction through a thin (1 nm) silicon oxide film.27–30 In other papers, the CNT/Si junction formation was instead interpreted as that of a p–n heterojunction3,4,10,31 due to the prevalent semiconducting character of the used SWCNTs.4,6,31 Moreover, it is often assumed that, due to the optical semitransparency of the CNT film, most of the incoming light is absorbed in Si, thus implying that the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectral range and value of the hybrid CNT/Si solar cell is mainly driven by the Si response. Some information on the UV and IR extension of the conventional Si device spectral response has already been reported,8,10,11 but further insight on this topic is needed with the aim of exploiting all the abilities of such hybrid devices.The purpose of this paper is to establish how the EQE spectral range can be modulated as a function of the CNT network sheet resistance Rsh, which will be very useful to further design/optimize solar cells with improved performance in spectral regions generally not covered by conventional Si p–n devices. To better achieve this goal we used two different SWCNT powders, one with a very high percentage of semiconducting tubes (around 85%), the other with 65% metallic ones. The use of such metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs, allowed also us to detect hints of an unexpected metallic SWCNT participation to photocurrent generation. In addition, we show that the networks formed with the latter SWCNTs exhibit a PCE higher than that obtained with the mostly semiconducting SWCNTs up to a sheet resistance value of 0.5 kΩ sq−1, while for the lower Rsh, films of semiconducting SWCNTs were more efficient than the others. This behavior is correlated to optical transmittance values, attempting to discriminate between the optical absorption and Rsh contributions. However, although the Rsh always decreases with a lowering of optical transmittance, the optical transmittance for both the highly metallic and semiconducting networks is comparable for the same sheet resistance, thus making it difficult to establish which one gives rise to the most efficient device.2 Experimental2.1 Fabrication of the SiO2/Si patterned substrateThe substrates consisted of 5 × 10 mm2 slices of passivated SiO2 (thickness 300 nm) n-type Si(100), resistivity 3–12 Ω × cm with an aluminum ohmic back contact obtained from FBK (Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy). The oxide layer was patterned by a lithographic process with a positive resist and subsequent chemical etching in order to obtain a 5 × 5 mm2 bare silicon window in the middle of two SiO2 bases. The chemical etching was carried out with wetting for 5 minutes of the bare SiO2 with a HF/NH4F buffer solution. This patterning of the SiO2 layer allowed us to create nanotube/n-Si multijunctions in the 5 × 5 mm2 Si window and, at the same time, to insulate the silver paste deposited on the nanotube film from the Si underneath, so as to avoid short circuits between the metal electrode and the Si. A scheme of the fabricated device is shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1  Scheme of the SWCNT/Si photovoltaic device. The 5 mm × 5 mm photoactive window is in the center of the device where the SWCNT film lies directly on the bare Si. The dark red steps represent the 300 nm thick SiO2 insulating bases on top of which is deposited the SWCNT film contacted by Ag paint. The back contact is constituted of a thin aluminum film. In the measurements, the Ag top contacts were used as signal electrodes, while the Al back contact was grounded. 2.2 Preparation of the SWCNT film by a vacuum filtration methodSWCNT films were obtained by filtering a SWCNT dispersion in water with a cellulose acetate membrane filter (PALL corp. 0.45 μm pores). Semiconducting and metallic SWCNT powders were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and were used without further purification. Semiconducting (6,5) SWCNTs (hereafter called S85) are sold as a powder being >90% in carbon, >77% in SWCNT and diameters ranging between 0.7 and 0.9 nm. Highly metallic SWCNTs (hereafter called M65) are declared to be >90% in carbon, >80% in SWCNT with various chirality and a diameter ranging between 0.7 and 1.4 nm. The nanotube dispersion was prepared by sonicating about 100 μg of SWCNT powder in a sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) (assay > 98.5%, Sigma Aldrich) solution in water, concentration of 3% in weight. After 1 hour of ultrasound treatment, the dispersion was left to settle and the clear supernatant containing unbundled nanotubes was divided from the precipitate and used to fabricate the film. The filtration was carried out by a vacuum filtration assembly. Once the SWCNT film was deposited on the membrane, in order to remove the SDS residuum, it was washed several times with deionized water and finally with an ethanol/methanol/water mixture (15:15:70 in volume). Different film thicknesses were obtained by varying the volume of the filtered solution. The SWCNT film was transferred onto the patterned Si substrate by pressing the SWCNT coated membrane onto the Si/SiO2 surface. Though proper modification, this procedure was derived from ref. 32 and 33 to improve the adhesion and to favor the SWCNT film detachment from the membrane, the latter was soaked with ethanol and subsequently dried under vacuum. The residual cellulose acetate membrane lying on top of the SWCNT film was removed by dissolving it in acetone (3–4 washes) and rinsing it in isopropanol. The optical transmittance (T%) spectrum of the film was acquired by a Perkin Elmer Lambda 200 spectrometer. The Raman spectra were acquired by a customized Raman setup equipped with a Dilor monochromator, LN2 cooled Horiba 3000V CCD and a Coherent Sabre Ar + laser. The morphology of the SWCNT film deposited onto Si was examined through scanning electron microscope (SEM) images acquired using a field emission gun (FEG-SEM, Leo Supra 35) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray (EDX).2.3 Photovoltaic characterization of the deviceThe external quantum efficiency spectrum was measured by a set-up made up of a Xenon lamp equipped with a monochromator, focusing and collecting optics, a reflecting chopper and lock-in electronics. The EQE is defined as the fraction of the incident photons, Nph, converted into photocurrent, I(λ), i.e. the number of the generated e–h pairs multiplied by the electron charge, e. The number of the incident photons is evaluated in terms of the power density of the Xe lamp, P(λ), since Nph = λP(λ)/hc, where h is the Planck constant and c is the speed of light:  I(λ) was measured by modulating the light, using an optical chopper, and recovering the amplified current signal (converted to voltage) by a lock-in amplifier locked to the chopper frequency (around 22 Hz). The lamp power was measured simultaneously in a similar way by a calibrated Si photodiode. The light spot area was of (5 × 5) mm2. To measure the current density versus voltage curves a Keithley Sourcemeter (Model 6502A) was used. The measurements were performed under dark and white illumination conditions using a 150 W Xe lamp with a power density on the sample of 150 mW cm−2. All the measurements were performed by contacting the samples to the amplifying unit, so as to have the aluminium back electrode grounded and the SWCNT semitransparent electrode through lateral silver paint contacts connected to the signal (positive).3 Results and discussionFig. 2 shows an SEM image of the SWCNT film deposited onto the Si window of the device. It can be seen that the highly entangled nanotube network forms a uniform layer covering the entire Si surface. It is important to stress that the film also overlaps with the SiO2 outer steps allowing it to make contact with the silver paint and avoiding it making a short-circuit with the Si underneath. Fig. 2  A high resolution SEM picture of the SWCNT film deposited on Si. The SWCNT network is very entangled and covers completely the Si underneath. The white spots might be due to the residual cellulose acetate membrane not completely removed by the acetone. Fig. 3 shows the Raman spectra in the radial breathing mode (RBM) range of the S85 and M65 SWCNTs transferred onto the glass substrates, according to the method described in the experimental section. In order to establish the amount of metallic and semiconducting nanotubes in both the samples, we made a fit of the curve by using a suitable number of Lorentzian lineshapes characterized by the same full width half maximum. This allowed us to assign to most of the modes a pair of (n,m) indices, by using the frequency values reported in ref. 35. In the S85 sample, we found mainly semiconducting (7,6), (10,2) and at a lower extent metallic (7,7) and (9,3) chiralities. Therefore, the percentage of semiconducting SWCNTs was not lower than 85%. The M65 sample shows a more complex Raman spectrum where dominating peaks have been assigned to (8,5), (7,7), (9,9), (11,8), (9,3) metallic SWCNTs and to (9,8), (11,7), (10,2) and (13,6) semiconducting ones. In this case, we obtain a percentage of metallic tubes not lower than 65%. Fig. 3  Raman spectra of metallic (blue dots) and semiconductor (red dots) SWCNT in the spectral range of the radial breathing mode (RBM). Both spectra were fitted using Lorentzian lineshapes. This Raman peak assignment is in accordance with the values of the Eii resonances that can be qualitatively deduced by the optical absorbance spectra (Fig. 4) of the two SWCNT films transferred on a quartz substrate.34,35 However, both the S85 and the M65 sample absorbance spectra show also the presence of features between 1000 and 1070 nm which can be attributed to (8,1) or/and (7,5) semiconducting nanotubes, whose presence has not been clearly evidenced by the corresponding Raman peaks. In Fig. 5a and b we report the behavior of the power conversion efficiency of the S85 and M65 devices as a function of their sheet resistance, Rsh and that of the SWCNT network optical transmittance T550 taken at a wavelength of 550 nm.† Fig. 4  Absorption spectra of metallic (dark green) and semiconducting (magenta) SWCNT in aqueous solution.  Fig. 5  (a) PCE value with the varying of sheet resistance, Rsh, for metallic (black dots) and semiconducting (red dots) SWCNT. The plots give hints on how the film Rsh affects the value of the PCE. (b) Optical transmittance values taken at a wavelength of 550 nm, T550vs. Rsh. The thicker and denser the nanotube networks are, the lower the sheet resistance is for both the M65 and S85 films. Both curves of Fig. 5a exhibit a maximum for Rsh = 0.5 kΩ sq−1. Several authors have reported similar PCE behavior as a function of the nanotube film sheet resistance or optical transmittance.2,11 The lower the Rsh value is, the lower the series resistance of the device, the higher the overall PCE should be. Here, the sheet resistance value depends on the resistance of the nanotube network and on the front silver paint contacts, since the Si substrate does not affect the overall Rsh. The resistance of the SWCNT network, in turn, originates from several factors, all related to the carbon nanotube arrangement on the Si surface which defines the charge carrier percolation paths. Among these factors we can enumerate: the network thickness, its areal density, the percentage of SWCNT residual bundles and possibly the percentage of semiconductor/semiconductor or metal/metal junctions with respect to the metal/semiconductor ones (i.e. the higher the number of the same type of SWCNT junctions, the lower the network resistivity).35 On the other hand, optical transmission is an appropriate method of averaging the surface alternation of occupied/empty regions and characterizing the thickness of the SWCNT networks.Fig. 5b demonstrates that the sheet resistance increases as the T550 decreases, i.e. as the total amount of CNTs coating the Si surface drops, which in turn prevents light reaching the silicon substrate underneath. Therefore, the maximum value of the PCE assumed for a certain value of Rsh has been interpreted in terms of competition between the nanotube film thickness on one side and the total number of nanotube/Si heterojunctions (i.e. the Si surface area covered by SWCNT) and nanotube network resistance on the other side.8,13 In fact, the mechanism at the base of this hybrid device has been reported to be the following: the carbon nanotube network mainly works as a semitransparent charge separator and collector, therefore the lower its thickness, the higher the photon number impinging on the silicon substrate underneath and, as a consequence, the higher the short circuit current value, Isc. However, in order to maximize the separated e–h pairs created upon photon absorption, it is necessary to maximize the number of nanotube/Si heterojunctions. The most effective way to obtain this, in case of random SWCNT networks, is to suitably increase the nanotube network thickness, which is reflected in a reduction of the optical transmittance. Moreover, to maximize the PCE, an optimum value of the fill factor is needed, which reflects in a lower value of Rsh. Fig. 5a also shows that networks of semiconducting and mostly metallic nanotubes behave differently. In fact, for high Rsh values (up to 0.5 kΩ sq−1) the mostly metallic tubes give rise to higher PCEs than the mainly semiconducting ones. Conversely, for lower sheet resistances the S85s exhibit a higher PCE. Also, the data shown in Fig. 5b indicates a different behavior of the M65 and S85 networks. Given the lower resistivity of the metallic SWCNTs with respect to the semiconducting ones, for the same value of Rsh one would expect a higher T550 for M65 with respect to the S85 films. However, the values of T550 for the two types of film are comparable over all of the Rsh range. The reasons for this behavior might be due to the possible different resistances offered by the silver paint contacts, as well as to the more intrinsic properties of the two nanotube networks. These different properties might be ascribed to different percentages of percolation paths as a function of the SWCNT network thickness and the areal density for the M65 and S65 devices, to correlate with different percentages of unbundled nanotubes, different percentages of metal/semiconducting nanotube junctions blocking charge carrier flow and perhaps a higher amount of residual SDS coating metallic SWCNT due to a stronger interaction with the latter.36 This complicates the interpretation of the PCE differences between the two types of device and makes it impossible to establish which is the most efficient type of device of the two presented.In the center and lower panels of Fig. 6 we report the normalized optical transmittance and the external quantum efficiencies of several S85 and M65 devices respectively. Only one normalized optical transmittance spectrum for each type of nanotube is shown, because by varying the thickness and the areal density of the SWCNT network, the percentage of transmitted light changes, but the shape of the spectra is not affected over a wide wavelength range. Each device has a different sheet resistance. The EQE spectra closely resembles that of a conventional Si solar cell, which is generally quite flat between 500 nm and 900 nm, with a descending tail toward 350 nm and 1000–1100 nm, i.e. when light energy is comparable to the energy band gap of Si. The former tail is defined by the characteristics of an emitter (in our case, the carbon nanotube network) in terms of the front surface recombination velocity of the carriers and emitter carrier diffusion length with respect to the emitter thickness. The shape of the tail in the near infrared region is mostly due to the base (here, the Si substrate) carrier diffusion length with respect to the base thickness and, to a lesser extent, to the back surface recombination velocity. The resemblance of the measured EQEs to that of a conventional Si solar cell suggests that in the SWCNT/Si hybrid device the formation of electron–hole pairs occurs mostly in the silicon substrate. However, a more careful analysis shows that there is a marked difference between the EQE spectra of the lowest and highest Rsh SWCNT/Si. In particular, a straightforward difference is observed in the ultraviolet wavelength range (between 350 and 450 nm) where the EQE for a low Rsh is much higher than for a high Rsh. This can be ascribed to the following reasons; because of the thinness of the carbon nanotube networks, for high Rsh UV photons are mainly, but not totally, absorbed in carbon nanotube film due to the high energy electronic transitions.8,20 As a matter of fact, UV photons are also absorbed, though at a lower extent, in the silicon substrate underneath. For the low thickness of the SWCNT film, the minority carriers generated in the SWCNTs have to travel for a length comparable to their diffusion length, L, before reaching the depletion area of the heterojunction. Moreover, the carriers created in the silicon substrate below the nanotubes should suffer a lower surface recombination process. Both the first conditions are no longer valid as the nanotube film thickness increases, namely, all the UV photons are absorbed in the SWCNT and the path for the carriers to be separated becomes much longer than L. This is reflected in a reduction of the intensity and UV extension of the EQE spectrum for low Rsh devices (Fig. 6). This means that, in principle, it is possible to use thin SWCNT networks in order to extend and exploit the UV range that in equivalent p–n Si cells is depressed due to the thickness of the Si-base emitter and surface recombination. Furthermore, for the thinnest SWCNT networks in the EQE spectral range between 350 and 500–600 nm there are clearly visible hints of peaks in close correspondence to optical transitions exhibited as valleys by the transmittance spectra (Fig. 6, dark green and violet solid curves).  Fig. 6  EQE of the poly-crystalline Si solar cell (upper panel), semiconducting SWCNT/Si solar cell (middle panel) and metallic SWCNT/Si solar cell (lower panel). Comparison with normalized optical transmittance spectra of semiconducting (dark green curve) in the middle panel and metallic (violet curve) in the lower panel. These features are present in the EQE spectra of semiconducting and metallic tubes. In particular, for the M65 sample, the SWCNT film extends the EQE for a wider spectral range because of the extreme thinness of the SWCNT film. The presence of these small peaks in the EQE, irrespective of the electronic nature of the SWCNTs, is highly notable. This means that, despite the metallic character of the nanotubes, the photogenerated exciton has a lifetime long enough to reach the heterojunction without recombining. A similar phenomenon has already been observed in the case of multiwall carbon nanotubes and interpreted in terms of the low density of electronic states at the Fermi energy for these graphitic-like systems.20 With Rsh decreasing, the nanotube network still absorbs photons at peculiar wavelengths in the visible range, but it is not able to generate photocurrent because its thickness becomes much larger than the minority carrier diffusion length. Therefore, we observe a depletion in the EQE spectra in close correspondence with the SWCNT absorption transitions. These depletions are more and more important as the film thickness increases. However, in the case of long wavelengths, photons are absorbed in the SWCNT film closest to the interface. Therefore, minority carriers generated by them can cross the heterojunction and contribute to the photocurrent. This is the reason why we observe peaks in the EQE of very low Rsh nanotube films in correspondence with the transitions in the optical absorption spectra. This effect partially extends toward the near IR the spectral range of the high Rsh devices. A similar effect has been reported in ref. 10 for semiconducting (7,6) and (8,6) nanotubes evidencing an enhancement of the EQE in the wavelength region close to and higher than the Si energy gap, and in correspondence with the peak of absorption of the (7,6) SWCNT. Furthermore, this also means that by using nanotubes with a suitable chirality one can extend the silicon spectral range towards the IR range. All these considerations on the EQE enable us to say that CNTs can produce a photocurrent over a very wide spectral range spanning from the IR to ultraviolet, as well as visible range, and this can extend considerably the spectral response of the sole silicon substrate.4 ConclusionsIn conclusion we have shown that the EQE spectral range can be modulated as a function of the CNT network sheet resistance in a hybrid SWCNT/Si solar cell. This result will be very useful to further design/optimize devices with improved performance in spectral regions generally not covered by the conventional Si p–n devices. Moreover, by using highly metallic and mainly semiconducting SWCNT networks, we were also able to detect hints of unexpected metallic SWCNT participation to photocurrent generation. In addition, we report that the networks formed with the latter SWCNTs exhibit a PCE higher than that obtained with the mostly semiconducting SWCNTs up to a sheet resistance value of 0.5 kΩ sq−1, while for lower Rsh value the films of semiconducting SWCNTs showed a higher PCE. However, although the Rsh always decreases with a lowering of optical transmittance, the values of T550 for the two types of film were unexpectedly comparable over all of the Rsh range, making it difficult to establish which one gives rise to the most efficient device. Reasons for these comparable Rsh values for the S85 and M65 networks have been suggested.AcknowledgementsThe authors thank Prof. Francesca Nanni of the Department of Chemistry, University of Roma Tor Vergata, for SEM measurements. We acknowledge the financial support of the EOARD (European Office of Aerospace Research and Development) through Air Force Office of Scientific Research Material Command, USAF, under Grant no. FA8655-11-1-3036.ReferencesJ. U. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 073101–073104 CrossRef .J. Q. Wei, Y. Jia, Q. K. Shu, Z. Y. Gu, K. L. Wang, D. M. Zhuang, G. Zhang, Z. C. Wang, J. B. Luo, A. Y. Cao and D. H. Wu, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2317–2321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Jia, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, A. Y. Cao, Q. K. Shu, X. C. Gui, Y. Q. Zhu, D. M. Zhuang, G. Zhang, B. B. Ma, L. D. Wang, W. J. Liu, Z. C. Wang, J. B. Luo and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4594–4598 CrossRef CAS .Z. R. Li, V. P. Kunets, V. Saini, Y. Xu, E. Dervishi, G. J. Salamo, A. R. Biris and A. S. Biris, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1407–1414 CrossRef PubMed .P. Wadhwa, B. Liu, M. A. McCarthy, Z. C. Wu and A. G. Rinzler, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 5001–5005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Jung, X. K. Li, N. K. Rajan, A. D. Tayor and M. A. Reed, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 95–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Jia, A. Y. Cao, X. Bai, Z. Li, L. H. Zhang, N. Guo, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, H. W. Zhu, D. H. Wu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1901–1905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Del Gobbo, P. Castrucci, M. Scarselli, L. Camilli, M. De Crescenzi, L. Mariucci, A. Valletta, A. Minotti and G. Fortunato, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 183113–183115 CrossRef .J. Kim, A. J. Hong, B. Chandra, G. S. Tulevski and D. K. Sadana, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1899–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. L. Ong, W. B. Euler and I. A. Levitsky, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 105203 CrossRef PubMed .V. Le Borgne, L. A. Gautier, P. Castrucci, S. Del Gobbo, M. De Crescenzi and M. A. El Khakani, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 215206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. El Khakani, V. Le Borgne, B. Aissa, F. Rosei, C. Scilletta, E. Speiser, M. Scarselli, P. Castrucci and M. De Crescenzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 083114–083116 CrossRef .V. Le Borgne, P. Castrucci, S. Del Gobbo, M. Scarselli, M. De Crescenzi, M. Mohamedi and M. A. El Khakani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 193105–193107 CrossRef .P. Castrucci, F. Tombolini, M. Scarselli, E. Speiser, S. Del Gobbo, W. Richter, M. De Crescenzi, M. Diociaiuti, E. Gatto and M. Venanzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 253107–253109 CrossRef .H. Derbal-Habak, C. Bergeret, J. Cousseau and J. M. Nunzi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, S53–S56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Holt, A. J. Ferguson, N. Kopidakis, B. A. Larsen, J. Bult, G. Rumbles and J. L. Blackburn, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4627–4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Kataura, Y. Kumazawa, Y. Maniwa, I. Umezu, S. Suzuki, Y. Ohtsuka and Y. Achiba, Synth. Met., 1999, 103, 2555–2558 CrossRef CAS .J. Chen, M. A. Hamon, H. Hu, Y. S. Chen, A. M. Rao, P. C. Eklund and R. C. Haddon, Science, 1998, 282, 95–98 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Fuhrer, J. Nygard, L. Shih, M. Forero, Y. G. Yoon, M. S. C. Mazzoni, H. J. Choi, J. Ihm, S. G. Louie, A. Zettl and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2000, 288, 494–497 CrossRef CAS .P. Castrucci, C. Scilletta, S. Del Gobbo, M. Scarselli, L. Camilli, M. Simeoni, B. Delley, A. Continenza and M. De Crescenzi, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 11571–11578 CrossRef PubMed .P. Castrucci, M. Scarselli, M. De Crescenzi, M. A. El Khakani, F. Rosei, N. Braidy and J. H. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3857–3859 CrossRef CAS .S. X. Lu and B. Panchapakesan, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1843–1850 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Lien, W. K. Hsu, H. W. Zan, N. H. Tai and C. H. Tsai, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Merchant and N. Markovic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 115701 CrossRef .X. K. Li, Y. Jung, K. Sakimoto, T. H. Goh, M. A. Reed and A. D. Taylor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 879–887 CAS .D. W. Shin, J. H. Lee, Y. H. Kim, S. M. Yu, S. Y. Park and J. B. Yoo, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 475703 CrossRef PubMed .A. Behnam, J. L. Johnson, Y. H. Choi, M. G. Ertosun, A. K. Okyay, P. Kapur, K. C. Saraswat and A. Ural, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 243116 CrossRef .A. Behnam, N. A. Radhakrishna, Z. C. Wu and A. Ural, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 233105 CrossRef .Y. Jia, A. Y. Cao, F. Y. Kang, P. X. Li, X. C. Gui, L. H. Zhang, E. Z. Shi, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, H. W. Zhu and D. H. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8391–8396 RSC .Y. Jia, P. X. Li, X. C. Gui, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, H. W. Zhu, D. H. Wu, L. H. Zhang, A. Y. Cao and Y. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 133115 CrossRef .P. L. Ong, W. B. Euler and I. A. Levitsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 033106 CrossRef .S. Y. Chew, S. H. Ng, J. Z. Wang, P. Novak, F. Krumeich, S. L. Chou, J. Chen and H. K. Liu, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2976–2983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. G. Nasibulin, A. Kaskela, K. Mustonen, A. S. Anisimov, V. Ruiz, S. Kivisto, S. Rackauskas, M. Y. Timmermans, M. Pudas, B. Aitchison, M. Kauppinen, D. P. Brown, O. G. Okhotnikov and E. I. Kauppinen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3214–3221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Fantini, A. Jorio, M. Souza, M. S. Strano, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. A. Pimenta, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 147406 CrossRef CAS .R. B. Weisman and S. M. Bachilo, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1235–1238 CrossRef CAS .T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe, D. Nishide and H. Kataura, Appl. Phys. Express, 2009, 2, 125002 CrossRef .Footnote† To obtain these measurements, some of the SWCNT networks were divided into two parts, of which one was deposited on the Si substrate and the other on a quartz substrate.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the SWCNT/Si photovoltaic device. The 5 mm × 5 mm photoactive window is in the center of the device where the SWCNT film lies directly on the bare Si. The dark red steps represent the 300 nm thick SiO2 insulating bases on top of which is deposited the SWCNT film contacted by Ag paint. The back contact is constituted of a thin aluminum film. In the measurements, the Ag top contacts were used as signal electrodes, while the Al back contact was grounded.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  A high resolution SEM picture of the SWCNT film deposited on Si. The SWCNT network is very entangled and covers completely the Si underneath. The white spots might be due to the residual cellulose acetate membrane not completely removed by the acetone.	 

 	Fig. 3  Raman spectra of metallic (blue dots) and semiconductor (red dots) SWCNT in the spectral range of the radial breathing mode (RBM). Both spectra were fitted using Lorentzian lineshapes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Absorption spectra of metallic (dark green) and semiconducting (magenta) SWCNT in aqueous solution.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) PCE value with the varying of sheet resistance, Rsh, for metallic (black dots) and semiconducting (red dots) SWCNT. The plots give hints on how the film Rsh affects the value of the PCE. (b) Optical transmittance values taken at a wavelength of 550 nm, T550vs. Rsh. The thicker and denser the nanotube networks are, the lower the sheet resistance is for both the M65 and S85 films.	 

 	Fig. 6  EQE of the poly-crystalline Si solar cell (upper panel), semiconducting SWCNT/Si solar cell (middle panel) and metallic SWCNT/Si solar cell (lower panel). Comparison with normalized optical transmittance spectra of semiconducting (dark green curve) in the middle panel and metallic (violet curve) in the lower panel.	 
Footnote
† To obtain these measurements, some of the SWCNT networks were divided into two parts, of which one was deposited on the Si substrate and the other on a quartz substrate.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
