Trace fluorinated-carbon-nanotube-induced lithium dendrite elimination for high-performance lithium–oxygen cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR09749J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR09749J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3424-3434Trace fluorinated-carbon-nanotube-induced lithium dendrite elimination for high-performance lithium–oxygen cells†

        
          
            Hao 
            Cheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yangjun 
            Mao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunhao 
            Lu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Zhang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Xie
          
        
      *ad and 

        
          
            Xinbing 
            Zhao
          
        
      ad
aState Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China. E-mail: xiejian1977@zju.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-571-87951451;   Tel: +86-571-87951451
bDepartment of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China
cHangzhou Skyrich Power Co., Ltd, Hangzhou 310022, P. R. China
dKey Laboratory of Advanced Materials and Applications for Batteries of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China
Received 
      15th November 2019
    , Accepted 30th December 2019First published on 31st December 2019AbstractLithium metal has attracted considerable attention due to its ultrahigh theoretical capacity. Nevertheless, issues such as dendritic Li formation and instability of the Li metal/electrolyte interface still restrain its practical applications. In this work, we design a Li composite anode with fluorinated carbon nanotubes (FCNT) fabricated by a simple melting–soaking method. It was found that trace amounts of added FCNT (only 1.6 wt%) lead to a significant chemical/electrochemical stability of metallic Li. The obtained Li/FCNT composite electrode (LFCNT) exhibits much better stability in open air and electrolyte than bare Li. The LFCNT enables uniform plating/stripping of metallic Li, preventing the dendrite formation during repeated cycling. In situ optical microscopy observations confirm dendrite-free Li deposition with the mechanism clarified by density functional theory calculations. Compared with bare Li, the LFCNT shows a considerable improvement in rate capability, voltage hysteresis and cycle performance, sustaining stable cycling at a high current density of 3 mA cm−2 or a capacity up to 5 mA h cm−2. Li–O2 cells with a LFCNT anode exhibit a long life of 135 cycles at a capacity of 1000 mA h g−1, which is six-fold than that with the bare Li anode.
Introduction
It is generally recognized that the massive use of fossil fuels not only leads to serious pollution, but also causes global warming with alarming consequences. Though solar, wind and wave energies are promising clean energies, they are variable with time and require energy storage devices.1 Over the past few decades, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have achieved great success and enabled the popularity of portable electronics such as mobile phones, laptops and drones. Nevertheless, issues such as energy density, cost, safety and service life still restrain the employment of LIBs for the huge market of electric vehicles, which could effectively reduce the consumption of fossil fuels.2,3 The energy density of traditional LIBs using graphite anodes has almost reached their theoretical value which cannot meet the demand of long-range electric vehicles. Therefore, advanced electrode materials are urgently needed for next-generation high-energy-density batteries.4,5
Among various anode materials, Li metal with an ultrahigh theoretical capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and the lowest electrochemical potential (−3.040 V versus standard hydrogen electrode) has attracted much attention.6 However, severe challenges have hindered its practical applications. The instability of the Li metal/electrolyte interface can cause irreversible reactions and continuous consumption of Li and the electrolyte. The generated thick solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer increases the interface resistance and electrochemical polarization, thus jeopardizing the battery performance.7 During the Li plating/stripping process, the uncontrolled formation and growth of Li dendrites lead to short circuit and safety issues. Besides, large volume changes of Li metal during cycling can easily break the SEI layer, and the fresh Li will be exposed to the electrolyte that generates a large-surface-area SEI layer, resulting in a rapid capacity decay and low coulombic efficiency. Li dendrites are also prone to detach from Li metal to form dead Li which is electrochemically inert due to the easy electron reception and early dissolution of dendrite roots.8,9 In recent years, Li–air (O2) and Li–S batteries have triggered a wave of research due to the much higher energy densities compared to conventional LIBs.10–12 Though the fabrication of cathode materials consisting of catalysts for O2 reduction/evolution or sulfur has made great progress, the utilization of stable Li metal is critical for the practical applications of both batteries.
To inhibit dendrite growth and obtain a stable Li anode, numerous strategies have been proposed during the past decades. One option is the use of solid-state electrolytes with a higher modulus than that of Li, which could block the penetration of Li dendrites and improve the safety performance. However, the ionic conductivity of the present solid electrolytes at room temperature is still far below that of the nonaqueous liquid electrolyte (10−3 S cm−1).13,14 Another method to obtain a dendrite-free Li anode is the rational structure design of the anode. Considering the fact that large thickness change and uneven plating/stripping of Li during cycling would induce Li dendrite formation, the design of novel current collectors based on nanomaterials and nanotechnology has been proposed. Recent reports on designs of some current collectors, such as nickel,15 copper,16 carbonaceous framework,17–20 and transition metal compound arrays,21–23 show a significant improvement in coulombic efficiency and dendrite-free Li deposition. Nevertheless, the interface reactions between Li metal and electrolyte still remain a critical challenge. Therefore, an artificial SEI layer with robust mechanical stability and high Li-ion conductivity is necessary to stabilize the interface and to suppress Li dendrites. Electrochemical pretreatment,24–26 chemical pretreatment27–29 and physical pretreatment30–32 are three usual methods to fabricate an artificial SEI layer. Although electrochemical or chemical pretreatments are promising to modify Li metal, they usually involve a complicated procedure. For example, the electrochemical pretreatment includes steps such as pretreatment in cells, dismantling cells to obtain the modified anode, and assembly of the new cells. In comparison, physical pretreatment such as coating is more facile and cost-effective for mass production. Each of the methods mentioned above has its own merits and their integration might realize a safe Li metal anode.
Herein, we propose a facile method to synthesize a composite Li anode modified by trace amounts (only 1.6 wt%) of fluorinated carbon nanotubes (FCNT) using a physical pretreatment method. The FCNT-modified Li electrode (LFCNT) realizes in situ formation of a LiF-rich artificial SEI layer via an electrochemical process. Experiments and density functional theory (DFT) calculations demonstrate that FCNT could react with Li during Li plating to form carbon nanotubes (CNT) and LiF. The presence of a CNT-reinforced, LiF-rich layer enables uniform plating/stripping of metallic Li, inhibiting the growth of Li-dendrites effectively. The even distribution of CNT with a high mechanical strength and LiF-rich SEI layer preserves the structural integrity of the Li anode and maintains the interfacial stability with the electrolyte upon long-time cycling. As a result, the LFCNT electrode can sustain stable cycling at high current density up to 3 mA cm−2 and large capacity up to 5 mA h cm−2. The Li–O2 cell with the LFCNT anode shows a six-fold cycle life compared to that with the bare Li anode, indicating excellent performance of the LFCNT anode.
Experimental section
Synthesis of the LFCNT composite anode
First, FCNT powder (≥99.5%, XFNANO Co., Ltd) was dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C for 10 h. Second, polished Li foil (≥99.9%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd) was placed on a stainless-steel plate that was heated to 350 °C to melt Li metal. Then, the dried FCNT powder was added to the molten Li under vigorous stirring for 5 min to obtain a homogeneous LFCNT composite. Finally, the LFCNT compound was cooled down to room temperature, mechanically pressed and cut into discs of 1 cm diameter and 600 μm thickness. The mass fraction of FCNT in the composite anode is 1.6 wt%. All of the above operations were carried out in an argon-filled glove box.
Material characterization
Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was employed to observe the morphologies of the pristine and cycled electrodes using an SU8010 microscope (Hitachi, Japan). X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were collected on a KRATOS AXIS ULTRA-DLD spectrometer with Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.6 eV). The cells after cycling were dismantled in the glove box and the cycled electrodes were washed three times with 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) (≥99.5%, Macklin Co., Ltd) before characterization. The in situ optical microscopy observation of dendrite growth behaviors of bare Li and LFCNT electrodes was conducted on a BETICALXTL microscope.
Electrochemical measurements
Symmetric cells were assembled in the glove box using CR2025-type cells to test the electrode performance of the bare Li and LFCNT electrodes. 1 M LiPF6 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC), dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC) (1:1:1 in volume) (LB-002, Suzhou Dodochem Ltd) was used as the electrolyte. The symmetric cell with LFCNT was also tested in 1 M LiClO4 (≥99.99%, Sigma Aldrich) in tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME, ≥99.0%, Sigma Aldrich) under an O2 atmosphere. The Li–O2 cells were assembled using δ-MnO2-decorated carbon cloth as the cathode, a Celgard C480 membrane as the separator, bare Li or LFCNT as the anode and 1 M LiClO4 dissolved in TEGDME as the electrolyte. The mass loading of δ-MnO2 on carbon cloth is 0.5 mg cm−2 and the δ-MnO2 catalyst was prepared according to our previous work.33 δ-MnO2-decorated carbon cloth was dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C for 5 h before cell assembly. After the Li–O2 cells were assembled, they were purged with pure O2 for 20 min and kept in an open voltage circuit (OCV) for 5 h before electrochemical tests. A Neware battery cycler (Shenzhen, China) was used to test the electrochemical performance of symmetric half cells and Li–O2 full cells. The specific capacity (mA h g−1) and current density (mA g−1) of Li–O2 cells were calculated normalized to the mass of δ-MnO2. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests were conducted on a CHI660C electrochemistry workstation with an AC voltage of 5 mV amplitude over the frequency range of 10−2 to 105 Hz. All of the electrochemical tests were performed at room temperature.
Theoretical methods
All calculations were performed based on DFT using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) within the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE)34 functional implemented in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package.35 We employed the projector augmented wave pseudo-potential method to model ionic potentials.36 The kinetic energy cutoff was set above 400 eV for calculations. The Monkhorst–Pack scheme k-point sampling method was used for integration in the first Brillouin zone.37 All atoms were fully relaxed until the force on them was less than 0.01 eV Å−1. We used a 3 × 3 × 1 supercell (bilayer fluorinated graphene including 16 C and 16 F) to simulate the partial configuration of multi-walled fluorinated carbon nanotubes. To avoid the interaction between neighboring images, the minimum vacuum layer thickness was larger than 20 Å.
Results and discussion
A versatile and simple approach was employed to fabricate a LFCNT composite electrode. Li metal was heated at 350 °C under argon, and the molten Li was mixed with FCNT powder to obtain homogeneous LFCNT. SEM characterization studies were performed to investigate the morphology of the composite electrode. Fig. S1 (ESI†) shows the initial morphology of FCNT, which indicates that the nanotubes have a diameter of 20–30 nm and a length of several microns. As shown in Fig. 1a–d, bare Li exhibits a relatively flat surface, while the LFCNT shows a rough surface. It can be seen in the enlarged image that FCNTs are uniformly dispersed on the surface of the electrode, and the energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) mapping of the F element also confirms the uniform distribution of FCNTs on the electrode surface. Fig. S2 (ESI†) shows the cross-sectional image of bare Li and LFCNT. Compared to the neat surface of Li, the presence of FCNTs is obvious for LFCNT, indicating that FCNTs were introduced into Li during the melting/mixing process. XPS in Fig. 1e shows that an additional Li 1s peak appears in the spectrum of LFCNT compared with that of FCNT, indicating the successful formation of the LFCNT composite. The appearance of the O 1s peak is due to air exposure before the XPS characterization. The appearance of the LiF peak in Fig. 1f reveals that part of FCNT has reacted with Li during the melting–soaking process, where the large Gibbs free energy change is responsible for the reaction and formation of LiF.38 As a result, the addition of 1.6 wt% FCNT changes the surface morphology of Li. It is expected that the FCNT in the composite electrode will regulate the stripping/plating behaviors of metallic Li during cycling.
 Fig. 1  Surface morphology of (a) bare Li and (b, c) LFCNT electrode, (d) EDS mapping of (b), and (e) XPS survey spectra and (f) F 1s spectra of FCNT and LFCNT. 
To evaluate the protection effect of FCNT, bare Li and LFCNT electrodes were placed in open air (RH = 60%) for 75 h. As shown in Fig. 2a, the surface of bare Li changes from silver to grey in 1 min, and the surface color becomes white after 75 h. It can be seen from the side view that the center of bare Li becomes sunken and its edge becomes warped. These transformations are due to the reactions between Li and N2, O2, CO2, H2O in air, and the final white surface indicates that most of the Li has transformed to LiOH after 75 h. In contrast, the color of the LFCNT surface has no obvious change and the electrode maintains a flat surface without warping. Fig. S3 (ESI†) shows the composition evolution of LFCNT and bare Li in open air. In the initial state, both Li and LFCNT show a sharp lithium peak and the LFCNT shows the Li3N peak due to the exposure to N2 in air during the XRD test. After being exposed to air for 75 h, the main degradation product of bare Li is LiOH while it is Li3N for LFCNT (Fig. S3c, ESI†). It can be concluded that the LFCNT is very stable towards H2O in air. H2O is one harmful component in the electrolyte and is detrimental to the Li anode and cycle life of cells while N2 content is usually low in the electrolyte.
 Fig. 2  (a) Variation of bare Li and LFCNT electrodes with time in open air, impedance evolution of the symmetric cells with (b) LFCNT and (c) bare Li electrodes in open circuit voltage and after cycling (5 cycles at a capacity of 1 mA h cm−2 and a current density of 1 mA cm−2), (d) rate capability of the symmetric cells at a capacity of 1 mA h cm−2, and (e) polarized potentials of bare Li and LFCNT at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. 
EIS measurements were conducted to study the resistance variation with time of the symmetric cells using LFCNT and bare Li electrodes. Fig. 2b and c exhibit the impedance change of LFCNT and bare Li from 0 h to 200 h. The Nyquist plots begin with ohmic resistance (Re) at high frequency followed by semicircles at lower frequencies that correspond to the surface film resistance of SEI (Rf) and charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the electrode, respectively.7,39 Here we define the sum of Rf and Rct as the electrode interface impedance (Rinterface). Table S1 (ESI†) summarizes the fitting results of impedance using the equivalent circuit in Fig. S4 (ESI†). Under open circuit voltage conditions, the Rinterface of LFCNT and bare Li converges to the maximal values after 200 h, indicating that the SEI thickness and composition tend to be constant. The results reveal that Re is far lower than Rinterface, which thus suggests that the overpotential and Li plating/stripping behavior depends mainly on Rinterface. As time increases, the Rinterface of the symmetric cell with LFCNT changes from 147 Ω to 422 Ω, and the major change comes from the increase in Rct, while for the symmetric cell with bare Li, the increase in Rinterface is 456 Ω (from 300 Ω to 756 Ω), where both Rf and Rct have a huge increase. The increase in Rf and Rct is due to the thickness growth of SEI and inevitable reaction between Li and electrolyte.40 After cycling (5 cycles), the Rinterface value of the symmetric cell with LFCNT is 41.2 Ω, which is lower than that with bare Li (81.1 Ω), corresponding to the lower voltage hysteresis of the symmetric cell with LFCNT in the following tests. The Rinterface values of symmetric cells with both LFCNT and bare Li are much lower than those measured just after assembly (0 h). It can be due to a large increase in the surface area of the lithium anode after cycling. The lower impedance and less variation of LFCNT can be attributed to the CNT/LiF layer in situ formed on the surface. As previously stated, the reaction between FCNT and Li produces LiF, which is a strong electron insulator.41 The SEI layer in the thickness direction is not homogeneous. The layer close to the Li metal surface contains Li2CO3, LiOH, Li3N, LiF and Li2O, labeled as the inorganic layer, while the outer part of the surface film is labeled as the organic layer containing ROCO2Li and RCOO2Li (R is an organic group related to the solvent).8 Li2CO3 has a relatively high ionic conductivity (∼10−8 S cm−1) but it is not a good electron insulator, while LiF is a good electron insulator but has relatively low ionic conductivity. Neither of them alone meets the desired properties of an ideal SEI. Hence, LiF can form a heterogeneous structure with Li2CO3 to improve ionic conduction and block electron transfer.42 Ozhabes reported that the surface diffusion barrier for ion transfer at the LiF/Li surface is about 0.1 eV, much lower than that of Li2CO3 (0.24 eV).43 The low diffusion barrier facilitates Li-ion conductivity and reduces the Rct. The CNT/LiF layer can also suppress electrolyte decomposition and Li consumption corresponding to the tiny change of Rf. Fig. 2d presents the rate capability of bare Li and LFCNT electrodes tested by cycling the symmetric cells at different current densities with a fixed areal capacity of 1 mA h cm−2. The LFCNT demonstrates a stable voltage polarization of 35, 50, 100 and 150 mV at a current density of 0.5, 1, 3 and 5 mA cm−2, respectively. Nevertheless, bare Li exhibits a much larger voltage polarization, especially at a high current density of 5 mA cm−2, where the voltage hysteresis exceeds 300 mV. Such phenomenon is attributed to the uneven Li plating/stripping process and large kinetic obstacle at high current density.7,44 The improved rate performance of LFCNT indicates that the modified surface layer facilitates the transport of Li-ions and reduces the difference of local current densities to promote the even deposition of Li. Fig. 2e shows the polarization curve of bare Li and LFCNT at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. The LFCNT electrode delivers a capacity of 96 mA h without voltage fluctuation which corresponds to a utilization ratio of 96.4% of Li in LFCNT, demonstrating the stable SEI layer and dendrite-free behavior during Li deposition. In contrast, bare Li shows drastic fluctuation and large polarization potential, implying the uneven deposition and formation of Li dendrites. Based on the above results, we can conclude that the LFCNT composite could effectively alleviate side reactions between Li and electrolyte and reduce the interface impedance to favor the uniform plating/stripping of Li.

Fig. 3 shows the voltage hysteresis of the symmetric cells with LFCNT and bare Li electrodes at different current densities and capacities. Voltage hysteresis is considered to be the sum of overpotential for Li plating/stripping.45 As shown in Fig. 3a, the LFCNT cell exhibits stable voltage profiles with a low voltage hysteresis and maintains a long cycling time over 1300 h without voltage fluctuation. In contrast, the bare Li cell shows a much higher voltage hysteresis in the first few cycles, corresponding to the formation of the SEI layer, and displays a gradual augment in hysteresis voltage which is always larger than that of the LFCNT cell. There are some fluctuations in the voltage profiles of bare Li cells during cycling and a sudden voltage drop is detected after 1300 h, which is ascribed to the fracture of the SEI on bare Li and formation of Li dendrites.8 Voltage profiles of the LFCNT cell at different cycles further demonstrate the lower overpotential and relatively flat voltage plateau compared to that of the bare Li cell (Fig. S5, ESI†). When the current density is increased to 3 mA cm−2, the LFCNT cell still presents much better cycling stability without voltage fluctuation, while the bare Li cell exhibits an obviously fluctuated voltage profile and worse cell performance. Fig. S6 (ESI†) and Fig. 3c present the voltage hysteresis of the LFCNT cell and bare Li cell with a large capacity of 3 mA h cm−2 and 5 mA h cm−2, respectively. The voltage profiles of bare Li exhibit conspicuous fluctuations in the first several cycles, indicating a big obstacle for Li plating/stripping with a high capacity, in good agreement with Fig. 2e. In contrast, the LFCNT cell shows a much lower overpotential and more stable cycling, which is attributed to the superior mechanical stability of the CNT/LiF layer and its ability to regulate the uniform Li plating/stripping.
 Fig. 3  Galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of the symmetric cells with LFCNT and bare Li electrodes at (a) 0.5 mA cm−2 and (b) 3 mA cm−2 with a capacity of 1 mA h cm−2, and (c) 1 mA cm−2 with a capacity of 5 mA h cm−2. 
To further understand the reasons for performance improvement of the LFCNT electrode, the morphologies of bare Li and LFCNT electrodes were observed after 100 cycles at 1 mA cm−2 with a capacity of 1 mA h cm−2. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, the bare Li electrode exhibits a rough surface composed of large Li agglomerates, indicating the uneven deposition of Li and formation of Li dendrites. Such a huge morphology variation of the bare Li accounts for the large voltage hysteresis and poor cycling stability of the symmetric cells. In contrast, the surface of LFCNT remains flat without detectable Li agglomerates and dendrites (Fig. 4d). The enlarged image in Fig. 4e shows that the SEI layer of LFCNT possesses a flat surface with little undulation. The cross-sectional images further confirm the undulating feature of the bare Li (Fig. 4c), which has a sharp contrast to the flat feature of the LFCNT electrode (Fig. 4f). XPS measurements were carried out to figure out the difference in SEI composition between LFCNT and bare Li. Fig. 4g shows that Li–F bonds instead of C–F bonds are the main chemical bonds on the surface of the SEI layer. Compared to the XPS spectrum in Fig. 1f, it can be speculated that the FCNT on the surface of LFCNT has reacted with Li during cycling and it was converted to CNTs and LiF. Fig. 4h also confirms the existence of LiF in the SEI layer of LFCNT. The LiF-rich SEI layer allows for the formation of a robust structure inhibiting the puncture of Li dendrites and a higher ionic conductivity, facilitating rapid Li-ion transport. The CNTs formed during cycling constitute good conducting networks which can promote even distribution of local current density and also alleviate the growth of Li dendrites.
 Fig. 4  Surface SEM images and cross-sectional SEM images of (a, b, c) bare Li and (d, e, f) LFCNT electrodes after 100 cycles, (g) F 1s and (h) Li 1s spectra of the LFCNT electrodes after 10 cycles, and (i) the model of Li intercalation into LFCNT and the optimized structure. 
DFT calculations were conducted to gain insight into the mechanism for the performance improvement of the LFCNT electrode. The FCNT we used is multi-walled fluorinated carbon nanotubes with a diameter of 20–30 nm. Here we adopt bilayer fluorinated graphene including 16 C and 16 F to simulate the partial configuration of FCNT (Fig. S7a, ESI†). Eight Li atoms are intercalated into the fluorinated graphene layers to simulate the Li plating process. As shown in Fig. 4i, F atoms of the fluorinated graphene layers between the Li atoms are detached after structural optimization, generating a flat graphene layer, while the other fluorinated graphene layers have no obvious structural changes. The side view of the optimized structure in Fig. S7b (ESI†) further verifies the formation of a flat graphene layer and LiF. The strong interaction between Li and F atoms results in the fracture of the C–F bond, causing the hybridization of carbon to change from sp3 to sp2. The calculation results indicate that the above change is spontaneous and an energy of 4.103 eV is released with each insertion of the Li atom. With the progress of Li plating, the FCNT is converted to carbon nanotubes with more LiF formed in the SEI layer. The SEI layer containing carbon nanotubes and LiF can effectively promote the uniform Li stripping/plating and suppress the growth of Li dendrites, while the SEI of bare Li has a poor mechanical stability and is easy to be fractured.

In situ optical microscopy images were recorded to investigate the Li deposition behavior on LFCNT and bare Li directly. From Fig. 5a, it is clear that Li dendrites grow rapidly from the surface of bare Li at a current density of 1 mA cm−2, which would cause safety issues such as cell short circuit and capacity loss due to the formation of dead Li. Once Li dendrites form, the roots of dendrites tend to dissolve earlier during stripping, resulting in the shedding of Li dendrites and fracturing of the SEI layer. In contrast, no obvious surface variation is observed on the surface of LFCNT, suggesting the uniform deposition of Li and the good structural stability of the SEI layer. It can thus be concluded that the introduction of FCNT significantly improves the deposition behavior of Li and thereby the electrochemical performance. Videos were recorded to see the dynamic changes of Li deposition behavior on LFCNT and bare Li electrodes (Videos 1 and 2†). To display the changes more obviously, the videos are played at a speed 100 times that of the original one. The results indicate that a small amount of FCNT (1.6 wt%) can effectively inhibit the growth of dendrites.
 Fig. 5  (a) In situ optical microscopy images of Li deposition behavior on bare Li and LFCNT electrodes without a separator at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 after 10, 20 and 30 min, and (b) the diagrams of the Li plating/stripping behavior on bare Li and LFCNT electrodes. 
Based on the comprehensive analysis of experiments and calculation results, diagrams of the Li plating/stripping behavior on bare Li and LFCNT electrodes are presented in Fig. 5b. For the bare Li electrode, the inhomogeneous plating of Li results in the growth of Li dendrites, and the large contact area of Li with the electrolyte causes huge side reactions and consumption of Li and electrolyte. During the stripping process, the uneven current density distribution leads to the undulating surface and rupture of the SEI layer. The faster dissolution of dendrite roots causes the detachment of the dendrite tip (dead Li) which damages the electrode and reduces capacity gradually. As for LFCNT, the robust protection layer containing CNT/LiF exhibits a good mechanical stability and high conductivity for Li-ion transport. During the Li plating/stripping process, the surface of LFCNT remains flat with Li depositing or stripping beneath the SEI layer homogeneously. Consequently, the LFCNT electrode shows lower voltage hysteresis, better rate capability and longer cycle life.
To highlight the critical role of FCNT introduction for Li dendrite elimination and the accompanied performance improvement, a separator was attached to one side of the symmetric cells. As shown in Fig. 6a, for the bare Li electrode, Li dendrites can easily penetrate the separator during the Li deposition process. Videos were also recorded to vividly see the Li deposition behavior on the LFCNT and bare Li electrodes (Videos 3 and 4†). It can be seen from Video 4† that the separator moves in the opposite direction of Li-ion transport at the beginning of Li deposition. As the Li deposition proceeds, some Li dendrites can penetrate the separator and even reach the other side of the symmetric cell. In an actual cell, this will inevitably cause a short circuit of the cell. Besides the formation of dendrites, the newly deposited Li layer is loosely stacked, in sharp contrast to the dense packing of the pristine electrode. Therefore, after repeated Li plating/stripping processes, dead Li would form which would lead to the degradation and final death of the Li electrode. In contrast, for the LFCNT electrode, no dendrites can be observed and the newly deposited Li layer is also densely stacked as shown in Fig. 6b and Video 3.†
 Fig. 6  (a) In situ optical microscopy images of Li deposition behavior on (a) bare Li and (b) LFCNT electrodes with a separator at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 after 10, 20 and 30 min. 
The LFCNT composite anodes were paired with the δ-MnO2 cathode to evaluate the electrochemical performance of Li–O2 cells. Because the Li–O2 full cells were tested in 1 M LiClO4/TEGDME and under an O2 atmosphere, symmetric cells with LFCNT and bare Li electrodes under the same atmosphere and electrolyte as the Li–O2 cells were tested to verify the merit of LFCNT. As shown in Fig. S8,† the bare Li cell shows a much higher voltage hysteresis and the voltage hysteresis exceeds 500 mV after 30 h, while the LFCNT cell exhibits much lower voltage hysteresis and maintains a long cycling time over 300 h without voltage fluctuation, which further confirms the merit of LFCNT. Fig. S9 (ESI) and Table S2 (ESI†) show the EIS results of Li–O2 cells with the LFCNT and bare Li anodes. It can be clearly seen that the charge transfer resistance of LFCNT decreases apparently compared to that of the bare Li anode, which is ascribed to the high ionic conductivity of the LiF-rich SEI layer of LFCNT. The discharge capacity of Li–O2 cells with different anodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 is presented in Fig. S10 (ESI†). All of the current density and specific capacity are normalized to the mass of δ-MnO2. The cell with the LFCNT anode yields a large capacity of 4916 mA h g−1, which is much higher than that with the bare Li anode (2965 mA h g−1). The large increase in discharge capacity further confirms the merit of the LFCNT anode.
To evaluate the cycling stability, Li–O2 cells with LFCNT and bare Li anodes were cycled at a current density of 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 in a voltage range of 2.0–4.5 V. Fig. S11 (ESI†) shows that the capacity of the Li/MnO2 cell in Ar is much smaller than that in O2 (Fig. 7d), indicating that the Li-ion intercalation effect in MnO2 contributes only a small proportion to the total capacity of the cell. Fig. 7a and b show the voltage profiles of Li–O2 cells with the LFCNT and bare Li anodes at different cycles. As the cycle number increases, the overpotential of the Li–O2 cell with LFCNT exhibits a stable value, even at the 135th cycle. In contrast, the cell with the bare Li anode shows a rapid augment in polarization and it reaches the discharge cut-off voltage of 2 V at the 22nd cycle. Note that as the conversion from FCNT to LiF and carbon nanotubes is irreversible and occurs in the first few cycles, the discharge voltage of the Li–O2 cell with LFCNT is relatively lower compared with bare Li in the first cycle. Fig. 7c shows the cycle life of Li–O2 cells with LFCNT and bare Li anodes. The cell with LFCNT exhibits a stable cycling of 135 cycles while that with the bare Li anode can last only 22 cycles. To further show the advantage of the LFCNT anode, Li–O2 cells with different anodes at a current density of 400 mA g−1 without the limiting capacity were also tested as shown in Fig. 7d. The Li–O2 cell with LFCNT delivers a capacity of 2687 mA h g−1 at the first discharge and maintains a discharge capacity over 1000 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles, better than the Li–O2 cell with bare Li. The above results demonstrate that the LFCNT-based Li–O2 cells possess an excellent electrochemical performance. The superior performance can be attributed to the stable structure of LFCNT with little degradation during cycling. The LiF-rich SEI layer can facilitate the Li-ion transport and promote uniform Li plating/stripping with inhibited Li dendrites. As a result, the cell with LFCNT shows a lower overpotential, a larger discharge capacity and longer cycle life. To highlight the superior performance of the Li–O2 cell with the LFCNT anode, the electrochemical performance of the cells with Li anodes with different modifications is listed in Table S3 (ESI†). Among these modified anodes, the advantage of the LFCNT electrode is more obvious considering the better cycling performance of the cell, the easy and possible large-scale fabrication of the anode, and low cost of manufacture (only 1.6 wt% in the electrode).
 Fig. 7  Voltage profiles of the Li–O2 cells with (a) LFCNT and (b) bare Li anodes at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 and (c) the comparison of cycle life, and (d) discharge capacity of the Li–O2 cells with bare Li and LFCNT anodes between 2.2 and 4.3 V at 400 mA g−1 without limiting the capacity. 
Conclusion
In summary, a LFCNT composite anode has been fabricated to address the dendrite issues of the Li metal anode. Through a simple synthesis method, the Li electrode protected by the FCNT layer with a small amount (1.6 wt%) shows much better stability in open air and slower degradation in the electrolyte than bare Li. During initial plating processes, a CNT-reinforced, LiF-rich SEI layer with robust mechanical stability and flat surface formed on the surface of LFCNT. Owing to the high Li-ion conductivity of the LiF-rich layer and effective electron transfer with carbon nanotubes, uniform plating/stripping of metallic Li is achieved, promoting the dendrite-free Li deposition and flat morphology of the LFCNT electrode. As a result, symmetric half cells with LFCNT electrodes show a significant improvement in rate capability, voltage hysteresis and cycle life, with stable cycling even at a high current density of 3 mA cm−2 and a large capacity of 5 mA h cm−2. Li–O2 full cells with the LFCNT anode deliver a high capacity of 4916 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and a long cycle life of 135 cycles at a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 under a current density of 400 mA g−1, greatly improved compared to those with the bare Li anode. This work provides a facile, cost-effective strategy to prepare dendrite-free Li metal electrodes, which show promising applications in Li metal batteries.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51572238) and the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. LY19E020013.
References
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Evarts, Nature, 2015, 526, S93–S95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y. U. Kim, J. H. Kim, C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9011–9034 RSC .
J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16141 CrossRef .
W. Xu, J. L. Wang, F. Ding, X. L. Chen, E. Nasybulin, Y. H. Zhang and J. G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 513–537 RSC .
G. Bieker, M. Winter and P. Bieker, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 8670–8679 RSC .
X. B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C. Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Lin, Y. Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 19–29 CrossRef PubMed .
A. C. Luntz and B. D. McCloskey, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11721–11750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Sayahpour, P. Abbasi, A. T. Ngo, K. Karis, J. R. Jokisaari, C. Liu, B. Narayanan, M. Gerard, P. Yasaei, X. Hu, A. Mukherjee, K. C. Lau, R. S. Assary, F. KhaliliAraghi, R. F. Klie, L. A. Curtiss and A. SalehiKhojin, Nature, 2018, 555, 502–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kalhoff, G. G. Eshetu, D. Bresser and S. Passerini, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2154–2175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Rangasamy, Z. C. Liu, M. Gobet, K. Pilar, G. Sahu, W. Zhou, H. Wu, S. Greenbaum and C. Liang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chi, Y. C. Liu, W. L. Song, L. Z. Fan and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700348 CrossRef .
Q. Li, S. P. Zhu and Y. Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606422 CrossRef .
S. Liu, A. X. Wang, Q. Q. Li, J. S. Wu, K. Chiou, J. X. Huang and J. Y. Luo, Joule, 2018, 2, 184–193 CrossRef CAS .
A. X. Wang, S. Tang, D. B. Kong, S. Liu, K. Chiou, L. J. Zhi, J. X. Huang, Y. Y. Xia and J. Y. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703891 CrossRef PubMed .
A. X. Wang, X. Y. Zhang, Y. W. Yang, J. X. Huang, X. J. Liu and J. Y. Luo, Chem, 2018, 4, 2192–2200 CAS .
C. Y. Zhang, S. Liu, G. J. Li, C. J. Zhang, X. J. Liu and J. Y. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801328 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Z. Yu, T. Tao, S. Mateti, S. G. Lu and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803023 CrossRef .
S. Y. Li, Q. L. Liu, J. J. Zhou, T. Pan, L. N. Gao, W. D. Zhang, L. Fan and Y. Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808847 CrossRef .
X. Y. Zhang, R. J. Lv, A. X. Wang, W. Q. Guo, X. J. Liu and J. Y. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15028–15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. C. Liu, J. J. Xu, S. Yuan, Z. W. Chang, D. Xu, Y. B. Yin, L. Li, H. X. Zhong, Y. S. Jiang, J. M. Yan and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5241–5247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, M. S. Kim and L. A. Archer, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4181–4189 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Cheng, C. Yan, X. Chen, C. Guan, J. Q. Huang, H. J. Peng, R. Zhang, S. T. Yang and Q. Zhang, Chem, 2017, 2, 258–270 CAS .
S. L. Koch, B. J. Morgan, S. Passerini and G. Teobaldi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 150–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Zhang, W. Wang, H. Tang, W. Q. Bai, X. Ge, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 304–311 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Q. M. Zhang, X. G. Wang, C. Y. Wang, Y. N. Chen, Z. J. Xie and Z. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12814–12818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Bucur, A. Lita, N. Osada and J. Muldoon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 112–116 RSC .
H. K. Jing, L. L. Kong, S. Liu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12213–12219 RSC .
S. M. Choi, I. S. Kang, Y. K. Sun, J. H. Song, S. M. Chung and D. W. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, P. C. Sun, J. Xie, Z. C. Tang, Z. X. Yang, Z. X. Dong, G. S. Cao, S. C. Zhang, P. V. Braun and X. B. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 9, 206–213 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 13, 5188–5192 CrossRef .
G. G. Amatucci and N. Pereira, J. Fluorine Chem., 2007, 128, 243–262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schranzhofer, J. Bugajski, H. J. Santner, C. Korepp, K. C. Möller, J. O. Besenhard, M. Winter and W. Sitte, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 391–395 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Lin, J. Zhao, J. Sun, H. B. Yao, Y. Y. Liu, K. Yan and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Chen, C. Y. Ouyang, L. J. Song and Z. L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7044–7049 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Zhang, J. Pan, P. Lu, Z. Y. Liu, M. W. Verbrugge, B. W. Sheldon, Y. T. Cheng, Y. Qi and X. C. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2011–2016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Ozhabes, D. Gunceler and T. A. Arias, arXiv, 2015, 1504, 05799.
J. Heine, S. Krüger, C. Hartnig, U. Wietelmann, M. Winter and P. Bieker, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300815 CrossRef .
Z. Liang, D. C. Lin, J. Zhao, Z. D. Lu, Y. Y. Liu, C. Liu, Y. Y. Lu, H. T. Wang, K. Yan, X. Y. Tao and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM image of FCNTs, cross-section SEM image of Li and LFCNT electrodes, equivalent circuit for the fitting, fitting results in Fig. 2b and c, voltage profiles of LFCNT and bare Li electrodes in symmetric cells at selected cycles, galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of LFCNT and bare Li electrodes in symmetric cells at 1 mA cm−2 and 3 mA h cm−2, model of the bilayer fluorinated graphene, Nyquist plots of the Li–O2 cells with bare Li and LFCNT electrodes, fitting results in Fig. S7,† discharge profiles of Li–O2 cells with bare Li and LFCNT electrodes at 100 mA g−1, comparison of electrochemical performance of Li–O2 cells with various Li anodes, discharge profiles of Li/MnO2 cells in pure Ar, and in situ microscopy observation of LFCNT and bare Li electrodes. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr09749jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Surface morphology of (a) bare Li and (b, c) LFCNT electrode, (d) EDS mapping of (b), and (e) XPS survey spectra and (f) F 1s spectra of FCNT and LFCNT.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Variation of bare Li and LFCNT electrodes with time in open air, impedance evolution of the symmetric cells with (b) LFCNT and (c) bare Li electrodes in open circuit voltage and after cycling (5 cycles at a capacity of 1 mA h cm−2 and a current density of 1 mA cm−2), (d) rate capability of the symmetric cells at a capacity of 1 mA h cm−2, and (e) polarized potentials of bare Li and LFCNT at a current density of 1 mA cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 3  Galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of the symmetric cells with LFCNT and bare Li electrodes at (a) 0.5 mA cm−2 and (b) 3 mA cm−2 with a capacity of 1 mA h cm−2, and (c) 1 mA cm−2 with a capacity of 5 mA h cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 4  Surface SEM images and cross-sectional SEM images of (a, b, c) bare Li and (d, e, f) LFCNT electrodes after 100 cycles, (g) F 1s and (h) Li 1s spectra of the LFCNT electrodes after 10 cycles, and (i) the model of Li intercalation into LFCNT and the optimized structure.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) In situ optical microscopy images of Li deposition behavior on bare Li and LFCNT electrodes without a separator at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 after 10, 20 and 30 min, and (b) the diagrams of the Li plating/stripping behavior on bare Li and LFCNT electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) In situ optical microscopy images of Li deposition behavior on (a) bare Li and (b) LFCNT electrodes with a separator at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 after 10, 20 and 30 min.	 

 	Fig. 7  Voltage profiles of the Li–O2 cells with (a) LFCNT and (b) bare Li anodes at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 and (c) the comparison of cycle life, and (d) discharge capacity of the Li–O2 cells with bare Li and LFCNT anodes between 2.2 and 4.3 V at 400 mA g−1 without limiting the capacity.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM image of FCNTs, cross-section SEM image of Li and LFCNT electrodes, equivalent circuit for the fitting, fitting results in Fig. 2b and c, voltage profiles of LFCNT and bare Li electrodes in symmetric cells at selected cycles, galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of LFCNT and bare Li electrodes in symmetric cells at 1 mA cm−2 and 3 mA h cm−2, model of the bilayer fluorinated graphene, Nyquist plots of the Li–O2 cells with bare Li and LFCNT electrodes, fitting results in Fig. S7,† discharge profiles of Li–O2 cells with bare Li and LFCNT electrodes at 100 mA g−1, comparison of electrochemical performance of Li–O2 cells with various Li anodes, discharge profiles of Li/MnO2 cells in pure Ar, and in situ microscopy observation of LFCNT and bare Li electrodes. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr09749j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
