Semiconducting polymers : the Third Generation   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B914956M View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B914956M
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2354-2371Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSemiconducting polymers: the Third Generation†

        
          
            Alan J. 
            Heeger
          
          
        
      *
      University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93103, USA. E-mail: ajhe1@physics.ucsb.edu
Received 
      22nd October 2009
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      21st January 2010
    AbstractThere has been remarkable progress in the science and technology of semiconducting polymers during the past decade. The field has evolved from the early work on polyacetylene (the First Generation material) to a proper focus on soluble and processible polymers and co-polymers. The soluble poly(alkylthiophenes) and the soluble PPVs are perhaps the most important examples of the Second Generation of semiconducting polymers. Third Generation semiconducting polymers have more complex molecular structures with more atoms in the repeat unit. Important examples include the highly ordered and crystalline PDTTT and the ever-growing class of donor–acceptor co-polymers that has emerged in the past few years. Examples of the latter include the bithiophene–acceptor co-polymers pioneered by Konarka and the polycarbazole–acceptor co-polymers pioneered by Leclerc and colleagues. In this tutorial review, I will summarize progress in the basic physics, the materials science, the device science and the device performance with emphasis on the following recent studies of Third Generation semiconducting polymers: stable semiconducting polymers; self-assembly of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) materials by spontaneous phase separation; bulk heterojunction solar cells with internal quantum efficiency approaching 100%; high detectivity photodetectors fabricated from BHJ materials.
Alan J. Heeger
Widely known for his pioneering research in and the co-founding of the field of semiconducting and metallic polymers, Prof. Heeger is the recipient of numerous awards, including the Nobel Prize in Chemistry (2000). Prof. Heeger came to UC Santa Barbara in 1982 to join the Physics Department. He was a founding member of the Materials Department and he was a founder and first Director of the Institute for Polymers and Organic Solids. He currently holds the Presidential Chair at UCSB where he serves as Professor of Physics and Professor of Materials. Prof. Heeger has more than 800 publications in scientific journals and more than 50 patents. He founded UNIAX Corporation in 1990; UNIAX was acquired by DuPont in 2000. Prof. Heeger is a co-founder and serves on the Board of Directors Konarka Technologies Inc. He is co-founder and Chairman of CBrite Inc. in Santa Barbara. He is co-founder and Vice-Chairman of Cynvenio (micro fluidics for cell sorting and diagnostics) and Cytomx Therapeutics (novel technology for targeted drug delivery). Prof. Heeger's research group at UC Santa Barbara continues to study aspects of the science and technology of semiconducting and metallic polymers. A lover of theatre, Dr Heeger has also participated in the production of three Broadway plays.
Introduction
In general, the electronic structure of π-conjugated polymers originates from the sp2pz hybridized wavefunctions of the carbon atoms in the repeat unit.1–3 Semiconducting polymers are described in terms of the energy bands that originate from the bonding and anti-bonding energy levels associated with the σ-bonds between adjacent carbon atoms (formed from the sp2 wavefunctions) and the orthogonal π-bonds that originate from the pz wavefunctions. The σ-bonds hold the structure together, but the π-bonds are the origin of the properties that characterize conjugated polymers as semiconductors. A schematic band diagram for π-conjugated polymers is shown in Fig. 1. The wavefunctions of the π-bands are linear combinations of the pz orbitals from the carbon atoms in each repeat unit. In the one-electron approximation (i.e. neglecting the electron–electron Coulomb interaction), the number of sub-π-bands is determined by the number of carbon atoms in the repeat unit of the polymer.
 Fig. 1  Schematic band diagram for π-conjugated polymers. 
The first—and classic—example of a semiconducting polymer is polyacetylene. The molecular structure and π-electron band structure of trans-polyacetylene are shown in Fig. 2. Trans-(CH)x is a semiconductor with energy gap, Eg = 2Δo. The total π-electron bandwidth is expressed as W = 4to where to is the transfer integral (typically denoted β in molecular orbital theory). The large π-electron bandwidth, W ≈ 12–13 eV, leads to delocalization of the electronic wavefunctions along the conjugated polymer chain. The energy gap of trans-(CH)x is approximately 1.8 eV.1–3
 Fig. 2  a. Acetylene polymerizes to form trans-poly(acetylene). b. Tight-binding band structure of dimerized trans-(CH)x, a semiconductor with energy gap Eg = 2Δo. The full π-electron bandwidth, W = 4to ≈ 12–13 eV. The energy gap of trans-(CH)x is approximately 1.8 eV. 
There are two forms of polyacetylene, trans-polyacetylene and cis-polyacetylene.1 As shown in Fig. 3, for trans-polyacetylene, there are two carbon atoms in the repeat unit. As a result, the π-band in trans-polyacetylene is split into two sub-bands (π- and π*-bands); the π-band is fully occupied and the π*-band is empty. In cis-polyactylene, there are four carbon atoms in the repeat unit, and consequently the π-band in cis-polyacetylene is split into four sub-bands with energy gaps in between; the two lower energy π-bands are filled and the two higher energy π*-bands are empty. The energy of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) corresponds to the top of the highest energy π-band, and the energy of the lowest unoccupied orbital (LUMO) corresponds to the bottom of the lowest energy π*-band. The energy gap between the highest occupied energy band and the lowest unoccupied energy band dominates the properties of the semiconductor.
 Fig. 3  Left: trans-polyacetylene. Right: cis-polyacetylene. 

Cis- and trans-polyacetylene are the First Generation semiconducting polymers. Although cis-polyacetylene is formed during polymerization by the Ziegler–Natta catalyst used in the Shirakawa synthesis, trans-(CH)x is the stable form; cis-polyacetylene can be thermally converted to trans-polyacetylene.4
In conjugated polymers, the interchain interactions are significantly weaker than the intrachain π-electron interactions; the associated interchain bandwidths (W⊥) are comparable to the bandwidths in organic molecular crystals and at least an order of magnitude smaller than the intrachain bandwidth (W∥); i.e. W⊥/W∥ ≪ 1.1 As sketched in Fig. 2, W∥ ≈ 12–13 eV. Thus, semiconducting polymers are inherently anisotropic and properly called “quasi-one-dimensional” materials; the optical properties are anisotropic, the carrier mobilities are anisotropic, and even the “chemistry” is anisotropic. There are strong σ- and π-bonds along the chain but only weak van der Waals forces or hydrogen bonding between chains. This chemical anisotropy is the origin of the solubility of semiconducting polymers and the ability to formulate them as functional “inks”. The “chemical anisotropy” also enables diffusion of counterions into the structure during, for example, electrochemical doping. This intrinsic anisotropy is, however, evident in macroscopic electronic phenomena such as optical properties, electrical transport, etc. only when the polymer chains are both extended and aligned.
Because of the finite molecular weight of the polymer chains, transport in semiconducting polymers is always limited by interchain hopping. Nevertheless, the tendency toward delocalization along the chain is much greater than in the transverse directions. As described in later sections in this review, macroscopic anisotropy has been demonstrated for several of the First and Second Generation materials. The intrinsic anisotropy is also expected to become evident in Third Generation materials. The only such example known to date is PDTTT, where films formed from solution by blade coating and subsequently annealed above the melting temperature show polarized absorption.5 In such films the transport at high carrier densities exhibits the power law dependences and universality predicted for the one-dimensional Luttinger liquid model.6
Disorder—for example, in films cast from solution—often dominates the macroscopic properties and hides, or even eliminates, the intrinsic delocalization. Disorder always competes with delocalization. Because of the intrinsically anisotropic intra- and interchain bandwidths, however, weak disorder will destroy interchain coherence and localize the π-electron wavefunctions onto individual chains while allowing significant delocalization along the chain. By destroying the phase coherence between chains, weak disorder converts a quasi-1D material into a 1D material. Because of the localization onto individual chains, experiments can detect 1D phenomena from macroscopic samples.
The molecular structures of selected members of the class of Second Generation semiconducting polymers are shown in Fig. 4.1–3 Poly(paraphenylene), the linear polymer with the benzene ring as the repeat unit, has six carbon atoms per repeat unit. The broad π-band (see Fig. 1) of poly(paraphenylene) is split into six sub-bands, three occupied and three empty. Poly(phenylene vinylene), with eight carbon atoms in the repeat unit, is an alternating copolymer of acetylene and benzene. Although polythiophene has a sulfur atom in the repeat unit, the π-electron wavefunctions on the four carbon atoms dominate the electronic structure. The electronic structure of polythiophene is like that of cis-polyacetylene, but the molecular structure is stabilized by the sulfur heteroatom in the ring structure of the repeat unit.
 Fig. 4  Molecular structures of some of the more important First and Second Generation semiconducting polymers. 
Polythiophene and poly(phenylene vinylene) were made soluble and processible by the addition of alkyl or alkoxy side chains. The corresponding structures are also shown in Fig. 4. The poly(3-alkyl thiophenes), for example poly(3-hexyl thiophene), P3HT, and the soluble poly(phenylene vinylenes), PPVs, are the most studied of the Second Generation semiconducting polymers.
Although conceptually important because of the protonation-induced transition from insulator to metal, the semiconducting form of poly(aniline) has not been of major importance in the development of either the physics or the device science of semiconducting polymers. The so-called emeraldine salt form of polyaniline has been and continues to be one of the most important metallic polymers. The doped, metallic form of poly(ethylenedioxythiophene) is also far more important than the parent pristine semiconductor.
Examples of Third Generation semiconducting polymers are shown in Fig. 5. The Third Generation polymers have more complex molecular structures with more atoms in the repeat unit. Important examples include the highly ordered and crystalline PDTTT and the ever-growing class of donor–acceptor co-polymers that has emerged in the past few years. Examples of the latter include the bithiophene–acceptor co-polymers pioneered by Konarka7 and the polycarbazole–acceptor co-polymers pioneered by Leclerc and colleagues.8,9
 Fig. 5  Molecular structures of some of the more important Third Generation semiconducting polymers. 
Although the progress has indeed been “remarkable”, there is a need for a deeper understanding of the physics of the relatively complex molecular structures characteristic of the Third Generation semiconducting polymers. Moreover, there is both a need for, and an opportunity associated with, the development of higher performance materials made up of high molecular weight polymers in which the chains are extended and aligned with interchain structural order. To clarify these needs and opportunities, I start with a review of the semiconductor physics of the First and Second Generation materials.
Conjugated polymers as semiconductors
The thin film diode first described in 1987 provides a simple example of a semiconductor device: the metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) structure comprised of a single layer of semiconducting polymer cast from solution and sandwiched between metal contacts with different work functions operates as a diode with relatively high rectification ratio.10 When depletion depth within the semiconducting polymer is larger than the film thickness, the built-in potential of the diode originates from the difference in the work functions of the two metallic contacts. Indium–tin-oxide (ITO) was used as the higher work function material for one electrode and either In or Al was used as the lower work function material for the other electrode. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) was cast from solution to form the thin film semiconductor layer with thickness approximately 100 nm. The current–voltage characteristics obtained from this simple MSM structure exhibit rectification ratios in the range 100 ∶ 1 to 1000 ∶ 1; the forward current increases exponentially over several decades, whereas a relatively small leakage current flows under reverse bias (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Current–voltage characteristics in In–P3HT (●) and In–P3MT (○) diodes.10 
Even in these early experiments, capacitance vs. voltage data indicated uniform films with a remarkably small concentration of electronically active impurities. For such an asymmetric MSM structure, the capacitance per unit area vs. voltage is given by the Schottky equation: (1)where Vint = Vbi − kB/e is the intercept voltage, Vbi is the built-in voltage, ε is the dielectric constant (εo is the permittivity of the vacuum), and Na is the number of impurities (donors) per unit volume.
The capacitance vs. voltage data obtained from these early MSM diodes are shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Capacitance–voltage characteristics of In–P3HT (●) and In–P3MT (○) diodes; the data are plotted as C−2vs. V.10 
The impurity concentration can be obtained from the data in Fig. 7 using eqn (1): (2)The linear dependence of C−2 in reverse bias implies a nearly uniform impurity concentration within the semiconducting polymer. With ε ≈ 3, the density of electronically active impurities inferred from the data is surprisingly small, of order 1017 cm−3; i.e. less than 1 per 1000 thiophene rings. Subsequent studies showed that in polythiophenes this extrinsic impurity concentration is sensitive to exposure of the polymer to the oxygen. The zero bias depletion width, W = [2εεoVint/eNi]1/2, implied by the data in Fig. 7 was W ≈ 100 nm, comparable to the thickness of the semiconducting polymer film.
When the zero bias depletion width is significantly less than the film thickness, the MSM is described as a Schottky diode. In this limit, the energy bands in the semiconductor bend to self-consistently enable the depletion of electronic charge from the impurities; the voltage dependent band bending is responsible for the voltage dependence of the capacitance.
Subsequent studies of MSM light-emitting diodes made with higher purity luminescent polymers showed significantly higher rectification ratios and lower concentrations of electronically active impurities (∼1015 cm−3). For such high quality materials, C becomes independent of V implying a zero bias depletion width larger than the thickness of the semiconducting polymer. In this high purity limit, there is no band bending; the electric field within the semiconducting polymer layer is uniform as shown in Fig. 8, and (as noted above) the built-in potential arises from the difference in work functions of the metallic contacts.
 Fig. 8  The electronic structure of an MSM diode in forward bias. Electrons are injected (via tunneling) into the π*-band and holes into the π-band. 
The MSM diodes are significant for two reasons. First, they demonstrate that potentially useful electronic components can be fabricated by processing semiconducting polymers from solution. Second, although semiconducting polymers cannot be considered materials with ultra-high chemical purity, the data obtained from MSM diodes demonstrated that the density of electronically active impurities can be small, in fact comparable even to the impurity levels in inorganic semiconductors.
Solutions of conjugated polymers can be formulated as “inks” with electronic functionality. As a result, “printed plastic electronics” has become a focal point of the science and technology of semiconducting polymers.
Optical properties of semiconducting polymers
In the elementary energy band picture of semiconductor physics, the absorption of photons leads to the promotion of electrons from the valence band (π-band) to the conduction band (π*-band) resulting in mobile electrons and holes, as sketched in Fig. 9. Because of these photogenerated electrons and holes, one expects to observe photoconductivity; i.e. the electrons and holes in the π*- and π-bands, respectively, are mobile and “free” to move in response to an applied electric field.
 Fig. 9  π–π* interband transition with associated generation of a mobile electron in the π*-band and a mobile hole in the π-band. 
Even in the classical inorganic semiconductors such as Si, Ge and GaAs, where the bandwidths are larger than the separation of atomic levels, the electron–hole Coulomb attraction results in the formation of bound excited states, neutral excitons, with a binding energy that is sensitive to the dielectric constant of the material. In inorganic semiconductors for which the crystal structure and the electronic structure are 3-dimensional, the binding energy and radius of the exciton can be described in direct analogy with the hydrogen atom. (3a) (3b)where m* is the effective mass, e is the electron charge, ε is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor and ħ is Planck's constant. For Si and GaAs, the exciton binding energy is small and the exciton radius much larger than the interatomic spacing, e.g. for GaAs, EB(exciton) = 3 meV. The bound state in these traditional inorganic semiconductors, where the electron and hole in the bound state are delocalized over many atoms, is known as a Wannier exciton.
In a molecular solid such as anthracene, the bandwidths are smaller than the separation of the molecular energy levels. As a result, the electron–hole bound state, the exciton, corresponds in first approximation to an excited state of the molecule with an electron promoted from the HOMO energy level to the LUMO energy level. In a molecular solid, therefore, the exciton binding energy is large, often larger than 1 eV. Although the so-called Frenkel excitons in molecular solids are localized primarily on a single molecule, they can hop from molecule to molecule as a result of the weak interactions between molecules.
For semiconducting polymers, because of the π-electron overlap between closely spaced neighboring atoms in the repeat units, the intrachain bandwidth is large (see Fig. 2), comparable to the bandwidths in inorganic semiconductors. However, the interchain interactions are weak, comparable to those in molecular crystals (a few tenths of an eV). Because of this essential anisotropy, the exciton binding energies are intermediate between those of Wannier excitons and Frenkel excitons. In semiconducting polymers, the exciton binding energies range from EB(exciton) < 0.1 eV in the PPVs and polythiophenes to a several tenths of an eV in the larger band gap systems such as the polyfluorenes. For these same reasons, the exciton wavefunction extends over a number of repeat units along the chain. Depending upon the detailed interchain stacking, the wavefunction of the excited state can spread onto neighboring chains; the multi-chain exciton is known as an “exciplex”. As noted above, however, the disorder characteristic of semiconducting polymers cast from solution tends to localize the neutral excited states onto single chains.
The electrons and holes generated by the interband optical absorption transition rapidly relax toward the respective band edges and subsequently form neutral intrachain excitons. If the resulting charge carriers are on separate chains, the carriers self-localize to form polarons.1–3 Singlet excitons and triplet excitons are also stable excitations in semiconducting polymers. The triplet excitons have significantly larger binding energies with wavefunctions that are much more spatially localized than the singlet excitons. All these excitations have been observed in different semiconducting polymers. The critical parameters are the interchain transfer integral (sensitive to the details of the π–π* interchain stacking), the purity, the disorder, the regioregularity (or not), the (partial) crystallinity, and the dielectric properties of the medium.
The branching ratio between the intrachain excitations and interchain excitations is determined by a combination of the disorder and the ratio between the interchain and the intrachain bandwidths. Early experiments demonstrated that the onset of photoconductivity in disordered PPV films cast from solution coincides with the onset of absorption, implying that the principal π–π* absorption band originates from the interband transition (Fig. 9).11 The quantum yield of charged polarons, separated on different chains, was a few percent.11 Subsequent experiments demonstrated that in partially crystalline regio-regular P3HT, the direct quantum yield of charged polarons is in excess of 30%.12
Electron–hole pairs that are created on a single chain at energies hν > Eg relax to the band edge and either recombine or form neutral excitons. The intrachain excitons are dressed with a local chain distortion that further lowers the total energy of the bound state. The electron–hole relaxation, polaron self-localization and formation of neutral excitons are described schematically by the following sequence:e+ + e− → P+ + P+ → BP0 → excitonwhere e− and e+ are electrons and holes, respectively, P− and P+ are positive and negative polarons, and BP0 is a neutral bipolaron. The recombination of on-chain polaron pairs is described in Fig. 10. This process will go forward only if the total energy decreases in each step, i.e. only if E(P−) + E(P+) > E(exciton).
 Fig. 10  Energy diagrams showing the P− + P+ → BP0 → exciton recombination process. 
Defining [E(P−) + E(P+)] ≡ Eg − 2E(pol)b, where E(pol)b is the polaron binding energy with respect to an electron at the bottom of the π*-band (or with respect to a hole at the top of the π*-band), the condition for exciton formation is the following:2E(pol)b < EB(exciton).Note that E(pol)b cannot be inferred from the polaron energy level diagrams in Fig. 10. These electronic diagrams do not include the energy lowering from the local structural distortion on the chain. The “P− + P+ → BP0 → exciton” process is expected to be valid because of the Coulomb attraction between the charged polarons and because the neutral bipolaron shares the distortion of the two charged polarons; intrachain excitons are dressed with a local chain distortion that is similar to that of the neutral bipolaron.
The intrachain excitons can migrate, undergo intersystem crossing to the triplet state, dissociate at impurities, dissociate to create polaron pairs on neighboring chains or, of course, radiatively and non-radiatively decay to the ground state.
Optical properties of oriented and aligned semiconducting polymer chains
The intrinsic photophysics of semiconducting polymers has been explored using highly oriented chains of MEH–PPV in a matrix of ultra-high molecular weight (UHMW) polyethylene (PE).13–16 Nearly perfect alignment of the PE and the MEH–PPV chains can be attained through gel processing followed by stretch orientation with draw ratio, initial length divided by final length, equal to 50.13–16 The optical absorption and photoluminescence of these highly oriented chains are therefore characteristic of semiconducting polymers in which the role of structural disorder has been minimized.
As shown in Fig. 11, the alignment of the MEH–PPV chains can be inferred from the anisotropy in the absorption and the luminescence. The maximum absorption is obtained with light polarized parallel to the chain consistent with the interband π–π* absorption sketched in Fig. 9. Moreover, the perpendicular absorption spectrum is completely different from that obtained with the light polarized parallel to the chains. Thus, the perpendicular spectrum arises from interchain absorption, i.e. promotion of an electron from the π-band on one chain to the π*-band on a neighboring chain. Because the parallel and perpendicular absorption spectra are different, the absorption data can set a lower limit for the orientational order parameter (f > 50 ∶ 1).
 Fig. 11  The anisotropic absorption and emission in stretch oriented MEH–PPV blends in UHMW PE. Left: anisotropic absorption by aligned MEH–PPV; right: anisotropic emission from aligned MEH–PPV.14 
The solid curve in Fig. 11b is the luminescence obtained with a polarizer oriented to transmit light with polarization vector parallel to the orientation direction, and the dotted curve is the luminescence obtained with a polarizer oriented to transmit light with polarization perpendicular to the orientation direction. Note that the perpendicular data are multiplied by a factor of 80; the dotted curve at the bottom are the actual data obtained with polarization vector perpendicular to the chain. The orientational order parameter is approximately 80 ∶ 1. The inset to Fig. 11b shows that the angular dependence, I(θ), is accurately described by I(θ) = αcos2θ + β where θ is the angle between the chain orientation direction and the polarization vector. The orientational order parameter is defined as f = α/β.
The measured anisotropy of the electroabsorption for the oriented MEH–PPV blends in UHMW PE is larger than 100. The remarkably high orientational order parameter and the clear separation of the parallel and perpendicular absorption spectra give confidence that the intrinsic photophysics of semiconducting polymers can be explored through studies of these highly oriented polymer chains (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Anisotropy in the electroabsorption with respect to the optical field and the chain orientation axis for oriented MEH–PPV in PE.15 
Vibronic structure
The vibronic structure in the absorption and emission can be understood in qualitative terms using a Jablonski diagram in which one plots the ground state and first excited state energies as a function of the amplitude of a structural distortion, Q; for example, the amplitude of a distortion with normal coordinates of a specific Raman mode of the repeat unit of the polymer. A more general distortion could be described as a superposition of several Raman modes.
The minimum in the excited electronic energy represented by the upper parabola occurs at a different value of Q than the minimum of the ground state energy (lower parabola), implying changes in the bond lengths in the excited state. This shift (ΔQ) arises from the structural relaxation in the backbone geometry; the larger the structural relaxation, the larger the shift. The horizontal lines in Fig. 13 represent the energies of the vibrational normal mode (in this example, the specific Raman mode) in the ground state and the excited state.
 Fig. 13  Jablonski diagram showing the ground state and first excited state energies as a function of the amplitude of a structural distortion, Q. 
If the electrons in the excited π*-state were delocalized over the entire chain of N repeat units, the bond length relaxation would be of order 1/N and thus not observable. The vibronic features observed in the absorption and emission spectra are therefore indicative of self-localization in the excited state. That there is structural relaxation and localization in the excited state is not a surprising result; self-localization with the formation of polarons is expected following photoexcitation.1
The total wavefunction is a product of the electronic wavefunction, ψelectronic, and the lattice wavefunction, ψstructure: ψ = ψelectronicψstructure(5)When there is no structural relaxation in the excited state, the normal mode vibrational wavefunctions are orthonormal to one another and ΔQ = 0. In this limit, electronic transitions between different vibrational states in the ground and excited states are forbidden because of the requirement that Δq = 0 for an optical transition (the wavelength of light is much larger than the lattice constant). Thus, for ΔQ = 0, there are no vibrational features in the spectra; only direct transitions are allowed; e.g. 0-phonon to 0-phonon, 1-phonon to 1-phonon, etc. When ΔQ ≠ 0, the different vibrational states in the ground and excited electronic states are no longer orthogonal; the resulting overlap enables vibrational sideband transitions such as those shown in the Jablonski diagram above; e.g. 0-phonon to 1-phonon, etc.
The finite overlap of vibrational levels in ground state and the excited state can be expressed as (6)where the Si are defined as the Huang–Rhys factors (7)ħωi is the vibrational level spacing, ΔQi are the normal coordinate displacements and νi are the number of phonons in the excited state (since the temperature is small compared to the optical phonon energies, the ground state has νi = 0).
Because the various ΔQi ≠ 0, the absorption coefficient exhibits vibronic side bands (8)where α0(ħω) is the absorption coefficient in the rigid lattice approximation (ΔQi = 0). If a single optical phonon (Raman mode) dominates, only a single S and ν are required in these equations. The zeroth-order line shape, αo(ω), is assumed to be that derived for a one-dimensional semiconductor (e.g. as in SSH theory), but assuming a Gaussian distribution of the energy gaps (with width γ to account for residual disorder) centered about the mean value, 2Δ0.

Fig. 14 shows the excellent agreement between the theory (solid curve) and the absorption data (dotted curve) obtained from oriented MEH–PPV in PE; the data were obtained with the sample at 80 K to minimize the thermal disorder. The best-fit parameters were the following: 2Δ0 = 2.136 eV, ħωph = 0.172 eV, γ = 0.040 and S = 0.41. The value for ħωph = 0.172 eV is in excellent agreement with the strongest Raman line observed in the PPVs. Note that only a single Raman mode is required to fit the data, implying that the bond relaxation in the excited state is neither that of a fully formed pair of polarons nor a neutral bipolaron. Using these values for Δ0 and γ, one can compare α0(ħω) obtained from experiment with that given by eqn (9).13–16 (9)
 Fig. 14  Comparison of the optical absorption spectrum of MEH–PPV blends in UHMW PE with the 1D electronic density of states. (left) α(ħω); theory (solid curve) and experiment (dotted curve) obtained from oriented MEH–PPV in PE.14,15 (right) Comparison of α0(ħω) obtained from experiment with the theoretical result for a perfect single chain.14,15 
A similar Huang–Rhys analysis was carried out for the emission data. (10)where Γ is the width of the emission band at 2ħω0 with vibrational side bands displaced by ħωj.
The conclusion is that electrons and holes are initially generated via the interband π–π* transition. These electrons and holes rapidly thermalize to the band edges in at most a few ps, and if the e–h pair is on the same chain, combine to form neutral excitons. The formation of polarons on separate chains is discussed above in terms of the yield of mobile carriers as measured by the photoconductivity.11
The luminescence originates from the radiative decay of the excitons to the ground state. The energy difference between the exciton excited state and the ground state is given by the measured luminescence emission. The best-fit shown in Fig. 15 is obtained with ħ(2ω0) = 2.088 eV, Γ0 = 0.066 eV and S = 0.47. Only one phonon frequency is needed to obtain the excellent fit, ħω1 = 0.162 eV, implying that the strongest Raman line is at a slightly lower energy in the excited state (the corresponding optical phonon energy is 0.172 eV in the ground state as obtained from the analysis of the absorption data).
 Fig. 15  Emission; comparison of theory (solid curve) and experiment (dotted curve) obtained from oriented MEH–PPV in PE.14,15 
The data of Fig. 11, 12, 14 and 15 demonstrate that the absorption is dominated by the quasi-1D joint density of states associated with the interband transition. In contrast, the luminescence is from the relaxed exciton to the ground state. The Stokes shift obtained from the difference in energies of the 0-phonon absorption band edge and the 0-phonon emission line is quite small, 0.05 eV. This energy difference provides a quantitative measurement of the maximum possible exciton binding energy in well ordered MEH–PPV, EB(exciton) ≈ 0.05 eV. This value for the exciton binding energy is in good agreement with that obtained from measurements of the photoconductivity.11 Note, however, that the conclusions of the analysis summarized here are completely independent of the photoconductivity and the photoinduced IRAV mode measurements.
The analysis summarized in this section leads to the conclusion that the π–π* absorption band is the interband transition between the π- and π*-bands separated by the energy gap Eg = 2Δ0. As noted above, however, the exciton binding energies in semiconducting polymers are expected to be intermediate between those of Wannier excitons and Frenkel excitons. In the Frenkel exciton limit, the oscillator strength is almost completely removed from the higher energy interband transition and shifted into the exciton absorption. Thus one might attempt to explain the π–π* absorption band as resulting from a transition from the ground state to the exciton excited state (and indeed this point of view has been expressed repeatedly in the literature). There are, however, serious problems with this alternative point of view. For example, the line shape for the Δq = 0 optical transition between the ground state and the lowest lying exciton would be symmetric in contrast to the asymmetric line shape obtained from experiment; see Fig. 14.
The excellent agreement between theory and experiment for the most highly ordered system available, ordered MEH–PPV chains in aligned PE, provides confidence and confirmation in the assumption that the so-called π–π* absorption band is indeed the interband transition between the π- and π*-bands separated by the energy gap, Eg = 2Δ0, and that the exciton binding energy is small.
The synthesis of Third Generation semiconducting polymers with smaller Eg is a principal goal of the research directed toward higher efficiency BHJ solar cells. The smaller energy gap, Eg ≈ 1.2–1.3 eV, is required to efficiently harvest the photons of the solar spectrum. In this context, it is important to recall that the dielectric constant of a semiconductor increases as the energy gap decreases; ε is proportional to (1/Eg).2 Thus, we anticipate that the exciton binding energy in such small band gap polymers will be even smaller than in the PPVs. Therefore, we do not expect that the exciton binding energy will be a barrier to efficient photoinduced charge separation at the donor–acceptor interfaces in Third Generation BHJ materials.
Stable semiconducting polymers
Although the opportunities associated with “printable plastic electronics” are well-known,17,18 the poor stability of semiconducting polymers when exposed to modest temperatures, to oxygen and/or to water vapor has been and continues to be a barrier to commercialization.
PCDTBT (see the inset of Fig. 15a) is one of a relatively large class of donor–acceptor polycarbazole co-polymers.8,9 The stability of the fully aromatic backbone of PCDTBT and the stability of the amorphous structure of PCDTBT are responsible for the remarkable stability of this semiconducting polymer.19

Fig. 16 shows UV-Vis absorption spectra of PCDTBT thin films annealed for 15 minutes at various temperatures in air (Fig. 16a) and under N2 atmosphere (Fig. 16b). In air, the π–π* absorption spectrum is not affected by exposure to temperatures up to 150 °C. Under N2 atmosphere, the electronic band structure of PCDTBT is stable even when exposed to temperatures as high as 350 °C.
 Fig. 16  Absorption of PCDTBT after annealing for 15 minutes at elevated temperatures in air (a) and in nitrogen (b); see ref. 19. 
Typically, when semi-crystalline conjugated polymers are annealed at temperatures above Tg (for PCDTBT, Tg = 130 °C),18 their degree of crystallinity and/or the size of the crystallites increase leading to changes in their electronic properties. The PCDTBT thin films are amorphous when cast and remain amorphous after annealing at high temperature.19
To explore the effect of exposure to high temperatures on the chemical bonding in PCDTBT, XPS measurements were carried out on PCDTBT thin films. No changes were observed in the N 1s spectrum, the C 1s spectrum or the S 2p spectrum with increasing temperature up to 350 °C. After annealing at 400 °C, some of the spectral features showed a slight shift. The XPS data confirm, therefore, that PCDTBT is stable after exposure in N2 to temperatures up to 350 °C.19
To probe more deeply into the stability of PCDTBT as a semiconductor for use in device applications, the field-effect transport mobility was obtained from the current–voltage characteristics of FETs.19Fig. 17a shows transport mobility (measured at room temperature) as a function of the temperature at which the FET devices were annealed in N2 atmosphere. The mobility increases steadily after exposure to elevated temperatures up to 170 °C to a maximum of 0.02–0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1 and then slowly decreases, with stability even up to 350 °C. By contrast, for example, the mobility of poly(3-hexylthiophene), P3HT, decreases by more than two orders of magnitude after exposure to 200 °C. Note that the high temperature stability of the transport mobility is strongly dependent on the molecular weight of PCDTBT (see Fig. 17b); the excellent thermal stability is observed only for the highest molecular weight materials, evidently indicative of degradation via reactive end groups.
 Fig. 17  a. Hole mobility of PCDTBT (red) as a function of annealing temperature. Results obtained from a similar device fabricated with poly(3-hexylthiophene), P3HT, are shown for comparison (black). b. Effect of weight-average molecular weight on the high temperature stability of PCDTBT. c. Mobility before and after annealing in air at elevated temperatures.19 
When exposed to elevated temperatures in air, conjugated polymers are known to immediately start to degrade even for temperatures below Tg. Exposure to elevated temperatures accelerates the oxidation of the polymer backbone and thereby eventually destroys the electronic structure and the semiconductor properties. The effect of exposure, in air, to high temperatures on the field-effect mobility of PCDTBT is shown in Fig. 17c. The transport mobility of PCDTBT is stable in air at temperatures up to 150 °C.

Fig. 18 shows the effect of long term air exposure on the mobility of PCDTBT as obtained without any encapsulation or passivation layer. The initial hole mobilities of four independently fabricated PCDTBT FETs were approximately 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1. The hole mobilities decreased by only a factor of 2–3 over the 31 day period of exposure to air. Long term stability should be attainable by encapsulation with simple and inexpensive barrier films.
 Fig. 18  Hole mobilities obtained from PCDTBT FETs as a function of storage time in air. The measurements were made without any encapsulation/passivation layer.19 
The remarkable stability of PCDTBT originates from the large ionization potential; i.e. the energy of the HOMO at the top of the π-band. Because of the deep HOMO, −5.5 eV below the vacuum,8,9,19 this semiconductor (and presumably others with similarly deep HOMO energies) is inherently stable against oxidation even at relatively high temperatures.
Self-assembly of BHJ materials by spontaneous phase separation
Polymer bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells based on composites of an electron-donating conjugated polymer and an electron-accepting fullerene offer promise for realization of a low-cost, printable, light weight and flexible renewable energy source. Although the BHJ solar cell performance has steadily improved with power conversion efficiencies (PCE ≡ ηe) in excess of 6%, further improvements in efficiency are required for large scale commercialization.
Rather than using a single junction architecture, the fundamental BHJ concept involves self-assembly of nano-scale heterojunctions by spontaneous phase separation of the donor (polymer) and the acceptor (fullerene).20,21 Because of the spontaneous phase separation, charge-separating heterojunctions are formed throughout the bulk of the material. Ultrafast photoinduced charge separation at the donor–acceptor interface has been demonstrated and time resolved for many polymer–fullerene systems.22,23 Because the initial charge transfer process is orders of magnitude faster than any competing process and because back charge transfer is inhibited by the band offset of the heterojunction, the quantum efficiency for charge separation approaches unity.
During the past decade, research has focused on regio-regular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) as the standard electron-donating material in polymer BHJ solar cells with important progress in understanding of the device science and associated improvements in the device efficiency. Relatively high performance polymer BHJ solar cells made from a mixture of P3HT and [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) have been reported with maximum power conversion efficiencies of ηe = 4–5%.
The morphology of the phase separated BHJ materials is critical to the performance of the solar cell:
1. The characteristic length scale must be of order 20 nm. If the length scale is significantly larger, the photogenerated excitons will not reach a phase separating junction.
2. The donor polymer and the fullerene acceptor must form interpenetrating networks and each network must be fully percolated with a relatively small number of dead ends. These phase separated networks provide the pathways that carry the photogenerated charge carriers to the electrodes.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has enabled detailed examination of the nano-scale morphology.

Fig. 19 left shows a TEM micrograph of a thin film of P3HT; the electron beam passes through the film from top to bottom.24 The contrast is obtained by properly defocusing the electron beam;25 the darker regions in the micrograph are fullerene-rich and the lighter regions are P3HT-rich (the fullerenes have more carbon nuclei to scatter the electrons from the beam than the donor polymer). Examination of the nano-structure in comparison with the scale bar demonstrates that the typical length scale is nearly ideal for BHJ charge separation, i.e. approximately 20–25 nm. Fig. 19 right shows the power spectral density of the spatial Fourier transform of the data in the TEM micrograph.24 The quasi-periodicity evident in Fig. 19 left shows up as the peak in the power spectral density, again indicative of a characteristic length scale of 20–25 nm.
 Fig. 19  Left, TEM image of P3HT–PCBM BHJ film; right, spatial Fourier transform of the data from the same TEM image. (See ref. 24.) 
There are two particularly interesting features of the TEM image in Fig. 19. First, one sees connected pathways (for both components) over relatively large distances. Second, the observation of contrast in the top-down image suggests a column-like structure. If there were many layers of polymer and fullerene through the thickness of the film, one would expect to see a uniform gray image without contrast. This “column-like” nano-structure has been directly observed in defocused cross-sectional TEM images.25 These “column-like” structures provide the required pathways for charge transport across the film thickness.
In order to examine the cross-section of the BHJ phase separation, thin sections (“slices”) of the BHJ film were obtained from typical rrP3HT–PCBM (1 ∶ 0.7) solar cell devices which had been annealed at 150 °C. A focused ion beam (FIB) was used to cut a thin hexahedron with a length of 10 µm, width of 4 µm and thickness of 120 nm. Over a part of this section, the slice was further trimmed to approximately half the original thickness, i.e. to a thickness of approximately 60 nm. The TEM images were obtained with the electron beam passing through the 120 nm and the 60 nm thick regions.25
The cross-sectional images are shown in Fig. 20a for the 120 nm slice and Fig. 20b for the 60 nm slice. The dark and bright regions are typically connected across the film, thereby forming “column-like” pathways from the top to the bottom of the BHJ layer. The binary enhanced images directly below the original images show these “column-like” pathways more clearly and can be used as a guide to the eye. To obtain the binary enhanced image, the original TEM image was first subjected to Gaussian blur with a 2.5 nm radius to reduce noise. To convert to the binary image, a threshold brightness was chosen that results in the same ratio of white and black as the known volume fraction (1 ∶ 0.7) of rrP3HT to PCBM within the BHJ material. Fig. 20a and b show that there are many well-connected vertical pathways in the BHJ layer. The shortest distance within a single pathway is typically only slightly larger than the film thickness.
 Fig. 20  Defocused cross-sectional images of the rrP3HT–PCBM BHJ layer. (a) 120 nm thick slice. (b) ∼60 nm thinned slice. In each case the corresponding binary images can be used as a guide to the eye; see text.25 
Although certainly not perfect, this “column-like” structure results in efficient transport of carriers through the BHJ film as required for high efficiency BHJ solar cells. Moreover, because the optical absorption depth is greater than the film thickness, light is absorbed and separated charges are generated throughout the film thickness. Thus, the imperfect nature of the somewhat elongated and distorted columns is not very important.
The spatial Fourier transform and the autocorrelation function (ACR) provide important quantitative information on semi-periodic structures; see Fig. 21. From the ACR, one can determine not only the “period” but also the domain size. The ACR is defined by eqn (11). (11)where Lx is the lateral length of the image and I(x) is the phase contrast intensity along the x-direction for each line of pixels. The averaged ACR was calculated from the ACR from a single line of pixels by averaging the ACR's obtained from 165 separate pixel lines. In the ACR, the most probable “period” of the pathway is given by the position of the first maximum after the autocorrelation triangle. The value is again 25 nm; see Fig. 21. When a straight line is drawn from the self-correlation point, ACR(0), with initial slope equal to that of ACR(x) (see the red dotted lines in Fig. 21c and d) the line intercepts the x-axis at approximately 11 nm implying that the average domain size of the dark (PCBM) regions is ∼11 ± 1 nm.25 Therefore the average widths of pathways for electrons and holes in the vertical direction are estimated to be 11 nm and 14 nm, respectively. The results obtained from the 120 nm and the thinner trimmed areas are the same.
 Fig. 21  (a) The power spectral density (spatial Fourier transform) from the cross-sectional defocused TEM image of the 120 nm slice. (b) The power density spectrum from the thinner region of the slice (∼60 nm). (c) The autocorrelation function obtained from the cross-sectional defocused TEM image of the 120 nm slice. (d) The autocorrelation function from the thinner region of the slice (∼60 nm).25 
The PSD and ACR analyses of the TEM images indicate that the mean domain size in the nano-morphology is 20–25 nm in P3HT–PCBM bulk heterojunction material formed by spontaneous phase separation. Since the typical diffusion length of excitons in conjugated polymers is known to be 5–10 nm,25 this length scale is nearly ideal for efficient charge separation and the resulting generation of mobile carriers.
The open circuit voltage of the BHJ solar cell originates from the energy difference between the HOMO of the polymer and the LUMO of the fullerene. This microscopic picture of the origin of Voc is translated to the macroscopic Voc measured at the electrodes of the BHJ solar cell by a combination of the symmetry breaking from use of two different contacts with different work functions and by using charge selective transport layers, i.e. an electron transport–hole-blocking layer on the cathode side and a hole transport–electron-blocking layer on the anode side. This combination automatically connects all the BHJ domains in parallel and establishes the macroscopic Voc. Note, however, that in most of the work done to date, charge selective contacts have not been used. The TiOx layer does provide an electron transport–hole-blocking layer, and indeed cell performance is significantly improved with the use of the TiOx layer. PEDOT does not function as an electron-blocking layer. Thus, a replacement for PEDOT that functions as a hole transport–electron-blocking layer on the anode side is expected to improve performance.
BHJ solar cells with internal quantum efficiency approaching 100%26
Several classes of Third Generation low-band gap polymers have been developed to better harvest the solar spectrum with deeper HOMO energies that can potentially increase Voc.7–9,27,28 Among them, alternating co-polymers based on poly(2,7-carbazole) derivatives,8,9 with a suite of electron deficient moieties to choose from, are particularly promising. These electron deficient moieties can be used to tune the electronic energy gap of the semiconducting polymer while the deep HOMO of the carbazole leads to higher values for Voc. The implied flexibility in the synthesis can lead to a smaller band gap that enables the harvesting of a larger fraction of the solar radiation spectrum, and a deeper HOMO energy that both increases the open circuit voltage of the photovoltaic device and leads to better stability of the polymer (the latter is discussed in an earlier section of this review). Using BHJ composites with PCDTBT and PC70BM, solar cells with 6% power conversion efficiency have been demonstrated. The internal quantum efficiency (IQE) is close to 100%, implying that essentially every absorbed photon results in a separated pair of charge carriers and that all photogenerated carriers are collected at the electrodes.26
In BHJ cells, the photocurrent generation is determined by two factors: (1) the fractional number of absorbed photons in the active layer (relative to the total flux of photons from the solar spectrum) and (2) the IQE defined by the fraction of collected carriers per absorbed photon. In principle, one can simply increase the thickness of the active layer to absorb more light, and if the IQE remains fixed, one would expect a higher fraction of collected carriers. However, because of the relatively low carrier mobility of the disordered materials (cast from solution with subsequent phase separation), increasing the thickness increases the internal resistance of the device. Consequently, the fill factor (FF) typically plummets as the thickness is increased. To increase the photocurrent while keeping the thickness fixed, an optical spacer was inserted between the photoactive layer and the top electrode; because of the optical spacer, the maximum light intensity is redistributed to be within the active charge-separating BHJ layer.

Fig. 22 shows the structure of the BHJ device together with the molecular structures and an energy level diagram of the component materials. From the fundamental physics of the open circuit voltage associated with the donor–acceptor heterojunction and the empirical relationship demonstrated in ref. 29–31, the relatively deep HOMO energy of PCDTBT, approximately 5.5 eV, is expected to yield a higher open circuit voltage. Moreover, since the spherical symmetry of the fullerene has been lifted in PC70BM (compared to PCBM), the PCDTBT–PC70BM BHJ material has higher absorption and consequently, enhanced photocurrent.32,33
 Fig. 22  The device structure is sketched together with energy level diagram. The titanium oxide (TiOx) composite layer is introduced as an optical spacer on top of the BHJ layer.25 
The layer of titanium sub-oxide (TiOx) layer was introduced as the optical spacer34,35 and as a hole blocker36 between the BHJ layer and the top metal electrode. The TiOx layer redistributes the light intensity within the BHJ by changing the optical interference between the incident light and the light reflected from the metal electrode. Hole blocking by the TiOx is also important. In the PCDTBT–P70PM solar cells, the thickness of the active layer is about 80 nm, and the TiOx layer thickness is about 10 nm.
Note that the energy of the bottom of the conduction band of TiOx is well-matched to that of the LUMO of PCBM. Finally, the relatively high electron mobility of PC70BM and the hole-blocking feature of TiOx enable efficient electron collection without significant increase in the series resistance.34–36

Fig. 23a shows the absorption spectra of PCDTBT solar cells with and without the TiOx layer. The total absorption by the active layer (including the doubled path length in the BHJ layer as a result of reflection from the Al electrode) was measured in reflection geometry as sketched in the inset of Fig. 23a. Comparing two devices with the same active layer thickness (80 nm), a substantial enhancement in absorption is observed in the device with the TiOx layer. Consequently, the device with the TiOx layer demonstrates higher IPCE (incident photon-to-current efficiency) (Fig. 23b) throughout the visible range compared with the device without the TiOx layer. Since the integration of the product of the IPCE with the AM 1.5 solar spectrum is equal to the short-circuit current, the higher short-circuit current (see Fig. 23c) obtained with the TiOx layer is consistent with the higher IPCE values.
 Fig. 23  a. Total absorption in the active layer; b. IPCE spectra; c. current density versus voltage with and without TiOx layer.25 
Measurements of the total absorption spectrum and the IPCE of the PCDTBT–PC70BM solar cells enable the calculation of the IQE spectrum25 shown in Fig. 24 upper, where the red-line indicates the total absorption of the 1 ∶ 4 device and the blue-line is the IPCE spectrum. The PCDTBT–PC70BM solar cells have remarkably high IQE values i.e. high efficiency of collected carriers per incident absorbed photon. The IQE of the PCDTBT–PC70BM solar cells approaches 100% around 450 nm and stays near or even above 90% throughout the entire absorption spectrum (400 nm–650 nm). Such a high IQE is truly remarkable and indicates that nearly every absorbed photon leads to a separated pair of charge carriers and that all photogenerated carriers are collected at the electrodes.
 Fig. 24  (upper) IQE values of 1 ∶ 4 device; film cast from DCB. The red-line shows the total absorption of the device, and the blue-line shows the IPCE. (lower) J–V characteristics of the device under monochromatic 532 nm light.25 
The high efficiency of the PCDTBT–PC70BM solar cells is further demonstrated when illuminated with monochromatic light. Fig. 24 lower shows the J–V characteristics of a PCDTBT–PC70BM BHJ device under monochromatic illumination (532 nm) with an intensity of 19.67 mW cm−2. The power conversion efficiency is ηe = 17%. Note that the measured 17% efficiency is consistent with IQE ≈ 95% at 532 nm when calculated directly from the J–V curve and the relatively low optical density at 532 nm (approximately 30% of the incident light is reflected out through the front surface). The observation of ηe = 17% demonstrates without ambiguity that efficiencies in excess of 10–15% should be achievable with BHJ cells fabricated using semiconducting polycarbazole derivatives with smaller energy gaps. Tandem cells offer promise of significantly higher values.37
PCDTBT–PC70BM solar cells exhibit high power conversion efficiency. Fig. 25 shows the J–V characteristics of PCDTBT–PC70BM solar cell under air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) illumination as certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. The power conversion efficiency is ηe = 6%.
 Fig. 25  NREL certified J–V characteristics of a PCDTBT–PC70BM solar cell.25 
Polymer photodetectors with spectral response from 300 nm to 1450 nm
Polymer photodetectors, processed from solution and operating at room temperature, exhibit detectivities greater than 1012 cm Hz1/2 W−1 over the remarkably wide spectral range extending from 300 nm well into the infrared out to 1450 nm with linear dynamic range larger than 100 dB.38 The performance of polymer photodetectors is comparable to or even better than that of photodetectors fabricated from any inorganic material.
Following the initial discovery of ultrafast photoinduced electron transfer from semiconducting polymers to fullerenes,39 polymer photodetectors (PPDs) with fast temporal response and high sensitivity were reported with spectral response from 400 nm to 900 nm.20,40–42 However, prior to the work of Gong et al.,38 there was no report on PPDs with photoresponse spanning the full range from the UV-visible through the NIR.
The molecular structures of PDDTT and PCBM are shown in Fig. 26. Fig. 27 shows the normalized UV-Vis absorption spectra of thin films of pristine PDDTT, pristine PC60BM and PDDTT–PCBM composites. The inset shows the absorption spectra in the short wavelength range from 300 nm to 500 nm. Pristine PDDTT thin films exhibit two absorption peaks, at ∼480 nm and ∼860 nm. The onset wavelength at 1450 nm is the result of the small single chain energy gap of PDDTT, Eg ≈ 0.8 eV.
 Fig. 26  Molecular structures of PDDTT and PC60BM.38 
 Fig. 27  Absorption spectra of pristine PDDTT, pristine PC60BM and PDDTT–PCBM BHJ composites. Inset shows the absorption spectra from 300 nm to 500 nm.38 
The addition of 50% w/w of PC60BM does not significantly alter the absorption spectrum of PDDTT; the new spectral feature that appears between 350 nm to 500 nm in the spectrum of the PDDTT–PC60BM composites originates from PCBM.
Despite the small energy gap, ultrafast photoinduced electron transfer occurs between PDTTT and PCBM.38 The short-circuit current is approximately 200 times higher from ITO–PEDOT–PDDTT–PC60BM–Al bulk heterojunction devices than that from ITO–PEDOT–PDDTT–Al devices.38
The photodetector figure of merit is the “noise equivalent power” (NEP); i.e. the minimum incident optical power that a detector can distinguish from the noise; NEP = (AΔf)1/2/D*(12)where A is the effective area of the detector in cm2, Δf is the electrical bandwidth in Hz, and D* is the detectivity measured in units of Jones. D* is given by the following: D* = (AΔf)1/2R/in(13)where R the responsivity in A W−1 measured under the same conditions as the noise current in (in amperes).
There are three contributions to the noise which limit D*:43–45 shot noise from dark current; Johnson noise, and thermal fluctuation “flicker” noise. If, as expected, the shot noise from the dark current is the major contribution, the detectivity can be expressed as D* = R/(2qJd)1/2 = (Jph/Llight)/(2qJd)1/2(14)where q is the absolute value of electron charge (1.6 × 10−19 Coulombs), and Jd is the dark current. Detectivities were calculated (based on the measured photocurrent, dark current and incident light intensity) using eqn (14) at λ = 500 nm and λ = 800 nm for the PPDs with the ITO–PEDOT–PDDTT–PC60BM–Al structure.
At zero bias, the calculated detectivities are D* = 3.9 × 1010 Jones and 2.1 × 1010 Jones for PPDs under illumination at 500 nm with light intensity of 0.28 mW cm−2 and 800 nm with light intensity of 0.22 mW cm−2, respectively. With a bias at −500 mV, D* = 3.9 × 1010 Jones and 2.1 × 1010 Jones for illumination at 500 nm and 800 nm, respectively.
These modest detectivities are limited by the high dark current. In the bulk heterojunction blend, the dark current is determined by the energy difference, EPF, between the HOMO (top of the valence or π-band) of PDDTT and the LUMO of PC60BM. The dark current is given by the diode equation: Jdark = J0exp(eV/nkT)(15)where J0 is the dark saturation current which is dependent on EPF, V is the applied voltage across photodetector; e is absolute value of electron charge; k is Boltzmann's constant; T is absolute temperature (K) and n is the ideality factor.
In order to minimize the dark current, polymer photodetectors with different multi-layer structures were fabricated. The general concept is to create blocking electrodes that suppress the thermally generated dark current. The best results were obtained from polymer photodetectors with the following structure (denoted PPD5): ITO–PEDOT–PS–TPD–PFCB–PDDTT–PC60BM–C60–Al.

Fig. 28 shows the detectivities of PPDs in comparison with detectivities of Si and InGaAs photodetectors. The detectivities of PPD5 were calculated at 500 nm (4.2 × 1013 Jones) and 800 nm (2.3 × 1013 Jones) using the equations given above with the assumption that the detectivity is limited by dark current. By combining the calculated detectivities at 800 nm with the photoresponsivity data, the PPD detectivity values were obtained over the entire spectral range. Operating at room temperature, the optimized PPD exhibited spectral response from 300 nm to 1450 nm with detectivity greater than 1013 Jones at wavelengths from 300 nm to 1150 nm and greater than 1012 Jones from 1150 nm to 1450 nm.
 Fig. 28  Detectivities of Si photodetector, InGaAs photodetector and polymer photodetector vs. wavelength. 
The detectivity of the PPDs is comparable to or even better than those from Si and InGaAs photodetectors, and the PPD covers a significantly broader spectral range than either Si or InGaAs photodetectors. Note, in addition, that for InGaAs photodetectors, the devices must be cooled to 4.2 K in order to obtain the high detectivities (1012 Jones).
The linear dynamic range (LDR) or photosensitivity linearity (typically quoted in dB) is another important figure of merit for photodetectors. LDR = 20log(J*ph/Jd),(16)where J*ph is the photocurrent, measured at light intensity of 1 mW cm−2. Fig. 29 shows the photocurrent versus the light intensity for the PPD5 structure. Under illumination at λ = 800 nm, the LDR is more than 100 dB which is close to that of a Si photodetector (120 dB) and significantly higher than that obtained from InGaAs photodetectors (66 dB).
 Fig. 29  Linear dynamic range of the polymer photodetectors with ITO–PS–TPD–PFCB–PDDTT–PC60BM–C60–Al architecture.38 
The achievement of high performance polymer photodetectors implies that semiconducting polymers can be used in a variety of possible sensor applications. The photoresponsivity and detectivity results open exciting opportunities for the creation of detectors with unusually wide spectral range and for the fabrication of high-resolution detector arrays for optical communications, chemical/biological sensing and day- and night-time surveillance.
Conclusion
In my Nobel Lecture,2,3 I noted that the discovery of conducting polymers and the ability to dope these polymers over the full range from insulator to metal were particularly exciting because it created a new field of research on the boundary between chemistry and condensed matter physics, and because it created a number of opportunities:
Conducting polymers opened the way to progress in understanding the fundamental chemistry and physics of π-bonded macromolecules;
Conducting polymers provided an opportunity to address questions that had been of fundamental interest to quantum chemistry for decades;
Conducting polymers provided an opportunity to address fundamental issues of importance to condensed matter physics as well, including, for example, the metal–insulator transition.
Finally—and perhaps most important—conducting polymers offered the promise of achieving a new class of polymers: materials which exhibit the electrical and optical properties of metals or semiconductors and which retain the attractive mechanical properties and processing advantages of polymers.
Thus, when asked to explain the importance of the discovery of conducting polymers, I offered two basic answers:
(i) They did not previously exist.
(ii) They offer a unique combination of properties not available from any other known materials.
The first expressed an intellectual challenge; the second expressed a promise for utility in a wide variety of applications.
Semiconducting and metallic polymers are now being used in a variety of innovative applications. Because these electronic polymers can be dissolved in common solvents, they can be formulated as inks—“inks with electronic functionality”. Gutenberg invented printing in 1545. Today, scientists and engineers in laboratories all over the world are actually printing electronic circuits, they are printing light-emitting displays, and they are printing solar cells. The dream of “utility in a wide variety of applications” is coming true.
Much, however, remains to be done, especially in generalizing the fundamental concepts of the field (some of which I summarized in various sections of this review). For example, the data shown in Fig. 11 and 12 demonstrate the intrinsic anisotropy of chain extended and chain aligned semiconducting polymers. In this context, I emphasize once again the need for a deeper understanding of the electronic structure of the relatively complex molecular structures characteristic of the Third Generation semiconducting polymers. There is a need for, and an opportunity associated with, the development of higher performance materials made up of high molecular weight polymers in which the chains are extended and aligned with interchain structural order.
Fundamental studies of the physics of the Third Generation semiconducting polymers can lead to new and unexpected discoveries. For example, the non-linear transport data obtained from PBTTT at relatively high carrier densities are in agreement with the predictions of the Luttinger liquid theory of a one-dimensional metal implying the transition from insulator to metal at high carrier densities.6 The data obtained using a wide range of parameters (temperature, gate-induced carrier density, source–drain voltage and doping level) scale onto the universal curve predicted for transport in systems with electronic structure described by the Luttinger liquid model. Variation of the charge density in the FET channel via gating independently confirmed the existence of the Luttinger liquid electronic state.
Creativity, discovery and risk are the components of scientific progress that are recognized by the Nobel Prize. Although creativity and discovery are essential features of Nobel Prize science, I am certain that every scientist understands and remembers the role of risk in his or her own history. Fortunately, I realized that great discoveries can be found by exploring new directions in interdisciplinary science. Moving into such new directions, however, required going beyond my core knowledge and therefore involved serious risk. For me, that risk was both shared and mitigated (at least in part) through the remarkable collaboration that I enjoyed with Alan MacDiarmid and Hideki Shirakawa.
I conclude with some advice—advice to the Nobel Laureates of the future:
•Cherish creativity
•Be bold and have the audacity to seek to discover
and, perhaps most important of all—
•Remember that creativity and discovery necessarily involve risk.
Dealing with that risk is part of the thrill and satisfaction of living a life in science.
Acknowledgements
I thank all my faculty colleagues, my graduate research students and my postdoctoral research colleagues (past and present) who contributed to the work summarized in this review. I thank Kenneth Wynne (ONR), Charles Lee (AFOSR) and Andrew Lovinger (NSF-DMR) for long term support of my research. I thank Howard Berke for his dedicated and successful efforts to make Konarka Technologies a successful company. I thank my colleagues at Konarka for taking the idea of “plastic” solar cells and making it a commercial reality.
References
A. J. Heeger, S. Kivelson, J. R. Schrieffer and W.-P. Su, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1988, 60, 781 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Heeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40(14), 2591 CrossRef CAS  ; Nobel Lecture.
A. J. Heeger, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2001, 73(3), 681–718 CrossRef CAS  ; Nobel Lecture.

  (a) H. Shirakawa and S. Ikeda, Polym. J. (Tokyo), 1971, 2, 231 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Shirakawa, T. Ito and S. Ikeda, Makromol. Chem., 1978, 179, 1565 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline, E. K. Lin, D. A. Fischer, L. J. Richter, L. A. Lucas, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. E. Northrup, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 833–837 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Yuen, R. Menon, N. E. Coates, E. B. Namdas, S. Cho, S. T. Hannahs, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 572–575 CrossRef CAS .
D. Muhlbacher, M. Scharber, M. Morana, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2884–2889 CrossRef .
N. Blouin, A. Michaud, D. Gendron, S. Wakim, E. Blair, R. Neagu-Plesu, M. Belletête, G. Durocher, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 732–742 CrossRef CAS .
N. Blouin, A. Michaud and M. Leclerc, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2295–2300 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tomozawa, D. Braun, S. Phillips and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Met., 1987, 22, 63 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moses, J. Wang, A. J. Heeger, N. Kirova and S. Brazovski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98(24), 13496–13500 CrossRef CAS .
R. Osterbacka, C. P. An, X. M. Jiang and Z. V. Vardeny, Science, 2000, 287, 839 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hagler, K. Pakbaz, J. Moulton, F. Wudl, P. Smith and A. J. Heeger, Polym. Commun., 1991, 32(11), 339 CAS .
T. W. Hagler, K. Pakbaz, K. F. Voss and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B, 1991, 44(16), 8652 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hagler, K. Pakbaz and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B, 1994, 49(16), 10968 CrossRef CAS ; T. W. Hagler, K. Pakbaz and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B, 1995, 51(20), 14199 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Yang, A. J. Heeger and Y. Cao, Polymer, 2000, 41, 4113 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dötz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
M. Muccini, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, J. H. Seo, S. H. Park, S. Beaupré, M. Leclerc and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater. DOI:10.1002/adma.200903420 .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Heeger and N. S. Sariciftci, US patent, 5454880 .

  (a) B. Kraabel, C. H. Lee, D. Moses, N. S. Sariciftci and A. J. Heeger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 213(3–4), 389 CrossRef ; 
  (b) B. Kraabel, C. H. Lee, D. Moses, N. S. Sariciftci and A. J. Heeger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 213(3–4), 389 CrossRef ; 
  (c) C. J. Brabec, G. Zerza, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri, S. Luzzati, J. C. Hummelen and S. Sariciftci, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 340, 232 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soci, I. W. Hwang, D. Moses, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17(4), 632–636 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Y. Yang and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1387–1390 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Moon, J. K. Lee, S. Cho, J. Byun and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(1), 230–234 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 Search PubMed .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wang, L. Wang, L. Lan, C. Luo, W. Zhuang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033307–033310 CrossRef .
M. C. Scharber, D. Muhlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummenlen, Adv. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Saricifitci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374–380 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Arbogast and C. S. Foote, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 8886–8889 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, W. J. H. Verhees, J. Knol, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3371–3375 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H. H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Park, S. H. Kim, S. Cho and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2445–2449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, J. Yuen, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, A. J. Heeger and S. Y. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063505 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, M. Tong, Y. Xia, W. Cai, J. S. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C.-L. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2009, 325, 1665–1667 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Simliowitz, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Barabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3885–3887 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Wang, J. McElvain and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1431–1434 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, V. Bulovic and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 3855–5857 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. O'Brien, A. J. Quinn, D. A. Tanner and G. Redmond, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2379–2383 CrossRef CAS .

          A. R. Jha, Infrared technology, John Wiley & Son, Inc., New York,  2000, pp. 245–359 Search PubMed .

          P. Bhattacharya, Semiconductor Optoelectronics Device, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ,  1997, pp. 345–367 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Part of the Conducting Polymers for Carbon Electronics themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Alan J. Heeger
	Widely known for his pioneering research in and the co-founding of the field of semiconducting and metallic polymers, Prof. Heeger is the recipient of numerous awards, including the Nobel Prize in Chemistry (2000). Prof. Heeger came to UC Santa Barbara in 1982 to join the Physics Department. He was a founding member of the Materials Department and he was a founder and first Director of the Institute for Polymers and Organic Solids. He currently holds the Presidential Chair at UCSB where he serves as Professor of Physics and Professor of Materials. Prof. Heeger has more than 800 publications in scientific journals and more than 50 patents. He founded UNIAX Corporation in 1990; UNIAX was acquired by DuPont in 2000. Prof. Heeger is a co-founder and serves on the Board of Directors Konarka Technologies Inc. He is co-founder and Chairman of CBrite Inc. in Santa Barbara. He is co-founder and Vice-Chairman of Cynvenio (micro fluidics for cell sorting and diagnostics) and Cytomx Therapeutics (novel technology for targeted drug delivery). Prof. Heeger's research group at UC Santa Barbara continues to study aspects of the science and technology of semiconducting and metallic polymers. A lover of theatre, Dr Heeger has also participated in the production of three Broadway plays.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic band diagram for π-conjugated polymers.	 

 	Fig. 2  a. Acetylene polymerizes to form trans-poly(acetylene). b. Tight-binding band structure of dimerized trans-(CH)x, a semiconductor with energy gap Eg = 2Δo. The full π-electron bandwidth, W = 4to ≈ 12–13 eV. The energy gap of trans-(CH)x is approximately 1.8 eV.	 

 	Fig. 3  Left: trans-polyacetylene. Right: cis-polyacetylene.	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structures of some of the more important First and Second Generation semiconducting polymers.	 

 	Fig. 5  Molecular structures of some of the more important Third Generation semiconducting polymers.	 

 	Fig. 6  Current–voltage characteristics in In–P3HT (●) and In–P3MT (○) diodes.10	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 7  Capacitance–voltage characteristics of In–P3HT (●) and In–P3MT (○) diodes; the data are plotted as C−2vs. V.10	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  The electronic structure of an MSM diode in forward bias. Electrons are injected (via tunneling) into the π*-band and holes into the π-band.	 

 	Fig. 9  π–π* interband transition with associated generation of a mobile electron in the π*-band and a mobile hole in the π-band.	 
	(3a)
	(3b)
e+ + e− → P+ + P+ → BP0 → exciton

 	Fig. 10  Energy diagrams showing the P− + P+ → BP0 → exciton recombination process.	 
2E(pol)b < EB(exciton).

 	Fig. 11  The anisotropic absorption and emission in stretch oriented MEH–PPV blends in UHMW PE. Left: anisotropic absorption by aligned MEH–PPV; right: anisotropic emission from aligned MEH–PPV.14	 

 	Fig. 12  Anisotropy in the electroabsorption with respect to the optical field and the chain orientation axis for oriented MEH–PPV in PE.15	 

 	Fig. 13  Jablonski diagram showing the ground state and first excited state energies as a function of the amplitude of a structural distortion, Q.	 
ψ = ψelectronicψstructure	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 14  Comparison of the optical absorption spectrum of MEH–PPV blends in UHMW PE with the 1D electronic density of states. (left) α(ħω); theory (solid curve) and experiment (dotted curve) obtained from oriented MEH–PPV in PE.14,15 (right) Comparison of α0(ħω) obtained from experiment with the theoretical result for a perfect single chain.14,15	 
	(10)

 	Fig. 15  Emission; comparison of theory (solid curve) and experiment (dotted curve) obtained from oriented MEH–PPV in PE.14,15	 

 	Fig. 16  Absorption of PCDTBT after annealing for 15 minutes at elevated temperatures in air (a) and in nitrogen (b); see ref. 19.	 

 	Fig. 17  a. Hole mobility of PCDTBT (red) as a function of annealing temperature. Results obtained from a similar device fabricated with poly(3-hexylthiophene), P3HT, are shown for comparison (black). b. Effect of weight-average molecular weight on the high temperature stability of PCDTBT. c. Mobility before and after annealing in air at elevated temperatures.19	 

 	Fig. 18  Hole mobilities obtained from PCDTBT FETs as a function of storage time in air. The measurements were made without any encapsulation/passivation layer.19	 

 	Fig. 19  Left, TEM image of P3HT–PCBM BHJ film; right, spatial Fourier transform of the data from the same TEM image. (See ref. 24.)	 

 	Fig. 20  Defocused cross-sectional images of the rrP3HT–PCBM BHJ layer. (a) 120 nm thick slice. (b) ∼60 nm thinned slice. In each case the corresponding binary images can be used as a guide to the eye; see text.25	 
	(11)

 	Fig. 21  (a) The power spectral density (spatial Fourier transform) from the cross-sectional defocused TEM image of the 120 nm slice. (b) The power density spectrum from the thinner region of the slice (∼60 nm). (c) The autocorrelation function obtained from the cross-sectional defocused TEM image of the 120 nm slice. (d) The autocorrelation function from the thinner region of the slice (∼60 nm).25	 

 	Fig. 22  The device structure is sketched together with energy level diagram. The titanium oxide (TiOx) composite layer is introduced as an optical spacer on top of the BHJ layer.25	 

 	Fig. 23  a. Total absorption in the active layer; b. IPCE spectra; c. current density versus voltage with and without TiOx layer.25	 

 	Fig. 24  (upper) IQE values of 1 ∶ 4 device; film cast from DCB. The red-line shows the total absorption of the device, and the blue-line shows the IPCE. (lower) J–V characteristics of the device under monochromatic 532 nm light.25	 

 	Fig. 25  NREL certified J–V characteristics of a PCDTBT–PC70BM solar cell.25	 

 	Fig. 26  Molecular structures of PDDTT and PC60BM.38	 

 	Fig. 27  Absorption spectra of pristine PDDTT, pristine PC60BM and PDDTT–PCBM BHJ composites. Inset shows the absorption spectra from 300 nm to 500 nm.38	 
NEP = (AΔf)1/2/D*	(12)
D* = (AΔf)1/2R/in	(13)
D* = R/(2qJd)1/2 = (Jph/Llight)/(2qJd)1/2	(14)
Jdark = J0exp(eV/nkT)	(15)

 	Fig. 28  Detectivities of Si photodetector, InGaAs photodetector and polymer photodetector vs. wavelength.	 
LDR = 20log(J*ph/Jd),	(16)

 	Fig. 29  Linear dynamic range of the polymer photodetectors with ITO–PS–TPD–PFCB–PDDTT–PC60BM–C60–Al architecture.38	 
Footnote
† Part of the Conducting Polymers for Carbon Electronics themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
