DNA metallization: principles, methods, structures, and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00011E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00011E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4017-4072DNA metallization: principles, methods, structures, and applications

        
          
            Zhaowei 
            Chen†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Chaoqun 
            Liu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Fangfang 
            Cao
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Jinsong 
            Ren
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xiaogang 
            Qu
          
          
        
      *a
aLaboratory of Chemical Biology and State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resources Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, Changchun, Jilin 130022, P. R. China. E-mail: xqu@ciac.ac.cn; jren@ciac.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, P. R. China
cUniversity of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230029, P. R. China
Received 
      22nd January 2018
    First published on 3rd April 2018AbstractDNA metallization has witnessed tremendous growth and development, from the initial simple synthesis aimed at manufacturing conductive metal nanowires to the current fabrication of various nanostructures for applications in areas as diverse as nanolithography, energy conversion and storage, catalysis, sensing, and biomedical engineering. To this, our aim here was to present a comprehensive review to summarize the research activities on DNA metallization that have appeared since the concept was first proposed in 1998. We start with a brief presentation of the basic knowledge of DNA and its unique advantages in the template-directed growth of metal nanomaterials, followed by providing a systematic summary of the various synthetic methods developed to date to deposit metals on DNA scaffolds. Then, the leverage of DNAs with different sequences, conformations, and structures for tuning the synthesis of feature-rich metal nanostructures is discussed. Afterwards, the discussion is divided around the applications of these metal nanomaterials in the fields mentioned above, wherein the key role DNA metallization plays in enabling high performance is emphasized. Finally, the current status and some future prospects and challenges in this field are summarized. As such, this review would be of great interest to promote the further development of DNA metallization by attracting researchers from various communities, including chemistry, biology, physiology, material science, and nanotechnology as well as other disciplines.
Zhaowei Chen
Zhaowei Chen received his BSc degree from the Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2010, and his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry and Chemical Biology from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. He then started his postdoctoral fellowship in the Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University. His research interests include the design and synthesis of biomimetic (e.g., biomolecule-templated, enzyme-mimic, cell-inspired) materials for theranostic, biocatalytic, and energy conversion applications.
Chaoqun Liu
Chaoqun Liu received his Bachelor of Science degree and Master of Medicine degree from Henan University in 2011 and 2014, respectively. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jinsong Ren at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interest focuses on the synthesis and application of multifunctional nanomaterials in cancer therapy.
Fangfang Cao
Fangfang Cao received her BSc degree from Nanjing Normal University in 2014. She then joined the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a PhD candidate, majoring in Chemical Biology under the supervision of Prof. Jinsong Ren. Her current scientific interest is focused on the fabrication of functional nanomaterials for analytical and biomedical applications.
Jinsong Ren
Jinsong Ren received her BSc degree from Nanjing University in 1990, and PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1995. From 1996 to 2002, she worked at the School of Medicine, UMMC and the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology. In 2002, she took a position as a principal investigator at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research interests include molecular recognition and regulation, high-throughput drug screening and nanofunctional materials.
Xiaogang Qu
Xiaogang Qu received his PhD from the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 1995. He then moved to the United States and worked with Professor J. B. Chaires at the Mississippi Medical Center, and Nobel Laureate Professor Ahmed. H. Zewail at the California Institute of Technology. Since late 2002, he has been a professor at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, CAS. He visited the group of Nobel Laureate Professor Alan J. Heeger at UCSB from December 2006 to May 2007. His current research is focused on ligand–nucleic acids or related protein interactions, and biofunctional materials for advanced medical technology.
1. Introduction
During the past decade, great efforts have been devoted to the development of metal nanomaterials with well-defined sizes and specific shapes due to their unique physical/chemical properties and wide applications in the fields of microelectronics, optical devices, catalysis, energy conversion and storage, sensor technologies, and biomedical theranostics. Up to now, various top-down and bottom-up methods encompassing photolithography, microcontact printing, photo- or chemical reduction, and pyrolysis have been proposed to synthesize metal nanostructures with diverse morphologies, such as nanowires, nanoclusters, spherical nanoparticles, nanocages, and nanotubes.1–3 Toward shape-controlled nanometal fabrication, bottom-up approaches enable more flexible preparations compared to top-down protocols. In particular, biomolecule-templated bottom-up nanofabrication has been intensively studied to tune nanocrystal growth with precise control at the atomic and molecular levels.4–6 Of the many biomolecules available, DNA stands out as a powerful template for directing metal nanofabrication, where the processes for depositing metal nanostructures on DNA scaffolds by the reduction of metal salts are known as DNA metallization.7
Since Braun and coworkers reported the first work of DNA metallization for fabricating a conductive silver nanowire on the contour of bacteriophage λ-DNA in 1998,7 myriads of metal nanostructures with different compositions, such as Au, Pt, Pd, Cu, Co, Fe, Ni, Te, Rh, and alloys, have been made on DNA templates. Furthermore, with the rapid development of DNA nanotechnology in recent years,8–10 metal nanomaterials with sophisticated geometries and two or three dimensions can also be easily fabricated. In addition, recent studies have revealed that the versatile tunability of the DNA sequence, chemical structure, length, and conformations allow us to conveniently modulate the physicochemical (e.g., fluorescence, optical, magnetic, and catalytic) properties of the resulting metal nanomaterials, enabling the fabrication of useful and unique nanostructures for broad applications beyond the preparation of conductive nanowires.
Due to DNA metallization initially being proposed to construct miniaturized integrated circuits, only a few reviews with themes either focusing on DNA metallization for fabrication of metal nanowires or with specific topics covering partial works of DNA metallization have been reported to date.11–18 In the past few years, thanks to the gradual understanding of DNA-metallization processes, applications of DNA-templated nanometals have undergone tremendous development in areas ranging from electronics to catalysis, environmental sensors, energy conversion, photonics, biomedical diagnostics, and therapy applications, as outlined in the works reported by our and other groups. Unfortunately, thus far, no in-depth review on the progress of DNA metallization with a comprehensive summary of the template design, synthetic methods, nanometal properties, and diverse applications has been attempted.
As the research in DNA metallization is multidisciplinary, in this review, we intend to provide systematic coverage of DNA metallization from flexible nanofabrication to versatile applications. In Section 2, we introduce the unique physicochemical and biological properties of DNA for better understanding its superiorities as metal growth templates. In Section 3, we summarize the different synthetic methods that have been developed in recent years for controlled DNA metallization. In Section 4, we provide an overview of the flexibility of DNA-metallization-directed nanofabrication, covering metal nanomaterials with different elements, sizes, morphologies, and physicochemical properties based on the versatile choice of metal ions and the diverse DNA structures with different sequences, lengths, dimensions, or conformations. Section 5 is dedicated to highlighting the achievements of DNA metallization for a wide range of applications in different areas since its inception. Finally, we conclude with our own opinions on the overall current status, foreseeable challenges, and future perspectives of DNA metallization (Section 6). Overall, we anticipate that this review will inspire more interest from various disciplines and boost this active field in which DNA metallization can bring significant advantages for broader applications.
2. Why DNA?
Compared with other common biomolecules, such as proteins or peptides, DNA is a readily available biopolymer and is well suited as a nanofabrication template because of its relatively physiological stability, programmable size, and pre-designable architecture.19–21 More importantly, DNA's rich chemical functionality allows it to bind various metal ions to subsequently produce a variety of nanomaterials of interest.22–25
2.1 DNA composition and properties
DNA is a polynucleotide composed of nucleobases (guanine (G), cytosine (C), adenine (A), and thymine (T)) that are joined to one another by monophosphorylated deoxyribose sugars (Fig. 1A). The number and sequence of nucleotides in the polymer chain encode the instructive information dictating the structure and function of DNA. Based on the classical Waston–Crick base-pairing interactions, i.e., A pairs with T, and G pairs with C, single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) molecules can hybridize to form helical duplex or more complex motifs when their sequences are (partially) complementary. Typically, the resulting helix exhibits a nanoscale dimension reflected by a length of 0.34 nm per nucleotide subunit and a width of 2 nm. Hence, we can see that both DNA structures and nanomaterial science meet at the same size level.
 Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of DNA duplex structures formed by Waston–Crick base-pairing interactions. (B) Structures of nucleobases. Both the negatively charged phosphate groups and the nitrogen atoms (numbered and highlighted in blue) in the nucleobases provide binding sites for metal ions. 
As the molecule for storing, transmitting, and translating genetic information in living things, natural DNA can be easily obtained from bacteria, animals, and viruses. On the other hand, to date, based on the simple four-letter alphabet, DNA with an arbitrary sequence or length can be readily synthesized by automated methods and amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in a high quality and large amounts at a relatively low price. Also, functional groups (thiol, alkyne, azide, etc.)-modified nucleotides by ingenious organic synthesis can be inserted at will into the DNA chains, conferring additional properties such as site-specific post functionalization. For example, Carell and coworkers did a lot of work to prepare alkyne-modified DNA that could be used for a subsequent copper(I)-catalyzed Huisgen cycloaddition with azide-bearing molecules; in this way, site-specific labeled DNA could be obtained, thus allowing DNA functionalization with unprecedented efficiency for various applications.26
Moreover, it should be noted that nature endows us with a unique toolbox of highly specific enzymes, such as ligase, telomerase, endonucleases, nicking enzymes, and other DNA-modifying enzymes, which allow manipulating and molding DNA structures with remarkable Ångström-scale resolution.19 For instance, it is feasible to produce DNA molecules of a precisely known size and sequences with restriction endonuclease as it can specifically cleave the DNA backbone at a known site. In contrast, no other biomolecules or synthetic polymers possess such advantages.
Because of its unparalleled molecular recognition and programmable properties, beginning with the pioneering work by Seeman and coworkers,8 the potential of DNA has been further explored as a building block (predominantly double-crossover and triple-crossover tiles) to construct sophisticated and hierarchical DNA nanostructures, such as well-defined 2D periodic lattices and 3D crystalline macrostructures.27–32 As a further development, the DNA origami technique developed by Paul Rothemund in 2006 provided exciting new methodologies to fabricate self-assembled DNA nanostructures with predesigned 2D or 3D shapes and patterns, where a long scaffold strand is folded by hundreds of short auxiliary strands.33–38 Later on, the method of using short synthetic DNA strands as “DNA bricks” with hundreds of distinct sequences enabled the scaffold-free fabrication of numerous predesigned shapes, exhibiting complicated surface features as well as intricate interior channels and cavities.39,40 Very recently, a computer algorithm-assisted top-down strategy has been presented to design nearly arbitrary DNA origamis with meshed architectures autonomously based merely on the target shape.41 Importantly, this algorithm method showed no theoretical limitation on the length of the scaffold used to program the target DNA origami object. Besides that, the interactions between specific DNA sequences and proteins or small molecular ligands also allow the construction of hybrid systems with predesigned structures and functions.42–44 All these DNA nanostructures can be directly used as scaffolds for the templated synthesis of nanocircuits, nanodevices, and plasmonics, among others.
2.2 DNA–metal ion interactions
From the chemical structure of DNA as shown in Fig. 1A, it can be seen that the backbone of DNA is negatively charged and all the nucleobases are nitrogenated. Such a unique chemical composition of DNA provides a variety of binding sites for metal ions through either electrostatic or coordination interactions. Under physiological pH conditions, the polyanionic backbone of DNA can bind extensively with positively charged metal ions via simple electrostatic interactions. Meanwhile, the empty orbitals of metal ions also can accept electrons from the nitrogen atoms of the DNA bases or the phosphate oxygen to form coordination complexes. For nucleobases (Fig. 1B), the N7 and N1 atoms of A, the N7 and O6 atoms of G, and the N3 atom of pyrimidines (C and T) are the predominant coordination sites for metal cations.24 These are typical interactions between metal ions with DNA molecules. Artificial DNAs that incorporate metal ligands have also been shown to be elegant templates to directly fabricate metal ion arrays;45–47 however, this is different from the topic of DNA metallization summarized here, which mainly involves zero-valent metal deposition on pre-synthesized DNA.
Generally, the initial step of each biomolecule-templated heterogeneous nucleation process is the binding of metal ions onto biotemplates. Thus, these diverse interactions among metal ions and DNA templates can facilitate the fabrication of various inorganic nanomaterials after a further addition of reducing agents or other chemical reagents (chalcogenide or hydroxide). Besides making metal nanomaterials, these advantages have also been leveraged in the DNA-template synthesis of metal oxides, mixed metal oxides, metal chalcogenide, semiconductors, upconversion nanomaterials, etc., for which broad applications with exciting discoveries have been demonstrated.48–68 In the present review, we mainly focus on a survey of the development of DNA metallization in different research fields, including the principles, methods, structures, and applications. For the DNA-templated synthesis of other types of nanomaterials, readers can refer to other pioneering reviews or research works.48–68
Therefore, given the unique chemical, physical, and biological properties of DNA, it is not surprising that DNA-templated metal nanomaterials could be fabricated with a broad range of geometries and various dimensions. Recent advances have demonstrated the flexibility of DNA metallization for the bottom-up preparation of nanometals with unique conductive, fluorescent, chiral, catalytic, plasmonic, and magnetic properties, which have shown wide-ranging applications in the field of catalysis, sensing, electronics energy conversion/storage, and biotechnologies.
3. Methods for DNA metallization
Following the seminal work reported by Braun et al., who utilized a chemical reduction method to deposit silver on DNA templates, up to now, various methods, including chemical reduction, photoreduction, electrochemical reduction, site-specific reduction of metal ions via reductive group-modified DNA, and the enlargement of metal seeds introduced on a DNA scaffold, have been developed to fabricate various DNA-templated metal nanomaterials. All these approaches aim at rationalizing the processes of DNA metallization under different reaction conditions and for specific demands.
3.1 Chemical reduction
Chemical reduction of the absorbed metal cations is the most widely applied method for DNA metallization. The working principle was first proposed by Braun and coworkers as shown in Fig. 2.7 First, a λ-DNA was assembled between two adjacent gold electrodes by hybridization with the surface-bound complementary oligonucleotides that serve as anchors. Then, sliver ions were selectively localized on the contour of the DNA molecule by an ion-exchange process and by the formation of complexes with the DNA bases. After the subsequent reduction with hydroquione and further “development”, a 100 nm wide, 12 μm long conductive silver nanowire connecting the two gold electrodes was generated. Two-terminal electrical measurements demonstrated the electrical transport ability of the silver deposited on the DNA bridge. Although there were more or less some drawbacks, this pioneering work sparked great progress in nanowire fabrication by the metallization of DNA molecules. In a similar way, Richter and coworkers subsequently demonstrated a method for the nanoscale Pd metallization of DNA and they found that the nanowires exhibited Ohmic transport behavior at room temperature. The specific conductivity of the nanowire was only ten times lower than that of bulk Pd.69–71 These works encouraged researchers to prepare DNA-directed nanowires made of platinum, copper, gold, nickel, etc. using similar schemes. The general procedure of all these approaches essentially comprised three main steps (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 2  (a–e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of λ-DNA-templated silver nanowires to bridge two gold electrodes. (f) Fluorescence image proving the stretch of the DNA template between two electrodes. (g and h) Atomic force microscopy images substantiating the formation of silver nanowires on the DNA scaffolds with granular morphology. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 1998 Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 3  General procedures for synthesizing DNA-templated metal nanostructures by chemical reduction. Chemical reduction can be used to fabricate metal nanomaterials with different sizes or shapes by tuning the reaction conditions, such as DNA sequences, lengths, metal precursor/DNA ratios, reaction time, and temperatures. 
Step 1: Activation. In this initial step, metal ions or metal complexes absorb on the DNA backbone to provide reactive metal sites for triggering the nucleation event, thus activating the DNA. Therein, both of the electrostatic and coordination interactions between the metal and DNA play crucial roles in this step. Usually, the activation timescale varies from several hours up to one day according to the reactivity between the metal precursors and DNA. For example, for the platinum complex Pt(terpy)2+, more than one day was needed to form stabilized Pt2+–DNA adducts,72 whereas the formation of Pd2+–DNA hybrids only took 2 h in the case of using Pd acetate as the precursor.69
Step 2: Reduction. In the second step, reducing agents are added to transform the formulated reactive metal sites into metal clusters that are then fixed on the DNA strands. This procedure is convenient for both seed ions and metal complexes. The commonly used reducing agents are hydroquinone, sodium borohydride, dimethylamine borane (DMAB), and ascorbic acid. Sometimes, it is anticipated that the metal growth kinetics can be slowed down by diluting the agents or choosing those with a low reactivity, thus avoiding the background metal deposition.
Step 3: Growth. Finally, in the presence of excess reducing agents, the unbound or new introduced metal ions or metal complexes are further deposited on the affixed metal clusters to grow into metallic structures via an autocatalytic process, in which the metal clusters serve as both catalytic surfaces and nucleation sites. It should be particularly noted that the final growth metal does not need to have the same elements as the seeding, thereby opening up the possibility to fabricate a more broad range of metal nanomaterials on DNA templates, which is especially useful in cases where the metal ions have low or no affinity toward the DNA backbone.73–75 A similar virtue can also be achieved by galvanic displacement of the pre-prepared DNA-templated nanostructures with heterometals, as demonstrated by Harb and coworkers who fabricated Te nanowires from DNA-directed Ni templates.76
Based on the above understanding of the process, metal nanomaterials with various unique physiochemical properties can be easily obtained by varying the reaction parameters, such as the reaction time, DNA/metal ion ratios, concentration of reducing agents, DNA sequence, length, and conformation. For instance, if the DNA/metal ratio is too large, fluorescent nanoclusters bound to DNA strands can be obtained; whereas metal nanoparticles or nanowires will be formed with a decreased DNA/metal ratio. Also, the properties of the formulated metal nanomaterials could be tuned by changing the template DNA sequence or length, which will be discussed in the parts below.
Although this method is convenient and the most popular, limitations still exist. First, the major drawback of this technique is the fast growth kinetics, which makes it difficult to achieve metallization only on the DNA scaffold and often leads to coarse and irregular structures. Second, the deposition of metal is uniform over the entire DNA structure, thus it lacks selectivity toward the specific DNA strand of interest. Besides, the seeds form nonspecifically also plate metal, bringing an undesired background metal growth. Third, the utilization of reducing agents can contaminate, denature, or even destruct DNA stands via chemical attack. Although the different affinity of metal ions toward the four nucleobases has been exploited to generate DNA–metal adducts with specific sequences, only specific nanometals can be fabricated.77–79 Thus, novel procedures are continuously being developed to improve the selectivity and to minimize the homogeneous nucleation of metals in solution.
3.2 Photoreduction
Photoreduction has been recognized as a clean, simple, and fast method for producing metal nanoparticles. Organic ligands, such as photosensitizers or polymers, are often added as the catalysts and stabilizing agents to facilitate the metallization processes.80–82 Thanks to their intrinsic adsorption in the ultraviolet (UV) region and rich chemical structures, DNA can act as a sensitizing agent as well as a capping ligand for supporting photo-induced metal deposition. Berti et al. demonstrated for the first time the fabrication of silver nanochains via the photoreduction of silver-ion-bound DNA strands (Fig. 4).83 In their study, after the formation of DNA–Ag+ complexes, 254 nm UV light was employed to irradiate the mixture and a peak centered at around 420 nm was witnessed after 5 min, which could be attributed to the surface plasmonic resonance of the formulated silver nanoparticles (AgNPs). After a further four complexation/photoreduction cycles, the size of the nanoparticle clusters became bigger and the polydispersity increased as well. Interestingly, the metal growth occurred only along the DNA contour, whereas almost no background metal deposition was observed. Similar processes were also employed to prepare Au, Pt, Pd, and alloy nanowires by other groups, where all of the metals were homogeneously distributed over the DNA strand.84–87 All these procedures use a sequence of three steps, similar to that of the chemical reduction method, except the reduction process was induced by UV light irradiation.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic depiction of DNA-metallization induced by photoreduction. (b and c) UV-vis spectrum and atomic force microscopy characterization of the optical property and morphology of the photoreduced silver–DNA complexes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
Although it is clear that DNA plays a crucial role in the photoreduction process, up to now, knowledge of the reaction mechanism is still premature. Generally, it is hypothesized that the intrinsic strong absorption of UV light enables the DNA to act as a photosensitizer to accelerate the metal ion photoreduction by facilitating electron transfer, meanwhile leading to photooxidation of the DNA bases.84,86 Moreover, according to previous studies where many organic agents, like ethylene glycol and poly(vinyl) alcohol, could mediate the photoreduction process by sharing their hydroxyl groups,80–82 it is reasonable to suggest that the hydroxyl groups of deoxyribose sugar on the DNA backbone play an important role in initiating metal reduction. Also, the involvement of the solvent and buffer salt in electron transfer during the photoreaction process, as proposed by Zinchenko and coworkers, cannot be ruled out.88 Further detailed investigations will be necessary to illustrate the full mechanism underlying the photo-induced DNA metallization.
Overall, to achieve successful photo-induced DNA metallization, three factors have to be considered: (i) DNA templates: the primary element is the presence of DNA as both a photosensitizer and capping agent; (ii) metal precursors: an appropriate DNA/metal ratio is necessary to minimize the formation free particles; (iii) UV light: the irradiation time depends on the light power and metal ion reactivity as well as other parameters.
The main advantage of this method lies in its low background nanomaterial generation, by which all metals can grow homogeneously on the DNA templates. Also, this process is very simple and rapid, and does not involve any external harsh reducing agents or other additives. Yet, the lack of sequence selectivity makes it difficult to control metallization on specific DNA segments. Besides, the oxidation damage induced by the prolonged UV irradiation might bring unexpected side effects on the nanowire growth such as collapse or aggregation of clusters due to the loss of capping agents.86
3.3 Electrochemical deposition
As another clean and simple method for fabricating nanostructures, electrochemical deposition has shown great advances in producing a variety of materials, such as metals, semiconductors, and organic conducting polymers.89–92 Electrochemical methods offer several advantages over other solution-based methods, since they can be performed under ambient conditions without any reducing agents. Importantly, as the electron-transfer rate can be tuned by the applied potential, considerable control over the material growth kinetics can be achieved.93 Also, this methodology is inexpensive to carry out and has the potential for scale up. With these features in mind, Yang and coworkers reported the first work for preparing DNA-templated silver nanowires with an electrochemical method.94 DNA was first adsorbed on the electrode and then activated by immersing into Ag+ solution for a certain time. After that, the silver ions were reduced by bulk electrolysis with Coulometry with an electrolytic potential of −0.3 V and an electrolytic time of 3 min. Further increasing the Ag+ concentration or electrolytic time made the linearity of the Ag nanowire worsen. Jayaraman et al. further presented an in-depth study to explore three different methods for the electrochemical deposition of Ag+:DNA-to-substrates electrostatic deposition, drop-casting, and layer-by-layer deposition.95 They demonstrated that electrons could transfer directly from the highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) substrate to the metal ion binding on DNA, as shown as eqn (1). Mn+:DNA + ne− → M:DNA|Eapplied| > |E0|(1)
Kasyanenko and coworkers found that an n-type silicon surface could not only act as a substrate for DNA fixation but could also provide electrons for silver reduction. Since n-type silicon is a semiconductor with electrons as the main charge carriers, in such cases silver deposition also has a sense of electrochemical reduction.96,97 Recently, Houlton et al. reported a method for fabricating electrically conductive and superparamagnetic Fe nanowires by supporting a reaction solution of DNA stands and Fe2+ cations on a n-doped Si〈100〉 wafer, which at the same time was used as the working electrode (Fig. 5).98 The process mainly consisted of two stages: (i) formation of DNA–Fe2+ hybrids to facilitate subsequent Fe nucleation on the DNA templates; (ii) electrochemical reduction of Fe2+ attached on DNA at the surface of working electrode to form Fe particles over the DNA stands.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of DNA-templated Fe nanowires via electrochemical deposition. This scheme can be also used to describe the processes of DNA-templated metal growth using electrochemical deposition on different electrodes. (b) Atomic force microscopy image of a DNA-templated Fe nanowire (i) and illustration of the morphology of the Fe nanowires on the DNA template (ii). (c) Scanned conductance microscopy (SCM) and (d) magnetic force microscopy characterization of the DNA-templated Fe nanowires. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
By utilizing a very simple apparatus and optimizing the reaction parameters, fine metal nanostructures on DNA templates could be easily obtained. However, this method is limited to be useful for modifying surface-based template structures. Also, similar to the photoreduction process, sequence-selective DNA metallization can be hardly realized with this technology.
3.4 Localization of reducing groups on DNA
Besides searching for new reduction approaches, the rich chemistry of DNA provided an alternative option to achieve homogeneous and selective metallization. The localization of reactive groups on DNA strands has recently demonstrated to be effective to program the metallization process with a very low background. In such cases, the DNA simultaneously acts as a template, reducing, and capping agent. Up to now, there are mainly four strategies to derivate DNA with reducing groups.

3.4.1 Direct modification of DNA with aldehydes. 
Braun et al. reported a simple method to first modify DNA with glutaraldehyde, which could react with the primary amine groups of the nucleobases (A, C, G) within the DNA strand before metal deposition (Fig. 6A).73,99,100 This treatment not only does not affect the recognition abilities of DNA but also allows the in situ reduction and nucleation of silver ions only along the DNA segments that are modified with aldehydes. After that, many studies have employed this derivation processes to induce metallization on more complicated DNA templates, such as branched DNA structures, DNA nanotubes, and DNA origamis.74,101,102 This method effectively minimizes the background metal deposition. More importantly, high selectivity can be achieved by taking advantage of the maintained programmability or recognition ability of the DNA templates. This procedure opens up new avenues for the construction of elaborate structures, such as branched junctions and networks.
 Fig. 6  (A) Scheme of the possible reaction mechanism for glutaraldehyde-modified DNA. Besides adenine base, guanine and cytosine bases also have primary amines that can react with glutaraldehyde in a similar way. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (B) Structures of molecules used to synthesize aldehyde-labeled DNA (a), which is then used as template for directed DNA metallization (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic illustration of (a) synthesis of cyclic-diol-modified deoxyuridine triphosphate and (b) conversion of di-thiol-derived DNA into aldehyde-modified DNA for further controlled metallization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 


3.4.2 Post-synthetic modification of DNA. 
Modified nucleobases prepared by ingenious organic synthesis can be inserted into a DNA sequence in a programmable way by PCR, thus allowing for site-specific post-modification with reductive groups for controlling the metallization.103 Carell and coworkers reported a seminal work for the post-modification of DNA with aldehyde-containing groups and demonstrated that the aldehyde-modified DNA was efficient and selective for depositing silver on the DNA contour (Fig. 6B).104 For the synthesis of artificial DNA, first, acetylene was introduced into selected genes via the DNA polymerase-mediated incorporation of 5-position-modified pyrimidine nucleoside triphosphates. Second, sugar containing azides was conjugated onto DNA via Cu(I)-catalyzed “click reaction”. In this way, the selected DNA could be functionalized with aldehyde groups. To demonstrate the versatility of this strategy, they further incorporated an alkyne group-modified cytosine derivative into DNA strands for further clicking sugar azides.105 In parallel studies, they constructed DNA with dialdehyde moieties by functionalizing DNA with cis-3,4-dihydroxypyrrolidine units, which were then cleaved directly onto the DNA strands by sodium periodate (Fig. 6C).106,107 Finally, after further reaction with Tollens agents and subsequent development, metal nanowires could be deposited precisely on all of these DNA templates.
As the modified nucleobases of interest are readily available and can be inserted into DNA with high programmability by PCR, this route provides an effective method for the spatially defined and sequence-specific metallization of artificial DNA strands. This methodology would be particularly useful for the preparation of nanoscale blocks within complex structures, such as DNA origami, as recently demonstrated by Yan and coworkers.108


3.4.3 Boranephosphonate DNA. 
Boranephosphonate DNA (bpDNA) is a DNA derivative containing a borane (BH3) moiety in place of one of the nonbridging oxygens, as shown in Fig. 7A.109–112 Of particular interest, since the BH3 group is known to be a reducing agent, bpDNA provides unprecedented opportunities for the in situ reduction of metal ions. For instance, recently Caruthers et al. reported that bpDNA could effectively reduce a number of metal ions, such as AuCl4−, PtCl42−, and Ag+ to form nanoparticles, while the B–P bonds underwent solvolysis to generate phosphate esters (Fig. 7B).113,114 After demonstrating the metal ion-reducing ability of bpDNA, the authors took a further step toward demonstrating the incorporation of bpDNA oligomers into a two-dimensional (2D) DNA array for the site-specific deposition of AgNPs (Fig. 7C).115 As designed well-defined and programmed arrays of AgNPs were generated over the predesigned DNA structure (Fig. 7D).
 Fig. 7  (A) Structures of oligonucleotide (left) and the corresponding bpDNA analog (right). Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (B) Mechanism of methanolysis of bpDNA to induce metal reduction. Modified and reprinted from ref. 113. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic illustration of site-specific metal nucleation on bpDNA-containing 2D arrays, and (D) transmission electron microscopy image of the in situ deposition of silver onto arrays containing bpDNA. The repulsive interactions between the metal nanoparticles lead to the folding of the flat arrays into tube structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
It can be concluded that bpDNA, with the reductive moiety as an inherent part of the backbone, has several unique features for use as a template: (i) the linkages can be easily introduced on the DNA strands of interest by either chemical or enzymatic methods;116–118 (ii) the borane phosphate linkage is stable to all conditions used in the preparation of the nanostructures; (iii) a homogeneous and site-specific deposition of metal on the bpDNA scaffold can readily achieved by precisely locating the bpDNA sequences. However, possibly due to the complicated synthesis of bpDNA, its application for DNA metallization has not been widely studied so far.


3.4.4 Reductive group-modified ligands of DNA. 
Instead of modifying DNA structures, very recently Takenaka and coworkers reported a new method for the selective metallization of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) by using galactose-derived naphthalene diimide (NDI) as the dsDNA ligand and in situ reducing agents.119,120 In this approach, two kinds of NDI derivatives with different spaces between the NDI and galactose were synthesized (NDI-DS1 and NDI-S2). Both of them could selectively bind to dsDNA via threading intercalation with high affinities in the order of 105 M−1, yet none of them showed significant interaction with ssDNA. After silver mirror reaction and further growth with gold metal, metallization occurred preferably on dsDNA other than ssDNA.
DNA is polymorphic and can exist in a variety of secondary structures and conformations, such as duplexes, triplexes, tetraplexes, three- and four-way junctions, hairpins, bugles, G-quadruplexes, and i-motifs, depending on their sequences and the surrounding environmental conditions. To date, a large number of ligands have been screened to specially recognize different structures, which is very important for developing new drugs, as outlined in the works or reviews by our group and others.44,121–124 Thus, we can reason that by rational derivation of ligands with reductive groups, metallization on specific structures while maintaining the biological function of other segments could be readily realized, finally enlarging the metallization flexibility.

3.5 Seed-mediated DNA metallization
In the metallization process of all the above methods, there is a key step in which DNA-bound metal ions are first reduced to generate metal clusters. These clusters then serve as seeds to provide both catalytic surfaces and nucleation sites for further metal growth. In fact, besides the in situ formation of clusters, pre-prepared small metal nanoparticles with chemical modifications can also be introduced onto the DNA scaffold and utilized as seeds. This approach can be used to induce the deposition of various kinds of metals, even those whose ions or complexes have no interaction with DNA. Typically, according to the surface modification of the nanoparticles, the methods for attachment of the seeds can be classified into two categories: nonspecific and specific.

3.5.1 Nonspecific attachment of seeds. 
In this approach, positively charged metal nanoparticles are generally used to attach onto the entire polyanionic DNA scaffold via electrostatic interactions. A recent example reported by Liedl et al. showed that 1.4 nm AuNPs coated with positively charged amines could bind to DNA origami of different shapes and dimensions, and then acted as seeds for the deposition of gold ions, enabling the fabrication of continuously metallized structures with arbitrary shapes, including polymerized nanorods, nanodonuts, and gold nanocuboids (Fig. 8A).125 Considering the wide variety of structures and shapes that can be built with DNA, this method provides a general path to fabricate complex materials.
 Fig. 8  Seed-mediated DNA metallization. (A) Nonspecific anchoring of positively charged gold nanoparticles (1.4 nm) onto DNA origami templates for further metal deposition into continuous structures (a–d). Based on this method, arbitrarily shaped DNA origami could be metallized (b–j). Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (a and b) In panel B show the processes of the specific attachment of metal seeds onto DNA scaffolds via hybridization with complementary DNA segments and covalent chemical reactions for fabricating metal nanowires, respectively. (c) In panel B shows a typical transmission electron microscopy image of a gold nanowire made by enlargement of gold seeds on a DNA scaffold according to the scheme shown in (a) of panel B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 


3.5.2 Specific attachment of seeds. 
To introduce metal seeds at specific sites on DNA scaffolds, we can modify small nanoparticles with either reactive groups that can covalently interact with specific groups on the DNA backbone or DNA oligomers that can specially recognize the target sequences on DNA scaffolds.
For instance, with this method, Willner and coworkers fabricated a continuous gold nanowire on single-strand telomers (Fig. 8B).126 In their study, first, 1.4 nm Au nanoparticles functionalized with oligomers complementary to the telomeric repeat sequence were used as the seeds to hybridize with the telomer. After further enlargement in a solution of HAuCl4 and hydroxylamine, the separated seeds were connected to yield a wire. In the same report, they also introduced another method in which they conducted the telomerization in the presence of aminoally-functionalized dUTP and utilized active ester-modified Au nanoparticles as the seeds. The seeds could be attached to the telomer via covalent interaction between N-hydroxysuccinimide on the Au surface and the amine units on the telomer backbone. The same group also utilized DNA strands containing programmed sequence-specific domains synthesized by a rolling circle amplification process as the templates and gold nanoparticles functionalized with glucose oxidase as the seeds to prepare Au wires with a length of 1–5 μm and a width of 150 nm.127 The enzyme-produced H2O2 acted as a reducing agent to induce the reduction of AuCl41− on the surface of the seeds, leading to the formation of metal wires.
Recently, this method was extended to site-specific metallization onto complex DNA nanostructures, such as DNA origamis. Finkelstein et al. fabricated DNA origami templates with binding sites that had free ssDNA.128 Then, complementary DNA-functionalized gold nanoparticles could be attached to these binding sites. After a subsequent silver deposition, various metallic structures, such as pairs of bars, H shapes, and rings, could be produced. Using a similar process, Harb and coworkers performed metallization selectively on a T-shaped DNA origami to produce Au nanowires.129–131 The site-special deposition of multiple metals on a single DNA origami could also be achieved using this method.132 Besides using short DNA-immobilized metal nanoparticles as nucleation sites, Kim et al. reported the utilization of thiol-tagged DNA-binding peptide (DBP-SH: KWKWKKA-SH) to introduce metal seeds onto the DNA backbone.133
Overall, this selective DNA metallization method would be particularly useful in cases of fabricating metallic nanostructures on complicated DNA templates. Many parameters, such as the binding sites of the seeds on the DNA templates, the relative amount of the seeds and the DNA templates, and the metallization kinetics, still need to be optimized to increase the overall yield while avoiding nonspecific metal deposition.

3.6 Other methods
Different from wet-chemistry approaches, Bezyradin et al. used a physical method for the metallization of suspended DNA molecules by sputter deposition.134 With this method, they fabricated nanowires with diameters as thin as 3 to 4 molecules. Compared to metal nanowires made by the wet-chemistry method, their nanowires were more homogeneous. However, the method had no selectivity as the process involved the sputter disposition of metallic films over the DNA molecules as well as over the substrate surfaces.
Kundu et al. tried to use a microwave-heating method for the DNA-templated growth of gold nanowires, where the DNA served as a reducing and capping agent and no other additives were required.135 The process was really fast and only needed 120–180 s to be completed. Importantly, this method exhibited high selectivity in depositing gold on DNA chains, either in solution or immobilized on a solid substrate. For more complicated DNA templates, their stability under microwave irradiation needs to be considered when using this method.
4. Flexible nanofabrication
Based on the above reviewed synthetic methods, up to now, metal nanomaterials with different compositions, sizes, morphologies, and other physiochemical properties have been fabricated with DNA metallization. Specially, the enriched DNA libraries provide perfect protocols to control the properties of the resulting nanometals. To make this section more clearly understandable, we summarize the flexible nanofabrication in terms of the dimensions of the metal nanomaterials. At the same time, the changes in the electronic, optical, electrical, and magnetic properties of the metal nanostructures dependent on the DNA sequence, length, and conformation are highlighted.
4.1 Zero-dimensional metal nanomaterials
Zero-dimensional metal nanomaterials, including nanoclusters and nanoparticles, with high stability, good dispersibility, and specific properties can be easily fabricated by fine tuning the metal ion/base stoichiometry, DNA sequences or conformations, reaction kinetics, and other parameters.

4.1.1 Metal nanoclusters. 
Metal nanoclusters composed of a few to several tens or hundreds of metal atoms are a class of materials considered as intermediates between metal atoms and nanoparticles (which have diameters greater than 2 nm).136–139 They have received broad interest owing to their unique fluorescent, optical, electronic, electric, and catalytic properties, which make them attractive for application in many areas, such as imaging, catalysis, and sensing.136–139 DNA scaffolds provide spatial constraints for the controlled growth of clusters, whose properties can be flexibly modulated by the sequences and length of the DNA structures. To date, DNA oligonucleotides have been widely employed as efficient ligands to synthesize Ag, Au, Pd, Cu, and alloy nanoclusters.
4.1.1.1 Silver nanoclusters. 
Silver clusters were significantly developed by Henglein et al. in the early 1990s and have received more attention after Dickson and others reported the pioneering works related to small fluorescent Ag nanoclusters (AgNCs).140–143 In particular, for the first time, by utilizing 12-base ssDNA oligomers as the template and slowing down the formation kinetics, Dickson and coworkers reported a time-dependent formation of AgNCs with sizes ranging from Ag1 to Ag4 per oligonucleotide, which had strong and characteristic electronic transitions between 400 and 600 nm (Fig. 9A).144 After that, they reported a bright, near-infrared-emitting (Em ≈ 700 nm) AgNCs templated by 12 cytosine base-containing ssDNA that showed excellent photostability, high emission rates, strong antibunching, and essentially no intensity fluctuations on experimentally relevant time scales.145 Lately, by utilizing C-rich and T-rich 12-base ssDNAs to formulate silver clusters, Jeffrey et al. found that the fluorescence changed with the variations of the solution pH, suggesting that the AgNCs were associated with the N3 of cytosine and thymine, respectively.146–148 Moreover, they found that DNA-templated AgNCs also exhibited two-photon-excited fluorescence intensity far exceeding the best water-soluble two-photon dyes.149 Recently, the upconversion emission of AgNCs was reported by Shao's group, who studied the effect of DNA sequences on the upconversion luminescence of AgNCs.150 Compared to conventional rare-earth-based upconversion nanomaterials,151–153 the easy modification of the DNA templates allowed their templated nanoclusters to be used in a broad range of applications.
 Fig. 9  DNA-templated synthesis of silver nanoclusters. (A) Synthesis of 12-base ssDNA oligomer-templated silver nanoclusters with characteristic electronic transitions between 400 and 600 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (B) Tuning the optical properties of silver nanoclusters on DNA templates with different conformations (19-base oligomer). Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Following Dickson's pioneering work,144 Gwinn and coworkers used a series of 19-base DNA oligomers, such as complementary G and C strands, and hairpin oligomers having A, T, C, G loops with 7-base pair stems that close 5-identical-base loops to host AgNCs (Fig. 9B).154 Strikingly different fluorescence spectra were found with different oligomer-templated AgNCs. Both C- and G-strands produced brightly fluorescent AgNCs; however, the complementary duplex produced negligible visible fluorescence even with attached Ag present. More interestingly, by comparing the relative capacities of A, T, C, and G loops to host fluorescent clusters, they found that C- and G-loop exhibited a similar brightness fluorescence. As for A-loop hosted clusters, a much weaker fluorescence was observed. On the other hand, T loop solutions produced no fluorescence for excitation at visible wavelengths. Further comparisons indicated that the primary fluorescence peak for the C-strand and G-strand was about three and five times brighter than that for the C and G loops, respectively. These findings suggest that the fluorescence spectra of AgNCs can be controlled by tuning the base and secondary structure of the DNA strands, which may ultimately contribute to achieving sequence-programmed optical properties with nanometer-scale resolution.
In addition to tuning the fluorescence spectra of AgNCs by changing the sequences of the ssDNA templates, the variation of the microenvironment of nucleotides around AgNCs induced by hybridization, base mismatch, site mutation, or conformational changes also provides a new way to modulate their optical properties.17 In such cases, AgNCs can be fabricated with more complicated DNA structures, such as duplex/triplex DNAs, i-motifs, and G-quadraplexes. For instance, Wang and coworkers utilized cytosine loops inserted DNA duplexes as scaffolds to synthesize AgNCs, whose fluorescent properties were influenced by the distance between the C6 loop and the mutation site as well as the distance between the base pairs away and the mutation site.155 Our group created fluorescent AgNCs using mismatched dsDNA templates, where the AgNCs were found to locate in the mismatched site without affecting the integrity of the metallized DNA.156 The fluorescence intensities were influenced by the mismatched bases in the order of T–C > T–G > T–T. Also, our group reported the first work synthesizing Ag nanoclusters with triplex DNA at a predefined position of CG·C+.157,158 By utilizing DNA stands containing AgNC nucleation sequences and target recognizing sequences, Jeffrey et al. reported many works to tune the emission of the AgNCs by hybridization with the target sequence as the target strand to restore the favored cluster environment.148 Shao et al. synthesized AgNCs with selective sizes at DNA abasic sites in a constrained duplex environment with an opposed cytosine and two flanked guanines.159 In their research, they found that the emissions of the AgNCs were gradually red-shifted as the sequence one base away from the AP site changed from T to C, A, and G. Also, larger emission shifts were observed for templates with 3′-side sequences of the 5′-G stack directly flanking the AP site rather than those with 5′-side sequences of the 3′-G stack, which could be attributed to the variations in the dipole moments of the guanines directly flanking the AP site induced by base-stacking.
From all these above studies, it can be seen that both the template sequence and the microenvironment nearby the nucleation sites have a strong effect on the optical properties of the AgCNs. Also, it can be concluded that C- and G-rich DNA strands favor the formation of fluorescent AgNCs, but most of these DNA templates are designed based on the experimental testing of oligomers with sequences selected by informed guessing. To address this challenge, Gwinn and coworkers proposed a powerful approach that combined large array data sets with computational machine learning tools to identify ‘base motifs’ that could stabilize fluorescent AgNCs.160 The motif-based method could effectively design DNA templates for generating brightly fluorescent AgNCs.
4.1.1.2 Gold nanoclusters. 
Compared to AgNCs, which can be oxidized, gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) are more stable. The fluorescence of AuNCs depends on the size via a spherical jellium model, with a scaling relation of EFermi/N1/3 for the emission energy, where EFermi represents the Fermi level of the gold element and N is the number of Au atoms composing the AuNCs.161 Typically, AuNCs have been prepared by etching preformed gold nanoparticles with small molecule or macromolecules as well as by the direct reduction of gold precursors using different ligands, such as thiol compounds, dendrimers, peptides, and proteins.162–166 Inspired by a previous etching method, in 2009, Zhou et al. utilized duplex DNA to etch gold nanoparticles and nanorods under sonication to prepare AuNCs with defined chemical components (Au8, ‘magic’ clusters, Fig. 10A).167
 Fig. 10  Synthesis of fluorescent gold nanoclusters on DNA templates. (A) Generation of gold nanoclusters by etching gold nanorods with DNA molecules. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Fabrication of gold nanoclusters on homopolymeric DNA oligomers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although favorable interactions between AuNCs with DNA bases or base pairs have been studied by density functional theory (DFT) for years,168–170 the utilization of DNA as a template to reduce the Au precursor for synthesizing AuNCs is not as popular as DNA-templated AgNCs, which was only proposed relatively recently in 2012 by Liu's and Shao's groups, respectively.171,172 This is due to the template DNA needing to bind strongly to gold precursors, yet the most commonly used gold source is HAuCl4, thus the negative charge of both DNA and AuCl4− does not facilitate their interactions. To this end, Liu and coworkers proposed that favorable interactions between DNA and AuCl4− could be achieved at low pH.171 With three DNA homopolymers (A30, T30, and C30) as the templates, they prepared AuNCs at pHs between 3 and 7 using citrate as a reducing agent. They found that C30 DNA could produce fluorescence only at low pH with a large excess of DNA, while the highest fluorescence was observed for A30 with the ratio between A30 and HAuCl4 being 1:30. However, no fluorescence was produced by T30 DNA. It was concluded that the pH, stoichiometry, and sequence requirements might be related to the coordination interactions between the bases and Au (Fig. 10B).
At the same time, Shao's group employed single-stranded DNAs with the sequences of 5′-GAGGCGCTGCCYCCACCATGAGC-3′ (named 23-Ys, Y = C, A, G, and T) as the template and dimethylamine borane as a mild reducing agent to quantify the right conditions for synthesizing AuNCs in weakly acidic PBS buffer (pH 4.4).172 Red fluorescent AuNCs (Ex = 467 nm, Em = 725 nm) could be prepared using 23-C as the template. Meanwhile, the solution pH, the choice of reductant, the DNA sequences, and the DNA lengths all played key roles in modulating the fluorescent properties of the AuNCs. Then in 2013, Shao and coworkers further utilized hairpin DNAs with varied loop sequences as hosts to systematically investigate the fluorescent properties of the AuNCs.173 Among the DNA templates, the cytosine loop was the most efficient to produce fluorescent AuNCs. Compared to cytosine and guanine loops-templated AuNCs, those produced on thymine and adenine loops showed much weaker emissions. They also demonstrated that the emission of AuNCs templated by ssDNAs with identical sequences of hairpin loops also exhibited a cytosine-rich dependence, whereas fully matched DNAs showed less efficiency than the corresponding loop and ssDNA structures. They attributed these results to the differences in binding nucleophilicity of the DNA heterocyclic nitrogen and the exocyclic keto groups to the hydrolyzed Au(III) species. These pioneering works highlighted how there remains broad room for further exploring the parameters controlling DNA-templated AuNCs with different optical properties.
4.1.1.3 Palladium nanoclusters. 
Pd nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼5–8 nm were easily synthesized with natural fish DNA sperm or calf thymus DNA as templates;174–176 however, the synthesis of sub-nano Pd nanoclusters (PdNCs) has been rarely reported. This is because the strong electrostatic interactions between Pd ions with DNA's negatively charged backbones make it hard to control the reaction kinetics to fabricate PdNCs of less than 1 nm. Based on the versatile chemical structures of DNAs, Li's group reported a facile method to synthesize sub-nano PdNCs by leveraging i-motif DNA as the template.177 DFT calculations disclosed that the CH+·C pairs can effectively ligate the negatively charged Pd complex ions at the N3 sites of cytosines. By reduction with NaBH4, PdNCs consisting of metallic Pd atoms and positively charged Pd atoms ligated by nucleobases were obtained. By increasing the [Pd]/[base] ratio from 0.2 to 0.5, and 2.6, PdNCs with sizes of Pd1–Pd5, Pd8–Pd9 and 2.6 nm were formed, respectively. This work suggested a facile pathway to fabricate sub-nano metal clusters from the point of view of green chemistry and ecofriendliness in comparison with previous methods.
4.1.1.4 Copper nanoclusters. 
Copper is widely used in our daily life and in industries due to it being highly conductive and quite inexpensive. However, compared to the extensive studies on AgNCs and AuNCs, few attempts have been made to synthesize Cu nanoclusters (CuNCs), as single-nanosized Cu inherently suffers from unstable colloidal stability and easy surface oxidation.138 In particular, it is difficult to control the size, as the obtained copper nanoparticles generated by traditional methods are generally larger than 10 nm in diameter.178 In this context, Wang and colleagues reported that by utilizing 15-mer dsDNA as the template, CuNCs with a size of less than 2 nm could be synthesized by reducing Cu(NO3)2 with ascorbic acid.179 By utilizing a single-nucleotide-mismatched DNA, they found that the fluorescent intensity of the resulting CuNCs was increased twice compared to that formed on full duplexes, which could be attributed to the differences in the DNAs’ electron-donating capacities. After further exploiting the possible mechanisms, they concluded that both the length and the situated mutation position of the DNA templates played important roles in the fluorescent properties of the CuNCs. These findings shed light on the synthesis of CuNCs with different properties by varying the DNA templates for specific applications.
4.1.1.5 Alloy nanoclusters. 
Substituting one or several atoms in the nanoclusters with heteroatoms of other metal elements offers an interesting method to tune the optical, electronic, and catalytic properties of nanoclusters as well as to better understand the stability and other aspects of nanoclusters.180 The utilization of DNA as a template to fabricate alloy nanoclusters (ALNCs) also provides an exciting opportunity to tune their properties. Chang and coworkers found that with the introduction of Cu(II) ions to a solution containing DNA (5′-CCCTTAATCCCC-3′) and Ag(I) ions, the fluorescence of the solution was stronger than that without the addition of Cu(II) ions.181,182 Meanwhile, the absorbance and emission wavelength changed only slightly. Interestingly, it took a much shorter time to finish the reaction. By investigating the DNA conformations of the final DNA–Cu/Ag nanoclusters, it was suggested that a more rigid structure of the DNA templates existed in the hybrids. This had the consequence that the Cu–Ag ALNCs were protected more completely by the DNA ligands and exhibited better resistance to the environmental quenching. After that, the same group reported a one-pot method to prepare fluorescent DNA-templated Au/Ag ALNCs, which remained highly stable in high ionic strength media. Different from Cu/Ag ALNCs, the Au/Ag ALNCs had a longer emission wavelength than that of pure AgNCs (630 vs. 530 nm).183 Also, they found that the DNA with the sequence 5′-CCCTTAATCCCC-3′ over other DNAs (e.g., 5′-CCCCCCCCCCCC-3′ and 5′-CCCTCTTAACCC-3′) allowed fabricating Au/Ag ALNCs with stronger emission. Recently, Yang and coworkers developed a facile one-step method to prepare Ag/Pt ALNCs on a C-rich DNA template.184 By taking advantage of the versatility of using DNA as a template, ALNCs that possessed superior properties over their monometallic counterparts could be easily fabricated.


4.1.2 Metal nanoparticles. 
Looking in depth, one could see that in Braun's as well as in others’ works, the DNA-templated metal nanowires were in fact chains of continually clustered nanoparticles stacked on the long DNA contour. That's to say, metal nanoparticles could be easily fabricated with shorter DNAs by maintaining the metal growth at the second step of the chemical reduction processes, as proved by our and other groups. Interestingly, recent studies reported that the DNA sequences could tune the growth, morphology, and physical properties of the resulting metal nanoparticles, which will be mainly summarized in this subsection.
4.1.2.1 Silver nanoparticles. 
AgNPs are important building blocks for sensors, optical devices, electronics, catalysis, and antibiotics.185–187 Intensive studies have clearly shown that the properties and performance of AgNPs are strongly correlated to their physical parameters, including size, morphology, and surface coating. In the past decades, great efforts have been paid to synthesize various AgNPs by different methods.185–187 Therewith, DNA has also showed its versatility as a template in directing the synthesis of AgNPs. For instance, we and others have synthesized AgNPs with diameters ranging from 2 to 250 nm by using short dsDNA and ssDNA, G-quadruplex, telomeric repeats, ctDNA, and DNA networks as templates.188–197
Li and Lu's group pushed the boundaries of this technique further in 2014, when they used ssDNA as a modulator to tune the morphological evolution of silver nanocubes.198 By using silver nanocubes as seeds, AgNPs with edge-truncated octahedral structures of different truncation extents and truncated tetrahedral structures were obtained in the presence of 10-mer oligo-A, -T, and -C short DNAs, respectively. In contrast, the addition of oligo G-DNA showed no effect on the AgNPs, which remained as nanocubes. A systemic study of the growth process suggested that both the binding affinity of the bases with the Ag surface and the secondary structure of DNA oligomers played critical roles in directing the growth of the silver deposition.
The ability of DNA to template and direct the growth of AgNPs would not only broaden the choices of synthetic methods but also open up the possibility of synthesizing feature-rich AgNPs for many user-specified purposes.
4.1.2.2 Gold nanoparticles. 
Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have been widely studied for several decades owing to their fascinating electronic, catalytic, plasmonic, and optical properties, which can be tuned by the variation in their morphologies and sizes.199,200
In this sense, by covalently modifying thiol–DNA on small AuNPs, Suh and Nam's group demonstrated that well-defined gold nanobridged nanogap particles (AuNNPs) with highly stable and reproducible surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) signals could be easily fabricated.201 In their further work (Fig. 11A),202 they established the principles and methods for synthesizing AuNNPs with various Au shell morphologies and interior nanogaps based on different DNA modifications. In their experiments, first, they introduced four different DNA sequences (HS-A10, HS-C10, HS-G10, and HS-T10) to investigate how the DNA bases affect the AuNNP structures. Due to the different binding affinity of the bases toward the gold surfaces,203 the amount of DNA attached on the AuNP surfaces were different. From a structural viewpoint, the more DNA absorbed on the AuNP surface, the less nucleation sites were left for further metal deposition, and thus the more regular the nanogap was. Second, they studied the effect the length of the thiol–DNA had on the formation of the interior nanogap, and found that it was the DNA sequence close to the thiol–Au bond (inner part) that dominantly controlled the final AuNNP structures. Finally, by controlling the number of DNA stands on the AuNP seeds, more distinctive nanogaps were formulated at higher DNA grafting densities. Their strategy offered a synthetic platform to generate tailorable metal nanostructures beyond AuNPs. Later on, the same group also studied the effect of reaction conditions, such as pH and NaCl concentration, on the shell morphologies and nanogap sizes, since these two factors both influenced the conformation of DNA templates and the stability of Au ions.204
 Fig. 11  Tuning the morphologies of gold nanostructures with DNA templates. (A) Systematic study of the formation of gold nanogap structures using a series of thiolated DNA with different bases and sequences. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (B) Synchrotron-based small-angle X-ray scattering measurements and scattering model to investigate the DNA-controlled growth of gold nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) Schematic illustration of DNA-tuned metal deposition onto spherical gold nanoseeds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic summarization of controlled metal growth from Au nanoprism seeds using homogeneous DNA oligomers and DNA with combined bases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Fan and Chen's group (Fig. 11B) combined synchrotron-based small-angle X-ray scattering and TEM to illustrate the dependence of the AuNP nanostructure's size, surface, morphology, and optical properties on the dynamic and stoichiometric control of DNA-mediated growth.205 By keeping the reducing agent in excess and simultaneously controlling the concentration of the gold precursor, they could halt the reaction at five successive stages to obtain different kinds of gold nanostructures with different sizes and shapes. But at each stage, the nanoparticles all had uniform and hollow nanogaps between the core and shell, indicating the coverage of DNA on the gold seeds prevented further Au deposition.
Inspired by the discovery of the three-letter genetic codes for protein synthesis, Lu and coworkers aimed to decipher the “genetic codes” for controlling the morphology of nanomaterials.200 In 2010, by noncovalently absorbing three types of 30-mer DNAs (poly A–A30, poly C–C30, poly T–T30) onto 20 nm AuNPs, Lu's group (Fig. 11C) investigated the effect of DNA sequences on AuNP morphology during crystal growth.206 They found that flower-shaped AuNPs were formed with the assistance of poly A and poly C, while spherical AuNPs were obtained in the presence of poly T. By varying the number of the absorbed DNA, they found that the AuNP shape became flower-like with the increased amount of DNA adsorbed, suggesting that the DNA with a chain-like structure was able to direct the deposition of the reduced gold metal on the AuNPs. They hypothesized that the formulation of the gold nanoflowers was due to either the selective deposition of reduced gold metal to the surface-adsorbed DNA or an uneven growth of AuNP due to the binding of DNA to the surface.
Encouraged by these results, they further explored the effect of different combinations of DNA sequences on the morphology of the Au nanomaterials.207 They utilized gold nanoprisms with a 〈111〉 facet at the top and bottom flat surfaces and stacking faults on the side faces as the seeds. After incubation with oligo dA30, oligo dT30, oligo dC30, or oligo dG20, and the further addition of HAuCl4 and a reducing agent, round nanoplates with rough surfaces, six-pointed stars, nanoplates with smooth surfaces, and hexagonal nanoplates were, respectively, obtained. Due to the fact that different DNA bases bind to the Au surface differently and as the Au nanoprism are anisotropic, the binding of DNA with different facets can direct the growth in different directions. More interestingly, by further dividing the DNA oligomers into two segments while fixing the length at 30 nt, the residues compete or synergize with each other in controlling the final morphology. Based on these phenomena, they summarized a series of rules of how homogenous or mixed DNA stands governed the morphology and shape growth of the AuNPs (Fig. 11D). Later on, they further conducted a systematic study to investigate the mechanism behind the DNA-mediated AuNP growth from Au nanoprisms.208 The evolution of the AuNPs was proposed to proceed via two stages: first, by growing into different shapes, determined by the binding affinity of DNA toward AuNPs and the DNA concentration used during the growth process, and second, by growing in thickness, depending on the amount of the Au precursor remaining in the solution after the shape has developed.
In a recent work carried out in a collaboration between Lu's and Liang's groups, another anisotropic Au nanomaterial, specifically gold nanorods (AuNRs), was used as the seeds and their overgrowth and plasmonic properties tuned by different DNA sequences was studied.209 Similar to the processes where AuNPs were used as seeds, AuNRs were first incubated with 20-mer homooligomer (A20, G20, C20, and T20) and then deposited with gold, resulting in AuNPs varying from dumbbell-shaped to octahedron nanostructures as well as shapes in between. Kinetic studies of the growth process disclosed that two representative pathways controlled the evolution of the nanostructures. No matter what sequences were used, the growth started from the ends of AuNRs; but the further growth was related to the binding affinity of DNA to the gold surface, where a stronger binding affinity led to less growth in the diameter.
Thus, by virtue of the binding differences of DNA bases with Au surfaces and Au precursors, as well as the versatility of the DNA sequences design or base modification, it should be easy to fabricate Au nanostructures with desired morphologies and optical properties based on DNA-templated metallization.
4.1.2.3 Copper nanoparticles. 
Copper nanoparticles (CuNPs) are of great interest to researchers as they have shown great potential in various areas, such as antifouling, electronic, catalytic, and optical applications.178 Although the nonspecific deposition of Cu on DNA templates was reported in 2003 to fabricate nanowires, the selective metallization of specific regions of dsDNA with copper nanoparticles not performed, until it was proposed seven years later by Mokhir and coworkers.79 In their work, copper(II) ions were reduced by ascorbate in the presence of dsDNA templates, and fluorescent CuNPs were obtained with Ex = 340 nm and Em = 587–600 nm. However, no CuNPs supported on ssDNA were observed. By increasing the length of the dsDNA templates, larger CuNPs with a higher fluorescent quantum yield were generated. As for dsDNA with a single nucleotide mismatch, no CuNPs were formulated. Different from previous studies where DNA were first incubated with metal salts and then reducing agents, in this work, they found that it was important to mix Cu(II) with a reducing agent before the addition of DNA templates. They hypothesized that the DNA-templated CuNPs were formed in two steps: Cu(II) was first reduced to Cu(I); second, the Cu(I) underwent disproportionation into Cu(II) and Cu(0), where Cu(0) was clustered on dsDNA to formulate nanoparticles.
Later on, Wang and colleagues reported the controlled copper metallization on specific sections of ssDNAs. By using five kinds of 20-mer ssDNA, namely random ssDNA, polyA, polyT, polyC, and polyG, it was found that only the solution containing polyT emitted fluorescence at 615 nm upon excitation with 340 nm UV light. Nevertheless, for solutions containing the other four ssDNA, no fluorescence was observed. By further varying the length of polyT, similar to Mokir's work, an increase in CuNP size was observed for longer ssDNA templates. Moreover, by leveraging heterogeneous ssDNA containing different length polyT segments and other bases, at least 20 consecutive T bases were needed for generating fluorescent CuNPs.210 They reasoned that the generation of CuNPs on polyT templates could be attributed to the binding interactions between Cu(II) and thymine. Based on Mokir's and their own work, Wang's group further investigated how the sequence composition of dsDNA controlled the growth of fluorescent CuNPs. It was found that poly(AT–TA) could act as a highly effective template.211 In addition, the fluorescent intensity of the resulting CuNPs was positively correlated with the length and polymerization degree of poly(AT–TA).
With those advantages, it is possible to produce more complex metal structures on DNA superstructure templates, as Cu metallization can be conducted selectively on dsDNA strands or segments of ssDNA strands with specific sequences. Also, by proper designing the DNA templates, copper-metallized DNAs can be further used as building blocks to construct functional nanodevices. Moreover, by utilizing the preformed CuNPs on DNA templates as seeds, various complicated alloy metal nanostructures can also be expected.
4.1.2.4 Bimetallic nanoparticles. 
Bimetallic nanoparticles, composed of two different metal elements, are of greater interest than monometallic ones in terms of their enhanced catalytic, optical, and magnetic properties, because of the synergistic effect between the two metals.1,212,213 Thanks to the contributions of many researchers, numerous protocols have been developed to produce bimetallic nanoparticles with well-defined features.1,212 In this regard, the leveraging of DNA as a template to direct the growth of alloy nanometals or the deposition of one metal onto another provides a flexible toolbox of techniques to fabricate bimetallic nanoparticles with tunable properties. By using DNA as both a ligand and reducing agent, Liu's group fabricated core–shell Ag–Au bimetallic nanoparticles via a sequential sunlight-induced deposition process, where the core size and shell thickness of the bimetallic nanoparticles could be easily controlled;214 while Fu's group proposed a one-pot method to fabricate alloyed Au–Pt bimetallic nanoparticles via using C-rich oligonucleotide as the templates.215 By using DNA hydrogel as a template, Taniguchi et al. demonstrated an easy method for the fabrication of core–shell or Ag/Au alloy nanoparticles by the sequential or simultaneous addition of the metal precursors.216
Beside the in situ deposition of metal on a DNA scaffold, Nam and coworkers modified mono-thiolated DNA with a spacer sequence (A10-polethylene glycol) on the AuNP surface to direct the heterogeneous growth of a silver shell.217,218 By properly tuning the spacer sequence and the amount of silver precursors, DNA-embedded Au/Ag core/shell bimetallic nanoparticles with different shell thicknesses and plasmonic properties could be synthesized. Besides, the exposed DNA segments on the silver shell conferred the bimetallic nanoparticles with excellent stability and a biorecognition ability. Using a similar reaction system, they also found that asymmetric bimetallic nanoparticles with Au–Ag head–body nanosnowman structures were formulated by lowering the NaCl concentration.219,220 A mechanistic study suggested that at lower salt concentrations, the lowered salt around AuNPs reduced the repulsive forces between the DNA strands, making the DNA structures less uniform on the AuNP surfaces. Such a DNA conformation on the AuNP surfaces facilitated the introduction of Ag–PVP in a certain direction, thus leading to an asymmetric growth of the silver body.
Just as tuning the growth of monometallic nanoparticles have been studied by Lu and coworker, recently they challenged themselves to control the shape of DNA-templated Pd–Au bimetallic nanoparticles by using Pd nanocubes as the seeds.221 They found that the presence of four different 10-base homo-oligomer DNA strands containing A, T, C, or G led to the formation of rhombicuboctahedron, cuboctahedron core frame, cuboctahedron, and uneven surface-coated cube nanoparticles, respectively. Through detailed investigations, they inferred that the DNA sequences controlled the morphologies via affecting the binding affinity with the facets on the Pd nanocube seeds as well as the diffusion of metal precursors from the solution onto the seed surfaces.
From a simple templated synthesis to precisely directing the evolution of bimetallic nanoparticles, these works imply that DNA can allow researchers to finely control the bimetallic nanoparticle structures and to synthesize more complex hybrid metal nanomaterials with various functional properties.


4.1.3 Growth of metal nanoparticles on heterogeneous surfaces. 
The deposition of metal nanoparticles on carbon materials, including graphene oxide, reduced graphene oxide, carbon nanotubes, has been demonstrated to improve the stability, lifetime, and catalytic performance of the metal materials.222–224 However, the poor dispersion of most carbon materials as well as the difficulty in controlling the size and shape of metal nanoparticles by traditional complicated synthetic methods make it difficult to prepare hybrid materials with the anticipated properties. To address these issues, by taking advantage of the adsorption of DNA on carbon surfaces via π–π stacking and the versatility of DNA in mediating nanometal synthesis, the DNA-templated growth of metal nanoparticles with ultrafine sizes on carbon surfaces could be easily realized. Besides, DNA at the same time could act as a stabilizer to enhance the stability of the metal/carbon hybrid materials in aqueous solutions. For instance, our group first reported the synthesis of Pd nanoparticles on graphene by using calf thymus DNA (ctDNA) as a mediator.225 By subsequently heating ctDNA at 95 °C for 1 h, incubating with graphene oxide and hydrazine at 100 °C for another hour, ctDNA adsorbed reduced graphene oxide was obtained. Then, after the addition of H2PdCl4 and NaBH4, isolated and ultrafine PdNPs with uniform sizes of about 4.8 nm were formed on the reduced graphene oxide surfaces (Fig. 12A). Almost at the same time, Li's group reported the utilization of 200-base DNA to template the deposition of Pd nanocrystals with an average size of 3.4 nm on the surface of carbon nanotubes (Fig. 12B).175 Later on, Kim's group employed plant genomic dsDNA to direct the growth of Pt nanoparticles on graphene oxide surfaces (Fig. 12C).226,227 Tan's group reported the synthesis of uniformly sized Au, Ag, Cu, Pt, and Au/Cu/Pt alloy nanoparticles on graphene oxide surfaces by using short dsDNA with ssDNA hangs as the template.228,229 In another recent report, Yan's group proposed the DNA-assisted deposition of well-dispersed and ultrafine CoAuPd alloy nanoparticles on the graphene surfaces.230
 Fig. 12  DNA-metallization-assisted deposition of metal nanoparticles on heterogeneous surfaces. (A) Synthesis of Pd nanoparticels on calf thymus DNA-modified graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (B) Deposition of Pd nanocrystals on DNA absorbed carbon nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) Genomic DNA-directed Pt nanoparticle nucleation on graphene oxide surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
Besides growing metal nanoparticles on carbon surfaces, DNA has also been utilized to template metal nanoparticle nucleation on other surfaces, such as electrode surfaces, mesoporous silica particle surfaces, and carbon nanotubes.193,231–233 These studies imply that leveraging the respective synergistic interaction between DNA with different surfaces and metal ions represents a unique strategy toward synthesizing metal nanoparticle-based hybrid materials whose component parts can intimately engage and augment one another.


4.1.4 Chiral metal nanoparticles. 
Chirality is not strictly limited to organic molecules, but also appears in any object, ranging from nano/microstructures to macroscopic structures.234 Of particular interest, since the first work reported by Whetten and Schaaff, who discovered CD signals in the electronic transitions of small gold clusters protected by L-glutathione molecules,235 the induction of chiroptical effects at the plasmonic and excitonic resonances of achiral metal nanoparticles capped with and/or formed in the presence of chiral molecules has been widely studied.235 Based on the intrinsic chirality of DNA endowed by their helical structures, DNA has shown great potential for constructing chiral metal nanostructures via surface modification, self-assembly, or templated metallization. As mentioned above, Dickson and coworkers reported the first work of utilizing DNA to synthesize AgNCs.144 In fact, this was the first time the appearance of a chiroptical response in the AgNCs was observed, whereby they evidenced the binding of AgNCs to the DNA scaffold. Unfortunately, they did not further explore the origin of this phenomenon. Later on, Markovich and Kotlyar's group reported (Fig. 13A) the synthesis of chiral AgNPs by reducing Ag(I) ions bound to base pairs of polyG–polyC or polyA–polyT.236 As no CD signals were observed for AgNPs, which were separately prepared and complexed with DNA afterward, they confirmed that the chirality of AgNPs was induced during the metallization process in the helical DNA environment. On the basis of the three possible reasons explaining the chiroptical effects of AuNCs suggested by Schaaf and Whetten, they speculated that the formation of chiral AuNPs was due to the influence of the chiral DNA ligand on the formation of the nanoparticles. Then, in their further study, by cutting the polyA–polyT DNA templates with DNase to separate the DNA and AgNPs, no elimination of the CD signals of the particles was observed (Fig. 13B).237 They concluded that the induction of the chirality of the DNA–AgNPs was based on the weak multibase-Ag interactions, which was different from the optical activities of AuNCs induced by L-glutathione.
 Fig. 13  Synthesis of chiral metal nanoparticles with DNA metallization. (A) Circular dichroism response of silver nanoparticles grown on poly(G–C) double strand DNA templates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (B) Cutting of the DNA template with DNase showed no effect on the chiroptical response of the separated DNA-coated silver nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (C) Preparation of chiral optically active gold–silver core–shell nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To fabricate DNA-templated individual nanoparticles with strong chiroplasmonic activity, Kuang and colleagues synthesized Au core–DNA–silver shell nanoparticles with Ag grown on the DNA template pre-attached on AuNP surfaces (Fig. 13C).238 AuNPs seeds were first modified with an excess of thiolated cytosine-rich (C30) ssDNA to maximally saturate the binding sites of AuNP surfaces. Then, Ag(I) ions were bound to the C30 ssDNA to form a metal complex. Centrifugation was conducted before reducing the Ag(I) to Ag shells. By tuning the Ag(I) concentrations, the final shell thickness varied correspondingly. With increasing the shell thickness, both the Ag plasmon resonance band at 400 nm and the D signal at 413 nm increased. Specially, when the Ag shell was 8.0 ± 0.6 nm thick, the CD signal at 420 nm reached 105 ± 2.3 mdeg with a chiral anisotropy factor equal to 0.0193. This is impressive for individual nanoparticles since the anisotropy factor value was about 1 order of magnitude higher than that of plasmonic or nonplasmonic nanoclusters or nanoparticles. The chiral plasmonic optical activity was likely due to two factors: (1) DNA–plasmon interactions, including the orientation of the DNA molecule and the embedding of the DNA; and (2) the coupling and plasmonic oscillation between the core and shell, which further magnified the plasmonic CD signal.
These studies highlight the promising potential of using DNA metallization to direct the synthesis of various chiral nanometals for various applications, including enantioselective catalysis, and chiral sensing or recognition. Importantly, in-depth studies are needed to clarify the origin of the chiral CD signals based on DNA metallization.

4.2 One-dimensional metal nanomaterials
The controllable synthesis of one-dimensional (1D) metal nanomaterials (nanorods, nanowires, nanobelts, and nanotubes) has aroused broad interest due to their special optical, magnetic, electronic transport, and mechanical properties upon confinement.239 Specially, nanorods and nanowires play important roles as both interconnecting and active components in fabricating nano/micro-scale circuitries and nano/microdevices (e.g., chips, transistors, and computing devices). Generally, conventional methods, such as lithography, vapor deposition, and solution-based synthesis, are complicated, expensive, and it is difficult to control the arranging direction.240 Encouraged by pioneering work using λ-DNA as a template for synthesizing Ag nanowires, various 1D metal nanomaterials have been obtained by using a DNA template. In particular, based on the availability of numerous currently well-developed techniques regarding the chemical modification, assembly, and structure tailoring of DNA templates, it would be easy to tailor the growth of metal nanowires at desired locations with a predesigned length.

4.2.1 Metal nanorods. 
Strictly speaking, the employment of DNA for the templated synthesis of metal nanorods has rarely been reported. Although Woolley and coworkers reported a straightforward method to prepare 1D metal nanostructures and for the first time called them nanorods, in fact, these nanomaterials were nanowires composed of clustered nanoparticles.241 Encouraged by Woolley's study, Li and coworkers fabricated silver nanorods (AgNRs) by utilizing DNA networks that had tailorable pores as the template.194 By tuning the pore size of the DNA networks around 18.94 ± 5.89 nm and by dipping the silver absorbed network into a solution of reducing agents, AgNRs with a length and diameter of 117.84 and 9.38 nm were obtained. They explained that the AgNRs were formed via a two-step process. In the first step, small silver nanoparticles were formed on the network of DNA templates and then the twinned nanoparticles acted as the seeds to induce the growth of nanorods via recrystallization. Compared to the above-mentioned conventional synthesis method, this approach is rather simple. More studies are still desired to fully exploit the potential of utilizing DNA as a template to tune the growth of ultrafine metal nanorods.


4.2.2 Linear metal nanowires. 
In order to simultaneously take advantage of the programmable ability and to overcome the inherent low conductivity of DNA for constructing nanometer-scale electronics, Braun et al. proposed the first work for fabricating AgNWs on assembled dsDNAs.7 After that, similar DNA metallization schemes have been shown to be suitable for the fabrication of various electrically conductive DNA-templated nanowires made of palladium, platinum, copper, gold, rhodium, and alloys, as summarized in Table 1. However, such nanowires tended to exhibit low conductivity compared with their bulk counterparts, which might be caused by the nanocrystalline character, non-uniformity, internal grain boundaries, ill-aggregated branches, or necklace of the obtained nanostructures. To improve the conductivity, Bezryadin's group fabricated superconducting Mo21Ge79 alloy nanowires with diameters as thin as 3–4 molecules by using the sputter deposition of metallic film over suspended DNA strands.134,242 Moreover, by using DNA nanotubes self-assembled from triple-crossover tiles as templates, LaBeand's group fabricated AgNWs with a dramatically higher conductivity compared to values previously reported for dsDNA-templated AgNWs,101,243 which thus expanded the availability of DNA structures as templates. As the preliminary work of DNA metallization was mainly focused on engineering nanoelectronics, several elegant reviews summarized the work on early DNA-templated 2D metal nanowire synthesis, and readers can refer to these works for further details.11–14,242 Besides to improve the conductivity of DNA scaffolds, magnetic DNA-templated nanowires made out of nickel, cobalt, and iron have also been reported (Table 1), which would be suitable for the development of high-density memory storage devices or magnetic field sensors. All these studies demonstrate the promising feasibility of using bottom-up DNA metallization to create increasingly sophisticated nanodevices, although further improvements are desired for enhancing the metal deposition selectivity, homogeneity, and control of the size.
Table 1 Summary of metal nanowires fabricated on DNA templates




Metal
DNA template
Metal source
Reducing agent
Methoda
Ref.





a The methods summarized in Section 3 of this review.
b DMAP is the short notation for 4-(dimethylamino)pyridine.
c [Pt(terpy)Cl]Cl is short for dichloro(2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine)platinum(II).





Silver
λ-DNA
AgNO3
Hydroquinone
3.1

7, 96 and 97



DNA nanotube
AgNO3
Aldehyde
3.4.1

101 and 243



Yeast polη gene
Ag(NH3)2OH
Galactose
3.4.2

104



λ-DNA
AgNO3
Aldehyde
3.4.1

100 and 244



ctDNA
AgNO3
Electrolysis
3.3

94 and 95



λ-DNA
AgNO3
Sunlight
3.2

245



900-mer dsDNA
Ag(NH3)2OH
Dialdehyde
3.4.2

106 and 107



ctDNA
Ag(NH3)2OH
Galactose
3.4.4

119 and 120



λ-DNA
AgNO3
UV light (366 nm)
3.2

83



T4 DNA
AgNO3
UV light (254 nm)
3.2

88



Salmon tests DNA
AgNO3
UV light (260 nm)
3.2

246



4 × 4 tile nanoribbon
AgNO3
Aldehyde
3.4.1

28



Platinum
ctDNA
[Pt(terpy)Cl]Clccis-Pt(NH3)2Cl2
NaBH4
3.1

72



λ-DNA
Pt(NO3)2
UV light (254 nm)
3.2

247



λ-DNA
K2PtCl4
DMAB
3.1

248 and 249



Poly(GC)–poly(AT)

cis-Pt(NH3)2Cl2
DMAB
3.1

77



Palladium
λ-DNA
Pd(OAc)2, (NH4)2PdCl4
DMAB
3.1

69–71 and 250–256



λ-DNA
K2PdCl4
H2
3.1

254



λ-DNA
(NH4)2PdCl4
UV light (260 ± 10 nm)
3.2

255



DNA nanotube
Pd(OAc)2
DMAB
3.1

29



Gold
Herring testes DNA
HAuCl4
NaBH4
3.1

256



ssDNA
Oligo-AuNPs or active ester–AuNPs, and HAuCl4
NH2OH, or H2O2
3.5.2

126 and 127



ctDNA
DMAP–AuNPsb, and Goldenhance solution
Goldenhance solution
3.5.1

257 and 258



ctDNA
DMAP–AuNPs, HAuCl4
NH2OH
3.5.1

259



Salmon tests DNA
HAuCl4
UV light (260 nm)
3.2

85



Salmon tests DNA
HAuCl4
Microwave
3.6

135



Copper
λ-DNA
Cu(NO3)2
Ascorbic acid
3.1

260–262



Nickel
λ-DNA
NiCl2 or Ni(NO3)2
NaBH4
3.1

263



Rhodium
ctDNA/λ-DNA
RhCl3·H2O
NaBH4
3.1

264



ctDNA/λ-DNA
RhCl3·H2O
Electrolysis
3.3


Platinum/silver
λ-DNA
Cis-platin, AgNO3
DMAB, hydrazine
3.1

257



Palladium/copper
λ-DNA
Pd(OAc)2, CuSO4
DMAB, formaldehyde
3.1

265



Silver/gold
900-mer dsDNA
AgNO3, KAuCl4
Sugar, hydroquinone
3.4.2, 3.1

105



Molybdenum/germanium
λ-DNA
Mo79Ge21
Sputter deposition
3.6

134



Silver/nickel
λ-DNA
AgNO3, NiCl2
Hydroquinone, NaBH4
3.1

76



Silver/copper
λ-DNA
AgNO3, CuSO4
Hydroquinone, formaldehyde
3.1

76



Palladium/nickel
λ-DNA
PdCl2, Ni(OAc)2
DMAB
3.1

266



Nickel/gold
λ-DNA
Ni(SO4)2, HAuCl4
Hydrazene hydrate, sodium borohydride
3.1

267



Palladium/cobalt
λ-DNA
Na2PdCl4, CoCl2
DMAB
3.1

75 and 268



Iron
ctDNA
FeSO4
Electrolysis
3.3

98







4.2.3 Segmented metal nanowires. 
With well-calculated periodic structures and excellent programmability, DNA templates can also serve as molecular rules to fabricate segmented metal nanowires with tunable gap distances. Toward this goal, Braun and coworkers developed a technology named “sequence-specific molecular lithography” toward fabricating metal nanowires separated by predesigned gaps (Fig. 14).73 First, by modifying the template DNA with glutaraldehyde, followed by binding with a RecA nucleoprotein filament—a major protein responsible for homogeneous recombination in Escherichia coli—the template could effectively direct the deposition of silver metals on the unprotected DNA segments, while the RecA could effectively resist the growth of silver. In another work, the utilization of RecA to mask the DNA template against aldehyde derivation also enabled the fabrication of segmented metal nanowires.100 The authors also demonstrated that the hybridization of aldehyde derivatized and underivatized DNA building blocks could provide blueprints to template the growth of segmented metal nanowires.100 By using a properly designed divalent DNA–AuNP conjugate and the precise deposition of Pt at the base resolution, Ijiro's group prepared linear double junction structures separated by an ssDNA space between the AuNP and the two Pt nanowire segments.269 The combination of a DNA origami template and seeded metallization process gave rise to nanowires with heterogeneous Cu–Au junctions.132 Compared to previous reported methods, such as on-wire lithography,270 sequential electrochemical deposition,271 and vapor–solid–liquid growth,272 the utilization of DNA nanostructures as templates would allow more accurate control over the gap distances and positions. But more work is still required to improve the continuity and uniformity of the nanowire morphologies.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematics illustration for synthesizing segmented silver nanowires by utilizing a sequence-specific mask of the DNA template by binding the RecA nucleoprotein filament. (b) Atomic force microscopy image of the DNA templates and the corresponding segmented silver nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2002 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 

4.3 Two-dimensional nanometals
For practical applications, more sophisticated nanocircuits are desired, which require multiple interconnections and branches, necessitating more complex template designs. In this regard, arbitrary 2D shapes assembled from DNA crossover tiles,8 DNA origami,33 or DNA ‘bricks’39,40 have been demonstrated to address the need for complex templates for fabricating nanoscale metallic circuits. The versatility of DNA topological conformations,273 as well as their ability to conjugate with proteins or other ligands, also opens up the possibilities to produce complicated DNA templates with unprecedented shapes.42,43,274 In combination with an appropriate metallization method, these DNA nanostructures can serve as efficient patterns for DNA-templated 2D nanometals.

4.3.1 Branched metal nanowires. 
Significant early work to fabricate metal nanowires with branched structures was contributed by Woolley's group. Inspired by the elegant 2D DNA nanostructures reported by Seeman and coworkers,10,21 Woolley's group developed a three-branched DNA motif by hybridizing three appropriately designed oligonucleotides.275 The specific deposition of conductive Ag or Cu on DNA templates resulted in branched metal nanowires, which, however, were difficult to fabricate by other methods. The appearance of DNA origami nanotechnology further encouraged Woolley's group to create metal nanowires with increased complexity and flexibility.74,252,276 However, certain challenges exist in the metallization of DNA origamis, such as the stability of DNA origami, the selectivity of metal deposition, and the difficulty in adhering DNA origamis to substrate surfaces, as well as the influence of the excess staple strands. To this end, they enhanced the DNA origami stability by crosslinking with amine-modified psoralen and by dialyzing against a Mg2+-containing buffer solution. The presence of Mg2+ ions reduced the repulsive interactions between the scaffold DNA and the staple strands, avoiding unfolding of the origami on mica surfaces. They also studied the influence of the ratio of staple strands to scaffold on the stability of the origami during dialysis and found that only the absolute concentration of staple stands in solution affected the stability. After seeding the glutaraldehyde-functionalized DNA origami with silver ions, the template was plated with Au via an electrodeless deposition process, in which the addition of Mg2+ increased the adhesion of DNA origami to surfaces. To increase the selectivity, they chose a more concentrated DNA origami, decreased the volume of DNA origami solution, and prolonged the rinse time. In this way, they fabricated the first Y-shaped metal nanowire on DNA origamis (Fig. 15).74 In the same year, they developed a quick and efficient Pd seeding method to grow T-shaped Pd and Au nanowires with a higher continuity and uniformity on DNA origamis.252 Two years later, they reported the fabrication of conductive Au and Cu nanostructures on circuit-like DNA origami nanostructures. This time, they further increased the uniformity and density of the metal by using multiple Pd seeding steps.276
 Fig. 15  Schematic design of the branched origami (a) and deposition on the mica surface for further sequential silver seeding and gold growth (b). (c) A typical atomic force microscopy image of the branched metal nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to using ionic seeding methods, the introduction of metal nanoparticle seeds onto origami can be easily achieved by modifying the seeds with oligonucleotides to hybridize with the lengthened staple strands on the DNA origamis.277–279 Also, by attracting positively charged metal nanoparticles on DNA origamis, metal nanoparticle seeds could be placed on the template more easily. In this context, a series of 2D metallic nanostructures, such as pairs of parallel bars, H shapes, T-shapes, corner-to-corner multimerized cuboids, bundles, and rectangles, have been fabricated to resemble the structures of DNA origamis,125,128,129,280 which was covered in Section 3.4 of this review.
The assembly of DNA or DNA conjugates with other materials, such as proteins, can also provide templates for fabricating branched metal nanostructures. For instance, based on the homogeneous pairing of RecA protein, a three-way branched metal nanowire was formulated by pairing the two DNA strands at a precise position.102 In a recent work, by conjugating biotinylated DNA to a single streptavidin core, well-defined branched DNA templates were constructed by Baigl's group, enabling the preparation of one- to four-branch metal nanowires. Different from DNA-origami-templated metallization, which had been conducted on surfaces, the metallization on streptavidin-based DNA branches could be performed directly in the bulk phase. Moreover, with this strategy, the branch length could be controlled by tuning the initial DNA size, and the branch degree could be varied by choosing the DNA and streptavidin concentrations.
The success of electrodeless metallization of 2D DNA templates has made it possible to fabricate arbitrarily shaped metallic nanostructures. However, the granular nature and defects in the uniformity of the resulting structures remain the intractable problems of the DNA metallization method. Still, the combination DNA nanotechnology with metallization indeed offers a more versatile toolbox to fabricate 2D metal nanostructures for applications in a broad range of areas besides electronics.


4.3.2 Metal nanorings. 
The unique properties of ring-like metal materials with sizes in the meso- or nanoscopic regime make them dramatically different from compact objects of the same size. For example, persistent currents could be generated when trapping a magnetic flux in the interior of an electrically conducting ring,281,282 and plasmonic resonances could be dramatically enhanced when transforming metal spheres to rings.283,284 Although lithographic techniques, solid-templates, or nanoparticles arrays have been reported as elaborate methods to prepare metal rings,285–287 rings prepared with these method are larger than 0.5 μm and cannot be directly dispersed in an aqueous medium. On the other hand, the ability of DNA chains to form toroidal condensates in the presence of condensing agents, such as cationic polyamines,288 multivalent cationic metal ions,289 and cationic surfactants,290 was noticed by Zinchenko and colleagues, and for the first time, they leveraged this unique intrinsic property of DNA to template the growth of silver toroidal nanostructures (nanorings) with a controlled shape and dimensions (Fig. 16).291 By a three-step process, silver nanorings with an inner diameter of around 22 nm and outer diameter of around 93 nm were easily fabricated in water solution (Fig. 16). Later on, this approach was employed to fabricate gold nanorings by the same group.292 With the same DNA template, Pu et al. prepared smooth gold nanorings via a photoreduction process.293 Although metal nanorings have also been fabricated with circular DNA origami templates,125,128,294 the ring-like metal nanostructures templated on condensed DNAs are more uniform and smooth and show no granular structures. Moreover, as DNA longer than 400 base pairs could be condensed into toroidal conformations in the presence of multications, thus metal nanorings with sizes from 30 to 200 nm would be easily controlled by varying the DNA length. Importantly, this method is rather facile for preparing metal nanorings.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of metal nanorings on a compact DNA template. Transmission electron microscopy image of the DNA toroid (b) and the templated silver nanorings (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 291. Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

4.4 Three-dimensional nanometals
Metal nanomaterials with specific 3D morphologies have attracted great attention due to their tailorable anisotropy, optical, electromagnetic, and mechanical properties, which can be exploited for applications in optoelectronic devices, integrated quantum optics, and biodetection.295,296 To date, various methods, including lithography, direct laser writing, and glancing angle deposition, have been developed to create various 3D metal nanostructures.297–300 However, these methods are limited in resolution as well as in their ability to fabricate genuine 3D structures.301 Alternatively, the self-assembly ability and programmability of DNA allow for the bottom-up construction of sophisticated 3D architectures with a theoretical precision of 2–3 nm,302–304 which could also be conveniently used as templates to direct the arrangement or growth of metal nanoparticles for the fabrication of 3D metal nanostructures. A pioneering work in this area was conducted by Kuzyk et al., who utilized DNA origami 24-helix bundles as templates for arranging AuNPs into complex and chiral geometries. By exposing the AuNPs on the DNA origami with excessive amounts of silver precursor during metal deposition, the AuNPs were merged into 3D metal nanohelices, which exhibited a giant molar CD signal of about 108 M−1 cm−1.305
By leveraging the ‘3D cavity’ provided by origami superstructures as the molds, Yin's group and Seidel's group published their research almost at the same time reporting the synthesis of nanometals with arbitrarily predesigned 3D shapes.306,307 In Yin's work, stiff 3D DNA origami molds containing prescribed 3D cavities and covered with lids were computationally designed (Fig. 17A).306 After further enclosing a small nucleating AuNP seed and metal deposition, the Au seed grew into a lager nanometals that were confined within the cavity of the mold, thus replicating the 3D shapes. In this way, by using molds with different shaped cavities, a series of 3D nanometals with 3 nanometer resolution, ranging from silver cuboids with three independently tunable dimensions to silver and gold nanostructures with diverse cross sections, and hybrid structures with more than one component, were fabricated. Different from Yin's work, which used lids to confine the growth of nanometals within molds, Seidel's work employed DNA origami molds with a hollow cuboid cavity but open ends to direct the growth of gold nanostructures (Fig. 17B).307 By introducing AuNPs as nucleation centers inside the cavity, and sequentially filling the molds with hydroxylamine (reducing agent) and the addition of HAuCl4, particle growth occurred within the molds, and the shape then extended along the mold cavity until the gold precursor was consumed, at which point the growth self-terminated.
 Fig. 17  Fabrication of 3D metal nanostructures with DNA metallization. (A) Casting metal nanomaterials with predesigned 3D shapes using programmable DNA nanostructure templates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) DNA mold-constrained growth of 3D metal nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 307. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (C) DNA-directed growth of 3D metal nanostructures from 5 nm gold nanoparticle seeds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
Instead of using 3D DNA nanostructures as the templates, in a very recent work reported by Ma et al., dsDNA with different sequences were anchored onto 5 nm gold nanoseeds with various alignments to direct the growth of AuNPs into defined 3D topologies, such as pushpin-, star-, biconcave disk-like, and even more complex jellyfish- and flower-like nanostructures (Fig. 17C).308 An all-atom molecular dynamic simulation and real-time in situ nanoplasmonic sensing study suggested that the dsDNA-directed metal growth was mainly driven by the distribution gradient of the gold precursors (HAuCl4). It seemed that the reaction substrate AuCl4− and NH3OH+ ions encountered each other near the dsDNA/Au interface, which moved along the dsDNA scaffold as the gold deposition proceeded, which explained the directional specificity. The role of dsDNA in this study was different from in previous works, where the affinity of ssDNA with the gold surface determined the growth direction.205–209 Thus by modifying different dsDNA on the gold seed surface, various 3D metal nanostructures could be obtained in a controlled way. Overall, this method is rather facile and the control level is comparable to Yin's and Seidel's works.
Although only limited studies have been reported in this new area of making 3D nanometals with DNA metallization, it is imaginable that the rapid development of DNA nanotechnology will definitely help expand these methods to design and fabricate feature-rich 3D metal nanomaterials for specific applications.
5. Versatile applications
Metal nanomaterials are of particular interest due to their size and shape-dependent physicochemical properties. From the above, it can be seen that the utilization of DNA as a template indeed provides a facile and flexible method to direct the growth of metal nanomaterials with different morphologies as well as tailorable properties. Furthermore, the physicochemical and biological properties of DNA itself allow for conferring additional functions to the resulting nanometals, such as a recognition or targeting ability, chiroptical effects, and complicated topologies. As a result, DNA-metallization-directed nanometals have shown great value for applications in many areas, including nanoelectronics, energy conversion and storage, catalysis, sensing, biosensing, bioimaging, therapy, and antibacteria.
5.1 Nanoelectronics
The last 50 years have witnessed a great increase in the density of electronic computing elements, known as Moore's law, which states that the computer chip speed and complexity double every 18 months.309 However, it is undeniable that Moore's law will find it hard to hold true after 2016 due to the fact that the traditional top-down lithographic technologies to fabricate electronic devices are approaching their limits.310 Motivated by this, researchers are trying to explore alternative methods, such as molecular recognition or self-assembly-based bottom-up nanotechnology, to fabricate nanocircuits with refined precision. In particular, DNA molecules have shown great power in building complicated nanoscale structures due to their self-assembly ability.18–20 Unfortunately, DNA is a good insulator in the dry state, which makes it hard to directly construct electrical nanocircuits.311–314 To this end, Braun and coworkers started pioneering work to construct nanoelectronics with DNA metallization, which conferred the DNA scaffold with sufficient conductivity for nanoelectronics. By first bridging two adjacent gold microelectrodes with a λ-DNA and then by subsequently depositing silver on the DNA contour, a prototype nanocircuit built with DNA metallization was formulated. Latterly, the scheme has also been used to build similar nanocircuits by using other metal species. This work represents an important step in the process to extend biological principles into the area of nanotechnology.
In ongoing work, Braun and coworkers further extended the concept of DNA metallization to fabricate a nanoscale field-effect transistor that could be operated at room temperature (Fig. 18).99 With the help of a RecA filament, a single-wall carbon nanotube (SWNT) was located in a specific sequence of λ-DNA, where the RecA also protected that sequence against metallization in the following step. In this way, a field-effect transistor in the form of an individual SWNT contacted by two DNA-templated metal nanowires was obtained. This DNA-based self-assembly and DNA-templated metallization design effectively helped overcome the difficulties encountered in previous studies related to the precise localization and interconnection of SWNT toward large-scale integrated circuits.315–317 Moreover, this strategy could be generalized to build functional circuits on more complicated DNA scaffolds.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the DNA-templated field-effect transistor. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of a single-wall carbon nanotube contacted by two DNA-templated nanowires. (c) Schematic representation and electrical characterization of the DNA-templated carbon nanotube field-effect transistor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2003 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Fitzmaurice and coworkers reported the utilization of DNA as a template to direct the growth of two gold nanowires and the assembly of a protein-modified 10 nm gold nanoparticle at the gap as another type of nanoelectronic device.310 In another work, they fabricated a three-electrode nanodevice with a similar method by using a Y-shaped DNA as the template.318 Recently, Ijiro and coworkers used divalent DNA-conjugated gold nanoparticles to fabricate a single-electron device model by taking advantage of the sequence-specific platinum metallization.269 These works highlighted the promise of fabricating multiple-tunnel junctions by a DNA-metallization process.
The achievements discussed above demonstrate that DNA metallization has contributed substantially to the development of nanoelectronics. In particular, sequence-specific metallization allows for locating different components at almost a molecular resolution, by which the fabrication of complicated nanocircuits is possible. However, it should be noted that, the scientific knowledge to build nanoelectronics with DNA metallization is still in its infancy, as neither large-scale synthesis nor practical application of these nanocircuits has been achieved yet. Also, the presence of defects in the resulting metal nanowires reflects the need to improve the feasibility of the current methods and thus to improve the conductivity of the nanowires. In other words, much more research effort, especially in multidisciplinary areas, is encouraged to contribute to this exciting field to generate more reliable strategies for the prolonged development of nanoelectronics.
5.2 Nanolithography
As a well-known top-down fabrication approach, lithography represents an important surface patterning method.319 In particular, micro- and/or nanolithography refer to lithographic patterning methods capable of arranging a material into designed structures on a fine scale. Generally, working with features with a size less than 10 micrometers is considered as microlithography, while working with features in the range of 1 to 100 nanometers is regarded as nanolithography. The most prominent lithographic technique is photolithography, which has been widely used in microelectronics since its invention.320 The ongoing development of computer chips and their increasing complexity require lithographic techniques that are able to reduce the size of the structures to smaller nanoscale. To this end, new lithographic approaches called nanolithography, such as electron beam lithography, nano-imprinting lithography, and scanning probe-based nanolithography, have been developed to extend Moore's law in the range below 100 nm.80,321–323 However, most of these methods are either expensive or involve a low throughput.
On the other hand, the marriage of bottom-up self-assembly and top-down lithography provides an alternative means to generate features with sizes of tens of nanometers. In this regard, the versatility of DNA nanotechnology makes it a good candidate for bridging this gap, where arbitrary DNA scaffolds can act as masks for pattern transfer. For instance, by using DNA self-assembled structures as negative masks and by further depositing a layer of gold films, Mao and coworkers fabricated gold replicas with 1D triangle, 2D tetragonal, and 2D pseudohexagonal DNA arrays (Fig. 19A).324 All the patterns of these replicas were in good agreement with the DNA masks. Wooley and coworkers extended the concept using a DNA-shadowed nanolithography method to generate trenches with straight or curved linear structures whose with a width of about 7 nm.325 In such cases, the chemical nature of DNA is compatible with the metal deposition processes and its pattern can be easily transferred onto the metal surfaces. Whereas, in other cases where harsh reaction conditions are required, this restricts the direct utilization of DNA as a negative mask.326 Additionally, the poor adhesion of DNA nanostructures to the surfaces of inorganic substrates makes it difficult for the pattern transfer to proceed.327,328
 Fig. 19  (A) Different structured DNA templates as negative masks for pattern transfer in fabricating gold replicas. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) DNA-templated metal nanostructures for the robust nanopatterning of graphene via plasma etching. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
These limitations motivated researchers to develop more robust DNA nanostructure-based masks. To this challenge, Strano and coworkers proposed a DNA-metallization nanolithography technique for patterning 2D nanomaterials with plasma etching (Fig. 19B).294 First, DNA templates with different shapes, such as nanorings, letter-shaped junctions, and nanoribbons, were absorbed onto the surface of graphene pretreated with 1-pyrenemethylamine. Then, the metallization of these DNA nanostructures was triggered, first with silver precursors and then enlarged further with Goldenhance solution. After these the metallized DNA nanostructures could survive in the following Ar/O2 plasma reactive ion etching process and acted as positive masks to transfer the patterns into the final graphene products. Utilizing similar processes, Choi and coworkers proposed using palladium-metallized DNA nanotubes as masks to fabricate defined 2D semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide materials, such as MoS2, MoSe2, and WSe2, with a nanoscale geometry.329 They were even able to manufacture WSe2 nanoribbons with a width of tens of nanometers and a length of a few micrometers.
Compared with previously developed nanolithography techniques, the utilization of metallized DNA for nanolithography not only allows reserving the structure information of the DNA templates but also protects the DNA from the harsh etching conditions. Given the structural diversity of DNA nanostructures and the flexibility of DNA metallization, patterned materials with different structures could be easily fabricated. More importantly, scaling up the fabrication of patterned materials with high-resolution can be achieved with this methodology, as larger DNA masks can be readily designed by hierarchical or algorithmic self-assembly strategies. But we should note that due to the granular nature of the DNA-templated metals, the patterned materials more or less have discontinuous points, which could affect their functions. Also, the unspecific background metal disposition may disrupt or bring defects to the final patterned materials. Therefore, further improving the metallization quality would be required for obtaining ultrafine structures from DNA templates.
5.3 Energy conversion and storage
Energy issues, such as sustainable energy production, storage, and consumption, are unquestionably among the most important challenges facing humanity in the 21st century.330 The development of advanced energy conversion and storage (ECS) devices, such as fuel cells, solar cells, Li-ion batteries, and supercapacitors, is anticipated to address these critical issues.331 It has been demonstrated that the performance of ECS devices depends strongly on the properties of the materials used to build them.332 As a result, improvements in the materials play a key role in further enhancing the potency of ECS devices. Particularly, with the fast development of nanotechnology, nanomaterials with different properties have been fabricated for improving the efficiency of ECS devices.333,334 In this context, the flexibility of DNA-metallization-directed metal nanomaterial synthesis has also shown great potential for ECS devices. In particular, the abilities of DNA to template metal deposition on heterogeneous surfaces as well as to tune the physiochemical properties of the resulting nanometals have been leveraged to synthesize electrode materials for fuel cells and batteries and for hole-collecting layers in solar cells.

5.3.1 Cathode materials. 
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) on the cathode is an important reaction and has an effect whereby it limits the efficiency of electrochemical ECS devices, such as fuels cells and metal–air batteries.335 To date, Pt and PtM (M = Pd, Ru, Au, Fe, Co) alloy nanoparticles supported on high-surface-area carbon materials, such as graphene, represent the most widely studied cathode catalyst material for ORR with a high efficiency.335–337 Therewith, the performance of the cathode catalyst depends intimately on the size, morphology, dispersion, stability, and durability of the Pt or PtM nanoparticles on the carbon supports.
As discussed above in Section 4.1.3, benefiting from the favorable interactions between DNA with graphene and the ability of DNA to template metal deposition, Kim and coworkers reported the fabrication of interconnected Pt-nanodendrite/DNA/graphene hybrid materials for ORR.226 Compared to the commercially available Pt/C catalysts, the hybrid catalyst exhibited very high ORR catalytic activity, stability, and constant mass activity over a wide pH range of 1–13 (Fig. 20A). Later, they reported the deposition of nanosized Pt clusters (≤1.4 nm) on genomic DNA–graphene oxide composites and demonstrated their high catalytic performance for ORR.227 Due to the strong interactions between the ultrafine Pt nanoparticles with the DNA–graphene oxide composites, the hybrid showed notable electrochemical behavior, as highlighted by the high ORR onset potential/half-wave potential, mass/specific activity, accelerated durability tests (10000 cycles), and cyclic voltammetry stability (10000 cycles) results.
 Fig. 20  Application of DNA-templated nanomaterials for oxygen reduction. (A) Synthesis of Pt-nanodendrite/DNA/graphene hybrid materials as high-performance cathode materials. Compared to bare Pt/graphene or commercial Pt/C materials, the tri-component hybrids exhibited higher ORR catalytic activity, stability, reusability, and constant mass activity over a broad pH range from 1 to 13. Printed with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (B) Integration of DNA-templated gold nanoclusters with bilirubin oxidase and single-wall carbon nanotubes to enhance the electron transfer between the enzyme and cathode and thus to improve the ORR activity. Printed with permission from ref. 341. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Bhat and coworkers proposed the utilization of DNA to direct the growth of Pt nanoparticles on graphite nanofibers to achieve high ORR efficiency in a hydrogen-oxide polymer electrolyte fuel cell.338 In the study, they found that the excellent dispersion of the Pt nanoparticles led to a high electrochemical surface area and resulted in enhanced cathode catalytic performance, as validated by a peak power density of 675 mW cm−2 observed at a load current density of 1320 mA cm−2. Moreover, the hybrid exhibited high stability in acidic medium even after repeated potential cycling of up to 10000 runs.
To overcome the limitations of Pt cathode materials, such as low poison resistance, expensiveness, and low natural reserves, Li and workers proposed developing Pd-based catalysts fabricated by a DNA-directed metal growth on carbon nanotubes for ORR reactions.175 Due to the small size of the Pd nanoparticles, the facilitated mass transfer promoted the performance of the Pd catalysts.
Apart from using synthesized metal-based materials for ORR, natural oxidizing enzymes, such as multicopper oxidase, laccase, and bilirubin oxidase, can also be employed at the anode for constructing enzymatic fuel cells, which represent a new kind of ECS devices.339,340 Nevertheless, the major obstacle in this area is the low electron-transfer efficiency between the enzyme active centers and the cathode. To overcome such a limitation, Atanassov and Martinez's group utilized DNA-templated AuNCs to facilitate electron transfer at the bilirubin oxidase–electrode interface.341 By integrating DNA-templated AuNCs with single-wall carbon nanotubes and bilirubin oxidase, a greatly enhanced ORR performance was observed (Fig. 20B), as highlighted by the low overpotential, enhanced current densities, and no disturbance of the enzymatic processes.


5.3.2 Anode materials. 
Fuel cells operating on small molecules, such as hydrogen, alcohols (mainly methanol and ethanol), and formic acid, are environmentally friendly and widely considered as potential alternatives for fossil fuels to meet the growing energy demand.342 To commercialize these direct fuel cells, the development of anode materials with high electrocatalytic activity is of vital importance.
Although carbon-supported Pt is the most commonly used anode material, a number of limitations, such as high cost, low-efficiency oxidation of fuel molecules, and poisoning by intermediates or by-products, severely affect its performance. Various approaches have been explored to improve the performance of Pt-based eletrocatalysts by controlling the sizes or morphologies or by alloying with other metals.342
DNA-metallization-directed metal materials have also been explored as efficient anode catalysts for improving these electrochemical ECS devices. For instance, Li's group deposited Pt/Pd/Ni on DNA-modified reduced graphene oxide and utilized the hybrid as an anode material for direct ethanol fuel cells.343 Detailed studies demonstrated that the hybrid electrocatalyts exhibited high electrochemical activity and stability in an alkaline solution. Wen's and Yang's groups reported the utilization of ssDNA-templated Pt metallization on reduced graphene to fabricate anode materials for direct methanol fuel cells.344 They found that the hybrid not only possessed outstanding electrocatalytic activity, but also showed an excellent ability against carbon monoxide poisoning. The latter could benefit from the abundant oxygen groups on ssDNA, which removed carbon monoxide from the surface of metals. Due to Pd's better resistance to carbon monoxide, our group synthesized Pd/DNA/graphene hybrid materials for formic acid electro-oxidation.225 In comparison with the commercial Pd/C catalyst, a significantly greater activity and durability were observed for the DNA-metallization-directed hybrid catalyst, which might be attributed to the mediator role played by the DNA.
Besides preparing anode materials for fuel cells, Kim et al. took advantage of DNA metallization to fabricate nickel–nickel oxide core–shell nanostructures as anode materials for lithium ion batteries.345 Due to the unique 1D nanostructures, the electrocatalyst exhibited stable cycling performance for 150 cycles and delivered great reversible capacities of 850 mA h g−1.


5.3.3 Polymer solar cells. 
Solar cells are ECS devices that directly convert sunlight into electricity, making sustainable and green energy feasible. Among various types of solar cells, polymer bulk heterojunction organic (BHJ) solar cells have drawn great attention because of their many advantages, such as low cost, light weight, tunable optical properties, and potential for high-throughput fabrication.346 The key technology in BHJ solar cells is the ability to improve the disassociation efficiency of the excited electron–hole pairs in the active layer.347 With this in mind, Yengel et al. investigated the effects of Pt-metallized DNA on a device with a BHJ solar cell.348 Upon placing Pt–DNA nanowires between the P3HT:PCBM and the PEDOT:PSS layers, they observed that the Pt–DNA nanostructures improved the power conversion efficiency by 25%. They proposed that the increase in efficiency was due to an enhancement of hole collection and a reduction in the recombination loses contributed by these Pt–DNA nanostructures. In another similar work reported by Ozkan's group, the conversion efficiency enhancement was attributed to the improved hole-collection efficiency and adsorption spectra due to the surface plasmonic nature of Pt particles and the electron-blocking ability of the DNA molecules.349
From these studies introduced in this section, it can be concluded that the unique advantage of DNA metallization to direct metal growth indeed provides us with a versatile technique to add to the toolbox to synthesize highly efficient ECS device materials. Nevertheless, to gain a better understanding of the effect of DNA on the performance of the materials, besides facilitating the metal deposition and acting as a ligand to stabilize the hybrid, further detailed investigations are encouraged regarding the optimization of the DNA sequences and lengths to achieve the highest efficiency.

5.4 Catalysis
Metallic nanoparticles have been intensively studied as highly efficient catalysts for numerous reactions due to their large surface-to-volume ratio and active surface atoms. During the catalytic process, it is important that the metal nanoparticles maintain their size, structure, and shape, which mainly determines the catalytic activities.350 Different capping ligands have been explored to confer metal nanoparticles with good stability and to tune their catalytic properties.351 In this sense, DNA metallization provides a versatile methodology to prepare metallic catalysts with different properties, as the negatively charged nature of DNA molecules could make the metal nanoparticles stable in solution. Furthermore, the physiochemical properties of the resulting metal nanomaterials can be easily tuned by changing the DNA sequences and bases, which allows researchers to design and synthesize catalysts with desired properties. More interestingly, the electron-rich groups on the DNA scaffold and the chiral nature of DNA structures could confer additional properties on top of the catalytic properties of the metal nanoparticles. With these advantages, DNA-templated metal nanoparticles have been used as catalysts in many reactions in the past years.

5.4.1 Cross-coupling reactions. 
The Suzuki and the Heck reactions are the two main types of cross-coupling reactions catalyzed by transition metal nanoparticles. The Suzuki reaction is a C–C bond formation reaction between phenylboronic acid and aryl halides,352 while the Heck reaction is the C–C coupling between aryl halides or vinyl halides and activated alkenes.353 Both reactions have shown wide applications in the synthesis of pharmaceutical intermediates, agrochemicals, and fine chemicals.354 To date, Pd nanoparticles (PdNP) are the most popular metal nanoparticles used to catalyze these two types of reactions.
As DNA has shown versatility in PdNPs synthesis, Hori's group and our group almost at the same time reported the utilization of DNA-templated PdNPs to catalyze the Suzuki reaction. In Hori's study, PdNPs with a size of about 5–8 nm were prepared on salmon testes DNA templates and interestingly the PdNP/DNA remained stable and showed high activity in air (Fig. 21A).174 While in our work, PdNPs were deposited on DNA scaffolds absorbed graphene surfaces and used to catalyze the Suzuki reaction in water under aerobic conditions.225 In both works, the catalysts could be reused for numerous cycles while retaining reasonable residue activity. One year later, Li's group further extended the boundaries of this area by preparing PdNPs with G-rich oligonucleotide d[AG3(T2AG3)3] and C-rich oligonucleotide d[(C2TA2)3C3T] as the templates, and then studied the effect of the DNA sequences on the catalytic characteristics of the PdNPs in different reaction solvents, base species, and aryl halides.355 They found that both kinds of PdNPs showed high catalytic activity under mild conditions.
 Fig. 21  DNA-templated metal nanoparticles for cross-coupling reactions. (A) Preparation of DNA–Pd nanomaterials for Suzuki reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Heck reactions of aryl halides with 2,3-dihydrofuran catalyzed by DNA-templated Pd nanoparticles on multi-walled carbon nanotubes, and the proposed reaction mechanism. Reprinted with permission from ref. 356. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The leverage of DNA-templated PdNPs has been less studied for Heck reactions. To date, only Hajipour et al. have reported the utilization of DNA-templated PdNPs for Heck reactions.356 In their study, ssDNA of salmon testes was first absorbed onto multi-walled carbon nanotubes and then used to support the growth of PdNPs. The catalyst showed high activity in both common and regioselectivity Heck reactions and exhibited good reusability for up to nine cycles with no significant loss of catalytic activity. Notably, they attributed the high regioselectivity in the arylation reaction of 2,3-dihydrofuran to the synergistic effect of PdNPs with DNA, whereby the strong bonding between the negative phosphate groups on the DNA backbone with the olefin product allowed the hydridopalladium species to undergo reversible insertion/elimination to generate the desired products (Fig. 21B).


5.4.2 Hydrogenation reactions. 
The hydrogenations of various molecules with one or more unsaturated bonds, such as benzene and its derivatives, unsaturated aldehydes, cyclic alkenes, and alkynes, are the most common reactions that are catalyzed by transition metal nanoparticles.64 Various metal nanoparticles, such as Pd, Ru, Pt, and Ir nanoparticles, have been shown to be able to catalyze hydrogenation reactions with different substrates and solvents.351 Based on DNA metallization, Wang's group utilized natural fish sperm DNA as a cheap ligand to template the synthesis of four metal–DNA nanohybrids (e.g., Pd, Au, Ag, and Pt).176 To compare their catalytic activities, the hydrogenation of nitrophenyl compounds to aniline derivatives with H2 was studied. The best catalyst was proved to be Pd–DNA, while Pt–DNA was found to be less active and Au–/Ag–DNA exhibited little activity. Moreover, Pd–DNA showed broad catalytic activities toward substrates with either electron deficient, rich, and neutral groups or metal sensitive groups, such as aldehydes, carboxylic acid, and ester.
Hori's group utilized DNA-supported PdNPs to catalyze the hydrogenation of nitrostyrene and benzyl cinnamate, whereupon, in both cases, excellent selective hydrogenation of the olefin part was observed.174 Also, the catalyst showed high activity toward the hydrogenation of 3-butyn-2-ol to give 3-buten-2-ol with a >80% yield. They further tested the ability of the catalyst in the asymmetric hydrogenation of citral, whereupon optically active (R)-citronellal was produced with a 73% ee.
In a recent work by Kundu's group, osmium organosol on a DNA scaffold was synthesized to catalyze the hydrogenation of cyclohexene.357 Although a little research has disclosed that osmium is a poor catalyst in the hydrogenation of alkenes, the osmium organosol templated by DNA, in contrast, showed high activity and good reusability in catalyzing the conversion of cyclohexene, which could be attributed to the ultrasmall size and high surface area of the osmium nanoparticles.


5.4.3 Reduction reactions. 
The reduction of p-nitrophenol is the most often employed reaction to test the catalytic activity of metal nanoparticles in aqueous solution.358 Besides, the reduction of p-nitrophenol as well as other nitrophenols is important in the field of environmental chemistry as these compounds are anthropogenic and toxic.359 This reaction has also been used to study the catalytic activity of various metal nanoparticles prepared with different DNA structures. For instance, Zinchenko's group reported a series of works to investigate the catalytic activity of different metal nanoparticles synthesized in DNA hydrogels.360–363 The in situ metal deposition in the DNA hydrogel not only avoided the problem of nanoparticle aggregation but also reduced the dissolution effects of reactants on the nanoparticle integrity.360 Moreover, by using an ionic-responsive swelling DNA hydrogel, the catalytic property of the metal nanoparticles could be easily tuned.361 By varying the amount of metal precursors and the reducing agent, AuNPs with sizes of 2–6 nm were formulated within the DNA hydrogels, where AuNPs with a size of 4 nm were found to exhibit the highest activity.362 In their most recent work, narrow-size-distributed nanoparticles of Au, Ag, Pt, Pd, Cu, and Ni with an average diameter of 2–3 nm were prepared in DNA hydrogels and these metal nanoparticles exhibited activities in the order of Pd > Ag ≈ Au ≈ Cu > Ni > Pt.363
The influence of the polymorphic structures on the catalytic activity of the resulting metal nanoparticles was first studied by Li's group.355 But by using i-motif, G-quadruplex, and duplex DNA as templates, AgNPs with a different size distribution and lattice spacing were formulated. Correspondingly, the AgNPs formed on the i-motif DNA showed the highest catalytic activity in the reduction of p-nitrophenol, followed sequentially by G-quadruplex and the duplex DNA-templated AgNPs. In their recent work, Pd clusters stabilized by i-motif DNA with different sizes were formed and their activities in the reduction of p-nitrophenol were studied (Fig. 22).177 Pd8–Pd9 clusters showed the highest activity due to the consecutive hemiprotonated CH+·C pairs being able to effectively ligate Pd ions at the N3 sites of the cytosines to facilitate activation of the nitryl group of p-nitrophenol. These studies suggested a promising way to prepare metal catalyst with programmable DNA scaffolds.
 Fig. 22  Schematic representation of the synthesis of Pd nanoclusters on i-motif DNA templates and the mechanism for their high activity in catalyzing the reduction of p-nitrophenol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to reduce p-nitrophenol, DNA-templated metal nanoparticles, such as AuNPs and osmium clusters, were also used to catalyze the reduction of p-nitroaniline.364,365 In both studies, the metal nanoparticles respectively showed high catalytic activity due to their widely exposed active surface.


5.4.4 Nanozymes. 
Nanomaterials with enzyme-mimetic catalytic activities have been a hot topic in recent years, and a novel term “nanozyme” has even been adopted to describe such nanomaterials.366,367 Up to now, various nanomaterials made of metal, metal oxide, or carbon have been reported to resemble the functions of various enzymes, such as peroxidase, oxidase, superoxide dismutase, and catalase, as reported by our and other groups.368–370 Due to their facile synthesis, low cost, and especially high stability against harsh reaction conditions, nanozymes are promising alternatives for natural enzymes in various applications.371–376 Metal nanoparticles templated on proteins have been synthesized with high peroxidase-like activities,377,378 while the rich physiochemical properties of DNA have also allowed researchers to develop novel nanozymes with DNA metallization. Motivated by this, Chen and coworkers reported pioneering work in this area using aptamer DNA to template the growth of Pt nanoparticles as an aptasensor to mimic the activity of peroxidase.379 Following this, Li and coworkers utilized G-rich and C-rich oligonucleotides as templates for Pt metallization to study the influence of the DNA polymorphologies on the Pt-based nanozyme activity.380Via a thorough study of the reaction parameters to determine the physicochemical properties of the Pt nanoparticles, 2.9 nm Pt nanoparticles stabilized by i-motif RET2 were demonstrated to be the most efficient nanozymes. Later on, other DNA-templated metals, such as silver nanoclusters, were also synthesized to mimic the activity of peroxidase.381,382 Moreover, DNA-stabilized bimetallic nanoparticles have been synthesized with high peroxidase-mimic activities.184,215 The further extended application of these DNA-templated metal nanozymes will be discussed in the biosensing section.


5.4.5 Other reactions. 
5.4.5.1 Oxidation reactions. 
The oxidation of alcohols represents a very important reaction in many industrial processes as well as in academic studies.383 With four kinds of metal nanoparticles formed on fish sperm DNA,176 Wang and coworkers also tested their catalytic activity toward the aerobic oxidation of alcohols. Their experimental study demonstrated that Au–DNA showed the highest activity, which allowed the oxidation to proceed under mild conditions. Importantly, the Au–DNA nanohybrid remained stable and well-dispersed after reaction. By using ethanol to precipitate the nanoparticles after reaction, the catalysts could be easily recovered and directly reused for several runs.
5.4.5.2 Amide formation reaction. 
Amide-containing compounds are important due to their key role in organic chemistry and biological systems. Recently, the direct synthesis of amides from alcohols and amines was shown as a simple and environmentally friendly protocol.384 However, to facilitate this reaction, the most important challenge is to develop an efficient catalyst. Along this line, Wang and coworkers proposed the utilization of DNA-templated AuNPs as water-soluble catalysts for amide formation from a series of alcohols and amines.384 With this catalyst, the reaction could be carried out smoothly at a mild temperature of 50 °C. As to the scope of alcohols, both aromatic and aliphatic alcohols were shown to be good substrates. While for amine screening, it was found that both primary and secondary amines and even ammonia could be converted. Similar to their previous work described above, the catalytic AuNPs showed good reusability for five runs while retaining a notable efficiency.
5.4.5.3 Dehydrogenation of formic acid. 
Formic acid represents an attractive in situ source of hydrogen for fuel cells. Recently, it was demonstrated that the hydrogen stored in formic acid could be released using either homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysts.385 Based on DNA-mediated metal growth on heterogeneous surfaces, Yan and coworkers reported the synthesis of a CoAuPd/DNA/reduced graphene oxide composite for formic acid dehydrogenation.230 The hybrid showed enhanced activity due to the ultrafine and uniform CoAuPd nanoparticles formulated on the graphene-absorbed DNA template. Moreover, the hybrid showed 100% hydrogen selectivity as well as high stability.
These studies highlight the promising potential of utilizing DNA metallization to fabricate metallic catalysts with desirable properties. From a broad viewpoint, there is still great space for extending the application of DNA-templated metal nanoparticles for catalysis in various areas, such as enantioselective catalysis, biocatalysis, and biosynthesis.386

5.5 Environmental sensing
Monitoring environmental pollutants, such as heavy metal ions, gases, and other harmful chemicals, is highly important to identify and manage exposure risks to human healthcare and the ecosystems, which requires the development of simple, fast, and cost-effective analytical methodologies.387–389 Given their rich and tunable characteristics, such as fluorescent and electrical properties, DNA-templated metallic nanomaterials have been employed to construct optical and electronic probes for sensing environmental contaminants.

5.5.1 Heavy metal ion sensing. 
Heavy metal ions, including Hg2+, Pb2+, and Cu2+, are highly deleterious to biological systems, even at low concentrations. Generally, they could induce toxic effects in plants and animals via their circulation in soil and groundwater, and could initiate serious health problems, including damages toward the nervous, cardiovascular, endocrine, kidney, and immune systems once they accumulate in the human body.390–394 By leveraging the interference of the fluorescent properties of DNA-templated metal nanoclusters with heavy metal ions, simple but efficient optical probes could be easily constructed.
5.5.1.1 Hg2+ sensing. 
Wang and coworkers reported the utilization of an oligonucleotide with the sequence of 5′-CCCCCCCCCCCC-3′ to fabricate AgNCs for selective Hg2+ identification.395 It was found that the fluorescence of the as-formed AgNCs could be easily quenched upon the addition of Hg2+, and kinetic studies demonstrated that the quenching effect reached an almost maximum within 3 min, which allowed the rapid detection of Hg2+. Sensitivity and selectivity studies respectively showed a detection limit of 5 nM and excellent specificity toward Hg2+. Similar schemes have also been recently reported by other groups utilizing different DNA-templated AgNCs as the nanoprobe.396–398 Yang and coworkers utilized AuNCs on DNA templates containing T-rich and C-rich segments as probes for sensing Hg2+, where aggregation of the DNA–AuNCs induced by the formation of T–Hg2+–T duplexes led to a decrease in fluorescence.399
In contrast, Liu et al. proposed a turn-on probe for Hg2+ detection using the T-rich DNA-templated growth of copper nanoparticles.400 As discussed above, fluorescent CuNPs could be formed on dsDNA or T-rich ssDNA templates. Along this line, Liu et al. found that the Hg2+-mediated T–T base pair favored the formation of fluorescent CuNPs. However, no such phenomenon was observed with other metal ions, which thus opens up a new way for developing Hg2+ sensors. In the same year, Wang and coworkers presented another turn-on method using a DNA molecular machine to sense Hg2+ and produce DNA templates for growing AgNCs, which were then used for the signal transduction.401
5.5.1.2 Pb2+ sensing. 
Zeng's group proposed utilizing random dsDNA-templated CuNPs as label-free fluorescent probes for the selective detection of Pd2+.402 They found that Pb2+ could selectively dramatically quench the fluorescence of the CuNPs upon mixing. The sensing mechanism was supposed to be caused by the interaction between Pb2+ and the Cu+ on the surface of the CuNPs. Instead of employing the direct interaction between the Pb2+ and DNA-templated nanometals, Zhang and coworkers designed an amplified Pb2+ sensing scheme via using DNAzyme-mediated molecular bacon cleavage to cyclically liberate G-DNA segments, which later on partially hybridized with other AgNCs-deposited hairpin DNAs to enhance the fluorescence intensity for signal readout.403
5.5.1.3 Cu2+ sensing. 
Instead of the post addition of metal ions, Chang's group introduced the Cu2+ into the solution used for preparing DNA-templated AgNCs.182 As a result, the obtained Cu/Ag alloy nanoclusters exhibited a stronger fluorescence than AgNCs alone, without affecting the absorption wavelength and absorbance. More interestingly, the presence of Cu2+ greatly shortened the reaction needed for nanocluster formation. These unique advantages allowed researchers to build a rather simple but convenient Cu2+ sensor. Afterwards, the same group developed another Cu2+ detection method by using thiol-quenched DNA-templated Cu/Ag alloy nanoclusters as the probe. The presence of Cu2+ could catalyze the oxidation of thiol compounds into disulfide, thus recovering the fluorescence of the alloy nanoclusters and thereby allowing the detection of Cu2+.181


5.5.2 Gas sensing. 
The detection of gases, such as toxic or explosive ones, is of high impact both in industry and in everyday life. In this way, it is possible to keep both the working and living environment safe as well as to precisely control important industrial process parameters, such as in chemical engineering or fuel cell procedures.404 By utilizing DNA as a template to direct the growth of conductive metal nanostructures on or between electrodes, electronic sensors could be easily fabricated for gas sensing via measuring the changes in conductivity, resistivity, or impedance of the metal nanostructures upon the adsorption of gas molecules.
5.2.2.1 Hydrogen sensors. 
Given the inflammable and explosive characters of hydrogen gas, which is highly regarded as a potential future alternative fuel, the development of reliable sensors is highly desired in consideration of the safety precautions. By depositing compacted DNA-templated moss-like Pd nanoparticles between two Au electrodes to form a sponge-like structure, Hatakeyama et al. reported the building of a hydrogen gas sensor with high-resistance break junctions.405 Upon interaction with hydrogen gas, the volume of the moss-like Pd nanoparticles expanded and the break junctions between them closed, which finally led to an increase in the readout current (Fig. 23). Importantly, the senor showed high sensitivity and could detect hydrogen gas at a concentration as low as 0.1%. Moreover, the sensor responded rather fast upon atmosphere exchange between nitrogen and hydrogen gases. It should be pointed out that the increase in current for hydrogen sensing in this study was different from previous sensors, where the current generally decreased due to the formation of a PdHx complex.406 Later on, Horrocks and coworkers reported the synthesis of a DNA-templated Pd nanowire network on a Si/SiO2 substrate for the preparation of a two-terminal electronic hydrogen sensor.407 The interaction of hydrogen with the Pd nanowires resulted in the formation of Pd hydride, which increased the resistance.
 Fig. 23  Synthesis of moss-like Pd nanoparticles on λ-DNA for constructing a hydrogen sensor. (a) Schematic illustration of the moss-like Pd nanostructure formation in the presence of DNA and ascorbic acid. (b) Transmission electron microscopy images of the moss-like Pd nanoparticles. (c) Schematic showing the differences in the sensing mechanism of electronic hydrogen sensors for traditional Pd materials (left) and Pd–DNA hybrid nanostructures (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 406. Copyright 2011 Society of Powder Technology Japan. 
5.2.2.2 Ammonia sensors. 
Ammonia is widely used in the farming industry and chemical industry for the production of fertilizers, explosives, and coolants. The leakage of ammonia gas is highly dangerous to living creatures.408 For instance, even a low concentration of ammonia can bring toxicity to aquatic organisms; besides, the inhalation of a tiny amount of ammonia can induce acute poisoning to humans. To sense ammonia gas at low concentrations and with a fast response, Liu and coworkers utilized DNA-templated silver nanowires as the sensing material of an electronic sensor.409 Upon the adsorption of ammonia, the conductivity of the silver nanowires increased. Particularly benefiting from the high surface/volume ratio of the DNA-templated silver nanostructures, rapid alarm and identification device (RAID) gas sensing (∼10 s) and high sensitivity could be achieved. More importantly, the sensing process could be conducted at room temperature, which was more convenient than previous semiconducting material-based sensors that required high temperatures.410
5.2.2.3 Humidity sensors. 
Good humidity control plays an important role in various fields, such as weather reports, industrial processes, and everyday domestic life.411 To date, various materials, including mesoporous nanomaterials, polymers, and metallic nanomaterials, have been exploited to develop sensitive humidity sensors.411–413 In one example, Shen and coworkers proposed the design of a humidity sensor by dropping DNA-templated silver nanonetworks on comb-like gold electrodes.245 Once water vapor was absorbed on the metal nanostructure surface, hydroxyl could be formed on the surfaces, allowing the transfer of protons. As a result, the increase in current in the sensor could be used as the signal readout for humidity.
In addition to the utilization of mere DNA–metal nanohybrids as sensing materials, Myung synthesized a series of metal/DNA-modified single-wall carbon nanotubes as gas sensing materials.414 By using Pd, Pt, and Au as the metal parts, a series of sensors were fabricated by depositing the corresponding ternary hybrids onto microelectrodes. They systematically studied the sensitivity and selectivity of the sensors in response to various gases, such as ammonia, hydrogen, hydrogen sulfide, and nitrogen dioxide, by measuring the variation in resistance.
The enriched properties of DNA-templated metal nanostructures and their responses toward different environmental factors contribute a lot to the development of efficient sensors. The selectivity of the DNA-metallization-based sensors, however, remains a problem to be overcome, unless a clear relationship between the DNA sequence and the response of the templated metal toward analytes is figured out.

5.6 Biosensing
Due to the flexibility in synthesis and the rich functions of both the DNA templates as well as the templated metal nanomaterials, the most popular studied application of DNA metallization is in biosensing. Although studies related to this section have been partially summarized in other reviews with different topics,17,136,137,415–417 herein, we tend to comprehensively summarize how DNA-templated nanometal growth is elaborately employed for biosensing applications from the perspective of DNA metallization, and to provide the general principles to potential researchers interested in this area to help them select the most appropriate processes for engineering new biosensors with DNA metallization.

5.6.1 Direct metallization on the DNA analyte. 
This is the simplest and most direct biosensing scheme with DNA metallization, and mainly relies on the sequence-dependent fluorescent properties of the resulting metal nanoclusters. This approach allows researchers to easily identify a single nucleotide mutation or to sense the environment around the metal nanoclusters. For instance, both Wang's group and our group almost simultaneously proposed the utilization of site-specific DNA-programmed AgNC growth for fluorescently detecting single nucleotide polymorphisms.155,156 Utilizing a similar approach, Hosseini's group detected the methylation on a DNA scaffold.418 Later on, Wang's group found that the DNA-templated CuNC synthesis could also be used to discriminate various mismatch types;179 while Shao's group utilized AgNCs deposited on the abasic site or gap site of dsDNA as the sensor for detecting the bases in the nearby microenvironments.419–422 By using the abasic site simultaneously as a pocket for recognizing theophylline and as a support for AgNCs, a biosensor for theophylline was easily fabricated based on the inhibited growth of AgNCs by theophylline.423 The tunable fluorescence variation of the AgNCs on the same template with switchable conformations allowed researchers to study the structural fluctuation and the solvation dynamics of the human telomeric sequence.424 Although simple, this method was limited to sensing mainly DNA analytes that possess special base sequences and has limited application with non-DNA species, and also this method requires tedious processes for screening the target DNA templates.
As DNA possesses molecular recognition abilities and as the templated metal nanomaterials are highly active, probes based on DNA metallization can sense analytes via either interacting with the metals or by changing the structures of the DNA templates, which thus trigger a variation in the metal nanomaterials’ properties that can be recognized as the signal readout.


5.6.2 Pre-synthesized DNA-templated nanometals as probes. 
Similar to some metal ions that can quench the fluorescence of nanoclusters, various biology-related small molecules, like thiol-containing compounds,425–427 sulfide ions,183 hydrogen peroxide,428,429 hypochlorite,429,430 quinone,428,431 dopamine,432 nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide,433 and L-histidine,434 were also found to be potential quenchers due to their strong interactions with metal atoms. For instance, Wang and coworkers reported the utilization of short DNA-templated AgNCs for the detection of biothiols in biological fluids.425 They speculated that the coordination interaction between silver and sulfur atoms lead to the formation of a Ag–thiol complex, which was a fluorescent groundstate complex that absorbs light, but immediately returns to the groundstate without the emission of photons.
In contrast, our and other groups found that some molecules could enhance the fluorescent intensities of AgNCs.435–437 As exemplified in one of our works, the emission of AgNCs templated on a C12 oligomer were enhanced upon the addition of thiol compounds.435 The unusual phenomenon was attributed to charge transfer between the AgNCs and thiols or the change in microenvironment induced by the thiols. While Chang and coworkers found that AgNCs formed on oligomers that form an i-motif structure could be used to sense adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP) via an emission wavelength shift and fluorescent intensity enhancement at acidic and basic pH, respectively.436 Based on the variation in the CD spectrum, they revealed that the interactions between AgNCs and DNA were enhanced in the presence of ATP and thus this induced a variation in the fluorescent properties.
In addition to leveraging fluorescent variations for signal transduction, Liu and coworkers utilized the DNA-supported Ag/Au alloy nanostructures as active SERS substrates for the highly sensitive detection of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene and cancer biomarkers-carcinoembryonic antigens.214
5.6.2.2 Transformed into species that can interact with nanometals. 
Based on the work discussed in the above subsection, these probes have been further extended to monitor the activities of enzymes that can generate molecules to quench the fluorescence of DNA-templated nanoclusters. A typical example of this sort of probe was reported in 2012 by Willner and coworkers, who disclosed the utilization of DNA-templated AgNCs that could be quenched by hydrogen peroxide or quinones to respectively detect hydrogen peroxide-generating oxidase or quinones-producing enzymes (Fig. 24).428 Moreover, by coupling these enzymes with other enzymes they could formulate biocatalytic cascades, which allowed them to detect a broad scope of enzymes. Later on, similar schemes were reported to detect enzymes, such as acetylcholinesterase,438 acetylcholinesterase,438 glutathione reductase,439 and alkaline phosphatase.398 Furthermore, these probes could also be employed to detect analytes that could be converted into species via chemical reaction or biological processes to induce changes in the properties of DNA-templated nanomaterials.440,441
 Fig. 24  Typical procedures for DNA-templated nanometals in sensing analytes that can be converted into species to interact with the nanometals to produce signals for readout. For example, based on the quenching effect of hydrogen peroxide (a) and quinones (b) toward DNA-templated silver nanoclusters, biosensors for detecting broadened analytes could be achieved by incorporating enzymatic or cascade enzymatic processes. Modified and printed with permission from ref. 428. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
5.6.2.3 Analyte-induced changes in the structure of DNA. 
As already discussed in Section 4.1.1.1, changes in the microenvironment of DNA structures around AgNCs can also be used to tune the fluorescent properties. In this context, various sensors have been prepared with DNA metallization by using DNA template composed of two segments, where one is used as the nucleation sites for nanoclusters and the other is employed to recognize the target analyte. Upon binding the target molecules, the structure of the template DNA is switched, thus inducing a variation of the fluorescent properties of the nanoclusters.
Quintessential work in this area was reported in 2010 by Martinez, Werner, and coworker, who discovered that the red fluorescent intensity of DNA-templated AgNCs was enhanced 500-fold when located near G-rich DNA sequences upon partial hybridization of the template DNA with the G-rich segment-containing strand (Fig. 25A).442 However, no enhancement was induced by either A-rich strand, while irreversible cluster transfer was observed for C-rich strands, and a green emission was induced by T-rich strands. Taking advantage of this turn-on process, they further designed a probe to detect target DNA which could bring the AgNC–DNA and G-rich DNA into proximity via hybridization. On the basis of this work, they found another interesting phenomenon in 2012, whereby different turn-on colors of the AgNCs could be obtained with the same DNA template and the same G-rich DNA segment by just tuning the position of the G-rich segment relative to the template DNA (Fig. 25B).443 They extended this scheme for single nucleation polymorphism detection since different single nucleation polymorphisms lead to variations in the location of the G-rich DNA and the AgNCs. Different hypotheses have been proposed to try to explore the mechanism behind the fluorescence enhancement, but no clear explanation has been achieved yet. Lately inspired by these works, numerous biosensors that involve bringing the G-rich region proximal to AgNCs via different biological processes, such as hybridization,444–453 competitive hybridization,454,455 hybridization chain reaction,456 strand displacement reaction,452,457 aptamer recognition,458–460 and nonspecific binding,461 have been built for detecting DNA,449–456 single N6-methyladenine,448 microRNA,457 RNA,447 H2O2,446 glucose,446 enzyme activities,444,445,460 ATP,458,460 adenosine,458 thrombin,452,458,459 and Plasmodium falciparum lactate dehydrogenase.461
 Fig. 25  Changes in the microenvironment around a sliver nanocluster for biosensing. (A) Red fluorescence enhancement induced by the proximity of a G-rich overhang (a and b) and its application for DNA detection (c). Printed with permission from ref. 442. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (B) Different color response by changing the position of the enhancer relative to the silver nanocluster nucleation sequence (b). The design can be used to detect single nucleotide polymorphisms (b–d). Printed with permission from ref. 443. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Another interesting phenomenon was disclosed by Yang and Vosch's group, who reported that the hybridization of a target miRNA with the recognition region of the DNA–AgNC probe induced a decrease in the red fluorescence intensity.82 In a further study, they demonstrated that not only the DNA sequence but also the secondary structure mutually determined the emission of AgNCs.462 Specifically, they proved that the sequence propensity for forming mismatched self-dimers or hairpins played an important role in creating and stabilizing red-emissive AgNCs, which explained why the hybridization with miRNA led to a quenching effect. Along this line, a series of probes were developed for the detection of multiplex plant miRNAs and human miRNAs.463–466 Contrary to their findings, Jeffrey and Chang respectively reported that the hybridization of certain DNA sequences with the recognition region increased the fluorescence intensity of the AgNCs, which could be used for DNA detection.467–472
There are also some other interesting phenomena that have been found accidently. In a recent work, Yin and Ye's group found that the fluorescence intensity of AgNCs was greatly enhanced when AgNC pairs (also called dimers) were formed via hybridization of their recognition segments.473 Taking advantage of this feature, biosensors for analyzing DNA,474,475 aptamer ligands,475 and single nucleotide polymorphisms476 have been manufactured. Kim and coworkers showed that the hybridization-induced irreversible cluster transfer, which allowed the turn-on detection of single nucleotide polymorphism.477 The conformation variations of the recognition segment in the presence of an aptamer-targeting protein or ssDNA-binding proteins were found to decrease the fluorescence intensity of metal nanoclusters.478,479 Fluorescence quenching caused by complete degradation of the DNA template has been leveraged to detect nucleases.480,481
Moreover, by taking advantage of the energy transfer between DNA-templated metal nanoclusters with other molecules or nanomaterials (e.g., hemin, black hole quencher, AuNPs, graphene oxide) and the stimulated conformational variation of the recognition segment to trigger or perturb such processes, various probes have been developed for detecting DNA,482–487 aptamer ligands,486–489 RNA,490 and DNA intercalating ligands.491–493


5.6.3 Target-induced generation of metallization templates. 
In some cases, targets cannot be sensed directly by either the DNA template or by the supported nanometals. To this end, alternative methods have been developed relying on an analyte-induced generation of a DNA template with specific sequences for subsequently directing the growth of nanometals, the properties of which are then finally used as signal reporters. For instance, taking advantage of analyte-triggered DNA hybridization/dehybridization,192,494–503 isothermal exponential amplification,504,505 enzymatic DNA polymerization/degradation,307,506–517 hybridization chain reaction,160,518 or a combination of these processes519–522 or inhibition of these processes523,524 for producing DNA templates, fluorescent nanocluster-based biosensors have been prepared for detecting aptamer ligands,500,506 DNA,192,494–497,516–518,522 microRNA,160,504,505,522 enzyme activities,307,508–515,523 small molecules,501,502,520,521,524 protein–small molecule interactions,507 proteins,498,499,503,519 and cancer cells.160 The methods classified in this category typically feature high sensitivity and a label-free capacity, but consideration should be taken into account when detecting analytes in complicated environments that may interfere with the metallization process or that can affect the properties of the generated nanometals.
In addition, by triggering DNA template generation on an electrode surface via these biochemical processes followed with metallization, the produced metal nanomaterials can be used as electroactive labels for manufacturing highly sensitive electrochemical biosensors.193,501,525–528 For example, by sequentially modifying telomerase primer oligonucleotides on a Au electrode, elongating the primer in the presence of telomerase and dNTPs, and depositing the clustered AgNPs on the DNA template, our group proposed an ultrasensitive electrochemical biosensor for detecting telomerase activity in circulating cancer cells.193
Given that DNA metallization can be directed by seed-mediated site-specific nucleation, Mirkin and Letsinger proposed a chip-based scanometric assay system, leveraging a sandwich structure composed of a target DNA, an oligonucleotide-modified gold nanoparticle probe, and a short DNA-anchored glass slide (Fig. 26A).529 Both the DNA strands on the glass slide and the nanoparticle probe could hybridize with parts of the target DNA. By utilizing the gold nanoparticles captured on the glass slide as silver metallization nucleation sites, amplified signals could be visualized by a flatbed scanner. Based on this work, Mirkin and coworkers extended work to further enhance the sensitivity of this chip-based assay by combing a scanometric assay with a bio-barcode amplification strategy (Fig. 26B).530 Generally, the bio-barcode amplification method contains two components: magnetic nanoparticles modified with target captures that can either recognize proteins or DNA, and AuNPs anchored with barcode DNA as well as the target captures to form a sandwich structure with magnetic particles. In the presence of the analyte target, the formed sandwich structures can be magnetically isolated from the assay solution. After releasing the bio-barcode DNA from the AuNPs and subsequent silver metallization, scanometric methods can be used to readout the detection results.
 Fig. 26  Target-induced generation of a DNA-metallization template for building biosensors. (A) Schematic illustration of a chip-based scanometric assay system for DNA detection by reading the amplified signals generated from seed-mediated site-specific metallization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 529. Copyright 2000 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) Schematic depiction of a biosensor combining scanometric assay with a bio-barcode amplification strategy for the ultrasensitive detection of proteins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 530. Copyright 2003 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
To date, different bio-barcode sensors have been designed for detecting single/multiple proteins, or nucleic acids, cancer biomarkers, and pathogenic biomarker for Alzheimer's disease.531–539 Besides the bio-barcode assay, by attaching Raman-dye-label onto AuNPs, targets could be identified by the surface-enhanced Raman scattering signal promoted by the silver coating.540,541 Using a similar sandwich structure and metallization process shown in the scanometric assay formulated between two electrodes or on quartz piezoelectric crystals and a glass slide, biosensors using electrical current, microgravimetric quartz-crystal-microbalance, and liquid crystals for signal transduction have been reported for DNA analysis.542–545


5.6.4 Nanozyme-based biosensor. 
The peroxidase-mimicking activity of nanometals templated on DNA allowed researchers to fabricate colorimetric biosensors. For instance, Yang and coworkers proposed the utilization of DNA-templated Ag/Pt nanoclusters as a peroxidase-mimicking nanozyme for the colorimetric detection of thrombin, where the DNA contained one segment for metal nucleation and another aptamer segment for binding thrombin.381 Also, by randomly depositing metal nanoparticles onto templates induced by target-triggered biological processes, amplified biosensors based on nanozymes have been reported for detecting lysozyme and thrombin.381,382 Also, based on the inhibition of the enzyme-mimicking activity of the nanometals by absorbing thiol-containing molecules, Sun et al. reported a biosensor for the colorimetric detection of cysteine and homocysteine.215 Amplified signal readout could be easily achieved with sensors built in this category, which required no complicated labeling synthesis.


5.6.5 Demetallization-based biosensors. 
In the ongoing investigation of DNA metallization, researchers found that the deposition of enough metal on the DNA scaffold could not only protect the DNA from changes in the environment but also block the DNA chemical or biological activities.291 In recent years, our group demonstrated that, by tailoring the ratio of Ag+ and short ssDNA or dsDNA, the biological functions of the DNA could be completely blocked.188–192 On the other hand, we also found that some silver strong binding molecules, such as dopamine and biothiols, could compete with the DNA ligand and displace the DNA from the deposited silver (the term ‘demetallization’ is used to describe this process). Simultaneously, the biological functionalities of the released DNA were recovered, which, for example, allowed the hybridization between ssDNA and the complementary strands,188 the intercalation of dsDNA binding ligands,189,190 the conformation switch of the G-quadruplex,191 and initialization of exonuclease III-mediated amplification processes (Fig. 27).192 In this way, biosensors for demetallization agents could be easily built on the basis of using the released DNA to generate further signals for the readout. Very recently, Zhao and Yin instead utilized the released AgNPs to generate silver ions for producing electrochemical signals.546 By combing glutathione-induced demetallization with chain hybridization reaction amplification, our group very recently developed a label-free ratiometric electrochemical GSH biosensor for monitoring intracellular redox homeostasis.547 But what exactly the demetallization mechanism is requires in-depth investigation of how the DNA strands are released in the presence of these small molecular agents: by simple surface displacement, metal etching, both, or other reasons?
 Fig. 27  Demetallization-based biosensors. Upon the addition of a demetallization agent, such as biothiols or dopamine, the biological functions of DNA molecules are recovered. (A) The released DNA can hybridize with its complementary strands. Reprinted with permission and in a color version from ref. 188. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Genefinder can intercalate the demetallized double strands. Reprinted with permission and in a color version from ref. 190. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) The G-quadruplex structure is recovered after demetallization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Exo nuclease III-based recycling process can be initiated in the presence of the demetallized ssDNA strands. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V. 


5.6.6 Logic gate devices. 
Logic gate devices constructed with molecular computing have been suggested as potential alternatives for traditional semiconductor transistor-based computation, which offers a promising paradigm for future computing technology.548 Among all the molecules employed to date, nucleic acids are recognized as attractive building blocks for logic gates due to their programmability, recognition property, and polymorphic conformations.549 But to generate signals readable for output, signal transducers are required to integrate with DNA logic gates. In this scenario, sensors manufactured with DNA metallization have been further extended to construct logic gates via using analytes as the inputs and nanometal property variations as the outputs.
For instance, Wang and coworkers reported the utilization of a hairpin DNA containing ploy C, G-rich, and C-rich regions as a AgNC template for the construction of DNA logic gates with K+ and H+ as the inputs (Fig. 28A).550 The fluorescence variation of the AgNCs induced by the conformational switch of the G-rich and C-rich segments upon the respective input of K+ and H+ could be used as outputs. In this way, several types of logic operations (NOT, NOR, and AND) were performed. Based on the fluorescence variation of the DNA-templated AgNCs induced by the proximity of the G-rich or T-rich sequences, our group reported the construction of various logic gates using DNA as inputs (Fig. 28B).551 At the same time, a biomolecular keypad that could construct crossword puzzles was also enabled. Inspired by these works, many different types of DNA logic operations have been proposed in recent years,488,552–554 mainly based on the utilization of inputs that can induce changes in the DNA template microenvironment. Besides using DNA–AgNCs as platforms, our group also reported the construction of logical gates by taking advantage of thiol-induced DNA demetallization and graphene oxide–DNA interaction, in which thiols and DNA were used as inputs, while the fluorescence response of the dye-labeled DNA absorbed on graphene oxide functioned as the output.188
 Fig. 28  DNA-templated silver nanoclusters for logic operations. (A) Logic gates built with hairpin DNA-templated silver nanoclusters, whose fluorescence can respond to the presence of K+ and/or H+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 550. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (B) Logic operations by leveraging the fluorescence variation of DNA-templated silver nanoclusters induced by the proximity of a G-rich or T-rich overhang, which can be further used to construct crossword puzzles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 551. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Therefore, we can see that properly choosing the DNA templates and carefully designing the metallization process can allow researchers to easily build biosensors toward different analytes via reading the chemical/physical properties of the DNA-templated nanometals, which could also be further extended to conduct logic gate operations. Such designs would be highly beneficial for a wide spectrum of applications, ranging from clinical diagnosis to electronic applications.

5.7 Bioimaging
The development of fluorescence microscopy techniques greatly expands our understanding of biological processes, from biomolecular interactions to cellular functions. Compared to conventional fluorescence contrast agents, such as organic dyes and quantum dots, noble metal nanoclusters, especially AgNCs and AuNCs, have been developed as a novel class of optical probe for biomedical imaging due to their excellent properties, including tunable fluorescence emission, large Stoke shifts, photostability, subnanometer size, and biocompatibility.137 In particular, DNA-templated AgNCs offer great potential for high sensitivity biological labeling as they can be easily functionalized via either post chemical conjugation or by elaborately designing DNA template sequences.416,417 In this section, we summarize how the flexibility of DNA metallization directs the evolution of AgNCs for biomedical labeling and imaging.

5.7.1 Pre- or post-modification of the DNA templates. 
The early studies into utilizing DNA-templated AgNCs for live cell surface labeling were mainly reported by Dickson and coworkers. Due to the low affinity and permeability of cells to DNA, they proposed using functional biomolecules to modify the DNA templates before AgNC growth. For instance, by employing the C24 DNA strand ending with a thiol group, by which maleimide-activated avidin was covalently conjugated as the template, they fabricated highly stable and bright AgNCs to specially label biotinylated cells.555 However, the AgNCs generated with this method needed a biotinylation agent to pre-treat the methanol-fixed cells, which could affect the cell viability. To this, they further developed AgNCs templated on heparin sulfate antibody-conjugated DNA for better cell surface staining at 4 °C. Interestingly, internalization of the AgNCs and an emission in the nuclei were observed when the cells were incubated at 37 °C, which allowed investigation of transmembrane delivery. Nevertheless, the conjugated antibody could be destroyed by the harsh reductant-BH4−. In another work, they proposed a fluorogenic cluster shuttle concept by transferring pre-synthesized AgNCs on a poly(acrylic acid) backbone to C12 ssDNA-tagged proteins, allowing the generation of highly emissive labels on specific proteins without interfering with their biological activities (Fig. 29).556 In this way, C12 DNA-conjugated actin antibodies were transferred with AgNCs and could be subsequently used as fluorescent probes for specific staining bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells. Later on, they systematically optimized the reaction conditions, namely the DNA sequences, DNA/Ag+ ratio, reaction time, and temperature, to synthesize AgNCs with strong and pure emission for labeling both live and fixed cells.557 Therein, intracellular delivery was enabled by coupling the DNA templates with cell-penetrating peptides or via microinjection. Instead of pre-conjugating DNA templates with cell-targeting ligands, Hofkens and Vosch reported a simpler method for intracellular delivering of DNA–AgNCs by complexing them with the commercially available transfection reagent lipofectamine.558 Both the endocytosomes and the nucleus of living HeLa cells were observed to be labeled with strong luminescence of the AgNCs after 24 h incubation.
 Fig. 29  DNA-templated silver nanoclusters (SCs) for cell bioimaging. (a) Schematic illustration of shuttle transfer SCs from a poly(acrylic acid) (PA) template to 12-mer oligocytosine (C12). (b) The excitation of the SCs were red-shifted after transfer (left panel) and a 10-fold fluorescence enhancement was observed correspondingly (right panel). Based on the SC shuttle method, FITC-modified anti-actin antibody-conjugated C12 could be labeled with SCs. (c–e) Colocalization of the red fluorescence of SC and the green fluorescence of FITC in the cell demonstrating the feasibility of this probe for cell labeling. Printed with permission from ref. 556. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


5.7.2 Aptamer-containing DNA templates. 
Aimed at overcoming the tedious probe fabrication processes and the cell treatments involved in the above studies, AgNCs templated on a DNA scaffold containing aptamer sequences were lately proposed as a new generation of cell-specific bioimaging AgNCs. This method was rather simple and needed no further modification or purification. For example, Gao and coworkers employed DNA templates containing a segment of Sgc8 aptamer and another segment of a C-rich sequence to synthesize AgNCs in one-pot and used these for specially binding the nucleus of live CCRF-CEM cells (Fig. 30A);559 while, Wang and Li respectively reported the direct deposition of AgNCs on the scaffold of AS1411 and MUC1 aptamers for cellular imaging. Also, DNA templates containing a linker-sequence-bridging aptamer and AgNC nucleation sequence were studied for synthesizing AgNCs with tunable fluorescent properties for cell-targeting imaging.432,560–562 Very recently, Han et al. revealed the utilization of L-DNA-templated aptamer–AgNCs as a biostable optical probe for recognizing and imaging cancer cells, due to L-DNA being less sensitive than D-DNA toward degradation by nucleases (Fig. 30B).498
 Fig. 30  (A) Silver nanoclusters (AgNCs) templated on DNA sequences containing aptamers for targeted cell nucleus labeling. The red fluorescence of AgNCs colocated well with the blue fluorescence of Hoechst 33342 in the nucleus of liver CCRF-CEM cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 559. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Synthesis of AgNCs on an L-DNA-templated aptamer as a biostable probe for type-specific cell imaging. Reprinted with permission from ref. 498. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (C) Preparation of AgNCs on aptamer-containing DNA templates with bioresponsive properties for intracellular mRNA imaging. In the presence of mRNA, the changes in the microenvironment around the AgNCs lead to a spectrum shift and intensity enhancement in the emission of the AgNCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 565. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.7.3 Bioresponsive DNA templates. 
As a further evolution of the DNA–AgNC-based cellular labeling probe, responsive bioprobes that exhibit variations in their fluorescent properties upon recognizing specific type cells have been developed. Such strategies mainly rely on the changes in the microenvironment around AgNCs, induced by the interaction of the DNA template with cellular biomolecules. In one example, Wang and coworkers designed a label-free and turn-on probe for cancer cell imaging by taking advantage of aptamer (sgc8c) recognition-induced conformational alternation of one hairpin DNA and the subsequent hybridization-triggered enhancement of the AgNCs emission.563 Whereas, the turn-off strategy has been reported by Huang and coworkers, who synthesized a yellow-emission DNA–AgNCs for detecting and imaging prion protein on SK-N-SH cell surfaces,564 instead, Zhu and coworkers proposed a DNA–AgNC probe with hybridization-induced ‘turn-on’ and ‘spectrum-shift’ properties for the intracellular imaging of tumor-related mRNA (Fig. 30C), which allowed the reduction of the background signal and was thus suitable for the detection of low concentration intracellular targets.565 Moreover, the combination of DNA–AgNCs with carbon nanotubes allowed designing a FRET-based probe for fluorescently labeling a folate receptor on cancer cells.566 Based on the fact that the cleavage of DNA templates by reactive oxygen species can destroy the microenvironment around AgNCs and thus quench the fluorescence, Zhang et al. proposed the utilization of DNA–AgNCs for intracellular imaging of hydroxyl radicals.567 Utilizing the conjugation of aptamer-templated AgNCs with polyethylene glycol-coated ultrasmall gadolinium oxide nanoparticles, Xu and coworkers fabricated a cancer cell-targeted nanoprobe for optical/magnetic resonance dual-modal bioimaging.568 Therein, an interesting phenomenon was found, in that proper adjustment of the ratio between AgNCs and the gadolinium oxide nanoparticle could boost both the emission and magnetic resonance signals in the complex.
Besides visualizing cellular components, our group reported the utilization of DNA-programmed AgNCs for fingerprint imaging.569 Based on the fluorescence variation induced by a G-proximity and T-proximity strategy,442 both endogenous and exogenous substances in the fingerprint could be simultaneously observed with different aptamer-modified AgNCs.
The flexibility of the DNA–AgNC design and synthesis provides a powerful toolbox for designing biomedical labeling and imaging agents. Yet, for further applications in more complicated environments, such as small animals or even further in human being's diseases sites, systematic studies concerning the stability, biocompability, pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, and the clearance of DNA–AgNCs are necessary.

5.8 Therapy
Over the past few decades, a broad range of functional nanomaterials have been explored for diagnosing and treating various diseases, including cancer, Alzheimer's disease, and infections.570–573 The main advantages of nanomaterials for medical applications lie in the fact that such therapeutics allow for targeted drug delivery, improved solubility, extended half-life, controlled release, and reduced immunogenicity.81,573,574 In particular, the unique ability of nanomaterials to combine multiple modalities in one single system enables real-time monitoring of the therapeutic processes and for optimizing treatment interventions. Within this context, metal nanomaterials fabricated via DNA metallization have also been employed for therapeutic applications on the basis of their rich functionalities.

5.8.1 Nanotoxicology. 
Along with the prevalence of nanomaterials in technical products as well as biomedical studies, concerns have been raised about their potential impacts on health and safety, with such concerns categorized in the field of nanotoxicology.575 Acquiring knowledge about the relationship between the physiochemical properties of nanomaterials and their toxicological profiles is an important step toward the further development of nanomaterials for clinic applications.
In 2012, Mandal and coworkers reported the cancer cell killing effect of folic-acid-functionalized Fe–Au core–shell nanoparticles grown on DNA templates.576 They attributed the cancer cell death to possibly inference in the life cycle of cancer cells by the nanoparticles or by uptake of the nanoparticles. However, no further in-depth studies were carried out. In the same year, Martinez and corkers reported the synthesis of a highly stable AgNC templated on DNA with the sequence of 5′-ACCCGAACCTGGGCTACCACCCTTAATCCCC-3′, where the generated AgNCs could retain strong fluorescence for at least one year.577 Interestingly, a lower cellular toxicity was observed for these stable AgNCs in comparison with the less stable DNA-templated AgNCs, which might be due to the fact that free silver was easily released from the less stable AgNCs and this led to the toxicity. Although the cytotoxicity of different DNA–AgNCs has been more or less studied in the works summarized in the bioimaging section, all these parts are conducted on a case-by-case basis.
Very recently, Heinrich and coworkers investigated the cytotoxicity of AgNCs with three different DNA templates, namely 28-base ssDNA, 19-base ssDNA, and hairpin DNA (Fig. 31).578 They found that the cytotoxicity of the DNA–AgNCs showed no dependency on their optical sensing abilities. When incubating cells with silver concentrations between 75 nM and 36 μM, all three AgNCs displayed concentration-dependent toxicity. The hairpin DNA-templated AgNCs showed the least cytotoxicity, with cell viabilities above 80% at all concentrations studied; while for the two ssDNA-templated AgNCs, a significant cell inhibition effect was observed at the highest concentration, whereby a shorter template DNA, led to a higher cytotoxicity induced by the templated AuNCs. In further studies of the cytotoxicity induced by free silver ions and the DNA templates, they concluded that for stable AgNCs, the DNA templates could effectively protect them from attack by cellular structures and molecules, thereby reducing the release of silver ions and thus lowering the cytotoxicity. Heinrich's study implied the potential of tuning the cytotoxicity of DNA–AgNC-based probes by adapting DNA sequences with different bases at certain sites.
 Fig. 31  Synthesis of DNA-templated silver nanoclusters (a) with different sequences, such as 28-bases ssDNA (b), 19-base ssDNA (c), and hairpin DNA (d). (e) Cell viability assays demonstrated the tunable toxicity of the DNA-templated silver nanoclusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 578. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
Unfortunately, only limited studies have been reported to date studying the in vitro toxicology of DNA-templated nanomaterials. It is also a pity that no comprehensive in vivo toxicological data are available to date. Hence, there is a prominent need to establish reliable both in vitro and in vivo models to assess their impacts on future biomedical applications.


5.8.2 Imaging-guided delivery. 
Real-time monitoring of drug delivery would provide crucial information on the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, cell intake efficiencies, cellular pathways, and mechanisms of activation, which would enable optimizing a personalized drug dosing while minimizing the potential side effects.579 To date, the fluorescence imaging strategy has been the most popular technique to track drug-delivery processes.580 Based on their unique characters, DNA-templated AgNCs have also been used as fluorescent labels for real-time monitoring of cargo delivery. For instance, by coupling biotinylated siRNA and biotinylated aptamer-templated AgNCs onto the same streptavidin, Zhu and coworkers fabricated a dual-purpose probe for the delivery and in situ tracking of siRNA into target cells.581
In a very recent work, Hsu and workers designed an ‘all-in-one’ oligonucleotide-based probe for AgNCs nucleation and mciroRNA loading, by which real-time monitoring microRNA delivery was achieved.582 As a further extension of this area, our group synthesized the one-pot DNA-programmed growth of AgNCs on a CpG (unmethylated cytosine–phosphate–guanine) oligodeoxynucleotide-containing sequence for simultaneously enhancing the immune response and achieving the real-time bioimaging of dendritic cells.569 These works encouraged the broad application of DNA-templated metal nanoclusters for imaging-guided delivery.


5.8.3 Photothermal therapy. 
Compared to conventional chemotherapy, photothermal therapy relying on photothermal agents that can generate heat from light absorption has shown unique advantages, such as high spatial/temporal resolutions, remarkable selectivity, and minimum side effects.583 Metal nanomaterials, such as Au, Pd, and alloys, with strong adsorption in the near-infrared region have shown great promise in the treatment of cancer and infectious diseases with photogenerated hyperthermia.584–586 In this circumstance, DNA-templated gold nanostructures have recently been studied as a new type of photothermal agent, as the DNA scaffold can be flexibly programmed to control the growth of different gold nanostructures with tunable optical properties. For example, Kim and Park's group recently reported the synthesis of branched Au nanostructures with a hydrodynamic diameter of about 20 nm using X-shaped and Y-shaped DNA templates.569 As the Au nanostructures showed broad absorption in the near-infrared region, they were further utilized as efficient photothermal sensitizers for treating cancer cells. In another work, by taking advantage of DNA-templated gold metallization on the heterogeneous surfaces of SWNTs via a nonspecific seed-mediated process, Liu's group synthesized water-soluble gold-coated SWNTs for improved photothermal cancer therapy.587 Meanwhile, the enhanced SERS effect of the hybrid allowed the Raman imaging of cancer cells. These works highlight the great potential of utilizing DNA metallization for the facile synthesis of different metal nanostructures in aqueous solution for photothermal therapeutic applications. Moreover, besides being utilized as ligands, the DNA template may be further optimized with functions such as targeting abilities and gene therapy effects.


5.8.4 Demetallization-mediated cargo release. 
Nanomaterials that can release cargoes in response to a stimulus, especially a biological stimulus in pathological microenvironments, are of particular interest for therapeutic applications, which could not only enhance the bioavailability of drugs at the disease sites but also reduce systematic cytotoxicity and undesired side effects.588 The unique character of demetallization of DNA-templated silver nanostructures in the presence of biothiols was recently employed to tune cargo release in the intracellular part since there highly concentrated glutathione can be found in the cytosol. For example, by leveraging DNA-directed silver metallization on heterogeneous surfaces, Yang and coworkers prepared a nanocarrier made of AgNP-capped mesoporous silica nanoparticles (Fig. 32A);232 whereby the latter have been widely investigated as drug carriers due to their high surface area and high-loading capacity.589–591 It was found that upon uptake by cells, the rich glutathione inside the cells displaced the AgNPs on the anchored DNA templates and opened the pores of the mesoporous silica nanoparticle, allowing the pinpoint release of encapsulated drugs. Moreover, by further modifying the sgc8 aptamer on the AgNCs, these nanocomposites could be extended for the in vivo targeted chemotherapeutic inhibition of tumor growth.231 Our group reported a rather simple but direct method for gene delivery by the demetallization of plasmid-templated silver nanoparticles (Fig. 32B).592 This method avoided the use of gene transfection agents but also effectively protected the delivered DNA from the harsh conditions. In particular, the intracellular release of DNA allowed for effective gene delivery with minimum side effects. Such properties of DNA-templated silver nanostructures would enable the site-specific delivery of different therapeutic agents in a mild manner.
 Fig. 32  Demetallization-assisted intracellular cargo delivery. (A) (a) DNA-templated silver nanoparticle deposition on the surface mesoporous silica nanoparticles as gatekeepers, which can be removed by intracellular glutathione to release the loaded drugs. (b) Typical transmission electron microscopy image of the silver-deposited mesoporous silica nanoparticles. (c) Intracellular release of loaded rhodamine 6G. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Silver metallization on plasmid for efficient gene delivery. (b) Representative transmission electron microscopy image of the silver–plasmid nanohybrids. (c) Enhanced green fluorescence protein expression in A549 cells transfected with the silver–plasmid hybrid nanoparticles. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 592. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

5.9 Antibacteria
Bacterial infections remain one of the most challenging global health problems, diagnosed in millions of people every year.593,594 Although antibiotics are currently considered as the golden bullet to combat bacterial infections, the continuous emergence of multidrug resistant strains resulting from the abuse of antibiotics has fueled the development of alternative types of antibacterial agents, especially in the form of nanomaterials.595 In particular, AgNPs or their nanohybrids have been widely studied in recent years, though no consensus has yet been reached on the antibacterial mechanism.596–598 One of the key factors determining the antibacterial activity of AgNPs is the need to keep their high colloidal stability.594 To this end, DNA metallization provides a simple but effective way to prepare highly stabile AgNPs as the DNA templates are rich in negatively charged groups. By the deposition of silver on a salmon milt DNA scaffold, AgNPs with a size less than 10 nm and high stability were prepared by Takeshima's group and exhibited a high inhibitory and killing efficiency against Escherichia coli, both in the free form and after immobilization on fabrics. Tan's group reported the utilization of dsDNA-templated silver metallization on graphene oxide surfaces to fabricate antibacterial nanohybirds with highly enhanced activities (Fig. 33).228 Interestingly, compared to bare AgNPs, the nanohybrids showed a much higher efficiency, which might be attributed to the reduced tendency of aggregation of AgNPs immobilized on the graphene oxide surface, the synergistic effect of the two nanomaterials, and also the facilitated contact with the bacteria membranes. These results encouraged the group to further test the ability of the nanohybrids for reducing the severity of Xanthomonas perforans spots on tomato leaves,229 and they found them to be much better than using the combination of copper and mancozeb, which is the current standard treatment.
 Fig. 33  Application of DNA-templated silver nanoparticles for antibacterial studies. (A) Schematic depiction of the synthesis of highly uniformed and colloidal stable silver nanoparticles on the surface of dsDNA-absorbed graphene oxide. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Facilitated interaction between the AgNP/dsDNA/graphene with the bacteria membrane, which was responsible for the high antibacterial efficiency. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Besides colloidal stability, the morphologies and sizes of the AgNPs also play important roles in their ability to prevent bacterial proliferation.595 Along this line, DNA metallization would provide a versatile platform to synthesize AgNPs with different parameters for antibacterial studies and applications. Moreover, a controllable silver interaction with bacteria or silver ions release is also possible by choosing the right DNA templates, or metallization conditions, or silver nanostructures.
6. Conclusion and perspectives
Throughout this review, we can see that impressive progress has been made in the past twenty years with regard to the development of DNA metallization and its application in many diverse areas. The unique chemical characters, programmability, and the inherent rich information encoding properties of the DNA molecules present us with a rational understanding of their distinctive capacity for directing metal growth. Intriguingly, such manipulations allow for control over both the morphologies and the physiochemical properties of the metal nanomaterials, which in some cases cannot be achieved by conventional methods. As a result, the application of DNA-templated metal nanomaterials has attracted attention from numerous areas to build improved devices. Nevertheless, as the research into DNA metallization is located at the interface of chemistry, biology, physics, materials, and computer science, this field is highly dynamic and will continue to provide exciting challenges and opportunities in the future.
6.1 Future challenges in the optimization of DNA metallization

6.1.1 Detailed mechanisms of DNA metallization. 
Although different methods have been developed to fabricate metal nanomaterials with colorful characters on various DNA templates, little knowledge has been gathered about the detailed mechanism which the DNA plays in controlling the growth process as well as the final functions. This emphasizes the importance to shift DNA metallization from currently an empirical science to one built on theory and solid foundation, which requires the collaboration of scientists from multidisciplinary areas. In this way, the precisely controlled synthesis of metal nanostructures with high reproducibility would be possible. Also, it could even allow for the fabrication of metal nanomaterials with desired properties using predesigned sequences. Moreover, it would not be a dream to build a library to encode the relationships between the properties of metal nanomaterials and DNA templates, similar to the discovery of the three-letter genetic codes for protein synthesis in natural biological systems.200 This outlook is consistent with the ambitious goal of the Materials Genome Initiative.599


6.1.2 Optimization of the cost of DNA metallization. 
A main barrier to implement the practical application of DNA metallization lies in the low production, complicated synthetic processes and work-up, and especially the much higher price of DNA templates compared with commonly used chemicals. On the one hand, this encourages the development of facile methods to obtain DNA templates; for example, by enzymatic reactions (e.g., rolling circle amplification, polymerase extension strategies) to amplify the quantities of DNA templates at low cost. Also, there have been reports utilizing DNAs directly obtained from natural sources.229 On the other hand, this requires further simplifying and refining the current synthetic protocols, while at the same time improving the reproducibility and decreasing the errors in the metallization process.

6.2 Future challenges in the applications of DNA metallization

6.2.1 Challenges in nanoelectronics and nanolithography. 
Some major and common obstacles exist in these two areas, including in the alignment and localization of the DNA templates onto a substrate, defects in the metallized nanostructures, and background metal deposition. As DNA surface attachment with desired structures is the first step to fabricating elegant nanocircuits and nanopatterns, advanced alignment techniques are in high demand. The granular structures of the final metal nanomaterial and the existence of nonspecific metal nucleation tend to perturb the expected functions and even induce fatal damage, which thus necessitates improvements to be made in the synthetic processes for fabricating nanometals with high qualities.


6.2.2 Challenges in energy conversion and storage. 
DNA metallization has shown great promise in preparing electrode metal materials with ultrafine structures. Yet, besides acting as a stabilizing ligand, the deep roles that DNA plays in these materials have been rarely studied. Especially as DNA itself contains rich functional chemical groups, their potential effect or the synergistic effect with the metals on the electrochemical processes might bring us a new view for more efficient electrode material design. Besides, the sensitivities of the DNA-templated materials to temperature or other factors should be systematically studied in order to build robust energy conversion and storage devices.


6.2.3 Challenges in catalytic applications. 
The high colloidal dispersibility, air stability, good reusability, and high catalytic activity of the DNA-templated metals provide easy access to prepare water-soluble catalysts for a broadened scope of reactions. Importantly, the polymorphic properties of DNA templates facilitate the synthesis of catalysts with tunable activities, since the morphologies of the metal nanostructures are strongly affected by the DNA sequences and conformations. There is still ample room worthy exploring, for instance, the intrinsic chiral microenvironment of DNA structures to prompt us to further the application of DNA metallization to enantioselective catalysis;386 also, based on the recognition ability of DNA biomolecules, we could build activatable catalysts that could catalyze reactions in special environments upon variations in the DNA templates; moreover, if we could build a database for the relationship between DNA, the metal structure, and the catalytic performance, then metal catalysts with desired functions would be more easily manufactured, just like the enzyme protein synthesis in living systems.


6.2.4 Challenges in sensing applications. 
The rich physicochemical properties of DNA-templated metal nanomaterials make them good signal transducers for sensing applications. As exemplified in the above, the fluorescence response of metal nanoclusters made on DNA templates has allowed their broad applications in both environmental and biological sensing probe constructions. However, for probes that can directly interact with analytes via inducing fluorescence quenching, currently their selectivity would be a problem in situations where more than two of these analytes exist simultaneously. Maybe the sequences used in these works are different, but problems like this should be systematically studied in order to avoid false positive signals. More importantly, the stability and selectivity of these probes in more complicated solutions, such as wastewaters or biological fluids, should be considered, as the subnanometer sized clusters are highly reactive toward many chemicals. To extend the boundary of this area, the leveraging of other properties, such as electrochemical, magnetic, and the SERS signals, of DNA-templated metals are encouraged in the future.


6.2.5 Challenges in biomedical engineering. 
Despite the many exciting ideas that have floated around in recent years using DNA metallization for biomedical engineering (e.g., biological imaging, therapeutic, and antibacterial applications), the nanotoxicology of such materials undisputedly stands in the forefront as a problem issue in this area. For a further step toward clinical applications, nanotoxicity in a cell-based assay is not enough. Concerns regarding the long-term stability, the distribution and transformation in the body, the excretion or any induced changes in the organs or tissues need to be addressed. Also, insufficient data are available on the interactions between DNA-templated metals and the biomolecules in the circulation system. Furthermore, detailed information on the effect of DNA templates on these processes in biological systems would be important for optimizing the synthesis of reliable metal nanoparticles for biomedical engineering applications. Besides the toxicology, the flexibility in DNA metallization still allows for the design and preparation of multifunctional metal nanostructures for advanced theranostic applications.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support was provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21210002, 21673223, 21431007, and 21533008), and the Key Program of Frontier of Sciences, CAS QYZDJ-SSW-SLH052.
References
K. D. Gilroy, A. Ruditskiy, H.-C. Peng, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10414–10472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Tao, S. Habas and P. Yang, Small, 2008, 4, 310–325 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. White, R. Luque, V. L. Budarin, J. H. Clark and D. J. Macquarrie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 481–494 RSC .
C. M. Niemeyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4128–4158 CrossRef CAS .
E. Katz and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6042–6108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, L. Lin, D. Sun, H. Chen, D. Yang and Q. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6330–6374 RSC .
E. Braun, Y. Eichen, U. Sivan and G. Ben-Yoseph, Nature, 1998, 391, 775–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Seeman, J. Theor. Biol., 1982, 99, 237–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Seeman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 3220–3238 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Seeman, Chem. Biol., 2003, 10, 1151–1159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. D. Watson, A. R. Pike, J. Pate, A. Houlton and B. R. Horrocks, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4027–4037 RSC .
J. Richter, Physica E, 2003, 16, 157–173 CrossRef CAS .
R. Stoltenberg and A. Woolley, Biomed. Microdevices, 2004, 6, 105–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qun, C. Chuanding, G. Ravikanth, S. Shivashankar, A. Sathish, D. Kun and T. H. Donald, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, R14 CrossRef .
A. Latorre and Á. Somoza, ChemBioChem, 2012, 13, 951–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shen, K. Tapio, V. Linko, M. Kostiainen and J. Toppari, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 146 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2014, 58, 99–111 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Becerril and A. T. Woolley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 329–337 RSC .
O. I. Wilner and I. Willner, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2528–2556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, S. P. Surwade, F. Zhou and H. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2488–2496 RSC .
N. C. Seeman, Nature, 2003, 421, 427–431 CrossRef PubMed .
P. P. Pompa, L. Martiradonna, A. D. Torre, F. D. Sala, L. Manna, M. De Vittorio, F. Calabi, R. Cingolani and R. Rinaldi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 126–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Izatt, J. J. Christensen and J. H. Rytting, Chem. Rev., 1971, 71, 439–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Berti and G. A. Burley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 81–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng and H. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1012–1021 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Gramlich, C. T. Wirges, A. Manetto and T. Carell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8350–8358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, J. J. Birktoft, Y. Chen, T. Wang, R. Sha, P. E. Constantinou, S. L. Ginell, C. Mao and N. C. Seeman, Nature, 2009, 461, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, S. H. Park, G. Finkelstein, J. H. Reif and T. H. LaBean, Science, 2003, 301, 1882–1884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. He, A. E. Ribbe and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1942–1945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Winfree, F. Liu, L. A. Wenzler and N. C. Seeman, Nature, 1998, 394, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, T. Ye, M. Su, C. Zhang, A. E. Ribbe, W. Jiang and C. Mao, Nature, 2008, 452, 198–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, Y. Chen, H. Liu, A. E. Ribbe and C. Mao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12202–12203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. K. Rothemund, Nature, 2006, 440, 297–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Andersen, M. Dong, M. M. Nielsen, K. Jahn, R. Subramani, W. Mamdouh, M. M. Golas, B. Sander, H. Stark, C. L. P. Oliveira, J. S. Pedersen, V. Birkedal, F. Besenbacher, K. V. Gothelf and J. Kjems, Nature, 2009, 459, 73–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Douglas, H. Dietz, T. Liedl, B. Hogberg, F. Graf and W. M. Shih, Nature, 2009, 459, 414–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Han, S. Pal, Y. Liu and H. Yan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liedl, B. Hogberg, J. Tytell, D. E. Ingber and W. M. Shih, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 520–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Han, S. Pal, J. Nangreave, Z. Deng, Y. Liu and H. Yan, Science, 2011, 332, 342–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ke, L. L. Ong, W. M. Shih and P. Yin, Science, 2012, 338, 1177–1183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wei, M. Dai and P. Yin, Nature, 2012, 485, 623–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Veneziano, S. Ratanalert, K. Zhang, F. Zhang, H. Yan, W. Chiu and M. Bathe, Science, 2016, 352, 1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Niemeyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1200–1216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rinker, Y. Ke, Y. Liu, R. Chhabra and H. Yan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 418–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Song and J. Ren, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7283–7294 RSC .
K. Tanaka, A. Tengeiji, T. Kato, N. Toyama and M. Shionoya, Science, 2003, 299, 1212–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Engelhard, R. Pievo and G. H. Clever, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12843–12847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takezawa and M. Shionoya, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 2066–2076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kundu and U. Nithiyanantham, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 13667–13679 CrossRef CAS .
U. Nithiyanantham, S. R. Ede, S. Anantharaj and S. Kundu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 673–686 CAS .
S. R. Ede, A. Ramadoss, S. Anantharaj, U. Nithiyanantham and S. Kundu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 21846–21859 RSC .
S. R. Ede, A. Ramadoss, U. Nithiyanantham, S. Anantharaj and S. Kundu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 3851–3863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Karthick, U. Nithiyanantham, S. R. Ede and S. Kundu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 3174–3188 CrossRef CAS .
U. Nithiyanantham, S. R. Ede, T. Kesavan, P. Ragupathy, M. D. Mukadam, S. M. Yusuf and S. Kundu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 38169–38181 RSC .
U. Nithiyanantham, A. Ramadoss, S. R. Ede and S. Kundu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8010–8023 RSC .
S. Anantharaj, P. E. Karthik and S. Kundu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24463–24478 CAS .
U. Nithiyanantham, A. Ramadoss and S. Kundu, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 3506–3521 RSC .
S. R. Ede and S. Kundu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2321–2336 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Ede, V. Mani, N. Kalaiselvi and S. Kundu, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 6185–6199 RSC .
K. Karthick, S. Anantharaj, P. E. Karthik, B. Subramanian and S. Kundu, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 6734–6745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Karthick, S. R. Ede, U. Nithiyanantham and S. Kundu, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 3473–3486 RSC .
S. R. Ede, S. Anantharaj, U. Nithiyanantham and S. Kundu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5474–5484 RSC .
A. Kumar and V. Kumar, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7044–7078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ma, E. H. Sargent and S. O. Kelley, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 954–964 RSC .
M. Pan, A. J. Brush, Z. D. Pozun, H. C. Ham, W.-Y. Yu, G. Henkelman, G. S. Hwang and C. B. Mullins, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5002–5013 RSC .
L. Zhou, Z. Chen, K. Dong, M. Yin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2424–2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Z. Chen, K. Dong, M. Yin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 8694–8702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ma, G. Tikhomirov and S. O. Kelley, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 173–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kundu, H. Lee and H. Liang, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 121–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Richter, R. Seidel, R. Kirsch, M. Mertig, W. Pompe, J. Plaschke and H. K. Schackert, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 507–510 CrossRef CAS .
J. Richter, M. Mertig, W. Pompe and H. Vinzelberg, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2002, 74, 725–728 CrossRef CAS .
J. Richter, M. Mertig, W. Pompe, I. Mönch and H. K. Schackert, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 536–538 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Ford, O. Harnack, A. Yasuda and J. M. Wessels, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1793–1797 CrossRef CAS .
K. Keren, M. Krueger, R. Gilad, G. Ben-Yoseph, U. Sivan and E. Braun, Science, 2002, 297, 72–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Geng, E. Pound, S. Gyawali, J. R. Ashton, J. Hickey, A. T. Woolley and J. N. Harb, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2240–2247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gu and D. T. Haynie, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3047–3050 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, B. Uprety, S. Gyawali, A. T. Woolley, N. V. Myung and J. N. Harb, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 11176–11184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tanaka, Y. Matsuo, Y. Hashimoto and K. Ijiro, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4270–4272 RSC .
M. Mertig, L. C. Ciacchi, R. Seidel, W. Pompe and A. De Vita, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 841–844 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rotaru, S. Dutta, E. Jentzsch, K. Gothelf and A. Mokhir, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5665–5667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xia, Z. Ku, S. C. Lee and S. R. J. Brueck, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 147–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, F. Wang and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13107–13127 RSC .
S. W. Yang and T. Vosch, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 6935–6939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Berti, A. Alessandrini and P. Facci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11216–11217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, B. Sun, F. Meng, M. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Li and J. Liu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1270–1274 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu, V. Maheshwari and R. F. Saraf, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 551–555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Samson, A. Varotto, P. C. Nahirney, A. Toschi, I. Piscopo and C. M. Drain, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 339–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kundu and H. Liang, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 377, 87–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Zinchenko, N. Chen and S. Murata, Chem. Lett., 2008, 37, 1096–1097 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5260–5265 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Day, P. R. Unwin and J. V. Macpherson, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 51–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, H. P. Jakobson, R. Kou, J. Tang, R. Z. Fineman, D. Yu and Y. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4231–4237 CrossRef CAS .
J. Verbeeck, O. I. Lebedev, G. Van Tendeloo, L. Cagnon, C. Bougerol and G. Tourillon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, E468–E471 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ustarroz, J. A. Hammons, T. Altantzis, A. Hubin, S. Bals and H. Terryn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11550–11561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cui, Y. Liu, Z. Yang and X. Wei, Mater. Des., 2007, 28, 722–725 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jayaraman, W. Tang and R. Yongsunthon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, K123–K126 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Puchkova, P. A. Sokolov and N. A. Kasyanenko, J. Struct. Chem., 2011, 52, 1195–1201 CrossRef CAS .
A. Puchkova, P. Sokolov, Y. Petrov and N. Kasyanenko, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 3633–3641 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. D. Watson, H. D. A. Mohamed, B. R. Horrocks and A. Houlton, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5349–5359 RSC .
K. Keren, R. S. Berman, E. Buchstab, U. Sivan and E. Braun, Science, 2003, 302, 1380–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Keren, R. S. Berman and E. Braun, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 323–326 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, S. H. Park, J. H. Reif and T. H. LaBean, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 717–722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nishinaka, A. Takano, Y. Doi, M. Hashimoto, A. Nakamura, Y. Matsushita, J. Kumaki and E. Yashima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8120–8125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gierlich, G. A. Burley, P. M. E. Gramlich, D. M. Hammond and T. Carell, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 3639–3642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Burley, J. Gierlich, M. R. Mofid, H. Nir, S. Tal, Y. Eichen and T. Carell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1398–1399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fischler, U. Simon, H. Nir, Y. Eichen, G. A. Burley, J. Gierlich, P. M. E. Gramlich and T. Carell, Small, 2007, 3, 1049–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Wirges, J. Timper, M. Fischler, A. S. Sologubenko, J. Mayer, U. Simon and T. Carell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 219–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Timper, K. Gutsmiedl, C. Wirges, J. Broda, M. Noyong, J. Mayer, T. Carell and U. Simon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7586–7588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pal, R. Varghese, Z. Deng, Z. Zhao, A. Kumar, H. Yan and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 4262–4265 CrossRef .
A. Sood, B. R. Shaw and B. F. Spielvogel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 9000–9001 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tomasz, B. R. Shaw, K. Porter, B. F. Spielvogel and A. Sood, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1992, 31, 1373–1375 CrossRef .
H. B. McCuen, M. S. Noé, A. B. Sierzchala, A. P. Higson and M. H. Caruthers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8138–8139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Z. A. Sergueeva, M. Dobrikov and B. R. Shaw, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4746–4796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, M. Olesiak, P. Padar, H. McCuen and M. H. Caruthers, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2012, 10, 9130–9133 CAS .
S. Ganguly, S. Paul, O. Yehezkeli, J. Cha and M. H. Caruthers, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2239–2245 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, M. Olesiak, S. Shang and M. H. Caruthers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6234–6241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Sergueev and B. R. Shaw, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 9417–9427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shimizu, K. Saigo and T. Wada, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 4262–4269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Porter, J. D. Briley and B. R. Shaw, Nucleic Acids Res., 1997, 25, 1611–1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Komizo, H. Ikedo, S. Sato and S. Takenaka, Bioconjugate Chem., 2014, 25, 1547–1555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Himuro, R. Araki, S. Sato, S. Takenaka and T. Yasuda, Trans. Jpn. Soc. Med. Biol. Eng., 2013, 51, R-148 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, K. Qu, C. Zhao, L. Wu, J. Ren, J. Wang and X. Qu, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1074 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-F. Soulé, H. Miyamura and S. Kobayashi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18550–18553 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Metcalfe and J. A. Thomas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 215–224 RSC .
J. Ren and J. B. Chaires, Biochemistry, 1999, 38, 16067–16075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schreiber, S. Kempter, S. Holler, V. Schüller, D. Schiffels, S. S. Simmel, P. C. Nickels and T. Liedl, Small, 2011, 7, 1795–1799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Weizmann, F. Patolsky, I. Popov and I. Willner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 787–792 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Wilner, S. Shimron, Y. Weizmann, Z.-G. Wang and I. Willner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2040–2043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pilo-Pais, S. Goldberg, E. Samano, T. H. LaBean and G. Finkelstein, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3489–3492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Pearson, J. Liu, E. Pound, B. Uprety, A. T. Woolley, R. C. Davis and J. N. Harb, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 10551–10560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Gates, J. K. Jensen, J. N. Harb and A. T. Woolley, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 8134–8141 RSC .
B. Uprety, J. Jensen, B. R. Aryal, R. C. Davis, A. T. Woolley and J. N. Harb, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 10143–10152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Uprety, E. P. Gates, Y. Geng, A. T. Woolley and J. N. Harb, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 1134–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-I. Kim, S. Lee, X. Jin, S. J. Kim, K. Jo and J. H. Lee, Small, 2017, 13, 1601926 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Hopkins, D. Pekker, P. M. Goldbart and A. Bezryadin, Science, 2005, 308, 1762–1765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kundu and H. Liang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9668–9674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-R. Song, N. Goswami, H.-H. Yang and J. Xie, Analyst, 2016, 141, 3126–3140 RSC .
Y. Tao, M. Li, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636–8663 RSC .
X. Hu, T. Liu, Y. Zhuang, W. Wang, Y. Li, W. Fan and Y. Huang, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2016, 77, 66–75 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou and Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10346–10413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mulvaney and A. Henglein, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1990, 168, 391–394 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein and M. Giersig, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9533–9539 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng and R. M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13982–13983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Jadzinsky, G. Calero, C. J. Ackerson, D. A. Bushnell and R. D. Kornberg, Science, 2007, 318, 430–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Petty, J. Zheng, N. V. Hud and R. M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5207–5212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Vosch, Y. Antoku, J.-C. Hsiang, C. I. Richards, J. I. Gonzalez and R. M. Dickson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 12616–12621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Ritchie, K. R. Johnsen, J. R. Kiser, Y. Antoku, R. M. Dickson and J. T. Petty, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 175–181 CAS .
C. I. Richards, S. Choi, J.-C. Hsiang, Y. Antoku, T. Vosch, A. Bongiorno, Y.-L. Tzeng and R. M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5038–5039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Petty, S. P. Story, J.-C. Hsiang and R. M. Dickson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1148–1155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Patel, C. I. Richards, J.-C. Hsiang and R. M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11602–11603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cui, Y. Shao, K. Ma, S. Xu, F. Wu and G. Liu, Analyst, 2012, 137, 2362–2366 RSC .
Z. Chen, L. Zhou, W. Bing, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Ren and X. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7498–7504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, H. Agren, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1680–1713 RSC .
J. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Feng, Y. Sun and F. Li, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 395–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Gwinn, P. O'Neill, A. J. Guerrero, D. Bouwmeester and D. K. Fygenson, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 279–283 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, J. Yuan, Q. Dong and E. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, F. Pu, D. Hu, C. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3774–3780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, Z. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Nucleic Acids Res., 2012, 40, e122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, L. Wu, F. Xing, L. Hu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 98, 378–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ma, Y. Shao, Q. Cui, F. Wu, S. Xu and G. Liu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 15313–15322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Copp, P. Bogdanov, M. Debord, A. Singh and E. Gwinn, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5839–5845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, C. Zhang and R. M. Dickson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 077402 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-H. Wang, C.-A. J. Lin, C.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, Y.-M. Tseng, C.-L. Hsieh, C.-H. Chen, C.-H. Tsai, C.-T. Hsieh, J.-L. Shen, W.-H. Chan, W. H. Chang and H.-I. Yeh, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4337–4344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Duan and S. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2412–2413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, Y. Zheng and J. Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 888–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Liu, H.-T. Wu, Y.-H. Hsiao, C.-W. Lai, C.-W. Shih, Y.-K. Peng, K.-C. Tang, H.-W. Chang, Y.-C. Chien, J.-K. Hsiao, J.-T. Cheng and P.-T. Chou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7056–7060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Hedden, B. J. Bauer, A. Paul Smith, F. Gröhn and E. Amis, Polymer, 2002, 43, 5473–5481 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, M. Shi, X. Chen, M. Wang and H. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4944–4951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Kryachko and F. Remacle, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22746–22757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Shukla, M. Dubey, E. Zakar and J. Leszczynski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3960–3966 CAS .
E. S. Kryachko and F. Remacle, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 735–739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. C. Kennedy, J. L. MacLean and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6845–6847 RSC .
G. Liu, Y. Shao, K. Ma, Q. Cui, F. Wu and S. Xu, Gold Bull., 2012, 45, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y. Shao, F. Wu, S. Xu, J. Peng and L. Li, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 015503 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Itoh, H. Maeda, S. Yamada and Y. Hori, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1737–1740 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zhang, C. X. Guo, Z. Cui, J. Guo, Z. Dong and C. M. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15693–15698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, G. Ouyang, J. Zhang and Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7912–7914 RSC .
J. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Fu, Y. Han, J. Cheng, Y. Zhang and W. Li, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 14345–14350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Brege, C. E. Hamilton, C. A. Crouse and A. R. Barron, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2239–2242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jia, J. Li, L. Han, J. Ren, X. Yang and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3311–3317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Su, G.-Y. Lan, W.-Y. Chen and H.-T. Chang, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 8566–8572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-Y. Lan, C.-C. Huang and H.-T. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1257–1259 RSC .
W.-Y. Chen, G.-Y. Lan and H.-T. Chang, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 9450–9455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zheng, A.-X. Zheng, B. Liu, X.-L. Zhang, Y. He, J. Li, H.-H. Yang and G. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13103–13106 RSC .
Y. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2497–2511 RSC .
M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Tao, F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4565–4572 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Tao, J. Ren, F. Pu and X. Qu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 28, 339–343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, M. Yin, F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Small, 2011, 7, 1557–1561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Lin, C. Zhao, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11428–11430 RSC .
Z. Chen, L. Zhou, A. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Lin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 58, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, J. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2727–2733 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wei, H. Zhou, Z. Liu, Y. Song, L. Wang, L. Sun and Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8738–8743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dawn and A. K. Nandi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18291–18298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Zhang, M. Yu, S. Li and J. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 310–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takeshima, L. Sun, Y. Wang, Y. Yamada, N. Nishi, T. Yonezawa and B. Fugetsu, Polym. J., 2014, 46, 36–41 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, L. H. Tan, K. Hwang, H. Xing, P. Wu, W. Li and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15195–15202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Nam, J.-W. Oh, H. Lee and Y. D. Suh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2746–2755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Tan, H. Xing and Y. Lu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1881–1890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Lim, K.-S. Jeon, J.-H. Hwang, H. Kim, S. Kwon, Y. D. Suh and J.-M. Nam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 452–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Oh, D.-K. Lim, G.-H. Kim, Y. D. Suh and J.-M. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14052–14059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kimura-Suda, D. Y. Petrovykh, M. J. Tarlov and L. J. Whitman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9014–9015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, S. H. Nam, Y. J. Jung, S. Park, J.-M. Kim, Y. D. Suh and D.-K. Lim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10728–10733 RSC .
J. Shen, L. Xu, C. Wang, H. Pei, R. Tai, S. Song, Q. Huang, C. Fan and G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8338–8342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. M. Ekman, P. J. A. Kenis and Y. Lu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1886–1891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Tang, L. H. Tan, J. Li and Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9078–9082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Tan, Y. Yue, N. S. R. Satyavolu, A. S. Ali, Z. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14456–14464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Song, L. Tang, L. H. Tan, X. Wang, N. S. R. Satyavolu, H. Xing, Z. Wang, J. Li, H. Liang and Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8114–8118 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qing, X. He, D. He, K. Wang, F. Xu, T. Qing and X. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9719–9722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Qing, Z. Qing, Z. Mao, X. He, F. Xu, L. Wen, D. He, H. Shi and K. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 61092–61095 RSC .
R. Ghosh Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2373–2433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sankar, N. Dimitratos, P. J. Miedziak, P. P. Wells, C. J. Kiely and G. J. Hutchings, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8099–8139 RSC .
L.-b. Yang, G.-y. Chen, J. Wang, T.-t. Wang, M.-q. Li and J.-h. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6849–6856 RSC .
Y. Sun, J. Wang, W. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y. Fu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 1038–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Taniguchi, A. Zinchenko and S. Murata, Chem. Lett., 2016, 45, 610–612 CrossRef CAS .
D.-K. Lim, I.-J. Kim and J.-M. Nam, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5312–5314 RSC .
D.-K. Lim, K.-S. Jeon, H. M. Kim, J.-M. Nam and Y. D. Suh, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 60–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lee, G.-H. Kim and J.-M. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5456–5459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lee, M.-H. You, G.-H. Kim and J.-M. Nam, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6217–6225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Satyavolu, L. H. Tan and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16542–16548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, R. Pasquarelli, T. Holme, J. Berry, D. Ginley and R. O'Hayre, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7830–7838 RSC .
J. Wu, J. Zhang, Z. Peng, S. Yang, F. T. Wagner and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4984–4985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei and X. Qu, Small, 2012, 8, 2138–2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qu, L. Wu, J. Ren and X. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5001–5009 CAS .
J. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, K. Nath, R. N. Tiwari, H.-G. Nam and K. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9223–9231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Tiwari, K. Nath, S. Kumar, R. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, N. H. Le, D. H. Youn, J. S. Lee and K. S. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2221 Search PubMed .
I. Ocsoy, B. Gulbakan, T. Chen, G. Zhu, Z. Chen, M. M. Sari, L. Peng, X. Xiong, X. Fang and W. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2319–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ocsoy, M. L. Paret, M. A. Ocsoy, S. Kunwar, T. Chen, M. You and W. Tan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8972–8980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, H.-L. Wang, J.-M. Yan, Y. Ping, S.-I. O, S.-J. Li and Q. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2732–2734 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Zheng, L. Deng, C. Ma, J. Li, Y. Li, S. Yang, J. Yang, J. Wang and R. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11930–11938 CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Qing, J. Zheng, L. Deng, C. Ma, J. Li, Y. Li, S. Yang, J. Yang, J. Wang, W. Tan and R. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6544–6547 RSC .
C. Shao, N. Lu and Z. Deng, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 629, 15–22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Wang and H. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2930–2962 RSC .
T. G. Schaaff and R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2630–2641 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shemer, O. Krichevski, G. Markovich, T. Molotsky, I. Lubitz and A. B. Kotlyar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11006–11007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Molotsky, T. Tamarin, A. B. Moshe, G. Markovich and A. B. Kotlyar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15951–15954 CAS .
X. Wu, L. Xu, W. Ma, L. Liu, H. Kuang, W. Yan, L. Wang and C. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 850–854 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sung Ha, Y. Hao, H. R. John, H. L. Thomas and F. Gleb, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, S525 CrossRef .
V. M. Cepak and C. R. Martin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9985–9990 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Becerril, R. M. Stoltenberg, C. F. Monson and A. T. Woolley, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 611–616 RSC .
A. Houlton and S. M. D. Watson, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg. Chem., 2011, 107, 21–42 RSC .
S. H. Park, R. Barish, H. Li, J. H. Reif, G. Finkelstein, H. Yan and T. H. LaBean, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 693–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, M. W. Prior, T. H. LaBean and G. Finkelstein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 33901–34100 CrossRef .
J. Lu, L. Yang, A. Xie and Y. Shen, Biophys. Chem., 2009, 145, 91–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Majumdar, A. Singha, P. K. Mondal and S. Kundu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7798–7807 CAS .
C. Erler, K. Günther and M. Mertig, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 9647–9651 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mertig, R. Seidel, L. C. Ciacchi and W. Pompe, AIP Conf. Proc., 2002, 633, 449–453 CrossRef CAS .
R. Seidel, L. Colombi Ciacchi, M. Weigel, W. Pompe and M. Mertig, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10801–10811 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng and C. Mao, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1545–1548 CrossRef CAS .
L. John, D. Jianchun, D. Zhaoxiang, M. Chengde and A. P. Babak, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2752 CrossRef .
Y. Geng, J. Liu, E. Pound, S. Gyawali, J. N. Harb and A. T. Woolley, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12126–12131 RSC .

          K. Nguyen, S. Campidelli and A. Filoramo, in DNA Nanotechnology, ed. G. Zuccheri and B. Samorì, Humana Press,  2011, vol. 749, pp. 49–59 Search PubMed .
K. Nguyen, M. Monteverde, A. Filoramo, L. Goux-Capes, S. Lyonnais, P. Jegou, P. Viel, M. Goffman and J.-P. Bourgoin, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1099–1104 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu, K. Wang, D. Huitink and H. Liang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10146–10152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swami, N. Brun and D. Langevin, J. Cluster Sci., 2009, 20, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ongaro, F. Griffin, P. Beecher, L. Nagle, D. Iacopino, A. Quinn, G. Redmond and D. Fitzmaurice, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1959–1964 CrossRef CAS .
F. Griffin, A. Ongaro and D. Fitzmaurice, Analyst, 2004, 129, 1171–1175 RSC .
A. Satti, D. Aherne and D. Fitzmaurice, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1543–1545 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Monson and A. T. Woolley, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 359–363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pate, F. Zamora, S. M. D. Watson, N. G. Wright, B. R. Horrocks and A. Houlton, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9265–9273 RSC .
S. M. D. Watson, N. G. Wright, B. R. Horrocks and A. Houlton, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2068–2075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Becerril, P. Ludtke, B. M. Willardson and A. T. Woolley, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 10140–10144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. A. Mohamed, S. M. D. Watson, B. R. Horrocks and A. Houlton, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 438–446 RSC .
H. Kudo and M. Fujihira, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2006, 5, 90–92 CrossRef .
Q. Gu, C. Cheng, S. Suryanarayanan, K. Dai and D. T. Haynie, Physica E, 2006, 33, 92–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mandal and K. Mandal, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 026101 CrossRef .
G. Qun, C. Chuanding and T. H. Donald, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1358 CrossRef .
G. Wang, A. Ishikawa, A. Eguchi, Y. Suzuki, S. Tanaka, Y. Matsuo, K. Niikura and K. Ijiro, ChemPlusChem, 2012, 77, 592–597 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, S. Li, J. E. Millstone, M. J. Banholzer, X. Chen, X. Xu, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4210–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Laocharoensuk, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Burdick, P. Kanatharana, P. Thavarungkul and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 403–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Keating and M. J. Natan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 451–454 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Conwell, I. D. Vilfan and N. V. Hud, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 9296–9301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, P. Yin, Y. Liu, J. H. Reif, T. H. LaBean and H. Yan, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 729–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Becerril, R. M. Stoltenberg, D. R. Wheeler, R. C. Davis, J. N. Harb and A. T. Woolley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2828–2829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Geng, A. C. Pearson, E. P. Gates, B. Uprety, R. C. Davis, J. N. Harb and A. T. Woolley, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3482–3490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ding, Z. Deng, H. Yan, S. Cabrini, R. N. Zuckermann and J. Bokor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3248–3249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sharma, R. Chhabra, C. S. Andersen, K. V. Gothelf, H. Yan and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7820–7821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pal, Z. Deng, B. Ding, H. Yan and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2700–2704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pilo-Pais, A. Watson, S. Demers, T. H. LaBean and G. Finkelstein, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2099–2104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rabaud, L. Saminadayar, D. Mailly, K. Hasselbach, A. Benoît and B. Etienne, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 3124–3127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Matveev, A. I. Larkin and L. I. Glazman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 096802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winzer, M. Kleiber, N. Dix and R. Wiesendanger, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1996, 63, 617–619 CAS .
J. Aizpurua, P. Hanarp, D. S. Sutherland, M. Käll, G. W. Bryant and F. J. García de Abajo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 057401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. McLellan, M. Geissler and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10830–10831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yan and W. A. Goedel, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1193–1196 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yan and W. A. Goedel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2084–2088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Gosule and J. A. Schellman, Nature, 1976, 259, 333–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Widom and R. L. Baldwin, Biopolymers, 1983, 22, 1595–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Mel'nikov, V. G. Sergeyev and K. Yoshikawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 2401–2408 CrossRef .
A. A. Zinchenko, K. Yoshikawa and D. Baigl, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2820–2823 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ning, A. Z. Anatoly and Y. Kenichi, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5224 CrossRef .
S.-y. Pu, A. Zinchenko, L.-l. Qin, C.-w. Ye, M. Xu and S. Murata, Mater. Lett., 2014, 130, 168–171 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, W. Sun, Y. Ke, C.-J. Shih, G. L. C. Paulus, Q. Hua Wang, B. Mu, P. Yin and M. S. Strano, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1663 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Moon and S. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 547–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Yetisen, I. Naydenova, F. da Cruz Vasconcellos, J. Blyth and C. R. Lowe, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10654–10696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Gansel, M. Thiel, M. S. Rill, M. Decker, K. Bade, V. Saile, G. von Freymann, S. Linden and M. Wegener, Science, 2009, 325, 1513–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Koh, A. I. Fernández-Domínguez, D. W. McComb, S. A. Maier and J. K. W. Yang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1323–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Mark, J. G. Gibbs, T.-C. Lee and P. Fischer, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 802–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, G. K. Larsen, W. Ingram and Y. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1976–1981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Soukoulis and M. Wegener, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 523–530 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, J. Zhao, D. Pan, Y. Zhang, Q. Liu, C. Fan, J. Hu and L. He, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2006, 51, 2973–2976 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dietz, S. M. Douglas and W. M. Shih, Science, 2009, 325, 725–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Simmel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5884–5887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kuzyk, R. Schreiber, Z. Fan, G. Pardatscher, E.-M. Roller, A. Hogele, F. C. Simmel, A. O. Govorov and T. Liedl, Nature, 2012, 483, 311–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, E. Boulais, Y. Hakobyan, W. L. Wang, A. Guan, M. Bathe and P. Yin, Science, 2014, 346, 8 Search PubMed .
S. Helmi, C. Ziegler, D. J. Kauert and R. Seidel, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6693–6698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, J. Huh, W. Park, L. P. Lee, Y. J. Kwon and S. J. Sim, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Moore, Proc. IEEE, 1998, 86, 82–85 CrossRef .
A. Ongaro, F. Griffin, L. Nagle, D. Iacopino, R. Eritja and D. Fitzmaurice, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1799–1803 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tuukkanen, A. Kuzyk, J. J. Toppari, V. P. Hytönen, T. Ihalainen and P. Törmä, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 183102 CrossRef .
A. J. Storm, J. v. Noort, S. d. Vries and C. Dekker, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3881–3883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, R. H. Austin, J. Kraeft, E. C. Cox and N. P. Ong, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 198102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. de Pablo, F. Moreno-Herrero, J. Colchero, J. Gómez Herrero, P. Herrero, A. M. Baró, P. Ordejón, J. M. Soler and E. Artacho, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 4992–4995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bachtold, P. Hadley, T. Nakanishi and C. Dekker, Science, 2001, 294, 1317–1320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tans, A. R. M. Verschueren and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 393, 49–52 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. C. Postma, T. Teepen, Z. Yao, M. Grifoni and C. Dekker, Science, 2001, 293, 76–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Stanca, R. Eritja and D. Fitzmaurice, Faraday Discuss., 2006, 131, 155–165 RSC .
D. Wouters and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2480–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 550–575 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, C. Carbonell and A. B. Braunschweig, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6289–6310 RSC .
X. Zhou, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5221–5231 RSC .
D. Wang, V. K. Kodali, W. D. Underwood Ii, J. E. Jarvholm, T. Okada, S. C. Jones, M. Rumi, Z. Dai, W. P. King, S. R. Marder, J. E. Curtis and E. Riedo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3696–3702 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4068–4070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Becerril and A. T. Woolley, Small, 2007, 3, 1534–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, J. Nangreave, Y. Liu and H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11198–11211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Surwade, F. Zhou, B. Wei, W. Sun, A. Powell, C. O’Donnell, P. Yin and H. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6778–6781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Surwade, S. Zhao and H. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11868–11871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, H. Chen, F. Li, L. Yang, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, P. D. Ye and J. H. Choi, Small, 2015, 11, 5520–5527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-G. Guo, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
M.-R. Gao, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986–3017 RSC .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127–3171 RSC .
S. Guo, S. Zhang and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8526–8544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bu, N. Zhang, S. Guo, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Yao, T. Wu, G. Lu, J.-Y. Ma, D. Su and X. Huang, Science, 2016, 354, 1410–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Peera, A. K. Sahu, A. Arunchander, K. Nath and S. D. Bhat, J. Power Sources, 2015, 297, 379–387 CrossRef CAS .
E. Katz and K. MacVittie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2791–2803 CAS .
M. Zhou and J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2012, 24, 197–209 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakraborty, S. Babanova, R. C. Rocha, A. Desireddy, K. Artyushkova, A. E. Boncella, P. Atanassov and J. S. Martinez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11678–11687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Antolini, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 915–931 CAS .
J. Ma, J. Wang, G. Zhang, X. Fan, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Pan, X. Guo, Y. Liang, Y. Wu, Y. Wen and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10353–10359 CAS .
D. J. Kim, M.-A. Woo, Y. L. Jung, K. K. Bharathi, H. G. Park, D. K. Kim and J. W. Choi, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, E. J. Kramer, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7006–7043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yengel, L. Wang, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Proc. SPIE, 2009, 7411, 74110B CrossRef .
A. B. Guvenc, S. Guo, C. S. Ozkan and M. Ozkan, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2011, 1322 Search PubMed .
P. Herves, M. Perez-Lorenzo, L. M. Liz-Marzan, J. Dzubiella, Y. Lu and M. Ballauff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5577–5587 RSC .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Miyaura, K. Yamada and A. Suzuki, Tetrahedron Lett., 1979, 20, 3437–3440 CrossRef .
R. F. Heck and J. P. Nolley, J. Org. Chem., 1972, 37, 2320–2322 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. C. Johansson Seechurn, M. O. Kitching, T. J. Colacot and V. Snieckus, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5062–5085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Y. Fu, Y. Fu, X. Wang and J. Zhang, Catal. Lett., 2013, 143, 578–586 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Hajipour, Z. Khorsandi and H. Farrokhpour, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 59124–59130 RSC .
S. Anantharaj, U. Nithiyanantham, S. R. Ede and S. Kundu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 19228–19238 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dong, Z. Liu and J. Ren, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 6329–6334 RSC .
P. Zhao, X. Feng, D. Huang, G. Yang and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 287, 114–136 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zinchenko, Y. Miwa, L. I. Lopatina, V. G. Sergeyev and S. Murata, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3226–3232 CAS .
Y. Che, A. Zinchenko and S. Murata, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 445, 364–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zinchenko, S. Taniguchi and S. Murata, Macromol. Symp., 2015, 358, 106–111 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zinchenko, Y. Che, S. Taniguchi, L. I. Lopatina, V. G. Sergeyev and S. Murata, J. Nanopart. Res., 2016, 18, 179 CrossRef .
S. Kundu and M. Jayachandran, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 16486–16498 RSC .
U. Nithiyanantham, S. R. Ede and S. Kundu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3782–3794 RSC .
Y. Lin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1097–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei and E. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6060–6093 RSC .
Y. Song, W. Wei and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4215–4236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, E. Ju, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, J. Zhuang, L. Nie, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, N. Gu, T. Wang, J. Feng, D. Yang, S. Perrett and X. Yan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 577–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Natalio, R. Andre, A. F. Hartog, B. Stoll, K. P. Jochum, R. Wever and W. Tremel, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 530–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, C. Zhao, E. Ju, H. Ji, J. Ren, B. P. Binks and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1682–1688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, H. Ji, C. Liu, W. Bing, Z. Wang and X. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10732–10736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Manea, F. B. Houillon, L. Pasquato and P. Scrimin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6165–6169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Tonga, Y. Jeong, B. Duncan, T. Mizuhara, R. Mout, R. Das, S. T. Kim, Y.-C. Yeh, B. Yan, S. Hou and V. M. Rotello, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 597–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Vernekar, D. Sinha, S. Srivastava, P. U. Paramasivam, P. D’Silva and G. Mugesh, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, Y. Lin, Z. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2594–2599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fan, J.-J. Yin, B. Ning, X. Wu, Y. Hu, M. Ferrari, G. J. Anderson, J. Wei, Y. Zhao and G. Nie, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1611–1618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Higuchi, Y.-D. Siao, S.-T. Yang, P.-V. Hsieh, H. Fukushima, Y. Chang, R.-C. Ruaan and W.-Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 6580–6586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, X. Zhao, J. Zhang and W. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18116–18125 CAS .
L. Chen, L. Sha, Y. Qiu, G. Wang, H. Jiang and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3300–3308 RSC .
Y. Zhang, W. Ren, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 80, 463–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corma and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2096–2126 RSC .
Y. Wang, D. Zhu, L. Tang, S. Wang and Z. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8917–8921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tedsree, T. Li, S. Jones, C. W. A. Chan, K. M. K. Yu, P. A. J. Bagot, E. A. Marquis, G. D. W. Smith and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 302–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Boersma, R. P. Megens, B. L. Feringa and G. Roelfes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2083–2092 RSC .
A. Sett, S. Das and U. Bora, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2014, 174, 1073–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Palchetti and M. Mascini, Analyst, 2008, 133, 846–854 RSC .
L. Basabe-Desmonts, D. N. Reinhoudt and M. Crego-Calama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 993–1017 RSC .
B. O. Okesola and D. K. Smith, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4226–4251 RSC .
N. Dave, M. Y. Chan, P.-J. J. Huang, B. D. Smith and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12668–12673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lou, T. Zhao, R. Liu, J. Ma and Y. Xiao, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 7574–7580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, X. Li and H.-B. Kraatz, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 6896–6901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yin, Z. Li, Z. Liu, X. Yang and J. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 431–437 CAS .
W. Guo, J. Yuan and E. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3395–3397 RSC .
Y. Kuang, S. Liang, F. Ma, S. Chen, Y. Long and R. Zeng, Luminescence, 2017, 32, 674–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, J. Ling, X.-Q. Zhang, H.-P. Bai, L. Zheng, Q.-E. Cao and Z.-T. Ding, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 137, 1250–1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Ma, B.-C. Yin, X. Wu and B.-C. Ye, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 9219–9225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Zhuo, H. Miao, D. Zhong and X. Yang, Luminescence, 2015, 30, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, Y. Shao, J. Peng, W. Dai, L. Liu, S. Xu, F. Wu and X. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 345502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yin, X. He, X. Jia, K. Wang and F. Xu, Analyst, 2013, 138, 2350–2356 RSC .
J. Chen, J. Liu, Z. Fang and L. Zeng, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1057–1059 RSC .
L. Gong, H. Kuai, S. Ren, X.-H. Zhao, S.-Y. Huan, X.-B. Zhang and W. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12095–12098 RSC .
T. Wagner, S. Haffer, C. Weinberger, D. Klaus and M. Tiemann, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4036–4053 RSC .
Y. Hatakeyama, M. Umetsu, S. Ohara, F. Kawadai, S. Takami, T. Naka and T. Adschiri, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1122–1128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohara, Y. Hatakeyama, M. Umetsu, Z. Tan and T. Adschiri, Adv. Powder Technol., 2011, 22, 559–565 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Al-Hinai, R. Hassanien, N. G. Wright, A. B. Horsfall, A. Houlton and B. R. Horrocks, Faraday Discuss., 2013, 164, 71–91 RSC .
H. S. Mader and O. S. Wolfbeis, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 5002–5004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhao, Q. Chang, X. Chen, B. Zhang and J. Liu, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2009, 29, 1191–1195 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jimenez-Cadena, J. Riu and F. X. Rius, Analyst, 2007, 132, 1083–1099 RSC .
T. Wagner, S. Krotzky, A. Weiss, T. Sauerwald, C. D. Kohl, J. Roggenbuck and M. Tiemann, Sensors, 2011, 11, 3135–3144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kuang, C. Lao, Z. L. Wang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6070–6071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Wales, J. Grand, V. P. Ting, R. D. Burke, K. J. Edler, C. R. Bowen, S. Mintova and A. D. Burrows, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4290–4321 RSC .
C. S. Heng, Z. Miluo, B. Wayne, L. Jae-Hong and V. M. Nosang, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 505502 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang and E. Wang, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 132–157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, R. M. Dickson and J. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1867–1891 RSC .
Y. Yu, B. Y. L. Mok, X. J. Loh and Y. N. Tan, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 1844–1859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dadmehr, M. Hosseini, S. Hosseinkhani, M. Reza Ganjali and R. Sheikhnejad, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 73, 108–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kun, C. Qinghua, L. Guiying, W. Fei, X. Shujuan and S. Yong, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 305502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Peng, Y. Shao, L. Liu, L. Zhang and H. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 1534–1541 RSC .
J. Peng, Y. Shao, L. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Liu and Y. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2014, 850, 78–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cui, K. Ma, Y. Shao, S. Xu, F. Wu, G. Liu, N. Teramae and H. Bao, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 724, 86–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Park, S. S. Oh, H. T. Soh and H. G. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9977–9982 RSC .
H.-C. Hsu, M.-C. Ho, K.-H. Wang, Y.-F. Hsu and C.-W. Chang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 2140–2145 RSC .
B. Han and E. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2585–2589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cao, E. Ju, C. Liu, F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5167–5170 RSC .
X. Wang, R. Lin, Z. Xu, H. Huang, L. Li, F. Liu, N. Li and X. Yang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 793, 79–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, F. Wang, A. Niazov-Elkan, W. Guo and I. Willner, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 309–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, S. Park, K. Lee and J. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10908–10910 RSC .
S. Park, S. Choi and J. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 129 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Qi, Y. Huo, H. Wang, J. Zhang, F.-Q. Dang and Z.-Q. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 11078–11083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Zhang, Y. Teng, B. Lou, X. Jia, X. Gu and E. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13224–13229 RSC .
P. Jain, B. Chakma, S. Patra and P. Goswami, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 956, 48–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-R. Liu, R. Hu, T. Liu, X.-B. Zhang, W. Tan, G.-L. Shen and R.-Q. Yu, Talanta, 2013, 107, 402–407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, F. Pu, Y. Lin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3487–3489 RSC .
J. D. Lee, J. Cang, Y.-C. Chen, W.-Y. Chen, C.-M. Ou and H.-T. Chang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 58, 266–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Chen, C.-W. Wang, J. D. Lee, P.-C. Chen and H.-T. Chang, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2017, 64, 8–16 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, W. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Xia, Q. Shen, Z. Nie, Y. Huang and S. Yao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 47, 345–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, X.-e. Zhao, W. Zhang, Z. Liu, W. Qi, S. Anjum and G. Xu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 786, 111–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, L. Deng and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 401–407 RSC .
H. Dong, K. Hao, Y. Tian, S. Jin, H. Lu, S.-F. Zhou and X. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 53, 377–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Yeh, J. Sharma, J. J. Han, J. S. Martinez and J. H. Werner, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3106–3110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Yeh, J. Sharma, I.-M. Shih, D. M. Vu, J. S. Martinez and J. H. Werner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11550–11558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Juul, J. M. Obliosca, C. Liu, Y.-L. Liu, Y.-A. Chen, D. M. Imphean, B. R. Knudsen, Y.-P. Ho, K. W. Leong and H.-C. Yeh, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8332–8337 RSC .
X. Tian, X.-J. Kong, Z.-M. Zhu, T.-T. Chen and X. Chu, Talanta, 2015, 131, 116–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-X. Han, X. Tian, X.-J. Kong, R.-Q. Yu and X. Chu, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 7989–7994 RSC .
E. Shokri, M. Hosseini, F. Faridbod and M. Rahaie, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 99437–99443 RSC .
Y.-A. Chen, J. M. Obliosca, Y.-L. Liu, C. Liu, M. L. Gwozdz and H.-C. Yeh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10476–10479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, W. Wang, C. Liu, J. Liu, T.-S. Kang, C.-H. Leung and D.-L. Ma, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 128–131 RSC .
S. Y. Lee, N. H. Hairul Bahara, Y. S. Choong, T. S. Lim and G. J. Tye, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 433, 183–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, L. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Wei and W. Jiang, Talanta, 2015, 138, 163–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Zhu, Z. Zhou, S. Guo, J. Li, S. Dong and E. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 4004–4010 RSC .
T. Ye, J. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Ji, G. Zhou and Z. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16091–16096 CAS .
Q. Cao, Y. Teng, X. Yang, J. Wang and E. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 318–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, W. Wei, Q. Lu, Z. Zhou, H. Li, L. Zhang and S. Liu, Anal. Methods, 2014, 6, 6082–6087 RSC .
L. Liu, Q. Li, L.-J. Tang, R.-Q. Yu and J.-H. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 57502–57506 RSC .
J. Zhang, C. Li, X. Zhi, G. A. Ramón, Y. Liu, C. Zhang, F. Pan and D. Cui, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 1294–1302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, X.-c. Hu, S. Shi, R.-r. Gao, H.-l. Huang, Y.-y. Zhu, X.-y. Lv and T.-m. Yao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 205–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Zhong, H. Zhang, X. C. Le and J.-J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5170–5174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, S.-M. Guo, Y.-R. Li, P. Zuo and B.-C. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5488–5490 RSC .
W. X. Wang, Y. W. Cheung, R. M. Dirkzwager, W. C. Wong, J. A. Tanner, H. W. Li and Y. Wu, Analyst, 2017, 142, 800–807 RSC .
H.-B. Wang, H.-D. Zhang, Y. Chen, K.-J. Huang and Y.-M. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 146–153 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shah, S. W. Choi, H.-j. Kim, S. K. Cho, P. W. Thulstrup, M. J. Bjerrum, Y.-J. Bhang, J. C. Ahn and S. W. Yang, Analyst, 2015, 140, 3422–3430 RSC .
P. Shah, P. W. Thulstrup, S. K. Cho, Y.-J. Bhang, J. C. Ahn, S. W. Choi, M. J. Bjerrum and S. W. Yang, Analyst, 2014, 139, 2158–2166 RSC .
P. Shah, S. W. Choi, H.-j. Kim, S. K. Cho, Y.-J. Bhang, M. Y. Ryu, P. W. Thulstrup, M. J. Bjerrum and S. W. Yang, Nucleic Acids Res., 2016, 44, e57–e57 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hosseini, A. Akbari, M. R. Ganjali, M. Dadmehr and A. H. Rezayan, J. Fluoresc., 2015, 25, 925–929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Petty, B. Giri, I. C. Miller, D. A. Nicholson, O. O. Sergev, T. M. Banks and S. P. Story, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 2183–2190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Petty, D. A. Nicholson, O. O. Sergev and S. K. Graham, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 9220–9228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Petty, B. Sengupta, S. P. Story and N. N. Degtyareva, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5957–5964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Petty, O. O. Sergev, A. G. Kantor, I. J. Rankine, M. Ganguly, F. D. David, S. K. Wheeler and J. F. Wheeler, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5302–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Petty, O. O. Sergev, D. A. Nicholson, P. M. Goodwin, B. Giri and D. R. McMullan, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 9868–9876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-Y. Lan, W.-Y. Chen and H.-T. Chang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2431–2435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-C. Yin, J.-L. Ma, H.-N. Le, S. Wang, Z. Xu and B.-C. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15991–15994 RSC .
L. Feng, J. Liu, S. C. Zhang and X. R. Zhang, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 5689–5694 RSC .
J.-L. Ma, B.-C. Yin and B.-C. Ye, Analyst, 2016, 141, 1301–1306 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Lu, L. Feng, S. Wang, S. Zhang, X. Zhu, L. Sheng, S. Zhang and X. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 2622–2627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, J. Lee, C. Ban and W. J. Kim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 43, 419–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-Y. Lan, W.-Y. Chen and H.-T. Chang, Analyst, 2011, 136, 3623–3628 RSC .
J. Sharma, H.-C. Yeh, H. Yoo, J. H. Werner and J. S. Martinez, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2294–2296 RSC .
Y. Dou and X. Yang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 784, 53–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, F. Shu, K.-Y. Wong and Z. Liu, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 8493–8497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, Y. Lin, Z. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Analyst, 2012, 137, 2588–2592 RSC .
J.-L. Ma, B.-C. Yin, H.-N. Le and B.-C. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12856–12863 CAS .
N. Enkin, F. Wang, E. Sharon, H. B. Albada and I. Willner, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11666–11673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-D. Ye, L. Xia, D.-D. Xu, X.-J. Xing, D.-W. Pang and H.-W. Tang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 837–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, F. Wang, R. Aizen, O. Yehezkeli and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11832–11839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Zhu, S. Guo, T. Li, J. Li and E. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2403–2406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, Y. Zhu, L. Chen and X. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 63, 552–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sharon, N. Enkin, H. B. Albada and I. Willner, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1100–1103 RSC .
K. Zhang, K. Wang, X. Zhu, Y. Gao and M. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14221–14224 RSC .
K. S. Park and H. G. Park, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 64, 618–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, W. Guo and E. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 706, 338–342 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hosseini, F. Mehrabi, M. R. Ganjali and P. Norouzi, Luminescence, 2016, 31, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Q. Chen, C. Gao, M. Zhang, B. Qin and H. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 964–967 RSC .
L. Liu, Q. Yang, J. Lei, N. Xu and H. Ju, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13698–13701 RSC .
Y. Zhang, C. Zhu, L. Zhang, C. Tan, J. Yang, B. Chen, L. Wang and H. Zhang, Small, 2015, 11, 1385–1389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Del Bonis-O'Donnell, D. Vong, S. Pennathur and D. K. Fygenson, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14489–14496 RSC .
G.-M. Han, Z.-Z. Jia, Y.-J. Zhu, J.-J. Jiao, D.-M. Kong and X.-Z. Feng, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 10800–10804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Liu, X.-R. Song, Y.-W. Wang, A.-X. Zheng, G.-N. Chen and H.-H. Yang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 749, 70–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Y. Du and S. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5122–5127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, S. Hu, Y. Cao, B. Zhang and G. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 66, 327–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Zhu, W.-X. Dai, X.-D. Yu, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Talanta, 2015, 144, 642–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhou, Y. Yao, J. Luo, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Yin, F. Gao and P. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 969, 8–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Q. Liu, M. Zhang, B.-C. Yin and B.-C. Ye, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5165–5169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-P. Wang, B.-C. Yin and B.-C. Ye, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8633–8636 RSC .
J. Chen, X. Zhang, S. Cai, D. Wu, M. Chen, S. Wang and J. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 57, 226–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He and B. Jiao, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 3183–3189 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, W. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Nie, Y. Huang and S. Yao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 61, 321–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Peng, Z. Liu, W. Li, Y. Huang, Z. Nie and S. Yao, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 4355–4361 RSC .
W. Yang, J. Tian, L. Wang, Y. Zhao and S. Zhao, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 9452–9457 RSC .
L. Zhang, J. Zhao, H. Zhang, J. Jiang and R. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 44, 6–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qing, T. Qing, Z. Mao, X. He, K. Wang, Z. Zou, H. Shi and D. He, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12746–12748 RSC .
R. Hu, Y.-R. Liu, R.-M. Kong, M. J. Donovan, X.-B. Zhang, W. Tan, G.-L. Shen and R.-Q. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 42, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Z. Lin and X. Su, Talanta, 2015, 131, 59–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qing, X. He, T. Qing, K. Wang, H. Shi, D. He, Z. Zou, L. Yan, F. Xu, X. Ye and Z. Mao, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 12138–12143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, J. Tian, Y. Ma, L. Wang, Y. Zhao and S. Zhao, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 900, 90–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Ma, B.-C. Yin and B.-C. Ye, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 65437–65443 RSC .
C. Song, X. Yang, K. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Huang, J. Liu, W. Liu and P. Liu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2014, 827, 74–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, H. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Li, L. Sun and G. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11004–11007 RSC .
J. Chen, X. Ji, P. Tinnefeld and Z. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1786–1794 CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Cui, Z. Cao, C. Lau and J. Lu, Talanta, 2016, 154, 574–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, H. Shi, X. He, K. Wang, D. He, Q. Guo, Z. Qing, L. a. Yan, X. Ye, D. Li and J. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 6976–6982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Zhao, M. Duan, H. Zhang, J. Jiang and R. Yu, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 3797–3801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiong, Y. Tang, J. Zhao and S. Zhao, Analyst, 2016, 141, 1499–1505 RSC .
J. Wang, O. Rincón, R. Polsky and E. Dominguez, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 83–86 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hwang, E. Kim and J. Kwak, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 579–584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fang, Y. Fan, J.
M. Kong, G. J. Zhang, L. Linn and S. Rafeah, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 126, 684–690 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qian, F. Gao, L. Du, Y. Zhang, D. Tang and D. Yang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 483–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Taton, C. A. Mirkin and R. L. Letsinger, Science, 2000, 289, 1757–1760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Nam, C. S. Thaxton and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2003, 301, 1884–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Nam, S.-J. Park and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3820–3821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Nam, C. S. Thaxton and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2003, 301, 1884–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Nam, S. I. Stoeva and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5932–5933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Georganopoulou, L. Chang, J.-M. Nam, C. S. Thaxton, E. J. Mufson, W. L. Klein and C. A. Mirkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 2273–2276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Thaxton, H. D. Hill, D. G. Georganopoulou, S. I. Stoeva and C. A. Mirkin, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 8174–8178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Bao, T.-F. Wei, P. A. Lefebvre, H. An, L. He, G. T. Kunkel and U. R. Müller, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 2055–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Stoeva, J.-S. Lee, J. E. Smith, S. T. Rosen and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8378–8379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Stoeva, J.-S. Lee, C. S. Thaxton and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3303–3306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Thaxton, R. Elghanian, A. D. Thomas, S. I. Stoeva, J.-S. Lee, N. D. Smith, A. J. Schaeffer, H. Klocker, W. Horninger, G. Bartsch and C. A. Mirkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 18437–18442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Faulds, W. E. Smith and D. Graham, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 412–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Cao, R. Jin and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2002, 297, 1536–1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Park, T. A. Taton and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2002, 295, 1503–1506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Weizmann, F. Patolsky and I. Willner, Analyst, 2001, 126, 1502–1504 RSC .
L. Zhou, P. Lu, M. Zhu, B. Li, P. Yang and J. Cai, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 881–887 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, S. Yang, G. Shen, R. Yu and Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8608–8611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lv, M. Lu, Y. Yang, Y. Yin and J. Zhao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 244, 151–156 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Z. Yan, Y. Sun, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6215–6218 RSC .
A. P. de Silva and S. Uchiyama, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 399–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5742–5757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, L. Zhang, J. Ai, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6334–6338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Y. Tao, F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 6663–6669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Y. Liu and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3107–3109 RSC .
J. Li, X. Jia, D. Li, J. Ren, Y. Han, Y. Xia and E. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6131–6138 RSC .
Z. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Mol. BioSyst., 2012, 8, 921–926 RSC .
J. Yu, S. Choi, C. I. Richards, Y. Antoku and R. M. Dickson, Photochem. Photobiol., 2008, 84, 1435–1439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, S. Choi and R. M. Dickson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 318–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, J. Yu, S. A. Patel, Y.-L. Tzeng and R. M. Dickson, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10, 109–115 CAS .
Y. Antoku, J. Hotta, H. Mizuno, R. M. Dickson, J. Hofkens and T. Vosch, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 716–721 CAS .
Z. Sun, Y. Wang, Y. Wei, R. Liu, H. Zhu, Y. Cui, Y. Zhao and X. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11960–11962 RSC .
J. Li, X. Zhong, F. Cheng, J.-R. Zhang, L.-P. Jiang and J.-J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4140–4146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yin, X. X. He, K. M. Wang, Z. H. Qing, X. Wu, H. Shi and X. H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 110–112 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Dai, S. Wang, C. Han and K. Xu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 232, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, X. He, K. Wang, F. Xu, J. Shangguan, D. He and H. Shi, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 12011–12019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhou, C. M. Li, Y. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Analyst, 2013, 138, 873–878 RSC .
J. Li, J. You, Y. Zhuang, C. Han, J. Hu, A. Wang, K. Xu and J.-J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7107–7110 RSC .
H. Jiang, G. Xu, Y. Sun, W. Zheng, X. Zhu, B. Wang, X. Zhang and G. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11810–11813 RSC .
L. Zhang, R.-P. Liang, S.-J. Xiao, J.-M. Bai, L.-L. Zheng, L. Zhan, X.-J. Zhao, J.-D. Qiu and C.-Z. Huang, Talanta, 2014, 118, 339–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. You, Y. Dai, M. Shi, C. Han and K. Xu, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 11306–11311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ran, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 557–560 RSC .
M. Li, X. Yang, J. Ren, K. Qu and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1722–1728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Chen, Z. Liu, P. Shi, K. Dong, E. Ju, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 9678–9688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Arvizo, S. Bhattacharyya, R. A. Kudgus, K. Giri, R. Bhattacharya and P. Mukherjee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2943–2970 RSC .
J. A. Barreto, W. O’Malley, M. Kubeil, B. Graham, H. Stephan and L. Spiccia, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, H18–H40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Petros and J. M. DeSimone, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2010, 9, 615–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y.-F. Li, Y. Qu, Z. Chai and Y. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8266–8303 RSC .
M. Mandal and A. Bandyopadhyay, Adv. Res., 2012, 3, 359–363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sharma, R. C. Rocha, M. L. Phipps, H.-C. Yeh, K. A. Balatsky, D. M. Vu, A. P. Shreve, J. H. Werner and J. S. Martinez, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4107–4110 RSC .
N. Bossert, D. de Bruin, M. Götz, D. Bouwmeester and D. Heinrich, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 37897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Smith and S. S. Gambhir, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 901–986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Weinstain, E. Segal, R. Satchi-Fainaro and D. Shabat, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 553–555 RSC .
K. L. Hamner, C. M. Alexander, K. Coopersmith, D. Reishofer, C. Provenza and M. M. Maye, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7011–7020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, K. Albert, C.-C. Wen, P.-Y. Hsieh, S.-Y. Chen, N.-C. Huang, S.-C. Lo, J.-K. Chen and H.-Y. Hsu, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 152, 423–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Li, J. Wang, E. Ju, L. Zhou, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 522–529 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, M. Yang, B. Pang, M. Vara and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10410–10488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, S. Tang, Z. Guo, X. Wang, S. Mo, X. Huang, G. Liu and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8210–8216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Liu, Z. Liu, F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2890–2895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Wang, L. Cheng, S.-T. Lee and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7414–7422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ganta, H. Devalapally, A. Shahiwala and M. Amiji, J. Controlled Release, 2008, 126, 187–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 391–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Lin, M. Yin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 1364–1371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Lin, M. Yin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 1778–1783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, E. Ju, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9791–9793 RSC .
H. Sun, N. Gao, K. Dong, J. Ren and X. Qu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6202–6210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 789–799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Miller, L. Wang, B. C. Benicewicz and A. W. Decho, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7787–7807 RSC .
L. Rizzello and P. P. Pompa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1501–1518 RSC .
W. Bing, Z. Chen, H. Sun, P. Shi, N. Gao, J. Ren and X. Qu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1648–1658 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-m. Xiu, Q.-b. Zhang, H. L. Puppala, V. L. Colvin and P. J. J. Alvarez, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4271–4275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) (2011), https://www.whitehouse.gov/mgi, accessed: September, 2015.

Footnote† These authors contribute equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Zhaowei Chen
	Zhaowei Chen received his BSc degree from the Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2010, and his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry and Chemical Biology from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. He then started his postdoctoral fellowship in the Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University. His research interests include the design and synthesis of biomimetic (e.g., biomolecule-templated, enzyme-mimic, cell-inspired) materials for theranostic, biocatalytic, and energy conversion applications.

Chaoqun Liu
	Chaoqun Liu received his Bachelor of Science degree and Master of Medicine degree from Henan University in 2011 and 2014, respectively. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jinsong Ren at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interest focuses on the synthesis and application of multifunctional nanomaterials in cancer therapy.

Fangfang Cao
	Fangfang Cao received her BSc degree from Nanjing Normal University in 2014. She then joined the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a PhD candidate, majoring in Chemical Biology under the supervision of Prof. Jinsong Ren. Her current scientific interest is focused on the fabrication of functional nanomaterials for analytical and biomedical applications.

Jinsong Ren
	Jinsong Ren received her BSc degree from Nanjing University in 1990, and PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1995. From 1996 to 2002, she worked at the School of Medicine, UMMC and the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology. In 2002, she took a position as a principal investigator at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research interests include molecular recognition and regulation, high-throughput drug screening and nanofunctional materials.

Xiaogang Qu
	Xiaogang Qu received his PhD from the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 1995. He then moved to the United States and worked with Professor J. B. Chaires at the Mississippi Medical Center, and Nobel Laureate Professor Ahmed. H. Zewail at the California Institute of Technology. Since late 2002, he has been a professor at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, CAS. He visited the group of Nobel Laureate Professor Alan J. Heeger at UCSB from December 2006 to May 2007. His current research is focused on ligand–nucleic acids or related protein interactions, and biofunctional materials for advanced medical technology.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of DNA duplex structures formed by Waston–Crick base-pairing interactions. (B) Structures of nucleobases. Both the negatively charged phosphate groups and the nitrogen atoms (numbered and highlighted in blue) in the nucleobases provide binding sites for metal ions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of λ-DNA-templated silver nanowires to bridge two gold electrodes. (f) Fluorescence image proving the stretch of the DNA template between two electrodes. (g and h) Atomic force microscopy images substantiating the formation of silver nanowires on the DNA scaffolds with granular morphology. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 1998 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  General procedures for synthesizing DNA-templated metal nanostructures by chemical reduction. Chemical reduction can be used to fabricate metal nanomaterials with different sizes or shapes by tuning the reaction conditions, such as DNA sequences, lengths, metal precursor/DNA ratios, reaction time, and temperatures.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic depiction of DNA-metallization induced by photoreduction. (b and c) UV-vis spectrum and atomic force microscopy characterization of the optical property and morphology of the photoreduced silver–DNA complexes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 
Mn+:DNA + ne− → M:DNA|Eapplied| > |E0|	(1)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of DNA-templated Fe nanowires via electrochemical deposition. This scheme can be also used to describe the processes of DNA-templated metal growth using electrochemical deposition on different electrodes. (b) Atomic force microscopy image of a DNA-templated Fe nanowire (i) and illustration of the morphology of the Fe nanowires on the DNA template (ii). (c) Scanned conductance microscopy (SCM) and (d) magnetic force microscopy characterization of the DNA-templated Fe nanowires. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Scheme of the possible reaction mechanism for glutaraldehyde-modified DNA. Besides adenine base, guanine and cytosine bases also have primary amines that can react with glutaraldehyde in a similar way. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (B) Structures of molecules used to synthesize aldehyde-labeled DNA (a), which is then used as template for directed DNA metallization (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic illustration of (a) synthesis of cyclic-diol-modified deoxyuridine triphosphate and (b) conversion of di-thiol-derived DNA into aldehyde-modified DNA for further controlled metallization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Structures of oligonucleotide (left) and the corresponding bpDNA analog (right). Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (B) Mechanism of methanolysis of bpDNA to induce metal reduction. Modified and reprinted from ref. 113. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic illustration of site-specific metal nucleation on bpDNA-containing 2D arrays, and (D) transmission electron microscopy image of the in situ deposition of silver onto arrays containing bpDNA. The repulsive interactions between the metal nanoparticles lead to the folding of the flat arrays into tube structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Seed-mediated DNA metallization. (A) Nonspecific anchoring of positively charged gold nanoparticles (1.4 nm) onto DNA origami templates for further metal deposition into continuous structures (a–d). Based on this method, arbitrarily shaped DNA origami could be metallized (b–j). Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (a and b) In panel B show the processes of the specific attachment of metal seeds onto DNA scaffolds via hybridization with complementary DNA segments and covalent chemical reactions for fabricating metal nanowires, respectively. (c) In panel B shows a typical transmission electron microscopy image of a gold nanowire made by enlargement of gold seeds on a DNA scaffold according to the scheme shown in (a) of panel B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  DNA-templated synthesis of silver nanoclusters. (A) Synthesis of 12-base ssDNA oligomer-templated silver nanoclusters with characteristic electronic transitions between 400 and 600 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (B) Tuning the optical properties of silver nanoclusters on DNA templates with different conformations (19-base oligomer). Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  Synthesis of fluorescent gold nanoclusters on DNA templates. (A) Generation of gold nanoclusters by etching gold nanorods with DNA molecules. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Fabrication of gold nanoclusters on homopolymeric DNA oligomers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Tuning the morphologies of gold nanostructures with DNA templates. (A) Systematic study of the formation of gold nanogap structures using a series of thiolated DNA with different bases and sequences. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (B) Synchrotron-based small-angle X-ray scattering measurements and scattering model to investigate the DNA-controlled growth of gold nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) Schematic illustration of DNA-tuned metal deposition onto spherical gold nanoseeds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic summarization of controlled metal growth from Au nanoprism seeds using homogeneous DNA oligomers and DNA with combined bases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  DNA-metallization-assisted deposition of metal nanoparticles on heterogeneous surfaces. (A) Synthesis of Pd nanoparticels on calf thymus DNA-modified graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (B) Deposition of Pd nanocrystals on DNA absorbed carbon nanotubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) Genomic DNA-directed Pt nanoparticle nucleation on graphene oxide surfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis of chiral metal nanoparticles with DNA metallization. (A) Circular dichroism response of silver nanoparticles grown on poly(G–C) double strand DNA templates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (B) Cutting of the DNA template with DNase showed no effect on the chiroptical response of the separated DNA-coated silver nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (C) Preparation of chiral optically active gold–silver core–shell nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 


Silver	λ-DNA	AgNO3	Hydroquinone	3.1	
7, 96 and 97

DNA nanotube	AgNO3	Aldehyde	3.4.1	
101 and 243

Yeast polη gene	Ag(NH3)2OH	Galactose	3.4.2	
104

λ-DNA	AgNO3	Aldehyde	3.4.1	
100 and 244

ctDNA	AgNO3	Electrolysis	3.3	
94 and 95

λ-DNA	AgNO3	Sunlight	3.2	
245

900-mer dsDNA	Ag(NH3)2OH	Dialdehyde	3.4.2	
106 and 107

ctDNA	Ag(NH3)2OH	Galactose	3.4.4	
119 and 120

λ-DNA	AgNO3	UV light (366 nm)	3.2	
83

T4 DNA	AgNO3	UV light (254 nm)	3.2	
88

Salmon tests DNA	AgNO3	UV light (260 nm)	3.2	
246

4 × 4 tile nanoribbon	AgNO3	Aldehyde	3.4.1	
28

Platinum	ctDNA	[Pt(terpy)Cl]Clccis-Pt(NH3)2Cl2	NaBH4	3.1	
72

λ-DNA	Pt(NO3)2	UV light (254 nm)	3.2	
247

λ-DNA	K2PtCl4	DMAB	3.1	
248 and 249

Poly(GC)–poly(AT)	
cis-Pt(NH3)2Cl2	DMAB	3.1	
77

Palladium	λ-DNA	Pd(OAc)2, (NH4)2PdCl4	DMAB	3.1	
69–71 and 250–256

λ-DNA	K2PdCl4	H2	3.1	
254

λ-DNA	(NH4)2PdCl4	UV light (260 ± 10 nm)	3.2	
255

DNA nanotube	Pd(OAc)2	DMAB	3.1	
29

Gold	Herring testes DNA	HAuCl4	NaBH4	3.1	
256

ssDNA	Oligo-AuNPs or active ester–AuNPs, and HAuCl4	NH2OH, or H2O2	3.5.2	
126 and 127

ctDNA	DMAP–AuNPsb, and Goldenhance solution	Goldenhance solution	3.5.1	
257 and 258

ctDNA	DMAP–AuNPs, HAuCl4	NH2OH	3.5.1	
259

Salmon tests DNA	HAuCl4	UV light (260 nm)	3.2	
85

Salmon tests DNA	HAuCl4	Microwave	3.6	
135

Copper	λ-DNA	Cu(NO3)2	Ascorbic acid	3.1	
260–262

Nickel	λ-DNA	NiCl2 or Ni(NO3)2	NaBH4	3.1	
263

Rhodium	ctDNA/λ-DNA	RhCl3·H2O	NaBH4	3.1	
264

ctDNA/λ-DNA	RhCl3·H2O	Electrolysis	3.3
Platinum/silver	λ-DNA	Cis-platin, AgNO3	DMAB, hydrazine	3.1	
257

Palladium/copper	λ-DNA	Pd(OAc)2, CuSO4	DMAB, formaldehyde	3.1	
265

Silver/gold	900-mer dsDNA	AgNO3, KAuCl4	Sugar, hydroquinone	3.4.2, 3.1	
105

Molybdenum/germanium	λ-DNA	Mo79Ge21	Sputter deposition	3.6	
134

Silver/nickel	λ-DNA	AgNO3, NiCl2	Hydroquinone, NaBH4	3.1	
76

Silver/copper	λ-DNA	AgNO3, CuSO4	Hydroquinone, formaldehyde	3.1	
76

Palladium/nickel	λ-DNA	PdCl2, Ni(OAc)2	DMAB	3.1	
266

Nickel/gold	λ-DNA	Ni(SO4)2, HAuCl4	Hydrazene hydrate, sodium borohydride	3.1	
267

Palladium/cobalt	λ-DNA	Na2PdCl4, CoCl2	DMAB	3.1	
75 and 268

Iron	ctDNA	FeSO4	Electrolysis	3.3	
98


 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematics illustration for synthesizing segmented silver nanowires by utilizing a sequence-specific mask of the DNA template by binding the RecA nucleoprotein filament. (b) Atomic force microscopy image of the DNA templates and the corresponding segmented silver nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2002 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic design of the branched origami (a) and deposition on the mica surface for further sequential silver seeding and gold growth (b). (c) A typical atomic force microscopy image of the branched metal nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of metal nanorings on a compact DNA template. Transmission electron microscopy image of the DNA toroid (b) and the templated silver nanorings (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 291. Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 17  Fabrication of 3D metal nanostructures with DNA metallization. (A) Casting metal nanomaterials with predesigned 3D shapes using programmable DNA nanostructure templates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) DNA mold-constrained growth of 3D metal nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 307. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (C) DNA-directed growth of 3D metal nanostructures from 5 nm gold nanoparticle seeds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the DNA-templated field-effect transistor. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of a single-wall carbon nanotube contacted by two DNA-templated nanowires. (c) Schematic representation and electrical characterization of the DNA-templated carbon nanotube field-effect transistor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2003 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Different structured DNA templates as negative masks for pattern transfer in fabricating gold replicas. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) DNA-templated metal nanostructures for the robust nanopatterning of graphene via plasma etching. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 20  Application of DNA-templated nanomaterials for oxygen reduction. (A) Synthesis of Pt-nanodendrite/DNA/graphene hybrid materials as high-performance cathode materials. Compared to bare Pt/graphene or commercial Pt/C materials, the tri-component hybrids exhibited higher ORR catalytic activity, stability, reusability, and constant mass activity over a broad pH range from 1 to 13. Printed with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (B) Integration of DNA-templated gold nanoclusters with bilirubin oxidase and single-wall carbon nanotubes to enhance the electron transfer between the enzyme and cathode and thus to improve the ORR activity. Printed with permission from ref. 341. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  DNA-templated metal nanoparticles for cross-coupling reactions. (A) Preparation of DNA–Pd nanomaterials for Suzuki reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Heck reactions of aryl halides with 2,3-dihydrofuran catalyzed by DNA-templated Pd nanoparticles on multi-walled carbon nanotubes, and the proposed reaction mechanism. Reprinted with permission from ref. 356. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic representation of the synthesis of Pd nanoclusters on i-motif DNA templates and the mechanism for their high activity in catalyzing the reduction of p-nitrophenol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Synthesis of moss-like Pd nanoparticles on λ-DNA for constructing a hydrogen sensor. (a) Schematic illustration of the moss-like Pd nanostructure formation in the presence of DNA and ascorbic acid. (b) Transmission electron microscopy images of the moss-like Pd nanoparticles. (c) Schematic showing the differences in the sensing mechanism of electronic hydrogen sensors for traditional Pd materials (left) and Pd–DNA hybrid nanostructures (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 406. Copyright 2011 Society of Powder Technology Japan.	 

 	Fig. 24  Typical procedures for DNA-templated nanometals in sensing analytes that can be converted into species to interact with the nanometals to produce signals for readout. For example, based on the quenching effect of hydrogen peroxide (a) and quinones (b) toward DNA-templated silver nanoclusters, biosensors for detecting broadened analytes could be achieved by incorporating enzymatic or cascade enzymatic processes. Modified and printed with permission from ref. 428. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Changes in the microenvironment around a sliver nanocluster for biosensing. (A) Red fluorescence enhancement induced by the proximity of a G-rich overhang (a and b) and its application for DNA detection (c). Printed with permission from ref. 442. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (B) Different color response by changing the position of the enhancer relative to the silver nanocluster nucleation sequence (b). The design can be used to detect single nucleotide polymorphisms (b–d). Printed with permission from ref. 443. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Target-induced generation of a DNA-metallization template for building biosensors. (A) Schematic illustration of a chip-based scanometric assay system for DNA detection by reading the amplified signals generated from seed-mediated site-specific metallization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 529. Copyright 2000 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (B) Schematic depiction of a biosensor combining scanometric assay with a bio-barcode amplification strategy for the ultrasensitive detection of proteins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 530. Copyright 2003 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 27  Demetallization-based biosensors. Upon the addition of a demetallization agent, such as biothiols or dopamine, the biological functions of DNA molecules are recovered. (A) The released DNA can hybridize with its complementary strands. Reprinted with permission and in a color version from ref. 188. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Genefinder can intercalate the demetallized double strands. Reprinted with permission and in a color version from ref. 190. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) The G-quadruplex structure is recovered after demetallization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Exo nuclease III-based recycling process can be initiated in the presence of the demetallized ssDNA strands. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 28  DNA-templated silver nanoclusters for logic operations. (A) Logic gates built with hairpin DNA-templated silver nanoclusters, whose fluorescence can respond to the presence of K+ and/or H+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 550. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (B) Logic operations by leveraging the fluorescence variation of DNA-templated silver nanoclusters induced by the proximity of a G-rich or T-rich overhang, which can be further used to construct crossword puzzles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 551. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 29  DNA-templated silver nanoclusters (SCs) for cell bioimaging. (a) Schematic illustration of shuttle transfer SCs from a poly(acrylic acid) (PA) template to 12-mer oligocytosine (C12). (b) The excitation of the SCs were red-shifted after transfer (left panel) and a 10-fold fluorescence enhancement was observed correspondingly (right panel). Based on the SC shuttle method, FITC-modified anti-actin antibody-conjugated C12 could be labeled with SCs. (c–e) Colocalization of the red fluorescence of SC and the green fluorescence of FITC in the cell demonstrating the feasibility of this probe for cell labeling. Printed with permission from ref. 556. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 30  (A) Silver nanoclusters (AgNCs) templated on DNA sequences containing aptamers for targeted cell nucleus labeling. The red fluorescence of AgNCs colocated well with the blue fluorescence of Hoechst 33342 in the nucleus of liver CCRF-CEM cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 559. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Synthesis of AgNCs on an L-DNA-templated aptamer as a biostable probe for type-specific cell imaging. Reprinted with permission from ref. 498. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (C) Preparation of AgNCs on aptamer-containing DNA templates with bioresponsive properties for intracellular mRNA imaging. In the presence of mRNA, the changes in the microenvironment around the AgNCs lead to a spectrum shift and intensity enhancement in the emission of the AgNCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 565. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  Synthesis of DNA-templated silver nanoclusters (a) with different sequences, such as 28-bases ssDNA (b), 19-base ssDNA (c), and hairpin DNA (d). (e) Cell viability assays demonstrated the tunable toxicity of the DNA-templated silver nanoclusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 578. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 32  Demetallization-assisted intracellular cargo delivery. (A) (a) DNA-templated silver nanoparticle deposition on the surface mesoporous silica nanoparticles as gatekeepers, which can be removed by intracellular glutathione to release the loaded drugs. (b) Typical transmission electron microscopy image of the silver-deposited mesoporous silica nanoparticles. (c) Intracellular release of loaded rhodamine 6G. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Silver metallization on plasmid for efficient gene delivery. (b) Representative transmission electron microscopy image of the silver–plasmid nanohybrids. (c) Enhanced green fluorescence protein expression in A549 cells transfected with the silver–plasmid hybrid nanoparticles. Modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 592. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 33  Application of DNA-templated silver nanoparticles for antibacterial studies. (A) Schematic depiction of the synthesis of highly uniformed and colloidal stable silver nanoparticles on the surface of dsDNA-absorbed graphene oxide. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Facilitated interaction between the AgNP/dsDNA/graphene with the bacteria membrane, which was responsible for the high antibacterial efficiency. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contribute equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
