Ambipolar charge transport in a bis-diketopyrrolopyrrole small molecule semiconductor with tunable energetic disorder   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP07708D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP07708D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 1787-1793Ambipolar charge transport in a bis-diketopyrrolopyrrole small molecule semiconductor with tunable energetic disorder†

        
          
            Jiyu 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shiqing 
            Bi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shuo 
            Yang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Huiqiong 
            Zhou
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aHEEGER Beijing Research & Development Center, School of Chemistry, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: yuanzhang@buaa.edu.cn
bCAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: zhouhq@nanoctr.cn
Received 
      15th November 2017
    , Accepted 8th December 2017First published on 11th December 2017AbstractEnergetic disorder and activation energy are important parameters that influence the charge carrier mobility in organic semiconductors. Herein, we investigate temperature-dependent ambipolar charge transport alongside its thermal activation energy in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) based on a diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) based small molecule BTDPP2. The determined energetic disorder in BTDPP2 is analogous to those of highly crystalline molecules, such as pentacene, while lower than those of widely used fullerene derivatives (PCBM) or semi-crystalline polymers, such as P3HT. We demonstrate that the energetic disorder and activation energy in BTDPP2 are both impacted by the crystallinity, which is tuned by thermal annealing; moreover, to a certain extent, these two parameters can reduce with increasing the structural order. Moreover, the energetic disorder tends to decrease when BTDPP2 is subjected to thermal annealing. Through comparing the electron transport in BTDPP2 based OFETs and vertical diodes, in which the electron densities differentiate substantially, the different activation energies are roughly described in terms of achievable carrier densities in these two devices. To the best of our knowledge, this aspect has not been addressed on the electron transport in molecular semi-conductive materials. Our results shine light on fundamental understandings of charge transport properties in solution processed small molecules holding promise for opto-electronic applications.
1. Introduction
Diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) containing compounds have emerged with great research interest for organic optoelectronic applications,1–6 showing a charge carrier mobility >5 cm2 V−1 s−1 in organic field effect transistors (OFET)7–14 and power conversion efficiencies approaching 10% in organic bulk heterojunction solar cells.15–18 The successful device applications can be largely attributed to satisfactory charge transport in DPP-containing solid films, in which intermolecular packing between fused ring moieties can facilitate charge delocalization due to molecular planarization and overlapping19,20 as well as the strong electron withdrawing capability of DPP core, leading to tunability in band gaps.15 To date, many of the high mobility DPP based OFETs are found in the form of conjugated polymers, exhibiting a dominant hole-transport. Compared to OFETs with a unipolar transport,21 ambipolar transistors are advantageous in realizing simplified circuit design and device integration22,23 and thus, they are of fundamental interest. We have reported a bis-DPP containing small molecule (SM) 4,7-bis{2-[2,5-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3-(5-hexyl-2,2′:5′,2′-terthiophene-5′-yl)-pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrolo-1,4-dione-6-yl]-thiophene-5-yl}-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (BTDPP2, molecular structure (Fig. 1a)), which displays excellent ambipolar transport behavior with balanced charge carrier mobility in solution-processed OFETs and organic inverters.24 The crystallinity in BTDPP2 was observed to be greatly enlarged after thermal annealing, leading to alteration of the transport properties, while maintaining the balance between the hole and electron mobilities. In addition, X-ray diffractometry (XRD) study revealed that the crystallinity in BTDPP2 drastically enhanced as a function of annealing temperature (Tann) up to 240 °C.24 As shown in Fig. 1a, the benzothiadiazole functional group in BTDPP2 helps lower the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) to ∼3.8 eV, leading to a reduced band gap of 1.3 eV.24 As a result, ambipolar charge transport is promoted in OFETs. These features afford BTDPP 2 as an ambipolar model system to investigate structure-transport relationships.
 Fig. 1  (a) Molecular structure of BTDPP2. (b) Device architecture of OFETs, and (c) energy contour of BTDPP2 where the density of states (DOS) for the LUMO and HOMO is schematically shown. 
There have been a numerous efforts in clarifying the influences of molecular structure, conformational degree of freedom, device architecture, or even mechanical properties on charge carrier mobilities in OFETs.20,25–31 In addition to these aspects, the importance of energetic disorder (σDOS) for transport properties and related device characteristics was recently revisited. In molecular semiconductors with a characteristic hopping-like transport, carriers migrate in multiple states (rather than in single band) within the band gap and the distribution (of these states) is generally described by a Gaussian density of states (DOS). The energetic disorder parameter (defined as σDOS) refers to the width of the DOS and reflects the energetic distance between each hopping site. A larger σDOS generally corresponds to a higher degree of disorder, typically identified in amorphous polymer associated with a low mobility.32 Recently, it was demonstrated that having a nearly disorder-free feature, the hole-transport in OFETs based on an amorphous indacenodithiophene donor–acceptor copolymer could be more superior to that in semi-crystalline polymers, such as P3HT or PBTTT.33 Regarding counterpart electrons, the high electron mobility in the benchmarked n-polymer P(NDI2OD-T2) could also ascribed to the low degree of crystallinity and resultant low σDOS.34 Moreover, σDOS has been found to be directly correlated to the voltage losses in organic solar cells,35,36e.g., enlargement of σDOS can cause reductions in the open-circuit voltage.37 Activation energy (Δmobility) is a relevant parameter to σDOS that measures the energetic distance from the equilibrium state to the transport levels within the DOS.38 It has been demonstrated that Δmobility is intimately correlated to the charge carrier mobility in organic semiconductors and it commonly decreases with increase in mobility.38 Based on a variety of conjugated polymers with different ranges of mobilities, a universal Arrhenius temperature (T) dependence for the hole-transport and Δmobility was established.39 The different Δmobility in OFETs and diodes were interpreted by the different hole densities in these two devices under operation,39 highlighting the influences of Δmobility and carrier density for charge carrier mobility.
However, in comparison to these appreciable achievements for conjugated polymers, knowledge within this aspect remains almost blank for organic small molecules, particularly for solution-processed ambipolar SMs. As aforementioned, DPP small molecules are generally prone to crystallize in solid films and the carrier mobility can be tuned within a relatively wide window through thermal annealing.40–43 Even though a control on mobility is achieved, it is still unclear to what degree the structural disorder can affect the σDOS and Δmobility, and how the electron mobility and Δmobility in DPP SMs are affected by carrier density.
To address these questions, in this article we choose BTDPP2 as a model system and investigate the processing-energetics-transport relationships with T-dependent OFET measurements and modelling,20,24 enabling to quantify σDOS and Δmobility in BTDPP2. The main rationale of choosing DTPPD2 is that the knowledge on the structural properties and OFET transport at room temperature has been acquired through our previous studies,24 which allows us to apply thermal annealing to tune the crystallinity and energetic disorder. We found that, to a certain degree, both σDOS and Δmobility are reduced with increasing Tann. We also comparatively investigated the activation energy of electron transport in two differentiating devices of OFETs and sandwich (vertical) diodes based on BTDPP2, in which the carrier concentration differs by 2–3 orders. The distinct carrier mobility and Δmobility can be explained by the different electron densities in device operations. To the best of our knowledge, the dependence of Δmobility on carrier density has only been demonstrated for the hole-transport in unipolar conjugated polymers, but for the electron-transport in ambipolar SM semiconductors.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Energetic disorder and activation energy in BTDPP2 OFETs
OFETs, prepared in this study adopt the staggered bottom gate-top electrode device configuration (see device structure in Fig. 1b). The LUMO energy in BTDPP2 roughly hits the universal trap level (∼3.8 eV), which is established on a variety of molecular semiconductors.44 Thus, the traps in BTDPP2 (if present) could be energetically shallow. As a result, the impact of traps on the T-dependence can be mitigated, which is essential for parameterization and modelling in this study.39,45 Based on the thermal properties of BTDPP2 investigated previously,24 the melting temperature (Tm) of BTDPP2 is around 274 °C. Thus, in this study, all thermal annealing was performed well below its Tm. In Fig. 1c, the energetic contour for BTDPP2 is illustrated, in which the density of states for LUMO and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) are both assumed with a Gaussian distribution. The two depicted Gaussian centres refer to the LUMO and HOMO levels and the Gaussian width is denoted as σDOS that mirrors the energetic disorder. As detailed in the following section, both σDOS and Δmobility, to a certain degree, are affected by thermal annealing. It should be mentioned that in OFETs, in which charge transport occurs typically within a few nanometers between the interface of semiconductor and dielectric layers, the interfacial disorder (of dielectrics) can affect the activation energy and energetic disorder in the active layer.34 Therefore, in this study, all comparisons (with different Tann) were performed based on exactly identical treatments on the dielectric layer.

Fig. 2a–c (symbols) show representative transfer characteristics of BTDPP2 OFETs measured at various T with Tann = 150 °C. Tann was chosen based on the previous study on BTDPP2 showing optimal transport under this condition.24,46 Due to the large contact resistance of Au for electron injection, we cannot observe any satisfactory electron current in the linear regime; thus, for n-type mode, we focussed only on the Ids in the saturation regime. With a matched work function of Au with respect to the HOMO in BTDPP2,46 we observe the source–drain current (Ids) in the linear regime (p-mode) at a low drain voltage (Vd) = −20 V (see Fig. 2a). In contrast to the off-state current (Ioff) that is nearly T-independent, the Ids in the on-state (Ion) exhibits an evident decreasing trend at lower T (for Vg < −10 V). Fig. 2b and c show T-dependent transfer characteristics in the saturation regime for p-type (Vg = −60) and n-type (Vg = +60 V) modes, respectively. At all T, the Ids values non-monotonously vary with Vg, resulting in a minimal Ids value that appears at a certain transition voltage, Vtr. The value of Vtr is approximately half the maximal applied Vg (in both p- and n-modes), which is in line with the ambipolar transport feature identified in BTDPP2.24
 Fig. 2  Temperature (T)-dependent transfer characteristics (symbols) together with simulated results (lines) of BTDPP2 OFETs operated in different regimes with (a) Vd = −20 V, (b) Vd = −60 V, and (c) Vd = +60 V. (d and e) Charge carrier mobility of BTDPP2 OFETs as a function of 1/T2 (d) and 1000/T (e) using Au top source–drain electrodes operated in p- and n-type modes. 
To determine σDOS and Δmobility, we extracted the carrier mobility in BTDPP2 OFETs using classical MOS-FET equations (see eqn (S1) and (S2) in ESI†). At room temperature (RT), the hole-mobility is 1.2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the saturation regime and 8.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the linear regime. The small mobility difference appears to suggest a small impact of contact resistance at BTDPP2/Au interface. Accordingly, we attained an electron mobility of 4.4 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 using Au contacts. This value is slightly lower than those using low work function metal electrodes, such as Ba or Ca,24 which may be caused by the enlarged electron injection barrier. Fig. 2d and e display Arrhenius plots of the determined OFET mobilities as functions of 1/T2 and 1000/T, respectively. The hole and electron mobilities exhibit a comparable T-dependence, indicative of an equivalence in Δmobility. We further calculated Δmobility using the Arrhenius relation (see eqn (S3), ESI†), which yielded a Δmobility of ∼0.1 eV for both the hole and electron mobilities. For comparison, the Δmobility of BTDPP2 is comparable to that of polymeric OFETs based on semi-crystalline regio-regular poly(thiophene).47 For σDOS, we applied the model proposed by Bässler for organic semiconductors,48 (1)where μ0 is the mobility with the temperature approaching infinity, q is the elementary charge, a is the intersite separation, and E is the electrical field. This model has led to viable assessments on σDOS in fullerene derivatives.49 Linear fittings with eqn (1) to the plot of mobility versus 1/T2 (Fig. 2d) yielded a σDOS of ∼50 meV for both HOMO and LUMO energies. This result implies that the energetic disorder in the HOMO and LUMO of BTDPP2 can be equivalent.24 Based on the relation, WDOS = σDOS2/kBT, the actual width of the Gaussian DOS (WDOS) was determined to be 96 meV. The resemblance in the WDOS for HOMO and LUMO seemingly correlates to the comparable hole and electron mobilities in BTDPP2 at RT.
2.2. Impacts of thermal annealing on energetic disorder and activation energy
Next, we explore the impact of thermal annealing on σDOS and Δmobility for BTDPP2. In our previous study, we showed that the Tann could induce considerable changes in crystallinity and mobility in BTDPP2.24 With improved mobility afforded by annealing, we have identified a reduced intermolecular d-spacing and enhanced crystallinity using X-ray diffractometry coupled with atomic force microscopy.24 Based on this knowledge, we adopted similar annealing procedures and assumed that the structural ordering/crystallinity in BTDPP2 is systematically tuned by Tann. To understand how σDOS and Δmobility are impacted by the structural ordering, we extracted these two parameters as a function of Tann. Fig. 3a and c show the determined Δmobility and σDOS of BTDPP2 OFETs using Au source–drain electrodes. Surprisingly, σDOS is not substantially affected by Tann, given its tendency of crystallization in this small molecule.24 The σDOS for HOMO only slightly decreases (from 54 meV to 49 meV when increasing Tann from 120 °C to 150 °C). Upon further annealing at 200 °C, the σDOS adversely increases to 52 meV. The trend of σDOS for LUMO exhibits a monotonous decrease with increasing Tann. This result can be understood by the general fact that thermal annealing to some degree enhances molecular ordering. It should be noted that even with observable variations on σDOS, the impact of annealing on energetic disorder is much smaller than that on crystallinity.24Fig. 3c shows the Δmobility of OFETs with Au contacts as a function of Tann. We observe an analogous fashion to that of σDOS, i.e., the Δmobility for holes slightly reduces with increasing Tann up to 150 °C and adversely increases at Tann = 200 °C. Within certain ranges of Tann, the enhanced OFET mobility with reduced Δmobility is consistent to the established universal Arrhenius temperature dependence of carrier mobility in conjugated polymers.38 As for higher Tann (200 °C), the slight increase in σDOS (or Δmobility) might be related to the enlargement of grain boundaries, resulting in a decrease of mobility in BTDPP2.24 Based on a recent transport study on small molecules, the energetic disorder has been found to primarily correlate to the ordering in molecular stacking,50 while it does not necessarily follow the degree of crystallinity. This is supported by the aforementioned example of amorphous indacenodithiophene copolymer that surprisingly exhibits a low degree of energetic disorder and extraordinarily large mobility.33
 Fig. 3  (a) Energetic disorder parameter σDOS and (c) activation energy Δmobility as a function of annealing temperature (Tann) determined in the linear and saturation regimes for the hole mobility (HOMO) and saturation regime for the electron mobility (LUMO) based on OFETs with Au source–drain electrodes. (b) σDOS and (d) Δmobility for BTDPP2 OFETs using Ba/Al source–drain electrodes as a function of Tann operated in different modes. 
To further evaluate the impact of the contact properties on σDOS, we measured T-dependent transport in BTDPP2 OFETs with Ba/Al source–drain electrodes. The low work function of Ba assures an ohmic contact for electron injection, thus enabling the observation on Ids in the linear regime (n-mode). The determined σDOS and Δmobility using Ba/Al contacts were similarly plotted as a function of Tann (see Fig. 3b and d). The electron mobility is enhanced by nearly one order compared to the result obtained using Au electrodes, reaching ∼10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 at RT. Interestingly, the σDOS and Δmobility for OFETs with Ba electrodes are both reduced, i.e. a σDOS = 41.7 meV and Δmobility = 70.4 meV are determined with Tann = 150 °C. Considering that the activation energy estimates the energetic distance between the equilibrium and transport states,51 the reduced Δmobility may be interpreted by the enlargement of electron density (due to facilitated electron injection) and resultant rising of the equilibrium states using Ba contact. In this case, it should be emphasized that the activation energy and energetic disorder both tend to be subjected to the influence of contact rather than being intrinsic materials properties. In comparison to contact properties, it appears that Tann has a less significant impact on σDOS and Δmobility, showing a maximal change less than 10 meV. It is of importance that with different source–drain electrodes, a consistent trend for dependence of σDOS on Tann in BTDPP2 OFETs is observed.
2.3. Modelling of OFET transport in BTDPP2
As an alternative for the determination of energetic disorder in BTDPP2, we simulated OFET characteristics (Fig. 2a–c) using the variable range hopping (VRH) model proposed by Vissenberg et al. (see details in eqn (S4) and (S5) in ESI†).52,53 This model was applied to semi-crystalline materials, yielding satisfactory descriptions for OFET transport. Moreover, with the density dependent mobility, the VRH model has successfully predicted the ambipolar OFET transport in a narrow band-gap organic molecule, nickel-dithiolene.53 On this basis, we attempted to utilize Vissenberg's equations to fit OFET characteristics of BTDPP2. Lines in Fig. 2a–c are the recreated OFET curves by the VRH model, in which both temperature- and charge carrier density-dependencies are taken into account. In this model, a characteristic temperature T0, equivalent to σDOS, is used to depict the DOS width.47 To parameterize T0, we first fitted the transfer and output characteristics at RT (see results in Fig. S1, ESI†). We attained a T0 = 390 K and Vth = −12 V for the p-mode and T0 = 380 K and Vth = 4.8 V for the n-mode. With the parameterized T0, we simulated T-dependent transfer curves as shown in Fig. 2a–c (with maintaining all fitting parameters constant). Markedly, by using a single set of fitting parameters, the Ids in the saturation regime is well described in a wide T range, validating the applicability of VRH model to describe the ambipolar OFET transport in BTDPP2. As a further conformity, T-dependent hole currents in the linear regime (Vd = −20 V) were modelled based on the same set of fitting parameters, producing satisfactory fittings (see eqn (S5) in ESI†). All these results confirm that the energy disorder in the HOMO and LUMO of BTDPP2 is roughly identical, consistent to the results in Fig. 2d and e. It is noteworthy to mention that the T0 in the VRH model measures the width for DOS with an exponential distribution while in eqn (1), one assumes a Gaussian DOS. The difference primarily originates from the different energy regimes, in which the device operates. It has been shown that the exponential DOS can mimic the Gaussian DOS in the high charge carrier density regime (1018–1019 cm−3) which applies to operating OFETs.39 It is of importance that the determined T0 for BTDPP2 is clearly smaller than those of PPV derivatives (T0 = 540 K) and P3HT (T0 = 425 K), and is comparable to the T0 for pentacene (380 K) based on the same determinant model.32 This result points to a low energetic disorder in solution-processed DPP-SMs, which may result from the preferential intermolecular packing between DPP cores.
2.4. Density-dependent mobility and Δmobility in BTDPP2
The origin of the enhanced hole-mobility in amorphous polymers has been explored, highlighting the significance of charge carrier density (Nd) in operational devices.32 To understand how Nd impacts the OFET mobility (μFET) in BTDPP2, we calculated μFET with the VRH model and compared it to the values directly determined from classical MOS-FET equations. The μFET as a function of Vg is extracted using eqn (S6) (ESI†), in which Nd in OFETs is primarily governed by gate-induced carriers as CiVeff with Veff = Vg − Vt. In contrast to MOS-FET equations, which estimate charge carrier mobility under averaged carrier Nd, the VRH model accounts for the carrier density dependence, thus predicting the mobility at a specific carrier density. As shown in Fig. 4a–c, similar carrier mobilities are obtained with these two determinant approaches at Vg = −40 V (for holes) and Vg = +30 V (for electrons) with VRH model. Consistently, a comparable T-dependence (of mobility) is found. As the μFET is subject to carrier density-dependence, one expects that the activation energy should be a function of Nd. Fig. 4d shows the comparative plot of the determined Δmobility for the hole and electron currents (saturation regime) as a function of Nd (also see Fig. S2 and S3, ESI†). It is evident that the Δmobility for both carriers decrease with increasing Nd. This observation can be explained by the filling up of tail states by gate-induced carriers. With the increase of Vg, the equilibrium level (Eeq) within the HOMO (or LUMO) is lifted. It is known that the energetic distance between Eeq and the transport level contributes to Δmobility.38,51 To this end, the modulation of gate bias leads to a decrease in the thermal activation energy.
 Fig. 4  Arrhenius plot of carrier mobilities of BTDPP2 OFETs versus temperature operated in (a) p-type linear regime, (b) p-type saturation regime, and (c) n-type saturation regime. The scattered closed symbols and connected open symbols are the mobility determined with the classical MOSFET equations and VRH model which accounts for the density-dependent mobility, respectively. (d) Δmobility of the hole and electron mobilities in the saturation regime calculated as a function of charge carrier density in BTDPP2 OFETs. 
With the identified carrier density-dependence of transport in BTDPP2, it is of interest to explore the Δmobility in devices operated in different carrier density regimes. For this purpose, we investigated the electron mobility in BTDPP2 based single-carrier (vertical) diodes, defined as μdiode(e). The diode was obtained by sandwiching the same BTDPP2 layer (as in OFETs) between the Al bottom anode and Ba/Al top cathode, which allows for an ohmic contact for electron injection. Fig. 5a displays current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of BTDPP2 diodes measured at various T. Within a large bias, the electron current shows a quadratic voltage dependence at low bias, indicating a dominant space-charge limited transport in BTDPP2. The μdiode(e) was estimated by applying the Mott–Gurney law and the fitting results are displayed in Fig. S4 (ESI†). At lower T, we note visible deviations from the quadratic voltage dependence, which may be related to the increased field-dependence due to Poole–Frenkel effect.45 The observed anisotropic charge carrier mobility in these two devices, in addition to the different carrier densities, may also be related to the π–π intermolecular stacking in BTDPP2 films along with preferential orientation. At this stage, we do not have a clear evidence on this aspect, which may call for further investigations using GIWAXS.
 Fig. 5  (a) Current versus voltage characteristics of BTDPP2 electron-only (EO) devices measured from 300 K to 160 K. Inset: Device architecture of BTDPP2 EO devices. (b) Comparison of the Δmobility of electron mobility in BTDPP2 in the low carrier density (diode) and high carrier density (FET) regimes. Inset: Zoomed-in plot of Δmobilityvs. carrier density in the OFET regime. 
The Δmobility for the electron transport in diodes was determined similarly by plotting μdiode(e) against 1/T, leading to extracting a Δmobility = 263 meV. It is of interest that the Δmobility roughly falls in the range predicted by the universal Arrhenius temperature dependence in conjugated polymers with a comparable mobility.38
It can be noted that the difference in electron mobility between the BTDPP2 OFET and diode is relatively small (only by 1 order of magnitude) when compared to the hole mobility difference between PPV devices (by 3 orders of magnitude). In the density-dependent mobility model,32 the mobility increases with Nd following a power law dependence as ∼NdT0/T−1. It should be noted that the Nd in these two devices typically differs by 2–3 orders. It appears evident that with a larger T0, the difference in mobility following the power dependence can sharply increase. On this basis, the shrunk difference between μdiode(e) and μFET(e) in BTDPP2 may be reconciled by the smaller T0 or energetic disorder. Finally, we compared thermal activation energies for the electron transport in these two devices. Fig. 5b shows the comparison of the Δmobility of BTDPP2 OFETs with that of vertical diodes as a function of Nd. The Nd in the BTDPP2 diode falls in the range of 1016 cm−3, which is 2–3 orders lower than that in OFETs. We found that the activation energy of the two devices approximately exhibits a linear dependence on Nd, which is evidenced by the extrapolated straight line from the OFET regime to that of diodes. The unified Δmobility can be primarily explained by the density dependence of electron mobility in BTDPP2. This result is in line with previously identified activation energies of hole transport in OFETs and diodes based on conjugated polymers. Combining these results, we conclude that existing transport models established on conjugated polymers tend to be valid for describing the electron transport in DPP small molecules with ambipolarity feature.
3. Conclusions
To summarize, T-dependent ambipolar transport in BTDPP2 OFETs was investigated. In a wide T-range, BTDPP2 displays a balanced ambipolar charge transport, showing equivalent thermal activation energy. We found that the energetic disorder in the HOMO and LUMO of BTDPP2 is nearly equivalent, corresponding to a Gaussian DOS width of ∼96 meV, which is lower than that of widely used amorphous polymers such as PPV derivatives or semi-crystalline polymers such as P3HT. Alongside the enhanced crystallinity with thermal annealing, both the energetic disorder and activation energy in BTDPP2 are tunable with Tann, but to a less degree. We identified that the carrier mobility and thermal activation in BTDPP2 are both dependent on the carrier density, which explains the observed difference in activation energies for the electron transport in OFETs and diodes. Future studies can be focused on a series of small-molecular semiconductors with different chemical structures and bandgaps to reach a more solid conclusion on the relationship between energetic disorder and crystallinity. This study enables an in-depth understanding on charge transport properties in solution-processed DPP small molecules that hold promise for optoelectronic device applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y. Z. thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21674006) and the 1000 Young Talents Program in China. H. Z. acknowledges the support from the Chinese Academy of Science (100 Top Young Scientists Program and QYZDB-SSW-SLH033). Y. Z. greatly thanks Prof. Thuc-Quyen Nguyen for the materials used in this study and helpful discussion.
References
P. Sonar, S. P. Singh, Y. Li, M. S. Soh and A. Dodanalapur, Adv. Mater., 2010, 20, 5409 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li and S. P. Singh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, Y. S. Choi and W. H. Jo, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 3060 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Sharma, J. A. Mikroyannidis, S. S. Sharma, M. S. Roy and K. J. R. Thomas, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 652 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, Z. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Yao, Z. Cai, H. Luo, G. Zhang and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 10101 RSC .
G. Lin, Y. Qin, J. Zhang, Y.-S. Guan, H. Xu, W. Xu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 4470 RSC .
Z. Yi, S. Wang and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xiao, G. Zhao, A. Zhang, W. Jiang, R. A. J. Janssen, W. Li, W. W. Hu and Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, A.-R. Han, H. Yu, T. J. Shin, C. Yang and J. H. Oh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 135, 9540 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Cho, J. Shin, H. Yoon, T. W. Lee, M. Kaur and D. H. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7132 RSC .
J. Y. Back, H. Yu, I. Song, I. Kang, H. Ahn, T. J. Shin, S.-H. Kwon, J. H. Oh and Y.-H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1732 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, C. Xiao, Q. Wang, J. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Wu, Z. Wei, X. Zhan, W. Hu, Z. Wang, R. A. J. Janssen and W. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Um, D. H. Lee, D. U. Heo, D. S. Yang, J. Shin, H. Baik, M. M. J. Cho and D. H. Choi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5264 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Xiao, G. Y. Zhao, A. D. Zhang, W. Jiang, R. A. J. Janssen, W. Li, W. P. Hu and Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, K. H. Hendriks, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Hendriks, G. H. Heintges, V. S. Gevaerts, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Ashraf, I. Meager, M. Nikolka, M. Kirkus, M. Planells, B. C. Schroeder, S. Holliday, M. Hurhangee, C. B. Nielsen, H. Sirringhaus and I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 137, 1314 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Choi, S.-J. Ko, T. Kim, P.-O. Morin, B. Walker, B. Lee, M. Leclerc, J. Y. Kim and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tantiwiwat, A. B. Tamayo, N. Luu, X.-D. Dang and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17402 CAS .
B. Walker, C. Kim and T.-Q. Nguyen, Small Molecule Solution-Processed Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 470 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Namdas, I. D. Samuel, D. Shukla, D. M. Meyer, Y. Sun, B. B. Y. Hsu, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 043304 CrossRef .
Y.-M. Lin, J. Appenzeller and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 947 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Ye, Y. Matsuhashi and Y. Iwasa, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Kim, J. Lin and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 97 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge, H. N. Tsao, M. R. Hansen, C. M. Amb, C. Risko, J. Subbiah, K. R. Choudhury, A. Mavrinskiy, W. Pisula, J. L. Bredas, F. So, K. Mullen and J. R. Reynods, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Zhang, Y. Han, X. X. Zhu, Z. P. Fei, Y. Feng, N. D. Treat, H. Faber, N. Stingelin, I. McCulloch, T. D. Anthopoulos and M. Heeney, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. DiBenedetto, D. L. Frattarelli, A. Facchetti, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Reyes-Martinez, A. J. Crosby and A. L. Briseno, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Hwang, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, M. Fenoll, M. Yun, J. Park, J. W. Shim, K. A. Knauer, A. Dindar, H. Kim, Y. Kim, J. Kim, H. Cheun, M. M. Payne, S. Graham, S. Im, J. E. Anthony and B. Kippelen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3378 CAS .
C.-F. Huang, S.-L. Wu, Y.-F. Huang, Y.-C. Chen, S.-T. Chang, T.-Y. Wu, K.-Y. Wu, W.-T. Chuang and C.-L. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5175 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Wu, Y.-F. Huang, C.-T. Hsieh, B.-H. Lai, P.-S. Tseng, J.-T. Ou, S.-T. Liao, S.-Y. Chou, K.-Y. Wu and C.-L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14967 CAS .
C. Tanase, P. M. W. Blom and D. M. de Leeuw, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 193202 CrossRef .
D. Venkateshvaran, M. Nikolka, A. Sadhanala, V. Lemaur, M. Zelazny, M. Kepa, M. Hurhangee, A. J. Kronemeijer, V. Pecunia, N. Nasrallah, I. Romanov, K. Broch, I. McCulloch, D. Emin, Y. Olivier, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and H. Sirringhaus, Nature, 2014, 515, 384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Caironi, M. Bird, D. Fazzi, Z. Chen, R. D. Pietro, C. Newman, A. Facchetti and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3371 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Hulea, S. Fratini, H. Xie, C. L. Mulder, N. N. Iossad, G. Rastelli, S. Ciuchi and A. F. Morpurgo, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Lange, J. C. Blakesley, J. Frisch, A. Vollmer, N. Koch and D. Neher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 216402 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Blakesley and D. Neher, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075210 CrossRef .
N. I. Craciun, J. Wildeman and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 056601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tanase, E. J. Meijer, P. W. M. Blom and D. M. de Leeuw, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 216601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Nielsen, M. Turbiez and I. McCulloch, Adv. Mater., 2012, 25, 1859 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, B. Walker, A. B. Tamayo, Y. Zhang and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 47 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fernández, A. Viterisi, J. W. Ryan, F. Gispert-Guirado, S. Vidal, S. Filippone, N. Martín and E. Palomares, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5871 RSC .
H. T. Nicolai, M. Kuik, G. A. H. Wetzelaer, B. de Boer, C. Campbell, C. Risko, J. L. Bredas and P. W. M. Blom, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, B. de Boer and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 085201 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, M. Wang, S. D. Collins, H. Zhou, H. Phan, C. Proctor, A. Mikhailovsky, F. Wudl and T.-Q. Nguyen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Salleo, T. W. Chen, V. R. Völkel, Y. Wu, P. Liu, B. S. Ong and R. A. Street, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 115311 CrossRef .
H. Bässler, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1993, 175, 15 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, J. K. J. van Duren, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, J. M. Kroon, M. T. Rispens, W. J. H. Verhees and M. M. Wienk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 43 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Proctor, A. S. Kher, J. A. Love, Y. Huang, A. Sharenko, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502285 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, H. Phan, X. Zhang, J. Zhou, K. Moudgil, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, A. Facchetti and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600546 CrossRef .
M. C. J. M. Vissenberg and M. Matters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 12964 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. P. Smits, D. Anthopoulos, S. Setayesh, E. van Veenendaal, R. Coehoorn, P. W. M. Blom, B. de Boer and D. M. de Leeuw, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 205316 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp07708dThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Molecular structure of BTDPP2. (b) Device architecture of OFETs, and (c) energy contour of BTDPP2 where the density of states (DOS) for the LUMO and HOMO is schematically shown.	 

 	Fig. 2  Temperature (T)-dependent transfer characteristics (symbols) together with simulated results (lines) of BTDPP2 OFETs operated in different regimes with (a) Vd = −20 V, (b) Vd = −60 V, and (c) Vd = +60 V. (d and e) Charge carrier mobility of BTDPP2 OFETs as a function of 1/T2 (d) and 1000/T (e) using Au top source–drain electrodes operated in p- and n-type modes.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Energetic disorder parameter σDOS and (c) activation energy Δmobility as a function of annealing temperature (Tann) determined in the linear and saturation regimes for the hole mobility (HOMO) and saturation regime for the electron mobility (LUMO) based on OFETs with Au source–drain electrodes. (b) σDOS and (d) Δmobility for BTDPP2 OFETs using Ba/Al source–drain electrodes as a function of Tann operated in different modes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Arrhenius plot of carrier mobilities of BTDPP2 OFETs versus temperature operated in (a) p-type linear regime, (b) p-type saturation regime, and (c) n-type saturation regime. The scattered closed symbols and connected open symbols are the mobility determined with the classical MOSFET equations and VRH model which accounts for the density-dependent mobility, respectively. (d) Δmobility of the hole and electron mobilities in the saturation regime calculated as a function of charge carrier density in BTDPP2 OFETs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Current versus voltage characteristics of BTDPP2 electron-only (EO) devices measured from 300 K to 160 K. Inset: Device architecture of BTDPP2 EO devices. (b) Comparison of the Δmobility of electron mobility in BTDPP2 in the low carrier density (diode) and high carrier density (FET) regimes. Inset: Zoomed-in plot of Δmobilityvs. carrier density in the OFET regime.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp07708d

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
