Recent advances of fluorous chemistry in material sciences  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CC34750D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CC34750D
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11382-11391Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent advances of fluorous chemistry in material sciences

        
          
            Jean-Marc 
            Vincent
          
          
        
      *
      Université Bordeaux – CNRS UMR 5255, 351 Crs de la Libération, 33405 Talence, France. E-mail: jm.vincent@ism.u-bordeaux1.fr
Received 
      3rd July 2012
    , Accepted 18th September 2012First published on 19th September 2012AbstractIn recent years, there has been an increasing interest in exploiting fluorous derivatives/moieties for applications that are not only related to reaction mixture purification issues and catalyst recycling, but to confer unique/improved properties to materials. Herein we will focus on the recent advances of fluorous chemistry in material sciences, with special emphasis on applications in organic electronics, crystals/metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) engineering and surface modification chemistry, in particular SiO2 surfaces. By selecting major contributions in these areas, we wish to highlight the benefits imparted by the introduction of fluorous tags within/onto materials, such as favouring the self-organisation of charge-carrier compounds in bulk heterojunctions, improving the hydrophobicity and/or stability of coordination polymer networks, facilitating solid-state structural rearrangement of large magnitude within crystals or the modification of surfaces through adsorption processes.
Jean-Marc Vincent
Jean-Marc Vincent received his PhD in 1995 from the Joseph Fourier University in Grenoble under the supervision of Marc Fontecave and Stéphane Ménage. After a post-doc in 1996 in the Richard Fish's group at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, he entered the CNRS in 1997 as “Chargé de Recherche” in the Institute of Molecular Sciences of the University of Bordeaux. In 2010, he was promoted “Directeur de Recherche”. His research at the ISM concerns fluorous chemistry, copper-catalyzed reactions and enantioselective organocatalysis.
A. Introduction
Fluorous chemistry is the chemistry and study of molecules labelled with perfluoroalkyl moieties (F-tags) formed of perfluorinated sp3 hybridized carbons, the most commonly employed F-tags being linear chains of formula CnF2n+1.1 The adjective fluorous appeared for the first time in 1994 in a paper published in Science by Horváth and Rábai on the fluorous biphasic catalysis concept applied to the rhodium-catalyzed hydroformylation of alkenes.2 The adjective “fluorous” was coined in analogy to the adjective “aqueous”, highlighting the fact that similarly to the aqueous media, reactions could be conducted effectively in perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and enjoy significant benefits in terms of ease of catalyst recycling. After this discovery, the concept of fluorous tagging developed rapidly and proved to be very powerful not only to facilitate catalyst recovery,3 but also to facilitate the purification procedures of complex reaction mixtures, in particular using the fluorous-solid phase extraction (F-SPE) protocol on fluorous silica.4 The so-called fluorous compounds had been previously exploited before the seminal work of Horváth and Rábai, in particular in the area of surfactant chemistry.5 Indeed, the stiffness of the F-alkyl fragments combined with their hydrophobic and lipophobic character confers fluorous compounds extreme amphiphilic properties thus favouring their self-organization and packing into highly stable and ordered assemblies (tubules, fibers, vesicles, etc.) or colloids.
The unique properties of fluorous tags and solvents have thus been largely exploited over the past 40 years in the area of surfactant chemistry5 and polymer chemistry,6 and during the past two decades in separation methodologies. A survey of the articles published within the past five years on fluorous chemistry showed that there is an increasing interest of the scientific community to exploit fluorous tags and solvents for applications that are not related to purification issues or surfactant chemistry, but to confer unique/improved properties to supramolecular assemblies,7 biomolecules,8 or materials.9 In this feature article, by selecting major contributions published within the past five years, we will describe how fluorous chemistry has impacted material sciences in the areas of organic electronics, crystal/MOFs engineering and surface modification, with a special emphasis on glass surfaces. We will highlight the benefits of providing a fluorous character to materials, such as favouring the self-organisation of charge-carrier compounds in bulk heterojunctions, improving the hydrophobicity and/or stability of coordination polymer networks, facilitating solid-state structural rearrangement of large magnitude within crystals or the modification of surfaces through adsorption processes.
B. Fluorous dyes for organic electronics
A major current research area is organic electronics with special interest for the development of organic thin-film transistors (OTFTs) and photovoltaic devices.10 For these applications much work is dedicated to the discovery of solution-processable semi-conducting p-type and n-type organic materials exhibiting high charge carrier mobility and good stability in air. High charge mobility is favoured when the charge carrier is organized into highly-ordered densely packed structures, crystals thus representing ideal materials in terms of charge mobility. On the other hand, easily solution-processable organic dyes are highly desirable. This ideally requires compounds that will be able to self-organize within thin films, films that are typically processed by spin-coating or drop-casting. Examples of fluorous dyes that were developed recently toward these goals are presented in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Structures of fluorous donors and acceptors employed in bulk heterojunctions of organic thin film transistors (OTFTs) and organic solar cells. 
The fluorous perylene tetracarboxylic acid bisimide (F-PBI) 1,11 and the fluorous C60 derivative 212 have been recently used to prepare n-type OTFT devices. In the case of 1 the organic semiconductor thin films (40 nm thickness) were obtained by vapour deposition at controlled temperature onto Si/SiO2 substrates, while spin-coating of chloroform solutions conducted under ambient conditions was used to deposit thin films of 2. Both OTFT devices prepared from the fluorous dyes 1 and 2 exhibited very high field-effect electron mobility (μ), with measured values of 0.349 and 0.25 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, values that are among the highest ever observed for this type of device. For comparison, the electron mobility measured using the reference [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) 3 is 0.025 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is one order of magnitude lower. The OTFT device based on 1 proved to exhibit an exceptionally high on-to-off current ratio of 107, which is much higher than the value of 4 × 105 obtained for the OTFT based on 2. Structural analysis of the thin films of 1 and 2 by X-ray diffraction (XRD) revealed that both displayed high crystallinity. In sharp contrast, films of PCBM 3 were amorphous. The perfluoroalkyl chains thus provide a strong amphiphilic character to the dyes with the possibility of forming additional weak intermolecular interactions such as C–H⋯F–C contacts, as observed in the X-ray structure of 1. This favours self-organisation into highly ordered films in which stronger π–π interactions occur leading to more efficient electron conduction. Importantly, both fluorous-based OTFTs were shown to retain their properties when operating in air. The dense packing of the F-chains in the films might be responsible for such unusual stability by limiting the diffusion of O2 and H2O into the channel region. Finally, it should be noted that for 1, the presence of both the fluorine substituents on the aromatic ring and fluorous tags facilitates its reduction by about 200–250 mV compared to the non-fluorinated analog. Thus both electronic and structural parameters might be responsible for the exceptional properties of the resulting OTFT device.
Tajima, Hashimoto and co-workers showed that incorporating only ∼5% of the fluorous PCBM (F-PCBM) 4 in a blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and PCBM led to a considerable improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the resulting bulk-heterojunction polymer solar cell, the PCE values increasing from 3.09% without 4 to 3.79% in the presence of 4.13 They showed that, due to the low surface energy of perfluorinated compounds, the F-PCBM spontaneously migrates during the spin-casting process at the air/liquid interface, thus forming a thin film of F-PCBM (∼2 nm) playing the role of a buffer layer between the thicker (∼100 nm) P3HT:PCBM active layer and the Al electrode (Fig. 1). The spontaneous formation of a very thin layer of 4 at the air/liquid interface was confirmed by XPS analysis, the F 1s peak being clearly observed without etching while disappearing completely after etching for 2, 6, 20, 80 and 100 nm.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the bulk heterojunction solar cell resulting from the spin-casting process of a blend of P3HT:PCBM:F-PCBM (1:0.8:0.1, w/w). Adapted from ref. 13. 
The benefit of fluorous molecules for the control of the phase separation process in a bi-component film of an electron acceptor–donor blend was recently demonstrated by Müllen, Palermo, Samori and co-workers.14 They prepared the fluorous perylene bis(dicarboximide) (F-PDI) 5 substituted with branched N-perfluoroalkyl moieties, the alkyl spacer providing almost complete isolation of the perylene core from the electron-withdrawing effect of the F-tags, thus not affecting the HOMO and LUMO energy levels. Spectroscopic studies on solutions containing both the electron acceptor 5 and the electron donor hexakis(dodecyl)benzocoronene (HBC-C12) revealed an unexpected strong interaction (Kass = 2.1 × 104 M−1) between the two compounds. As a consequence of such hetero-association phenomena, the self-aggregation and hence precipitation of the fluorous dye 5 that was noticed at concentrations above 70 μM in CHCl3 was avoided in the presence of HBC-C12. Thus, easily processable concentrated homogeneous solutions of the dimer 5–HBC-C12, which behaved as a single building block, could be used to prepare thin films of blends by spin or drop-casting of CHCl3 solutions, followed by solvent vapour annealing. AFM and fluorescence microscopy studies on the resulting thin films revealed that the two compounds self-assembled into anisotropic structures with no observable phase-separation of dyes at the microscopic scale (Fig. 2, image b). This contrasted with films made from blends of PDI2 (having 1-ethyl-propyl side chains) and the non-fluorous HBC-C12 in which a clear macroscopic phase separation occurred, as revealed by the fluorescence images showing the coexistence of long red fibers of PDI2 and short yellow crystals of HBC-C12. Interestingly, while macroscopic phase-separation did not occur, local-scale phase separation was evidenced by X-ray diffraction and wide-angle X-ray scattering studies by fibers. It was proposed that such peculiar behaviour was due to a cooperative and synergistic effect of both C–H⋯F–C interactions present in high numbers and π–π interactions, thus leading to stronger interactions between the two dyes. Overall these results highlight that a judicious choice of F-tags allows fine tuning of the phase separation process of bicomponent semiconducting donor–acceptor blends, thus providing a potential tool for optimizing charge transport in bulk heterojunction solar cells.
 Fig. 2  Fluorescence microcopy images of: (a) a blend of HBC-C12 and non-fluorous PDI2 after solvent vapour annealing in THF; (b) a blend of HBC-C12 and F-PDI 5 after solvent vapour annealing in CHCl3. From ref. 14. 
Fluorous transition metal complexes were recently advantageously exploited to develop dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). Phthalocyanins (Pcs) are emerging as appealing photosensitizers in DSCs, particularly unsymmetrical zinc phthalocyanins (ZnPcs) substituted with both bulky electron donating and electron withdrawing groups, the latter being typically carboxylic acids which additionally play the role of anchoring groups to the surface of the semiconductor metal oxide.15 The bulky groups on the Pcs periphery prevent their tendency to aggregate through π–π interactions on metal oxide surfaces, while the push–pull effect facilitates the electron transfer from the excited dye to the semiconductor conduction band. Considering this set of parameters, Pozzi, Caramori and co-workers synthesized unsymmetrical fluorous ZnPcs sensitizers such as 6 in which three benzene units were substituted by a very bulky pentaerythritol unit bearing three perfluoro-tert-butyl groups, while the fourth benzene unit was substituted by one or two carboxylic acid groups.16 DFT calculations, coupled to electrochemical and optical measurements, confirmed that the alkoxy groups were effectively shielding the aromatic core from the strong electron-withdrawing effect of the CF3 substituents, the pentaerythritol units thus retaining sufficient electron-donating character to ensure the push–pull effect. The DSCs assembled from the Pc 6 and nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes showed excellent performance, in particular a peak incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (ICPE) in the near IR region of ∼70% and a maximum power conversion efficiency (η) of 1.3%. Remarkably, these values were obtained without the requirement of antiaggregating agents or conduction band modifiers, typically required in Pc-based DSCs.
Ruthenium(II) polypyridine complexes are the most efficient photosensitizers used in nanocrystalline DSCs,10b the standard homoleptic cis-dithiocyanato(bis-2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate)RuII complex (N-719) developed by Grätzel et al. affords a maximum power conversion efficiency (η) up to 11%.17 Heteroleptic RuII was also developed with the objective of increasing the molar extinction coefficient of the dye by introducing an extended conjugated system on one dipyridyl ligand, but also to confer amphiphilic properties, which should favour their adsorption onto the TiO2 surface and hence improve the stability of the resulting DSCs by limiting the dye desorption under thermal stress. An outstanding example is the RuII complex K-19 with the 4,4′-bis(diethyl(p-hexyloxystyryl)-2,2′-bipyridine ligand which proved to be a highly efficient and stable photosensitizer.18 Lu, Lin and co-workers reported the synthesis of a series of fluorous heteroleptic RuII complexes and their use in DSCs.19 Complex 7 was shown to be a very efficient sensitizer affording a conversion efficiency of 6.82% and an ICPE of 70%, values that were close or similar to those measured for N-719 under the same conditions i.e. 7.31% and 70%, respectively. Interestingly, it was shown that the fluorous dyes were more strongly adsorbed onto the TiO2 surface affording higher packing densities when compared to the non-fluorous dyes. Remarkably, very low leaching was observed when rinsing the TiO2 surface with a 5 M NaOH aqueous solution. IR studies suggested that the increased affinity for TiO2 might be due to the presence of multiple weak C–F⋯H–O–TiO2 interactions.
To conclude this part we wish to highlight two recent important contributions which show the propensity of fluorous dyes to self-organize into highly stable assemblies/emulsions in water. Nakamura and co-workers reported that the anionic fluorous C60 derivative 8 (Scheme 1), when solubilised in water, spontaneously formed bilayer vesicles exhibiting a very narrow size distribution and a radius of ∼18 nm (Fig. 3).20
 Fig. 3  (a) Model structure of 8 and its vesicle. (b) SEM images of the vesicle-covered ITO surface under approximately 10−5 Pa (scale bar = 100 nm). Adapted from ref. 20. 
These vesicles were found very robust. Indeed, when an aqueous solution of the vesicles was spin coated on indium tin oxide followed by drying, the SEM image of the resulting surface revealed that the vesicles retained their spherical shape even under reduced pressure (Fig. 3). Moreover, these ‘teflon vesicles” repelled each other as the majority of them (>90%) were lying as isolated objects on the surface without sticking to each other. Interestingly, while the vesicles are hydrosoluble, the vesicle-modified ITO surface was found hydrophobic suggesting that the K+ counter-ion moved within the vesicles upon drying on the surface, leaving the hydrophobic perfluoroalkyl chains covering the vesicle surface.
Lim and Swager reported the synthesis of the fluorous conjugated polymer poly(p-phenylene ethylene) (PPE) 9 (Fig. 4).21 They exploited the high solubility of 9 in PFCs to conduct the polymerisation under fluorous biphasic conditions, allowing the recovery of the pure polymer in the lower fluorous phase by simple decantation, the Pd and Cu catalysts being left in the upper organic phase. Besides this practical synthetic interest, the 3D rigidity brought by the F-tags in 9 was found to limit its aggregation, leading to remarkable fluorescent properties with very high quantum yields measured both in perfluorodecalin solution (0.95) and in thin films (0.32). Strongly fluorescent and stable emulsions of 9 were prepared from a perfluorodecalin solution of 9 in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) buffer in the presence of 2H,2H,3H,3H-perfluorononanoic acid. These emulsions, formed of rather small and monodisperse particles (average diameter = 245.8 nm) featuring functional carboxylic acid groups on their surfaces (Fig. 4), show great promises for bioimaging and sensing applications.
 Fig. 4  Structure of the fluorescent PPE polymer 9 and: (a) absorption (dotted line) and emission (solid line) spectra of an emulsion of 9 and schematic representation of the emulsion particle. (b) Photographs of the emulsion before (left) and after (right) irradiation using a UV lamp. Adapted from ref. 21. 
C. Fluorous crystals/metal–organic frameworks
Being able to fine-tune the non-covalent interactions that hold together the molecules of a crystal lattice is a research of current interest as crystalline materials have high potential for important applications such as separation, storage, sensing or catalysis. For most of these applications, it might be of interest to facilitate structural rearrangement within the crystalline lattice, particularly if this occurs in a single crystal to single crystal (SC–SC) transformation. In this regard, F-tags represent powerful tools to facilitate large structural rearrangements as the stiffness and helical conformation of the F-tags, associated with weaker intermolecular interactions, may facilitate the slipping of F-chains within a crystal. Moreover, the phase-segregation between the fluorous and non-fluorous domains that typically occurs upon crystallisation of fluorous molecules offers an additional opportunity to control the organization of complex heteromeric supramolecular assemblies in the solid state.
From the seminal work of Resnati, Metrangolo and co-workers, on the use of halogen-bonding (XB) for the construction of supramolecular assemblies,22 α,ω-diiodoperfluoroalkanes (DIPFAs) have emerged as particularly attractive tectons for the engineering of crystals. Indeed, the electron-withdrawing effect of the perfluoroalkyl group makes the iodines in DIPFAs excellent XB donors. Moreover, the ditopic and rigid nature of such tectons made it possible to build self-assembled crystalline assemblies with predictable structures by a judicious choice of the HB acceptor partner. A remarkable example of control of the molecular and supramolecular chirality in crystals driven by the co-operation between HBs and ion–ion interactions was shown with the preparation of the supramolecular three-component heteromeric complex 11 which formed upon crystallization of a solution of the calixarene 10, barium diiodide and 1,8-diiodoperfluorooctane (Fig. 5).23 As seen from the crystal structure of 11, complexation of the Ba2+ cation within the calixarene cavity provided two I− counteranions lying outside the cavity. These naked I− ions behave as excellent bidentate XB acceptors, thereby allowing the formation of infinite 1D ⋯I−⋯I–(CF2)8–I⋯ homochiral left-handed (M) supramolecular helices, which further self-organize into an unprecedented example of homochiral perfluorinated double helices. Another remarkable feature of this system is that all the DIPFAs within the crystal adopt a right-handed (P) helical conformation, representing the first example of spontaneous resolution of the helical conformation of a long perfluoroalkyl chain.
 Fig. 5  Structural formulae of the individual components of supramolecular complex 11 and: (a) section of the crystal structure of the supramolecular complex 11; (b) view orthogonal to the c axis of the anionic sublattice of the crystal structure of complex 11. One double helix is represented by van der Waals spheres, with the PFA chains in yellow and red, and the iodine atoms in purple. Adapted from ref. 23. 
The ability of DIPFAs to readily form extended supramolecular assemblies in the presence of bidentate HB acceptors such as I− ions was beautifully exploited by Metrangolo and co-workers to develop a practical methodology to dynamically resolve mixtures of DIPFAs.24 They discovered that the bis(trimethylammonium) alkane diiodides 12, whose crystals are nonporous solids, can selectively and stoichiometrically incorporate DIPFAs 13 from solutions or even from the gas phase. As seen from the crystal structure of complex 12c·13c (Fig. 6), there is an excellent matching between the length of the supramolecular dianion I−⋯I–(CF2)6–I⋯I− (17.083(5) Å) and the distance between the intramolecular N atoms of 12c (16.395(11) Å). Such optimized geometry increases the electrostatic binding thus affording a peak stability for the resulting crystal framework of this given pair of diammonium salt and DIPFA (m = 6). An impressive application of such a selective and robust recognition process was the purification of a distillation residue obtained from industry composed of DIPFAs of various lengths: 1,8-diiodoperfluorooctane 13d (24.2 wt%), 1,10-diiodoperfluorodecane 13e (41.9 wt%), 1,12-diiodoperfluorododecane 13f (23.0 wt%), 1,14-diiodoperfluorotetradecane (8.3 wt%) and 1,16-diiodoperfluorohexadecane (2.6 wt%). When a MeOH solution of the bis(trimethylammonium) hexadecane diiodide 12e (equimolar amount with the DIPFA 13e) was added to the DIPFAs mixture dissolved in CCl4, the complex 12e·13e precipitated out almost immediately as a white solid. Importantly, complete removal of the DIPFAs from the diammonium·DIPFAs complexes was possible by simply heating the crystalline solids below their melting points, affording the diammonium salts in the same crystal phases as those of the starting materials. The selective encapsulation process was found to be very efficient for gas–solid reactions as well, when simply exposing finely ground samples of the nonporous crystals of the diammonium salts 12a–c to vapors of the rather volatile DIPFAs 13a–c.
 Fig. 6  Structural formulae of the individual components of the supramolecular complex 12·13 and crystal packing of the complex 12c·13c viewed along the a axis. Adapted from ref. 24. 
Recently, highly efficient solid–vapor reactions have also been evidenced from nonporous crystals of fluorous metal–carboxylate complexes. Brammer and co-workers reported that the crystals of the fluorous coordination network material [Ag4(tmp)3{O2C(CF2)3CF3}4(EtOH)2]n14 (tmp = tetramethylpyrazine), when heated at 320 K for 48 h, underwent a SC–SC transformation to afford the ethanol-free coordination polymer [Ag4(tmp)3{O2C(CF2)3CF3}4]n15.25 As shown in Fig. 7 the loss of the ethanol in 14, which is inserted in the silver–carboxylate bond, is accompanied by a profound rearrangement of the coordination sphere of one silver atom implying the breaking of two bonds (one coordination bond and one hydrogen bond) and the creation of a new carboxylate–silver bond, affording in 15 the classical silver carboxylate dimeric structure [Ag2(O2CR)2]. Importantly, this solid-state transformation was found to be reversible. Indeed, when microcrystalline samples of 15 were exposed to ethanol vapors, X-ray powder diffraction studies clearly revealed that the crystal lattice of 14 was recovered. Remarkably, while both crystals of 14 and 15 are nonporous, ethanol can diffuse in and out the crystal lattice with high efficiency. It was proposed that the ethanol access and release was made possible because of the anti to gauche conformation change observed for the Cγ–Cδ bond of half of the perfluoroalkyl chains, which were proposed by the authors to act like curtains. Thus in 14, all the C–C bonds of the perfluoroalkyl chains are anti, while in 15, one of the two perfluoroalkyl chains of the [Ag2(O2CR)2] unit adopts an anti–gauche–anti geometry. The other crucial parameter to account for the reversible structural rearrangement is the flexibility of the silver–carboxylate coordination sphere. The flexibility is probably exacerbated by the electron-withdrawing effect of the perfluoroalkyl chains leading to weaker and more labile silver–carboxylate coordination bonds favouring the insertion of the ethanol molecules.
 Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structure of 14 and structure of the Ag2(O2CR)2(EtOH) motif; (b) crystal structure of 15 obtained after EtOH loss and structure of the Ag2(O2CR)2 dimer motif. Adapted from ref. 25. 
If one wants to exploit such vapor–gas solid-state reactions for sensing applications, the gas uptake–release should obviously be accompanied by a significant variation in the optical, electrochemical or magnetic properties of the crystalline material.
Towards this goal, Vincent and co-workers have reported in 2009 that nonporous crystals of the fluorous copper(II)–carboxylate complex 16 behaved as a “magnetic sponge”, meaning that its magnetic properties, in the solid state, are markedly and reversibly modulated depending on its hydration state.26 The complex 16 displays the classical dimeric “paddle wheel” structure with four carboxylates bridging the two copper(II) ions (Fig. 8). Despite being nonporous and highly fluorinated, crystals of 16 exhibit a very high affinity for water vapors. When exposed to air, ground crystals of 16 rapidly trap up to 6 water molecules per copper ion leading to a decrease in the magnetic coupling from 2J = −480 cm−1 to 2J = −7 cm−1 (Fig. 8). The hydration process is accompanied by drastic changes in the powder EPR and FTIR spectra, revealing that the binding of the water molecules to the copper atoms leads to the release of the acetone ligands from the solid, and to the shifting of two carboxylates from bridging bidentate to non-bridging monodentate coordination mode with a water molecule inserted in the copper–carboxylate bond (Fig. 8). It has to be noted that the water uptake produces an amorphous solid. Recent work by Du and co-workers describing a SC–SC transformation of a coordination polymer formed of [Cu2(O2CR)4] units when exposed to water, confirmed the proposed structural rearrangement.27 When hydrated 16 was exposed to high vacuum, the water molecules were removed from the solid. The dehydration process led to the partial recovery of the antiferromagnetic coupling between the copper(II) ions as revealed by EPR and magnetic susceptibility measurements (Fig. 8).28 These data show that the hydration–dehydration process is not accompanied by a fully reversible structural rearrangement in the solid state.
 Fig. 8  (a) Proposed structural rearrangement occurring in the solid state upon hydration of 16 in air; (b) magnetic susceptibilities of crystals of 16 (black), hydrated 16 obtained from powdered crystals of 16 exposed to air for 24 h (red), and hydrated 16 that have been dehydrated under vacuum (blue). Adapted from ref. 28. 
While being nonporous, the above described fluorous crystals were shown to be able to accommodate guests upon important solid-state structural rearrangements. However, if considering applications such as gas storage, porous metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are versatile candidates.29 Despite the huge number of MOFs that have been developed within the last decade, it is only in 2007 that Omary and co-workers introduced the concept of fluorous MOFs (FMOFs) with the characterization and study of the so-called FMOF-1, prepared from the perfluorinated ligand 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)-1,2,4-triazolate (NaTz) and silver(I) ions (Fig. 9).30
 Fig. 9  (a) Tetranuclear [Ag4Tz6] building block of FMOF-1; (b) trinuclear [Ag3Tz4] building block of FMOF-2. Adapted from ref. 30 and 32. 
The crystal structure revealed that FMOF-1 was formed by the assembly of tetranuclear [Ag4Tz6] building blocks that are linked together by three coordinate Ag(I) ions bound to the 4-positioned nitrogen atom of the Tz ligand, resulting in neutral extended 3D nanotubular open frameworks of formula {Ag2[Ag4Tz6]}n. As seen in Fig 10, two types of cavities are present in FMOF-1, i.e. hydrophobic cylindrical channels with fluorous inner walls (∼12.2 Å × 7.3 Å dimensions), that are surrounded by smaller cavities (∼6.6 Å × 4.9 Å dimensions). This material is highly porous with an apparent surface area of 810.5 m2 g−1. Gas uptake studies carried out for O2, N2 and H2 revealed a two-step filling process that was assigned to the filling of the large channel first followed by the filling of the small pores. Interestingly, an unusual hysteretic adsorption–desorption of H2 was evidenced in the range of 10–30 bars of H2. The very high volumetric capacities measured for O2 and H2 (41 kg m−3 at 64 bars and 77 K) suggest that the gases are highly compressed within the material. The mechanism of the two-step breathing process was revealed through a X-ray study conducted on single crystals of FMOF-1 exposed to N2.31 A first crystal contraction of 8.6% occurs between 295 K and 119 K, followed by a remarkable crystal expansion of 13.1% from 119 K to 90 K. Interestingly, both the contraction and expansion follow an exponential trend, and are anisotropic processes, the a and b cell parameters following the trend of the cell volume while c exhibits the opposite trend. Refinement of the data between 295 and 90 K revealed, at the atomic level, the filling process by N2 molecules, in particular their accurate location in the various sites of the channels and cavities and their interactions with the chemical groups of FMOF-1. Overall, a full view of the reversible breathable process was disclosed, in particular the communication between the channels and the small cavities, highlighting the role of the fluorous surface in stabilizing the surface bending and store mechanical energy.
 Fig. 10  (a) Space-filling representation of the large fluoro-lined channels in FMOF-1; (b) perspective views of the small cavities, denoted by black spheres, surrounding the large channels. Adapted from ref. 31. 
Recently, the same group reported that FMOF-1 and FMOF-2, obtained by annealing FMOF-1 at 300 °C, were highly hydrophobic materials.32,33 IR and water adsorption isotherms revealed that water molecules could not penetrate into the pores thus providing these fluorous MOFs with an unusually high stability towards humidity. These highly porous MOFs are able to reversibly adsorb large amounts of C6–C8 hydrocarbons. For FMOF-1, a maximum amount of adsorbed toluene of 265 kg m−3 can be attained at low pressure (P/P0 = 0.20). This corresponds to up to 8 molecules of toluene per unit cell (7478.4(6) Å3 at 298 K). Interestingly, FMOF-2 has a superior capacity as it could accommodate twice the amount of toluene e.g. up to 12 molecules per unit cell of 5799.8 Å3. Overall, the results described by Omary et al. show that such moisture insensitive fluorous MOFs are very promising for real-life applications including oil spill decontamination and hydrocarbon storage.
Recently, detailed studies describing the influence of the substituents of the terephthalate or 4,4′-biphenyl dicarboxylate organic linkers in iron(III) MIL-53 and MIL-58 MOFs on the pore opening, host–guest interactions and swelling properties of the resulting materials have been reported.34 These important results, implying some partially fluorinated MOFs with –CF3 groups, but which can hardly be considered as fluorous materials, will not be further discussed in this account.
Toward the development of more stable MOFs, Decoste and co-workers reported in 2012 that, when treating the Cu3(BTC)2 MOF (1,3,5 benzenetricarboxylic acid, BTC) HKUST-1 by plasma-enhanced vapour deposition (PECVD) of perfluorohexane (PFH), the resulting MOF becomes highly resistant to humidity/liquid water, as evidenced from the PXRD patterns displayed in Fig. 11.35 The plasma treatment led to the modification of the surface of the pores by CF3 groups as well as their filling by PFH molecules which can constitute up to 16.1 wt% of the resulting material. Grand Canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) simulations revealed that clusters of PFH molecules lie at the center of the large pores (site I′), not too close to the axial coordination bonds of the copper atoms (site I). Water molecules can thus still bind to the copper(II) ions, the PFH clusters most probably prevent the formation of large water clusters at site I′ which could break the material structure. Importantly, despite the presence of a significant amount of PFH within the pores, the NH3 adsorption capacity of the plasma treated material proved to be superior to the untreated one. This was ascribed to the increased stability of the material which retains its crystallinity.
 Fig. 11  PXRD patterns for (a) Cu-BTC and (b) Cu-BTC plasma after immersion in water at room temperature for 0, 4, and 24 h. Adapted from ref. 35. 
It is interesting to note that the protecting role of perfluorocarbons toward water was previously exploited by Vincent et al. to develop a multiphasic colorimetric assay for the titration of EtOH in hydroalcoholic solutions.36 The compartmentalization of the highly fluorophilic supramolecular copper(II)–carboxylate receptor into a PFC thus allowed to selectively bind EtOH over H2O as the latter could not penetrate the highly hydrophobic fluorous phase and thus bind to the copper(II) ions.
D. Fluorous surfaces
SiO2 surfaces decorated with F-tags have emerged as very attractive tools for the preparation of small-molecule microarrays (SMMs). In a pioneering study, Pohl and co-workers showed that highly hydrophilic molecules (carbohydrates) modified with a single F-tag could strongly and selectively be adsorbed on fluorous-coated glass slides that have been covalently derivatized by –C8F17 groups.37 Thus, by exploiting the non-covalent fluorous–fluorous and solvophobic interactions, patterned microarrays in which F-tagged monosaccharides are localised at given places have been prepared and then screened, typically using fluorescently-labelled proteins (Fig. 12). Importantly, the non-covalent interaction proved to be strong enough to sustain washings with buffers and detergents. Interestingly, the low fluorescence background emission exhibited by the fluorous-coated glass slides, coupled to the low extent of non-specific adsorption of the non-fluorous proteins onto the fluorous surface led to excellent signal-to-noise ratios. It has also been shown that the judicious choice of the spacer between the F-tag and the small molecule,38 and the fluorophilicity of the F-tags38,39 were crucial parameters to ensure both optimal interaction with the proteins and minimal leaching during the washing steps. SMMs based on noncovalent fluorous interactions proved to be very useful, for instance to quantify the binding interactions between concanavalin A and glycero-D-manno-heptose,40 or in the discovery of histone deacetylase inhibitors.41 These important contributions, previously highlighted by Pohl,42 will not be further discussed here.
 Fig. 12  Principle of SMMs based on noncovalent fluorous interactions. Extracted from ref. 42. 
Cai and co-workers demonstrated that “click” chemistry could be used to covalently graft small molecules on noncovalent fluorous thin films presenting “clickable” azido or ethynyl groups.43 These films were conveniently prepared by immerging commercially available fluorous glass slides into a methanolic solution of the corresponding F-tagged azide 17 and alkyne 18, followed by washing (Fig. 13). Efficient functionalization (70–80% yield) could be achieved by reacting, in water, the resulting films with the alkyne 20 or the azides 21 and 22 using the water soluble catalyst Cu+/19 in the presence of ascorbic acid. Interestingly, it was shown that the “click” reaction could be conducted in microarray format as well, by spotting on the clickable surface a solution of the complementary reactant and the catalyst, thus affording localised functionalization.
 Fig. 13  Principle of covalent functionalization of “clickable” fluorous films via the CuAAC reaction. Adapted from ref. 43. 
A fully non-covalent approach exploiting the chemisorption fluorous copper(II)–carboxylate complexes and coordination chemistry was developed by Vincent and co-workers.44 The complexes 16 (Fig. 8) or 23 (Fig. 14) possess the ability to strongly chemisorb on non-fluorous SiO2 surfaces to afford dense and homogeneous monolayer-like thin films of the complexes. It was assumed that the Si–OH groups of the SiO2 surface could, similarly to the water molecules with complex 16 (Fig. 8), strongly interact with the accepting hydrogen bonding sites (CO) and accessible coordination sites of the complexes (Fig. 14). Interestingly, despite the presence of highly hydrophobic perfluorinated chains, the resulting surfaces retained a hydrophilic character (20° < water contact angle < 30°) reflecting the high affinity of the complexes 16 and 23 for water. These fluorous copper(II)–carboxylate layers were used for further surface functionalization by exploiting coordination chemistry. Thus, immersing the copper-modified SiO2 surfaces into a solution of the tetra(4-pyridyl)porphyrin 24, followed by copious rinsing, led to perfectly translucent and homogeneously coloured porphyrin films. Spectroscopic and fluorescence microscopy studies revealed that the porphyrin density was similar to those found in dense porphyrin monolayers and that most of the porphyrins were strongly interacting with the copper(II) ions, as revealed by their strong fluorescence quenching. Finally it has been shown that the layer-by-layer methodology based on coordination chemistry could be employed for the convenient preparation of porphyrin multilayers.
 Fig. 14  Principle of non-covalent functionalization of SiO2 surfaces combining the adsorption of fluorous copper(II)–carboxylate complexes and coordination chemistry. Adapted from ref. 44. 
Finally, Sebastián, Vallribera and co-workers developed fluorous azo dyes which were covalently grafted on the surface of glass slides or cotton fabric to afford hydrophobic dyed materials (Fig. 15).45
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of covalent functionalization of the surface of an activated cotton fabric (cellulose) and activated glass. The photographs show a droplet of water on: (a) top of a hydrophobic dyed cotton fabric and (b) on a hydrophobic dyed glass. Adapted from ref. 45. 
E. Conclusion and outlook
As seen from the results highlighted in this review, fluorous compounds are increasingly considered in material sciences. The unique properties of the fluorous tags composed of perfluorinated sp3 hybridized carbon atoms have been exploited to confer materials properties such as increased ordering/compartmentalization, hydrophobicity, chemical stability, or facilitate structural rearrangements and surface modifications. These fluorous materials proved to be very useful in various areas including organic electronics, crystals/MOFs engineering and biochips. Thanks to the extensive work conducted during the past 20 years in the area of fluorous chemistry, a wide range of fluorous tags bearing various reactive groups for subsequent modification are now available either from commercial sources or through straightforward syntheses. Moreover, the physico-chemical and electronic properties of the fluorous tags, and hence of the resulting materials, can be finely tuned by the appropriate choice of the perfluoroalkyl chain length, stiffness (perfluoroalkyl vs. perfluoroalkylpolyether), steric hindrance (linear vs. branched) and the spacer which can modulate the electron-withdrawing effect of the perfluoroalkyl group. Considering these attractive features and the increasing demand for materials with tailored properties, there is no doubt that fluorous and material chemistries will continue to be associated in the future. A combination with high potential concerns the modification of perfluorinated material such as Teflon membranes, films or foils, by adsorption of fluorous molecular receptors and/or fluorous solvents. The resulting materials have shown great promise for applications in potentiometric sensing,46 selective transport and/or extractions.47,48
Acknowledgements
The University of Bordeaux, the CNRS and la Région Aquitaine are gratefully acknowledged for supporting our research on fluorous chemistry. The author wishes to warmly thank his students and co-workers whose names are cited in the references for their contribution in this area.
Notes and references

Handbook of Fluorous Chemistry, ed. J. A. Gladysz, D. P. Curran and I. T. Horváth, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004, pp. 1–595 Search PubMed .
I. T. Horváth and J. Rábai, Science, 1994, 266, 72–75 Search PubMed .
J.-M. Vincent, Top. Curr. Chem., 2012, 308, 153–174 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. Zhang and C. Cai, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5686–5694 RSC ; 
  (b) W. Zhang and D. P. Curran, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 11837–11865 CrossRef CAS .
M.-P. Krafft and J. G. Riess, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 1714–1792 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Ameduri and B. Boutevin, Well-Architectured Fluoropolymers: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Elsevier,  2004, pp. 1–455 Search PubMed .

  (a) J.-M. Vincent, J. Fluorine Chem., 2008, 129, 903–909 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. L. O'Neal, H. Zhang, Y. Yang, L. Hong, D. Lu and S. G. Weber, J. Chromatogr., A, 2010, 1217, 2287–2295 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cametti, B. Crousse, P. Metrangolo, R. Milani and G. Resnati, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 31–42 RSC .
R. Berger, G. Resnati, P. Metrangolo, E. Weber and J. Hulliger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3496–3508 RSC .

  (a) P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20009–20029 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef .
R. Schmidt, M. M. Ling, J. H. Oh, M. Winkler, M. Könemann, Z. Bao and F. Würthner, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3692–3695 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chikamatsu, A. Itakura, Y. Yoshida, R. Azumi and K. Yase, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7365–7367 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, T. Nishizawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2211–2216 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Luca, A. Liscio, M. Melucci, T. Schnitzler, W. Pisula, C. G. Clark, L. M. Scolaro, V. Palermo, K. Müllen and P. Samori, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 71–82 RSC .
S. Mori, M. Nagata, Y. Nakahata, K. Yasuta, R. Goto, M. Kimura and M. Taya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4054–4055 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pozzi, S. Quici, M. C. Raffo, C. A. Bignozzi, S. Caramori and M. Orlandi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3777–3788 CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Müller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382–6390 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, C. Klein, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 808–809 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lu, J.-S. Shing, W.-H. Tu, Y.-S. Hsu and J. T. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 4289–4294 CrossRef CAS .
T. Homma, K. Harano, H. Isobe and E. Nakamura, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1665–1668 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lim and T. M. Swager, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7486–7488 CrossRef CAS .
P. Metrangolo, F. Meyer, T. Pilati, G. Resnati and G. Terrenao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6114–6127 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Casnati, G. Cavallo, P. Metrangolo, G. Resnati, F. Ugozzoli and R. Ungaro, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 7903–70912 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Casnati, R. Liantonio, P. Metrangolo, G. Resnati, R. Ungaro and F. Ugozzoli, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1915–1918 CrossRef CAS .
P. Metrangolo, Y. Carcenac, M. Lahtinen, T. Pilati, K. Rissanen, A. Vij and G. Resnati, Science, 2009, 323, 1461–1464 CrossRef CAS .
S. Libri, M. Mahler, G. Mínguez Espallargas, D. C. N. G. Singh, J. Soleimannejad, H. Adams, M. D. Burgard, N. P. Rath, M. Brunelli and L. Brammer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1693–1697 CrossRef CAS .
A. Motreff, R. Correa da Costa, H. Allouchi, M. Duttine, C. Mathonière, C. Duboc and J.-M. Vincent, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 5623–5625 CrossRef CAS .
M. Du, C.-P. Li, J.-M. Wu, J.-H. Guo and G.-C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8088–8090 RSC .
A. Motreff, R. Correa da Costa, H. Allouchi, M. Duttine, C. Mathonière, C. Duboc and J.-M. Vincent, J. Fluorine Chem., 2012, 134, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
G. Férey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 191–214 RSC .
C. Yang, X. Wang and M. A. Omary, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15454–15455 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, X. Wang and M. A. Omary, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2500–2505 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, U. Kaipa, Q. Z. Mather, X. Wang, V. Nesterov, A. F. Venero and M. A. Omary, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18094–18097 CrossRef CAS .
For a recent highlight on superhydrophobic MOFs see:   C. Serre, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6048–6050 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Devic, P. Horcajada, C. Serre, F. Salles, G. Maurin, B. Moulin, D. Heurtaux, G. Clet, A. Vimont, J.-M. Grenèche, B. Le Ouay, F. Moreau, E. Magnier, Y. Filinchuk, J. Marrot, J.-C. Lavalley, M. Daturi and G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Horcajada, F. Salles, S. Wuttke, T. Devic, D. Heurtaux, G. Maurin, A. Vimont, M. Daturi, O. David, E. Magnier, N. Stock, Y. Filinchuk, D. Popov, C. Riekel, G. Férey and C. Serre, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17839–17847 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Decoste, G. W. Peterson, M. W. Smith, C. A. Stone and C. R. Willis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1486–1489 CrossRef CAS .
M. El Bakkari, R. Luguya, R. Correa da Costa and J.-M. Vincent, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 193–196 RSC .

  (a) K.-S. Ko, F. A. Jaipuri and N. L. Pohl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13162–13163 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. K. Mamidyala, K.-S. Ko, F. A. Jaipuri, G. Park and N. L. Pohl, J. Fluorine Chem., 2006, 127, 571–579 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Nicholson, M. L. Ladlow and D. R. Spring, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3906–3908 RSC .
H. D. Edwards, S. K. Nagappaya and N. L. B. Pohl, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 510–512 RSC .
F. A. Jaipuri, B. Y. M. Collet and N. L. Pohl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1707–1710 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Vegas, J. E. Bradner, W. Tang, O. M. McPherson, E. F. Greenberg, A. N. Koehler and S. L. Schreiber, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7960–7964 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Pohl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3868–3870 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Santos, A. Kumar, W. Zhang and C. Cai, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2854–2856 RSC .
A. Motreff, G. Raffy, A. Del Guerzo, C. Belin, M. Dussauze, V. Rodriguez and J.-M. Vincent, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2617–2619 RSC .
R. Soler, J. Salabert, R. M. Sebastián, A. Vallribera, N. Roma, S. Ricart and E. Molins, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2889–2891 RSC .
See for instance: 
  (a) L. D. Chen, D. Mandal, G. Pozzi, J. A. Gladysz and P. Bülhmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20869–20877 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C.-Z. Lai, S. Koseoglu, E. C. Lugert, P. G. Boswell, J. Rábai, T. P. Lodge and P. Bülhmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1598–1606 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, A. Hussam and S. G. Weber, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17867–17879 CrossRef CAS .
A. Motreff, C. Belin, R. Correa da Costa, M. El Bakkari and J.-M. Vincent, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6261–6263 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Jean-Marc Vincent
	Jean-Marc Vincent received his PhD in 1995 from the Joseph Fourier University in Grenoble under the supervision of Marc Fontecave and Stéphane Ménage. After a post-doc in 1996 in the Richard Fish's group at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, he entered the CNRS in 1997 as “Chargé de Recherche” in the Institute of Molecular Sciences of the University of Bordeaux. In 2010, he was promoted “Directeur de Recherche”. His research at the ISM concerns fluorous chemistry, copper-catalyzed reactions and enantioselective organocatalysis.

 	Scheme 1  Structures of fluorous donors and acceptors employed in bulk heterojunctions of organic thin film transistors (OTFTs) and organic solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the bulk heterojunction solar cell resulting from the spin-casting process of a blend of P3HT:PCBM:F-PCBM (1:0.8:0.1, w/w). Adapted from ref. 13.	 

 	Fig. 2  Fluorescence microcopy images of: (a) a blend of HBC-C12 and non-fluorous PDI2 after solvent vapour annealing in THF; (b) a blend of HBC-C12 and F-PDI 5 after solvent vapour annealing in CHCl3. From ref. 14.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Model structure of 8 and its vesicle. (b) SEM images of the vesicle-covered ITO surface under approximately 10−5 Pa (scale bar = 100 nm). Adapted from ref. 20.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structure of the fluorescent PPE polymer 9 and: (a) absorption (dotted line) and emission (solid line) spectra of an emulsion of 9 and schematic representation of the emulsion particle. (b) Photographs of the emulsion before (left) and after (right) irradiation using a UV lamp. Adapted from ref. 21.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structural formulae of the individual components of supramolecular complex 11 and: (a) section of the crystal structure of the supramolecular complex 11; (b) view orthogonal to the c axis of the anionic sublattice of the crystal structure of complex 11. One double helix is represented by van der Waals spheres, with the PFA chains in yellow and red, and the iodine atoms in purple. Adapted from ref. 23.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structural formulae of the individual components of the supramolecular complex 12·13 and crystal packing of the complex 12c·13c viewed along the a axis. Adapted from ref. 24.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structure of 14 and structure of the Ag2(O2CR)2(EtOH) motif; (b) crystal structure of 15 obtained after EtOH loss and structure of the Ag2(O2CR)2 dimer motif. Adapted from ref. 25.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Proposed structural rearrangement occurring in the solid state upon hydration of 16 in air; (b) magnetic susceptibilities of crystals of 16 (black), hydrated 16 obtained from powdered crystals of 16 exposed to air for 24 h (red), and hydrated 16 that have been dehydrated under vacuum (blue). Adapted from ref. 28.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Tetranuclear [Ag4Tz6] building block of FMOF-1; (b) trinuclear [Ag3Tz4] building block of FMOF-2. Adapted from ref. 30 and 32.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Space-filling representation of the large fluoro-lined channels in FMOF-1; (b) perspective views of the small cavities, denoted by black spheres, surrounding the large channels. Adapted from ref. 31.	 

 	Fig. 11  PXRD patterns for (a) Cu-BTC and (b) Cu-BTC plasma after immersion in water at room temperature for 0, 4, and 24 h. Adapted from ref. 35.	 

 	Fig. 12  Principle of SMMs based on noncovalent fluorous interactions. Extracted from ref. 42.	 

 	Fig. 13  Principle of covalent functionalization of “clickable” fluorous films via the CuAAC reaction. Adapted from ref. 43.	 

 	Fig. 14  Principle of non-covalent functionalization of SiO2 surfaces combining the adsorption of fluorous copper(II)–carboxylate complexes and coordination chemistry. Adapted from ref. 44.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of covalent functionalization of the surface of an activated cotton fabric (cellulose) and activated glass. The photographs show a droplet of water on: (a) top of a hydrophobic dyed cotton fabric and (b) on a hydrophobic dyed glass. Adapted from ref. 45.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
