Air-processable high-efficiency CISSe solar cells from DMF molecular solution and their application to perovskite/CISSe tandems   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE03131G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03131G
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1479-1492Air-processable high-efficiency CISSe solar cells from DMF molecular solution and their application to perovskite/CISSe tandems†

        
          
            Yasir 
            Siddique
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kyungnan 
            Son
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Tanka Raj 
            Rana
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Syed Dildar Haider 
            Naqvi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Pham Minh 
            Hoang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Asmat 
            Ullah
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Huyen 
            Tran
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Sang Min 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sungjun 
            Hong
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Seung Kyu 
            Ahn
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Inyoung 
            Jeong
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            SeJin 
            Ahn
          
        
      *ab
aPhotovoltaics Research Department, Korea Institute of Energy Research (KIER), South Korea. E-mail: swisstel@kier.re.kr
bDepartment of Renewable Energy Engineering, University of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea
cGraduate School of Energy Science and Technology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, South Korea
Received 
      6th October 2021
    , Accepted 6th January 2022First published on 7th January 2022AbstractA breakthrough in the N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) molecular ink route for fabricating highly efficient, low bandgap CuIn(S,Se)2 (CISSe) solar cells is presented, demonstrating a newly certified record efficiency of 14.4% from air-processed devices. This finding changes the previous recognition of the requirement of a controlled environment, i.e., a nitrogen-filled glovebox, to obtain a high efficiency via this route. Instead, it is determined that DMF ink can be processed in air under certain optimized conditions without sacrificing the device performance, which opens a new horizon in terms of commercialization while maintaining all the potential benefits of solution-based routes. In particular, the air annealing temperature after spin-coating the ink is found to be a critical parameter in controlling the electrical properties of the absorber films. Air annealing not only facilitates carbon removal but also influences the crystallinity of the precursor films, which further determines the diffusion behavior of the constituent metal atoms during high-temperature selenization, ultimately affecting the interfacial recombination and carrier transport characteristics of devices. Our CISSe devices processed in air at an optimized air annealing temperature are further combined with semitransparent perovskite devices to realize all-solution-processed 4-terminal (4T) perovskite/CISSe tandem solar cells, demonstrating a promising efficiency of 23.03%, which is also the highest efficiency for all-solution-based perovskite/CISSe tandem configurations.

Broader context
Ga-free low bandgap (Eg ∼ 1 eV) CuIn(S,Se)2 (CISSe) solar cells are recently regaining attention as bottom cells in tandem structure with perovskite top cells to increase power conversion efficiency for future renewable energy goals. Solution processability of CISSe solar cells provides potential for a greatly reduced manufacturing cost of perovskite/CISSe tandem technology without significantly sacrificing performance. A simple, air processable, DMF molecular ink-based process is presented in this work through which it was able to achieve certified record efficiency of 14.4% for the CISSe device. In addition, a 4-terminal (4T) all-solution processed perovskite/CISSe tandem device with an efficiency of 23.03%, the highest efficiency amongst all-solution processed 4T configuration, is also demonstrated. In a technical point of view, the air annealing temperature was found to be the main controlling variable, not only ensuring carbon removal but also controlling surface defect formation of the absorber films.

Introduction
The power conversion efficiency of a single-junction solar cell is fundamentally limited to the Shockley–Queisser limit of 31–33%,1 while multiple stacking of solar cells with different band gap energies, i.e., tandem structures, may offer an opportunity to go beyond the efficiency limit, possibly enhancing the contribution of renewable solar resources to fossil fuel-free energy goals.2 In the tandem configuration, two subcells absorb incident photons in different wavelength ranges to minimize thermalization losses, by which it is theoretically possible to reach an efficiency of over 40%.3
Perovskite solar cells have been considered as an ideal top cell in tandem structures due to their high efficiency, bandgap tunability, low subbandgap absorption and processability at low temperatures.4 Perovskite top cells have been combined with various types of bottom cells such as c-Si, Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) and perovskite which have their own potential benefits. Perovskite/Si tandem technology has advantages of low cost along with high efficiency and stability.5–7 A monolithic two-terminal perovskite/Si solar cell with an efficiency of 29.80% was demonstrated.8 This value is higher than that of any type of (nonconcentrated) single absorber-based device. On the other hand, thin-film type tandem devices such as perovskite/CIGSe and perovskite/perovskite solar cells possess common advantages of bandgap tunability and possibility to be fabricated in flexible form,9–12 with unique individual characteristics such as radiation hardness for the former and low-temperature processability for the latter.13,14 Motivated by these potentials of wider applications compared to perovskite/Si configuration, the perovskite/CIGSe technology has gained great attention and recently a monolithic tandem device with an efficiency of 24.2%15 was demonstrated.
In most studies on perovskite/CIGSe tandem solar cells, CIGSe bottom cells have been fabricated using vacuum-based techniques, i.e., coevaporation or sputter/selenization processes.16,17 However, the high initial capital cost and energy-intensive nature of the above processes may raise overall cost-effectiveness issues. In this regard, the solution processibility of CIGSe solar cells provides the potential for a greatly reduced manufacturing cost of perovskite/CIGSe tandem technology. In the tandem structure, the required band gap energy of the CIGSe bottom cells is much lower at ∼1 eV18 than that of single junction CIGSe cells at ∼1.2 eV,19 which provides more prospects for solution-processed CIGSe solar cells because the efficiency gap between vacuum-based and solution-processed devices is much smaller for low-bandgap CISe (Eg ∼ 1 eV, 15% vs. 13.5%)20,21 than that for conventional CIGSe (Eg ∼ 1.2 eV, 23.35% vs. 17.7%).22,23
Among various solution-based routes suggested for the fabrication of CI(G)Se thin films, such as nanoparticle ink,24,25 molecular solution-based processes26–28 and electrodeposition,29,30 DMF-based molecular solution recipes have emerged as an exciting route compared to other recipes.21,31 It has been reported that DMF, along with thiourea (TU), has the ability to form relatively stable acid–base complexes with various metal chlorides, enabling the formulation of highly concentrated molecular inks that are stable for several weeks.32 Accordingly, it is possible to reduce the number of coatings required for a desirable thickness compared with other recipes while maintaining the high quality of the final absorber films. Using this route, A. R. Uhl reported CISSe solar cells with a certified efficiency of 13.1%,31 and J. Jiang recently claimed to improve certified efficiency up to 13.5%21 by increasing the Cu to In ratio, demonstrating the potential of this approach at acquiring a high efficiency with the abovementioned technical advantages. Details of the current status of solution-processed CIGSSe solar cells can be found in the recently published excellent review from A. R. Uhl.33 However, it should be mentioned that all the recent best CISSe devices fabricated through DMF-based routes reportedly require a controlled environment, i.e., a nitrogen gas environment in a glovebox, for the film coating and solvent drying steps, which is certainly inadequate from a commercialization point of view. This issue again brings up the question of whether highly efficient CISSe solar cells can be fabricated through this attractive route without a controlled environment, i.e., under ambient conditions, to maximize the cost competitiveness of the entire process. Accordingly, this question motivated us to systematically investigate the effects of air annealing of precursor films with the annealing temperature as a main variable on the properties of the final CISSe film and the device performance. This is a unique approach in comparison with previous studies, where almost all of the attention has been given to the selenization stage with the selenization temperature and pressure as variables.34–36
In typical two-step solution-based processes including DMF-based routes, the general film fabrication sequences are (1) precursor deposition via spin coating followed by drying or mild annealing, in which evaporation of the solvent and the initial precursor film structure is established, and (2) high-temperature selenization,4,37–39 in which the overall phase conversion from precursor film to the final CISSe occurs. Previously, air annealing of precursor films has long been considered to simply determine the degree of carbon removal,40–42 in which the air annealing temperature should be sufficiently high to remove residual carbon but low enough to avoid severe oxidation of the precursor films.
In this work, we found that the air annealing temperature not only determined degree of carbon removal (a well-known fact) but also affected the degree of crystallization in which the crystallinity of the precursor films was increased with increasing air annealing temperature, resulting in a stronger structuring of constituent atoms. Both the amount of remnant carbon and the degree of crystallinity of the precursor films influence the film growth kinetics during selenization and hence the electrical properties of the final CISSe films. Concretely, diffusion/supply of In to pre-existing CuxSe to ultimately form CISSe was found to be kinetically inhibited when the precursor films contained a carbon diffusion barrier or were excessively crystallized at unoptimized air annealing temperatures. This inhibited In supply resulted in a strong Cu-rich growth mode with forming surface defects and a defective interfacial layer at the absorber/buffer interface, which is detrimental to device performance. On the other hand, at an optimized air annealing temperature at which facile In supply to form CISSe was possible, we were able to achieve a high device efficiency of up to 14.4%.
Our results have revealed that air processing of the DMF-based route was not only viable but even beneficial in achieving highly efficient CISSe solar cells with a certified efficiency of up to 14.40% in the active area scheme, which is higher than the current record efficiency of 13.5% (also certified in the active area scheme).21 In addition, we found that the air-annealing temperature is an important variable that significantly affects the film growth kinetics during selenization and the characteristics of the final CISSe films. The improvement in the solution-processed CISSe device was further applied to all-solution-processed 4T perovskite/CISSe solar cells, demonstrating a 23.03% efficiency in a preliminary experiment, which is also the highest efficiency for all-solution-based perovskite/CISSe tandem configurations.
Results and discussion
Device performance
As the first step in this work, we investigated the effects of different air annealing temperatures on the performance of devices built with our CISSe films (Fig. 1). Statistical data were obtained for 5 devices at each temperature condition to determine the range of these parameters. The original IV curves and detailed parameters of the best devices under each condition are presented in Fig. S1(a) and Table S1 (ESI†), respectively. As shown in Fig. 1, the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) initially increased by increasing the air annealing temperature from 210 °C to 230 °C but then decreased upon a further increase in temperature up to 330 °C. It is interesting to note that subtle change in the air annealing temperature affected the device performance to a very large extent. Furthermore, under optimized conditions, it was possible to achieve an efficiency of approximately 14% through this air-processed DMF ink-based route, which is even higher than current certified record efficiencies of 13.1%31 and 13.5%,21 processed in a glovebox, for solution-processed low-bandgap CISSe solar cells. Here, our intention is not to claim that air processing is necessarily better than fabrication of films in inert environments, however, our results clearly demonstrate the viability of air processing of DMF ink-based routes for highly efficient solution-based CISSe solar cells, which is very important in view of commercializing this technique.
 Fig. 1  Electrical parameters of devices built with CISSe films processed at different air annealing temperatures of 210, 230, 280 and 330 °C: (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF and (d) PCE. 
A natural question arising at this stage is why the device performance is affected by the air annealing temperature, as shown in Fig. 1. We tried to identify the main determining factor among the photovoltaic parameters. Fig. S1(b) (ESI†) shows the relative change in photovoltaic parameters occurring with the change in air annealing temperatures by normalizing each value with respect to the 230 °C condition. It is evident that the FF is the main determining factor, which has the most significant effect on the PCE, while the Jsc and Voc values have secondary contributions. Dark IV analysis of our devices (Fig. S2, ESI†) further revealed that while Rsh remains constant under all conditions, Rs changes significantly with the air annealing temperature, in which Rs decreases from 210 °C to 230 °C, showing a minimum value, and then increases again when the temperature further increases to 330 °C. This trend is consistent with the efficiency and FF changes shown in Fig. 1, suggesting that air annealing of precursor films mainly determines the degree of current blocking in the final devices. In addition, because all the device parameters showed the same trend with different air annealing temperatures (Fig. 1), it is expected that the root cause of different carrier transport (in view of FF) induced by different air annealing temperatures affects the carrier collection (in view of Jsc) and recombination characteristics (in view of Voc) of the devices simultaneously.
Morphological, structural and compositional analysis of CISSe films
We began our investigation into the significant change in device performance owing to different air annealing temperatures by performing typical morphological, structural and compositional analysis on absorber films. (These films were etched with (NH4)2S solution after selenization). Cross-sectional and top view SEM images of the films were presented in Fig. 2 and Fig. S3(a) (ESI†), respectively. Fig. 2 reveals that all the films commonly exhibit a double layered structure, regardless of the air annealing temperature, consisting of a top polycrystalline layer with large grains and a bottom fine-grained layer, which is typical of solution-processed CI(G)SSe films.28,39,42–45 Top-view SEM images of the films (Fig. S3(a), ESI†) further show that all films have similar grain size and compactness. Even though there was a slight increase in the thickness of the top layer as the air annealing temperature increased, in general, there was no noticeable difference in the morphological characteristics of the films by which the device performance trend could be explained. Additional cross-sectional SEM and TEM-EDS elemental mapping were performed on one of the best working devices (PCE > 14%) to confirm the coverage of window layers on the rough CISSe films (Fig. S3(b) and S3(c), ESI† respectively), in which it is evident that CdS (50 nm), ZnO (50 nm), and ITO (160 nm) layers completely cover the absorber films.
 Fig. 2  Cross-sectional SEM images of CISSe absorber processed at different air annealing temperatures of (a) 210 °C, (b) 230 °C, (c) 280 °C and (d) 330 °C. 
We further investigated the phase constitution and composition of the films. The Raman spectra of the films (Fig. 3(a)) showed an identical shape consisting of typical CISSe peaks at 175 cm−1 and 214 cm−1,46,47 regardless of the air annealing temperature, confirming that all the films are mainly composed of α-CISSe without secondary binary phases such as CuxSey48 or InxSey.49,50 Small peaks at 290 cm−1 corresponding to CuInS2 (CIS)51 were also detected for all films, indicating traces of unconverted metal sulfide, which can be understood as our precursor being sulfide-based. It was revealed from EDS analysis (Fig. 3(b)) that all the films have similar Cu/In ratios ranging from 0.86 to 0.90. The S/Se ratio shows a relatively larger variation from 0.07 to 0.17, and its trends with the air annealing temperature are consistent with the bandgap of the films, calculated from EQE curves of each device (Fig. S4, ESI†). However, the S/Se ratio variation (and hence the Eg value of the films) had no relation with the observed Voc trend with different air annealing temperatures (Fig. 1(a)), implying that the overall composition of the films, i.e., Cu/In and S/Se ratios, cannot explain the device performance variation. The possibility of a different elemental depth distribution between samples, e.g., severe elemental segregation or localization, was further evaluated by TEM/EDS depth profiling of the absorber films for the top and bottom layers, separately, and the results are presented in Fig. S5 (ESI†). In general, it was observed that all of our CISSe films had some local fluctuations in both the Cu/In and S/Se ratios, which suggests that not all the precursor materials were completely converted to selenide and there was still some local compositional variation. However, there was again no clear evidence of the degree and/or trend of the elemental depth distribution to successfully explain the change in device parameters with air annealing temperature, as shown in Fig. 1. Thus, it was inferred that the significant difference in device performance with differing air annealing temperatures cannot be attributed to the macroscopic morphological, structural and compositional characteristics of the CISSe films.
 Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra and (b) EDS results of (etched) CISSe films processed at different air annealing temperatures of 210 °C, 230 °C, 280 °C and 330 °C. 
Defect analysis through photoluminescence
As a next step to understand why the device performance varies with different air annealing temperatures, we focused on more detailed electronic properties of our absorber films, i.e., the defect nature. For this purpose, low-temperature (10 K) photoluminescence (PL) analysis was performed on our CISSe films, and the results are presented in Fig. 4(a). Interestingly, all our films showed distinct PL peaks that can be assigned to different DAs (donor–accepter pair transitions) regardless of air annealing temperature, clearly indicating that our films were grown in a Cu-rich environment.52–54 In contrast, Cu-poor-grown films were reported to show broad asymmetric PL peaks due to their heavily compensated defect nature, in which peak identification is almost impossible.52
 Fig. 4  (a) Low temperature (10 K) photoluminescence spectra of CISSe films processed at different air annealing temperatures of 210, 230, 280 and 330 °C. (b) PL intensity ratio for DA2 and DA1 peaks as a function of air annealing temperature. DA and LO stands for donor–acceptor pair transition and longitudinal optical phonon replica, respectively. 
Based on the Cu-rich PL nature of our CISSe films, it was possible to identify the main PL signals shown in Fig. 4(a) as DA1 (∼1.025 eV), DA2 (∼1.002 V) and DA2-LO (∼0.974 eV). These peaks are overall consistent with the literature with Cu-rich-grown CISe samples,52–54 considering that the band gap energy of our films is slightly higher (∼0.03 eV) than that of pure CISe due to some S inclusion in the films (Fig. S4, ESI†). A misalignment of DA1 for the 230 °C sample was attributed to its most defect-compensated (or least Cu-rich) nature compared to that of other samples, as discussed below. Furthermore, the relative intensity of DA2 to DA1 is another indicator of the degree of Cu richness, in which as Cu richness increases, the DA2 peak intensity becomes stronger than that of DA1.52Fig. 4(b) shows a peak intensity ratio of DA2 to DA1 for our films. Interestingly, the degree of Cu richness of the growing film (DA2/DA1 intensity ratio) changes consistently with the device performance trend as a function of the air annealing temperature, with a minimum in Cu richness (maximum efficiency) occurring at 230 °C and an increase (decrease in efficiency) as the temperature is far from 230 °C. This coincidence motivated us to investigate the relationship between the Cu richness of our films during film growth and its consequences, such as different carrier transport, collection and recombination characteristics, in more detail, which will be addressed in the following sections.
Cu-richness of growing film: interfacial defects and p+ layer
In fact, Cu-rich growth of evaporated CISe films has extensively been studied by Susanne et al.,54–58 aiming to utilize the inherently superior electronic properties of Cu-rich films to Cu-poor films, confirmed by the larger splitting of the quasi-Fermi level of Cu-rich films. However, devices built with Cu-rich grown absorber films always show inferior performance compared with those built with Cu-poor films due to the higher interfacial recombination resulting in a lower Voc value than expected. In recent studies, the cause of this interfacial recombination has well been established: Cu-rich absorbers have CuxSe secondary phases, which must be removed before buffer layer deposition; therefore, etching the surface of selenized films with KCN or (NH4)2S is inevitable. Unfortunately, this etching process was found to induce the formation of surface defect complexes (VCu–VSe) being acceptor in nature, forming a highly doped p+ layer at the CISe/CdS interface in which interfacial recombination and blocking of carrier transport occurs.55,59–61 The authors also provided the unique features of the Cu-rich films and device built with them by which we can judge if one's films have Cu-rich nature with VCu–VSe surface defects existing at film surface: (1) Cu-rich PL signal of the films with distinct DA peaks, (2) Vocvs. temperature data showing activation energy of saturation current (Ea) smaller than Eg (interfacial recombination) and (3) existence of transport barrier in temperature dependent IV (IVT) curves primarily as a S-shape in the first quadrant (an injection barrier due to the p+ interfacial layer) and secondarily as a kink in the fourth quadrant (an extraction barrier) along with (4) admittance spectroscopy (AS) signal with a defect activation energy ranged from 170 to 200 meV, in which 200 ± 20 meV was detected for unpassivated absorbers (a typical value for VCu–VSe complex) and 175 ± 5 meV was reported for partially surface-passivated films with sulfur.55,62
Keeping these diagnostic features of Cu-rich films in mind, we performed a series of electrical analyses on our devices to answer the fundamental question: Do our CISSe films and devices have the same Cu-rich characteristics suggested by Susanne et al.? If so, is there any difference in the degree of acceptor defect (and p+ layer) formation at the absorber/buffer interface in our samples induced by different air annealing temperatures whose variation is consistent with the device performance trend shown in Fig. 1? Accordingly, we performed Voc-temperature (Fig. 5), temperature-dependent IV (IVT) (Fig. 6) and admittance spectroscopy (AS) (Fig. S6 and S7, ESI†) analyses on our CISSe devices processed at different air annealing temperatures. Fig. 5 shows that all of our devices suffer from interfacial recombination to some degree in that the activation energy of the main recombination channel (Ea), extracted from extrapolation of Voc to 0 K, is lower than the Eg of each CISSe film, obtained from EQE curves (Fig. S4, ESI†). Here, it is notable that the degree of interfacial recombination, which was estimated by ΔE = Eg–Ea as a function of air annealing temperature (Fig. 5(b)), correlates well with that of the degree of Cu richness (Fig. 4(b)) and device performance (Fig. 1). The IVT analysis results further reveal the carrier transport behavior of the devices depending on the air annealing temperature (Fig. 6). Regardless of the air annealing temperature, all the devices show roll-over in the first quadrant and kink-like behavior in the fourth quadrant, which are clear characteristics of injection and extraction barriers, respectively. In particular, the existence of a strong injection barrier for all the devices whose degree of current blocking again shows excellent matching with the degree of Cu richness (Fig. 4(b)) and device performance (Fig. 1) confirms the Cu-rich characteristics of our films. In fact, in the literature on Cu-rich CISe devices,55 the injection barrier was more pronounced, while the extraction barrier was not very prominent; in our case, extraction barriers were also markedly observed at low temperatures. Interestingly, the degree of blocking photocurrent by these extraction barriers again shows the same trend as the injection barrier and degree of Cu richness. This strongly suggests that both the injection and extraction barriers may have the same origin in which their height is influenced by the air annealing temperature simultaneously. As the final step of electrical analysis related to Cu richness, we performed AS analysis to determine the defect activation energy63 (Fig. 7 and Fig. S6, ESI†). The 230 °C device has a distinctively low admittance activation energy of 127.8 meV, while other devices have values near 175 ± 10 meV. The former value for the 230 °C device is consistent with the reported AS activation energy of completely passivated CISe films,55 which is attributed to the A2 and A3 acceptors of CISe.52,54 The larger activation energies of other devices are also reasonably within the reported activation energy range (175 ± 5 meV) for partially passivated Cu-rich films;55 the likely reason is that all our films were treated with (NH4)2S, which is known to passivate the surface of CISe films with sulfur.64 Interestingly, the density of these defects (Fig. S7, ESI†) shows a good match with the degree of Cu richness (Fig. 4(b)) and device performance (Fig. 1), in which the density of states shows a minimum at 230 °C and increases as the air annealing temperature deviates from this optimal value.
 Fig. 5  (a) Temperature dependent Voc curves of devices processed at different air annealing temperature. (b) Difference between Eg (from EQE in (S4, ESI†) and Ea (from (a)). 
 Fig. 6  Temperature dependent IV curves of CISSe devices processed at different air annealing temperature of (a) 210, (b) 230, (c) 280 and (d) 330 °C. Insets are 1st quadrant of each graph extended to 3 V. Data at 200 and 220 K were highlighted for easy comparison. 
 Fig. 7  Admittance activation energies of CISSe devices processed at different air annealing temperatures, calculated from admittance spectroscopy data (Fig. S6, ESI†). 
From all the electrical analyses mentioned above, we can extract following conclusions:
(1) Our DMF-based solution-processed CISSe films possess the electronic nature of Cu-rich films regardless of the air annealing temperature. This means that the films can be reasonably modeled as CISSe films containing (VCu–VSe) defect complexes at the surface, forming a p+ interfacial layer.
(2) The degree of Cu richness (and hence the density of the surface defect complex) is significantly affected by the air annealing temperature.
(3) The device performance change with air annealing temperature can reasonably be interpreted by different degrees of Cu richness and corresponding interfacial recombination and current transport blocking behavior. The difference in density of surface VCu–VSe defect complex and barrier height of the corresponding p+ interfacial layer is thought to affect the FF most significantly (by current blocking) and Voc (by interfacial recombination) and Jsc (by both current blocking and interfacial recombination) to a lesser extent, as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. S1(b) (ESI†). Regarding the Jsc changes, the fact that the EQE ratios (Fig. S4, ESI†) are wavelength independent further supports that the loss mechanism is plausibly due to a carrier transport barrier and/or interface recombination.57,65
A model band alignment near the CISSe/CdS interface established based on the experimental results is depicted in Fig. 8, with possible loss mechanisms indicated. It should be mentioned that in the papers of Susanne et al., surface defects of Cu-rich films primarily induced interfacial recombination, resulting in a large Voc deficit, and secondarily affected the other parameters, which is different from our work.55 We attributed this difference to the partial passivation of our CISSe films with (NH4)2S treatment, as mentioned before, compared to the etching process performed by S-free etchants such as KCN in the literature.64,66 This reason can also partially explain the overall high Voc values of all of our devices (Fig. 1) and the smaller extent of change of the Voc with Cu richness.
 Fig. 8  Simplified band diagrams with interfacial p+ layer between buffer and absorber layers. 
Compositional analysis at each process step
After concluding that the reason for the change in device performance with differing air annealing temperature is the change in Cu richness of the films, the final question to be answered is why and how Cu richness is affected by air annealing temperature. The answer is of particular interest because it was already shown that our starting solution (Cu/In = 0.9) and final (etched) absorber films (Fig. 3(b)) are both Cu-poor.
In this regard, we performed more detailed compositional analysis at each step of our process, and the results are summarized in Table 1. The Cu/In ratio was found to be unchanged until the air annealing step, which is consistent with the literature,31,32 where the loss of In by evaporation of InCl3 was prohibited during annealing when the TU/metal atomic ratio ≥3. However, it was observed that the Cu/In ratio increased after selenization (unetched), which was also supported by the Raman spectra of the unetched selenized films (Fig. S8, ESI†) showing a CuxSe Raman peak. Removal of the CuxSe phase by (NH4)2S treatment was already confirmed by the Raman spectra of etched films (Fig. 3(a)). This means that there is some In loss during selenization, as also reported in other studies,67,68 presumably by evaporation of the volatile InxSey phase.69 In ref. 68 it was shown that there was no In loss during selenization only when the Ar pressure in the chamber was very high at 1.6 atm, and even at 1 atm, there was significant In loss, suggesting that In loss during selenization in the DMF-based route is relevant. The fact that our selenization process is performed at a lower Ar pressure of 160 Torr (0.21 atm) supports the plausibility of In loss during selenization, which provides a basis for the possibility of Cu richness in our films. However, despite the In loss during selenization, we think that Cu/In ratio of the selenized films (before etching), shown in Table 1, can only partly explain the significant difference in all the electrical and optical properties. In particular, in literature, the high DA2/DA1 PL ratio was reported only when the Cu/In ratio of the evaporated CISe films was very high >1.8 (before etching),70 while in our case, large DA2/DA1 values were observed (Fig. 4), even for significantly smaller Cu/In ratios with a narrower range from 1.01 to 1.07. This finding strongly suggests that in addition to some In loss, there is another factor dominating the Cu richness of the growing CISSe films during selenization, which motivated us to investigate the growth pathway of our films from precursor (CIS) to final CISSe.
Table 1 Cu/In ratio obtained from EDS at each step of film fabrication process




Air annealing temperature (°C)
Solution
Precursor film (after air annealing)
Selenized film (unetched)
Selenized film (etched)




210
0.90
0.90
1.06
0.89


230
0.90
0.90
1.01
0.90


280
0.90
0.91
1.04
0.87


330
0.90
0.91
1.07
0.86




Influence of air annealing temperature on growth pathway of CISSe films
Before discussing the changes in the growth pathway of our CISSe films induced by different air annealing temperatures, it would be helpful to review a general film growth mechanism of solution-processed CISSe films, which is already established in the literature. Hao Xin et al.68 reported that in their DMF ink-based process, CI(S)Se films grew according to the following steps during selenization: (i) formation of the Se liquid phase, (ii) dissolution of Cu into liquid Se and formation of the CuxSe phase and (iii) diffusion of In into the growing CuxSe phase to finally form CI(S)Se. Fig. S9 (ESI†) shows Raman spectra and SEM images of our CISSe film processed at an air annealing temperature of 210 °C, taken at various stages of selenization, as designated in the inset in Fig. S9(a) (ESI†). It is clear that our CISSe films underwent the same pathway in that CuxSe initially forms from the CIS precursor (at 440 °C), which is followed by the participation of In in CISSe formation (at 490 °C) with consuming CuxSe. A very important implication that we can obtain from this sequential selenide formation is that all our films should inherently experience a Cu-rich growth stage from the initial preferential CuxSe formation regardless of the initial ink composition, which provides a firm basis for the nature of our films to be Cu-rich during selenization. Some In loss occurring during selenization (Table 1) would reinforce the Cu-rich nature of the films.
Based on this common growth mechanism in our route, our next focus is on how the air annealing temperature influences the Cu-rich nature during film growth. To this end, we performed another set of structural analyses on the precursor films processed at different air annealing temperatures. In Fig. 9(a), the main diffraction peaks at 27.9° and 46.4° are assigned to (112) and (204/220) planes of CuInS2 (JCPDS No. 32-0339), respectively, and peaks at 33.5° and 43.9° to (400) and (511) planes of CuIn5S8 (JCPDS No. 72-0956) or CuxS phases. The XRD data revealed that regardless of the air annealing temperature, our precursor films are a mixture of CuInS2 and intermediate CuIn5S8/CuxS phases. As shown in Fig. 9(b), it should be noted that relative peak intensity of intermediate phases (CuIn5S8/CuxS) to CuInS2 changes with differing air annealing temperature. At lower air annealing temperatures of 210 °C and 230 °C, intensity of intermediate CuIn5S8/CuxS phases is much stronger than that of CuInS2 peak while at higher air annealing temperatures of 280 °C and 330 °C, peak of intermediate CuIn5S8/CuxS phases almost diminished with much stronger peak of CuInS2 phase. This result is strong evidence that even within the range of air annealing temperatures used in this work (210 to 330 °C), there is a noticeable difference in the degree of crystalline CuInS2 phase formation. At relatively low temperatures of 210 and 230 °C, a large amount of unreacted CuIn5S8/CuS phases coexisted with CuInS2, and the crystallinity of the final CuInS2 phase was low, implying a loosely structured precursor film. In contrast, at high temperatures, those intermediate phases more completely reacted to form CuInS2 with high crystallinity, revealing that the precursor material was more strongly structured. An additional Raman analysis was performed on the same precursor films to investigate the existence of carbon residue, if any (Fig. 9(c)). TU was found to be completely decomposed and removed at air annealing temperatures from 230 °C to 330 °C, while there was a clear peak of CS bonds at 746 cm−1 in the precursor film air annealed at 210 °C, which is consistent with previous studies by Uhl et al. and Shun et al., showing that a minimum temperature of 219 °C is needed to completely decompose TU from the precursor film.67,71 It is not clear which metal the remaining TU is complexed with, i.e., Cu or In, in the 210 °C precursor film. It was reported that in solution, TU forms complexes mainly with CuCl; however, it was also suggested that during annealing while driving off DMF, TU can complex with InCl3,32 suggesting that it is reasonable to consider that in 210 °C precursor films, carbon attaches to both metals. Thus, the features of our precursor films can be summarized as follows: at a low air annealing temperature of 210 °C, the film contains carbon residue attached to constituent metals, and at high temperatures of 280 and 330 °C, the films are strongly crystallized with tightly structured atoms. Only the 230 °C film has a loosely structured and carbon-free nature.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) XRD pattern and (c) Raman spectra of precursor films processed at different air annealing temperatures. (b) is enlarged view of (a) in range of 42 to 49 degree. 
At this stage, it is worth reminding the general film growth mechanism of solution-processed CISSe films in which In diffusion into the pre-existing CuxSe phase is important to form the final CISSe phase, requiring material transfer from the precursor to the newly growing film.43 Here, the existence of carbon and crystallinity of precursor films is expected to definitely influence the degree of material transfer during selenization. Carbon residue has long been known as a diffusion barrier of elements in various solution-processed CI(G)SSe films. As an example, Uhl et al.31 reported that if TU is not properly decomposed, its amorphous carbon-nitrogen residual products may form and be trapped in the growing films during selenization, acting as a diffusion barrier. This carbon-related diffusion barrier may cause nonuniform diffusion of metals, affecting the elemental depth composition of the final film in an unexpected way42 or resulting in limited grain growth in the final films.40 The crystallinity of the precursor, particularly when it is in excess, can be another factor that can influence the material transfer during selenization. If the precursor film is too highly crystallized, it is expected that diffusion of the material will be suppressed because it is more difficult for the diffusing atoms to break the bond in the precursor.25,72–74
From the above discussion, both the carbon residue and high crystallinity of precursor films, for the case of low (210 °C) and high (280 and 330 °C) air annealing temperatures, respectively, will highly likely suppress the diffusion of metals during film growth, particularly for a less mobile one, i.e., Indium in our case. Thus, it is hypothesized that under these conditions of suppressed In diffusion, the initially formed CuxSe (Fig. S9, ESI†) will exist for a longer period (or slowly consumed) due to the slower supply of In, providing a much stronger Cu-rich environment during the CISSe film growth than that we expect solely from the composition of the (unetched) selenized films (Table 1). Some CuxSe is not completely converted to CISSe even at the end of selenization, which was already shown in the Raman spectra of unetched selenized films (Fig. S8, ESI†). The hypothesis of different In diffusion rates (or CuxSe consumption rate) was experimentally verified by Raman spectra of the samples during selenization (Fig. S10, ESI†). It was clear that the rate of CuxSe consumption and CISSe growth was different among samples in which CuxSe (CISSe) was consumed (grown) fastest at 230 °C condition (Fig. S10, ESI†), supporting the above hypothesis in that the existence of carbon residue and excess crystallinity of the precursor films indeed induced a slower supply of In to CuxSe. This result further suggests that the different In diffusion rates during selenization would be the main reason for the different degrees of Cu richness of the absorber films and all the related device characteristics observed with differing air annealing temperatures (i.e., the existence and concentration of the VCu–VSe defect complex, different degrees of interfacial recombination and blocking of current transport by the p+ interfacial layer) in conjunction with some In loss.
Before finally concluding the effects of air annealing temperature on the properties of CISSe films and performances of the corresponding devices, we performed Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) analysis on our films to obtain insights into the effect of oxygen inclusion in our air-processed absorbers on the device performance. As shown in Fig. S11 (ESI†), the top CISSe layers are free of oxygen and only the bottom layers contain small amount of oxygen regardless of air annealing temperature. Oxygen-free and oxygen-containing nature of top layer and bottom layer, respectively, can be understood from the mechanism of top layer formation as we discussed earlier, in which only metals can diffuse up to participate in top layer formation while other impurities such as oxygen and carbon are trapped in the bottom layer. We believe that the oxygen-free nature of the top layers is one of the reasons behind the high device efficiency demonstrated in this work in spite of the air-exposed processes including whole of the ink coating and annealing steps. It is thought that the overall photovoltaic performance of our devices is largely dominated by the thick (>1 μm) oxygen-free top layer in which most of light absorption and carrier collection can be done within this layer. However, it is also true that the oxygen containing bottom layer could play some detrimental role in inducing carrier recombination at the top/bottom layer interface and adding series resistance. Thus, complete elimination of oxygen containing bottom layer is believed to be one of research directions to further improve the device efficiency.
Based on the above experimental results, we can summarize our claim as follows: air processing of DMF-based ink is viable to achieve a high-efficiency CISSe device. Air annealing, with the air annealing temperature as a main variable, serves not only simply to remove carbon residue as per previous perception but also to determine the crystallinity of the precursor films, both of which critically affect the diffusion behavior of metals, i.e., in particular, In supply to pre-existing CuxSe to form a CISSe absorber. When In diffusion is suppressed either by carbon residue or excess crystallization due to too low and high air annealing temperatures, respectively, the film growth environment becomes strongly Cu-rich, which results in the final CISSe films having a large number of interfacial defects and a p+ layer. These interfacial defects cause interfacial recombination and blockage of carrier transport. However, at the optimized air annealing temperature, a carbon-free precursor film with appropriate crystallinity can be prepared, from which a final CISSe film with reduced interfacial defects is obtained.
To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first report on a close linkage between the Cu-rich CISe concept (and its defect nature), originally developed for co-evaporated CISe films,55,75–78 and the characteristics of solution-processed CI(S)Se films, which inherently experience a Cu-rich stage during film growth. One particular technical interest is that for the solution process, the films have a Cu-rich nature despite using a starting solution, which is nominally Cu-poor. In addition, it was clearly revealed that this Cu-rich nature can be tuned by experimental variables, i.e., air annealing temperature, as an example in this work. A model diagram visualizing the above scenario with differing air annealing temperatures is depicted in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Schematic model showing the step-wise mechanism of CISSe film formation, emphasizing the different In diffusion kinetics due to different annealing temperatures. At 210 °C, carbon restricts In supply towards growing CuxSe while at 280 °C and 330 °C condition, high crystallinity hinders In supply. Optimum air annealing temperature (230 °C) showed facile In supply. 
Certified IV curve and application to a 4-terminal perovskite/CISSe tandem device
One of our best devices, processed at an optimized air annealing temperature of 230 °C, was subjected to official certified measurements (Fig. 11 and Fig. S12, ESI†) in KIER. The PV device test laboratory in KIER is an ISO/IEC17025 certified test center and accredited by KOLAS (Korea Laboratory Accreditation Scheme), which signed the ILAC-MRA (International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation-Mutual Recognition Arrangement).79 Our champion CISSe device with a 110 nm MgF2 antireflective coating showed a certified active area efficiency of 14.4%, (Fig. 11(a)) with a Voc of 0.5636 V, Jsc of 37.12 mA cm−2 and FF of 68.80, which is, to the best of our knowledge, a new record in (nonhydrazine) solution-processed, low bandgap (Ga-free) CISSe solar cells. The EQE of the same cell was also measured, as presented in Fig. 11(b), showing a CISSe bandgap of 1.05 eV. A detailed comparison of device parameters (including device area) of our device with recent best CISSe solar cells fabricated through a DMF-based route is shown in Table 2.
 Fig. 11  (a) IV and (b) EQE curves of champion CISSe device. 
Table 2 Detailed comparison of device parameters (including device area) of recent best CISSe devices fabricated by using DMF molecular ink




Year
Solar cell

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF/%
Eff./%
Active area/cm−2
Ref.





a Certified efficiency.





2018
CISSe
0.443
35.5
65.3
10.3
0.10

68



2018
CISSe
0.518
37.9
70.3
13.8 (13.1)a
0.10

31



2019
CISSe
0.512
36.9
71.0
13.4
0.10

32



2020
CISSe
0.520
38.5
72.5
14.5 (13.5)a
0.10

21



2021
CISSe
0.564
37.1
68.8
14.4a
0.46
This study




We further utilized our highly efficient low-bandgap CISSe device in a tandem configuration with a semitransparent n–i–p perovskite top cell that was also fabricated in our laboratory. Schematic diagram of the tandem configuration was shown in Fig. S13 (ESI†). A detailed procedure of perovskite device fabrication can be found in the supplementary information. A completed top cell with an aperture area of 0.0765 cm2 showed an efficiency of 19.54% (Fig. 12(a)). In parallel, an optical filter of the same perovskite cell structure was fabricated, whose transmittance is shown in Fig. S14 (ESI†), and mechanically stacked on top of our CISSe bottom cell to investigate its 4T tandem performance. This filter was initially fabricated to be 2.5 × 2.5 cm2 in size, and after stacking on the bottom cell, an aperture area for 4T measurement was defined by a mask at 0.48956 cm2. The efficiencies of the CISSe bottom cell without and with the perovskite filter are 13.08% and 3.49%, respectively, with the main efficiency drop due to the decrease in Jsc, as expected (Table 3). By summing the efficiency of the filtered CISSe device and that of the perovskite top cell, a 4T-tandem efficiency of 23.03% was obtained, which is also the highest efficiency among all-solution processed 4-T configurations.4 EQE of the respective cell, i.e., CISSe standalone, CISSe filtered and perovskite cells are presented in Fig. 12(b).
 Fig. 12  Performance of 4T tandem solar cells: (a) IV and (b) EQE curve. 
Table 3 Photovoltaic parameters of different types of solar cells and summed efficiency of 4T all-solution-processed perovskite/CISSe tandem device







V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF/%
Eff./%




Perovskite top cell
1.12
22.72
77.00
19.54 (avg.)


CISSe standalone
0.541
36.10
66.92
13.08


CISSe filtered
0.510
10.37
66.05
3.49


Perovskite-CISSe -4T tandem






23.03




In addition to this encouraging 4T tandem efficiency of 23.03%, it should be mentioned that there is still much room to further improve the tandem performance. Regarding the top cell, its bandgap is only 1.516 eV, which is too low for transmitting sufficient light to the bottom cell. This is the reason for the low Jsc of the filtered CISSe device at only 10.37 mA cm−2, which will definitely be improved by employing a top cell with a higher band gap of >1.67 eV.15 Regarding the CISSe devices, Fig. 2 clearly shows that our CISSe films, even when processed at optimum air annealing temperature, contain a thick fine-grained residue layer at the bottom part, which acts as a recombination site, particularly for long wavelength light, and a source of additional series resistance. The still low Jsc value due to a low EQE at long wavelength ranges and the low FF of our champion device (Fig. 11) are attributed to the existence of the thick residue layer. Thus, with an advanced strategy to convert the fine-grained residue layer into a working absorber, we believe that new record efficiencies will be demonstrated not only for standalone solution-processed CISSe devices but also for all-solution-processed perovskite/CISSe tandem devices in the near future.
Conclusions
In summary, highly efficient low-bandgap CISSe solar cells were demonstrated by using DMF/TU-based ink, with particular emphasis on its processibility in ambient air. Control of the air annealing temperature after spin coating the precursor film was determined to be the most critical parameter to obtain a high efficiency, which has not been emphasized much before in solution-processed CISSe device fabrication. Air annealing was found to determine the degree of existence of carbon residue and crystallinity of precursor films, both of which affect the diffusion behavior of metals, i.e., in particular, In supply to pre-existing CuxSe to form a CISSe absorber. This phenomenon was linked with the degree of Cu richness of growing CISSe films, which in turn determines the concentration of surface defects and the p+ interfacial layer, resulting in a different interfacial recombination and carrier transport behavior. Based on this understanding, the controlled diffusion behavior of In through controlling the degree of air annealing resulted in a certified efficiency of 14.4%, a new record efficiency in (nonhydrazine) solution-based low bandgap CISSe solar cells. Furthermore, in combination with a semitransparent perovskite top cell, we demonstrated an all-solution-processed perovskite/CISSe tandem device in a 4T configuration, showing an efficiency of up to 23.03%.
Author contributions
Y. S performed device fabrication and manuscript writing. K. S. fabricated perovskite top cells. T. R. R. and S. M. L. executed characterization of film and device. S. D. H. N. P. M. H. A. U. H. T. and S. H. provided support in device fabrication and manuscript writing. S. K. A. supervised device characterization and measurements. I. J. suggested additional experiments and provided critical feedback and advice in research and manuscript writing. S. A. designed the research and reviewed all the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Development Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Research (KIER) (C2-2402 and C2-2403). This work was also partly supported by Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korean government (MOTIE) (No. 20203040010450).
References
S. Rühle, Sol. Energy, 2016, 130, 139–147 CrossRef .
T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 828–838 CrossRef CAS .
A. De Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839–846 CrossRef .
A. R. Uhl, Z. Yang, A. K. Y. Jen and H. W. Hillhouse, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3214–3220 RSC .
A. Al-Ashouri, E. Köhnen, B. Li, A. Magomedov, H. Hempel, P. Caprioglio, J. A. Márquez, A. B. Morales Vilches, E. Kasparavicius, J. A. Smith, N. Phung, D. Menzel, M. Grischek, L. Kegelmann, D. Skroblin, C. Gollwitzer, T. Malinauskas, M. Jošt, G. Matič, B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, M. Topič, L. Korte, A. Abate, B. Stannowski, D. Neher, M. Stolterfoht, T. Unold, V. Getautis and S. Albrecht, Science, 2020, 370, 1300–1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, L. Wang, F. Xu, J. Wu, T. Song and Q. Chen, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 1120 Search PubMed .
M. Jošt, E. Köhnen, A. B. Morales-Vilches, B. Lipovšek, K. Jäger, B. Macco, A. Al-Ashouri, J. Krč, L. Korte, B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, M. Topič, B. Stannowski and S. Albrecht, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3511–3523 RSC .
Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart | Photovoltaic Research | NREL, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, (accessed 24 November 2021).
C. Chen, J. Liang, J. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Yin, H. Cui, H. Wang, C. Wang, Z. Li, J. Gong, Q. Lin, W. Ke, C. Tao, B. Da, Z. Ding, X. Xiao and G. Fang, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106608 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, T. Duong, J. Peng, D. Jacobs, N. Wu, J. Gong, Y. Wu, S. K. Karuturi, X. Fu, K. Weber, X. Xiao, T. P. White and K. Catchpole, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 394–406 RSC .
D. Zhao, C. Chen, C. Wang, M. M. Junda, Z. Song, C. R. Grice, Y. Yu, C. Li, B. Subedi, N. J. Podraza, X. Zhao, G. Fang, R.-G. Xiong, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiao, R. Lin, Q. Han, Y. Hou, Z. Qin, H. T. Nguyen, J. Wen, M. Wei, V. Yeddu, M. I. Saidaminov, Y. Gao, X. Luo, Y. Wang, H. Gao, C. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Zhu, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 870–880 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, T. Feurer, R. Carron, G. T. Sevilla, T. Moser, S. Pisoni, R. Erni, M. D. Rossell, M. Ochoa, R. Hertwig, A. N. Tiwari and F. Fu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7502–7512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. He, S. Ren, C. Chen, Z. Yi, Y. Luo, H. Lai, W. Wang, G. Zeng, X. Hao, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Wu, F. Fu and D. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5723–5759 RSC .

          M. Jost, A. Al-Ashouri, B. Lipovsek, T. Bertram, R. Schlatmann, C. A. Kaufmann, M. Topic and S. Albrecht, in Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2020, pp. 763–766.
Q. Han, Y. T. Hsieh, L. Meng, J. L. Wu, P. Sun, E. P. Yao, S. Y. Chang, S. H. Bae, T. Kato, V. Bermudez and Y. Yang, Science, 2018, 361, 904–908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al-Ashouri, A. Magomedov, M. Roß, M. Jošt, M. Talaikis, G. Chistiakova, T. Bertram, J. A. Márquez, E. Köhnen, E. Kasparavičius, S. Levcenco, L. Gil-Escrig, C. J. Hages, R. Schlatmann, B. Rech, T. Malinauskas, T. Unold, C. A. Kaufmann, L. Korte, G. Niaura, V. Getautis and S. Albrecht, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3356–3369 RSC .
M. Jošt, L. Kegelmann, L. Korte and S. Albrecht, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904102 CrossRef .
T. Kato, J. L. Wu, Y. Hirai, H. Sugimoto and V. Bermudez, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2019, 9, 325–330 Search PubMed .
T. Feurer, R. Carron, G. Torres Sevilla, F. Fu, S. Pisoni, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901428 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, R. Giridharagopal, E. Jedlicka, K. Sun, S. Yu, S. Wu, Y. Gong, W. Yan, D. S. Ginger, M. A. Green, X. Hao, W. Huang and H. Xin, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104438 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakamura, K. Yamaguchi, Y. Kimoto, Y. Yasaki, T. Kato and H. Sugimoto, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2019, 9, 1863–1867 Search PubMed .

          A. Nakamura, H. Iida, T. Ohashi, Y. Kikuchi, Y. C. Liao, Y. Kawaguchi and T. Aramoto, 32nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, 2016, pp. 1108–1111.
M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, J. P. Schmidtke, L. Dunn, A. Dodabalapur, P. F. Barbara and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16770–16777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahn, Y. J. Choi, K. Kim, Y.-J. Eo, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, K. Shin, S. K. Ahn and K. Yoon, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1282–1287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tiwari, T. Koehler, X. Lin, A. Sarua, R. Harniman, L. Wang, R. Klenk and D. J. Fermin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2301–2308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Berner, D. Colombara, J. de Wild, E. V. C. Robert, M. Schütze, F. Hergert, N. Valle, M. Widenmeyer and P. J. Dale, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2016, 24, 749–759 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, S. S. Ahn, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, A. Cho, S. S. Ahn, K. Shin, D. Nam, H. Cheong and K. Yoon, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 513, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Bhattacharya, J. F. Hiltner, W. Batchelor, M. A. Contreras, R. N. Noufi and J. R. Sites, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 361, 396–399 CrossRef .
C. J. Hibberd, E. Chassaing, W. Liu, D. B. Mitzi, D. Lincot and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2010, 18, 434–452 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Uhl, A. Rajagopal, J. A. Clark, A. Murray, T. Feurer, S. Buecheler, A. K. Y. Jen and H. W. Hillhouse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801254 CrossRef .
J. A. Clark, A. Murray, J. M. Lee, T. S. Autrey, A. D. Collord and H. W. Hillhouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 298–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suresh and A. R. Uhl, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003743 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Clark, A. R. Uhl, T. R. Martin and H. W. Hillhouse, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9328–9339 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Badgujar, R. O. Dusane and S. R. Dhage, Sol. Energy, 2020, 209, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cho, S. J. K. Ahn, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, S. J. K. Ahn, K. Shin, J. Yoo, H. Song and K. Yoon, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 546, 299–307 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moon, S. Rehan, T. R. Rana, O. Byungsung, S. K. Ahn and S. Ahn, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900260 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rehan, J. Moon, T. G. Kim, J. Gwak, J. Kim, J. W. Kim, W. Jo, S. K. Ahn and S. J. Ahn, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 401–412 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Alruqobah and R. Agrawal, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4821–4830 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Y. Gong, J. Jiang, S. Wu, W. Yan, X. Li, W. Huang and H. Xin, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900052 CrossRef .
S. J. Park, Y. Cho, S. H. Moon, J. E. Kim, D.-K. Lee, J. Gwak, J. Kim, D.-W. Kim and B. K. Min, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 135105 CrossRef .
S. Rehan, K. Y. Kim, J. Han, Y. J. Eo, J. Gwak, S. J. K. Ahn, J. H. Yun, K. H. Yoon, A. Cho and S. J. K. Ahn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5261–5272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. McLeod, E. Alruqobah and R. Agrawal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 195, 12–23 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, S. J. Kim, M. Kar, W. N. Shafarman, R. W. Birkmire, E. A. Stach, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2982–2987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Ellis, J. W. Turnley, D. J. Rokke, J. P. Fields, E. H. Alruqobah, S. D. Deshmukh, K. Kisslinger and R. Agrawal, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 5091–5103 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rincón and F. J. Ramírez, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 4321–4324 CrossRef .
M. A. Hossain, T. Zhang, L. K. Keat, X. Li, R. R. Prabhakar, S. K. Batabyal, S. G. Mhaisalkar and L. H. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4147–4154 RSC .
V. Izquierdo-Roca, X. Fontané, E. Saucedo, J. S. Jaime-Ferrer, J. Álvarez-García, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, V. Bermudez and J. R. Morante, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 453–460 RSC .
J. Weszka, P. Daniel, A. Burian, A. M. Burian and A. T. Nguyen, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2000, 265, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hibberd, K. Ernits, M. Kaelin, U. Müller and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2008, 16, 585–593 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guan, X. Wang and Q. Sun, J. Nanomater., 2015, 579489 Search PubMed .
C. Spindler, F. Babbe, M. H. Wolter, F. Ehré, K. Santhosh, P. Hilgert, F. Werner and S. Siebentritt, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 90302 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Aida, V. Depredurand, J. K. K. Larsen, H. Arai, D. Tanaka, M. Kurihara and S. Siebentritt, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 754–764 CrossRef CAS .
F. Babbe, H. Elanzeery, M. H. Wolter, K. Santhosh and S. Siebentritt, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 31, 425702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sood, A. Urbaniak, C. K. Boumenou, T. P. Weiss, H. Elanzeery, F. Babbe, F. Werner, M. Melchiorre and S. Siebentritt, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2021, 1–13 Search PubMed .
M. Sood, H. Elanzeery, D. Adeleye, A. Lomuscio, F. Werner, F. Ehre, M. Melchiorre and S. Siebentritt, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2020, 28, 1063–1076 CrossRef CAS .
F. Babbe, L. Choubrac and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 082105 CrossRef .
H. Elanzeery, F. Babbe, M. Melchiorre, A. Zelenina and S. Siebentritt, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2017, 7, 684–689 Search PubMed .
M. Maciaszek, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 125, 043102 CrossRef .
M. Nichterwitz, R. Caballero, C. A. Kaufmann, H.-W. Schock and T. Unold, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 044515 CrossRef .
M. Igalson, P. Zabierowski, D. Przado, A. Urbaniak, M. Edoff and W. N. Shafarman, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1290–1295 CrossRef CAS .
H. Elanzeery, M. Melchiorre, M. Sood, F. Babbe, F. Werner, G. Brammertz and S. Siebentritt, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 055403 CrossRef CAS .
T. Walter, R. Herberholz, C. Müller and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 80, 4411 CrossRef .
M. Buffière, A.-A. El Mel, N. Lenaers, G. Brammertz, A. E. Zaghi, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401689 CrossRef .
F. Werner, M. H. Wolter, S. Siebentritt, G. Sozzi, S. Di Napoli, R. Menozzi, P. Jackson, W. Witte, R. Carron, E. Avancini, T. P. Weiss and S. Buecheler, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2018, 26, 911–923 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Yuan, X. M. Ding, B. Lai, X. Y. Hou, E. D. Lu, P. S. Xu and X. Y. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 2977 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Uhl, J. K. Katahara and H. W. Hillhouse, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 130–134 RSC .
J. Jiang, S. Yu, Y. Gong, W. Yan, R. Zhang, S. Liu, W. Huang and H. Xin, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800044 CrossRef .
S. Ahn, C. Kim, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, S. Jeong, B.-H. Ryu and K. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8108–8113 CrossRef CAS .
S. Siebentritt, N. Rega, A. Zajogin and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2004, 1, 2304–2310 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Q. Gao and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17281–17289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Ahn, K. Kim, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, K. Shin, S. K. Ahn and K. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1530–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, Y.-J. Eo, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, K. Shin, S. Kyu Ahn, S. Hyun Park, K. Yoon and S. E. Jin Ahn, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8444–8448 RSC .
S. J. Ahn, S. Rehan, D. G. Moon, Y. J. Eo, S. K. Ahn, J. H. Yun, A. Cho and J. Gwak, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1268–1277 RSC .
M. Sood, A. Lomuscio, F. Werner, A. Nikolaeva, P. J. Dale, M. Melchiorre, J. Guillot, D. Abou-Ras and S. Siebentritt, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100078 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luckas, C. Longeaud, T. Bertram and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 153905 CrossRef .
E. Korhonen, K. Kuitunen, F. Tuomisto, A. Urbaniak, M. Igalson, J. Larsen, L. Gütay, S. Siebentritt and Y. Tomm, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 064102 CrossRef .
J. K. Larsen, L. Gütay and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 201910 CrossRef .
ILAC MRA and Signatories International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation, https://ilac.org/ilac-mra-and-signatories/, (accessed 23 March 2021).

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03131gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Ga-free low bandgap (Eg ∼ 1 eV) CuIn(S,Se)2 (CISSe) solar cells are recently regaining attention as bottom cells in tandem structure with perovskite top cells to increase power conversion efficiency for future renewable energy goals. Solution processability of CISSe solar cells provides potential for a greatly reduced manufacturing cost of perovskite/CISSe tandem technology without significantly sacrificing performance. A simple, air processable, DMF molecular ink-based process is presented in this work through which it was able to achieve certified record efficiency of 14.4% for the CISSe device. In addition, a 4-terminal (4T) all-solution processed perovskite/CISSe tandem device with an efficiency of 23.03%, the highest efficiency amongst all-solution processed 4T configuration, is also demonstrated. In a technical point of view, the air annealing temperature was found to be the main controlling variable, not only ensuring carbon removal but also controlling surface defect formation of the absorber films.


 	Fig. 1  Electrical parameters of devices built with CISSe films processed at different air annealing temperatures of 210, 230, 280 and 330 °C: (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF and (d) PCE.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cross-sectional SEM images of CISSe absorber processed at different air annealing temperatures of (a) 210 °C, (b) 230 °C, (c) 280 °C and (d) 330 °C.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra and (b) EDS results of (etched) CISSe films processed at different air annealing temperatures of 210 °C, 230 °C, 280 °C and 330 °C.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Low temperature (10 K) photoluminescence spectra of CISSe films processed at different air annealing temperatures of 210, 230, 280 and 330 °C. (b) PL intensity ratio for DA2 and DA1 peaks as a function of air annealing temperature. DA and LO stands for donor–acceptor pair transition and longitudinal optical phonon replica, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Temperature dependent Voc curves of devices processed at different air annealing temperature. (b) Difference between Eg (from EQE in (S4, ESI†) and Ea (from (a)).	 

 	Fig. 6  Temperature dependent IV curves of CISSe devices processed at different air annealing temperature of (a) 210, (b) 230, (c) 280 and (d) 330 °C. Insets are 1st quadrant of each graph extended to 3 V. Data at 200 and 220 K were highlighted for easy comparison.	 

 	Fig. 7  Admittance activation energies of CISSe devices processed at different air annealing temperatures, calculated from admittance spectroscopy data (Fig. S6, ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 8  Simplified band diagrams with interfacial p+ layer between buffer and absorber layers.	 

210	0.90	0.90	1.06	0.89
230	0.90	0.90	1.01	0.90
280	0.90	0.91	1.04	0.87
330	0.90	0.91	1.07	0.86

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) XRD pattern and (c) Raman spectra of precursor films processed at different air annealing temperatures. (b) is enlarged view of (a) in range of 42 to 49 degree.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic model showing the step-wise mechanism of CISSe film formation, emphasizing the different In diffusion kinetics due to different annealing temperatures. At 210 °C, carbon restricts In supply towards growing CuxSe while at 280 °C and 330 °C condition, high crystallinity hinders In supply. Optimum air annealing temperature (230 °C) showed facile In supply.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) IV and (b) EQE curves of champion CISSe device.	 


2018	CISSe	0.443	35.5	65.3	10.3	0.10	
68

2018	CISSe	0.518	37.9	70.3	13.8 (13.1)a	0.10	
31

2019	CISSe	0.512	36.9	71.0	13.4	0.10	
32

2020	CISSe	0.520	38.5	72.5	14.5 (13.5)a	0.10	
21

2021	CISSe	0.564	37.1	68.8	14.4a	0.46	This study

 	Fig. 12  Performance of 4T tandem solar cells: (a) IV and (b) EQE curve.	 

Perovskite top cell	1.12	22.72	77.00	19.54 (avg.)
CISSe standalone	0.541	36.10	66.92	13.08
CISSe filtered	0.510	10.37	66.05	3.49
Perovskite-CISSe -4T tandem	
	
	
	23.03
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03131g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
