Two-dimensional layered Dion–Jacobson phase organic–inorganic tin iodide perovskite field-effect transistors   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3TA00084B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3TA00084B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 7767-7779Two-dimensional layered Dion–Jacobson phase organic–inorganic tin iodide perovskite field-effect transistors†

        
          
            Hongyu 
            Ji
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Longtao 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fan 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Qin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhidong 
            Lou
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Li
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yufeng 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yanbing 
            Hou
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Feng 
            Teng
          
        
      
Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China. E-mail: zhdlou@bjtu.edu.cn; danli@bjtu.edu.cn; fteng@bjtu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86 10 51684860
Received 
      5th January 2023
    , Accepted 13th March 2023First published on 14th March 2023AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) layered Dion–Jacobson (D–J) phase organic–inorganic Sn-based perovskites show potential applications in field-effect transistors, similar to their Ruddlesden–Popper (R–P) counterparts; however, they have not attracted sufficient attention. In this work, we report on the investigations of 1,4-butanediamine tin iodide perovskite (BDASnI4) and the demonstration of polymer-bottom-gated BDASnI4 thin film field-effect transistors. First-principles calculations reveal that BDASnI4 possesses a 2D layered D–J structure with small lattice distortions, which facilitates in-plane charge transport in the [SnI6]4− frameworks. Theoretical results and physical characteristics prove that the single BDA2+ layer eliminates the van der Waals gap in R–P perovskites, resulting in enhanced structural stability and a reduced quantum well effect. More importantly, the strong interlayer electronic coupling through the shortened apical I–I interactions improves the out-of-plane charge transport in BDASnI4, which is regarded as a limitation for 2D R–P perovskites. BDASnI4 transistors exhibit p-type high-performance with enhanced operating stability under ambient conditions. The hole mobility achieved in the champion device is 0.58 cm2 V−1 s−1, approaching that of amorphous silicon. Our work provides theoretical and experimental bases for developing 2D layered D–J phase perovskites for field-effect transistors.
Introduction
Metal halide perovskites with extraordinary optoelectronic properties have aroused great interest in developing perovskite field-effect transistors (FETs) with continuous and breakthrough improvements in the power conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells. Outstanding performance has been achieved in three-dimensional (3D) perovskite FETs.1–4 In principle, compared to Pb-based counterparts, Sn-based perovskites possess superior charge carrier transport as a result of smaller charge carrier effective masses induced by a weaker relativistic effect,5 less limited carrier mobilities at room temperature due to weaker Fröhlich interaction,6 and lower exciton binding energies ascribed to larger dielectric constants.5,7,8 3D Sn-based perovskite transistors have been demonstrated to exhibit better performance, and the highest hole mobility has been obtained in CsSnI3 transistors.3 However, the environmental susceptibility of 3D perovskites, particularly, the poor intrinsic stability of Sn-based perovskites, which is caused by the oxidation of Sn2+ and a hydrolysis reaction with moisture, impacts the operating stability of related optoelectronic devices.9 One effective strategy for addressing this issue is to introduce bulky hydrophobic organic monoammonium and diammonium cations into the 3D perovskite lattice, constituting low-dimensional layered Ruddlesden–Popper (R–P) and Dion–Jacobson (D–J) phase organic–inorganic perovskites.10 Bulky hydrophobic organic cations and highly oriented layered structures can improve the stability of low-dimensional perovskites and devices by inhibiting the intrusion of water and oxygen molecules and migration of ions.11,12 The tunable abilities of electronic bandgaps and optoelectronic properties through changing the layer number or chemical compositions also endow low-dimensional perovskites with great potential for the development of desired novel optoelectronic functionality.13 Up to now, tremendous achievements have been realized in the fields of low-dimensional R–P perovskite solar cells and light-emitting diodes. On the other hand, since the first D–J phase Pb-based perovskite solar cells based on 3- and 4-(aminomethyl) piperidiniums were invented in 2018,10 a variety of low-dimensional layered D–J perovskites have been designed by incorporating organic diammoniums such as linear, cyclic, piperidine, pyridine, and thiophene cations into the 3D perovskite lattice.14 Among them, the power conversion efficiency of 1,4-butanediamine (BDA)-based perovskite (BDAMA4Pb5X16) (MA = methylammonium) solar cells has reached 17.9%.15 Low-dimensional D–J perovskite photodetectors based on BDACsPb2Br7 and light-emitting diodes based on PDACsPb2Br7 (PDA = 1,3-diammonium) have also been demonstrated.16,17
In the aspect of FETs, R–P phase perovskite transistors have been reported so far. A few low-dimensional R–P Pb- and Sn-based perovskite materials have been employed for the fabrication of transistors;4,18,19 however, the devices have only shown very poor performance at low temperatures. In contrast, more studies have focused on pure 2D layered R–P Sn-based perovskite transistors that show superior field-effect performance.20 In pure single-phase 2D layered R–P phase perovskites, semiconducting inorganic sheets prefer to alternate with organic layers in the direction perpendicular to substrates.21 The in-plane charge carrier transport in inorganic sheets is thus parallel to the substrate surface, similar to that in a transistor channel.22 This reason, coupled with the fact that large organic cation layers can suppress ion migration and the shielding effect of gate electric fields in 3D perovskite transistors,12 makes 2D layered R–P perovskites promising channel materials for FETs. 2D R–P Sn-based perovskite FETs have been extensively investigated. High transport performance has been reported in phenylethylammonium tin iodide perovskite ((PEA)2SnI4) and other 2D R–P Sn-based perovskites.23,24 The (PEA)2SnI4 transistors have kept the highest record of hole mobility in 2D R–P perovskite FETs at room temperature in a vacuum, which pioneered the applications of metal halide perovskites in transistors two decades ago.20 Nevertheless, the insulating properties of organic cation layers and the multi-quantum-well structure are believed to be disadvantageous to out-of-plane charge carrier transport,4 which is a bottleneck that puts a limitation on the further performance enhancement of FETs based on 2D R–P perovskites.
Similar to 2D R–P perovskites, pure 2D layered D–J phase perovskites also show a high growth orientation,25 enabling efficient in-plane charge transport in inorganic layers and reduced out-of-plane ion movement. Besides, the results of low-dimensional D–J perovskite solar cells suggest they have only one single layer of diammonium cations between adjacent inorganic layers, thereby eliminating the van der Waals gap existing in R–P perovskites and weakening the quantum well effect.26,27 More importantly, it has been reported that the shortened interlayer distance can enhance the electronic coupling between adjacent inorganic layers and reduce the interlayer potential barriers, which will facilitate the out-of-plane charge transport in D–J perovskites.25,27 Furthermore, the substitution of monoammonium cations with diammonium ones can intrinsically stabilize the layered perovskite structure,26,28 giving rise to enhanced structural stability and thermal stability.25,28 The stability of low-dimensional D–J Sn- and Pb-based perovskite solar cells has been significantly improved.15,29 In consideration of the potential advantages of pure 2D layered D–J perovskites as channel materials, it is necessary to explore their applications in FETs. In comparison with their R–P counterparts, 2D D–J Sn-based perovskites have drawn relatively little attention to date.30 At present, there are no research papers published on D–J perovskite FETs, except for a BDASnI4 transistor constructed on a SiO2/Si substrate, which was mentioned in a patent about an R–P phase (PEA)2SnI4 thin film transistor in 2001.31 Therefore, the BDASnI4 perovskite material and FETs are worth in-depth restudy.
In this work, we have reported on theoretical and experimental studies on 2D layered D–J phase BDASnI4 perovskite and the demonstration of polymer-bottom-gated BDASnI4 FETs. Comparative studies on D–J BDASnI4 and R–P (PEA)2SnI4 thin films and transistors were conducted for a deep understanding of the physical properties of the D–J phase perovskite and its potential applications in optoelectronics. The geometrical and electronic structures of BDASnI4 as well as its charge transport and excitonic characteristics were investigated using first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT). The calculated crystal structure shows that BDASnI4 possesses a 2D layered D–J structure with small lattice distortions, which is verified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis and favorable for in-plane charge transport in [SnI6]4− octahedral frameworks. The single layer of BDA2+ cations eliminates the van der Waals gap and makes the adjacent inorganic layers close to each other with a short apical I–I distance, leading to enhanced structural stability and out-of-plane charge transport as well as a weakened quantum well effect. The theoretical results of the electronic band structure, charge transport, and excitons predict that BDASnI4 is a direct bandgap semiconductor with excellent intrinsic transport characteristics. High-quality BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin films were prepared by a one-step spin-coating method. Temperature-dependent photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was utilized to obtain information about the phase transition, exciton nature, and electron–phonon coupling mechanisms of the perovskite films in addition to the fundamental optical and electrical properties as well as the environmental and thermal stability. The BDASnI4 transistors exhibit p-type high performance and enhanced operating stability with a champion hole mobility of 0.58 cm2 V−1 s−1.
Results and discussion
Firstly, the geometrical and electronic structures of BDASnI4 as well as its charge transport and excitonic characteristics were investigated using first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT).32,33 In band structure calculations, we utilized the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) function and the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof hybrid functional incorporating 43% Hartree–Fock exact exchange (HSE43). The spin–orbit coupling (SOC) effect was considered in the HSE43 method due to the strong relativistic effect of the heavy element Sn.34–36 The simplified Brillouin zone for BDASnI4 (Fig. S1†) was sampled using a gamma-centered method to generate k-point meshes, where multiple highly symmetric k-paths in different directions were chosen for precisely calculating the electronic band structure.32 More computational details are available in the Computational details. Fig. 1a presents the optimized geometric crystal structure of BDASnI4, and the calculated lattice constants are listed in Table S1.† The [SnI6]4− frameworks and BDA2+ layers alternately stack along the c-axis via the hydrogen bond formed between the −NH3+ groups at both ends of BDA2+ and the halogens in [SnI6]4−, constructing a 2D layered D–J structure. As compared to the 2D R–P phase with monoammonium cations, the single BDA2+ layer eliminates the van der Waals gap,26 which strengthens the 2D layered structure and results in higher structural stability.25 More importantly, the two adjacent [SnI6]4− layers are closer to each other with a short apical I–I distance (7.21 Å), which will enhance the interlayer electronic coupling through I–I interactions.25,27,30 The bond lengths and bond angles of the [SnI6]4− octahedra are summarized in Table S2.† The out-of-plane I–Sn–I bond angle is 179.2°, indicating that the D–J phase perovskite is barely distorted in the out-of-plane direction. The in-plane lattice distortion is also relatively small since the in-plane Sn–I–Sn angle is 179.2°, which facilities charge transport in the [SnI6]4− frameworks.37
 Fig. 1  Crystal structure, electronic structure, and morphology of BDASnI4. (a) Optimized crystal structure. (b) Electronic band structure calculated using the HSE43 + SOC functional. (c) DOS calculated using the PBE functional. (d) SEM image, (e) AFM image, and (f) XRD spectrum of BDASnI4 thin films prepared on ITO/glass substrates at a precursor solution concentration of 0.3 M. 
The electronic band structures of BDASnI4 calculated using the HSE43 + SOC and PBE schemes are exhibited in Fig. 1b and S2.† The derived bandgap of BDASnI4 from HSE43 + SOC is 1.61 eV, while it is 1.08 eV from PBE, showing that the underestimated PBE bandgap is corrected by the HSE43 + SOC functional. The perovskite has both the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) appearing at the R point, implying that BDASnI4 is a direct bandgap semiconductor. To gain insights into the origins of the conduction and valence bands, Fig. 1c displays the density of states (DOS) of the perovskite based on the PBE scheme, which can provide similar band energy dispersion relations to HSE and avoid a high computational cost.30,32 It is obvious that the lower conduction band is predominantly made up of Sn 5p states. The upper valence band mainly consists of the 5p orbitals of the I atoms in the [SnI6]4− octahedra, weakly hybridizing with a small number of Sn 5s orbitals. The strong interlayer electronic coupling between the two apical I atoms in the neighboring inorganic layers is conducive to the transport of holes along the out-of-plane direction.28 Furthermore, it can be seen that the organic BDA2+ cation makes major contributions to the DOS far away from the conduction and valence band edges, revealing that BDA2+ has no direct influences on the CBM and VBM.38 According to our findings, the CBM and VBM of BDASnI4 are primarily governed by the [SnI6]4− octahedra. However, different from 2D R–P perovskites,39 the interlayer electronic coupling through the apical I–I interactions can affect the electronic band characteristics of the D–J perovskite, which will ultimately determine its optical and electrical properties as well as the performance of related optoelectronic devices.
Moreover, the effective charge carrier masses of BDASnI4 were estimated to evaluate the charge transport behavior and excitonic properties. The effective masses of electrons and holes derived from the curvatures of the CBM and VBM in Fig. S2 using eqn (S1) are summarized in Table S3.† Overall, BDASnI4 possesses relatively small effective masses. The average in-plane effective masses (0.197m0 for electrons and 0.159m0 for holes) are smaller relative to the out-of-plane ones (0.527m0 for electrons and 0.190m0 for holes) because the [SnI6]4− layer is the major transport pathway for carriers.32 The D–J perovskite also exhibits a competitive hole effective mass (0.159m0) with respect to (PEA)2SnI4 (0.410m0).23 Unlike 2D R–P perovskites with extremely large out-of-plane effective masses because of the van der Waals gap,23,24,40,41 BDASnI4 shows much smaller average out-of-plane effective masses, which is in favor of charge transport in this direction, owing to the strong electronic coupling between the adjacent inorganic [SnI6]4− layers as a consequence of the disappearance of the van der Waals gap. In particular, the out-of-plane hole effective mass is even smaller. This is because the reduced apical I–I distance makes the VBM wavefunctions overlap significantly.30,32 The intrinsic electron and hole mobilities of BDASnI4 determined by using eqn (S2) are shown in Table S4†.42 Except for the ones in the c direction, the average in-plane mobility values are of the order of 103 cm2 V−1 s−1 (3065 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons and 2092 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes). It should be noted that the out-of-plane electron and hole mobilities are about 6 and 133 cm2 V−1 s−1, suggesting improved charge transport properties along the out-of-plane direction of the D–J perovskite relative to 2D R–P perovskites, hole transport in particular, which are consistent with the results of the effective masses. In addition, the exciton binding energy (EB) of BDASnI4 evaluated according to eqn (S3)† is 56 meV, much smaller than that of (PEA)2SnI4 (174 meV) and favorable for charge transport.40 The significantly reduced exciton binding energy is ascribed to the weakened quantum well effect in the D–J perovskite due to the enhanced interlayer electronic coupling by the removal of the van der Waals gap.30 In a word, first-principles calculations anticipate that BDASnI4 exhibits a 2D layered D–J structure with enhanced stability and excellent transport characteristics as well as reduced exciton binding energy benefiting from the diammonium organic cations that eliminate the weak van der Waals interactions between the adjacent [SnI6]4− layers, as compared to 2D R–P perovskites, which in turn determine the optical and electrical properties of the perovskite. More importantly, in addition to the in-plane charge transport that resembles 2D lateral transport in a transistor channel, BDASnI4 shows superior out-of-plane charge transport properties to its R–P counterparts, disclosing great potential as a channel semiconductor, and hence, promising high field-effect performance can be expected in transistors based on this D–J perovskite.
We synthesized BDASnI4 thin films by a one-step spin-coating method using N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) as the solvent. The experimental details are present in the Experimental. The morphology and thickness of the films were optimized first by changing the concentration of the perovskite precursor solution, which play important roles in determining the performance of the corresponding optoelectronic devices. Fig. 1d exhibits the top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the BDASnI4 film prepared at a precursor solution concentration of 0.30 M on an indium tin oxide (ITO)/glass substrate, which is also shown in Fig. S3† together with its cross-sectional SEM image and those of the films prepared at 0.15 and 0.45 M for comparison. No clear individual grain boundaries are observed in the BDASnI4 films prepared at 0.30 and 0.45 M on a scale of 2 μm, suggesting that they have relatively large grain sizes, whereas the film prepared at 0.15 M presents grains of hundreds of nanometers. The cross-sectional SEM images show that the film prepared at 0.30 M has a thickness of 98 nm, nearly equal to that of the (PEA)2SnI4 thin film (Fig. S3d†). Fig. S3e† illustrates the top-view SEM image of this optimized perovskite film on a larger scale of 20 μm. It can be seen that the film is composed of extremely large grains with polygonal boundaries and an apparent lateral size of ∼50 μm far exceeding its thickness, beneficial to the lateral charge transport. The atomic force microscope (AFM) images in Fig. 1e and S4† show that the film at 0.30 M has a uniform and smooth surface morphology on the micrometer scale with the smallest root-mean-square (RMS) roughness (2.395 nm). Consequently, the BDASnI4 films in subsequent following studies were prepared at a precursor solution concentration of 0.30 M. The XRD spectrum of the BDASnI4 films is depicted in Fig. 1f to determine the crystal structure. It only shows four equidistant peaks: one dominant peak at 8.8° and the other relatively weak ones at 17.5°, 26.4°, and 35.4°. Since the relevant XRD pattern cannot be found in frequently-used crystal structure databases, the origin of the XRD peaks can be deduced from the literature. The peaks at 8.8°, 17.5°, and 26.4° are quite similar to the equidistant ones of the BDAPbI4 single crystal powder,13 which are located at 8.7°, 17.4°, and 26.2° and originate from the (001), (002), and (003) planes, respectively. By analogy, the peak at 35.4° corresponds to the (004) plane. Therefore, we can conclude that the XRD peaks in Fig. 1f are attributed to the reflections of the (00L) (L = 1, 2, 3, 4) planes of the BDASnI4 film. As far as we know, only a BDASnI4 single crystal was mentioned in a paper reporting on low-dimensional D–J phase lead-free perovskite solar cells.29 The four XRD peak positions in the BDASnI4 film are identical to some in the BDASnI4 crystal powder, but our film lacks the miscellaneous peaks that do not belong to the (00L) planes. These results indicate that the BDASnI4 films adopt a 2D layered D–J structure with high orientation and crystallinity. As predicted by the optimized crystal structure from our DFT calculations, the [SnI6]4− and BDA2+ layers alternately stack along the c-axis, which will enable efficient in-plane charge transport in the BDASnI4 film because the inorganic layers extend in the direction parallel to the substrate surface. The interlayer spacing of the BDASnI4 film is estimated to be 10.1 Å according to Bragg's law, agreeing well with the theoretically derived inorganic layer distance (10.3 Å). This value is smaller than that of 2D R–P (PEA)2SnI4,43 which will improve the out-of-plane charge transport in the D–J perovskite film.
The physical characteristics of semiconducting thin films dominate the performance of related optoelectronic devices. Herein, we conducted comparative studies on 2D D–J BDASnI4 and R–P (PEA)2SnI4 thin films with almost the same thickness for a deep understanding of the physical properties of the D–J perovskite and its potential applications in optoelectronics. The fundamental optical properties as well as the VBM, CBM, and Fermi level (EF) of the perovskite films were explored by spectroscopy techniques including ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption, steady-state photoluminescence (PL), time-resolved PL (TRPL), and ultraviolet photo-electron spectroscopy (UPS). Temperature-dependent steady-state PL spectroscopy was applied to the perovskite films to gain information about the exciton nature, phase transition, and electron–phonon coupling mechanisms,38 which is vital to exciton recombination and charge transport processes.
The room-temperature UV-vis absorption and steady-state PL spectra of the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 films in Fig. 2a and S5a† show that the BDASnI4 film has similar absorption and emission features to the (PEA)2SnI4 film in the visible light region with a steep absorption edge at 592 nm and an excitonic absorption peak at 572 nm as well as an exciton PL peak at 597 nm. A wide absorption band from 350 to 540 nm is also observed, originating from the electronic transitions between the valence and conduction bands that involve the high energy levels of the [SnI6]4− layers and the highest occupied molecular orbital and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital levels of the BDA molecules,32 as suggested by the DOS in Fig. 1c. The peak at 481 nm might be assigned to the excited states of the excitons.44 The steep absorption edge reflects the nature of a direct bandgap of the D–J perovskite, confirming the results of our theoretical calculations.7 The exciton absorption and emission peaks of the BDASnI4 film are observed at room temperature due to the quantum and dielectric confinement effects in the naturally formed multiple quantum well structure with the periodic arrangement of the BDA2+ and [SnI6]4− layers.14 Moreover, the Stokes shift due to exciton–phonon scattering in the D–J perovskite film is small (20 nm),45 indicating that the PL peak results from free-exciton emission. An optical bandgap of 2.10 eV is derived for the BDASnI4 film from the Tauc plot of the absorption spectrum in Fig. S6a,† larger than the above calculated values and close to that of the (PEA)2SnI4 film (1.99 eV), which can meet the moderate bandgap requirements (1–2 eV) of semiconductors for FET applications.46 The bandgap corrected by HSE43 + SOC is closer to the experimental value, but still smaller since the SOC effect results in a large energy splitting of the CBM, which might lead to a decrease in the bandgap.47 The VBM, CBM, and Fermi level of the BDASnI4 film were estimated based on the optical bandgap and the UPS spectrum in Fig. S6b.† The VBM and CBM are about −5.17 and −3.07 eV, respectively. These values obtained for the (PEA)2SnI4 film are −5.67 and −3.70 eV. The Fermi level is found to locate at −4.57 eV below the vacuum level by the method described in the ESI,† revealing a p-type nature of the BDASnI4 film. The schematic diagram of the electronic energy band of this perovskite is depicted in Fig. S6c† based on the experimental results. Besides, the average lifetimes of excitons (Table S5†) of the two perovskite films were calculated by fitting the TRPL decay curves in Fig. S7† with a three-exponential function (eqn (S5) and (S6)†).48 The average exciton lifetime of the BDASnI4 film is 2.14 ns and of the same order of magnitude as (PEA)2SnI4 (1.43 ns). As compared to (PEA)2SnI4, the relatively high lifetime arising from the non-radiative recombination in the BDASnI4 thin film can be ascribed to the differences in the band structure, as well as the density of traps and their carrier capture cross sections, which depend on the quality of the perovskite films.49 On the other hand, the BDASnI4 film exhibits longer radiative recombination and Auger recombination lifetimes, suggesting that this D–J perovskite has a smaller exciton binding energy.50
 Fig. 2  Optical properties and electron–phonon interaction of BDASnI4 thin films. (a) Room-temperature UV-vis absorption and PL spectra and (b) temperature-dependent PL spectra. (c) Pseudo-color map of the temperature-dependent PL spectra. (d) Integrated PL intensity as a function of the inverse of temperature. (e) Evolution of the PL peak energy (bandgap) with temperature. The calculated individual contributions from the thermal expansion and electron–phonon interaction are depicted by the dashed lines. (f) Evolution of the FWHM of the PL peak with temperature. 
Excitons have a significant impact on both the optical characteristics of perovskites and the physical processes in perovskite optoelectronic devices. The temperature-dependent PL spectra in Fig. 2b and S5b† are used to estimate the exciton binding energy values of the perovskite films. The PL intensity of the BDASnI4 film decreases along with a broadening of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) from 60 to 143 nm as the temperature increases, similar to that of the (PEA)2SnI4 film. On the other hand, the PL peak position of the BDASnI4 film blue-shifts from 595.2 nm at 80 K to 594.2 nm at 180 K, and then red-shifts to 597.6 nm at 320 K, whereas the emission peak of the (PEA)2SnI4 film exhibits a blue-shift from 646.5 nm at 80 K to 632.4 nm at 260 K, and then red-shifts to 633.8 nm at 320 K. The pseudo-color maps for the temperature dependent PL spectra of the perovskite films are illustrated in Fig. 2c and S5c† to explore whether the temperature-dependent orthorhombic-to-orthorhombic structural phase transition observed in R–P phase (BA)2SnI4 occurs in the films,51–53 which results from considerable structural fluctuations due to weak van der Waals interactions between the two layers of alkylammonium chains sandwiched by adjacent inorganic layers.8,51 Here, no abrupt change in the peak position is found, unravelling the absence of the phase transition in both of the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 films. D–J phase BDASnI4 does not show the phase transition behavior in the R–P phase (BA)2SnI4 primarily because the elimination of the van der Waals gap hinders the motion of disorders of the organic cations including reorientation and movement relative to the inorganic layers.54,55 The exciton binding energies are calculated by fitting the temperature-dependent integrated PL intensity of the perovskite films plotted in Fig. 2d and S5d with eqn (S7).† The EB value extracted for the BDASnI4 film is 53.1 meV, close to the aforementioned theoretical value, and much smaller than that of the (PEA)2SnI4 film (118.8 meV) owing to the weakened quantum well effect with the disappearance of the van der Waals gap.27 The relatively low exciton binding energy enables efficient exciton separation and charge transport in the BDASnI4 film, which might be disadvantageous for fabricating light-emitting devices, but endows this D–J perovskite with promising applications in FETs.
Temperature-dependent PL spectroscopy is a main approach to study the mechanisms of the electron–phonon interaction in a semiconductor, which offers the information of lattice vibration and phonons that impact exciton recombination and charge carrier transport via phonon scattering processes.52,55 The evolutions of the PL peak that corresponds to the bandgap of the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin films are displayed in Fig. 2e and S5e.† The lattice thermal expansion and electron–phonon interaction are known to be the dominant mechanisms accounting for the temperature dependence of the bandgap under a quasi-harmonic approximation at constant pressure.52 The thermal expansion impacts the electronic band structure by changing the lattice constant, and the electron–phonon interaction induces subtle changes in the electronic band structure via lattice vibration.52 In practice, a common two-oscillator model only involving one branch of acoustic and optical phonons is developed.56 For a polar semiconductor at temperatures above 80 K, the longitudinal optical (LO) phonon scattering via Fröhlich coupling is responsible for the electron–phonon interaction, whereas the acoustic phonon scattering is negligible due to the weak electron-acoustic phonon interaction.57 Therefore, taking into consideration the polar nature of the perovskite films and the PL spectra recorded above 80 K, we use a one-oscillator model only involving LO phonons in the subsequent analysis, which has been employed to interpret the temperature evolution of the bandgap in 2D and 3D perovskites. Based on the assumption of a linear relationship between the lattice constant and temperature, the simplified equation describing the evolution of the bandgap with temperature is as follows:52,56,58 (1)where ATE and AEP are the weights of the thermal expansion and electron–LO–phonon interaction; ELO is the average optical phonon energy contributing to electron–phonon coupling; kB is the Boltzmann constant; E0 is the unnormalized bandgap that equals E0 plus ATE at 0 K due to the quantum factor in the Bose–Einstein distribution. By fitting the curves in Fig. 2e and S5e† with this equation, the parameters were extracted and are summarized in Table S6.† The individual contributions from the thermal expansion and electron–phonon interaction can be distinguished according to the values calculated using the fitted parameters and eqn (1),58 as plotted in the figures. This clearly shows that the linearly increased bandgap of the BDASnI4 film below 140 K is mainly attributed to the thermal expansion. As the temperature rises, the electron–LO–phonon interaction becomes dominant, resulting in an increasingly negative contribution to the bandgap evolution.58 As to the (PEA)2SnI4 film, the thermal expansion contributes to the linear change in the bandgap below 120 K, while the temperature evolution of the bandgap at higher temperatures is caused by the synergistic impact of the thermal expansion and electron–phonon interaction. Furthermore, the contributions of the electron–phonon interaction to the temperature evolution of the bandgap over a temperature range in the perovskite films are compared by defining an energy difference between the bandgaps at 320 and 80 K (Table S6†), namely ΔEP = EEP (320 K) − EEP (80 K). The calculated ΔEP for the D–J BDASnI4 and R–P (PEA)2SnI4 films are −20.07 and −64.83 meV, respectively, verifying that the contribution of the electron–phonon interaction to the change of the bandgap in BDASnI4 is smaller, which can be explained by the difference in the 2D perovskite structure. In the D–J phase perovskite, the presence of the BDA2+ cations enhances the lattice stiffness and reduces the structural fluctuations of the lattice by forming hydrogen bonds at both ends of the divalent organic cations and avoiding the van der Waals gap,28 thereby attenuating the thermally induced electron–phonon coupling.
The electron–phonon interaction in the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin films was also explored by analyzing the temperature-dependent PL emission broadening.55,59 On the basis of first-order perturbation theory and the hypothesis that the phonon energy is independent of temperature, the total temperature-dependent PL spectral broadening in most semiconductors associated with different mechanisms of scattering between charge carriers and phonons or impurities is expressed by the following formula:53,55 (2)where Γinh is the inhomogeneous broadening induced by crystal disorder scattering at 0 K. The second term describes the homogeneous broadening due to the acoustic phonon scattering with Γac as the coupling strength between charge carriers and acoustic phonons, which can be omitted in this work. The third term stands for the contribution of the LO phonon scattering process to the homogeneous spectral broadening when only one single LO phonon mode is considered, resulting from the temperature-induced lattice vibration. ℏω represents the LO phonon energy and ΓLO is the charge-carrier-phonon coupling strength of the Fröhlich LO-phonon scattering. The last term is the inhomogeneous broadening in the presence of any fully ionized impurities with coupling strength Γimp, and Eimp is the average binding energy of impurities.59 The FWHM evolution of the PL peaks of the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 films with temperature is shown in Fig. 2f and S5f.† By fitting the curves with eqn (2), the values of the LO phonon energy and strength of the electron–LO–phonon Fröhlich coupling for the perovskite films were calculated (Table S7†). The LO phonon energy of BDASnI4 is about 57 meV, reasonable for 2D perovskites.53,55 The electron–phonon coupling strength of BDASnI4 is lower than that of (PEA)2SnI4 (545 versus 566 meV), implying that the D–J perovskite film has weaker electron–LO–phonon Fröhlich interaction that is important for exciton recombination and charge carrier transport. This is consistent with the results of the temperature dependence of the PL peak energy, and further proves that BDASnI4 has a more rigid perovskite structure stemming from the divalent organic cations.28,55
Exploring the essential electric characteristics of semiconductors has great significance in the development of optoelectronic devices. Herein, the conductivities of the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin films in the out-of-plane and in-plane directions (Table S8†) were roughly evaluated from the current–voltage curves of the vertical and lateral two-terminal devices, as shown in Fig. S8a and b.† The anisotropy of the conductivity is observed in the perovskite films as a consequence of a 2D layered structure. The insulating properties of the BDA2+ and PEA+ layers coupled with the quantum well effect make the values of the out-of-plane conductivity (10−6 Scm−1) of the two films two orders of magnitude lower than the in-plane ones. However, the out-of-plane conductivity of the BDASnI4 film is 9.9 × 10−6 Scm−1, about three times that of the (PEA)2SnI4 film. As the schematic diagrams of the geometrical structures in Fig. 3a show, the elimination of the van der Waals gap in the D–J perovskite results in increased out-of-plane charge transport and conductivity due to the stronger interlayer electronic coupling through the apical I–I interactions. Besides, to clearly clarify the issue of the ion migration in the perovskite films, dual-sweep current–voltage curves are plotted in semi-log coordinates (Fig. S8c and d†). In the vertical devices, the forward and reverse currents are identically equal, which unravels that the out-of-plane ion migration in the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 films is suppressed by the bulky organic layers. In contrast, the reverse current in the lateral devices is not completely overlapped with the forward current, suggesting the presence of in-plane ion migration in the two perovskite films. The detailed interpretation of the influence of the in-plane ion migration on the dual-sweep current–voltage characteristics of the devices is given in Fig. S8e.†
 Fig. 3  Comparison of the charge transport and device performance of BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. (a) Schematic diagram of the device structure for the perovskite FETs and the geometrical structures of the perovskites showing the elimination of the van der Waals gap and enhancement of the out-of-plane charge transport in BDASnI4. (b) Output and (c) transfer characteristics of BDASnI4 FETs. (d) Output and (e) transfer characteristics of (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. The BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin films were spin coated at 4000 rpm. (f) Schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms for the perovskite FETs. F is the applied gate electric field. 
A significant disadvantage of organic–inorganic perovskites is the sensitivity to ambient conditions, which leads to the decomposition of the materials to a certain extent. We compared the environmental and thermal stability of the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin films by monitoring the changes in the UV-absorption and PL spectra as well as the currents of the lateral two-terminal perovskite thin film devices. The absorption and PL spectra of the two unencapsulated films recorded in air at different time intervals are shown in Fig. S9.† It is apparent that the BDASnI4 film displays significantly less reduction in both the absorption and PL intensities after 4 and 2 days, respectively, demonstrating that BDASnI4 has better environmental stability. This is due to the fact that the diammonium BDA2+ cations eliminate the van der Waals gap by hydrogen bonding with the adjacent inorganic frameworks (Fig. 3a) that can restrict the thermal motions of the Sn2+ and BDA2+ cations and intrinsically stabilize the 2D perovskite structure,26,28 and therefore, restrain the oxidation of Sn2+.29 Fig. S10a–c† exhibit the variation of the PL intensity of the perovskite films with temperature, at which additional thermal treatments were carried out. Taken altogether, the PL intensity of the BDASnI4 film remains almost unchanged up till 423 K, whereas that of (PEA)2SnI4 drops dramatically induced by faster film decomposition. These results confirm that the BDASnI4 film is more thermally stable. This is also due to the enhanced structural stability of the D–J perovskite, suppressing the temperature-induced decomposition of the film. In addition, the change of the lateral current with temperature in the two-terminal devices (Fig. S10d–f†) shows that the current of the BDASnI4 film decreases more slowly than that of (PEA)2SnI4 as the temperature increases. The results also prove the superior thermal resistance of the BDASnI4 film. We further evaluated the structural stability of the two perovskite films by comparing the change in the PL intensity after mechanical exfoliation using adhesive tapes. Fig. S11† illustrates the PL spectra of the films after each peeling. The intensities of both the films increase slightly after the first peeling. A very thin defective layer containing nanocrystals and amorphous regions has been found to exist on the surface of organic–inorganic perovskite films,60 which initializes the degradation of the materials and gives rise to nonradiative recombination. In our case, the first peeling removes the defective surface layers along with the nonradiative recombination centers, and consequently, the PL intensities of the perovskite films increase. Nevertheless, the two films show opposite trends of the PL intensity change upon the subsequent three peeling treatments. The intensity of the (PEA)2SnI4 film decreases considerably with the increase of the peeling times because the weak van der Waals force between the organic PEA+ layers allows more facile mechanical exfoliation,60 leading to a decrease in the film thickness that reduces the PL emission. In contrast, the PL intensity of the BDASnI4 film hardly decreases due to little change in the thickness as a result of the absence of the van der Waals gap, which creates difficulties for mechanical exfoliation. This indirectly demonstrates the enhanced structural stability of the D–J phase perovskite.
We utilized a transistor platform to study charge transport in D–J phase BDASnI4 together with that in R–P (PEA)2SnI4 for comparison. The BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin film transistors with a bottom-gate top-contact configuration (Fig. 3a) were constructed on the polymer bilayer gate dielectrics used in our previous work,61 which consisted of an underlying layer of poly(vinylalcohol) (PVA) and a top layer of cross-linked poly(4-vinylphenol) (CL-PVP). The BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin films were spin coated at the same rotation speed (4000 rpm). ITO and Au served as the gate and source/drain electrodes, respectively. The detailed fabrication procedure is described in the Experimental. Fig. S12† shows the top view at low and high magnifications and cross-sectional SEM images of the perovskite films deposited on the PVA/CL-PVP bilayers. BDASnI4 exhibits a reduced grain size (20–40 μm) and an increased thickness (179 nm) on the CL-PVP surface. The thickness of the (PEA)2SnI4 thin film becomes even bigger (249 nm). For a fair comparison, we decreased its thickness to 191 nm by preparing a (PEA)2SnI4 film at 6000 rpm, whose top-view and cross-sectional SEM images are also displayed in Fig. S12.† The output and transfer characteristics of the perovskite transistors under ambient conditions are presented in Fig. 3b–e (4000 rpm) and S13† (6000 rpm). As suggested by the UPS results, the BDASnI4 device exhibits p-type field-effect behavior in accumulation operation mode under negative gate bias. The output curves show linear and saturation regions and the source-drain current in the channel can be effectively modulated by the gate voltage, analogous to the (PEA)2SnI4 device. The working mechanisms for the transistors are illustrated in Fig. 3f, which involve the perovskite/dielectric interface and the Au electrode/perovskite interface. The ITO electrode, the dielectric bilayer, and the perovskite layer form a metal-insulator-semiconductor capacitor. Upon application of a negative gate voltage, the energy band of the perovskite bends upward and holes accumulate at the perovskite/dielectric interface, resulting in the formation of a conducting channel. On the other hand, as the energy level diagram in Fig. S8b† shows, the smaller work function of BDASnI4 can lead to ohmic contacts between the Au electrodes and the perovskite,62 beneficial to efficient charge injection/extraction. This has been verified by the good linear lateral current–voltage relationship of the BDASnI4 film in the low voltage region (Fig. S8b†). When a source-drain voltage is applied, holes are injected from the source electrode and enter into the channel in the [SnI6]4− frameworks parallel to the substrate surface, forming a hole current. The analyses of the temperature-dependent PL spectra have already disclosed that in the transport process of the perovskite films LO phonons govern the scattering of charge carriers via Fröhlich interaction. The performance parameters of the devices are calculated from the transfer curves. The parameters of the (PEA)2SnI4 FETs with the (PEA)2SnI4 films spin coated at 4000 and 6000 rpm are listed in Table S9,† and those of the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 transistors with the perovskite films prepared at 4000 rpm are summarized in Table 1. The average hole mobilities for the (PEA)2SnI4 devices at 4000 and 6000 rpm are 0.32 and 0.30 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. This indicates that reducing the thickness of the (PEA)2SnI4 film from 249 to 191 nm has little influence on the mobility, which shows more dependence on the morphology of the perovskite thin films (Fig. S12†) and the perovskite/dielectric interface. As compared to the (PEA)2SnI4 devices, a relatively high average hole mobility of 0.48 cm2 V−1 s−1 has been achieved in the BDASnI4 devices. The champion BDASnI4 FET exhibits enhanced overall high performance with a hole mobility of 0.58 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an on-to-off current ratio of 1.9 × 104. The results are undoubtedly due to the excellent charge transport properties, in particular, the improved out-of-plane hole transport of the D–J perovskite,63 which have been predicted by our calculated mobility values and proved by the conductivities of the BDASnI4 film. To the best of our knowledge, no more BDASnI4 transistors have been reported except for the preliminary devices fabricated on Si/SiO2 substrates with a lower hole mobility (Table 1) in an early patent.31 Although the mobility is smaller than the expected intrinsic value, we have achieved the best field-effect mobility in BDASnI4 films to date, which approaches that of amorphous silicon. Moreover, the BDASnI4 FET has a positive threshold voltage of 7.0 V, indicating the existence of weak hole depletion in the devices. This depletion is closely associated with the hole density induced in the perovskite channel. The larger threshold voltage and subthreshold swing (6.0 V dec−1) for the BDASnI4 device suggest that besides the different intrinsic charge transport, the quality of the BDASnI4/CL-PVP interface is not as good as that of the (PEA)2SnI4/CL-PVP interface, where (PEA)2SnI4 is more compatible with the dielectric via the strong π–π interactions between the phenethyl groups in (PEA)2SnI4 and the benzene rings in PVP.64 The maximum interface trap density that can quantitatively assess the quality of the perovskite/dielectric interface in the transistors is calculated by using eqn (S8)† and listed in Table 1. The interface trap density for the BDASnI4 device is 7.2 × 1012 cm−2 eV−1 and larger than that of the (PEA)2SnI4 transistor (6.5 × 1012 cm−2 eV−1), consistent with the result that the BDASnI4/CL-PVP interface is less compatible because of the lack of the phenethyl groups in BDASnI4.
Table 1 Performance parameters and maximum interface trap density of BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 FETs in comparison with those reported in the literature. The averaged values and standard deviations in parentheses are derived from every ten devices, respectively




Perovskite
Dielectric
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Threshold voltage (V)
On-to-off current ratio
Subthreshold swing (V dec−1)
Interface trap density (cm−2 eV−1)
Reference





a The mobility range for the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 transistors in the patent.





BDASnI4
PVA/CL-PVP
0.58 (0.48 ± 0.05)
6.99 (6.60 ± 1.09)
1.9 × 104
6.0
7.2 × 1012
This work


(PEA)2SnI4
PVA/CL-PVP
0.33 (0.32 ± 0.04)
4.60 (5.05 ± 3.73)
5.0 × 104
5.4
6.5 × 1012
This work


BDASnI4/(PEA)2SnI4
SiO2
0.06–0.25a
—
—
—
—

31





The channel current modulation by a gate voltage is a crucial factor for FETs to operate stably and reliably. We make a comparison between the device stability of the D–J BDASnI4 and R–P (PEA)2SnI4 FETs in air. The dual-sweep transfer curves in Fig. 4a and b show the hysteresis of the BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. The BDASnI4 device exhibits a more notable voltage shift of 13.1 V in the hysteresis loop. Charge traps at the semiconductor/dielectric interface and ion migration are believed to be responsible for hysteresis phenomena observed in perovskite transistors.51,65,66 As discussed above, the BDASnI4 transistor has a larger interfacial trap density due to the less compatible BDASnI4/CL-PVP interface, attributed to the larger hysteresis. At the same time, the contributions of ion motion in the in-plane direction of the BDASnI4 film to the hysteresis cannot be ruled out. Finally, the operating stability of the transistors in air including cyclic sweep and bias stress stability was studied. The transfer curves of three scan cycles in Fig. 4c and d illustrate that the source-drain current of the (PEA)2SnI4 transistor increases with the scan number, whereas the current of the BDASnI4 transistor remains almost unchanged. The mobility values (Table S10†) estimated from the transfer curves of three scan cycles also show the same tendency. These results indicate the improved environmental stability of the D–J perovskite device.29 The increased current of the (PEA)2SnI4 device is obviously caused by the oxidation of Sn2+, which enhances the hole concentration. As for the BDASnI4 transistor, the improved structural stability due to the absence of the van der Waals gap can suppress the oxidation, inducing little change in the channel current. Fig. 4e displays the variations of the source-drain currents of the two devices with time to compare the bias stress stability, which operate under continuous gate and source/drain voltages. The normalized source-drain current (ID(t)/ID(0)) of the BDASnI4 transistor decreases much more slowly. This further confirms the inhibition of the oxidation of Sn2+ by the improved structural stability in the D–J phase perovskite thin film.
 Fig. 4  Stability comparison of BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. Dual-sweep transfer curves of (a) BDASnI4 and (b) (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. The gate voltage sweeps forward from positive to negative and then reverse to positive. The voltage shift value is defined as the gate voltage difference at half maximum current. Transfer curves of three scan cycles at a 5 min step for (c) BDASnI4 and (d) (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. (e) Bias stress stability of the perovskite FETs. The perovskite thin films were spin coated at 4000 rpm. 
Conclusions
In summary, the calculated crystal structure shows that BDASnI4 has a 2D layered D–J structure with small lattice distortions, in favor of in-plane charge transport. Compared to 2D R–P perovskites, the elimination of the van der Waals gap strengthens the perovskite structure and results in high structural stability. The quantum well effect is weakened by the close adjacent [SnI6]4− layers and short apical I–I distance. Electronic structure calculations reveal that BDASnI4 is a direct bandgap semiconductor, whose CBM and VBM are predominantly dominated by the [SnI6]4− octahedra, and the strong interlayer electronic coupling through the apical I–I interactions improves the out-of-plane charge transport. The theoretically estimated in-plane electron and hole mobility values are of the order of 103 cm2 V−1. More importantly, the out-of-plane electron and hole mobilities are about 6 and 133 cm2 V−1 s−1. Comparative studies on the physical properties of BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin films reveal that the BDASnI4 films show similar fundamental optical characteristics. The absence of phase transition and the exciton binding energy in the BDASnI4 films experimentally confirm the enhanced structural stability and reduced quantum well effect anticipated by first-principles calculations. The investigations of the temperature-dependent PL spectra disclose that Fröhlich LO-phonon scattering governs the exciton recombination and charge carrier transport processes in the perovskite films at temperatures above 80 K, and further prove that BDASnI4 has a more rigid 2D structure, which is also verified by the better environmental and thermal stability of the BDASnI4 films. The out-of-plane conductivity of the BDASnI4 film is about two times higher than that of (PEA)2SnI4, originating from the improved out-of-plane transport. Finally, we have successfully demonstrated p-type high-performance BDASnI4 FETs on a PVA/CL-PVP bottom gate dielectric bilayer, which exhibit enhanced operating stability. The values of the hole mobility, threshold voltage, on-to-off current ratio, and subthreshold swing for the champion device under ambient conditions are 0.58 cm2 V−1 s−1, 7.0 V, 1.9 × 104, and 6.0 V dec−1, respectively. This is the highest field-effect mobility achieved in D–J phase perovskite thin films to date, which approaches that of amorphous silicon. Our work provides theoretical and experimental bases for developing 2D layered D–J phase perovskites for FETs and paves the way for their potential applications in flexible optoelectronics.
Experimental
Materials
1,4-Diaminobutane dihydroiodide (BDAI2, >99%) and phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI, 99%) were purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp., and N,N-dimethylmethanamide (DMF, 99.8%) and tin(II) iodide (SnI2, 99.9%) from Alfa Aesar. Propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (PGMEA, >99.5%), 4,4-(hexafluoroisopropylidene) diphthalic anhydride (HAD, >99%), triethylamine (TEA, >99%), poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA, molecular weight of 85000–124000), and poly(4-vinylphenol) (PVP, molecular weight of 25000) were supplied by Sigma Aldrich.
Synthesis of 2D layered perovskite thin films
A one-step spin-coating approach was used to prepare the perovskite thin films in a N2-filled glove box. BDAI2 and SnI2 were dissolved in DMF in a 1:1 stoichiometric molar ratio, forming the BDASnI4 precursor solution with a concentration of 0.15, 0.30, or 0.45 M. The precursor solution was spin-coated on a glass, indium tin oxide (ITO)/glass or polymer dielectric substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Subsequently, the BDASnI4 precursor film was annealed at an optimized temperature of 110 °C in nitrogen gas for 10 min to promote the crystallization of the BDASnI4 thin film. The (PEA)2SnI4 thin film was prepared from a precursor solution with a concentration of 0.30 M using a similar synthesis procedure, but the stoichiometric molar ratio between PEAI and SnI2 was 2:1 and the annealing temperature was 100 °C.
Device fabrication
The pre-cleaned ITO/glass substrate was treated with ultraviolet (UV)/ozone for 15 min. The aqueous solution of PVA and the PGMEA solution of PVP with HDA as a cross-linking agent and a catalytic amount of TEA were spin coated successively on the substrate, and then annealed at 200 °C for 1 h in a vacuum oven, forming a PVA/CL-PVP gate dielectric bilayer of about 290 nm, as reported in our previous work.61 The BDASnI4 or (PEA)2SnI4 thin film was prepared on the PVA/CL-PVP bilayer as an active layer by the above method. Finally, under vacuum of 5 × 10−6 Torr an 80 nm gold (Au) layer was evaporated on the perovskite film using a mask as the source and drain electrodes, constructing a bottom-gate top-contact 2D layered perovskite field-effect transistor (FET) with a channel length and width of 50 and 1000 μm, respectively. Additionally, a vertical or lateral two-terminal device was fabricated by depositing an Au layer with the same mask on the perovskite film spin coated on a glass substrate or by sandwiching the perovskite film between Au and ITO electrodes, respectively.
Characterization of the 2D layered perovskite thin films and devices
The morphology of the perovskite thin films was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, Shimadzu SPM-9700). The thicknesses of the perovskite films and the polymer dielectric bilayer were estimated by cross-sectional SEM. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite films were recorded with a Bruker D8 X-ray diffractometer (λ = 1.5406 Å, 40 kV, and 40 mA). A Shimadzu UV-3101PC spectrophotometer and Fluorolog (Horiba) spectrofluorometers were employed to obtain the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra and the photoluminescence (PL) spectra excited with a 405 nm continuous wave laser. The time-resolved PL (TRPL) spectra were acquired using a TCSPC measurement (FluoroCube-01-NL) under a pulsed laser excitation of 405 nm. Temperature-dependent steady-state PL measurements were performed using a liquid nitrogen cryostat system. The ultraviolet photo-electron spectrum (UPS) was obtained by using a Kratos Axis Ultra DLD spectrometer under vacuum of 3.0 × 10−8 Torr. The output and transfer properties of the perovskite transistors and the current–voltage curves of the two-terminal devices were measured using a Keithley 4200 semiconductor parameter analyzer under ambient conditions and in a N2-filled gloved box at room temperature under dark conditions, respectively.
Computational details
In order to reveal the geometric and electronic band structures of BDASnI4, first-principles calculations were performed based on density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) with projector-augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials describing the interactions between the core electrons and valence electrons,33 as reported in our previous work.32,41 The generalized gradient approximation (GGA), as implemented by Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE), was chosen as the exchange correlation functional.67 For fully describing the interactions between the organic cations and the inorganic frameworks, the van der Waals interactions were taken into account using the Grimme's zero-damping DFT-D3 approach.68 The plane wave cut-off energy was set to 500 eV for all the DFT calculations. The self-consistent calculations for ionic relaxations had a convergence requirement of 10−5 eV between two successive stages, and the maximum force of each atom was less than 0.01 eV Å−1. To build k-point meshes, the first Brillouin zone was sampled using a gamma-centered method. A quasi-three-dimensional k-point grid of 17 × 17 × 11, rather than the two-dimensional ones for 2D layered R–P perovskites with the van der Waals gap,23,38,40,41 was generated automatically for BDASnI4 in the structural optimization. To find the crystal structure of BDASnI4 with the lowest energy, initial structures with different orientations of the organic molecules were used. GGA-PBE exchange correlation functional calculations often lead to the underestimation of the bandgap of semiconductors partially because the self-interaction error increases the valence band maximum (VBM).47,68 To correct the bandgap underestimation we calculated the electronic band structure of BDASnI4 using the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof of hybrid functional incorporating 43 percent Hartree–Fock exact exchange (HSE43).7 Owing to the relativistic effect of the heavy element Sn, the spin–orbit coupling (SOC) effect is strong in Sn-based perovskites.35,36 Consequently, in this work, SOC was combined with HSE43 to provide a relatively accurate description of the bandgap, which has succeeded in theoretical studies on many bismuth- and lead-containing perovskites.30,32
Author contributions
H. Ji: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, writing – original draft, and writing – review & editing. X. Liu: investigation, methodology, and software. L. Li, F. Zhang, L. Qin, Y. Hu and Y. Hou: investigation and methodology. D. Li: first-principles calculations. Z. Lou and F. Teng: supervision and writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 62075009), National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2022YFB3606500), and NSFC (No. 62205013, 62275013, 62234004, and 12274020).
References
S. Jana, E. Carlos, S. Panigrahi, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 14790–14797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, P. Guo, N. Zhou, T. J. Marks, R. P. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11445–11452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liu, H. Zhu, S. Bai, Y. Reo, T. Zou, M.-G. Kim and Y.-Y. Noh, Nat. Electron., 2022, 5, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shao, W. Talsma, M. Pitaro, J. Dong, S. Kahmann, A. J. Rommens, G. Portale and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008478 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Kuai, X. Li, J. Hao, L. Li, Y. Liu, X. Ma, L. Wu and P. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 15742–15750 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, A. Liu, K. I. Shim, J. Hong, J. W. Han and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2002717 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, A. M. Ganose, C. Niu and D. O. Scanlon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5652–5660 RSC .
M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, S. Peeters, P. C. Wang, K. M. Felter and F. C. Grozema, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2020, 103, e2000121 CrossRef .
I. Chung, J. H. Song, J. Im, J. Androulakis, C. D. Malliakas, H. Li, A. J. Freeman, J. T. Kenney and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8579–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, W. Ke, L. Pedesseau, Y. Wu, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3775–3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 4, 4–22 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1571–1572 CrossRef CAS .
M. Safdari, P. H. Svensson, M. T. Hoang, I. Oh, L. Kloo and J. M. Gardner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15638–15646 RSC .
W. Guo, Z. Yang, J. Dang and M. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106129 CrossRef CAS .
T. Niu, H. Ren, B. Wu, Y. Xia, X. Xie, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Chen and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2349–2356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xiao, Q. Sun, S. Wang, L. Ji, Y. Li, S. Xi, B. B. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Jie and Y. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 1187–1193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. K. Ono, G. Tong, H. Zhang and Y. Qi, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 908–914 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, L. Wang, J. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Zhang, H. Sun, J. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Hu and C. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2005662 CrossRef .
H. Shen, J. Li, H. Wang, J. Ma, J. Wang, H. Luo and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 7–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matsushima, S. Hwang, A. S. Sandanayaka, C. Qin, S. Terakawa, T. Fujihara, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10275–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, K. Chondroudis and C. R. Kagan, IBM J. Res. Dev., 2001, 45, 29–45 CAS .
C. Chen, X. Zhang, G. Wu, H. Li and H. Chen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600539 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, Z. Wei, P. Yoo, E. Shi, M. Zeller, C. Zhu, P. Liao and L. Dou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15577–15585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liang, Y. Gao, R. Asadpour, Z. Wei, B. P. Finkenauer, L. Jin, J. Yang, K. Wang, K. Chen, P. Liao, C. Zhu, L. Huang, B. W. Boudouris, M. A. Alam and L. Dou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 15215–15223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, J. Zhang, S. Jo, M. Qin, Z. Li, T. Liu, X. Lu, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Small Methods, 2019, 4, 1900831 CrossRef .
S. Ahmad, P. Fu, S. Yu, Q. Yang, X. Liu, X. Wang, X. Wang, X. Guo and C. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 794–806 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, D. Shen, T. W. Ng, M. F. Lo and C. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800710 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ghosh, D. Acharya, L. Pedesseau, C. Katan, J. Even, S. Tretiak and A. J. Neukirch, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22009–22022 RSC .
P. Li, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Liang, G. Chen, F. Li, M. Su, G. Xing, X. Tao and Y. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2020, 59, 2–8 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, M. Chen and S. F. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3670–3675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Chondroudis, C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, C. R. Kagan, I. Kymissis and D. B. Mitzi, US Pat., 6180956,  2001 Search PubMed .
W. Zhou, H. Tang, D. Li, D. Zhang, H. Zhang, A. Yang and C. Liang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 856, 157391 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Umari, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4467 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Im, C. C. Stoumpos, H. Jin, A. J. Freeman and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. B. Federico Brivio and A. Walsh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 155204 CrossRef .
X. Li, W. Ke, B. Traore, P. Guo, I. Hadar, M. Kepenekian, J. Even, C. Katan, C. C. Stoumpos, R. D. Schaller and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12880–12890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, H. Ji, L. Li, F. Zhang, J. Guo, L. Qin, Z. Lou, D. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Hou and F. Teng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 50401 CAS .
W. Peng, J. Yin, K. T. Ho, O. Ouellette, M. De Bastiani, B. Murali, O. El Tall, C. Shen, X. Miao, J. Pan, E. Alarousu, J. H. He, B. S. Ooi, O. F. Mohammed, E. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4759–4767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dyksik, H. Duim, X. Zhu, Z. Yang, M. Gen, Y. Kohama, S. Adjokatse, D. K. Maude, M. A. Loi, D. A. Egger, M. Baranowski and P. Plochocka, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3609–3616 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, D. Li, B. Liu, Y. Ma, W. Zhou, D. Zhang, H. Tang, A. Yang and C. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 6796–6810 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Wu, Y.-Q. Zhao, C.-W. Chen, L.-Z. Wang, B. Liu and M.-Q. Cai, Chin. Phys. B, 2016, 25, 107202 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, F. Wang, B. Zhao, S. Qu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, L. Sui, K. Yuan, J. Zhang, Z. Wei and Z. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1120–1127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yangui, S. Pillet, A. Mlayah, A. Lusson, G. Bouchez, S. Triki, Y. Abid and K. Boukheddaden, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 143, 224201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Wu, K. Wang and B. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801628 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ren, X. Yang, L. Zhou, J. Y. Mao, S. T. Han and Y. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902105 CrossRef .
P. P. Sun, Q. S. Li, L. N. Yang and Z. S. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1503–1512 RSC .
S. Y. Smolin, M. D. Scafetta, G. W. Guglietta, J. B. Baxter and S. J. May, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 022103 CrossRef .

          S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices,  2007 Search PubMed .
Y. Jiang, M. Cui, S. Li, C. Sun, Y. Huang, J. Wei, L. Zhang, M. Lv, C. Qin, Y. Liu and M. Yuan, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Shen, W. Li, S. Wang, J. Li and D. Li, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802019 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Ma, W. Li, J. Wang, H. Wang, H. Shen, J. Li, J. Wang, H. Luo and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2546–2553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ni, U. Huynh, A. Cheminal, T. H. Thomas, R. Shivanna, T. F. Hinrichsen, S. Ahmad, A. Sadhanala and A. Rao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10834–10843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, C. A. Feild, W. T. A. Harrison and A. M. Guloy, Nature, 1994, 369, 467 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, C. Zhou, X. Feng, N. Dong, H. Chen, X. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Lin and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bhosale, A. K. Ramdas, A. Burger, A. Muñoz, A. H. Romero, M. Cardona, R. Lauck and R. K. Kremer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 195208 CrossRef .
S. Rudin, T. L. Reinecke and B. Segall, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 11218–11231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Ke Wei, R. Chen, X. Zheng, X. Cheng and T. Jiang, Opt. Lett., 2016, 41, 3821 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D. Wright, C. Verdi, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, M. A. Perez-Osorio, H. J. Snaith, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11755 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Xiao, Z. Yu, Y. Deng, X. Dai, Z. Ni and J. Huang, Joule, 2020, 4, 2661–2674 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Zhu, L. Qin, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Lou, Y. Hou and F. Teng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4004–4012 RSC .
C. H. Lin, L. Hu, X. Guan, J. Kim, C. Y. Huang, J. K. Huang, S. Singh and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2108616 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, M. S. R. Huang, S. K. Yadavalli, J. D. Lizarazo Ferro, Y. Zhou, A. Zaslavsky, N. P. Padture and R. Zia, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 2375–2380 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Li, T. P. Chen, Y. F. Lin, C. M. Raghavan, W. L. Chen, S. H. Yang, R. Sankar, C. W. Luo, Y. M. Chang and C. W. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, e1803763 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Senanayak, A. J. Mojtaba, V. S. Kamboj, R. Carey, R. Shivanna, T. Tian, G. Schweicher, J. Wang, N. Giesbrecht, D. Di Nuzzo, H. E. Beere, P. Docampo, D. A. Ritchie, D. Fairen-Jimenez, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz4948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Burke, J. P. Perdew and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 154104 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ta00084bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Crystal structure, electronic structure, and morphology of BDASnI4. (a) Optimized crystal structure. (b) Electronic band structure calculated using the HSE43 + SOC functional. (c) DOS calculated using the PBE functional. (d) SEM image, (e) AFM image, and (f) XRD spectrum of BDASnI4 thin films prepared on ITO/glass substrates at a precursor solution concentration of 0.3 M.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optical properties and electron–phonon interaction of BDASnI4 thin films. (a) Room-temperature UV-vis absorption and PL spectra and (b) temperature-dependent PL spectra. (c) Pseudo-color map of the temperature-dependent PL spectra. (d) Integrated PL intensity as a function of the inverse of temperature. (e) Evolution of the PL peak energy (bandgap) with temperature. The calculated individual contributions from the thermal expansion and electron–phonon interaction are depicted by the dashed lines. (f) Evolution of the FWHM of the PL peak with temperature.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of the charge transport and device performance of BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. (a) Schematic diagram of the device structure for the perovskite FETs and the geometrical structures of the perovskites showing the elimination of the van der Waals gap and enhancement of the out-of-plane charge transport in BDASnI4. (b) Output and (c) transfer characteristics of BDASnI4 FETs. (d) Output and (e) transfer characteristics of (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. The BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 thin films were spin coated at 4000 rpm. (f) Schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms for the perovskite FETs. F is the applied gate electric field.	 


BDASnI4	PVA/CL-PVP	0.58 (0.48 ± 0.05)	6.99 (6.60 ± 1.09)	1.9 × 104	6.0	7.2 × 1012	This work
(PEA)2SnI4	PVA/CL-PVP	0.33 (0.32 ± 0.04)	4.60 (5.05 ± 3.73)	5.0 × 104	5.4	6.5 × 1012	This work
BDASnI4/(PEA)2SnI4	SiO2	0.06–0.25a	—	—	—	—	
31


 	Fig. 4  Stability comparison of BDASnI4 and (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. Dual-sweep transfer curves of (a) BDASnI4 and (b) (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. The gate voltage sweeps forward from positive to negative and then reverse to positive. The voltage shift value is defined as the gate voltage difference at half maximum current. Transfer curves of three scan cycles at a 5 min step for (c) BDASnI4 and (d) (PEA)2SnI4 FETs. (e) Bias stress stability of the perovskite FETs. The perovskite thin films were spin coated at 4000 rpm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ta00084b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
