Deep level trapped defect analysis in CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 perovskite solar cells by deep level transient spectroscopy   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE00303J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE00303J
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1128-1133Deep level trapped defect analysis in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells by deep level transient spectroscopy†

        
          
            Sung 
            Heo‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Gabseok 
            Seo‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Yonghui 
            Lee
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dongwook 
            Lee
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Minsu 
            Seol
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jooho 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jong-Bong 
            Park
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kihong 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dong-Jin 
            Yun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yong Su 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jai Kwang 
            Shin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tae Kyu 
            Ahn
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Mohammad Khaja 
            Nazeeruddin
          
        
      *c
aPlatform Technology Lab, Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, 130, Samsung-ro, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do 16678, Korea
bDepartment of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066 Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon, 16419, Korea. E-mail: taeahn@skku.edu
cGroup for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, EPFL Valais Wallis, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch
dDevice Laboratory, Device and System Research Center, Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Samsung Electronics, 130 Samsung-ro, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do 16678, Korea. E-mail: dl324.lee@samsung.com
Received 
      31st January 2017
    , Accepted 24th February 2017First published on 24th February 2017AbstractWe report the presence of defects in CH3NH3PbI3, which is one of the main factors that deteriorates the performance of perovskite solar cells. Although the efficiency of the perovskite solar cells has been improved by curing defects using various methods, deeply trapped defects in the perovskite layer have not been systematically studied, and their function is still unclear. The comparison and analysis of defects in differently prepared perovskite solar cells reveals that both solar cells have two kinds of deep level defects (E1 and E2). In the one-pot solution processed solar cell, the defect state E1 is dominant, while E2 is the major defect in the solar cell prepared using the cuboid method. Since the energy level of E1 is higher than that of E2, the cuboid solar cell shows higher open-circuit voltage and efficiency.

Broader context
Organohalide perovskites have recently brought about technological innovation in the field of photovoltaics. The research on perovskite solar cells has been focused on enhancing power conversion efficiency by controlling morphological properties and compositional engineering of perovskite layers and new deposition methods. Unlike Si-based cells, which are fabricated via a well-controlled semiconducting manufacturing process, perovskite solar cells are produced via a solution-based method. Thus, a lot of defects are generated during fabrication processes, which are the main factors that affect the efficiency and reproducibility. They can create mid-gap states in a band structure and also participate in carrier recombination. Controlling defect formation and concentration is paramount for achieving reproducible high efficiency. Therefore, here we prepare perovskite solar cells using two different methods (one step and two-step deposition) and carried out deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) experiments using both the samples. Our results indicate the existence of deep level defects. The one-step prepared solar cell has much more defects than the two-step deposited perovskite solar cell. And it is also explained using the DLTS data why the two-step prepared solar cell shows a difference between the efficiency of the solar cell and the open-circuit voltage (VOC). Our data based on the DLTS experiments demonstrate the existence of deep level defects using both methods; however, the one-step recipe produces fewer defects compared to the two-step recipe.

Introduction
Solution processed perovskite solar cells have recently achieved outstanding performances with power conversion efficiency exceeding 22%.1 This high conversion efficiency, together with the low processing temperature,2–6 makes them ideal candidates for the development of low-cost solar cells. The significantly improved power conversion efficiency is due to their unusual features such as long diffusion lengths7–9 and ambipolar charge carrier transport.10–13 Despite the remarkable progress, analysis of the pathway of carriers and defects in perovskite solar cells has not been systematically carried out. Although intrinsic defects in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite are known to create shallow levels,14 the electrical properties of CH3NH3PbI3 can be changed by self-doping.15 Here we examine defects in perovskite solar cells prepared via two different techniques, one-pot synthesis (one-pot) and the cuboid method,16 using deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS). Comparing their deep level trapped defect densities would pave the way for understanding the pathway for photo-excited carriers and enhancing further the efficiency and reproducibility.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows a schematic of a perovskite solar cell: fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass/compact TiO2/mp-TiO2/spiro-OMeTAD/gold (Au) electrode. The corresponding energy level diagram is depicted in Fig. 1b. For comparison, we formed the perovskite layers via two different methods, which may result in different structural conditions of the perovskite film. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) top views of the perovskite layers just after post-drying are shown in Fig. 1c and d. In the one-pot process, an organic–inorganic compound is dissolved in a solvent and is filmed by spin-coating on a substrate. The surface of the perovskite layer is rather flat in spite of poor film formation caused by fast evaporation of the solvent.17 Unlike the one-pot process, a bilayer film of organic–inorganic component is formed first by depositing PbI2 and followed by the reaction with CH3NH3I (MAI) in the cuboid process. Since the perovskite crystal is grown slowly in isopropanol, the top surface of the layer is relatively rough with fewer pores.13,18,19
 Fig. 1  Perovskite solar cells with different deposition methods. (a) Schematic of the device structure. (b) Energy level diagram for the device. SEM top-view images of the films prepared via (c) one-pot and (d) cuboid methods. TEM cross-sectional images of the complete devices prepared via (e) one-pot and (f) cuboid methods. Difference of internal voids is compared in the magnified images. 
Distinct X-ray diffraction peaks shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†) demonstrate that both perovskite layers have high crystallinity of the perovskite phase with a minor phase of PbI2.18 We made perovskite solar cells with two different films. From the J–V curve measurements, the solar cell efficiency of the one-pot process is 13.5%, as shown in Fig. S2a (ESI†), while the cell prepared using the cuboid process has an efficiency of 17.66%, as displayed in Fig. S2b (ESI†). Although the one-pot prepared solar cell has a smoother surface of perovskite layer than the cuboid cell, it has lower open-circuit voltage (VOC) and efficiency than the cuboid solar cell. Fig. 1e and f demonstrate transmission electron microscopy (TEM) cross-sectional images of the complete devices. Focused ion beam (FIB) was employed to prepare high-quality surfaces of the samples. Low-magnification TEM images clearly display structural differences between the cells prepared using the one-pot (Fig. 1e) and cuboid (Fig. 1f) methods. Through the magnified images, we found that the one-pot cell has many macro/micropores inside the TiO2-perovskite layer, while most of the pores are filled with perovskite for the cuboid device. This is in good agreement with previous studies.19–21 And such a structural imperfection is thought to be one of the main reasons for efficiency loss. The defect caused by the compositional charge generated during the deposition of the perovskite layer is another issue for the device efficiency.22
To identify intrinsic point defects in the perovskite capping layer, energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis was performed in two ways (reverse and forward) with full cells, TEM cross-sections of which are displayed in Fig. 1e and f. The results are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). In the region denoted by “1” in Fig. 1e, the ratios of I/Pb and I/C are 1.97 and 1.04, respectively. When the forward bias was applied (region 2), the ratios of I/Pb and I/C are 1.88 and 1.09, respectively. In region “3” in Fig. 1f, the ratios of I/Pb and I/C are 1.99 and 1.06, while the ratios are 1.84 and 3.60, respectively in region “4”. By comparing the values in the two modes (reverse and forward), it was deduced that the intrinsic defects (I atoms at Pb sites, IPb) are dominant in the one-pot sample, while I atoms at CH3NH3 (MA) sites (IMA) are prevalent in the cuboid sample.
The band structures of the perovskite solar cells were investigated by reflection electron energy loss spectroscopy (REELS) and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). The band gaps of HTM, TiO2, and the perovskite are extracted from the REELS data and are displayed in Fig. 2a–c. The values are 3.36 eV (HTM), 3.46 eV (TiO2), 1.62 eV (perovskite, one-pot), and 1.65 eV (perovskite, cuboid). The valence band spectra of the perovskite layers are displayed in Fig. 2d. The valence band offsets of the perovskite layers were extracted: 0.82 eV (one-pot) and 0.83 eV (cuboid). With the extracted bandgaps and valence band offset values, the bands of the perovskite solar cells were aligned and are illustrated in Fig. 2e and f. The Fermi level in the one-pot sample lies near the valence band in Fig. 2e, revealing that the perovskite layer is p-type. Although the Fermi level of the cuboid sample is in the middle of the bandgap, it is also p-type. The REELS and XPS results demonstrate that the samples prepared using one-pot and cuboid processes are electrically the same.
 Fig. 2  Band structures of the perovskite cells. Reflection electron energy loss spectroscopy (REELS) spectra of (a) HTM, (b) TiO2, and (c) the perovskite layers. (d) X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of the perovskite layers. Schematic of the energy diagram for each perovskite solar cell: (e) one-pot and (f) cuboid. 
The energy levels of the defect states in the perovskite layers were investigated by DLTS. In performing DLTS, the depletion region in a sample increases with increasing bias voltage. Defects at various depths can be investigated by varying the bias voltage, leading to differentiating defect states in a sample. Fig. 3a shows the DLTS measurement setup. Voltage pulses (VD) are applied to the solar cells while the current density (JD) is measured for both samples. Fig. 3b shows the capacitance measurements of both samples. The cuboid sample has a higher carrier density than the one-pot sample. The ratio of defect density to carrier density is 0.072 and 0.014 for the one-pot and cuboid samples, respectively. The carrier concentration profiles from C–V measurements are shown in Fig. 3c. Carriers in the one-pot sample are rather uniformly distributed throughout the perovskite layer, while most of the carriers are distributed in the middle of the perovskite layer in the cuboid sample. Because the cuboid sample has a higher carrier density (6.7 × 1016 cm−3) than the one-pot sample (1.8 × 1016 cm−3) and has a lower defect density than the one-pot sample according to the DLTS results, the cuboid sample may show higher efficiency. In Fig. 3d, the one-pot sample has one dominant defect state at 400 K in the reverse region, E2. However, in the forward direction, E2 disappears and the E1 peak grows distinctly. Since E1 is too big and strong, it seems that the other states are not present in the sample. As for the cuboid sample shown in Fig. 3e, there is one peak in the reverse direction. However, with the forward bias voltage, two peaks are clearly visible, E1 and E2. The defect parameters of both samples investigated by DLTS are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). The defect density of E1 in the one-pot sample is in the order of 1.3 × 1015 cm−3 in the forward bias, while the cuboid sample has a defect density of E2 in the order of 9.5 × 1014 cm−3 in the forward bias, implying that the one-pot sample has more defects than the cuboid sample and their dominant defect states are different. Since the one-pot sample has a higher ratio of defect density to carrier density than the cuboid sample, it is more prone to be influenced by interface defects than the cuboid sample.
 Fig. 3  Defect levels of the perovskite cells. (a) Schematic of the DLTS measurement setup. (b) Capacitance–voltage measurements of one-pot and cuboid samples. (c) Carrier concentration as a function of the depth determined by capacitance–voltage measurements for one-pot and cuboid samples. (d) DLTS spectra with various bias voltages for the one-pot sample. (e) DLTS spectra with various bias voltages for the cuboid sample. 
In the preparation of the perovskite solar cell via the one-pot process, a mixed solution of PbI2 and MAI was spin-coated on a substrate. As a result, methyl ammonium (MA) molecules are rich in the sample, while PbI2 is rich at the interface between the perovskite layer and TiO2 in the cuboid sample because each layer was spin coated separately. The one-pot sample has a higher defect density at E1 (0.62 eV), while the cuboid has a higher defect density at E2 (0.76 eV). The energy level of the E2 defect state is deeper placed in the bandgap than that of E1.
According to Yin et al.,23 the intrinsic point defect of iodine, such as I atoms at Pb sites, has relatively high formation energy. The energy state of IPb lies ca. −0.60 eV below the conduction band minimum, while IMA is located ca. −0.75 eV below the minimum. Thus, the defect states E1 and E2 can be correlated with intrinsic point defects IPb and IMA, i.e. E1 is formed by I atoms at Pb sites and E2 is formed by I atoms at the MA position. As mentioned before, defects can be the main source of the increase in carrier recombination and interface resistance. There are two kinds of defect states (E1 and E2) in each perovskite solar cell. The E1 state is dominant in the solar cell prepared using the one-pot method, while the E2 state is the main defect in the solar cell prepared using the cuboid process.
Although TiO2 and the perovskite layer have the same Fermi level at equilibrium, their Fermi level changes after electrons move to TiO2 and holes move to an Au electrode under illumination, i.e. the electron quasi-Fermi level shifted upward in TiO2 while the hole quasi-Fermi level moved downward in the perovskite layer. The difference between the newly formed quasi-Fermi levels is equivalent to the VOC of the solar cell.
Since the one-pot sample has the higher ratio of defect density to carrier concentration, the electron quasi-Fermi level of the TiO2 layer would be more likely to be pinned near the defect state E1. This is because the Fermi level is pinned at the semiconductor/oxide interface. In semiconductor compounds, the pinning of the Fermi-level is a common phenomenon and is influenced by interface formation, defects, and so on.24–26
However, the cuboid sample is less likely to have an electron quasi-Fermi level pinned near the defect state E2 due to the lower ratio of defect density to carrier concentration. Therefore, both samples might have different electron quasi-Fermi levels.
Since the difference between the Fermi levels of TiO2 and the perovskite under illumination is the VOC of the solar cell, the cuboid solar cell with the Fermi level pinned near the defect state E2 has a higher VOC than the one-pot processed solar cell if the ratio of defect density to carrier concentration is considered. Considering the contact between TiO2 and a perovskite layer, photo-induced electrons in the perovskite layer could easily move into TiO2 along the band bending, avoiding recombination with holes. Although the increase of VOC by the Fermi level pinning increases the efficiency of the solar cell, the short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) play a role in enhancing the efficiency in the cuboid sample.
Lastly, the energy states of both samples are displayed in Fig. 4a and b. The Fermi level of FTO is located at 4.67 eV below the vacuum level. The work function of TiO2 lies 4.48 eV below the vacuum level and the perovskite layers are placed at 4.99 eV (one-pot) and 4.89 eV (cuboid). Since the one-pot perovskite finds a deep trap with an activation energy, it has more E1 defects (ΔEr = 0.62 eV, NT = 1.3 × 1015 cm−3) than the E2 ones (ΔEr = 0.75 eV, NT = 3.9 × 1014 cm−3) and the Fermi level of the perovskite layer lies close to E1 (ΔEr = 0.62 eV, NT = 8.0 × 1013 cm−3), while the Fermi level of the perovskite layer in the cuboid lies close to the E2 state (ΔEr = 0.76 eV, NT = 9.5 × 1014 cm−3). The VOC value is related to the difference between the Fermi levels of TiO2 and the perovskite layer under illumination. Thus, the cuboid sample has a higher value than the one-pot sample.
 Fig. 4  Difference of energy levels at open-circuit. Work function levels, Fermi levels of TiO2 and the perovskite solar cells prepared via (a) one-pot and (b) cuboid methods. 
Conclusions
Defect states and densities of perovskite solar cells were investigated by deep level transient spectroscopy. The cuboid sample with fewer defects shows higher efficiency than the one-pot sample with greater defects. Defects at the interface between TiO2 and the perovskite layer hamper charge separation and accelerate charge recombination, which deteriorates the efficiency. In addition to the decline in efficiency, the defect state levels cause the Fermi level to be pinned near the defect levels. Since the one-pot sample has higher defect states (E1) inside the band structure, the difference in the Fermi levels between TiO2 and the perovskite is small, while the difference is slightly greater in the cuboid sample.
Experimental section
One-pot deposition perovskite film preparation
The product, methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I), was dissolved in ethanol, recrystallized from diethyl ether, and dried at 60 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 h and then the synthesized CH3NH3I powder was mixed with PbI2 (Aldrich) at a 1:1 molar ratio in γ-butyrolactone (GBL) at 60 °C for 12 h. The concentration of CH3NH3PbI3 was 40 wt%.1 The CH3NH3PbI3/γ-butyrolactone solution was then coated onto the FTO/compact-TiO2/mp-TiO2 substrate by spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 60 s and then at 3000 rpm for 60 s and dried on a hot plate at 100 °C for 2 min. The total preparation process is according to a reported procedure.2
Cuboid deposition perovskite film preparation
PbI2 was dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide at a concentration of 462 mg ml−1 (∼1 M) under stirring at 70 °C. The solution was kept at 70 °C during the whole procedure. The PbI2 solution was spin-coated on the mesoporous TiO2 films at 3000 rpm for 5 s and 6000 rpm for 5 s. After the spin-coating process, the film was dried at 40 °C for 3 min and then at 100 °C for 5 min. After cooling to room temperature, a CH3NH3I solution in 2-propanol was coated on PbI2 by spin-coating and it was dried at 100 °C for 5 min. The total preparation process is according to a reported procedure.16
Solar cell fabrication
The HTM was then deposited by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The HTM was deposited by spin-coating a solution of spiro-OMeTAD, 4-tert-butylpyridine, lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide and tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III) bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide. The Au counter-electrode was deposited by thermal evaporation.
Device characterization
The current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a solar simulator (Newport, Oriel 3A Class AAA, 64023A) equipped with a 450 W xenon lamp (Newport 6279NS) and a potentiostat (CHI 600D, CH Instruments). The light intensity was adjusted using a standard Si-reference cell (Oriel, VLSI standards; 1 Sun is equivalent to 100 mA cm−2). The J–V curves of all the devices were measured by masking the active area with a metal mask of area 0.096 cm2.
The chemical states were characterized using commercial XPS equipment (Quantum 2000 system) with an Al kα X-ray source (hν: 1486.6 eV) and a hemispherical electron analyzer. The resulting XPS results provide the average chemical information on a spatial area of 100 μm diameter and a depth of 5–10 nm.
The UPS measurements were performed on a home-made photoemission spectroscopy system, which consists of an ultraviolet source (VUV 5000) and an electron analyzer (SES-100) in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber. The He II source of 40.8 eV, controlled using a monochromator, enables precise electronic structures to be obtained from the UPS spectra.
Focused ion beam (FIB; Helios F1, FEI, Co.) among the various cross-sectional specimen preparation methods was carried out to investigate structural and elemental changes. Microstructure analyses of the cross-sectioned perovskite film were performed using a transmission electron microscope (TEM, Titan 80-200ST, FEI) equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer and a scanning TEM (STEM) unit.
XRD data were collected using a Panalytical X'Pert diffractometer with Cu Kα irradiation at 40 keV and 40 mA. The experimental conditions were continuous 2θ scan mode with grazing incidence, 10–60° 2θ range, 0.02° step size, and 1.0 s collection time for each data point.
The REELS was measured using an Auger electron spectroscope (AES; PHI 4700 system) with a concentric hemispherical analyzer (CHA). The primary energy of electrons for the AES measurements was 1.5 keV and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the elastic peaks of 1.5 keV was 0.8 eV.
DLTS measurements were performed using a PhysTech FT 1030 DLTS system (see the ESI† for details). The capacitance was measured using a modified Boonton 72B capacitance meter with a 1 MHz capacitance meter. Temperature scans were made between 20 and 430 K, at a heating rate of 2 K min−1. The samples were placed in the liquid helium cryostat. The pulse height, filling pulse width, and pulse period width were 0.4 V, 10 ms, and 10 ms, respectively. Here, the reverse bias is −0.8 V to −0.4 V, and the forward bias is 0.4 V to 0.8 V, respectively. The activation energy, capture cross-section, and concentration of traps were calculated using an Arrhenius plot.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Research Council of Science and Technology (NST) through Degree and Research Center (DRC) Program (2015). Y. L. and M. K. N. acknowledge funding from the European Commission H2020-ICT-2014-1, SOLEDLIGHT project, grant agreement no: 643791 and the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI).
References
Best Research Cell Efficiency (NREL), http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, accessed Oct, 2016.
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. M. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T. Song, C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tao, S. Neutzner, L. Colella, S. Marras, A. R. Srimath Kandada, M. gandini, M. De Bastiani, G. Pace, L. Manna, M. Caironi, C. Bertarelli and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2365–2370 CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gonzalez-Pedro, E. J. Juarez-Perez, W. S. Arsyad, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 888–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Peng, D. Su, X. Chen and Z. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4471–4475 CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, H. Xie, L. Lyu, X. Liu, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 163508 CrossRef .
J. H. Im, I. H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, H. Zhang, S. Zhang, L. Zhu, H. Su, J. Liu, K. S. Wong, L. Liao and W. Choy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14424–14430 CAS .
Y. H. Lee, J. Luo, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3925–3933 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Im, H. S. Kim and N. G. Park, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081510 CrossRef .
N. Yantara, D. Sabba, F. Yanan, J. M. Kadro, T. Moehl, P. P. Boix, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and C. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4603–4606 RSC .
J. Cao, F. Wang, H. Yu, Y. Zhou, H. Lu, N. Zhao and C. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10223–10230 CAS .
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, V. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu and J. J. Berry, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Dharmadasa, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2009, 24, 055016 CrossRef .
D. Colleoni, G. Miceli and A. Pasquarello, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 125304 CrossRef .
V. N. Brudnyi, S. N. Grinyaev and N. G. Kolin, Russ. Phys. J., 2003, 46, 594–600 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee00303j‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
Organohalide perovskites have recently brought about technological innovation in the field of photovoltaics. The research on perovskite solar cells has been focused on enhancing power conversion efficiency by controlling morphological properties and compositional engineering of perovskite layers and new deposition methods. Unlike Si-based cells, which are fabricated via a well-controlled semiconducting manufacturing process, perovskite solar cells are produced via a solution-based method. Thus, a lot of defects are generated during fabrication processes, which are the main factors that affect the efficiency and reproducibility. They can create mid-gap states in a band structure and also participate in carrier recombination. Controlling defect formation and concentration is paramount for achieving reproducible high efficiency. Therefore, here we prepare perovskite solar cells using two different methods (one step and two-step deposition) and carried out deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) experiments using both the samples. Our results indicate the existence of deep level defects. The one-step prepared solar cell has much more defects than the two-step deposited perovskite solar cell. And it is also explained using the DLTS data why the two-step prepared solar cell shows a difference between the efficiency of the solar cell and the open-circuit voltage (VOC). Our data based on the DLTS experiments demonstrate the existence of deep level defects using both methods; however, the one-step recipe produces fewer defects compared to the two-step recipe.


 	Fig. 1  Perovskite solar cells with different deposition methods. (a) Schematic of the device structure. (b) Energy level diagram for the device. SEM top-view images of the films prepared via (c) one-pot and (d) cuboid methods. TEM cross-sectional images of the complete devices prepared via (e) one-pot and (f) cuboid methods. Difference of internal voids is compared in the magnified images.	 

 	Fig. 2  Band structures of the perovskite cells. Reflection electron energy loss spectroscopy (REELS) spectra of (a) HTM, (b) TiO2, and (c) the perovskite layers. (d) X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of the perovskite layers. Schematic of the energy diagram for each perovskite solar cell: (e) one-pot and (f) cuboid.	 

 	Fig. 3  Defect levels of the perovskite cells. (a) Schematic of the DLTS measurement setup. (b) Capacitance–voltage measurements of one-pot and cuboid samples. (c) Carrier concentration as a function of the depth determined by capacitance–voltage measurements for one-pot and cuboid samples. (d) DLTS spectra with various bias voltages for the one-pot sample. (e) DLTS spectra with various bias voltages for the cuboid sample.	 

 	Fig. 4  Difference of energy levels at open-circuit. Work function levels, Fermi levels of TiO2 and the perovskite solar cells prepared via (a) one-pot and (b) cuboid methods.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee00303j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
