Synergetic light trapping effects in organic solar cells with a patterned semi-transparent electrode  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP00581A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP00581A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 11306-11312Synergetic light trapping effects in organic solar cells with a patterned semi-transparent electrode

        
          
            Hao 
            Ren
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xingang 
            Ren
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Zhixiang 
            Huang
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Xianliang 
            Wu
          
        
      ab
aInstitute of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, China. E-mail: xgren@ahu.edu.cn; zxhuang@ahu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Intelligent Computing & Signal Processing, Ministry of Education, Anhui University, Hefei, 230039, China
cGuangdong Provincial Key Lab of Nano-Micro Materials Research, School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China
Received 
      30th January 2019
    , Accepted 3rd May 2019First published on 9th May 2019AbstractThe dielectric/ultra-thin metal/dielectric structure has been widely used for semi-transparent electrodes in organic solar cells (OSCs) due to its potential replacement of the transparent conductive oxide indium tin oxide. Here, we introduce the dual light trapping structures, i.e. the nanopatterned MoO3/Ag/MoO3 (MAM) as the anode and a short-pitched metallic grating as the cathode, to cooperatively improve the OSC performance. The optical and electrical properties of the OSCs have been investigated via solving the coupled Maxwell and semiconductor equations by the finite-difference method. The results indicate that the optical light absorption of the active layer and the electrical carrier collection have been significantly enhanced after the adoption of the proposed dual light trapping structures. We have shown that the optical and electrical improvements are attributed to the synergetic effects of surface plasmon resonance of the grating patterned cathode and scattering effect of the nanopatterned MAM anode. Our results have further revealed that the short-pitched metal grating can induce considerable field confinement due to the mode coupling and hybridization of the surface plasmons in-between the adjacent short-distance metal strips. With the optimized structural parameters of the dual light trapping structure, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the OSCs has been substantially enhanced by 39% in comparison with a flat cell. Besides the efficiency improvement, the OSCs with the proposed dual light harvesting structures reveal an alleviated angular dependence of electrical properties as the light is beyond the normal incident angle. Our results contribute to the further development of ITO-free OSCs and are promising for semi-transparent optoelectronics.
Introduction
Organic solar cells (OSCs) have great potential in addressing energy issues and they have received intensive attention in the last several years due to their distinct advantages such as easy fabrication, low cost, and good flexibility.1–3 The standard structure of the OSCs includes the active layer, carrier transport layer and two electrodes, in which indium-tin oxide (ITO) is regularly used as the transparent electrodes.4 However, the element indium in ITO is less abundant in nature, and indium will slowly penetrate into other layers in the OSCs and affect the OSC lifetime. Furthermore, ITO is not suitable for flexible OSC devices because of its brittleness.5–7 Therefore, researchers have been trying to find alternative materials to replace ITO, which need to have transparent, conductive, and flexible properties. Currently, there are various types of transparent electrodes including monolayer graphene,8 Al:ZnO (AZO),9 metal nanowires10 and dielectric/ultra-thin metal/dielectric structures. The dielectric/ultra-thin metal/dielectric-based transparent electrodes exhibit a low sheet resistance and long-term stability along with excellent flexibility as compared to other types of transparent electrodes. Here, we will study the MoO3/Ag/MoO3 (MAM) stack as an alternative to ITO.11
As we know, the introduction of metallic nanostructures in planar OSCs would enhance light trapping through the excitation of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs).12–15 For the OSCs with conventional MAM as the transparent electrode, the employment of a metallic nanostructure, particularly metal gratings with a small period, as the electrode, will create highly localized hotspots around the metal strips,16 and then substantially enhance the optical light absorption of the active layer.17,18 In addition, the incorporated nanostructures have also been found to be beneficial to exciton dissociation, and charge carrier collection results in the further enhancement of the light absorption. The previous reports indicated that the integration of the nanopatterns on the planar MAM electrode would not only facilitate the active layer absorption but also favour an alleviated angular dependence of the device performance.19 Therefore, it is highly interesting to study the simultaneous incorporation of a small period grating into both the cathode and anode, and explore their roles in advancing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs.
Here, to study the optical light absorption, electrical carrier transport and collection of the OSCs with the nanopatterned MoO3/Ag/MoO3 (MAM) as the semi-transparent anode, we adopt the finite-difference method20 to solve the coupled semiconductor equations (including Poisson, continuity, and drift-diffusion equations) and Maxwell's equations. First, we investigate the effect of the introduction of a short-pitched metal grating into the active layer that follows the patterns of the silver cathode. The light absorption and electrical properties of the OSCs with the short-pitched metal grating structure have been found to be significantly improved as compared with those of the flat structure. We further revealed that the introduction of the nanopatterned MAM as the anode could further favor the light harvesting by multiple and high-angle scattering. Finally, we have optimized the device structure parameters, i.e. with the groove width of 4 nm, the height of 26 nm, and the period of 40 nm; the OSCs with the proposed dual plasmonic light trapping patterns (small periodic grating as cathode and patterned MAM as anode) reveal the best optical and electrical properties with a PCE improvement of 39%. This work contributes to the development of ITO-free OSCs and other transparent optoelectronics.
Structure and method
As shown in Fig. 1, the two-dimensional (2D) schematic device structure of the OSCs consists of four parts, i.e. MoO3/Ag/MoO3 (MAM) serves as the semi-transparent anode, PEDOT:PSS is the buffer layer, P3HT:PCBM is used as the active layer, and the cathode is Ag. Structure 1 represents the planar control structure with MAM as the transparent electrode, in which the MAM structure consists of 40 nm thick MoO3 as the outer coating layer, 10 nm thick Ag and 6 nm thick MoO3 as the inner carrier transport layer (adjacent to the active layer), as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). PEDOT:PSS and P3HT:PCBM are set with a thickness of 50 nm and 106 nm, respectively, and the thickness of the back Ag electrode is 30 nm. Structure 2 is shown in Fig. 1(b), in which the plasmonic OSC device architecture adopts the Ag grating as the cathode, and the subsequent coated active layer follows the exact pattern of the Ag grating. The period (P) and height (H) of the plasmonic grating in Structure 2 are fixed as 40 nm and 26 nm, respectively. The groove width is denoted as W. Although the light coupling of the transparent anode with the MAM structure has been enhanced by the antireflection coating as compared to the single ultra-thin metal film, it is still an essential topic to further improve the light coupling over a wide band region. Therefore, we use the patterned MAM structure (i.e. as described in Fig. 1(c) and thereafter termed as Structure 3) to replace the planar MAM layer to improve the optical light coupling further. The parameters of the patterned structure are set as t = 10 nm, t′ = 6 nm and T = 20 nm, as indicated in Fig. 1(c).
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the organic solar cell (OSC) structures and the complex refractive indices of the used materials. (a) Flat control Structure 1, (b) short-pitched grating Structure 2, (c) dual light trapping Structure 3, and (d) complex refractive indices of the materials used in the simulation. 
In this paper, the optical properties of the OSCs are numerically analysed by the finite difference method; the Helmholtz equations are solved for obtaining the electromagnetic field.21 In the model, we have simulated the infinite air region with the hybrid absorbing boundary condition, in which the perfectly matched layer (PML)22,23 together with the Mur absorbing boundary condition is adopted at the top and bottom of the structure for high calculation accuracy. The periodic boundary conditions (PBCs) are employed at the left and right side. In our simulation, the complex refractive indices are obtained from ref. 24–26, as shown in Fig. 1(d).
To investigate the light absorption properties, the absorbed power density (η)27 is written as (1)where ΔSa is the area of P3HT:PCBM, ω is the angular frequency, ε0 is the permittivity in a vacuum, Im[ε(λ)] is the imaginary part of the complex dielectric constant of the active layer material, and E is the electric field. The absorption efficiency and underlying mechanisms of the OSCs’ optical enhancement could be studied and analysed in our model. For the electrical characteristics of the OSCs, the exciton generation rate G28 can be written as (2)Thereinto, nr and ki are the real part and imaginary part of the complex refractive index of P3HT:PCBM, respectively, h is the Planck constant, and Γ is the solar irradiance spectrum of AM 1.5G. The analysis of the electrical performance of the solar cells is achieved by solving the semiconductor equations (continuous equation, Poisson equation, and drift-diffusion equation)29,30 ∇·(ε∇φ) = −q(p − n)(3) (4) (5)In the formulae (3)–(5), ε represents the static dielectric constant of the organic material P3HT:PCBM; n and p represent the concentration of electrons and holes, respectively; q is the unit charge; φ is the potential; μn and μp are the electron and hole mobilities, respectively; Dn (Dp) is the electron and hole diffusion coefficient; the exciton generation rate G can be obtained by the formula (2), and the exciton recombination rate is represented as R.
Result and discussion
The optical and electrical properties of the OSCs with the MAM transparent anode are shown in Fig. 2. After the introduction of the short-pitched metallic grating into the active layer, the optical light absorption of the active layer is conspicuously enhanced at 400–700 nm due to the excited SPPs, i.e. the absorption of Structure 2 with the Ag grating is higher than that of Structure 1 without the nanopattern. The absorbed power density of the P3HT:PCBM layer can be further increased after the incorporation of the grating pattern into the MAM anode, i.e. Structure 3, as illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The nanopatterned MAM structure with the rough surface can favor light scattering into the device and improve the light trapping efficiency. As shown in Fig. 2(b), the electrical properties, particularly the short circuit current density, are apparently boosted because of the enhanced light coupling by the dual light trapping structures. The short circuit current (Jsc) is improved from 61.15 to 82.73 A m−2 after the first introduction of the short-pitched grating as the cathode and then is further boosted to 87.56 A m−2 with the dual light trapping structures as compared with the planar structure. More importantly, the fill factor (FF) and open-circuit voltage (Voc) have also revealed a slight improvement for the OSCs with the dual light trapping structures as compared with the planar OSCs (i.e. FF = 0.55 and Voc = 0.58 V for the planar Structure 1, FF = 0.57 and Voc = 0.60 V for the single plasmonic Structure 2, and FF = 0.58 and Voc = 0.62 for the dual light trapping Structure 3).
 Fig. 2  The optical and electrical performances of the OSCs without and with the metal grating cathode together with the MAM patterned semi-transparent anode. (a) The absorbed power density and (b) the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the MAM anode-based OSC structures 1–3. The wavelengths λ1 = 460 nm and λ2 = 640 nm represent the distinct absorption enhancement regions, respectively. 
So as to better unveil the physical mechanism of the electrical and optical improvements in the OSCs with the grating patterned MAM anode, we calculate the distributions of the exciton generation rate and the electric field of the proposed structure at the wavelength indicated in Fig. 2(a). The exciton generation rates of Structure 2 and Structure 3 at λ1 = 460 nm are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b); it can be seen that the largest exciton generation rate appears inside the groove when the separation between the metal strips is only a few nanometers. The small distance between the metal strips in the short-pitched grating can favour the coupling and hybridization of the SPPs, which can induce strong interactions of light matter and result in a highly localized electric field to boost the exciton generation in the grating groove, particularly with a small groove width of W = 4 nm. Moreover, the exciton generation of the OSCs with the dual light trapping pattern Structure 3 reveals a conspicuous enhancement region near the patterned MAM anode (i.e. y = 46–106 nm) compared with single plasmonic Structure 2. The main reason is that the nanopatterned MAM anode improves the light absorption due to the light trapping due to the scattering effect of the nanopatterned MAM of the OSCs. Specifically, the incident light is preferentially scattered and trapped into the active layer by multiple and high-angle scattering, resulting in an increment of the effective absorption in the OSCs. We have also plotted the electric field at another enhanced region of λ2 = 640 nm. The electric field is mainly distributed at the two top corners of the groove surface (see Fig. 3(c) and (d)), and the electric field distribution inside the groove is far less than that at the two top corners. This is because the improvement induced by the surface plasmon effect of the metal grating is distinct around the two top corners at the wavelength of 640 nm. Therefore, the strong electric field concentrated at the two top corners of the groove mainly contributes to the light absorption at the wavelength of 640 nm.
 Fig. 3  Distributions of exciton generation and Ex for Structure 2 and Structure 3. Exciton generation at λ1 = 460 nm for (a) Structure 2 and (b) Structure 3. Ex distribution at λ2 = 640 nm for (c) Structure 2 and (d) Structure 3. 
In the following, we further study the optical and electrical properties of the OSCs affected by the groove width W. Fig. 4 shows the absorption of the OSC structures with the grating (P = 40 nm and H = 26 nm) patterned MAM anode varying with the groove width W. In Fig. 4(a), the absorbed power density of light is mainly concentrated at 430–480 nm and 600–640 nm. Besides, when the groove width W is less than 4 nm, an increase in the groove width will slightly improve the absorption. However, a significant reduction of the absorption has been observed with a further increment of the groove width, because the hotspots inside the groove due to the coupling and hybridization of the SPPs between the grating strips are very sensitive to the spacing of the two metal strips. To better interpret the enhancement between the short-pitched metallic grating structure and planar structure, we have introduced the enhancement factor EF = η1/η2, as shown in Fig. 4(b). It is clearly revealed that the largest EF occurs with the groove width of 4 nm, and it starts to decrease with a further increment of the groove width.
 Fig. 4  The optical properties of the OSCs with various widths of the grating groove. (a) Absorption map of Structure 2 with varying groove width (W) and wavelength, and (b) the enhancement factor EF = η1/η2 with varying width of groove (W). 
Next, we discuss the effect of the metallic grating height H and periodicity P on the optical properties of the OSCs with plasmonic Structure 2. Fig. 5(a) shows the absorbed power density of the active layer varying with the grating height H. It can be observed that the electric field intensity has been significantly increased at grating height = 10–30 nm, the electric field enhanced by the plasmonic metal grating becomes weaker as the grating height increases further, and the optimum value of the grating height is 26 nm. We have plotted the OSC absorption energy density varying with the grating period P with the optimum grating height of 26 nm in Fig. 5(b). It can be seen that the absorbed power density of OSCs decreased with the increment of the grating period, which is caused by the weakened coupling between the SPPs with increasing periodicity of the short-pitched grating structure. For the metal grating with the fixed ratio of the groove width and period (=0.1), the electric field (Ex) inside the grating groove for the metal grating with period P = 120 nm (width W = 12 nm) is weaker than that of the metal grating with period P = 40 nm (width W = 4 nm). The small separation of metal strips in the short-pitched grating produces the strong coupling and hybridization of SPPs in-between the adjacent metal strips. Hence, the short-pitched grating with the small period has advantages in boosting the light trapping.
 Fig. 5  The effects of the geometrical parameters of the metal grating on the optical properties of the plasmonic OSC Structure 2. (a) Absorption efficiency spectra of the active layer with varying grating height H, and the groove width and period of the metal grating are W = 4 nm and P = 40 nm, respectively; (b) the integrated absorption efficiency of the active layer with various grating period P, the ratio of the groove width and period of grating is fixed as 0.1. The inset is the electric field distribution at the wavelength of 460 nm when the grating periodicities are 40 nm and 120 nm, respectively. 
In this part, we studied the electrical performance of the OSCs with different groove widths. As shown in Fig. 6, it can be observed that the Jsc values decrease from 87.56 A m−2 (W= 4 nm) to 54.12 A m−2 (W = 18 nm) with increasing the groove width. The PCE is 38.3% higher than that of planar Structure 1 in the case of the metal grating with the optimum groove width of W = 4 nm. Therefore, the optimized optical and electrical properties can be achieved with the small grating groove of 4 nm and a period of 40 nm.
 Fig. 6  The J–V curves of the optimized dual light trapping structures with different grating groove width W. 
Finally, the angular dependence of the OSC performance is another critical issue, which should be considered in practical applications. We have examined the influence of incident angle on the Jsc of the OSCs with the proposed dual light trapping Structure 3 and single plasmonic Structure 2. As shown in Fig. 7, the OSCs with single plasmonic Structure 2 show a reduced angular dependence of Jsc due to the improved light trapping through the multiple scattering effects induced by the back grating cathode, resulting in a clear break of Lambert's cosine law. Interestingly, for the OSCs with the grating patterned MAM as the transparent electrode, the angle dependence of Jsc has been further improved as compared to the OSCs with single plasmonic Structure 2, which is attributed to the optical incoupling effect of the grating patterned MAM structure, and the reduction of the light reflection increases the absorbed power density of the active layer. Consequently, the angular dependence of Jsc is substantially alleviated after the introduction of the nanopatterned MAM structure as anode together with the back short-pitched grating as the cathode.
 Fig. 7  Angular dependent characteristics of Jsc. 
Conclusion
In summary, we have adopted numerical simulation to study OSC performance improved by the simultaneous introduction of the short-pitched grating as the cathode and nanopatterned MAM as the anode in OSCs. The maximum absorption has been achieved by the optimized grating with the groove width of W = 4 nm, the height of H = 26 nm, and period of P = 40 nm. The underlying mechanism of the absorption enhancement in OSCs has been investigated by the distribution of the exciton generation rate and electric field, and the results indicate that the plasmonic effect of the short-pitched grating and its hybridization contribute to such a broadband absorption enhancement. The influence of the geometrical parameters of the short-pitched metal grating (height, groove width and period) on the optical and electrical properties of OSCs has also been examined in detail. All the results revealed that the introduction of the nanopatterned MAM anode would deliver a significant enhancement of the optical coupling and alleviate the angular dependence of the device performance. The OSCs with dual light trapping patterns, i.e. the grating patterned MAM anode and back metal cathode, show substantially improved PCEs by more than 38.3% as compared with the planar structure due to the promotion of the optical light absorption and electrical carrier collection. This work is of critical importance to design and develop highly efficient ITO-free and transparent optoelectronics.
Conflicts of interest
The authors state that there are no potential conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61701003, 61871001 and 61701001), the National Natural Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars under Grant 61722101 and the Natural Science Research Foundation of Anhui Province (No. 1808085QF179). This work is also supported by the Open fund for Discipline Construction, Institute of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University and the Guangdong Science and Technology Program (2017B030314002).
References
C. Duan, C. Zhong, C. Liu, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1682–1689 CrossRef CAS .
S. In, D. R. Mason, H. Lee, M. Jung, C. Lee and N. Park, ACS Photonics, 2014, 2, 78–85 CrossRef .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 11–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Cho, S. K. Lee, S.-J. Moon, J. Jo and W. S. Shin, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 1144–1148 CrossRef .
O. Inganäs, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 201 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, B. He, H. Wang, J. Xu, T. Ta, W. Li, Q. Wang, S. Yang, Y. Tang and B. Zou, Mater. Lett., 2017, 188, 107–110 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, M. Agrawal, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 43–48 CrossRef PubMed .
E.-J. Yun, H. J. Moon, B. S. Bae, S.-M. Jin, H. G. Nam and N.-I. Cho, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2012, 60, 55–58 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, D. Zhang, X. Ren, J. Liu and W. C. Choy, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10980–10987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Cui, T. Ji, Y. Hao and F. Zhu, IEEE Photonics J., 2017, 9, 8400207 Search PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gan, F. J. Bartoli and Z. H. Kafafi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2385–2396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. C. Choy, L. Huo, F. Xie, W. E. Sha, B. Ding, X. Guo, Y. Li, J. Hou and J. You, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3046–3052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Cui, W. Wang, K. H. Fung, T. Ji, Y. Hao and F. Zhu, Plasmonics, 2015, 10, 773–781 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Camden, J. A. Dieringer, Y. Wang, D. J. Masiello, L. D. Marks, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12616–12617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Caldwell, O. J. Glembocki, F. J. Bezares, M. I. Kariniemi, J. T. Niinistö, T. T. Hatanpää, R. W. Rendell, M. Ukaegbu, M. K. Ritala and S. M. Prokes, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 26056–26064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, X. Li and W. C. Choy, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 187–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, F. Xiao, B. Wu, Z. Huang and X. Wu, Acta Photonica Sin., 2014, 43, 62–67 Search PubMed .
E. Wei, W. C. Choy and W. C. Chew, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 5993–6007 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chew, J. Jin and E. Michielssen, Microw. Opt. Tech. Lett., 1997, 15, 363–369 CrossRef .
J.-P. Berenger, J. Comput. Phys., 1994, 114, 185–200 CrossRef .

          E. Palik and G. Ghosh, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, Academic Press, New York,  1985, pp. 313–334 Search PubMed .
H. Shen and B. J. O. E. Maes, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A1202–A1210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ng, C. H. Li, M. K. Fung, A. B. Djurisic, J. A. Zapien, W. K. Chan, K. Y. Cheung and W.-Y. J. T. J. O. P. C. C. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15094–15101 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, L. Cheng, B. Wu and X. Wu, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2016, 28, 2047–2049 CAS .
Z. Huang, L. Cheng and X. Wu, IEEE Photonics J., 2016, 8, 4802109 Search PubMed .
J.-Y. Wang, F.-J. Tsai, J.-J. Huang, C.-Y. Chen, N. Li, Y.-W. Kiang and C. Yang, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 2682–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, N. P. Hylton, V. Giannini, K.-H. Lee, N. J. Ekins-Daukes and S. A. Maier, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A888–A896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the organic solar cell (OSC) structures and the complex refractive indices of the used materials. (a) Flat control Structure 1, (b) short-pitched grating Structure 2, (c) dual light trapping Structure 3, and (d) complex refractive indices of the materials used in the simulation.	 
	(1)
	(2)
∇·(ε∇φ) = −q(p − n)	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  The optical and electrical performances of the OSCs without and with the metal grating cathode together with the MAM patterned semi-transparent anode. (a) The absorbed power density and (b) the current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the MAM anode-based OSC structures 1–3. The wavelengths λ1 = 460 nm and λ2 = 640 nm represent the distinct absorption enhancement regions, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Distributions of exciton generation and Ex for Structure 2 and Structure 3. Exciton generation at λ1 = 460 nm for (a) Structure 2 and (b) Structure 3. Ex distribution at λ2 = 640 nm for (c) Structure 2 and (d) Structure 3.	 

 	Fig. 4  The optical properties of the OSCs with various widths of the grating groove. (a) Absorption map of Structure 2 with varying groove width (W) and wavelength, and (b) the enhancement factor EF = η1/η2 with varying width of groove (W).	 

 	Fig. 5  The effects of the geometrical parameters of the metal grating on the optical properties of the plasmonic OSC Structure 2. (a) Absorption efficiency spectra of the active layer with varying grating height H, and the groove width and period of the metal grating are W = 4 nm and P = 40 nm, respectively; (b) the integrated absorption efficiency of the active layer with various grating period P, the ratio of the groove width and period of grating is fixed as 0.1. The inset is the electric field distribution at the wavelength of 460 nm when the grating periodicities are 40 nm and 120 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  The J–V curves of the optimized dual light trapping structures with different grating groove width W.	 

 	Fig. 7  Angular dependent characteristics of Jsc.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
