Towards sustainable and versatile energy storage devices: an overview of organic electrode materials  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE40709H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE40709H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280-2301Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsTowards sustainable and versatile energy storage devices: an overview of organic electrode materials

        
          
            Zhiping 
            Song
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Haoshen 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *ab
aEnergy Technology Research Institute (ETRI), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8568, Japan. E-mail: son-zp@aist.go.jp; hs.zhou@aist.go.jp
bNational Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures & Department of Energy Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China
Received 
      1st March 2013
    , Accepted 8th May 2013First published on 10th May 2013AbstractAs an alternative to conventional inorganic intercalation electrode materials, organic electrode materials are promising candidates for the next generation of sustainable and versatile energy storage devices. In this paper we provide an overview of organic electrode materials, including their fundamental knowledge, development history and perspective applications. Based on different organics including n-type, p-type and bipolar, we firstly analyzed their working principles, reaction mechanisms, electrochemical performances, advantages and challenges. To understand the development history and trends in organic electrode materials, we elaborate in detail various organics with different structures, including conducting polymers, organodisulfides, thioethers, nitroxyl radical polymers and conjugated carbonyl compounds. The high electrochemical performance, in addition with the unique features of organics such as flexibility, processability and structure diversity, provide them great perspective in various energy storage devices, including rechargeable Li/Na batteries, supercapacitors, thin film batteries, aqueous rechargeable batteries, redox flow batteries and even all-organic batteries. It is expected that organic electrode materials will show their talents in the “post Li-ion battery” era, towards cheap, green, sustainable and versatile energy storage devices.Zhiping SongZhiping Song received his BSc and PhD degrees from the Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, China, in 2006 and 2011 respectively. In 2010–2011, he spent more than one year working as a visiting PhD student in Dr Donghai Wang's group at the Pennsylvania State University, USA. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Haoshen Zhou's group at the Energy Technology Research Institute (ETRI), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan. His research interests mainly focus on developing novel organic electrode materials and their applications in various energy storage devices including rechargeable lithium batteries.Haoshen ZhouHaoshen Zhou graduated from the Department of Physics, Nanjing University, China, in 1985. He received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering, the University of Tokyo, Japan, in 1994. He is now a prime senior researcher of the Energy Technology Research Institute (ETRI) and leading the Energy Interface Technology Group, in National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan. He is also a guest professor in both the University of Tokyo and Nanjing University. His research interests include the synthesis of functional materials and their applications in Li-ion batteries, metal–air batteries, new type batteries/cells, fuel cells, dye sensitized solar cells, hydrophobic/hydrophilic surfaces and electrochemical sensors.

Broader context
State-of-the-art Li-ion batteries recently met their development bottleneck because of the energy-density limitation of inorganic intercalation cathodes, in addition to the resources and environmental issues brought about by large-scale use of transitional metal based electrode materials. As an alternative, organic electrode materials have attracted more-and-more interest in recent years due to their high electrochemical performance, resource sustainability, environmental friendliness, structure diversity, flexibility and so on. Since 1969, a many organic electrode materials with various structures have been investigated as cathodes or anodes for various energy storage devices including Li–organic batteries. The previous researches indicate that conducting polymers, nitroxyl radical polymers and conjugated carbonyl compounds are promising organic electrode candidates for the next generation of cheap, green, sustainable and versatile energy storage devices beyond conventional Li-ion batteries.

1 Introduction
In the 21st century, energy and environmental issues are recognized as two major challenges to human beings. In order to meet the desire for an efficient and clean power source fitting the development of peoples' daily life and production, scientists have never given up trying to improve the electrochemical performance of existing battery techniques and seek novel battery techniques.1,2 Currently, in the rapid development of consumer electronics, electric vehicles and energy storage stations, the relatively poor battery performance becomes the major bottleneck. They put forward higher requirements on the state-of-the-art rechargeable lithium batteries and supercapacitors in the aspect of not only charge/discharge performance, but also safety, cost, sustainability and environmental friendliness,3 which provide great opportunities and challenges to the research and application of novel electrode materials and battery techniques.
In the past two decades, Li-ion batteries have achieved great successes due to their superior comprehensive battery performance, compared to lead–acid, Ni–Cd and Ni–MH battery. However, like the previous battery techniques, its development has also met a bottleneck recently. First, the conventional inorganic cathode materials (e.g., LiCoO2 and LiFePO4) for Li-ion batteries are restricted by their theoretical specific capacity and structure stability, making it difficult to improve further their energy density. Second, the large-scale production and use of transition metal (e.g., Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) based cathode materials, causes more and more concern for resources and environmental issues. Therefore, while most researchers in this field are still seeking high capacity cathodes (e.g., xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiMO2)4 and anodes (e.g., Si)5 for conventional Li-ion batteries, more-and-more researchers shift their attention to other alternative battery techniques, such as Li–S, Li–O2 (ref. 6) and Li–organic batteries.7
As an alternative to inorganic electrode materials involving intercalation reactions (e.g., LiCoO2, LiFePO4, graphite, Li4Ti5O12 and Si) or conversion reactions (e.g., transition metal oxides and sulfides),8 the electroactive organics or polymers involving reversible redox reactions are promising candidates as electrode materials for the new generation of “green lithium batteries” because of their higher theoretical capacity, safety, sustainability, environmental friendliness and potential low cost.3,7 Not only that, as the charge compensation function of Li+ can be substituted by other ions in electrochemical redox reactions of many organic electrode materials, and they have many distinct merits over inorganic electrode materials in reaction kinetics, structure diversity, flexibility and processability, they will also show great significance in many other battery techniques, such as rechargeable sodium batteries, supercapacitors, thin film batteries (e.g., flexible, printable or even transparent), aqueous rechargeable batteries, redox flow batteries, and even all-organic batteries (see Section 4).
For a long time, organic electrode materials have received much less attention compared to inorganic electrode materials, mainly because of their relatively poor electrochemical performance and the great success of inorganic electrode materials in either research or application. Like Li–S and Li–O2 batteries,6 Li–organic batteries are not a new concept that have appeared recently, their history can be traced back to 1969,9 almost the same time as the birth of lithium batteries.10 During the past decades, the research on organic electrode materials has never stopped and a lot of different organic structures and redox mechanisms have been tried for higher electrochemical performance to compete with inorganic materials. In the 1980s and 1990s, conducting polymers and organodisulfides were intensively studied as electrode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries,11 but their battery performance is still far from practical use. Thus after 2000, researchers gradually shifted their interest towards nitroxyl radical polymers and conjugated carbonyl compounds, and achieved great progress in this field.7 Nowadays, the comprehensive electrochemical performance of some organic cathode materials, including energy density, power density and cycling stability, are comparable or even superior to the conventional inorganic cathodes. However, compared to inorganic electrode materials, the research on organic electrode materials is still in its early stages, and may be not familiar to many researchers. Although there are already a few reviews7,11 involving almost all the published papers on this topic, we think there is still a lack of a review paper that introduces systematically and simply the basic knowledge of organic electrode materials. So we venture to write this review, as a brief introduction of the fundamentals, development and prospectives of organic electrode materials, aiming to cause more interest and innovation in this field.
2 Fundamentals of organic electrode materials
2.1 Working principles and cell configurations
The basic requirement for a cathode or anode active material (either inorganic or organic) for a rechargeable battery is that it can undergo a reversible electrochemical redox reaction, at least from the chemical species aspect. Thus, besides the transition-metal (e.g., Ti, V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) based inorganic electrode materials,12 there are also many other elemental substances (e.g., Li, Na, Mg, C, O2, Si, P (ref. 13), S, Sn, I2 (ref. 14)) and electroactive organics that can be used as electrodes for rechargeable batteries. For inorganics, the redox reaction is related to the valence change of the transition-metal or elemental substance, while for organics, the redox reaction is based on the charge state change of the electroactive organic group or moiety.
Generally, we can divide organic electrode materials into three types according to their different redox reactions (Fig. 1). For n-type organics, the reaction is between the neutral state (N) and the negatively charged state (N−), while for p-type organics, the reaction is between the neutral state (P) and the positively charged state (P+). There is also another type called bipolar organics, for which the neutral state (B) can be either reduced to a negatively charged state (B−) or oxidized to a positively charged state (B+), but it can be also regarded as N or P because only half of the reaction occurs on one electrode in most cases. In the electrochemical reduction reaction of N or oxidation reaction of P, cation (Li+) or anion (A−) are, respectively, necessary to neutralize the negative charge of N− or the positive charge of P+. In the reverse redox process, Li+ or A− will migrate back from the electrode to the electrolyte. For many n-type organics, Li+ can be substituted by other alkali metals (e.g., Na+ and K+) or even H+, which will not affect significantly the electrochemical behavior of the material. This is greatly different from inorganic intercalation compounds, which are very sensitive to the radius of the cation. For p-type organics, a lot of anions can be used as A−, such as ClO4−, PF6−, BF4− and TFSI− in non-aqueous electrolyte, or Cl− and NO3− in aqueous electrolyte.
 Fig. 1  The redox reaction of three types of electroactive organics: (a) n-type; (b) p-type; (c) bipolar. A− means anion of the electrolyte and Li+ can be replaced by other alkali ions. 
To assemble a rechargeable battery, we need to match the cathode with an anode. First, there must be a voltage gap large enough for practical use between a cathode with higher redox potential and an anode with lower redox potential. But that is not enough; we should also consider the redox state of the active material in both the cathode and anode. For instance, if the anode is in its reduced state in a fresh cell, it should be firstly oxidized. Meanwhile, there must be a reduction reaction on the cathode because the electron is transported from the anode to the cathode though the external circuit, thus the cathode must be in its oxidation state in the fresh cell. Vice versa, if the anode is in its oxidation state initially, the cathode must be in its reduction state.
Based on the above considerations, we demonstrate four types of possible cell configuration for rechargeable lithium batteries (Fig. 2). If the anode is in a reduced state and the cathode is in an oxidised state in a fresh cell, the first step of charge/discharge cycling is discharging (Fig. 2a and c). In the reversed situation, the first step is charging (Fig. 2b and d). Whatever the cell configuration, each organic electrode material can find its role. Theoretically, n-type organics may exist in the N or Li+N− form, while p-type organics may exist in the P or P+A− form, and all these four forms can be applied as either the anode or cathode, according to their redox potential. But in fact, Li+N− is always unstable in an ambient atmosphere because of the spontaneous hydrolysis reaction and oxidation reaction, especially when the N/N− redox potential is lower than 2.5 V vs. Li+/Li, so it is unlikely that Li+N− can be used as an anode. For p-type organics, the P+/P redox potential is always higher than 2.5 V vs. Li+/Li, so either P or P+A− is unlikely to be usable as an anode. In another word, organics prefer to be applied as the cathode in rechargeable batteries with different forms, such as N, Li+N−, P+A− and P in Fig. 2a–d, respectively. We only consider the situation of N as organic anode, (Fig. 2b and d) because it is stable in an ambient atmosphere and has the possibility to possess a relatively low redox potential. For bipolar organic B (Fig. 1c), we can treat it as N or P according to the actual redox reaction occurring on the electrode.
 Fig. 2  The cell configurations and charge transfer processes of various types of rechargeable batteries. Bipolar organic B can be regarded as N or P in these configurations, according to the actual electrode reaction. 
Among the four cell configurations in Fig. 2, (a) and (b) are two most common cases to researchers, in which Li+ is the deposition or insertion ion for both the anode and cathode. The first generation of rechargeable lithium batteries belongs to configuration a, which involves Li metal or alloy as the anode and Li source. Layered TiS2 was the best intercalation cathode at that time.1 This type of battery was eliminated from the market because of the serious safety issue caused by Li dendrite. However, because Li metal possesses the highest theoretical capacity (3680 mA h g−1) and it can match with many high capacity cathodes, such as S and O2, the study of the Li anode has never stopped. For an n-type organic cathode, this is also the most favored configuration, and most of the literature on organic electrode materials has to adopt this configuration, since the Li+N− form is usually difficult to synthesize and store.

Fig. 2b shows the cell configuration of an Li-ion battery, consisting of a reduction state cathode as the Li source such as LiCoO2 and LiFePO4, and an oxidation state anode such as graphite, Li4Ti5O12 and Si. Li metal can be also applied as the anode in this system, which is widely used as a half-cell in research, but it plays the role of a substrate and current collector instead of the active material. In this configuration, the n-type organic can find its role as either the anode or cathode. N with a lower redox potential can be applied as the anode, which has been realized in a few researches (see Section 4.2). Although we have mentioned that Li+N− is difficult to synthesize and store, it is not a unsolvable problem if we really want to use it as cathode to match with a Li-free anode. Especially when the N/N− redox potential is relatively high (>3.0 V vs. Li+/Li), Li+N− will not be easily oxidized in the ambient atmosphere and we just need to prevent it from hydrolysis. Although there is still no reported example of an Li+N− cathode as far as we know, there have been a few similar attempts on Li2S (ref. 15) and Li2O2 (ref. 16) cathodes as an alternative to an Li–S and Li–O2 battery, which are more difficult to realize.

Fig. 2c and d present the two possible cell configurations for p-type organics. In these two cases, A− has to transport between the cathode and the electrolyte, while Li+ has to transport between the anode and the electrolyte, which causes the concentration change of the electrolyte. In Fig. 2a and b, the electrolyte just plays the role of cation conductor, and we usually try to use as little electrolyte as possible to improve the energy density of the whole cell. However, in Fig. 2d, we must add enough electrolyte to provide sufficient Li+ and A− for electrode reactions and meanwhile ensure the ion conductivity. In Fig. 2c, although it is unnecessary to add excess electrolyte, we should confirm that the electrolyte and P+A− cathode contain the same anion A−, otherwise this may affect the electrochemical performance. Another thing that should be noted is that when calculating the specific capacity of p-type organics, we must specify whether it is based on the mass of P or P+A−, because A− always takes up a big part of the molecular weight.
2.2 Structures and redox mechanisms
In the above discussion, we have listed the abstract redox reactions of different electroactive organics, (Fig. 1) but that is not enough for us seeking for new organic electrode materials. We must figure out what kind of organic structures and redox mechanisms can be applied in electrode materials. In Table 1, we categorize them into seven types, which cover most of the researches on organic electrode materials in the past decades. Among the seven types of structures, organodisulfide and conjugated carbonyl belong to n-type organics, conjugated amine and conjugated thioether belong to p-type organics, while conjugated hydrocarbon and nitroxyl radical belong to bipolar organics. It is may be controversial to list thioether (4e) as one type, because the redox mechanism does not belonging to any type in Fig. 1 and has not been clearly verified, but we still take it into account to show the possibility of multi-electron reactions of organic electrode materials. Another thing that should be noted is that although nitroxyl radicals are bipolar, they are always regarded as p-type organics in practical use to obtain stable electrochemical performance (see Section 3.4). Generally, a reversible redox reaction usually occurs on an organic group or moiety with conjugated structure and atoms with lone pair electrons, such as N, O and S. This is reasonable, because a conjugated structure is beneficial to the electron transportation in the reaction and charge delocalization of the redox product, and lone pair electrons usually have a higher reaction activity. We will discuss each type of structure in detail when we introduce the development the history of organic electrode materials in Section 3.
Table 1 The structure and redox mechanism of various types of organic electrode materials




Structure
Redox mechanism
Examples
References




Conjugated hydrocarbon







32–34



Conjugated amine







35–38



Conjugated thioether







39,40 and 129



Organodisulfide







58 and 64



Thioether (4e)







67 and 68



Nitroxyl radical







70–72



Conjugated carbonyl







107 and 99





2.3 Requirements for electrochemical performance
Roughly speaking, every organic molecule that can undergo a reversible electrochemical redox reaction, either a small organic molecule or polymer, is a possible candidate electrode material for energy storage. Based on each structure listed in Table 1, we can design and synthesise large amount of organics. What kinds of organics, then, are worth further research? We summarise some basic requirements for these organic candidates, mainly on electrochemical performance.
(a) Reaction reversibility: here reversibility means not only chemical reversibility, but also thermodynamic reversibility. It is an important factor determining the electrochemical polarization and rate capability of the electrode material. The different reaction mechanisms in Table 1 show huge differences in reaction kinetics. For example, organodisulfide and thioether (4e) always show very slow reaction kinetics, because the bond breaking/forming of the S–S or SO bond needs a high activation energy. On the contrary, all other redox reactions show fast kinetics. Especially, nitroxyl radical presents the highest reaction kinetics and always leads to excellent high rate performance.
(b) Redox potential: like the reaction reversibility, it is also mainly determined by the electroactive organic group or moiety. Different structures in Table 1 show huge difference in charge/discharge plateau or average charge/discharge voltage. In Fig. 3, we can compare the redox potentials of some typical organic electrode materials. As we mentioned above, organics prefer to be applied as the cathode rather than the anode, since their redox potentials are usually between 2.0 and 4.0 V vs. Li+/Li, and much lower than inorganic intercalation cathodes. Usually, p-type organics possess a higher redox potential than n-type organics. For instance, nitroxyl radical TEMPO (only TEMPO+/TEMPO couple is utilized) and conducting polymer PAn always show a similar average charge/discharge voltage of about 3.5 V, while organodisulfide PDMcT and most conjugated carbonyl compounds including quinones (e.g. BQ, NQ and AQ) and dianhydrides (e.g. PMDA, NTCDA and PTCDA) show redox potentials below 3.0 V. Beside the functional group or moiety, the adjacent electron-withdrawing group (e.g., –Cl, –F, –CN and –NO2) or electron-donating group (e.g., –OH, –NH2 and –OCH3) can also elevate or lower the redox potential respectively, which can be forecast by theoretical chemical calculation.17,18
 Fig. 3  The redox voltage and specific capacity of typical inorganic and organic electrode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries. The structure of each organic can be found in Table 1, Fig. 12, Table 3 and Fig. 16. 
(c) Theoretical capacity: the theoretical specific capacity of an organic electrode material can be calculated by the following formula:  in the formula, Ct, n, F and Mw respectively mean the theoretical specific capacity, the transferred electron number in each structural unit, the Faraday constant and the molecular weight of the structural unit. According to this formula, there are two ways to improve the theoretical capacity: one is adopting multi-electron reactions and another is reducing the molecular weight of the structural unit. For a certain reaction mechanism, n is always specified, so the most efficient approach is to simplify the structure, reducing unnecessary groups or moieties as much as possible. There is also a huge difference in the theoretical capacity between different types of organic electrode materials (Fig. 3). For example, TEMPO polymers can only achieve a theoretical specific capacity below 140 mA h g−1 because the monomer molecular weight is large, and only one electron (TEMPO+/TEMPO) can be reversibly transferred-in per structural unit. In contrast, conjugated carbonyl based materials present a large capacity range from 100 mA h g−1 to 600 mA h g−1.
(d) Solubility: one major problem of organic electrode materials is the dissolution of the active material in the electrolyte, which affects significantly its cycling stability. Generally, small organic molecules cannot avoid dissolution in the electrolyte, either aqueous or non-aqueous, so they always show low discharge capacity and poor cycling performance. In contrast, polymers are always insoluble in the electrolyte, and likely to obtain good cycling performance.
(e) Synthesis and cost: it is much easier to design an organic electrode material than to synthesize it, and some organics with optimal structure are very difficult or even impossible to synthesize. As a result, a compromise must sometimes be made between structure optimization and synthesis simplification. Since the research on organic electrode materials is still in its early stage, we usually do not care about the cost of the raw material and synthesis. However, if they come to the application stage in the future, cost is an important factor to consider. In other words, it is better to investigate those organics with simple structures, cheap raw materials and easy synthesis.
In summary, the above five factors are the basic requirements guiding us to design and evaluate organic electrode materials. It is necessary to take all these factors into account before experiments. For different applications, we usually emphasize one or two factors. For example, we should choose structures with high reaction reversibility for high power density electrodes, and structures with both high redox potential and high theoretical capacity for high energy density cathodes.
2.4 Advantages and challenges
In recent years, we find a tendency in the development of various photoelectric materials in that organics are replacing inorganics. A lot of organic photoelectric materials19,20 have actually already been applied in photoelectric devices such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), photovoltaic (PV) devices and field-effect transistors (FETs). This is because on one hand the performance of organics is comparable or even superior to conventional inorganics, on the other hand organics have many incomparable advantages to inorganics. For energy storage devices, we believe this tendency is also applicable based on the following advantages of organic electrode materials.
(a) High energy density: in Fig. 3, it is found that the relatively lower redox potential of organic cathodes can be offset by their much higher theoretical capacity, thus it is still possible for them to obtain high energy density. For instance, benzoquinone (BQ)21 possesses a theoretical energy density of about 1400 W h kg−1, calculated from its redox potential of 2.8 V and theoretical capacity of 496 mA h g−1. This is much higher than that of commercial LiCoO2 (∼550 W h kg−1) and potential xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiMO2 (∼1000 W h kg−1).4
(b) High power density: since many organic redox mechanisms intrinsically have much faster reaction kinetics than inorganic intercalation cathodes, organic materials based on these reactions are potentially high-power electrode candidates. In Table 1, except organodisulfide and thioether (4e), it is possible for all other organic structures to achieve high rate performance. For example, nitroxyl radical polymer22 can retain 97% of its theoretical capacity even at a charge rate of 1200 C and discharge rate of 60 C in aqueous electrolyte.
(c) Structure diversity: although there have been tremendous researches on inorganic cathode materials, most of them focus on a few materials. At present, it becomes more and more difficult to find new types of inorganic cathodes and make a breakthrough in battery performance. But for organic cathodes, there are huge possibilities in both the structures and properties. Besides the structures listed in Table 1, there are still many other structures and redox mechanisms to be discovered.
(d) Flexibility: recently there is a tendency of making devices thinner, smaller, flexible and wearable. In this respect, organic materials show inherent advantages compared to inorganics. Besides the conventional way of making electrode, there may be many other methods to fabricate organic electrodes including casting, printing and vapor deposition, due to their characteristics of solubility, film-forming ability and sublimability.
(e) Sustainability: the large-scale use of transition metal based electrode materials is somewhat of an unsustainable route towards the devolvement of energy storage devices, because of resource limitations, environmental pollution and large energy consumption in both synthesis and recycling.3 Ideally, organic electrode materials could be extracted directly23,24 or eventually synthesized26,27 from biomass and recycled through carbon dioxide cycling (Fig. 4). In the whole process, there is no additional CO2 produced and much less energy is consumed during chemosynthesis and thermal recycling.
 Fig. 4  Simplified cycle life of sustainable rechargeable batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright © 2008 WILEY-VCH. 
In above discussion, we have summarized the main merits of organic electrode materials. However, many of them have not been realized at present and it is also full of challenges in the research and commercialization of organic electrode materials.
(a) Low mass density: as we know, organics usually have a much lower mass density than inorganics because of their different elements and crystalline state. This is not a problem when we are just concerned about the gravimetric energy density. However, for energy storage devices emphasizing the volumetric energy density, such as rechargeable lithium batteries used in mobile phones and electric vehicles, this is a big drawback and only those organics with much higher gravimetric energy density are competitive.
(b) Low electronic conductivity: except conducting polymers, almost all other organic electrode materials are electrical insulators, which seriously hinder the full utilization and high rate performance of the active materials. Just like the approaches for the LiFePO4 and S cathode, adding sufficient conductive carbon through a proper method can significantly improve the electron transport in the electrode and ensure a high utilization ratio of the active material. However, compared to inorganic cathodes, a much larger amount of conductive carbon should be used due to their low mass density and high surface area, thus the mass ratio of active material in the whole electrode is only 20–70% in previous researches. The best approach to overcome this drawback is adopting organics with a large conjugated structure, or mix active materials with excellent conductive carbon (e.g., CNT or graphene) on a molecular level (see Section 4.3).
(c) Dissolution: as mentioned above, the unwanted dissolution of active materials in the electrolyte is a major problem for organic electrode materials over a long period. For many small organic molecules, the dissolution is very serious and the shuttle effect makes the cell unrechargeable. The most efficient strategy to solve this problem is to design and synthesise organic polymers with a stable skeleton and a highly electroactive moiety, since they are always insoluble in commonly used electrolytes for batteries. There is also another type of polymer, the coordination polymers, which connect electroactive moieties with coordination bonds between the metal ions and N, O or S atoms. The coordination bond can hinder the dissolution of electroactive moieties but essentially cannot avoid this problem (see Section 3.5.3).
(d) Li metal anode: for the majority of organic electrode materials, especially n-type organics, Li metals or alloys must be applied as the anode and lithium source, which brings about serious safety issue in practical use.10 Since Li–S and Li–O2 batteries also face this problem, there have been many attempts at Li surface protection28 or lithium powder/carbon composite anodes.29,30 It is expected that this problem will be finally resolved to realize high energy density batteries with Li metal anodes.
3 Development history of organic electrode materials
We have discussed a lot of fundamental knowledge on organic electrode materials, but it is still necessary to elaborate the different types of organic electrode materials in detail. Since the main organic structures and redox mechanisms have been divided into seven types in Table 1, the elaboration is approximately according to this classification and roughly in a chronological order. Note that the first three types of conjugated structures (Table 1), including hydrocarbons, amines and thioethers, are all attributed to conducting polymers, because they mostly exist in this form and demonstrate many similar properties. Another thing that should be noted is the chronological order is based on the period when one type of organic electrode material is intensively studied, which is more appropriate for us to understand their development history and tendencies. Since conjugated carbonyl compounds (Section 3.5) are not only the earliest type of organic electrode materials, but also the most attractive and fruitful research field at present, we will pay more attention to this part.
3.1 Conducting polymers (1981–)
Since the discovery of conducting polymers in 1977,31 scientists found that they can achieve not only the electronic conductivity of semiconductors or even metals, but also the redox activity of electrode materials. Thus there have appeared a lot of researches on conducting polymers as electrode materials for rechargeable batteries since 1981.32 Among various conducting polymers studied in the past decades, there are five typical ones including polyacetylene (PAc),32,33 polyparaphenylene (PPP),33,34 polyaniline (PAn),35,36 polypyrrole (PPy)37,38 and polythiophene (PTh)39,40 (Table 2). Although in Table 1 we attribute them to three types of structures, they actually show many similar electrochemical behaviors.
Table 2 Some electrochemical parameters of typical conducting polymers




Name
Structure
Doping level (xmax)
Theoretical capacity/mA h g−1
Redox potential (V vs. Li+/Li)




Polyacetylene (PAc)



0.07
144
0–2.0 (n)


3.5–4.0 (p)


Polyparaphenylene (PPP)



0.4
141
0–1.0 (n)


4.0–4.5 (p)


Polyaniline (PAn)



1.0
295
3.0–4.0


Polypyrrole (PPy)



0.33
136
3.0–4.0


Polythiophene (PTh)



0.25
82
3.0–4.2




Among the five typical conducting polymers, PAn, PPy and PTh are regarded as p-type organics, while PAc and PPP are belong to bipolar organics (Fig. 1). When used as cathode, PAc and PPP can be also attributed to p-type organics. Unlike other p-type organics, conducting polymers always exist in the p-doping state instead of the electroneutralization state. It is well known that electroneutral polymers are absolute insulators and only doped polymers show greatly improved electronic conductivity, which was the first discovery in conducting polymers.31 Except for PAc, all other conducting polymers are pristinely in the p-doped state, synthesized by either chemical36 or electrochemical41 oxidation polymerization. The ratio of doped units to all structural units is defined as the doping level or doping degree, expressed as x in (Px+·xA−)n (0 ≤ x ≤ 1). P means the structural unit in the conducting polymer, which is equal to CH for PAc.
In Fig. 5, we demonstrate the typical electrochemical redox process of a p-type conducting polymer as cathode material. The open circuit voltage (OCV) of the cathode material strongly depends on the doping level, thus the gradient of the voltage profile is very sloping. Since the as-synthesized conducting polymer is in an intermediate state (B point), it can be firstly either discharged to the full-reduction state (A point) or charged to a semi-oxidation state (C point) when using Li metal as the anode (Fig. 2c and d). However, it is unlikely to charge to the full-oxidation state (D point). For most conducting polymers, the full-oxidation state is very unstable and it begins to decompose (usually involving reaction with the electrolyte) after the C point, due to the serious charge repulsion interaction between structural units. We define Vmax as the highest cutoff voltage for conducting polymers to achieve both large capacity and acceptable cycling performance, accordingly the highest doping level is xmax.
 Fig. 5  Typical electrochemical redox process of p-type conducting polymer. 
The xmax is an important factor to estimate the theoretical capacity of a conducting polymer. However, even for a specified conducting polymer, xmax was greatly different in previous researches. This is because xmax is strongly depends on the synthesis conditions, anion type and electrochemical test conditions. In order to compare the electrochemical performance between different conducting polymers, we adopt the highest reliable xmax values in the literature11 and calculate their theoretical capacity based on these values (Table 2). Note that the theoretical capacity is based on the molecular weight of only the P unit in (Px+·xA−)n, while the experimental specific capacity is mostly based on the molecular weight of Px+·xA− in the pristine state. Because of the low doping level of PAc, PPP, PPy and PTh, their theoretical capacity is less than 150 mA h g−1 and the practical capacity is much lower than this value. It is possible for PAn to achieve a full-oxidation state (xmax = 1) in non-aqueous electrolyte and thus it has the highest theoretical capacity of 295 mA h g−1, but it is difficult for the practical capacity based on the total mass of P and A− in the pristine state to exceed 150 mA h g−1.
As previously mentioned, p-type organics always present relatively higher redox potential than n-type organics. For the conducting polymers listed in Table 2, the redox potentials are all above 3.0 V. For PPP, the redox potential (4.0–4.5 V) is even higher than most inorganic electrode materials. However, because of the much lower specific capacity, the energy density of conducting polymers is not comparable to inorganics. Another critical drawback of conducting polymers is their poor cycling stability, especially when increasing the cutoff voltage for higher capacity. This is mainly because the irreversible overoxidation reaction at high voltage makes more-and-more structural units inactive during charge/discharge cycling. In addition, the low Coulombic efficiency and self-discharge phenomenon are also two negative factors hindering the practical application of conducting polymers in rechargeable lithium batteries.
In spite of the above disadvantages, the greatest strength of conducting polymers is their high electronic conductivity. Therefore the most appropriate application for energy storage is as a cathode for supercapacitors42,43 or as a conductive additive in composite cathode materials.44,45 PAn and PPy are two of the most promising in these applications due to their simple synthesis, relatively high energy density and cycling stability. The pseudocapacitor based on a conducting polymer cathode can undergo a fast redox reaction in the bulk of the material, so it can obtain a much superior capacitance compared to conventional electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLC) based on carbon electrodes.43 Since their electrochemical performance can be promoted by improving the surface area, electronic conductivity and ion conductivity, recently there has been a lot of research work on the synthesis of nanostructured conducting polymers,46,47 as well as nanocomposites of conducting polymers with CNT48 or graphene.49–52 Especially for PAn, there have been many attempts to prepare PAn/graphene composite paper or thin films,49–52 which can obtain both high electrochemical performance and high flexibility (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  (a) Photograph and (b) cross-section SEM image of PAn/graphene composite thin film. Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Organodisulfides (1988–)
It is known that S–S bond can be reversibly broken and rebuilt, and the two-electron redox reaction (Table 1) can provide a much larger capacity than the doping/undoping reaction of conducting polymers. Therefore there has appeared a large amount of research on organodisulfide (Fig. 7) cathode materials since 1988,53 most of which was done by S. J. Visco et al.53–56 and N. Oyama et al.57–62 In order to clearly understand the electrochemical behavior of organodisulfide cathode materials, we divide their development history into the following three stages.
(a) Dimeric organodisulfides: in 1988, S. J. Visco et al. firstly introduced TETD as a cathode material for a high temperature sodium battery.53 Later they studied some other dimeric organodisulfides and the reaction kinetics of the RSSR/2RS− reaction.54 Due to the high solubility of RSSR and RS− in organic electrolytes, it is unlikely that these kind of organodisulfides can be applied in rechargeable lithium batteries.
(b) Polymeric organodisulfides with S–S bonds in the main chain: This kind of polymer is mainly synthesized from dimercaptan or multimercaptan by oxidation polymerization.55,56 The most typical example is PDMcT,57–62 which has attracted the most attention among all organodisulfides due to its high theoretical specific capacity (362 mA h g−1). Note that although the oxidised state of PDMcT is polymer, the discharged product DMcT2− is a small organic molecule, and sometimes DMcT is directly used as the active material in the reduced state. Due to the serious dissolution of small organic molecules in the electrolyte, the cycling stability of this kind of polymer cathode is still very poor. Another critical problem is the slow reaction kinetics of the S–S bond, which results in low utilization of active material at ambient temperature. In 1995, N. Oyama et al. discovered the electrocatalysis effect of PAn for the redox reaction of DMcT.58 Later, they also found that the addition of Cu2+ can further improve the battery performance of DMcT due to its electrocatalysis and stabilization effect.59 From then on, there appeared a lot of researches on DMcT/PAn and DMcT/PAn/Cu(II) composite materials.60–62 However, the battery performance is still far from practical use because of intrinsic dissolution problem and slow kinetics.
(c) Polymeric organodisulfides with S–S bonds in the side chain: This kind of polymer consists of conducting polymer as the main chain and S–S bonds in the side chain, two typical examples of which are PDTDA63 and PDTTA.64 Although PDTDA contains an insoluble and electronically conductive main chain, the cycling performance is still poor because the dislocation of the two main chains after discharging hinders the rebuilding of the S–S bond. Therefore, researchers proposed another type of polymer with S–S bonds on the side of the same chain, such as PDTTA. This design can solve both the dissolution problem and dislocation problem, but the electrochemical performance of PDTTA is still unsatisfactory mainly due to the slow kinetics.
 Fig. 7  Typical organodisulfides and their theoretical capacity: tetraethylthiuram disulfide (TETD),53 poly(2,5-dimercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole) (PDMcT),57–62 poly(2,2′-dithiodianiline) (PDTDA),63 poly(5,8-dihydro-1H,4H-2,3,6,7-tetrathia-anthracene) (PDTTA).64 The capacity of PDTDA is based on the assumption that each aniline unit can contribute 0.5 e and ignores the mass of A−. 
In summary, organodisulfides were recognized as promising organic cathode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries in the 1990s. In order to overcome the problem of dissolution and slow kinetics, scientists have made huge efforts in optimizing the polymer structure and incorporating electrocatalytic additives. However, the intrinsic drawbacks are difficult to overcome completely, and the electrochemical performance of organodisulfides is unlikely to be improved to an acceptable level for practical use. Therefore, the research on this topic has almost disappeared in recent years.
3.3 Thioethers (2007–2009)
In the research of organosulfide cathode materials, C. Zhan et al.65–68 found that sometimes the material can deliver a much higher capacity than its theoretical value when certain electrolytes (e.g., LiTFSI/DOL + DME) and a high cutoff voltage (e.g., >4.2 V) is applied. They speculated this is related to the four-electron reaction of “thioether–sulfoxide–sulphone” (Table 1) Therefore they tested several thioethers as cathode materials, either conjugated66,67 or unconjugated.65,68 For instance, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)67 and poly(tetrahydrobenzodithiophene) (PDBDT)68 (Table 1) can achieve a discharge capacity of as high as 500–800 mA h g−1, with a discharge voltage between 1.5 and 2.5 V. In spite of the high energy density, the reaction polarization is too large and the cycling performance is very unstable. Moreover, the cells cannot avoid becoming dead after dozens of charge/discharge cycles. This is probably due to the unusual reaction mechanism, in which the electrolyte plays an important role in providing O atoms to form sulfoxide and sulphone groups. Since the detailed reaction mechanism is still unknown yet, and the poor cycling stability is far from practical use, this type of thioether cathode materials has no practical significance except showing the possibility for multi-electron reaction of organics.
3.4 Nitroxyl radical polymers (2002–)
In 2002, K. Nakahara et al.69 firstly proposed a stable nitroxyl radical polymer, namely PTMA (Fig. 8), as cathode material for rechargeable lithium batteries. After 2007, there appeared a lot of researches on radical polymer electrode materials,70–72 mostly based on nitroxyl radicals, such as 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) and 2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrrolidine-1-oxyl (PROXYL) (Table 1). The majority of research works on this topic were done by K. Nakahara et al.69,73–76 and H. Nishide et al.22,70,71,77–83 Although in previous reviews70–72 other radicals were also categorized as radical polymer electrode materials, and those batteries were defined as organic radical batteries (ORBs), only nitroxyl radical polymers are discussed here; but other radical polymers will be also mentioned in Section 3.6.
 Fig. 8  Typical nitroxyl radical polymers and their theoretical capacity: poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl-4-yl methacrylate) (PTMA),69,73,74,83–85 poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl-4-yl vinyl ether) (PTVE),22,75,76 poly(TEMPO-substituted norbornene) (PTN),77,80,81 poly(2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrrolidine-1-oxyl-3-yl ethylene oxide) (PTEO).82 
In Table 1, the reaction mechanism of nitroxyl radical indicates it is a bipolar organic, but there is little research on its two-electron reaction.78,85 In most cases, they are used as p-type polymers in order to obtain high discharge voltage and stable cycling performance. Thus, configuration d in Fig. 2 must be adopted for a nitroxyl radical polymer to assemble a cell. In spite of the A− consumed from the electrolyte, the theoretical capacity of nitroxyl radical polymers is strictly limited by the one-electron reaction and their large molecular weight. In Fig. 8, we list the structures and theoretical capacities of some typical examples, including PTMA, PTVE, PTN and PTEO. The highest theoretical capacity of these polymers is only 147 mA h g−1 and it is unlikely to be further improved by structure optimization.

Fig. 9a and b show the typical battery performance of PTMA,74 which is the most studied among various nitroxyl radical polymers due to its sufficient stability and relative high capacity. The charge/discharge plateau is very flat at 3.5 V and the utilization ratio is close to 100%. The cycling and rate performance of PTMA are also excellent due to the stable polymer structure and fast reaction kinetics of the radical. Other TEMPO based polymers always show similar electrochemical behavior but different specific capacity. The greatest strength of nitroxyl radical polymers is their high rate performance. If the electrode is well fabricated, TEMPO based polymers can easily sustain a current rate of 20 C or 50 C. This arises mainly from the fast electron self-exchange reaction between adjacent TEMPO units (Fig. 9c),70 which result in the efficient electron transfer despite the insulating polymer main chain.
 Fig. 9  (a) Typical charge/discharge curves and (b) cycling and rate performance of PTMA as the cathode material for a rechargeable lithium battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright © 2006 Elsevier. (c) The electron transfer process in a radical polymer electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright © 2009 WILEY-VCH. 
3.5 Conjugated carbonyl compounds (1969–)
Quinone is a type of well-known organic with good electroactivity. The redox mechanism can be generalized as an enolization reaction and a reverse reaction of the carbonyl group, which can be promoted by a conjugated structure (Table 1). In fact, besides quinone, many other conjugated carbonyl compounds can also undergo a similar electrochemical redox reaction. Based on their high theoretical capacity, fast reaction kinetics, as well as their structural diversity, we believe they are the most promising type of organic electrode materials so far.
In Fig. 10, we take AQ and NTCDA as examples, to show the typical redox reaction of quinone and dianhydride, the two most famous kinds of structural units among conjugated carbonyl compounds. For a dilute AQ solution, its two-step reversible redox mechanism involving a radical anion (AQ˙−) as transition state has been widely reported (Fig. 11a).86 However, when used as electrode materials for rechargeable batteries, there is probably only one flat charge/discharge plateau (Fig. 11b). This is may be because AQ˙− is more unstable in the solid-electrode-containing conductive carbon than in the solution, thus the second reduction step (AQ˙−/AQ2−) occurs very fast and the voltage gap between the two steps is too small to distinguish the plateaus. This phenomenon has been also discovered for many other conjugated carbonyl compounds with a two-electron reaction.
 Fig. 10  Typical electrochemical redox mechanism of quinone and dianhydride. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Cyclic voltammogram of 2 mM AQ in 0.1 M TBAP/CH3CN electrolyte at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society. (b) Charge–discharge curve of AQ electrode (AQ:C:PTFE = 6:3:1) in 1 M LiTFSI/DOL + DME electrolyte at a current rate of 0.2 C. 
For NTCDA, although it has four carbonyl groups, it is unlikely to fully utilize all of them. In order to obtain high reversibility and cycling stability, a two-electron reaction is usually adopted for rechargeable batteries (Fig. 10). Although lowering the cutoff voltage can further reduce NTCDA and obtain higher discharge capacity, the structure may be destroyed due to the serious charge repulsion interaction, which is similar to what happened in conducting polymers at high charging voltage. The charge repulsion interaction significantly restricts the practical capacity of electrode materials with high carbonyl group density or multi-electron reaction.
In the above discussion we introduced briefly the general electrochemical behavior of conjugated carbonyl compounds. In the past decades, a large amount of such materials have been investigated as electrode materials. In order to clearly elaborate their development history and features, we divided them into three types: small organic molecules, organic polymers and organic salts.

3.5.1 Small organic molecules (1969–). 
In 1969, D. L. Williams et al.9 reported a primary lithium battery using dichloroisocyanuric acid (DCA) as cathode. This is probably the first report on organic electrode materials. From then on, many scientists attempted to use small organic molecules as cathodes to assembly rechargeable batteries, with either an aqueous or non-aqueous electrolyte. In Fig. 12, we list the typical structures and their theoretical capacity, mostly based on quinone and dianhydride. Although many of them can achieve high discharge capacity and high energy density, they all suffered from the dissolution problem and cannot obtain acceptable cycling performance.
 Fig. 12  Typical small organic molecules based on conjugated carbonyl groups and their theoretical capacity. (a) Simple quinones: benzoquinone (BQ),21,87 naphthoquinone (NQ), anthraquinone (AQ),86,88,89 phenanthraquinone (PQ).90 (b) Quinone derivatives: 2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-benzoquinone (DMBQ),21,91 2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone (chloranil),87,92,93 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone (DDQ),87,90,94 1,2,4-trihydroxyanthraquinone (purpurin).24 (c) Multi-carbonyl quinones: 5,7,12,14-pentacenetetrone (PT),95 nonylbenzohexaquinone (NBHQ).96,97 (d) Simple dianhydrides: pyromellitic anhydride (PMDA),98 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA),99,100 3,4,9,10-perylentetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA).99 (e) Other conjugated carbonyl compounds: dichloroisocyanuric acid (DCA),9N,N′-diallyl-2,3,5,6-tetraketopiperazine (AP),101 5,5′-indigodisulfonic acid sodium salt (indigo carmine).102 The theoretical capacity is calculated based on the carbonyl group number except dianhydrides and AP. 
In order to solve the dissolution problem, researchers have tried several approaches in recent years. On one hand, increasing the content of conductive carbon89 or incorporating mesoporous carbon88 can strengthen the immobilization and prevent the active material from dissolving. On the other hand, using a solid electrolyte (e.g., LISICON)21 or polymer electrolyte (e.g., LiTFSI/PEO)94 can completely prevent dissolution. However, so far there has been no satisfactory result reported. The immobilization method cannot essentially avoid the dissolving and may probably reduce the capacity of the whole electrode. A solid electrolyte or polymer electrolyte will bring about low ion conductivity at ambient temperature and large interface resistance. Although using a liquid21 or quasi-solid94 electrode can reduce the interface resistance, it will greatly reduce the energy density of the whole battery. A very recent work shows that a high-salt-concentration electrolyte is helpful in inhibiting the dissolution of polysulfides for Li–S batteries,103 which is probably also a useful strategy for many organic electrode materials.


3.5.2 Organic polymers (1986–). 
In 1986, J. S. Foos et al.104 attempted to synthesize polymeric quinone (PQ) from electrochemically synthesized poly(l,4-dimethoxybenzene) and tested its electrochemical performance as a cathode for lithium batteries. PQ looks like a perfect structure for polymer cathode based on conjugated carbonyl, because of its relatively high discharge voltage (2.5–3.0 V vs. Li+/Li), high theoretical capacity (505 mA h g−1), as well as its insolubility. Unfortunately, however, the practical discharge capacity was only about one fourth of the theoretical value, and the cycling performance was very poor, due to the imperfect synthesis and unoptimized test conditions at that time.
After 1999, researchers have synthesized and tested many other polymer electrode materials based on quinone and dianhydride105–113 (Fig. 13). Especially in recent years, many polymers (e.g., PAQS,108 PVAQ,110 PPYT111 and PI-5 (ref. 112)) have shown excellent comprehensive electrochemical performance compared to previous results, including high capacity close to the theoretical value, high cycling stability and high Coulombic efficiency, as well as high rate capability. For instance, PPYT can retain 83% of its initial capacity after 500 cycles, or 90% of its capacity at 30 C as compared to 1 C (Fig. 14).111
 Fig. 13  Typical polymer electrode materials based on conjugated carbonyl groups and their theoretical capacity: polymeric quinone (PQ),104 poly(5-amino-1,4-naphthoquinone) (PANQ),105 poly(2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone-3,6-methylene) (PDBM),106,107 poly(anthraquinonyl sulfide) (PAQS),108,109,113 poly(2-vinylanthraquinone) (PVAQ),110 polymer-bound pyrene-4,5,9,10-tetraone (PPYT),111 polyimide (PI-2 and PI-5).112,113 The theoretical capacity is calculated based on the carbonyl group number, except for PI-2 and PI-5. 
 Fig. 14  (a) Cycling performance and (b) rate performance of PPYT. The cathode (PYT or PPYT:AB:PVDF = 3:8:2) is tested in LiTFSI/tetraglyme electrolyte at 45 °C. For (a) PYT is tested at 0.2 C while PPYT is tested at 1 C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Compared to monomer, polymer is always completely insoluble in the electrolyte, either aqueous or non-aqueous. Therefore the best way to solve the dissolution problem is by constructing polymer electrode materials with a stable and inactive skeleton, as well as highly electroactive organic group or moiety. However, it will also bring about many drawbacks, including reduced theoretical specific capacity, enlarged electrochemical polarization and slow ion/electron transportation in the electrode. For example, compared to AQ, PAQS can attain significantly improved cycling stability with slightly reduced capacity (Fig. 15), but the charge/discharge curve becomes more sloping, with slightly reduced average discharge voltage. This is probably related to the charge repulsion interaction between AQ units in the polymer chain, in addition to the electronic insulation of the polymer. Sometimes there is a capacity increasing stage for the polymer electrode, identified as the “activation process” (Fig. 15). We attribute this phenomenon to insufficient contact between the polymer and the electrolyte, which will be gradually improved during the charge/discharge process. Another major problem is the low electronic conductivity, because most polymers are insulators. In order to fully utilize the active material, a large amount of conductive carbon (e.g., 30–60%) is usually added during the fabrication of the electrode. An alternative approach is optimizing the mixing of active material with conductive carbon, for example, by in situ polymerization (Fig. 18).113 If the electrode is well fabricated, conjugated carbonyl based polymers are likely to achieve good high rate performance due to the fast reaction kinetics.
 Fig. 15  Comparison between the electrochemical performance of AQ and PAQS as cathode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries. The cathode (AQ or PAQS:C:PTFE = 6:3:1) is tested in 1 M LiTFSI/DOL + DME electrolyte at a current rate of 0.2 C. 


3.5.3 Organic salts (2008–). 
Since 2008, there has appeared a new type of conjugated carbonyl compound as electrode materials, namely organic salts or coordination polymers (Table 3). These organic salts include Li or Na salts of hydroxyl quinone,26,114–116 conjugated dicarboxylates117–121 and dianhydride derivatives.122–124 The majority of the works were done by M. Armand, J.-M. Tarascon and P. Poizot.26,115,117,121–123. The advantage of these type of organics is that the coordination bond such as O⋯Li⋯O can connect the small organic molecules and partially solve the dissolution problem. Therefore they can achieve much better cycling stability compared to small organic molecules, but are still unsatisfactory in long-term cycling. Although these organics already contain Li ions, they are still in the oxidation state of n-type organics. This is because the C–O− group connected to Li+ cannot be utilized to contribute to the capacity, otherwise the crystal structure will be irreversibly broken down, resulting in poor cycling performance.
Table 3 Typical organic salts based on conjugated carbonyl and their electrochemical parameters. Note that the practical capacity is usually approximate




Formula
Structure
Redox potential (V vs. Li+/Li)
Theoretical capacity/mA h g−1
Practical capacity/mA h g−1
Reference




Li2C6H2O4



1.7–2.5
353
176

114



Li2C6O6



1.5–3.5
589
500

26



Li4C6O6



1.6–2.0
274
200

115



Li2C14H6O4



1.5–2.5
213
126

116



Li2C6H4O4



1.3–1.5
348
150

117



Li2C8H4O4



0.7–1.0
301
300

117



Na2C8H4O4



0.2–0.6 V vs. Na+/Na
255
250

118–120



Li2C16H8O4



0.6–0.7
193
200

121



Li2C18H12O8



1.6–2.0
145 (2e)
125

122



Li2C10H2N2O4



1.5–2.0
235 (2e)
200

123



Li2C14H4N2O4



1.8–2.8
193 (2e)
140

124





Because of the existence of the C–O− group, the charge repulsion interaction will lower the redox potential of the material. For instance, Li2C6H2O4 (ref. 114) and Li2C14H6O4 (ref. 116) show much lower discharge voltage than BQ and AQ, respectively. Especially, conjugated dicarboxylates117–121 always show a much lower redox potential (e.g., 0.5–1.5 V vs. Li+/Li) than other conjugated carbonyl compounds, thus they are rare organic anode candidates for rechargeable lithium or sodium batteries. For example, after lithium terephthalate (Li2C8H4O4) was reported,117 there were many attempts on sodium terephthalate (Na2C8H4O4)118–120 as the anode for Na-ion battery, due to its appropriate redox potential and relatively high capacity.

3.6 Other organic electrode materials
Except for the above-mentioned five types of organic electrode materials, there have also appeared many other novel structures in recent years, as listed in Fig. 16. Among them, triazine is a bipolar organic, TCNQ and poly(galvinoxylstyrene) belong to the n-type organics, while the others are all of the p-type. PTPAn, triquinoxalinylene and PVK all have a conjugated amine structure, so their redox mechanism is similar to that of PAn and PPy (Table 1). In spite of the low theoretical capacity of PTPAn,125 it shows excellent rate capability at 20 C and cycling stability over 1000 cycles, mainly benefiting from its structural specificity. Triazine128,129 is another conjugated amine structure, but unlike others, its bipolar property can provide it with a much larger reversible capacity between 1.5 and 4.5 V vs. Li+/Li. Poly(S-TTN)130 contains both the structure of S–S bond and thianthrene (TA), but its reaction mechanism is different from other organodisulfides when tested between 2.8 and 4.4 V. It is similar to the p-type reaction of PTh (Table 1), but with much higher specific capacity and cycling stability. Poly(vinylferrocene)131 is a rare example of an organometallic electrode material, involving the well-known ferrocene redox moiety. It shows a redox potential of about 3.5 V and a specific capacity closed to the theoretical value (126 mA h g−1). Although the present result is not so satisfactory, it is expected to be a high power cathode candidate because of the fast reaction kinetics of the ferrocene unit. It also inspires us that organometallic electrode material may be another important development direction besides organics and inorganics. TCNQ90,132 has similar electrochemical behavior to quinone, with an even higher redox potential (2.8–3.2 V) than BQ, due to the strong electron-withdrawing effect of four CN groups. Besides the nitroxyl radical, there are still many other kinds of stable radicals that have been investigated as electrode materials, such as poly(galvinoxylstyrene)81 and PDBDAB.133 Galvinoxyl is a n-type radical with a redox potential of about 3.0 V, while dialkoxyaryl is a p-type organic with a redox potential of about 4.0 V. Like the nitroxyl radical polymers, the greatest strength and weakness of poly(galvinoxylstyrene) and PDBDAB is, respectively, the fast reaction kinetics and the low theoretical capacity. Although many of these organics are inappropriate for practical use due to their low energy density, they indicate the great structural diversity of organic electrode materials. Some structures can also inspire and encourage us to design and investigate new electrode materials with higher electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 16  Other organic electrode materials and their theoretical capacity: polytriphenylamine (PTPAn),125 triquinoxalinylene,126 poly(N-vinylcarbazole) (PVK),127 triazine,128,129 sulfur-linked tetrathionaphthalene polymer [poly(S-TTN)],130 poly(vinylferrocene),131 tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ),90,132 poly(galvinoxylstyrene),81 polymeric 2,5-di-t-butyl-1,4-dialkoxybenzene (PDBDAB).133 
4 Perspective applications of organic electrode materials
The high electrochemical performance, in addition with the unique properties of organics such as flexibility, processability and structure diversity, provide organic electrode materials with great opportunities to be applied in various types of energy storage devices, as either cathodes or anodes, with either aqueous or non-aqueous electrolytes, in either the bulk or thin-film forms. Note that the following classifications are according to different standards, so sometimes they may overlap each other.
4.1 Cathodes for Li–organic or Na–organic batteries
In previous researches, almost all organic electrode materials were investigated in a half-cell with Li metal as the anode and sufficient non-aqueous electrolyte, because it is compatible with either n-type or p-type organics, with ether high or low redox potential (Fig. 2). However, in practical use, n-type organics are more appropriate than p-type organics because they do not consume electrolyte during the charge/discharge process. Since the Li+N− cathode is difficult to synthesise and store in an ambient environment, n-type organic cathode materials are unlikely to replace inorganic cathodes in conventional Li-ion batteries with graphite as the anode. Thus the best choice for the organic cathode to be used in a rechargeable lithium battery is configuration a in Fig. 2. We define it as an Li–organic battery, following the definition of the Li–S battery and Li–O2 batteries. As discussed in Section 2.4, the safety issue of an Li metal anode is a common challenge faced by Li–S, Li–O2 and Li–organic batteries. Beyond that, although Li–organic battery cannot achieve as high an energy density as the Li–S and Li–O2 battery, it does not suffer from their insurmountable problems, such as unavoidable dissolution and large reaction polarization. In particular, many polymer cathode materials have already shown excellent comprehensive battery performance comparable to LiCoO2 and LiFePO4. Therefore, the Li–organic battery is somewhat closer to practical use than the Li–S and Li–O2 battery, in spite of the cost and the safety issues of the Li anode. At present, however, it is still necessary to develop novel polymer cathodes with higher energy density and the possibility of large-scale production.
Rechargeable sodium batteries134–136 have been recognized recently as an alternative to rechargeable lithium batteries because of the much lower cost of sodium. However, the migration of the typical inorganic cathode materials of lithium batteries to sodium batteries has mostly failed, because the crystalline structure is very sensitive to the insertion ion radius. In contrast, the ion radius has very little effect on the electrochemical performance of n-type organics, mainly due to their “soft” structure. Therefore, the cathode material for an Li–organic battery can be directly used as the cathode for an Na–organic battery. The discharge voltage is expected to be about 0.3 V lower because of the voltage gap between the Li+/Li and Na+/Na couple.
4.2 Anodes for Li-ion or Na-ion batteries
Since it is possible for n-type organics to possess a relatively low redox potential (e.g., 0–1.5 V vs. Li+/Li), they may be also applicable as anodes for non-aqueous Li-ion or Na-ion batteries, as illustrated in Fig. 2b. Up to now, there have been very few reports on organic anode materials, including bipolar conducting polymers (PAc33 and PPP33,34) and conjugated dicarboxylates.117–121 Due to the low capacity of the conducting polymer, it is more appropriate to develop conjugated carbonyl compounds as anode materials. Compared to Li-ion batteries, an organic anode is better suited for Na-ion batteries, because of the lack of an applicable anode for Na-ion batteries, as well as the relatively lower redox potential vs. Na+/Na. For instance, Fig. 17 shows the redox reaction and charge/discharge curves of disodium terephthalate (Na2C8H4O4)118 as anode for Na-ion battery. The relative low redox potential (0.2–0.6 V vs. Na+/Na) and flat voltage plateau give important insights into developing novel organic anode materials, but the large irreversible capacity in the initial cycle is another challenge faced by organic anodes.
 Fig. 17  Redox reaction and charge/discharge curves of Na2C8H4O4 anodes for Na-ion batteries. Adapted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH. 
4.3 High power electrodes for supercapacitors or batteries
In order to satisfy the demands of electric vehicles for both high energy density and high power density, it is necessary to develop electrode materials with extremely high rate performance (e.g., releasing all their energy within several seconds). As previously mentioned, one major strength of organic electrode materials is their inherent fast reaction kinetics, compared to the slow Li-ion diffusion kinetics in the bulk inorganic particles. Conducting polymers, nitroxyl radical polymers and conjugated carbonyl compounds are all promising candidates for high power electrodes. For instance, there are already a lot of investigations on PAn/C composite cathodes for pseudocapacitors48–52 (Fig. 6). Recently, there have also been some attempts to modify carbonyl groups on the surface of CNT137 or graphene,29 to achieve both high energy density and high power density by combining the redox reaction with the double-layer capacitance of high surface-area carbon. An alternative approach to overcome the low carbonyl density and complicated synthesis is to prepare polymer/carbon nanocomposites through in situ polymerization. For example, a PAQS/graphene nanocomposite113 can deliver a discharge capacity of more than 100 mA h g−1 within 16 seconds (Fig. 18). Anyway, once the electrode has been fabricated so as to sufficiently mix organics and conductive carbon, it will be much easier for organics to achieve higher rate performance than inorganics.
 Fig. 18  (a) TEM image of PAQS/graphene composite synthesized by in situ polymerization. (b) Voltage profiles of PAQS/graphene composite (PAQS:graphene = 74:26) at different C-rates. The capacity is calculated based on the mass of the whole composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. 
4.4 Thin film batteries or all-solid batteries
Thin film batteries are useful in many applications such as IC cards, sensors, microelectronics and bendable electronic equipment.138–140 According to their different type of electrolytes, they can be divided into polymer thin film batteries with polymer or gel electrolytes (Fig. 19a), and all-solid thin film batteries with inorganic solid electrolytes (Fig. 19b). When a polymer electrolyte (e.g., LiTFSI/PEO) or solid electrolyte (e.g. LISICON) is applied in the battery, there is a great opportunity for small organic molecules to be utilized because of the elimination of the dissolution problem. Recently, there have been many attempts to use carbon paper (a thin film of CNT or graphene, Fig. 19c and d) as a current collector to assemble flexible or transparent thin film batteries.141,142 Compared to inorganic cathode materials,141 the compatibility of organics with CNT or graphene is helpful to reduce the interface resistance between the carbon paper and organic cathode, or to synthesize an organic/carbon nanocomposite48–52,113 as cathode, therefore organics are more appropriate for the fabrication of a flexible thin film battery140,143 (Fig. 19a). Some polymers, for example photocrosslinked PTN77 (Fig. 19e), can form a transparent thin film, which is significant for the assembly of transparent energy storage devices.142,144 Moreover, many novel electrode fabrication techniques such as casting,52 patterning,144 printing145 (Fig. 19f) and vapor deposition could be used to assemble thin film batteries, based on the special properties of organics including solubility, film-forming ability and sublimability. In one word, organic electrode materials bring about great opportunities to make energy storage devices thinner, smaller, flexible, printable and even transparent.
 Fig. 19  (a) Possible flexible thin film battery based on n-type organic as cathode and carbon (CNT or graphene) paper as current collector. (b) Possible all-solid thin film battery based on n-type organic as cathode and solid Li-ion conductor as electrolyte. (c) Photograph of flexible graphene paper. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright © 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photograph of a flexible, transparent and conductive CNT thin film on a plastic substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH. (e) Photograph of transparent PTN thin film on an ITO-PET substrate prepared by a photocrosslinking approach. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright © 2007 Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Photograph of ink-jet printed supercapacitor on Xerox paper. Reprinted from ref. 145. Copyright © 2010 American Institute of Physics. 
4.5 Aqueous rechargeable batteries
Although aqueous rechargeable batteries have a much lower energy density than non-aqueous Li-ion batteries due to the working voltage limitation, they still attract much attention because of their low cost, high safety and high power density. However, previous investigations on aqueous rechargeable lithium batteries (ARLBs)146–148 indicate that most inorganic intercalation compounds show much poorer electrochemical performance in an aqueous electrolyte than in a non-aqueous electrolyte, mainly due to harmful side reactions and dissolution during the charge/discharge process. In contrast, polymer electrode materials do not suffer from these problems if the charge/discharge voltage range is within the electrochemical window of the aqueous electrolyte. Many polymers have already shown excellent electrochemical performance in an aqueous electrolyte, including conducting polymer (PAn),43 nitroxyl radical polymer (PTVE)22 and conjugated carbonyl polymer (PVAQ).110 Rather than in non-aqueous electrolyte, they can sufficiently show their ultra-fast charge/discharge ability in aqueous electrolyte due to the much higher ion conductivity. Among these polymers, conducting polymers and nitroxyl radical polymers are more appropriate for cathodes, while conjugated carbonyl polymers should be applied as anodes because of their much lower redox potential (2.0–3.0 V vs. Li+/Li). Since the cation type has little effect on the electrochemical performance of conjugated carbonyl polymers, besides ARLBs, aqueous rechargeable sodium batteries (ARSBs) or even proton batteries are also realizable in the future.
4.6 Redox flow batteries
Since the dissolution problem of small organic molecules is difficult to overcome in common rechargeable batteries, there is an alternative strategy of using them in solution phase with an ion exchange membrane as separator. In order to fully utilize the organic active materials in solution, the redox flow battery (RFB)149 is a good choice. Compared to previous RFBs, for example, all vanadium flow batteries and RFBs based on organic cathodes and/or anodes are more environmentally friendly.93,150–152 The structure diversity of organic electrode materials provides huge numbers of candidates for the cathode and anode. The redox potential and solubility of the specified organics can be also modified by introducing other functional groups. In order to improve the solubility of organic active materials, a non-aqueous electrolyte may be also used in the RFB,150–152 which will significantly enlarge the working voltage of the battery.
4.7 All-organic batteries
An all-organic battery constitutes both an organic cathode and an organic anode. Usually, except for current collectors and Li-ions (or Na-ions) in the electrolyte, there are no other metal elements. They have attracted much interest in recent years because of their flexibility, sustainability and environmental friendliness. At present, the attempts on all-organic battery have mainly focused on matching a p-type cathode with an n-type anode (Fig. 2d). For instance, the p-type radical cathode PTN is matched with an n-type radical anode poly(galvinoxylstyrene) to assemble a high power all-organic battery.81 Another example is thr bipolar conducting polymer PPP,34 which was used as both cathode and anode, benefiting from the large voltage gap between its p-type reaction and n-type reaction (Table 2). In spite of the low energy density, these systems are far from practical use due to the consumption of the electrolyte in the charging process. Therefore we proposed a novel type of all-organic battery, with n-type organics as both the cathode and anode (configuration b in Fig. 2b). More specifically, the battery constitutes conjugated carbonyl compound N with a low redox potential as the anode and conjugated carbonyl compound M+N′− with high redox potential as the cathode (Fig. 20). This system can be operated in either an aqueous or non-aqueous electrolyte, with various cations. It is expected this system can obtain a working voltage of about 2.0–2.5 V in a non-aqueous electrolyte, or around 1.0 V in an aqueous electrolyte. In an aqueous electrolyte, a proton may be used as a substitute for Li+ or Na+, thus a metal-free all-organic battery could be realized, which could be also defined as “proton battery”.2 To achieve this goal, there are a lot of challenges to face in developing high performance organic cathodes and anodes based on conjugated carbonyls.
 Fig. 20  A possible all-organic battery based on conjugated carbonyl cathode and anode. 
5 Conclusions
In summary, we provide an overview of organic electrode materials, including their fundamental knowledge, development history and perspective applications. Generally, the development of organic electrode materials is still in its infant stage, after more than 40 years' research. Fortunately, they are now meeting great opportunities because of increasing concerns on resources and environmental issues, the energy density limitation of inorganic cathode materials, as well as the electrochemical performance breakthrough of organic electrodes in recent years. Among different types of organics, we believe conjugated carbonyl compounds are the most promising type at present, because only they have the potential to achieve simultaneously high energy density, high cycling stability and high power density (Fig. 21). Moreover, its n-type reaction mechanism and structural diversity provide it with broad application prospects, compared to p-type conducting polymers and nitroxyl radical polymers. Of course, there are still a lot of new structures and new reaction mechanisms to be discovered, which can be inspired by other organic functional materials such as organic photoelectric materials.19,20 Anyway, there is still a great deal of room to improve the electrochemical performance of organic electrode materials. Another important research direction is extending the application of organic electrode materials. The unique features of organics including flexibility, processability, structure diversity and fast kinetics provide organic electrode materials many perspective applications besides Li–organic batteries, such as flexible thin film batteries and all-organic batteries. Besides Li–S and Li–O2 batteries, it is also expected that organic electrode materials will show their talents in the development of sustainable and versatile energy storage devices beyond Li-ion batteries.
 Fig. 21  Comparison of the comprehensive electrochemical performance between different types of organic electrode materials. Note that this is only a rough estimation and it is not suitable to compare specific organics. 
Notes and references
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot and F. Dolhem, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2003 CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, S.-H. Kang, C. S. Johnson, J. T. Vaughey, R. Benedek and S. A. Hackney, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3112 RSC .
U. Kasavajjula, C. Wang and A. J. Appleby, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1003 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 19 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 742 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Williams, J. J. Byrne and J. S. Driscoll, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 2 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yoshino, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5798 CrossRef CAS .
P. Novák, K. Müller, K. S. V. Santhanam and O. Haas, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 207 CrossRef .
B. C. Melot and J.-M. Tarascon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1226 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Liu, W.-M. Liu, M.-H. Zhan, Z.-W. Fu and H. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1261 CAS .
Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, A. Jackson, J. J. Cha, S. S. Hong and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1486 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogasawara, A. Debart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390 CrossRef CAS .
M. Namazian and H. A. Almodarresieh, J. Mol. Struct.: THEOCHEM, 2004, 686, 97 CrossRef CAS .
K. Alizadeh and M. Shamsipur, J. Mol. Struct.: THEOCHEM, 2008, 862, 39 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, H. Zhu, Q. Meng, X. Gong and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1754 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Dong, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2208 CrossRef CAS .
H. Senoh, M. Yao, H. Sakaebe, K. Yasuda and Z. Siroma, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 10145 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koshika, N. Sano, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chem. Commun., 2009, 836 RSC .
G. Milczarek and O. Inganäs, Science, 2012, 335, 1468 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. M. Reddy, S. Nagarajan, P. Chumyim, S. R. Gowda, P. Pradhan, S. R. Jadhav, M. Dubey, G. John and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 960 CrossRef .
H. Chen, M. Armand, G. Demailly, F. Dolhem, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 269 CrossRef .
H. Chen, M. Armand, G. Demailly, F. Dolhem, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 348 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 777 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Umeda, E. Menke, M. Richard, K. L. Stamm, F. Wudl and B. Dunn, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1593 RSC .
B. Z. Jang, C. Liu, D. Neff, Z. Yu, M. C. Wang, W. Xiong and A. Zhamu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3785 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Cao and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 180 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578 RSC .
P. J. Nigrey, D. MacInnes, Jr, D. P. Nairns, A. G. MacDiarmid and A. J. Heeger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1651 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Shacklette, J. E. Toth, N. S. Murthy and R. H. Baughman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 1529 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Zhu, A. W. Lei, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 567 RSC .
A. G. MacDiarmid, L. S. Yang, W. S. Huang and B. D. Humphrey, Synth. Met., 1987, 18, 393 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gospodinova and L. Terlemezyan, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1998, 23, 1443 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mermilliod and J. Tanguy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 1073 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, J. Qian, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4913 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kaneto, K. Yoshino and Y. Inuishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1983, 22, L567 CrossRef .
L. Liu, F. Tian, X. Wang, Z. Yang, M. Zhou and X. Wang, React. Funct. Polym., 2012, 72, 45 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gurunathan, A. Vadivel Murugan, R. Marimuthu, U. P. Mulik and D. P. Amalnerkar, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1999, 61, 173 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rudge, J. Davey, I. Raistrick, S. Gottesfeld and J. P. Ferraris, J. Power Sources, 1994, 47, 89 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gomez-Romero, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 163 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7237 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Cho and S. B. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 699 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin and Q. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 179 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Salvatierra, M. M. Oliveira and A. J. G. Zarbin, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5222 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, J. Zhao, W. Ren, Z.-G. Chen, J. Tan, Z.-S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. S. Zhao and J. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1392 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185 CAS .
S. J. Visco and L. C. DeJonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 2905 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, S. J. Visco and L. C. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 750 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, S. J. Visco and L. C. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1891 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, S. J. Visco and L. C. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1896 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sotomura, H. Uemachi, K. Takeyama, K. Naoi and N. Oyama, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 37, 1851 CrossRef CAS .
N. Oyama, T. Tatsuma, T. Sato and T. Sotomura, Nature, 1995, 373, 598 CrossRef CAS .
N. Oyama, J. M. Pope and T. Sotomura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L47 CrossRef CAS .
N. Oyama and O. Hatozaki, Macromol. Symp., 2000, 156, 171 CrossRef CAS .
N. Oyama, Macromol. Symp., 2000, 159, 221 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, S. Kim, S. Mihashi, O. Hatozaki and N. Oyama, Macromol. Symp., 2002, 186, 35 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, K.-i. Kawase, M. Mori and M. Komiyama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L173 CrossRef CAS .
S.-R. Deng, L.-B. Kong, G.-Q. Hu, T. Wu, D. Li, Y.-H. Zhou and Z.-Y. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 2589 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Zhang, L. B. Kong, L. Z. Zhan, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. H. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 278 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Z.-P. Song, N. Shan, L.-Z. Zhan, J.-Y. Zhang, H. Zhan, Y.-H. Zhou and C.-M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhan, Z. Song, J. Zhang, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. Zhou and C. Zhan, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 8319 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhan, Z. Song, N. Shan, J. Zhang, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. Zhou, Z. Li and C. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 859 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, S. Iwasa, M. Satoh, Y. Morioka, J. Iriyama, M. Suguro and E. Hasegawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 359, 351 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2339 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 222 CrossRef CAS .
T. Janoschka, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6397 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, J. Iriyama, S. Iwasa, M. Suguro, M. Satoh and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1110 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, J. Iriyama, S. Iwasa, M. Suguro, M. Satoh and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suguro, S. Iwasa, Y. Kusachi, Y. Morioka and K. Nakahara, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1929 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suguro, S. Iwasa and K. Nakahara, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1635 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, H. Konishi and H. Nishide, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1730 RSC .
T. Suga, Y.-J. Pu, S. Kasatori and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3167 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu, T. Suga, K. Yoshimura and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6646 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu, Y. Ando, H. Konishi and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14459 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, H. Ohshiro, S. Sugita, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1627 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu, T. Kawamoto, T. Suga and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 10382 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, S. Ohtani, K. Oyaizu, H. Nishide and K. E. Geckeler, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4440 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bugnon, C. J. H. Morton, P. Novak, J. Vetter and P. Nesvadba, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2910 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, Y.-X. Yin, S. Xin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5221 CAS .
A. J. Wain, G. G. Wildgoose, C. G. R. Heald, L. Jiang, T. G. J. Jones and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3971 CrossRef CAS .
H. Alt, H. Binder, A. Köhling and G. Sandstede, Electrochim. Acta, 1972, 17, 873 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, W.-K. Wang, A.-B. Wang, Z.-B. Yu, S. Chen and Y.-S. Yang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A991 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bu, S. Liu, Y. Lu, S. Zhuang, H. Wang and F. Tu, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 4617 CAS .
S.-i. Tobishima, J.-i. Yamaki and A. Yamaji, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 57 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yao, H. Senoh, S.-i. Yamazaki, Z. Siroma, T. Sakai and K. Yasuda, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 8336 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kalaiselvi and R. Renuka, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2000, 75, 285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Wen, J. Cheng, G. Cao and Y. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1422 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hanyu, Y. Ganbe and I. Honma, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 186 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yao, H. Senoh, T. Sakai and T. Kiyobayashi, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 2905 CAS .
T. Boschi, R. Pappa, G. Pistoia and M. Tocci, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1984, 176, 235 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pasquali, G. Pistoia, T. Boschi and P. Tagliatesta, Solid State Ionics, 1987, 23, 261 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohzuku, H. Wakamatsu, Z. Takehara and S. Yoshizawa, Electrochim. Acta, 1979, 24, 723 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, C. Chang, L. Yuan, T. Sun and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1616 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, G. Qing, J. Sun and T. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geng, J.-P. Bonnet, S. Renault, F. Dolhem and P. Poizot, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1929 CAS .
M. Yao, M. Araki, H. Senoh, S.-i. Yamazaki, T. Sakai and K. Yasuda, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39, 950 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1481 CrossRef .
J. S. Foos, S. M. Erker and L. M. Rembetsy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 836 CrossRef CAS .
D. Häringer, P. Novák, O. Haas, B. Piro and M.-C. Pham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 2393 CrossRef .
T. Le Gall, K. H. Reiman, M. C. Grossel and J. R. Owen, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 316 CrossRef CAS .
N. Oyama, T. Sarukawa, Y. Mochizuki, T. Shimomura and S. Yamaguchi, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 230 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, H. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2009, 448 RSC .
W. Xu, A. Read, P. K. Koech, D. Hu, C. Wang, J. Xiao, A. B. Padmaperuma, G. L. Graff, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4032 RSC .
W. Choi, D. Harada, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19839 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nokami, T. Matsuo, Y. Inatomi, N. Hojo, T. Tsukagoshi, H. Yoshizawa, A. Shimizu, H. Kuramoto, K. Komae, H. Tsuyama and J.-i. Yoshida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19694 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, H. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8444 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, T. Xu, M. L. Gordin, Y. B. Jiang, I. T. Bae, Q. Xiao, H. Zhan, J. Liu and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiang, C. Chang, M. Li, S. Wu, L. Yuan and J. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 280 CAS .
H. Chen, M. Armand, M. Courty, M. Jiang, C. P. Grey, F. Dolhem, J.-M. Tarascon and P. Poizot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8984 CrossRef CAS .
R.-H. Zeng, X.-P. Li, Y.-C. Qiu, W.-S. Li, J. Yi, D.-S. Lu, C.-L. Tan and M.-Q. Xu, Electrochem.
Commun., 2010, 12, 1253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, P. Ribière, P. Poizot and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 120 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, Z. Zhou, M. Armand and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 962 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, D.-S. Shin, S. H. Woo, N. S. Choi, K. H. Shin, S. M. Oh, K. T. Lee and S. Y. Hong, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3562 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abouimrane, W. Weng, H. Eltayeb, Y. Cui, J. Niklas, O. Poluektov and K. Amine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9632 CAS .
W. Walker, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, M. Armand, F. Wudl and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1615 RSC .
W. Walker, S. Grugeon, O. Mentre, S. Laruelle, J.-M. Tarascon and F. Wudl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6517 CrossRef CAS .
S. Renault, J. Geng, F. Dolhem and P. Poizot, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2414 RSC .
D. J. Kim, S. H. Je, S. Sampath, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7968 RSC .
J. K. Feng, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 199 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsunaga, T. Kubota, T. Sugimoto and M. Satoh, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 750 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yao, H. Senoh, T. Sakai and T. Kiyobayashi, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 364 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakaushi, G. Nickerl, F. M. Wisser, D. Nishio-Hamane, E. Hosono, H. Zhou, S. Kaskel and J. Eckert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7850 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakaushi, E. Hosono, G. Nickerl, T. Gemming, H. Zhou, S. Kaskel and J. Eckert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1485 CrossRef .
T. Sarukawa and N. Oyama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, F23 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tamura, N. Akutagawa, M. Satoh, J. Wada and T. Masuda, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1944 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hanyu and I. Honma, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 453 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nesvadba, L. B. Folger, P. Maire and P. Novák, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 259 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Kim, D.-H. Seo, X. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947 CrossRef CAS .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-González and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884 CAS .
S. W. Lee, N. Yabuuchi, B. M. Gallant, S. Chen, B.-S. Kim, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 531 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Bates, N. J. Dudney, B. Neudecker, A. Ueda and C. D. Evans, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 33 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patil, V. Patil, D. W. Shin, J.-W. Choi, D.-S. Paik and S.-J. Yoon, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 1913 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Science, 2008, 319, 737 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gwon, H.-S. Kim, K. U. Lee, D.-H. Seo, Y. C. Park, Y.-S. Lee, B. T. Ahn and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1277 CAS .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nyholm, G. Nyström, A. Mihranyan and M. Strømme, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3751 CAS .
I. Nam, S. Park, G.-P. Kim, J. Park and J. Yi, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1663 RSC .
L. Hu, H. Wu and Y. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183502 CrossRef .
W. Li, J. R. Dahn and D. S. Wainwright, Science, 1994, 264, 1115 CAS .
J.-Y. Luo, W.-J. Cui, P. He and Y.-Y. Xia, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 760 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Yi and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 830 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Luo, B. Li, X. Wei, L. Li and Z. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 970 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S. Li, S. Liu, K. Huang, D. Fang, F. Wang and S. Peng, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A171 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Brushett, J. T. Vaughey and A. N. Jansen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1390 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, W. Xu, L. Cosimbescu, D. Choi, L. Li and Z. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6669 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Zhiping Song	Zhiping Song received his BSc and PhD degrees from the Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, China, in 2006 and 2011 respectively. In 2010–2011, he spent more than one year working as a visiting PhD student in Dr Donghai Wang's group at the Pennsylvania State University, USA. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Haoshen Zhou's group at the Energy Technology Research Institute (ETRI), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan. His research interests mainly focus on developing novel organic electrode materials and their applications in various energy storage devices including rechargeable lithium batteries.
Haoshen Zhou	Haoshen Zhou graduated from the Department of Physics, Nanjing University, China, in 1985. He received his PhD degree from the Department of Chemical Engineering, the University of Tokyo, Japan, in 1994. He is now a prime senior researcher of the Energy Technology Research Institute (ETRI) and leading the Energy Interface Technology Group, in National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan. He is also a guest professor in both the University of Tokyo and Nanjing University. His research interests include the synthesis of functional materials and their applications in Li-ion batteries, metal–air batteries, new type batteries/cells, fuel cells, dye sensitized solar cells, hydrophobic/hydrophilic surfaces and electrochemical sensors.

Broader context
State-of-the-art Li-ion batteries recently met their development bottleneck because of the energy-density limitation of inorganic intercalation cathodes, in addition to the resources and environmental issues brought about by large-scale use of transitional metal based electrode materials. As an alternative, organic electrode materials have attracted more-and-more interest in recent years due to their high electrochemical performance, resource sustainability, environmental friendliness, structure diversity, flexibility and so on. Since 1969, a many organic electrode materials with various structures have been investigated as cathodes or anodes for various energy storage devices including Li–organic batteries. The previous researches indicate that conducting polymers, nitroxyl radical polymers and conjugated carbonyl compounds are promising organic electrode candidates for the next generation of cheap, green, sustainable and versatile energy storage devices beyond conventional Li-ion batteries.


 	Fig. 1  The redox reaction of three types of electroactive organics: (a) n-type; (b) p-type; (c) bipolar. A− means anion of the electrolyte and Li+ can be replaced by other alkali ions.	 

 	Fig. 2  The cell configurations and charge transfer processes of various types of rechargeable batteries. Bipolar organic B can be regarded as N or P in these configurations, according to the actual electrode reaction.	 

Conjugated hydrocarbon	

	

	
32–34

Conjugated amine	

	

	
35–38

Conjugated thioether	

	

	
39,40 and 129

Organodisulfide	

	

	
58 and 64

Thioether (4e)	

	

	
67 and 68

Nitroxyl radical	

	

	
70–72

Conjugated carbonyl	

	

	
107 and 99


 	Fig. 3  The redox voltage and specific capacity of typical inorganic and organic electrode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries. The structure of each organic can be found in Table 1, Fig. 12, Table 3 and Fig. 16.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  Simplified cycle life of sustainable rechargeable batteries. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright © 2008 WILEY-VCH.	 

Polyacetylene (PAc)	

	0.07	144	0–2.0 (n)
3.5–4.0 (p)
Polyparaphenylene (PPP)	

	0.4	141	0–1.0 (n)
4.0–4.5 (p)
Polyaniline (PAn)	

	1.0	295	3.0–4.0
Polypyrrole (PPy)	

	0.33	136	3.0–4.0
Polythiophene (PTh)	

	0.25	82	3.0–4.2

 	Fig. 5  Typical electrochemical redox process of p-type conducting polymer.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photograph and (b) cross-section SEM image of PAn/graphene composite thin film. Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Typical organodisulfides and their theoretical capacity: tetraethylthiuram disulfide (TETD),53 poly(2,5-dimercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole) (PDMcT),57–62 poly(2,2′-dithiodianiline) (PDTDA),63 poly(5,8-dihydro-1H,4H-2,3,6,7-tetrathia-anthracene) (PDTTA).64 The capacity of PDTDA is based on the assumption that each aniline unit can contribute 0.5 e and ignores the mass of A−.	 

 	Fig. 8  Typical nitroxyl radical polymers and their theoretical capacity: poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl-4-yl methacrylate) (PTMA),69,73,74,83–85 poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl-4-yl vinyl ether) (PTVE),22,75,76 poly(TEMPO-substituted norbornene) (PTN),77,80,81 poly(2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrrolidine-1-oxyl-3-yl ethylene oxide) (PTEO).82	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Typical charge/discharge curves and (b) cycling and rate performance of PTMA as the cathode material for a rechargeable lithium battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright © 2006 Elsevier. (c) The electron transfer process in a radical polymer electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright © 2009 WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  Typical electrochemical redox mechanism of quinone and dianhydride.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Cyclic voltammogram of 2 mM AQ in 0.1 M TBAP/CH3CN electrolyte at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright © 2005 American Chemical Society. (b) Charge–discharge curve of AQ electrode (AQ:C:PTFE = 6:3:1) in 1 M LiTFSI/DOL + DME electrolyte at a current rate of 0.2 C.	 

 	Fig. 12  Typical small organic molecules based on conjugated carbonyl groups and their theoretical capacity. (a) Simple quinones: benzoquinone (BQ),21,87 naphthoquinone (NQ), anthraquinone (AQ),86,88,89 phenanthraquinone (PQ).90 (b) Quinone derivatives: 2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-benzoquinone (DMBQ),21,91 2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone (chloranil),87,92,93 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone (DDQ),87,90,94 1,2,4-trihydroxyanthraquinone (purpurin).24 (c) Multi-carbonyl quinones: 5,7,12,14-pentacenetetrone (PT),95 nonylbenzohexaquinone (NBHQ).96,97 (d) Simple dianhydrides: pyromellitic anhydride (PMDA),98 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA),99,100 3,4,9,10-perylentetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA).99 (e) Other conjugated carbonyl compounds: dichloroisocyanuric acid (DCA),9N,N′-diallyl-2,3,5,6-tetraketopiperazine (AP),101 5,5′-indigodisulfonic acid sodium salt (indigo carmine).102 The theoretical capacity is calculated based on the carbonyl group number except dianhydrides and AP.	 

 	Fig. 13  Typical polymer electrode materials based on conjugated carbonyl groups and their theoretical capacity: polymeric quinone (PQ),104 poly(5-amino-1,4-naphthoquinone) (PANQ),105 poly(2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone-3,6-methylene) (PDBM),106,107 poly(anthraquinonyl sulfide) (PAQS),108,109,113 poly(2-vinylanthraquinone) (PVAQ),110 polymer-bound pyrene-4,5,9,10-tetraone (PPYT),111 polyimide (PI-2 and PI-5).112,113 The theoretical capacity is calculated based on the carbonyl group number, except for PI-2 and PI-5.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Cycling performance and (b) rate performance of PPYT. The cathode (PYT or PPYT:AB:PVDF = 3:8:2) is tested in LiTFSI/tetraglyme electrolyte at 45 °C. For (a) PYT is tested at 0.2 C while PPYT is tested at 1 C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Comparison between the electrochemical performance of AQ and PAQS as cathode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries. The cathode (AQ or PAQS:C:PTFE = 6:3:1) is tested in 1 M LiTFSI/DOL + DME electrolyte at a current rate of 0.2 C.	 

Li2C6H2O4	

	1.7–2.5	353	176	
114

Li2C6O6	

	1.5–3.5	589	500	
26

Li4C6O6	

	1.6–2.0	274	200	
115

Li2C14H6O4	

	1.5–2.5	213	126	
116

Li2C6H4O4	

	1.3–1.5	348	150	
117

Li2C8H4O4	

	0.7–1.0	301	300	
117

Na2C8H4O4	

	0.2–0.6 V vs. Na+/Na	255	250	
118–120

Li2C16H8O4	

	0.6–0.7	193	200	
121

Li2C18H12O8	

	1.6–2.0	145 (2e)	125	
122

Li2C10H2N2O4	

	1.5–2.0	235 (2e)	200	
123

Li2C14H4N2O4	

	1.8–2.8	193 (2e)	140	
124


 	Fig. 16  Other organic electrode materials and their theoretical capacity: polytriphenylamine (PTPAn),125 triquinoxalinylene,126 poly(N-vinylcarbazole) (PVK),127 triazine,128,129 sulfur-linked tetrathionaphthalene polymer [poly(S-TTN)],130 poly(vinylferrocene),131 tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ),90,132 poly(galvinoxylstyrene),81 polymeric 2,5-di-t-butyl-1,4-dialkoxybenzene (PDBDAB).133	 

 	Fig. 17  Redox reaction and charge/discharge curves of Na2C8H4O4 anodes for Na-ion batteries. Adapted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) TEM image of PAQS/graphene composite synthesized by in situ polymerization. (b) Voltage profiles of PAQS/graphene composite (PAQS:graphene = 74:26) at different C-rates. The capacity is calculated based on the mass of the whole composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Possible flexible thin film battery based on n-type organic as cathode and carbon (CNT or graphene) paper as current collector. (b) Possible all-solid thin film battery based on n-type organic as cathode and solid Li-ion conductor as electrolyte. (c) Photograph of flexible graphene paper. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright © 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Photograph of a flexible, transparent and conductive CNT thin film on a plastic substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH. (e) Photograph of transparent PTN thin film on an ITO-PET substrate prepared by a photocrosslinking approach. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright © 2007 Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Photograph of ink-jet printed supercapacitor on Xerox paper. Reprinted from ref. 145. Copyright © 2010 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 20  A possible all-organic battery based on conjugated carbonyl cathode and anode.	 

 	Fig. 21  Comparison of the comprehensive electrochemical performance between different types of organic electrode materials. Note that this is only a rough estimation and it is not suitable to compare specific organics.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
