Size-controlled CdSe quantum dots to boost light harvesting capability and stability of perovskite photovoltaic cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR03487C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR03487C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10075-10083Size-controlled CdSe quantum dots to boost light harvesting capability and stability of perovskite photovoltaic cells†

        
          
            Muhammad Naufal 
            Lintangpradipto‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Nikolai 
            Tsevtkov‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Byeong Cheul 
            Moon
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jeung Ku 
            Kang
          
        
      *ab
aGraduate School of Energy, Environment, Water, and Sustainability (EEWS), Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jeungku@kaist.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-42-350-3310
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea
Received 
      16th May 2017
    , Accepted 13th June 2017First published on 15th June 2017AbstractHere, we report that incorporation of size-controlled CdSe quantum dots (QDs) into perovskite photovoltaic cells (PSCs) boosts their light harvesting capability. X-ray photoemission and optical absorption spectroscopy analyses also show that the electronic structure of CdSe QDs makes them efficient charge transfer mediators between perovskite and Spiro-MeOTAD layers. In addition, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy experiments demonstrate that QDs help to decrease charge transfer resistance at the interfaces. Additionally, time-correlated single photon counting measurements show that small (2 nm) QDs enhance visible light collection of PSCs in the short wavelength region via Förster resonance energy transfer while large (4 nm) QDs improve light collection of PSCs in the long wavelength region via enhanced light backscattering at the perovskite/QD interface. Moreover, the photocurrent density in the PSCs with QDs retained over 95% of the initial value in a 100 h stability test, thus supporting that the perovskite layer that has been encapsulated with QDs acts to prevent penetration of water molecules through the perovskite layer. Consequently, these results support that utilization of size-controlled hybrid QDs could open up a new route to realize high-performance PSCs even under humid conditions.
Introduction
The unraveling of perovskite photovoltaic cells (PSCs) started from the observation of a very well-known methylammonium iodide,1–7 followed by mixed halide anions8–13 and organic cations,14,15 and has recently moved to inorganic–organic hybrid cation compositions16,17 to attain higher efficiency.18–20 With only a few milli-electron volts (eV) of the exciton binding energy,21 photo-generated electron and hole charge carriers are instantly produced at room temperature within a perovskite absorber.22 Many research groups succeeded in synthesizing high-quality perovskite materials.13,22 Meanwhile, trap states closely related to surface defects in a crystalline perovskite23,24 including methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) limit the charge carrier diffusion length to a millimeter scale. Moreover, a perovskite layer suffers from unfavorable separation of electron–hole carriers at the interface with the hole transfer layer (HTL). For instance, Spiro-MeOTAD, which is the most widely used HTL material, shows unbalance between an electron–hole injection time (∼600 ps) and a thermalization time (∼1 ps) of a hole carrier in the perovskite. This difference leads to the energy loss of photo-generated charge carriers at the perovskite/HTL interface.25 Another challenge in a perovskite sensitizer is to overcome its low absorption capability of long wavelength photons (λ > 700 nm). Therefore, a novel architecture that enables efficient light collection of long wavelength photons within the perovskite layer along with fast charge transfer of photo-generated electron and hole carriers toward the cathode and anode electrodes with appropriate band levels would open up a route to realize a new paradigm for high-performance PSCs. Utilizing QDs is a good choice26–29 to improve the kinetics of photo-generated charge carriers. Meanwhile, PSCs also suffer from their poor stability occurring as a result of degradation of the perovskite materials upon exposure to humidity.30,31 In this light, the development of a new architecture enabling both enhanced light harvesting capability and stability in PSCs remains a captivating challenge.
Herein, we report a facile method for the incorporation of size-controlled CdSe QDs between an MAPbI3 light sensitizer and a Spiro-MeOTAD HTL for PSCs. This is a promising approach to overcome the limitations of PSCs in that it allows improving light harvesting via efficient energy transfer and light collection along with improved stability. Also, we performed X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and optical spectroscopy measurements to discover the band structure of QDs acting as charge transfer mediators between MAPbI3 and Spiro-MeOTAD. Moreover, the important role of QDs in charge transfer resistance at the interfaces in PSCs has been unveiled by the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis (EIS). Additionally, we have performed time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) measurements to determine the mechanisms for efficient energy transfer and light collection in PSCs with hybrid QDs, where two different types of size-controlled QDs in small (∼2 nm) and large (∼4 nm) sizes between the perovskite/HTL layers of PSCs cause an enhancement in the efficiency of the device.
Experimental
Synthesis of QDs
Full details of the synthesis of QDs and solar cell fabrication are provided in the ESI.† At first, 0.756 gram of selenium powder was dissolved in a three-neck flask with a volume of 6.25 ml. Then, argon was introduced into the system through the Schlenk line prior to the heat treatment of the selenium solution. Next, the flask was heated up using the heating mantle to 250 °C. The solution was maintained at 250 °C for around 90 minutes and subsequently cooled down. 0.0534 g, 4 g, and 2 g of cadmium acetate dehydrate, trioctylphosphine oxide and hexadecylamine powder, respectively, were placed in a three-neck flask. Then, the vessel was heated up to 300 °C and kept at a given temperature for 30 minutes until the solution became transparent. Next, 5 ml of selenium precursors was injected at once into the vessel through the rubber neck to assure the growth of CdSe QDs. The color change was observed during this period and the results showed QDs ranging from a small size (yellow color) to a bigger size (red color). Aliquots were then taken after 2 and 20 minutes growing time into a 10 ml vial with methanol to stop the growth reaction. Finally, the samples were re-dispersed in toluene solvent at a concentration of 19.2 mg ml−1.
Fabrication of PSCs with QDs
Unless stated otherwise, all the processes for deposition were conducted inside an Ar-filled glovebox with a moisture level of 10–15 ppm. FTO-etched glasses were cleaned sequentially with DI water, ethanol and acetone for about 15 minutes in an ultrasonic bath. Substrates were then treated with UV-ozone plasma for 20 minutes. Next, a TiO2 blocking layer was deposited using a spin-coating instrument at a velocity of 2000 rpm for 60 seconds using 0.15 M titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in 1-butanol solution that was heated afterwards at 125 °C for 5 minutes. Subsequently, the TiO2 paste in ethanol (2:7 weight ratio) solution was spin-coated onto the substrate at 2000 rpm for 60 seconds and annealed at 125 °C for 5 minutes. Finally, the substrates were washed right after this with DI water and ethanol and blow-dried with argon and annealed at 500 °C for 90 minutes. A two-step method was used for the deposition of the perovskite layer. The PbI2 (DMSO) solution was deposited on the top of the cell by spin-coating at 6500 rpm for 90 seconds and the substrates were annealed at 70 °C for 10 minutes. Also, the MAI solution was spin-coated on the top of PbI2 films at a speed of 2000 rpm for 60 seconds followed by the wetting process for 60 seconds. The films were then annealed at 100 °C for 15 minutes until reaching a brown-like color. The solution of prepared CdSe QDs was drop-wise deposited on the perovskite film and spin-coated at 6500 rpm for 90 seconds. A wetting time of 5–10 seconds was necessary to ensure a decent number of QDs on the perovskite film. Meanwhile, it is notable that the amount of QDs depends on the dropping amount and the concentration of the solution. The substrate was annealed at 70 °C for 1 minute. The Spiro-MeOTAD solution was spincoated at 4000 rpm for 30 seconds to fabricate a hole-transport layer. Finally, a gold layer with ∼60 nm thickness was deposited using a thermal evaporator for the back electrode of the cell with a deposition rate of 1–1.5 Å s−1.
Characterization of materials and PSCs
The PL spectra were obtained by fluorescence spectroscopy (QM-400, HORIBA) using a 405 nm laser diode excitation source. UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy (JASCO spectrometer, model V-570) was also been used to probe QD solutions, the perovskite, and perovskite/QDs layers. Meanwhile, the size and shape of QDs were analyzed using a TEM (JEM-ARM200F, Jeol) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer. The morphologies of perovskite and QD layers were also investigated using a field emission SEM (Jeol, JSM-7600F). The photovoltaic performance was determined using an Oriel solar simulator with an IviumStat potentiometer. An aperture mask (0.105 cm2) was applied on the top of the cells during the measurements. Additionally, QE spectra were obtained using a PEC-S2026 spectrometer. The IV curves were recorded at a scan rate of 0.02 mV s−1 for reverse and forward scans. Furthermore, EIS measurements were performed under open circuit conditions and 100 mW cm−2 illumination in the frequency range of 1–106 Hz with an Ivium Compactstat potentiostat and a modulated voltage of 10 mV. In addition, the valence band maximum positions were analyzed using an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy instrument (Thermo VG Scientific, K-Alpha) with the calibration made using the C 1s peak (C–C bond) at 285.0 eV. The valence band maximum positions were estimated via extrapolation of the leading edge for valence band spectra. Furthermore, the FRET mechanism was explored using the time-correlated single photon counting method using a fluorescence lifetime spectrometer (FL920, Edinburgh Instruments). Full characterization details are provided in the ESI.†
Results and discussion
We have fabricated size-controlled QDs of about 2 nm and 4 nm, hereafter denoted 2 nm and 4 nm QDs, respectively. It is found that collection of light into the MAPbI3 light absorber is enhanced through two different mechanisms in the presence of size-controlled QDs. The small QDs with the average size of 2 nm lead to an enhancement of light harvesting capability through the FRET mechanism where the overlapping of the QD emission spectra with the perovskite absorption spectra leads to increased photocurrent in QD-based PSCs. Fig. 1a shows that an enhancement takes place via the FRET when the light, unabsorbed by the perovskite, is utilized and the non-radiative energy from QDs is transferred back to the perovskite. Meanwhile, the FRET is disoriented for large QDs of 4 nm sizes, attributed to the weak overlapping between QD emission and perovskite absorption spectra along with a short lifetime of photo-excited electrons produced in large QDs. Fig. 1b shows that backscattering of long wavelength photons at the perovskite/QD interface occurs due to the difference in the refractive indexes of the films. It is notable that large QDs have higher light reflection coefficients compared to small QDs. Fig. 1c shows that FRET and light reflection phenomena can take place simultaneously, thereby giving the synergistic effects on the perovskite light sensitizer when size-controlled QDs of 2 and 4 nm sizes are utilized, which are represented as hybrid QDs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Small quantum dots (QDs) allow Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) where the QDs transfer the non-radiative energy to the perovskite. (b) Large QDs make the incident light reflect back to the perovskite via backscattering at the perovskite/QD interface. (c) Hybrid QDs, which are composed of small and large QDs, enable FRET and light reflection to take place simultaneously at the perovskite/QD interface. 
QD incorporation and characterization
The CdSe QDs have been prepared using a wet chemistry colloidal method.32 More information is presented in Table S1 (ESI†). The specific size of QDs, which could be related to the Bohr radius, has been tuned by the control of the reaction temperature, the duration, and the chemical selection.33,34 In this work, we have synthesized two distinct sets of 2 nm and 4 nm QDs, which correspond to the samples grown for 2 min and 20 min, respectively. TEM images of Fig. S1 (ESI†) demonstrate good agreement between the expected size and the measured size of QDs, as shown in Table S1 (ESI†) along with the experimentally measured absorption and emission peaks. Fig. 2 elucidates the characteristics of size-controlled QDs, where the shifts of the absorption edge and the photoluminescence (PL) emission peaks are shown in Fig. 2a. Moreover, the high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images of Fig. 2b clarify that a CdSe QD has fine crystallinity on an oval-shaped morphology. Furthermore, the perovskite absorption and QD photoluminescence (PL) peaks (Fig. 2c) support that the FRET can take place at the perovskite/QD interface because there is good overlapping between the QD PL and perovskite absorption spectra.
 Fig. 2  (a) Absorption and photoluminescence spectra of small CdSe QDs (2 nm QD), large CdSe QDs (4 nm QD), and hybrid CdSe QDs (mixed with 2 nm and 4 nm QDs). (b) HRTEM images of small (top) and large (bottom) CdSe QDs, respectively. (c) Overlapping of perovskite absorption and QD photoluminescence (PL) spectra along with their external quantum efficiencies (EQEs). 
QDs could be located at the front side, the middle side and the back side of a perovskite absorber.26–30 We have chosen the back side to demonstrate the effectiveness of the QDs as a charge transfer mediator between perovskite and HTL. In addition, the sequential deposition method has been used since it allows good infiltration of MAPbI3 into the mesoscopic TiO2 layer with the thin perovskite-capped layer on its top. Fig. 3a illustrates the schematic of the deposition of size-controlled CdSe QDs, where the drop cast process has been applied on the control of the specific wetting time to ensure a fine coverage of the perovskite surface with the QDs. The cross sectional SEM image has been shown in Fig. 3b. Furthermore, the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis of the QD-covered perovskite surface (Fig. 3c) confirms the uniform redistribution of cadmium and selenide elements on the surface of the perovskite (Fig. 3d and e). On increasing the wetting time in the drop cast process, we can obtain a thicker film of quantum dots. Fig. S2 (see ESI†) also demonstrates that 30–50 nm thickness, among the different films used to fabricate the devices, leads to the best performance.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the deposition of size-controlled CdSe QDs onto the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. (b) Cross sectional SEM image of a fabricated PSC. (c) SEM plane view image of a perovskite capping layer morphology covered with the QD layer. (d, e) EDS image of signals of selenium and cadmium elements obtained from the area shown in Fig. 3c. 
Photovoltaic performance of PSCs
We have incorporated three different types of QDs, denoted small, large, and hybrid QDs, upon the perovskite layer. The spectra for the quantum efficiency (QE) of the PSCs fabricated under a humidity controlled atmosphere in the glovebox are shown in Fig. 4a. The difference in QEs between the control device without QDs and the PSCs device with QDs is presented in Fig. 4b. The results (Fig. 4c) support that the QDs boost the photocurrent of PSCs. The experiments demonstrate the highest energy conversion efficiency for the PSCs with hybrid QDs. The corresponding photovoltaic characteristics of PSC devices are summarized in Table S2 (see ESI†). In addition, we have observed excellent reproducibility of the PV parameters for the fabricated PSCs, which have been tested on at least 8 devices for each type of PSC. Moreover, the current density (Jsc) obtained from the quantum efficiency measurements has been proved to exhibit a deviation smaller than 6%. This confirms the proper measurement of the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics that often deviate due to alteration of the parameters such as scan rates and steps.35 In addition, we have found marginal hysteresis in PSCs with QDs. The deviated efficiency between forward and reverse scans (see Fig. S3, ESI†) is only about 1.5%. We have also fabricated PSCs under an ambient atmosphere and discovered the possible influence of the atmosphere on the properties of QD layers and the charge transfer processes in PSCs (see Fig. S4, ESI†). The results demonstrate that cells fabricated under ambient conditions have enhanced power conversion efficiency with QDs compared to the control devices without QDs.
 Fig. 4  (a) EQEs of PSCs along with PL emission spectra of QDs. (b) Difference between the EQEs of the PSCs with QDs and the control PSC without QDs. (c) Histogram of the parameters for PSCs. (d) Changes of the parameters for PSCs under ambient conditions with 20%–30% humidity at room temperature. 
Additionally, we have investigated the stability36 of PSCs fabricated with and without CdSe QDs during the 100 h test in the ambient air with a humidity of 20–30%. Fig. 4d shows that the PSC with QDs retains more than 90% of the initial power conversion efficiency compared to the control device whose performance declines quickly to an efficiency less than 60% of the initial performance. The measurements clarify that the degradation in efficiency for the control PSC devices is related to the decrease in its current density. The decrease in current density is about 30%, which is significantly higher than the 5% for PSC devices with QDs. This shows that degradation in a PSC starts from its perovskite light absorber through the other parts of the cell including surfaces and interfaces. Consequently, the results support that the utilization of QDs in PSCs could open up a new route to overcome the drawbacks of PSCs fabricated using only pristine perovskite materials without QDs. Furthermore, the degradation in current density is ascribed to the deterioration of the perovskite material that loses the capability of harvesting the incident light. In contrast, for the perovskite conjugated with QDs, Fig. 4d demonstrates that this degradation can be hindered by perovskite materials encapsulated with QDs that in turn prevent penetration of moisture into the perovskite light absorbers. Moreover, we find that a thicker layer of quantum dots improves significantly the stability of PSCs.
The external QE (EQE) measurements of Fig. 4a also demonstrate the photocurrent response as a function of the incident photon energy. We find that the small and large QDs provide different contributions to the QE spectra. Moreover, the QE of PSCs fabricated using hybrid QDs was determined to give a synergistic enhancement in QE. This supports that small and large QDs have positive effects in the short and long wavelength regions, respectively.
These indicate that different mechanisms take place when different sizes of QDs are used. Fig. 4b demonstrates the difference between the QE spectra of the PSCs with QDs and the control device. For small QDs of 2 nm size, we have observed an increase in QE of around 500 nm, in good agreement with the QD PL emission peak. The enhancement in QE can be due to the FRET.37,38 This mechanism is related to the size of a QD and the distance between the donor and acceptor elements.39 For large QDs, one distinct anomaly was that there was no enhancement at around 600 nm. It is notable that the increase in QE is mainly attributed to the FRET effect. Even large CdSe QDs do not show an increase in QE in the visible light region in contrast to small CdSe QDs. However, we found that PSCs based on large QDs show enhanced light collection ability in the IR-region above 750 nm. This increase in QE in the infrared region is attributed to the additional light backscattering at the perovskite/QD interface in the presence of large QDs. The refractive index for the small QDs is around 1.5, close to that of Spiro-MeOTAD.5,40 However, for large QDs with the average size of 4 nm, the refractive index41 is around 1.8–1.9. This can give additional reflection at the perovskite/QD interface, thus resulting in the broadening of the QE response in the long wavelength region. Furthermore, the results (Fig. 4c) demonstrate that other parameters such as the fill factor and the open circuit voltage exhibit robust performance for all the devices.
We also find that the increase in the overall QE can be attributed to efficient charge transfer in the PSCs with QDs. We expect that the interface between the perovskite and Spiro-MeOTAD materials in the presence of QDs becomes less defective, which in turn promotes faster charge transfer due to the decrease in its series resistance, as confirmed by our EIS measurements. Furthermore, it is found that hybrid QDs cause an increase in QE in both the visible and IR-regions.
Influence of QDs on charge transfer in PSCs
More insights into the FRET mechanism at the perovskite/QD interface have been obtained using the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) measurements for isolated, perovskite or perovskite/QD systems with no HTL or ETL present. TSCPC measurements give the lifetime for photoluminescence decay of charge carriers in the perovskite/QD structure and the pristine perovskite material. We performed two distinct measurements.
At first, the TCSPC decays of small QDs at around 535 eV and large QDs at around 610 eV were determined in the presence of the perovskite acceptor as shown in Fig. 5a and b. In addition, we determined the decay of the photoluminescence (PL) peak for the perovskite (MAPbI3) at around 775 nm in the presence of CdSe QDs (Fig. S5, ESI†). The triple exponential decay function42 was used to fit the experimental spectra and extract the carrier lifetime. Based on the data obtained from TCSPC measurements, the calculated electronic excited state lifetimes, which are summarized in Table 1, show that the small CdSe QDs show a carrier lifetime of 76 ns, which drastically decreases down to 7 ns when the QDs are in contact with the perovskite acting as the acceptor in energy transfer. Meanwhile, the perovskite exhibits a carrier lifetime of 189 ns, which is later increased in the presence of 2 nm CdSe QDs up to 213 ns, pointing out that the lifetime of an excited carrier in the perovskite is increasing due to the energy transfer from quantum dots. Moreover, these elongated and shortened carrier lifetimes clarify the specific resonance mechanism for FRET.43
 Fig. 5  (a) Decay of the QD PL peak at around 525 nm after turning off light for pristine QDs, 2 nm, and perovskite/QD layers deposited on the glass substrate. (b) Decay of the QD PL peak at around 610 nm after turning off light for pristine QDs, 4 nm, and perovskite/QD layers deposited on the glass substrate. (c) Nyquist plots of PSCs with and without QDs, where the inset describes the equivalent circuit used for fitting the EIS data. (d) Band level diagram of a perovskite/QD/HTL interface constructed using a combination of XPS and optical absorption spectroscopy analyses (see Fig. S7 in ESI†). 
Table 1 Electronic excited state lifetimes of the perovskite, QDs and perovskite/QD layers calculated from TRPL measurements




Structure
Perovskite lifetime (ns)
QD lifetime (ns)




Perovskite pristine
189
—


2 nm QD
—
76


Perovskite + 2 nm QD
213
7


4 nm QD
—
9


Perovskite + 4 nm QD
179
6




In terms of the charge transfer mechanism, the carrier lifetime for the perovskite in the presence of small QDs could be elongated since it could lead to a decrease in non-radiative recombination channels, which is likely due to the decreased trap densities in the perovskite or at the perovskite/QD interface. When QDs are in contact with the perovskite, we find longer decay in the carrier lifetime in the perovskite/QDs system, which is attributed to the additional hole states in the valence band of QDs since they provide locations for cooling down holes from the perovskite. Moreover, we find that photo-generated electrons in the perovskite stay longer at the excited states, which is caused by the hole extraction into the charge transit sites of QDs resulting in slower charge recombination, thereby increasing the light harvesting and charge collection abilities of PSCs.
On the other hand, the carrier lifetime of QDs in the presence of the perovskite was expected to be shortened as the photo-excited electrons from QDs are transferred to the underlying conduction band of the perovskite located around the midway gap of QDs. Furthermore, the perovskite could take the benefit by collecting the excited electrons transferred from small QDs. However, large QDs show a very different behavior, demonstrating very fast PL decay that almost does not change in the presence of the perovskite (Fig. 5b). The PL decay is reduced on the longer lifetime component (τ2) for large QDs as a quantum confinement effect promoting the charge recombination of photo-excited electrons.44 Meanwhile, the small decrease in the perovskite PL peak at 770 nm in the presence of large QDs eliminates the possibility of resonance energy transfer.
The open circuit voltage (Voc) of PSCs is related to the quality of the perovskite/HTL interface.45 The Voc of the PSCs with QDs was determined to be higher by about 20 and 40 mV for single QDs and hybrid QDs, respectively. This supports that the electronic structure of the perovskite/QD/Spiro-MeOTAD is favorable for efficient hole extraction from the perovskite as confirmed by the EIS measurements. The experimental EIS spectra in the form of Nyquist plots along with the equivalent circuit are shown in Fig. 5c and its inset. The semicircle reflects the charge transfer at the perovskite/HTL interface.46 The elements in the equivalent circuit are as follows: RS is the series resistance of the cell, corresponding to the high frequency intercept of the semicircle with the x-axis. Meanwhile, RCT and CPECT correspond to the charge transfer resistance and the capacitance, respectively, at the perovskite/QD/HTL interface. The values for RS are similar for different types of PSCs, pointing out that the difference in cell performance is ascribed to the variations of RCT. Therefore, it shows that RCT corresponding to the charge transfer resistance at the interface affects significantly the values of VOC in PSCs. The value of RCT decreases with the increase of the QD size and reaches the minimum for the PSCs with hybrid QDs, thus resulting in the minimum barrier for charge transfer at the perovskite/HTL interface, thereby leading to efficient hole extraction in the presence of hybrid QDs.
XPS spectroscopy also revealed the valence bands for large and small QDs in accordance with the perovskite and Spiro-MeOTAD energy levels (see Fig. S6, ESI†). In addition, the conduction band position has been acquired via XPS analysis and the band gap values by absorption spectroscopy (see Fig. S7, ESI†). The energy band diagram in Fig. 5d shows the stepwise alignment of the energy level for CdSe QDs located between the perovskite and HTL layers. By tuning the QD sizes, one can vary the QD conduction and valence levels to match with those47 for the HTL material. The presence of the intermediate energy level for CdSe QDs promotes efficient hole extraction from the perovskite by separating the hole counterpart in the QD layer, thus hindering back recombination. We have found that the valence band maximum level of a large QD layer is located slightly above that of the HTL. However, in general for solar cells, the observed energy barrier of 0.3 eV is known not to be detrimental for efficient charge transfer. Moreover, it was found that the energy barrier at the interface between the absorber and charge extraction layers in CuInS2 solar cells can help to decrease recombination.48 The blocking of the back recombination in the presence of QDs boosts the efficiency for hole injection toward the HTL, so that a thin layer of QDs can cause an enhancement in Voc as demonstrated in PSCs with QDs.
The photovoltaic cell device with hybrid QDs was also discovered to show the best performance in the cascade structure, consistent with our previous study.49 Indeed, the utilization of hybrid QDs in PSCs has been proven to give an increase in their efficiency by 17%. The hybrid QDs allow the efficient FRET that exists on the small QDs to enhance the light harvesting efficiency in the visible light region. Meanwhile, the large QDs with a high refraction index enable extending the spectra for light absorption toward the near-IR region. Consequently, these results support that large and small QDs can be combined to give a synergistic improvement for QE in the cascade structure. Moreover, Voc can be improved by matching the alignment of the valence and conduction bands of each layer in the perovskite/QDs/HTL structure, thereby enabling reduction of the recombination rate for efficient charge extraction.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated that size-controlled CdSe QDs could be used to realize high performance for PSCs fabricated in both the ambient air and the glovebox by boosting charge transfer and energy transfer. In particular, deposition of hybrid QDs as the buffer between MAPbI3 and Spiro-MeOTAD gave a significant improvement in light harvesting efficiency for PSC devices. Small QDs were discovered to allow enhanced light absorption by the perovskite layer via the FRET mechanism while large QDs with high refractive indexes allowed efficient light backscattering at the perovskite/QD/Spiro-MeOTAD interface so that the PSC light harvesting ability was enhanced in the long wavelength range. Moreover, it was determined that QDs encapsulate perovskite absorbers, thus improving the device stability in the ambient air. Consequently, these results support that high-performance perovskite PSCs could be realized on a tandem-like device with a thin layer of QDs to achieve the better cascade structure, and thus highly encouraged us to explore QDs as promising interface modifiers.
Acknowledgements
This research was mainly supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program (2013M3A6B1078884) at the Center for Hybrid Interface Materials (HIM), the Korea Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (2009-0093881), and the Korea Research Fellowship program funded by the ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning, and the National Research Foundation of Korea (2016R1A2B3012053, 2015H1D3A1062265).
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H. Kim, A. Sarkar, K. NazeeruddinMd, M. Gratzel and S. Il Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. De Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. R. Hong, J. B. You, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam and H. Wang, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170–e1501170 Search PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mohammad K., S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1898–1997 Search PubMed .
M. Hirasawa, T. Ishihara, T. Goto, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Phys. B, 1994, 201, 427–430 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Ban, T. Kondo, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 619–623 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mondai and A. Samanta, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1878–1885 RSC .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, R. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, M. T. Trinh, D. Niesner, H. Zhu, Z. Norman, J. S. Owen, O. Yaffe, B. J. Kudisch and X. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2089–2096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tachikawa, I. Karimata and Y. Kobori, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3195–3201 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2014, 342, 344–347 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Fan, H. Yan, D. L. Phillips and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-S. Li, C.-H. Chang, Y.-C. Wang, C.-W. Lin, D.-Y. Wang, J.-C. Lin, C.-C. Chen, H.-S. Sheu, H.-C. Chia, W.-R. Wu, U.-S. Jeng, C.-T. Liang, R. Sankar, F.-C. Chou and C.-W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1282–1289 CAS .
Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin, G. Walters, F. Fan, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, A. Buin, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2015, 523, 324–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, Z. Yang, G. Walters, R. Comin, Z. Ning, E. Beauregard, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Tiep, Z. Ku and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501420 CrossRef .
M. Ye, X. Hong, F. Zhang and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6755–6771 CAS .
H. S. Jang, H. Yang, S. W. Kim, J. Y. Han, S. G. Lee and D. Y. Jeon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2696–2702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bera, L. Qian, T. K. Tseng and P. H. Holloway, Materials, 2010, 3, 2260–2345 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854–2860 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, L. Gu, W. He and Z. Jia, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5474–5481 CAS .
B. E. Hardin, E. T. Hoke, P. B. Armstrong, J.-H. Yum, P. Comte, T. Torres, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
K. Feron, W. Belcher, C. Fell and P. Dastoor, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2012, 13, 17019–17047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Basham, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1253–1258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Moulé, H. Snaith, M. Kaiser, H. Klesper, D. M. Huang, M. Grätzel and K. Meerholz, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 73111 CrossRef .
B. T. Diroll, E. A. Gaulding, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6463–6469 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Lee, K. S. Han, W. H. Shin, J. W. Lee, J. H. Choi, K. M. Choi, Y. Lee, H. Kim, W. Choi and J. K. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 203–207 CAS .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy, Springer, US, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
Z. Győri, D. Tátrai, F. Sarlós, G. Szabó, Á. Kukovecz, Z. Kónya and I. Kiricsi, Process. Appl. Ceram., 2010, 4, 33–38 CrossRef .
M. Cha, P. Da, J. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Xiu, G. Zheng and Z.-S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Chen, T. Y. Huang, T. H. Chang, Y. Sanehira, C. W. Kung, C. W. Chu, M. Ikegami, T. Miyasaka and K. C. Ho, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 34319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. Lee, R. W. Meulenberg, K. M. Hanif, H. Mattoussi, J. E. Klepeis, L. J. Terminello and T. Van Buuren, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 1–4 Search PubMed .
I. Konovalov and R. Szargan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2088–2090 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Adhyaksa, G. I. Lee, S.-W. Baek, J.-Y. Lee and J. K. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2711 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr03487c‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Small quantum dots (QDs) allow Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) where the QDs transfer the non-radiative energy to the perovskite. (b) Large QDs make the incident light reflect back to the perovskite via backscattering at the perovskite/QD interface. (c) Hybrid QDs, which are composed of small and large QDs, enable FRET and light reflection to take place simultaneously at the perovskite/QD interface.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Absorption and photoluminescence spectra of small CdSe QDs (2 nm QD), large CdSe QDs (4 nm QD), and hybrid CdSe QDs (mixed with 2 nm and 4 nm QDs). (b) HRTEM images of small (top) and large (bottom) CdSe QDs, respectively. (c) Overlapping of perovskite absorption and QD photoluminescence (PL) spectra along with their external quantum efficiencies (EQEs).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the deposition of size-controlled CdSe QDs onto the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. (b) Cross sectional SEM image of a fabricated PSC. (c) SEM plane view image of a perovskite capping layer morphology covered with the QD layer. (d, e) EDS image of signals of selenium and cadmium elements obtained from the area shown in Fig. 3c.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) EQEs of PSCs along with PL emission spectra of QDs. (b) Difference between the EQEs of the PSCs with QDs and the control PSC without QDs. (c) Histogram of the parameters for PSCs. (d) Changes of the parameters for PSCs under ambient conditions with 20%–30% humidity at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Decay of the QD PL peak at around 525 nm after turning off light for pristine QDs, 2 nm, and perovskite/QD layers deposited on the glass substrate. (b) Decay of the QD PL peak at around 610 nm after turning off light for pristine QDs, 4 nm, and perovskite/QD layers deposited on the glass substrate. (c) Nyquist plots of PSCs with and without QDs, where the inset describes the equivalent circuit used for fitting the EIS data. (d) Band level diagram of a perovskite/QD/HTL interface constructed using a combination of XPS and optical absorption spectroscopy analyses (see Fig. S7 in ESI†).	 

Perovskite pristine	189	—
2 nm QD	—	76
Perovskite + 2 nm QD	213	7
4 nm QD	—	9
Perovskite + 4 nm QD	179	6
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr03487c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
