A ternary system exploiting the full solar spectrum to generate renewable hydrogen from a waste biomass feedstock   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE00603D View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00603D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, Advance Article A ternary system exploiting the full solar spectrum to generate renewable hydrogen from a waste biomass feedstock†
Qiyuan Li‡
a, 
Lixue Jiang‡a, 
Gan Huang‡bc, 
Da-Wei Wanga, 
Jack Shepherda, 
Rahman Daiyana, 
Christos N. Markidesb, 
Robert A. Taylor*d and 
Jason Scott*a
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales (UNSW), Kensington, New South Wales 2052, Australia. E-mail: jason.scott@unsw.edu.au
bClean Energy Processes (CEP) Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London, UK
cInstitute of Microstructure Technology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
dSchool of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, The University of New South Wales (UNSW), Kensington, New South Wales 2052, Australia. E-mail: robert.taylor@unsw.edu.au
Received 
24th February 2023
, Accepted 4th July 2023First published on 5th July 2023AbstractA solar-driven system is proposed capable of hydrogen production from waste biomass with low carbon and water footprints. The ternary system consists of a membrane-based waste biomass concentrator (WBC), a biomass preconditioning reactor (BPR) integrated with an array of hybrid PV-thermal (PVT) collectors, and a flow electrolysis cell (FEC) equipped with a custom, high-performance electrode – NiMo alloy deposited onto Ni foam. An innovative full-solar-spectrum hybrid PVT reflector-concentrator was constructed to confirm performance; this enabled a thermal efficiency of up to ∼50% to be achieved when operating the BPR at 120–150 °C, while also converting ∼8% of the solar flux to electricity for the FEC. The solar-thermal BPR can reform recovered waste biomass (i.e., a sugar-containing liquid feedstock) into a bio-alcohol (5-hydroxymethylfurfural) with a yield of 25 mol%, with the transformed biomass then used to feed the anodic compartment of the FEC. Within the FEC, biomass electrolysis using the NiMo catalyst facilitated hydrogen production, offering a low energy consumption of 40–53 kW h kg−1, which is 16–28% more efficient than alkaline water splitting using Ni foam electrodes. The ternary system achieved a 7.5% overall solar-to-hydrogen efficiency, additional revenue from clean water production (with >80% water reclaimed), and a value-added chemical by-product (2,5-furandicarboxylic acid at a 3–10% yield from the waste sugar stream). This work presents a new route towards efficient and economically feasible renewable hydrogen production—a system which can underpin a circular economy.

Broader context
Raw biomass streams (e.g., sugars and vegetable oils in waste) are very low cost (or even revenue producing) and they lower the oxidation potential within an electrolyser (to <0.5 V) compared to pure water oxidation (1.23 V). By substituting biomass-derived organic solutions for water within the anodic compartment of an electrocatalytic cell to supplant the oxygen evolution reaction, it should be possible to significantly reduce the energy consumption for hydrogen production. Further, there is the potential to co-produce value-added organic products from the biomass oxidation process. However, directly using raw/waste biomass as a feedstock for hydrogen electrolysis is difficult as most waste organic streams are complex, contain a mixture of organics and may not be in a state appropriate for feeding into an electrolyser. The objective of this work was to establish a ternary system which can transform a waste biomass feedstock (e.g., sugar-containing waste stream) into a more amenable bio-alcohol which enables improved hydrogen generation via electrolysis with lower energy consumption. The designed ternary system is capable of effectively and simultaneously producing renewable hydrogen, clean water, and other value-added organics using only sunlight and waste biomass and is a tool which can deliver economic, energetic and environmental sustainability.

Introduction
Solar-derived hydrogen represents a viable strategy to decarbonize the global energy economy as it can directly address intermittency issues associated with solar resources and serve as a fungible energy carrier.1 The major obstacle for wider implementation of current renewable water electrolysis technology is the high price (AU$ 4–12 kg−1 H2),2 a factor of 1.6–4.8 × higher than methane reforming technology or coal gasification (∼AU$ 2.5 kg−1 H2).3 The electricity consumption (45–65 kW h kg−1 H2) during water electrolysis represents around 50% of the operational cost (based on an AU$ 0.055 kW h−1 of mean solar PV electricity price in 2021 in Australia).4 In contrast, water consumption (15 L kg−1 H2)5 contributes to ∼1–6% of the cost, however it imposes a high social impact as it potentially competes with domestic water needs.6 Competing water uses could limit deployment at scale for renewable electrolysis installations in arid, sunny climates.7 Consequently, to realize a more sustainable hydrogen economy, innovative strategies are needed to significantly decrease the energy consumption and the water footprint, one of which is to use a waste biomass stream in place of clean water as a feedstock for the electrolyser.
Compared to pure water electrolysis, biomass electrolysis generates hydrogen by supplanting the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the anode with the oxidation of biomass-derived fuels, which can significantly reduce the electric energy consumption required for hydrogen production.8–10 Three major classes of small molecules, including alcohols (e.g. methanol, ethanol), N-containing molecules (urea and hydrazine), and some furan compounds (especially furfural and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural) are the strongest candidates to replace the sluggish OER.11 Waste biomass streams are a widely available option. If such streams are refined and concentrated, they can deliver a low standard oxidation potential (<0.5 V) compared to water oxidation (1.23 V).12 This can decrease the energy consumption by hydrogen production from 15%3 to 53%.13 Further, the consistently increasing generation of organic waste is a growing burden on the environment, and the degradation of organic waste contributes to greenhouse gas emission.14 For instance, effluent streams arising from many food and beverage industries contain a high concentration of waste organics, such as sugar (present as sucrose, fructose, etc.).15 Beverage wastewater can possess a high sugar content (approximately 1000–8000 mg L−1),15 epitomizing effluents with a high chemical oxygen demand (COD, up to ∼15000 mg L−1).16–19 To reduce the COD level in beverage wastewater streams to 200 mg L−1 (for discharge), the organic substances are typically degraded by biological17 or chemical oxidation methods,20 which necessitate high capital outlays and operating costs. Thus, coupling electrochemical hydrogen-evolution with the oxidation of organics presented in waste biomass (e.g., wastewater) represents a productive wastewater treatment strategy using an environmentally friendly approach. At the same time, it may be possible to produce value-added organic products from the process.21
However, it is difficult to directly use biomass waste as an electrolysis feedstock for hydrogen production22 as most waste organic streams comprise a mixture of organic molecules and may not be in an initially suitable state.23 Pre-treatment and pre-conditioning (e.g., hydrolysis, anaerobic fermentation22) can minimise difficulties associated with raw biomass heterogeneity.14 They can convert the original biomass (e.g., starch, cellulose, insulin, sucrose) into more uniform and amenable bio-alcohols and carboxylates with decreased electrochemical oxidation potential, facilitating greater H2 production. For instance, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (5-HMF) is the most-studied compound for electrochemical organic oxidation. 5-HMF can be derived from waste biomass (e.g., waste sugar or starch-rich food waste) via hydrolysis at a yield ranging from between 4.3% to 30 mol%.24 However, both pre-conditioning the waste biomass (e.g., hydrothermal treatment) and electrochemical oxidation of the (pre-conditioned) biomass require considerable thermal and electrical energy inputs.20 To produce renewable hydrogen from waste biomass (without emitting any carbon dioxide), the dual energy requirements for the biomass pre-conditioning (heat) and the flow electrolysis cell (electricity) can potentially be provided via a hybrid photovoltaic-thermal solar (PVT) collector.20,25,26 PVT collectors based on spectral beam splitting27 allow the solar cells and the thermal receiver to operate at significantly different temperatures, preventing excessive de-rating of the cells’ efficiency while also generating medium to high temperature heat (>100 °C). Furthermore, emerging PV materials (e.g., cadmium telluride (CdTe), perovskites and copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS)) are now attaining high power conversion efficiencies of up to 23%,28 and have been demonstrated to work as semi-transparent top-cells in multi-junction configurations.29 To-date, the implementation of semi-transparent PV solar cells as selective beam splitting filters is limited despite offering a means to efficiently utilise the full solar spectrum. In this work, a ‘winged’ PVT solar collector was designed to convert solar radiation to both heat and electricity, as required by the proposed waste biomass to renewable hydrogen ternary process. The established approach signifies a new solar spectrum splitting method, designed to selectively pre-absorbed visible light for electricity production, while reflecting and concentrating the remaining spectrum (IR) for the thermal receiver/reactor.
While a PVT-biomass preconditioning reactor (BPR) can boost solar and waste biomass utilization for biomass electrolysis, further improvement to the economics of sustainable hydrogen production can be realized by upgrading electrolysis efficiency.30,31 One means to deliver improvement is through design of the electrode materials which facilitate the charge transfer process and favor the desired reaction routes. Noble metal catalysts (e.g., Pt-based and Ir/Ru-based compounds) are the historic choice for biomass electrocatalytic oxidation,32 however their high price and rareness are likely to limit their use in large-scale application.33 In this regard, transition metals (especially Co and Ni), including bimetallic combinations (NiFe and NiCo), as well as layered double hydroxide (LDH)-based materials (e.g., NiFe-LDH) are emerging as suitable candidates for biomass (e.g., 5-HMF) oxidation due to their low cost, high efficiency, good selectively, and stability.11 Among the bimetallic electrocatalysts, Ni-based alloys introduce the additional benefits of comparatively low cost, ready fabrication into high surface area nanostructures and simple and (in some cases) direct growth onto three-dimensional conductive substrates such as Ni foam and carbon fibre paper. Selected Ni-based alloys have been shown to exhibit high catalytic activity for the HER and the biomass (e.g., urea) oxidation reaction,32,34 however their potential for waste biomass electrolysis has not been explored. Another complementary advantage is the oxidative transformation of biomass to value-added chemicals.31 That is, biomass electrolysis has the capacity to generate valuable chemicals as a secondary product. For instance, the solar-driven electro-oxidation of glucose can simultaneously produce H2 as well as other valuable and chemicals (e.g., gluconic acid and glucaric acid) at lower cost than the current industrial processes using chemical oxidation or microbial fermentation.9 Studies have shown promising results, suggesting glucaric acid can be produced at $6.94–9.32 per kg from glucose electrolysis, which is >50% lower than the production cost of industrial chemical approach ($17 per kg).9,35
In this work, we present an integrated ternary system for producing hydrogen and value-added chemicals from waste biomass feedstock using only renewable energy as the input. The system initially recovers clean water from the waste stream (with a portion being fed into the downstream electrolyser) and concentrates the feedstock enabling more efficient system performance. For the first time, this study systematically analyses the real performance of an integrated multi-step PV-solar thermal biomass reactor which first transforms a concentrated sugar-containing biomass feedstock into a more amenable form (e.g., bio-alcohol) which then facilitates greater H2 generation in the subsequent electrolysis stage. The key and innovative concepts incorporated within the system are: (i) a capacity for full spectrum harvesting via a unique hybrid PVT solar collector/reactor in a building-integrated design; (ii) a composite NiMo electrode designed to generate H2 from the pre-conditioned biomass within a flow electrolysis cell (FEC); and (iii) the delivery of green H2 with a much reduced system payback time, as well as a minimized water and energy footprint.
Results
Overall system design
A standalone biomass/organic wastewater treatment and reforming system was developed to produce green hydrogen and value-added chemicals. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the system comprises three primary integrated components: (i) a waste biomass concentrator (WBC), powered by a photovoltaic array which concentrates the biomass feed stream and simultaneously produces clean water suitable for use in the flow electrolysis cell; (ii) a solar PVT-BPR, which pre-conditions the biomass to be more appropriate for hydrogen generation; and (iii) a flow electrolysis cell (FEC), powered by a photovoltaic cell which uses pre-conditioned biomass (from the BPR) in the anodic compartment and clean water (from the WBC) in the cathodic compartment to produce hydrogen and value-added organic products.
 Fig. 1  Process overview of ternary biomass reforming system. 
The solar-driven WBC unit was established to upgrade the waste biomass feedstock, making it more amenable for the downstream components of the system. For instance, a typical high-sugar-containing waste stream (i.e., 1–8 g L−1 sugar from the soft drink industry), contains suspended solids, colouring compounds, a suite of other components (e.g., nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus) as well as carbonic acid, and inorganic salts which can impact system performance (wastewater characteristics are reported in Table S1, ESI†). To constrain their potentially negative influence on overall system performance, a membrane filtration-based (pre-treatment plus reverse osmosis) WBC unit has been installed upstream of the BPR which acts to: (i) decrease the presence of adverse components in the feed to the BPR; (ii) concentrate the sugar content of the feed to the BPR; and (iii) provide a clean water source suitable for use in the cathodic compartment of the FEC. The WBC is an arrangement of microfiltration (MF), ultrafiltration (UF) and reverse osmosis (RO) stages to pre-treat and concentrate the biomass feed. MF can reject suspended solids, colloids, and bacteria,36 while UF with activated charcoal can be used for large molecular weight organic compound removal (e.g., pigments) except sugar compounds (with very low co-adsorption/rejection of sugar).37 A RO membrane was employed to increase the sugar concentration up to 0.29 mol L−1 (M) from approximately 0.015 M (0.5° Brix, or 5 g L−1 of sucrose) initially in the UF permeate. The product streams from the WBC are: (i) the pre-treated/concentrated waste sugar feedstock (with a significantly reduced volume and increased sugar concentration) which is fed into the downstream PV/thermal BPR; (ii) permeate/treated water (further polished by second/third stage RO process to reach a conductivity of <5 μS cm−1)5 a portion of which is fed into the downstream FEC (cathode compartment of electrolyser).
For the hydrogen generated by the system to be completely renewable, all energy inputs need to be from the sun, as shown in Fig. 1. To enable this type of off-grid system, the BPR comprises a unique PV ‘winged’ solar PVT array which is able to generate both 120–150 °C process heat and electricity to drive the system components (i.e., FEC and pumps). A flexible semi-reflective thin film solar cell was designed (the structure of cell is reported in Fig. S3, ESI†) in the form of a solar mirror film, which can be applied as a sticker to all surfaces of the concentrator, including flat and curved reflector components. The sunlight can be selectively pre-absorbed by the semi-reflective PV for electricity generation, with the remaining/waste spectrum (ultraviolet and infrared) reflected and/or concentrated onto the receiver/reactor. To demonstrate the concept, a semi-transparent cadmium telluride (CdTe) solar panel with a reflector (Fig. 1) was used as the reflective PV wing. The biomass reactor comprises an evacuated solar tube (2.5 L volume with an outer/inner glass tube diameter of 58/47 mm and wall thickness of 1.6 mm) equipped with a corrosion resistant stainless steel (Alloy 20) end cap. The evacuated solar tube is located along the focal line of the compound parabolic concentrator (CPC) with a half acceptance angle of 60° and a focal line width of 47 mm.4,38 The output from the WBC (i.e., the concentrated biomass stream) is fed into the solar-thermal BPR where it is hydrothermally treated at 120–150 °C. Pre-conditioning the biomass waste can minimise difficulties associated with raw biomass heterogeneity and bacteria growth. In this work, the BPR converts an initial sugar-containing biomass feedstock into a bio-alcohol (e.g., 5-HMF) which is more amenable to H2 generation.
As detailed in Fig. 1, clean water from the WBC and the pre-conditioned biomass from the BPR, are then fed into the FEC cathode and anode compartments, respectively. The FEC (prototype unit shown in Fig. S4, ESI†) is composed of a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) where the bias is provided by a PV cell. Although the diagram illustrates direct coupling between the PV and FEC, if the I–V characteristics of PV cells is matched with the electrolysers, indirect coupling can also be realized by using a DC–DC power controller.6 To enhance 5-HMF electro-oxidation at the anode and simultaneously produce hydrogen efficiently at the cathode, a bifunctional electrode (NiMo alloy deposited on Ni foam) was developed. This transition metal-based alloy film facilitates biomass electrolysis (i.e., 5-HMF electro-oxidation at the anode and hydrogen evolution at the cathode) at a lower potential than Ni foam and can outperform overall pure water splitting. Using the low cost and effective NiMo electrode to drive the kinetic conversion at a lower energy demand is a further innovation to improve the economic feasibility of the system. The ternary system only requires abundant solar energy to upgrade waste biomass resources and produce renewable hydrogen simultaneously.
Waste biomass concentrator
The PV-driven WBC, comprising a wastewater treatment array (MF, UF with activated charcoal and RO systems in series) to concentrate the biomass feed stream, is depicted in Fig. 2(a). The WBC comprises: (i) a vacuum filtration apparatus with MF membrane filter (1 piece mixed cellulose esters membrane, 0.45 μm pore size, 47 mm OD); (ii) a 5 g L−1 activated charcoal suspension (25 °C agitated at 200 rpm) with a ceramic UF module (9 pieces of Filtanium Ceramic Membrane, 100 kDa, 10 mm OD × 250 mm length per tube, 0.045 m2 area per module); (iii) a primary RO module and a secondary RO module (Filmtec TW30HP-4611, Polyamide Thin-Film Composite, 2.2 m2 area per module). Additional details on module/system design and PV-battery powered operation are provided in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Synthetic wastewater (mixture of 3% cola, 3.5% apple juice, 3.5% lemonade and 90% water, containing approximately 10 g L−1 sugar) was prepared to represent wastewater from the beverage and sugar industry. The scope of this study does not include the assessment of biological contamination/activity (such as suppression of biofilm growth39) within the process, so no microorganisms were added to the feed. Characteristics of the simulated sugar wastewater are provided in Table S1 (ESI†), including colour, Brix, chemical oxygen demand (COD), total organic carbon (TOC), dissolved organic carbon (DOC), total inorganic carbon (TIC), Total Nitrogen, Total Phosphorus, and inorganic salts.
 Fig. 2  Schematic and performance of waste biomass concentrator for treating simulated sugar wastewater: (a) system schematic; (b) water quality values at various stages of the treatment process (indicated in (a)); (c) water permeability and sugar rejection during the RO membrane concentration stage. (‘sucrose’ and ‘fructose’ denote neat sucrose and fructose solutions). 
As microorganism (e.g., bacteria) removal performance is not included in the current study, the simulated wastewater was only filtered by with a MF module to remove suspended particles from the process liquid prior to UF treatment. For UF treatment with activated charcoal,37 the simulated sugar wastewater (pH = 3.4) was mixed with 5 g L−1 powdered activated charcoal (100–400 mesh, mean diameter ∼70 μm) and stirred at 200 rpm at 25 °C for 2 hours. The suspension was then filtered by the cross flow ceramic membrane module. A water flux, Jw, of 100–220 L permeate water per square meter of membrane area per hour (m−2 h−1) was achieved when operated at 5–10 bar feed pressure and 24 L h−1 feed flow rate. The permeability (normalised with respect to feed pressure) was ∼22 L m−2 h−1 bar−1 for the UF module using the synthetic wastewater. Up to 10 L h−1 of the sugar wastewater can be treated by the UF module with a 60 W power consumption (i.e., specific energy consumption = 6 kW h m−3). The change in key characteristics of the sugar wastewater with UF treatment is provided in Fig. 2(b). The activated charcoal/UF was effective at removing the coloured components (>95% colour reduction and 7.5% TOC reduction) of the sugar wastewater, while the sugar rejection was very low (sugar component remaining in the UF permeate as ° Brix is unchanged). Images of the pre- and post UF-treated water samples, and values for the individual constituents are provided in Table S1 and Fig. S1 (ESI†).
The sugar content in the UF permeate (10 g L−1) was concentrated to 35 g L−1 within the RO module, with an 80% reduction in feedstock volume to the BPR. Within the RO module a 0.5–2.5 m−2 h−1 bar−1 of permeate water flux was achieved when concentrating the sugar wastewater from 10 g L−1 to 35 g L−1 (Fig. 2(c)). The experiment was operated at 10 bar feed pressure and a 12 L h−1 feed flow rate with 75 W (9 V, 8.3 A) power applied to the DC pump. The flux decrease observed during treatment was expected and arises from an increase in osmotic pressure on the feed side of the membrane. Compared to the neat sucrose and fructose solutions, a lower permeate water flux was achieved when treating the synthetic sugar wastewater as other solutes (e.g., inorganic salts) accumulated within the feed (modelling method is provided by eqn (S1) and (S2), ESI†). It is possible to reach a higher sugar concentration (e.g., >50 g L−1) in the RO retentate (position 3 in Fig. 2(a), however a high retentate sugar concentration will have a high viscosity (>10 mPa s) and restrict permeate flux, in turn requiring greater energy consumption to overcome the osmotic pressure (>∼10 bar) and hydraulic resistance (>1 bar in this instance) of the membrane module. While the sugar was concentrated to 35 g L−1 by the primary RO module, 90–100% of the other organic and inorganic constituents (see Table S1, ESI†) are also retained by the RO module. Up to ∼1000 mg L−1 total dissolved solids (including 5–460 mg L−1 of Na+, K+, Ca2+, PO43−, Cl−) accumulated within the RO feed tank (position 3 in Fig. 2(a)). It is more economical to treat the concentrated sugar feedstock (with a significantly reduced volume) in the solar-thermal BPR. The additional selective removal of inorganic ions from the RO retentate is recommended and planned as future work. The presence of these ions may impose positive (e.g., conductivity increase) or negative (e.g., scaling problem) effects on the subsequent BPR and FEC stages.
The sugar concentration in the permeate from the first RO treatment stage (position 4 in Fig. 2(a)) increased from 0 to 4 g L−1 (89–100% sugar rejection, see Fig. 2(c)). The inorganic matter was ∼35 mg L−1 and the conductivity was 52 μS cm−1 in the permeate stream (position 4 in Fig. 2(a)). The permeate from the second RO treatment stage (position 5 in Fig. 2(a)) has a very low total dissolved solid (<10 mg L−1, conductivity = 2–16 μS cm−1) and TOC (<6.8 mg L−1) content with nutrients (total nitrogen = 0.82 mg L−1, total phosphorus = 0.12 mg L−1). The stage-two RO permeate (position 5 in Fig. 2(a)) could be used for general wash-down water and irrigation or as drinking water following further disinfection (e.g., UV treatment). Importantly, the stage-two RO permeate (conductivity <5 μS cm−1) is also suitable as a water source for electrolysis with a small portion diverted as feed for the cathodic compartment in the electrolyser. It was found that less than 10 kWh energy was required to treat 1 m3 of the sugar wastewater (recover >80% clean water and concentrate sugar ∼7 times) using the prototype WBC system.
PV-winged biomass preconditioning reactor
Once treated by the WBC the concentrated sugar feedstock is stored in a tank (position 3 in Fig. 2(a)) prior to transfer to the ‘winged’ PV-thermal BPR. The PVT unit is designed to ensure the hydrogen generated by the system is completely renewable. Incident sunlight provides heating via the solar-thermal reactor and electricity via the PV wings (Fig. 1 and 3). The performance of reflective PV wing (efficiency and reflectance) and the solar-thermal reactor (solar thermal efficiency and 5-HMF yield) are examined in the ensuing sections.
 Fig. 3  Performance of the semi-reflective CdTe wing: (a) schematic of cross-sectional encapsulated CdTe cell (illustrated layer thicknesses not to scale) and prototype setup; (b) simulated reflectance, transmission, and absorptance (R/T/A) at 0° incident angle; (c) solar efficiency at different incident angles, θPV; (d) solar reflectance and efficiency at different incident angles. (ITO, EVA and CdS are the abbreviation of Indium Tin Oxide, Ethylene Vinyl Acetate, and Cadmium Sulfide). 
Semi-reflective CdTe Panel (PV Wing)
To harvest as much of the sunlight incident on the solar-thermal reactor as possible, semi-reflective cadmium telluride (CdTe) photovoltaic cells were installed on the reflective reactor surfaces (Fig. 3(a)). The CdTe cells provide electrical power to drive the system components (i.e., the FEC and pumps), with their placement on the reflective reactor surfaces decreasing the required system footprint (i.e., solar collection area). In this work, we utilized a semi-reflective thin film solar cell structure comprising sub-micron thick CdTe (∼0.9 μm) as an absorber which is encapsulated by a transparent glass substrate and a silver coated glass mirror. The structure is a layered glass/ITO/n-CdS/p-CdTe/ITO/glass mirror arrangement, with a schematic diagram of the cell and an image of the prototype provided in Fig. 3(a). The reflectance/absorptance/transmission (R/A/T) spectra and PV efficiency of the semi-reflective CdTe solar panel were assessed by both simulation (using SunSolve™) and experimental measurement. Three diode lasers (405 nm, 520 nm and 635 nm) with a 1 mW output power per module and a Thorlab photodetector were used to measure the reflectance of the PV panel. A Rigol DC3021 module was used to measure the I–V characteristics of the panel.
The optical model was validated by laser reflectance measurements and on-sun solar efficiency tests (Fig. 3(a)). Detailed results are provided in ESI,† Fig. S15. The optical simulation results for the CdTe solar cell (Fig. 3(b)) show that the CdTe cell has high absorbance (>70%) in the UV and visible regions (250–700 nm wavelength) and lower absorptance (∼40%) in the infrared region (700–2500 nm wavelength). UV/visible light reflectance is ∼20% and infrared reflectance is greater than 50%. The simulation results in Fig. 3(d) also revealed that the solar reflectance increased slightly from 44% to 50% when incident angle increased from 0° to 75°, and then increased to ∼100% with a larger incident angle. The absorptance and reflectance results illustrate the concept of semi-reflective PV. The UV and visible portions of the spectrum contribute to electricity generation while the unwanted/reflected spectrum (infrared portion) of sunlight is predominantly responsible for heating the tubular receiver/reactor.
As shown in Fig. 3(c), the open-circuit voltage of a PV wing (comprising three CdTe modules connected in parallel, total area = 0.45 m2) attains 55 V, while the short circuit current is 0.9 A, tested on a clear sunny day in Sydney, NSW, Australia (under a global solar radiation G = 900 ± 10 W m−2, 25 ± 1 °C ambient temperature, measured on 16 Nov. 2021). The maximum power output of three modules reached 31 W, after which it slightly decreased (to 29 W) when the temperature on the solar panel surface increased from 30 to 45 °C (Fig. S18, ESI†). The power output at the maximum output locations decreased from 31 W to 3.81 W when the incident angle increased from 0° to 90°, while the efficiency reduced from 6.8% to 0.9% (Fig. 3(c and d)). The experimental results are in good agreement with the simulation results (Fig. 3(d)). Differences predominantly arise from the effect of the diffuse radiation component (experimental results calculated based on global radiation).
Additionally, as indicated in Fig. S15(a–c) (ESI†), the efficiency and reflectance of the cell with different CdTe absorber thicknesses (900, 1800 and 3600 nm)40 were numerically investigated. Although an increase in cell efficiency is achieved (from 8% to 10%) when the CdTe thickness is increased from 900 nm to 3,600 nm, the reflectance slightly decreased from 44% to 43%. Based on the efficiency and reflection values, a semi-reflective CdTe solar cell with an absorber thickness of 900–1800 nm is proposed, which delivers a moderate efficiency (8–10%) and a relatively high reflectivity (>40%). While conventional CdTe-based PV cells are dominated using glass as the growth substrate (with a ‘superstrate configuration’ where sunlight enters through the substrate into the solar cell), it is very challenging to grow CdTe solar cells on flexible metal foil substrates.41 Further improvements to efficiency and reflection may be achievable by pertinent selection of the ‘active’ component which could be easier to be fabricated on non-glass flexible substrates for roll-to-roll manufacturing.42 On this basis, a future flexible semi-reflective solar cell design comprising a Cu2(In,Ga)Se2 thin film deposited on a flexible molybdenum foil substrate is proposed and discussed in the Section S2 of the ESI,† (Fig. S3).
Solar-thermal biomass preconditioning reactor
Although solar tracking can be realized by rotating the PV wings reported in our previous study,4 herein we propose a passive solar tracking concentrator configuration which requires no mechanical effort or movement for sun tracking. Fig. 4(a) provides a cross-sectional illustration of the PV-winged BPR array with dimensions of 690 × 2,000 × 345 mm (width × length × height) per module. Each unit within the array contains a semi-reflective PV wing, which is designed with a height equal to the aperture of the CPC (181 mm) to ensure reflected/additional sunlight from the PV wings can be captured by the CPC. A CPC, with a half acceptance angle of 60° (solar incident angles less than 60° can be captured by this CPC, as illustrated by the ray tracing simulation shown in Fig. S16, ESI†) and a focal line width of 47 mm was selected to concentrate the sunlight onto the evacuated tubular receiver/reactor. A typical individual evacuated solar tube (1.8 m length, 47 mm inner diameter) sealed by a stainless-steel end cap with feedthroughs and O-ring/gaskets can hold ∼2.5 L of biomass feed (Fig. 3a and 4b). To accept the seasonal swing (δ = ±23.5°) of light from the sun, the BPR can be operated with its long axis (Z-axis) aligned in the East–West orientation (the absorber tube is situated horizontally), and the aperture surface of the CPC (X–Z) titled perpendicularly to sunlight from summer solstice.
 Fig. 4  Design and experimental diagram the PV-Winged-CPC array: (a) cross-sectional view and ray trace analysis of the optics; (b) schematic of the system. 
Ray tracing simulation and experimental studies were used to evaluate the optical performance of the BPR from summer solstice to winter solstice in the transversal (X–Y) plane, at a geographical latitude of 34° (tilt angle of the BPR = 55.3°). At the summer solstice (transversal incident angle, θT = 10.3°), the CPC concentrates all incoming light onto the evacuated solar tube (EST) with an optical efficiency of 60% (the reflectance of the CPC and absorptance of receiver was taken into account) where the incident angle modifier (IAM, defined as the ratio of optical efficiency at an arbitrary incident angle relative to at normal incidence) is 1 as sunlight travels perpendicularly towards the CPC aperture (X–Z plane). At the winter solstice (θT = 57.3°), the ray tracing simulation (Fig. 4(a)) indicates that the CPC alone can capture light up to a 46.9° incident angle with 64% optical efficiency, where a CPC reflectance of 0.9, outer glass tube transmittance of 0.92, and inner receiver absorption of 0.95 were assumed (Fig. S16, ESI†).
Advantageously, up to 31% additional solar energy can be absorbed by the PV-winged BPR compared to the CPC alone. This is due to the PV wing reflecting extra sunlight (with a reflectance of 0.47, see Fig. 3(d)) to the evacuated tube receiver/reactor through the CPC (Fig. 3(a)). To account for other off-normal incidence, the incidence angle modifier (IAM) can be determined by both ray tracing simulation and solar thermal efficiency testing (Section S4, ESI†), using eqn (S3)–(S6) (ESI†). Fig. 5(a) shows that the transversal IAM of the PV-winged-CPC (on X–Y plane) increases from 1 to ∼1.4 from summer solstice (incidence angle, θT = 10.3°) to equinox (θT = 33.8°) and decreases to 1.2 on winter solstice (θT = 57.3°). However, the longitudinal IAM of the BPR (on Y–Z plane) is comparatively lower than the transversal IAM, although it has a IAM (∼0.6) to capture the daily deviation of the sun from 9:00 am to 3:00 pm. The IAM analysis indicates that the solar biomass reactor can account for both seasonal and daily variations in the angle of the sun.
 Fig. 5  Performance the PV-Winged-CPC array: (a) transversal and longitudinal incident angle modifier as a function of the incident angle; (b) change in feedstock (sugar solution) temperature with time for different outdoor tests; (c) solar thermal efficiency as a function of operating temperature (blue dashed line and orange dashed line are the modelling results on winter and summer solstice, at solar noon); (d) 5-HMF yield and change in reactor temperature (initial sugar concentration = 35 g L−1, initial pH = 1.3). 
The improvement to the solar collection introduced by the PV-winged CPC is illustrated in Fig. S17 (ESI†), which compares the temperature increase in a water-filled evacuated solar tube with and without the PV-CPC under the same operating conditions (incident angle: θT = 0–30°, θL = 30°; global solar radiation G = 850 ± 50 W m−2, diffuse radiation: Gd = 80 ± 10 W m−2, ambient temperature: Ta = 20 ± 3 °C, tested on 6 May 2022 and 1 July 2022). The PV-winged BPR module takes less than 1.0 h to reach ∼80 °C, whereas the original evacuated solar tube (without CPC) takes 3.5 hours to achieve 80 °C (at standard atmospheric pressure). The difference in heating time between the two arrangements represent a three-fold improvement when using the PV-winged CPC design. Fig. 5(b) shows the temperature of the reaction medium in the PV-winged CPC also increases with time on-sun and decreases upon termination of the test (i.e., when the solar irradiance input was blocked). The solar thermal efficiency was calculated based on the rate of increase in the water/biomass temperature in the BPR with the thermal efficiencies (ηth) at different operating temperatures (Tf) provided in Fig. 5(c). Detail on evaluation of the thermal efficiency is provided in Section S4 (ESI†). The analysis revealed that an optical efficiency of 60% and a thermal efficiency of 40–50% can be achieved when operating at feedstock temperature of 150 °C on solar noon (θL = 0°) over a year (from summer solstice to winter solstice θT = 10–57°). Although efficiency would decrease to <30% with a large longitudinal incident angle (θL > 45°), the results show that the BPR can work effectively (ηth = 30–50% at 150 °C) during the sunniest hours of the day (e.g., from 9 am to 3 pm, solar time).
The viability of the PV-winged design for 5-HMF production was examined using concentrated waste sugar solution, obtained from WBC, as a feedstock (sugar content ∼35 g L−1, pH = 1.7). The test used operating conditions reported in earlier work, including pH adjustment to 1.3 and maintaining a reaction temperature between 120–180 °C for 1–2 hours.4 Fig. 5(d) shows the 5-HMF yield obtained from three on-sun tests using the solar-thermal BPR (Tests 1–3) as well as one indoor test (Test 4) using an electrically heated hydrothermal reactor system (Parr reactor system, Fig. S20, ESI†). Due to the internal pressure limit of the evacuated solar tube (10 bar),4 the Parr reactor system had to be used for the highest reaction temperature (180 °C). The concentration of 5-HMF is defined by both the attained reactor temperature and the reaction time (Fig. 5(b and d)). A 5-HMF yield of ∼25 mol% (50 mM 5-HMF) was obtained when the feedstock temperature was raised to 150 °C representing a total ∼3.5 hours reaction timeframe (test 3, Fig. 5(b)). At a reaction temperature of 180 °C (test 4, the reaction temperature maintained at 120–180 °C for ∼1 h, Fig. 5(b)) the additional increase in 5-HMF yield was small relative to the 150 °C condition. The results show that operating the solar-thermal BPR a reaction temperature between 120–180 °C for 1–2 hours can deliver a 20–25% 5-HMF yield from the waste sugar solution. Increasing the temperature or extending the reaction time is not advantageous as the energy consumption is higher and other by-products (e.g., humins) form. The ensuing section examines the electrocatalytic component of the system in greater detail.
Photovoltaic-powered flow electrolysis cell
Following treatment in the solar-thermal BPR, the preconditioned waste sugar stream is stored in a holding tank where it is then used as the feedstock for the PV cell-powered FEC. Clean water from the WBC (Fig. 2(a)) and the pre-conditioned biomass from the BPR (Fig. 4(b)) are fed directly into the FEC cathode and anode compartments, respectively. To improve the efficiency of hydrogen production within the flow electrolysis cell, an NiMo alloy electrode was developed, and its performance compared with a conventional Ni foam electrode. The NiMo alloy layer was formed on the surface of Ni foam via an electrodeposition process (Section S2, ESI†) with the electrode characteristics and performance provided in Fig. 6 and Fig. S5–S14 (ESI†).
 Fig. 6  Structural characteristics and electrocatalytic activity of NiMo alloy and Ni foam electrodes: (a and b) SEM images of NiMo electrode at low and high magnifications; (c) HER LSV curves of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes tested in 1 M KOH; (d) Tafel plots of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes for HER (e) capacitive current of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes in 1 M KOH; (f) LSV curves of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes tested in alkalified pure water (OER), 5-HMF and BPR solutions (biomass molecules oxidation). (g) Tafel plots of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes for 5-HMF oxidation; (h) Nyquist plots of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes for 5-HMF and BPR products oxidation; (i) LSV curves of NiMo//NiMo vs. Ni foam//Ni foam tested in alkalified pure water (overall water splitting), 5-HMF and BPR solutions (biomass molecules oxidation coupling hydrogen production) (‘BPR’ term denotes product stream from BPR unit mixed with 1 M KOH). 
SEM images of the synthesized NiMo nanosheets on Ni foam are provided in Fig. 6(a and b) and show that the NiMo alloy is uniformly distributed across the Ni foam surface. To verify the feasibility of the NiMo alloy for biomass electrolysis coupling hydrogen evolution, the electrocatalytic activities towards the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and biomass (neat 5-HMF and BPR product stream) oxidation reactions were initially assessed in a three-electrode cell in alkalified pure water and biomass solutions. The biomass solution comprised either 50 mM 5-HMF solution or the product stream from BPR unit (containing ∼50 mM 5-HMF) and was alkalified to a pH of 14 using KOH. The NiMo alloy or Ni foam (1.0 cm × 2.0 cm with the lower 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm immersed in the electrolyte) was directly used as the working electrode, and Hg/HgO and graphite rod were used as the reference electrode and counter electrode, respectively. In the two-electrode setup, two NiMo alloy electrodes or Ni foam electrodes were utilized as both the anode and cathode. The HER linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves shown in Fig. 6(c) indicate that the NiMo electrode exhibits a superior HER performance compared to Ni foam. The NiMo electrode requires an overpotential of ∼110 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is significantly smaller than for bare Ni foam (∼300 mV). As shown in Fig. 6(d) and (g), the Tafel plots for the NiMo electrode exhibit slopes of ∼185 mV dec−1 for HER and 33 mV dec−1 for HMF oxidation, which are lower than for Ni foam (∼295 mV dec−1 for the HER and 69 mV dec−1 for HMF oxidation), highlighting the more efficient kinetics for both the HER and HMF oxidation. The NiMo electrode exhibits a double layer capacitance of 1.2 mF cm−2 in 1 M KOH which is higher than that (0.42 mF cm−2) of Ni foam (Fig. 6e), confirming its higher electrochemical surface area (ECSA) with more exposed catalytically active sites. The NiMo electrode enables electro-oxidation of the alkalified 5-HMF and BPR product solutions, delivering a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.38–1.4 V (Fig. 6(f)). The value is slightly lower than Ni foam (1.42–1.43 V) while being significantly lower than the OER using Ni foam (1.62 V, Fig. S5(a), ESI†). The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) in Fig. 6(h) indicate that the NiMo electrode imparts a smaller charge transfer resistance for both 5-HMF oxidation and BPR oxidation compared to the Ni foam. Overall water splitting performance and biomass electrolysis performance using the bi-functional NiMo alloy as both the anode and the cathode was also compared with the Ni foam. The LSV curves in Fig. 6(i) and Fig. S5(b) in ESI† show that the assembled NiMo//NiMo electrolysis cell can achieve a current density of 10 and 100 mA cm−2 at a voltage of 1.52–2 V for BPR electrolysis, 1.5–2.2 V for 5-HMF electrolysis, and 1.76–2.2 for water splitting, which outperforms the Ni foam//Ni foam arrangement in all cases (1.8–2.3 V for BPR electrolysis, 1.75–2.3 V for 5-HMF electrolysis and 1.83–2.4 V for water splitting). Thus, with additional characteristics and performance reported in ESI,† the NiMo electrodes have shown excellent activity, selectivity, and stability towards HER, 5-HMF and BPR products oxidation.
The capacity to scale up the biomass electrolysis process was assessed using a larger scale electrolysis cell shown in Fig. 7(a) and Fig. S4 (ESI†). The larger alkaline FEC prototype was able to house 7.9 cm × 7.9 cm electrodes, serving as both the anode for 5-HMF oxidation and the cathode for hydrogen production, and was used to further evaluate system performance (e.g., hydrogen production rate, faradaic efficiency, coupling efficiency of PV and FEC). Initially the system was performance tested indoors after which it was integrated into the biomass/organic wastewater treatment and reforming system (Fig. 1) for outdoor testing. During indoor electrochemical experiments with the NiMo electrodes, three aqueous electrolytes (1 M KOH, alkalified 50 mM 5-HMF and alkalified BPR product solution, 50 mL per solution) were fed to the anodic compartment of FEC, while 1 M KOH solution was passed through the cathodic compartment at the same operating conditions (at 25 °C, 10 mL min−1 flow rate using peristaltic pumps).
 Fig. 7  Performance of larger scale Flow Electrolysis Cell (FEC) during biomass electrolysis in indoor settings: (a) image of FEC system (indoor); (b) LSV curves for biomass electrolysis and water splitting using NiMo electrodes; (c) conversion of 50 mM 5-HMF to FDCA with time; (d) conversion of 5-HMF (in BPR product) to FDCA with time. 
Fig. 7(a) provides images of the larger-scale FEC unit in both indoor and outdoor settings as well as a schematic of the outdoor arrangement. LSV profiles for the biomass (5-HMF and BPR product solution) oxidation and OER using the NiMo electrodes in 1 M KOH solution (pH = 14) are presented in Fig. 7(b). The electrolyser polarization curves obtained for 50 mM 5-HMF shows that the output current density across the cell voltage range of 1.2–1.71 V was 0–50 mA cm−2, higher than that observed across the same voltage range for the BPR product stream (0–33 mA cm−2) and water splitting (0–13 mA cm−2). However, as reported in Fig. S5(c) (ESI†), using 5-HMF (50 mM) delivered a higher current than the BPR product solution at lower voltages (<1.85 V), revealing that 1.6–1.85 V is the optimal operating window for 5-HMF (50 mM) electrolysis. A current density of 10–100 mA cm−2 (current 0.5–6 A) was provided by the BPR product electrolysis at voltages between 1.5–1.95 V, which is ∼2 times higher than water splitting (0–50 mA cm−2) across the same voltage range. The higher current densities produced during BPR product solution electrolysis compared to 5-HMF electrolysis at voltages >1.8 V can be ascribed to the presence of higher dissolved organic matter in the BPR product solution (∼12 g L−1 DOC compared to 3.6 g L−1 DOC in 50 mM 5-HMF).
Chronoamperometric measurements for oxidation of the alkalified 5-HMF and BPR product solutions were conducted at a constant current of 3.2 A. 5-HMF consumption and the generation of 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA; i.e., 5-HMF oxidation product) were monitored by HPLC as detailed in Fig. S21 (ESI†). The changing concentrations of 5-HMF and FDCA as a function of reaction time are shown in Fig. 7(c and d). It is important to note that adjusting the pH of the BPR product solution from 1.3 to 14 (via KOH addition) invoked almost immediate 5-HMF degradation with the concentration decreasing from 50 mM to 14 mM. In contrast there was negligible 5-HMF decomposition when dissolving the 5-HMF standard (purity >99%) in 1 M KOH. The difference may originate from poorer chemical stability of the 5-HMF in the BPR solution,43 resulting in accelerated 5-HMF degradation kinetics upon alkalifying (exothermic reaction). As can be seen in Fig. 7(c) and (d), 5-HMF conversion in the neat solution reached 99% with a FDCA yield of 87% after 30-min reaction. In the case of the BPR product solution, 5-HMF conversion was 99% with a ∼45% FDCA yield after 2 h reaction. Slower conversion of the 5-HMF in the BPR product solution may derive from the co-existence of additional by-products (e.g., glucose, formic acid, levulinic acid)44 generated during sucrose pre-conditioning in the BPR.4 Their presence may invoke competing reactions (e.g., glucose oxidation)9 which could slow down 5-HMF electrooxidation. Improving the FDCA yield from the BPR product solution will be undertaken as future work, employing strategies such as such as improving the 5-HMF productivity in the BPR process by using efficient catalyst (e.g., zeolite)45 and separating 5-HMF from the BPR solution by-products prior to feed into the FEC.44
Outdoor on-sun electrolysis tests were conducted utilising a DC–DC power regulator to regulate the electrolyser (electrode size 7.9 × 7.9 cm) input voltage from a battery that was charged by a PV cell with a maximum power point tracking (MPPT) charger controller, as an indirect coupling method. The schematic in Fig. 8(a) and image of rooftop prototype in Fig. 9 shows the FEC set-up. Alkalified BPR product solution (1 L, pH = 14, at 25 °C and 130 mL min−1 flow rate) was fed to the anodic compartment of the FEC, while 1 M KOH solution was passed through the cathodic compartment at the same operating conditions. The electrolyser I–V curve and the hydrogen production rate (theoretical and experimental) are provided in Fig. 8(b).
 Fig. 8  Performance of larger scale Flow Electrolysis Cell (FEC) during biomass electrolysis in outdoor settings: (a) schematic of outdoor arrangement; (b) I–V curve and (experimental/theoretical) hydrogen production rate for single cell arrangement; (c) direct-coupling of electrolysis stack (21 cells) with PV array (10 wings). Note: ‘BPR’ denotes BPR product solution adjusted with 1 M KOH; ‘HMF’ term denotes 50 mM 5-HMF solution adjusted with 1 M KOH. 
 Fig. 9  Digital images of the rooftop ternary prototype system including performance metrics of each unit: (a) WBC; (b) PV-thermal BPR; (c) FEC and overall arrangement. 
The experimental results were generated by applying selected potentials (1.0–2.2 V) for a given (5 min) time interval to acquire the steady-state current and hydrogen flow. The theoretical H2 gas yield during electrolysis was calculated according to Faraday's laws, while the hydrogen production rate was measured by a hydrogen flow meter (Bronkhorst, model number: MV-392-H2, accuracy 1.75%). The average faradaic efficiency (ratio of measured to theoretical yield of H2, eqn (S18), ESI†) was 98 ± 2%, calculated using the hydrogen flow rate with 0–10 A current passing through the cell (Fig. 8(b)). Furthermore, if there is a good match between the polarization curves of the PV cells and electrolyser, direct coupling (i.e., with no power tracking electronics) can maximize the overall conversion efficiency at a given solar irradiation (Fig. S19, ESI†), in turn reducing the investment cost.46,47 To directly couple the PV wing and FEC developed in this study, the current generated from the PV array can be enhanced by connecting 10 PV wings in parallel, while a 21-cell electrolysis stack (connected in series) can match the 10-cell PV array voltage output range, as illustrated in Fig. 8(c). Consequently, the maximum power output points (PMPP) of the PV wings (operated at different incident angles) can be aligned with the operating points (Pop) which are the intersection of the I–V curves between the PV cells and electrolyser stack. The findings show that the 10-cell PV array (connected in parallel), can provide 1 to 8 A of current to the 21-cell electrolysis stack, generating ∼0.16–1.05 L min−1 of hydrogen with a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency up to ∼7.5% (eqn (S17), ESI†) at 0–90° incident angle (∼50–1000 W m−2 solar radiation received by the PV wings).
Larger-scale FEC performance using either Ni foam or NiMo electrodes under different operating conditions is summarized in Table 1. Employing a combination of NiMo electrodes and BPR product solution at a current density of 10–100 mA cm−2 delivers a significantly lower overpotential (1.52–2 V) and decreased energy consumption (∼40.4–53.7 kW h kg−1 H2) when compared with water splitting (values comparable to 50 mM 5-HMF). The combination amounts to 16–28% savings in electrical energy (10–15 kW h kg−1 H2) relative to alkaline water electrolysis using Ni foam electrodes. This indicates that ∼AU$ 0.5–0.8 per kg H2 of electricity expense can be saved (based on an AU$ 0.05 kW h−1 as a mean solar PV electricity price in Australia). Further energy consumption reduction could be achieved by increasing the biomass and electrolyte concentration (e.g., 2 M) and by optimising the operating temperature (e.g., cell temperature at 80 °C), according to the best results (∼20 kW h kg−1 H2) published in the literature.8
Table 1 Larger-scale FEC outdoor performance comparing Ni foam and NiMo alloy electrode performance using water, 5-HMF and BPR product feedstocks




Electrolyser type
Ni electrodes
NiMo electrodes




Note: ‘BPR’ denotes BPR product solution adjusted with 1 M KOH; ‘5-HMF’ denotes 50 mM 5-HMF solution adjusted with 1 M KOH.




Temperature (°C)
25
25
25
25


Electrochemical reaction (electrolyte)
OER//HER (1 M KOH)
OER//HER (1 M KOH)
5-HMF//HER (5-HMF with 1 M KOH and 1 M KOH)
BPR//HER (BPR with 1 M KOH and 1 M KOH)


Products
H2
H2
H2
H2


O2
O2
FDCA (87% yield)
FDCA (45% yield)


Current density (mA cm−2)
10
100
10
100
10
100
10
100


Cell voltage (V)
2.1
2.4
1.76
2.2
1.5
2.2
1.52
2


Energy consumption (kW h kg−1 of H2)
56.3
64.4
46.8
59.0
39.9
59.0
40.4
53.7




Ternary system integration and scale-up
Each of the individual unit operations were combined to construct an integrated ternary prototype array capable of producing renewable hydrogen from a ‘waste’ sugar-containing stream. Images of the integrated ternary prototype system are provided in Fig. 9, illustrating the positioning and capacity, footprints and performance characteristics of the WBC, BPR and FEC units. An additional Si-PV panel and battery system (100 W, 12 V solar panel kit with MPPT and battery) was installed on the rig to provide pumping power for the WBC. The ternary prototype system has a 2.0 m × 0.8 m × 1.8 m footprint, configured to include concentration of the sugar feedstock in the WBC, the PV/Thermal BPR, and NiMo alloy-containing FEC. The prototype was able to produce 96 L H2 per day (0.067 L H2 per min), ∼45 L of clean water and ∼8 g of FDCA from 50 L day−1 feed of sugar solution (∼5 g L−1 sugar concentration).
The direct PV-FEC coupling findings (Fig. 8(c)) suggested that an expanded modular design could employ 10 PV-winged BPR units connected in parallel to power and feed a 21-cell electrolysis stack connected in series. As detailed in Table 2, a scaled-up system (comprising 10 expanded modules) would require a 100 m2 footprint for the PVT-BPR array (e.g., located on a factory rooftop) and ∼30 m3 space to house the WBC and FEC units. An estimate based on the current study indicates that the scaled-up system will enable transformation of 5 m3 day−1 of sugar-containing wastewater to ∼0.5 kg day−1 renewable hydrogen, >4.5 m3 day−1 clean water and valuable by-products (e.g., ∼0.8 kg day−1 FDCA).
Table 2 Predicted design and operating capacity of expanded modules/systems based on and relative to the current prototype system




Parameters
Current prototype
Scaled-up module
Scaled-up system (10 modules)


WBC
PVT BPR
FEC
WBC
PVT BPR
FEC
WBC
PVT BPR
FEC




Key design parameters
UF: 0.045 m2, Total RO: 3 m2
PV wing: 0.5 m2; BPR: (0.2 × 2 × 0.35 m, W × L × H); additional PV: 0.6 m2
1 cell (7.9 × 7.9 cm)
UF: 0.5 m2, RO: 15 m2
PV wing: 5 m2, BPR: 2 × 2 m
1 stack (21 cells)
UF: 5 m2, RO: 150 m2
PV wing: 50 m2, BPR: 20 × 2 m
10 stacks (21 cells per stack)


Footprint (area or volume)
0.12 m3
1 m2 solar aperture area
0.15 m3
1.2 m3
10 m2
1.5 m3
12 m3
100 m2
15 m3


Capacity
Biomass/clean water
5 L day−1 concentrated biomass; 45 L day−1 clean water
50 L day−1 concentrated biomass; 450 L day−1 clean water
500 L day−1 concentrated biomass; 4500 L day−1 clean water


Solar power (PV-thermal)
PV wing: 25 W; additional PV panel: 100 W; solar thermal power: 180 W
PV wing: 250 W; additional PV panels: 1 kW; solar thermal power: 1.8 kW
PV wing: 2.5 kW; additional PV panels: 10 kW; solar thermal power: 18 kW


H2 produced
72 L H2 per day (0.05 L H2 per min)
60–300 L H2 per day
600–3000 L H2 per day


(0.2–1.0 L H2 per min)
(2–10 L H2 per min)




Preliminary techno-economic analysis
A preliminary techno-economic analysis was conducted based on implementing the scaled-up system (shown in Table 2) located in a remote region with an average daily solar exposure of 5 kW h m−2 and limited access to power and water. The system has a total PV wing area of 50 m2 with an additional PV array of 100 m2 (to provide pumping power to the entire system and ensure the FEC stacks can work at full capacity), a total BPR aperture area of 100 m2, and 10 alkaline electrolysis stacks (each stack has 21 cells, ∼4 kW power in total). The expected lifetime of the system is estimated to be 20 years, while some components (e.g., electrodes/membranes of electrolysers cells)2 are suggested to be replaced every 5 years (note that biomass electrolysis may require a higher maintenance level).35 Two scenarios are implemented for this system: (i) the first scenario is organic wastewater treatment and hydrogen production (without the valuable by-product recovery); (ii) the second scenario is targeting valuable by-product recovery in conjunction with the first scenario. The capital expenses (CAPEX), operating expenses (OPEX) and revenue streams for the two scenarios are compared in Table S5, ESI.† Although the biomass can save costs associated with energy and water consumption compared to conventional water electrolysis, the revenue from hydrogen production (4 AU$ per day)30 is very low for this study. However, the produced hydrogen (1 kg, ∼30 kW h) could be stored and used locally (e.g., for heating/electricity, or to help smooth the intermittency of solar energy), which would represent a viable/valuable clean energy source for a remote community. Moreover, cost analysis under the first scenario indicated that the system can feasibly treat 5 m3 day−1 sugar-containing wastewater (∼5 g L−1 sugar content, COD ∼15000 mg L−1),48 where a 3–14 years payback period (calculated by initial investment/cash flow per year) could be achieved if a revenue (60–120 AU$ per day) can be obtained from waste management (e.g., COD removal, discussed in Fig. S22, ESI†). The second scenario could be more challenging if targeting valuable by-product recovery from a waste biomass feedstock, with the economic feasibility highly dependent on the FDCA output and price. A two-year payback time could be achieved if the system can produce AU$150 worth of organic by-products (FDCA) per day, which could be realized by further scaling up the system and/or improving the overall FDCA yield.
Conclusion
Extracting hydrogen from waste biomass (e.g., a waste sugar stream) via solar-driven electrolysis represents a valuable approach by which a waste organic stream can be used to generate hydrogen and produce value-added chemicals. In this work, we demonstrated this conceptual route by establishing a ternary prototype system which uses a sugar-containing wastewater stream to produce renewable hydrogen, clean water, and a valuable organic by-product, FDCA. The findings progress the capacity for effective integration of biomass streams into renewable hydrogen systems, offering the advantages of reduced water and energy footprints, wastewater utilization, renewable solar energy conversion, and energy-efficient electrode development. Importantly, this research has established:
(i) A new passive solar tracking and beam splitting array which enables yearly operation and requires no mechanical effort or movement for sun tracking. A maximum ∼58% solar energy conversion (8% PV efficiency plus ∼50% thermal efficiency at 150 °C) was achieved by the prototype, resulting in ∼30% less collector area being required to provide the same power as conventional solar PV (∼20% efficiency) and evacuated solar tube collectors (∼20% at 120–150 °C).
(ii) A waste biomass concentrator capable of achieving >95% waste sugar recovery. The system was capable of concentrating an initial 5 g L−1 sugar-containing wastewater to >35 g sugar/L with clean water reclamation at <10 kW h m−3 energy consumption.
(iii) An integrated hybrid PV-thermal biomass preconditioning reactor that can deliver a 5-HMF yield of ∼25 mol % at a ∼1 L h−1 production rate (5-HMF concentration: 0.01–0.05 mol) from the concentrated waste sugar solution (35 g L−1 sugar content).
(iv) NiMo alloy electrodes which can attain a current density of 10–100 mA cm−2 and low overpotentials (1.52 and 2 V), in turn reducing energy consumption (∼40–54 kW h kg−1 H2) by the electrocatalytic unit for biomass electrolysis. This translates to electrical energy savings of up to 25 kW h kg−1 H2 on comparing with alkaline water electrolysis using Ni foam electrodes.
(v) A scaled-up system (100 BPR units and 4 kW electrolyser stack) can upgrade sugar-containing wastewater (5 m3 per day feed, ∼5 g L−1 sugar concentration) to ∼1 kg day−1 renewable hydrogen, ∼1 kg day−1 value-added chemicals (e.g., FDCA), and >4.5 m3 day−1 clean water.
Overall, a standalone, scalable, prototype system capable of generating renewable hydrogen using a simulated waste biomass solution and sunlight has been established. The system has the capacity to impact situations where sustainability and water management are important, as well as offer an alternative strategy for industries and communities seeking to adopt a circular economy framework.
Author contributions
J. S., R. A. T., D. W. conceived the study design, supervised the research and edited the manuscript. Q. L., L. J., and G. H. designed and performed the experiments and analysis – these authors contributed equally. L. J. conducted electrodes fabrication, structural characterisation, and electrochemical measurement. J. Sh., Q. L. and R. D. conducted the techno-economic analysis. C. N. M. supervised the research and edited the manuscript. All authors discussed and commented on the manuscript. Q. L. wrote the original manuscript and finalized the manuscript with L. J. R. A. T., and J. S.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to acknowledge the gracious support of the Australian Government through its Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA). The activity received funding from ARENA as part of ARENA's Research and Development Program – Renewable Hydrogen for Export. The views expressed herein are not necessarily the views of the Australian Government, and the Australian Government does not accept responsibility for any information or advice contained herein. The work was also supported by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) [grant numbers EP/M025012/1, and EP/R045518/1], and by the Royal Society via an International Collaboration Award 2020 [grant number ICA\R1\201302]. The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable contributions by Beijing Origin Water and Apricus Energy Pty Ltd to the research program and to thank company Solar Flow Ltd (http://www.solar-flow.co.uk). Q. L. would like to acknowledge the advice from Professor Xiaojing Hao on flexible thin film solar cell design. For the purpose of Open Access, the authors have applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.
ReferencesN. A. Burton, R. V. Padilla, A. Rose and H. Habibullah, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 135, 110255 CrossRef CAS .J. Yates, R. Daiyan, R. Patterson, R. Egan, R. Amal, A. Ho-Baille and N. L. Chang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100209 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhao, D. Lu, J. Wang, W. Tu, D. Wu, S. W. Koh, P. Gao, Z. J. Xu, S. Deng, Y. Zhou, B. You and H. Li, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Li, Y. Zhuo, K. Shanks, R. A. Taylor, B. Conneely, A. Tan, Y. Shen and J. Scott, Sol. Energy, 2021, 218, 455–468 CrossRef CAS .S. G. Simoes, J. Catarino, A. Picado, T. F. Lopes, S. di Berardino, F. Amorim, F. Gírio, C. M. Rangel and T. Ponce de Leão, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 315, 128124 CrossRef CAS .L. Jiang, J. Pan, Q. Li, H. Chen, S. Zhou, Z. Yu, S. Jiang, H. Yin, J. Guan, R. A. Taylor, R. Fisher, G. Leslie, J. Scott, H. Zhao and D.-W. Wang, EcoMat, 2022, e12254,  DOI:10.1002/eom2.12254 .B. Lee, L. Wang, Z. Wang, N. J. Cooper and M. Elimelech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 714–722 RSC .Y. X. Chen, A. Lavacchi, H. A. Miller, M. Bevilacqua, J. Filippi, M. Innocenti, A. Marchionni, W. Oberhauser, L. Wang and F. Vizza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W.-J. Liu, Z. Xu, D. Zhao, X.-Q. Pan, H.-C. Li, X. Hu, Z.-Y. Fan, W.-K. Wang, G.-H. Zhao, S. Jin, G. W. Huber and H.-Q. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Na, B. Seo, J. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. Lee, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, D. K. Lee, H.-S. Oh and U. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5193 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Song, K. Ji, H. Duan and M. Shao, Exploration, 2021, 1, 20210050 CrossRef PubMed .C. Deng, K.-H. Wu, X. Lu, S. Cheong, R. D. Tilley, C.-L. Chiang, Y.-C. Lin, Y.-G. Lin, W. Yan, J. Scott, R. Amal and D.-W. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 2612–2620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Verma, S. Lu and P. J. A. Kenis, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 466–474 CrossRef CAS .W. Han, Y. Yan, Y. Shi, J. Gu, J. Tang and H. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. S. Sheldon and I. G. Erdogan, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 285, 368–377 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Isla, R. N. Comelli and L. G. Seluy, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 136, 140–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. N. Comelli, L. G. Seluy, I. E. Grossmann and M. A. Isla, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 7687–7693 CrossRef CAS .M. Garg, in Advances in Biological Treatment of Industrial Waste Water and their Recycling for a Sustainable Future, ed. R. L. Singh and R. P. Singh, Springer Singapore, Singapore,  2019, pp. 333–361,  DOI:10.1007/978-981-13-1468-1_11 .G. Güven, A. Perendeci and A. Tanyolaç, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 151, 149–159 CrossRef .D. Yuan, L. Tian, Z. Li, H. Jiang, C. Yan, J. Dong, H. Wu and B. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3103 CrossRef PubMed .C. Y. Toe, C. Tsounis, J. Zhang, H. Masood, D. Gunawan, J. Scott and R. Amal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1140–1175 RSC .W. Liu, Y. Cui, X. Du, Z. Zhang, Z. Chao and Y. Deng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 467–472 RSC .G. Eggleston, B. Andrzejewski, M. Cole, C. Dalley, S. Sklanka, E. St Cyr, Y.-J. Chung and R. Powell, Biomass Bioenergy, 2015, 81, 424–436 CrossRef CAS .I. K. M. Yu, D. C. W. Tsang, A. C. K. Yip, S. S. Chen, L. Wang, Y. S. Ok and C. S. Poon, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 237, 222–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Huang, K. Wang and C. N. Markides, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Radwan, T. Katsura, S. Memon, E. M. Abo-Zahhad, O. Abdelrehim, A. A. Serageldin, M. R. Elmarghany, A. Khater and K. Nagano, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 6251–6273 RSC .A. Mojiri, C. Stanley, D. Rodriguez-Sanchez, V. Everett, A. Blakers and G. Rosengarten, Appl. Energy, 2016, 169, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .D. Suthar, S. Chuhadiya, R. Sharma, Himanshu and M. S. Dhaka, Mater. Adv., 2022, 3, 8081–8107 RSC .J. Zheng, C. F. J. Lau, H. Mehrvarz, F.-J. Ma, Y. Jiang, X. Deng, A. Soeriyadi, J. Kim, M. Zhang, L. Hu, X. Cui, D. S. Lee, J. Bing, Y. Cho, C. Chen, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2432–2443 RSC .Z. Ke, N. Williams, X. Yan, S. Younan, D. He, X. Song, X. Pan, X. Xiao and J. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19975–19983 RSC .H. Zhou, Z. Li, L. Ma and H. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 897–907 RSC .J.-Y. Zhang, T. He, M. Wang, R. Qi, Y. Yan, Z. Dong, H. Liu, H. Wang and B. Y. Xia, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 894–902 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, Z. Dang and P. Gao, Nano Select, 2021, 2, 847–864 CrossRef CAS .N. Shaikh, R. Pati, I. Mukhopadhyay and A. Ray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 056511 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Khan, T. A. Al-Attas, N. G. Yasri, H. Zhao, S. Larter, J. Hu and M. G. Kibria, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 5568–5577 RSC .H. Zhang, J. Luo, L. Liu, X. Chen and Y. Wan, Green Chemical Engineering, 2021, 2, 27–43 CrossRef .M. Bernal, M. O. Ruiz, R. M. Geanta, J. M. Benito and I. Escudero, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 283, 313–322 CrossRef CAS .B. Widyolar, L. Jiang, Y. Bhusal, J. Brinkley and R. Winston, Sol. Energy, 2021, 230, 131–150 CrossRef CAS .J. Mansouri, S. Harrisson and V. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4567–4586 RSC .J. Li, F. He, X. Hao, S. Lin, W. Long, T. Gan, L. Wu, J. Zhang and L. Feng, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 18198–18208 CrossRef .L. Kranz, C. Gretener, J. Perrenoud, R. Schmitt, F. Pianezzi, F. La Mattina, P. Blösch, E. Cheah, A. Chirilă, C. M. Fella, H. Hagendorfer, T. Jäger, S. Nishiwaki, A. R. Uhl, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2306 CrossRef PubMed .S. Ishizuka, Y. Kamikawa and J. Nishinaga, npj Flexible Electron., 2022, 6, 90 CrossRef CAS .B. Zhu, C. Chen, L. Huai, Z. Zhou, L. Wang and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 120396 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Pawar, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 6851–6855 CrossRef CAS .P. Dornath and W. Fan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 191, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Bashir, M. A. Nadeem, M. Al-Oufi, M. Al-Hakami, T. T. Isimjan and H. Idriss, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 10510–10518 CrossRef PubMed .F. Barbir, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 661–669 CrossRef CAS .M. Arienzo, E. W. Christen, W. Quayle and N. Di Stefano, Water Environ. Res., 2009, 81, 233–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00603d‡ Contributed equally to the research outcomes.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
Raw biomass streams (e.g., sugars and vegetable oils in waste) are very low cost (or even revenue producing) and they lower the oxidation potential within an electrolyser (to <0.5 V) compared to pure water oxidation (1.23 V). By substituting biomass-derived organic solutions for water within the anodic compartment of an electrocatalytic cell to supplant the oxygen evolution reaction, it should be possible to significantly reduce the energy consumption for hydrogen production. Further, there is the potential to co-produce value-added organic products from the biomass oxidation process. However, directly using raw/waste biomass as a feedstock for hydrogen electrolysis is difficult as most waste organic streams are complex, contain a mixture of organics and may not be in a state appropriate for feeding into an electrolyser. The objective of this work was to establish a ternary system which can transform a waste biomass feedstock (e.g., sugar-containing waste stream) into a more amenable bio-alcohol which enables improved hydrogen generation via electrolysis with lower energy consumption. The designed ternary system is capable of effectively and simultaneously producing renewable hydrogen, clean water, and other value-added organics using only sunlight and waste biomass and is a tool which can deliver economic, energetic and environmental sustainability.


 	Fig. 1  Process overview of ternary biomass reforming system.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic and performance of waste biomass concentrator for treating simulated sugar wastewater: (a) system schematic; (b) water quality values at various stages of the treatment process (indicated in (a)); (c) water permeability and sugar rejection during the RO membrane concentration stage. (‘sucrose’ and ‘fructose’ denote neat sucrose and fructose solutions).	 

 	Fig. 3  Performance of the semi-reflective CdTe wing: (a) schematic of cross-sectional encapsulated CdTe cell (illustrated layer thicknesses not to scale) and prototype setup; (b) simulated reflectance, transmission, and absorptance (R/T/A) at 0° incident angle; (c) solar efficiency at different incident angles, θPV; (d) solar reflectance and efficiency at different incident angles. (ITO, EVA and CdS are the abbreviation of Indium Tin Oxide, Ethylene Vinyl Acetate, and Cadmium Sulfide).	 

 	Fig. 4  Design and experimental diagram the PV-Winged-CPC array: (a) cross-sectional view and ray trace analysis of the optics; (b) schematic of the system.	 

 	Fig. 5  Performance the PV-Winged-CPC array: (a) transversal and longitudinal incident angle modifier as a function of the incident angle; (b) change in feedstock (sugar solution) temperature with time for different outdoor tests; (c) solar thermal efficiency as a function of operating temperature (blue dashed line and orange dashed line are the modelling results on winter and summer solstice, at solar noon); (d) 5-HMF yield and change in reactor temperature (initial sugar concentration = 35 g L−1, initial pH = 1.3).	 

 	Fig. 6  Structural characteristics and electrocatalytic activity of NiMo alloy and Ni foam electrodes: (a and b) SEM images of NiMo electrode at low and high magnifications; (c) HER LSV curves of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes tested in 1 M KOH; (d) Tafel plots of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes for HER (e) capacitive current of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes in 1 M KOH; (f) LSV curves of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes tested in alkalified pure water (OER), 5-HMF and BPR solutions (biomass molecules oxidation). (g) Tafel plots of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes for 5-HMF oxidation; (h) Nyquist plots of Ni foam and NiMo electrodes for 5-HMF and BPR products oxidation; (i) LSV curves of NiMo//NiMo vs. Ni foam//Ni foam tested in alkalified pure water (overall water splitting), 5-HMF and BPR solutions (biomass molecules oxidation coupling hydrogen production) (‘BPR’ term denotes product stream from BPR unit mixed with 1 M KOH).	 

 	Fig. 7  Performance of larger scale Flow Electrolysis Cell (FEC) during biomass electrolysis in indoor settings: (a) image of FEC system (indoor); (b) LSV curves for biomass electrolysis and water splitting using NiMo electrodes; (c) conversion of 50 mM 5-HMF to FDCA with time; (d) conversion of 5-HMF (in BPR product) to FDCA with time.	 

 	Fig. 8  Performance of larger scale Flow Electrolysis Cell (FEC) during biomass electrolysis in outdoor settings: (a) schematic of outdoor arrangement; (b) I–V curve and (experimental/theoretical) hydrogen production rate for single cell arrangement; (c) direct-coupling of electrolysis stack (21 cells) with PV array (10 wings). Note: ‘BPR’ denotes BPR product solution adjusted with 1 M KOH; ‘HMF’ term denotes 50 mM 5-HMF solution adjusted with 1 M KOH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Digital images of the rooftop ternary prototype system including performance metrics of each unit: (a) WBC; (b) PV-thermal BPR; (c) FEC and overall arrangement.	 


Temperature (°C)	25	25	25	25
Electrochemical reaction (electrolyte)	OER//HER (1 M KOH)	OER//HER (1 M KOH)	5-HMF//HER (5-HMF with 1 M KOH and 1 M KOH)	BPR//HER (BPR with 1 M KOH and 1 M KOH)
Products	H2	H2	H2	H2
O2	O2	FDCA (87% yield)	FDCA (45% yield)
Current density (mA cm−2)	10	100	10	100	10	100	10	100
Cell voltage (V)	2.1	2.4	1.76	2.2	1.5	2.2	1.52	2
Energy consumption (kW h kg−1 of H2)	56.3	64.4	46.8	59.0	39.9	59.0	40.4	53.7


Key design parameters	UF: 0.045 m2, Total RO: 3 m2	PV wing: 0.5 m2; BPR: (0.2 × 2 × 0.35 m, W × L × H); additional PV: 0.6 m2	1 cell (7.9 × 7.9 cm)	UF: 0.5 m2, RO: 15 m2	PV wing: 5 m2, BPR: 2 × 2 m	1 stack (21 cells)	UF: 5 m2, RO: 150 m2	PV wing: 50 m2, BPR: 20 × 2 m	10 stacks (21 cells per stack)
Footprint (area or volume)	0.12 m3	1 m2 solar aperture area	0.15 m3	1.2 m3	10 m2	1.5 m3	12 m3	100 m2	15 m3
Capacity	Biomass/clean water	5 L day−1 concentrated biomass; 45 L day−1 clean water	50 L day−1 concentrated biomass; 450 L day−1 clean water	500 L day−1 concentrated biomass; 4500 L day−1 clean water
Solar power (PV-thermal)	PV wing: 25 W; additional PV panel: 100 W; solar thermal power: 180 W	PV wing: 250 W; additional PV panels: 1 kW; solar thermal power: 1.8 kW	PV wing: 2.5 kW; additional PV panels: 10 kW; solar thermal power: 18 kW
H2 produced	72 L H2 per day (0.05 L H2 per min)	60–300 L H2 per day	600–3000 L H2 per day
(0.2–1.0 L H2 per min)	(2–10 L H2 per min)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00603d
‡ Contributed equally to the research outcomes.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
