Architecture of low dimensional nanostructures based on conjugated polymers  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3PY00098B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3PY00098B
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 5162-5180Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsArchitecture of low dimensional nanostructures based on conjugated polymers
Songhua Chen

ab, 
Yongjun Li

a and 
Yuliang Li

*a
aCAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Science (BNLMS), Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: ylli@iccas.ac.cn
bGraduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
Received 
21st January 2013
, Accepted 25th February 2013First published on 26th February 2013AbstractTo date, the aggregated nanostructures of conjugated polymers have been actively investigated as active materials, displaying promising optical and electrical properties and as good candidates for developing potential applications in electronics, optics, photovoltaic cells, and biology. This paper presents a review of the works on low dimensional nanostructures (nanowires, nanotubes, nanobelts, and nanofibers) of π-conjugated polymers. The diverse preparation methods were discussed, including hard and soft template-assisted synthesis, electrospinning, nanolithography, self-assembly at interfaces, in solution and in solids, and other strategies. Their potential applications in the fields of light-emitting diodes, field emission devices, organic photovoltaics, sensors and nanoelectronics are shown.Songhua ChenSonghua Chen was born in 1985 in Fujian, China. He is now studying at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li. His research focuses on organic low-dimensionality nanomaterials.Yongjun LiYongjun Li was born in 1975 in Sichuan, China. He received his Master’s degree in Chemistry from Sichuan University in 2001, and he earned his PhD in organic chemistry in 2006 at ICCAS. He is currently an associate professor in Prof. Yuliang Li's group, ICCAS, working on the design and synthesis of functional organic molecules.Yuliang LiYuliang Li (Qingdao, China, 1949) is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests lie in the fields of functional organic molecular systems, covalent and noncovalent supramolecular self assembly systems, and fullerene chemistry, with a particular focus on the design and synthesis of photo-, electro-active organic/inorganic hybrid materials and nanoscale and nano-structural materials.
1 Introduction
Since the discovery of the conductivity of conjugated polymers, this class of material has been attracting considerable attention in the materials field.1 In general, conjugated polymers are also referred to as organic semiconductors with “intrinsic wide band gap semiconductors” down to “insulators” with negligibly low intrinsic charge carrier densities in their neutral states.2,3 One of the most prominent characteristics of conjugated polymers is their π-electronic structure and geometric structure. Their electronic states can be reversibly changed between insulating and conducting states by electrochemical redox reactions. Due to their outstanding optical and electrical properties, they have shown the promising applications in organic light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells, sensors, field-effect transistors and so on.4–8 In particular, there is growing interest in the design of conjugated polymers that are able to self-assemble into uniform aggregates with specific shapes and novel functionalities.9,10 An effective way to shape supramolecular architectures is by molecular self-assembly technology through the intramolecular, intermolecular, and molecule–substrate interactions.11 Until now, intensive efforts have been paid to investigate the self-assembly of polymer nanoparticles into architectural nanostructures. Especially the one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures are emerging as a representative family of new materials because they can transport the excitons efficiently in the smallest dimensional structures. A series of polymers have been constructed into low-dimensional structures, such as nanospheres,12 nanorods,13 nanowires,14 nanofibers,15 nanoplates16 and so on. Supramolecular polymers could be constructed not by conventional covalent polymerization of monomers, but by assembly of non-covalent interactions such as metal–ligand coordination, hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking, ionic interaction, and host–guest interaction etc.17 Many parameters can also influence the supramolecular structures including environmental parameters such as the nature of the solvent, temperature, or any combination of these. The assembly of conjugated polymers will greatly influence their photophysical properties.18 The extended π-bond system along the backbone endorsed the attractive photophysical properties for the conjugated polymers. The degree of the p-orbital overlap in the extended π-bond is determined by the torsion angle of the backbone, which can tune the effective conjugation length of a conjugated polymer by changing the conformation of the conjugated polymer. Therefore, the conformation of the polymers could decisively influence the photophysical properties of conjugated polymers such as the optical band-gap and ionization potential. This band-gap engineering is important in practical applications of conjugated polymers, especially for LED applications.19 Intermolecular interactions have a large impact on the photophysical properties of conjugated polymers, that is, the forming of weakly emissive interchain species, for example, a ground-state aggregate and an excimer, which leads to spectral red-shift and reduced quantum yield.20 In addition, these modern approaches in constructing supramolecular polymers often target the modulation of functional properties for their application. The goal of the fabrication is to produce a new class of functional materials that have distinct properties from those observed in the bulk materials. Based on this, a rich variety of new concepts for self-assembling polymers into different morphologies have been developed. More importantly, understanding the structure–property relationships that relate specifically to aggregated nanostructures and materials lead to new architectures for producing benign, high-performance conjugated molecules. However, the design and self-assembly of conjugated molecules with controlled dimensions and function remains a challenging and attractive target in nanoscience and nanotechnology.
In this review, we concentrate on the molecular design strategies which can be applied in synthesizing polymers, as well as the self-assembly of low dimension functional nanostructures in the solid state. Thus, in Section 2 of this review, some of the strategies for the controllable synthesis of low dimensional nanostructures based on conjugated polymers were elaborated. Specifically, the template-directed methods to synthesise one-dimensional nanoscale heterostructure materials are systematically discussed. Due to the novel structure and properties of graphdiyne (GD), the synthesis and fabrication of GD into nanostructures are demonstrated in Section 3. The self-organization of organic conjugated polymers with inorganic materials to form hybrid nanostructures is summarized and their unique features and advantages are highlighted in Section 4. The low dimensional conjugated polymer nanostructures have exhibited excellent electrochemical and optical properties, compared to their bulk polymer materials. Based on these characteristics, in the last section, we will briefly highlight their applications in solar cells, sensors, polymer-organic light emitting diodes, field-effect transistors and others.
2 Strategies for the synthesis and fabrication of low dimensional polymer nanostructures
2.1 Template synthesis
Conjugated organic polymers are straightforwardly prepared by chemical or electrochemical methods.21 However, it is difficult to make them into ordered nanostructures directly due to their poor solubility and low crystallinity. Comprehensive studies on assembling conductive polymers into nanostructures under external assistance have been carried out. Hard template,22 soft template,23 and template-free methods24 are efficient synthesis routes for conducting polymer nanostructures.
2.1.1 Hard template. The hard-template synthesis employs a physical template, such as anodized alumina oxide (AAO) and mesoporous silica/carbon templates, as a scaffold for the growth of conducting polymers. The target material is first precipitated in the template by the physical or chemical methods. After removal of the template, the aligned nanostructure can be obtained. Simply changing the morphology of the template can lead to different sizes and shapes of conducting polymers. More importantly, the fabricated aligned nanowire and nanotube arrays with control over the growth length and wall thickness could meet the needs of future electronic devices. Thus the superior control over the size and uniformity of the 1D nanostructures are the apparent advantages of this method. Difficulties in scalability, harsh post-synthetic conditions required to purify the heterostructures are the disadvantages of the hard-template technique. In addition, the expensive preparation and the difficulties of the scaling up of the hard template is also a weakness of this method for industrial applications.Martin firstly developed this kind of templating method to produce conducting polymer nanostructures through physical or electrochemical deposition in 1989.25 Since then, it has been a powerful, feasible, and controllable technique to engineer 1D nanostructures. A variety of organic nanowires and nanotubes have been successfully fabricated with precise control over their length and wall thickness.21,26 Conducting polymer poly[1,4-bis(pyrrol-2-yl)benzene] (PBPB) nanotubes with different wall thicknesses were obtained from an acetonitrile solution of 1,4-bis(pyrrol-2-yl)benzene (BPB) and tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) by changing the polymerization potentials (Fig. 1G). The nanowires exhibited very interesting flexibility with the formation of U-like, S-like, and O-like structures (Fig. 1C) and showed the excellent properties of solid photoluminescence and conductivity. The conductivity of a single PBPB/ClO4− nanowire depends strongly on the doping level of ClO4−.27 The increased concentration of ClO4− leads to higher conductivity of the nanowires. The unique flexible polymer-heterojunction nanowires could be successfully synthesized by this chemical/electro-chemical polymerization. For example, a full-organic PTh (polythiophene) and PPY (polypyrrole) wire/wire heterojunction nanowire was fabricated by chemical electro-polymerization of the monomer in a similar method. PTh was first electropolymerized with a voltage of 0.85 V at the AAO template with a platinum layer on one side. Then, PPY was electrodeposited onto the PTh nanowire-embedded AAO template. After etching the AAO template, the heterojunction PTh–PPY nanowires were then obtained. The PTh–PPY wire/tube heterojunction nanostructures could be obtained by enhancing the polymerization potentials from 0.85 V to 1.2 V (Fig. 2). As intelligent heterojunction nanowires, these PTh–PPY heterojunction nanowires exhibit smart responses to electrochemical redox potentials. In the oxidised state, PTh–PPY nanowires act as a resistor, whereas in the reduced state, they act as a diode. Also, the electrical transport mode can be reversibly changed by alternately exposing the nanowires to negative and positive potentials.28
 Fig. 1  (A) Model of the PBPB. (B) Model of the growth process of PBPB nanowires. (C) Nanowires show a soft characteristic. (D) SEM image, (E and F) TEM images of PBPB/ClO4− nanotubes. (G) Nanotube wall thickness variation with applied potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27 @ 2010 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the template synthesis of the PTh–PPY segmented wire/wire and wire/tube heterojunction nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28 @ 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
Conjugated polymer semiconducting materials have more advantages than conventional inorganic semiconductors due to their facile synthesis and modification as well as lower cost. On the other hand, the inorganic semiconductors intrinsically have high carrier mobilities and environmental stability. Based on this, low-dimension organic/inorganic hybrid nanostructures can be used to produce new classes of organic/inorganic solid materials with properties that are not observed in either the individual nanosize components or the larger bulk materials. For example, one-dimensional p–n inorganic/organic heterojunction nanowires can combine the functional properties of both organic molecules and inorganic molecules. They can also be exploited in novel nanoscale devices. However, how to combine organic semiconductors and inorganic semiconductors to produce uniformity of the size and shape at the nanoscale with unique properties is still a challenge. The electrochemical deposition template method is a powerful method for deliberately producing organic/inorganic semiconductor p–n junction nanowires. Li et al. used cadmium sulfide (CdS) as an n-type inorganic semiconductor and conjugated polymer as a p-type organic semiconductor to synthesize different heterojunction materials.29 In fabricating the CdS–PPY heterojunction nanowires, CdS nanowires were first deposited into the AAO template. Then the AAO template containing CdS nanowires was used as a working electrode to continually deposit PPY. The well-defined CdS–PPY heterojunction nanowires were formed in a large amount with a smooth surface and diameter ranging from 200 to 400 nm (Fig. 3). The interface between organic and inorganic materials was clear and can also be confirmed by element mapping, TEM and HRTEM images. The group further fabricated a single PPY–CdS p–n junction nanowire for photovoltaic devices and investigated the photophysical properties of such nanowire devices for the first time. The CdS–PPY nanowires exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 0.018% under an illumination intensity of 6.05 mW cm−2 (Fig. 3G). Meanwhile, the conducting property of the organic/inorganic p–n junction nanowire can be tuned by changing the intensities of incident light, which will be discussed in Section 5.30 To further check the exciting results, the PBPB–CdS and PANI (polyaniline)–CdS heterojunction p–n junction nanowire arrays were also prepared. As expected, the PBPB–CdS heterojunction nanowire arrays act as a diode and exhibit a perfect rectifying property.31 The material PANI–CdS heterojunction nanowire exhibits excellent rectifying features and a diode nature as well as a highly sensitive spectral response and a significant response speed under blue light (420 nm). With the light illumination on and off, the rectification ratio of the PANI–CdS heterojunction nanowire array device could respond quickly at “high” and “low” states with an “ON/OFF” ratio of about 11.6.32 Stimulated by these successful examples, this facile electrochemical disposition template method was employed to fabricate aligned [Ir(ppy)2Cl]2 (IPPC) nanowire–nanotube junctions, nanowires and nanotubes.33
 Fig. 3  CdS–PPY nanowires: (A) model; (B and C) SEM images; (D and E) TEM images and SAED pattern; (F) HRTEM image; and (G) typical current–voltage (I–V) curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29 and 30 @ 2008 American Chemical Society, @ 2010 American Chemical Society. 
An effective method was provided to control the growth of 1D organic–inorganic core–shell and segmented nanorod arrays by bottom-up and top-down growth patterns . The polythiophene (PTh)–CdS core–shell nanorods were fabricated in a typical process: PTh was first electro-polymerized in the anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template and then CdS was electrodeposited into the PTh contained AAO template at a current density of 2.5 mA cm−2 (Fig. 4A). The synthetic procedure of the PTh–CdS segmented nanorods is almost the same as the PTh–CdS core–shell nanorods, with the exception that the current density of CdS deposition was maintained at 5 mA cm−2 (Fig. 4D). The relationship between the field emission properties and the subtle structure of the hybrid nanorods was investigated. It turns out that these two different structured nanorods showed different field emission properties.34
 Fig. 4  SEM images of hybrid of PTh–CdS core–shell nanorods: (A) large area array, (B) top view and (C) TEM image. Top view of several PTh–CdS segmented nanorods (D and E); TEM and EDS spectra (F) of a single PTh–CdS segmented nanorod. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34 @ 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Lee and Liu have synthesized coaxial nanowires of MnO2 and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) by a one-step coelectrodeposition method.14 The MnO2 nanowires were obtained by the hydrolysis of Mn2+ to its higher oxidization state with a constant potential. Simultaneously, EDOT monomer is electropolymerized into PEDOT in the pores of the template. The combination of the MnO2/PEDOT nanostructures exhibit high specific capacitance values and maintain them well at a high current density. These excellent electrochemical and mechanical properties makes them have great applications in energy storage. Moreover, many metal-coated polymer nanostructures were also prepared through this route. For example, core–shell Ni/PPV nanowires were fabricated by a two-step process. Using a wet-chemical technique, the tubular PPV shells could be first prepared within nanoporous membranes; and then the PPV tubules prepared worked as a secondary template for the electrodeposition of the Ni cores.35 Other metal-coated polymers such as PTh/Cu, PTh/Ni, PTh/Co, have also been prepared by Kim and co-workers.36
By the covalent interaction on the interface of oligo(p-phenylene vinylene) (OPV3) and CdS, combined nanorods were fabricated by the template method under the assistance of vacuum. The organic unit OPV3 having two ester groups on each side could be linked on the surface of the inorganic semiconductor CdS to form a typical organic/inorganic hybrid interface with ordered arrays. The result showed that CdS was homogeneously distributed into OPV3. The emission of OPV3 decreased greatly in the hybrid nanorods, which was quenched by CdS nanocrystals because of charge transfer between the two semiconductors.37

2.1.2 Soft template. The hard template replicates existing nanostructures by physical or chemical interactions, while soft templates rely on molecular self-assembly to form nanostructures. Soft templates could employ micelles formed by surfactants or act by itself to confine the polymerization into low dimensional nanomaterials.38 A series of soft materials such as surfactants, liquid crystals and copolymers could be used to form micelles or reversed micelles in solutions for guiding the growth of conducting polymers. One of the disadvantages of this method is that a post-synthetic step to selectively remove the surfactant is typically necessary to get the pure nanostructures, thus the strong interactions between the components or in situ polymerization of the assembled components is needed.Jang et al. synthesized the mesoporous polymer material polyacrylonitrile (PAN) from micelle polymer precursors prepared by the micelle template method in reverse microemulsion systems. They found that the fabrication of the micelle/PAN precursor was strongly dependent on the surfactant/monomer weight ratio. It was revealed that the polymer precursor could be prepared in the range of 20–45 wt% for surfactants. Below or above these ranges, the micelle/PAN precursor will not be fabricated. Meanwhile, the average pore diameter of the mesoporous PAN can be tuned by varying the type and concentration of surfactants.39
Wang fabricated the capsule and nanotube structures of polypyrrole (PPy) using chemical oxidation polymerization in the presence of Rhodamine B (RB). They found that the morphology of the product could be adjusted by simply tuning the concentration of RB. In a high concentration (20 mM), large quantities of solid and hollow PPy spheres were observed. In a low concentration (10 mM), PPy capsules could be synthesized. When the concentration decreased to 2.5 mM, large quantities of PPy nanotubes were prepared. This synthetic process does not require removal of the template, for the template would automatically degrade by the reaction.40
Recently, a new approach has been developed to prepare mesoporous polymer monoliths by a thermally induced phase separation technique using the polymer itself as a precursor.41 The morphology of the microstructures could be controlled by optimizing the concentration and cooling temperature. This non-solvent induced phase separation method has been used for the fabrication of porous membranes in industry due to it being an easy and clean process.
Amphiphilic macromolecules containing hydrophilic and hydrophobic moieties display special self-assembling properties. These macromolecules are able to self-assemble into a variety of morphological structures including spheres, rods, lamellae, vesicles and large compound micelles or vesicles through hydrophilic–hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces. The self-assembly has been widely investigated for their rich structural variety and the possibility of adopting different conformations at the interface.42 Zhang demonstrated multicompartment micelles (MCMs) on the basis of a supra-amphiphilic polymer. The supra-amphiphilic polymer consists of two components. One component is a double hydrophilic block copolymer with neutral polyglycol and positively charged amine groups. The other component is a water-soluble vitamin pyridoxal phosphate (PLP). The reaction of amine moieties and aldehyde groups lead to the formation of supra-amphiphilic polymers. The self-assembling aggregated MCMs display a cooperative effect in response to the combination of both pH and enzymatic stimuli. For example, the supra-amphiphilic polymers concomitantly disassemble back to non-amphiphilic components in acidic conditions. Importantly, this progress can be clearly detected by the naked eye.43
Nolte and co-workers reported the synthesis of a monodisperse enzyme polymer hybrid and studied this giant amphiphile's self-assembling properties in water.44 The chosen enzyme head-group could catalyze the hydrolysis of esters in aqueous solutions and the maleimide-functionalized polystyrene was used as the hydrophobic tail. Using a Langmuir–Blodgett trough, the reaction of polystyrene and enzyme was carried out in a controlled manner. First, a chloroform solution of the polystyrene was spread at the air/water interface and the reduced enzyme was subsequently added to the sub-phase. The reaction for the formation of the giant amphiphile was carried out at the air/water interface. They then tried this coupling reaction in a THF–water mixture. The resulting reaction mixture revealed the formation of well-defined μm long fibers. The fibers were built up from bundles of rods, with the smallest rod having a diameter between 25 and 30 nm. The size of the smallest rod is similar to the predicted diameter of a micellar architecture formed by the self-assembly of the giant amphiphile. This exhibited that the giant amphiphiles show the same self-assembling properties as their low-molecular weight counterparts. However, the fibers exhibited only 6–7% of their initial activity due to destabilization of the active conformation of the enzyme and the aggregation decrease of the active sites. Other biomolecules, including DNA, can be used in the assembly of “smart”, responsive materials for their interesting physical characteristics.45 By the use of recognition properties, DNA has been assembled into sophisticated nanostructures, such as cubes, pyramids, and repeating geometric patterns.46 Different types of tiles could be used to make extended structures in one dimension. Meanwhile, different dimensional array of DNA nanotriangles could be constructed.47 Various kinds of conjugated molecules and DNA complexes have been fabricated into different morphologies. For instance, a new aggregate of conjugated polymers and DNA could be controlled to give fractal-like structures by simply controlling the self-assembly processes. Strong electrostatic interactions between polymers and DNA could be found and detected by the fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) and CD measurements. In the absence of PPE (PPE1 or PPE2), oligo-dsDNA exhibited a positive Cotton effect. After adding PPE, the secondary dsDNA structure changed from the B- to C-form due to the hydrophobic PPEs backbone replacing the sodium ion near the phosphate group of the DNA helix. More interestingly, the different FRET behavior between the polymer and DNA can be used to distinguish dsDNA from ssDNA. The formation of polymer/DNA fractal-like aggregates is a diffusion-limited aggregation process on a two-dimensional substrate. At a low concentration and high PPE/DNA charge ratio, a nanoscale fractal structure with a fractal dimension of 1.70 grows. At a high concentration, the fractal-like structure is made up of diffused particles. A highly ordered fractal structure of short wires can even be obtained with extending the random walk process.48
Ions can also induce the growth of conducting polymers to form defined aggregate structures. Recently, a two phase interface of ethyl acetate and water was employed as a platform to self-assembly nanostructures by the coordination-driven π-conjugated polymers and metal ions. Fig. 5 displays the mechanism of formation of the rolled-up microtubes. First, The Cu2+ aqueous solution was dripped onto a silicon substrate to form a liquid droplet. Then, an ethyl acetate solution of CC-PPV-O (Scheme 1) was carefully added onto the surface of the liquid droplet of Cu2+ aqueous solution. After rapid evaporation of the two solvents by heating the silicon substrate, the microstructures (CC-PPV-O-Cu2+ microtubes) were fabricated on the silicon substrate. In the experiment, CC-PPV-O consists of a hydrophobic poly(p-phenylenevinylene) backbone and several relatively hydrophilic oligo ethylene glycol substituents, at the oil/water interface, the hydrophilic glycol chains anchored to water phase, while the hydrophobic π-conjugated backbone was located in the oil phase. After the water face was fabricated with Cu2+ ion, the glycol chains of CC-PPV-O in the oil tended to immerse into the water to trap Cu2+ ion to form the ionic bilayer structure under the coordinative and electrostatic interactions. During rapid evaporation of the solvents, the strain in the bilayer film was developed and relaxed by self-rolling, which resulted in the formation of the microtubes.49
 Fig. 5  The mechanism for the formation of rolled-up microtubes at the interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 @ 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
 Scheme 1  Chemical structure of the selected conjugated polymers. 

2.1.3 Template-free synthesis. In the template-free synthesis, the monomers of the polymers could act as micelles by themselves and further format into nanostructures without any hard or soft templates. This is a simple and inexpensive method since it requires no template and no post-treatment for template removal. However, the morphology and diameter of the polymer micro/nanostructures were strongly affected by the structures of the monomer, dopant, and oxidant, as well as the preparation conditions. For instance, the morphology of PANI could be changed from 1D nanotubes to 3D hollow spheres just by changing the molar ratio of dopant to aniline.50 A naphthalene templating approach can be applied to prepare well-ordered porous poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV 1) and poly(p-phenyleneethynylene) (PPE 3) monoliths. In this approach, the melted naphthalene acts as a good solvent for conjugated polymers and crystallic naphthalene acts as an ordered template. After PPE3 or PPV1 were well mixed with naphthalene powders the mixtures were poured into a test tube and heated to a higher temperature to dissolve PPE3 or PPV1 into the melting naphthalene. Then the polymer solutions were frozen into solid state. Finally, the naphthalene in the samples was removed completely by a vacuum condition, and the well-ordered macroporous frameworks could be formed (Fig. 6).51 By this facile way, 0D, 1D, and 2D structures, including 0D nanodots, 1D ordered nanodots, 1D lamellas and 2D textured structures could be obtained through controlling the freezing direction.52
 Fig. 6  An illustration of the as-prepared well-ordered polymeric macroporous monoliths with formed naphthalene crystals (A). SEM images of the cross-sections of well-ordered PPV1 (a and b) and PPE1 (c and d) monoliths with different wall thicknesses. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 @ 2009 Wiley-VCH. 
Some other template-free polymerizations have also been developed to prepare nanostructures of polymers without using any structural directing agents. For example, star-shaped polymers with hydrophilic and hydrophobic units are usually used as emulsifiers and stabilizers for the generation of stable oil-in-water or water-in-oil emulsions at extremely low polymer concentrations. Matyjaszewski et al. reported two poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)-based star polymers to synthesize different emulsion nanostructures under ambient conditions in oil/water phases. The PEO-poly(divinylbenzene) star copolymer favored the formation of xylene-in-water emulsions while the PEO-poly(butylacrylate)-based macroinitiators-poly(divinylbenzene) miktoarm star polymers as stabilizers resulted in the formation of water-in-xylene emulsions due to the different surface activity on the polymers.53
By a template-free oblique angle polymerization process, parylene nanofibers can be produced without any post-processing step.54

2.2 Electrospinning
Electrospinning is a classic and versatile method in preparing long and continuous nanofibers by using an electrostatically driven jet of polymer solution. Unique alignments of nanostructures such as nanotubes and nanowires can be constructed. Furthermore, by tuning the specific properties of the solvent, electrospinning process and the external processing parameters, the dimensions and morphology, as well as the surface functionality of electrospun nanofibers can be controlled.55,56 It has been reported that the applied voltage, the viscosity/concentration/conductivity of solution, as well as the charge density carried by the jet and the surface tension of the solution would influence the morphology and size of the fibers.57,58 Disadvantages of the electrospinning process are the slow fiber production speed, safety and environmental issues of the solvents used in the spin dopes and the voltages involved in the electrospinning process.
Long and co-workers prepared electrospun fibers with polystyrene in three-dimensional (3D) spongiform with diameters in the range of 1.2–6.8 μm. By controlling the experimental conditions, such as the spinning voltage and additive, the self-assembled cone-like fiber stack can be obtained on aluminum foil within 30 min with stacks more than 10 cm in height. They also demonstrated that the 3D fiber stack converts to a 2D thin film by adding insulating lucite plate on the Al foil collector.59
Zhang fabricated highly aligned and uniform nanofibers with polyvinylidene fluoride in a large area by the electrospinning method.60 They investigated the influence of the key parameters including spinneret rotating speed, electrode gap width of polymer concentration on the properties of electrospun nanofibers. Samuelson and co-workers developed nanofibrous thin films as highly responsive fluorescence quenching-based optical sensors for metal ions and 2,4-dinitrotoluene (DNT) using the electrospinning technique, in which a fluorescent poly(acrylic acid)-poly(pyrene methanol) (PAA-PM) was used as the sensing material. The fluorescence quenching-based optical sensors were fabricated by electrospinning PAA-PM and thermally cross-linkable polyurethane latex mixture solutions. Compared to continuous thin films, the electrospun films sensors showed high reactivity and sensitivity due to the surface area-to-volume ratio of the nanofibrous membrane structures.61
As one of the best-established photo or electroluminescent polymers, poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene-vinylene](MEH-PPV) with an all silica mesoporous molecular sieve (SBA-15) has been electrospun into fibers. The composite fibers obtained exhibit a blue shift in the polymer emission while maintaining the same excitation spectrum as compared to pure MEH-PPV fibers. In addition, when SBA-15 containing phenyl silane was electrospun with MEH-PPV, a further shift to blue was observed.62
A large number of biodegradable polymers which have been directly electrospun into nanofibers could have potential applications in cell biology and tissue engineering. Gary E. Wnek and co-workers demonstrated that the electrospun poly(ethylene-co-vinyl alcohol) (EVOH) fibers have been shown to support the culturing of smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts.63 Jiang et al. used electrospinning to produce mats of nanofibers as the solid substrate, and converted the loose mats into easily manageable membranes by a simple “wet-press” method. The prepared mats showed a dramatically high sensitivity and signal-to-noise ratio for microfluidic HIV immunoassays.64
2.3 Nanolithography
Nanolithography is a printing process for generating numerous copies of a master pattern with the fabricated structures in the nanometer-scale.65 In the past two decades, some of the nanolithographic technology such as ion and electron-beam lithography (EBL),66 scanning probe lithography (SPL),67 X-ray lithography,68 UV photolithography and soft lithography69 have been applied as the effective methods for modern micro- and nano-fabrication in academia and in industry.
Pisignano et al. used the soft lithography method to synthesise large-area poly(dimethylsiloxane) nanowires.70 In this method, the uniaxially aligned poly(methylmethacrylate) fibers were obtained on the top of the SiO2 surface and covered by a layer of Cr/Au by physical vapor deposition (PVD) through shadow masks. Lifting-off of the polymer fibers resulted in discontinuity in the metal and exposed SiO2. Thus an array of nanogap electrodes was obtained. The production yield is only depended on the initial shadow mask. Typically, in this single soft nano-lithography step, different counts of parallel couples for electrodes are created.
Chen fabricated polymer-based suspended quasi-3D photonic slabs and 3D photonic crystals by the EBL method. They chose polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) as the building block for active optical components due to its resistance to EBL and its low glass transition temperature. LOR (a polydimethylglutarimide based polymer) was first spun to form a polymer layer and PMMA was then spin-coated on top of the LOR. After the bilayer polymers were subjected to electron-beam exposure, the exposed area of the PMMA layer can be etched away. Finally, by development of the bottom-layer LOR in tetramethyl-ammonium hydroxide, the undercut structure was fabricated. Meanwhile, multilayer polymer structures also can be obtained.71
Cacialli demonstrated a fabrication of PPV nanostructures by direct scanning near-field lithography of its soluble precursor. The thin film of the precursor of PPV spin coated on the silica substrates was first exposed to the ultraviolet optical field. Then the nonexposed material was washed off by dipping the sample into methanol. In a final step, the patterned precursor was converted into the fully conjugated PPV by thermal conversion under vacuum. The results showed that probe size, tip-sample distance, and film thickness contribute to the limitation of the resolution.72
What's more, nanolithographic approaches can generate 1D and 2D patterns on an organic semiconductor thin film, making the direction, size, aspect ratios, and periodicity controlled.65 Zhang patterned the conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doping with poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT-PSS) into nanowires by micromolding in capillaries and by liquid printing. The periods of the molded nanowires were 833 or 278 nm. The various heights of nanowires could be obtained by changing the force on top of the stamp during micromolding in capillaries. Even more, 2D nanodots with a periodicity of 278 nm on semiconducting polymer were also achieved by another soft-embossing technology.73 Lee developed a non-lithographic approach to fabricate free-standing nanostructured polymeric films with a close-packed hexagonal 2D array of nanoembossments or nanorods. In this method, electrochemically prepared textured aluminum sheets or nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide are used as a replication master.74
2.4 Self-assembled aggregate polymer films and layer by layer technology
The layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition technique is one of the most promising ways to fabricate a controllable molecular array for efficient energy and electron transfer because it is simple in procedure, easy to automate, and friendly to the environment. One major advantage of this technique is that it has great industrial applications. The electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, and charge transfer interaction, molecular recognition and coordination interactions are the most commonly used driving forces in the formation of a variety of highly ordered structures. In 1991, Decher and Hong first reported the alternate deposition of oppositely charged polymers to create a film of multiple layers, the field of LbL has gained rapid progress.75 Since then, the field of LbL has gained rapid progress. In this way, building blocks can self-assemble to form molecular assemblies, and the molecular assemblies can be used as one of the building blocks subsequently for LbL assembly. More importantly, it could not only bring new structures but also endow the multilayer thin films with new functions useful for photoelectrochemical devices.
Electrostatic binding is one of the main approaches used in the multilayer formation. The fabrication of LbL films by electrostatic complexation can be described as follows. First, polyelectrolytes are mixed with counter-charged molecules in aqueous solution to form electrostatic complexes; second, the complexes are deposited alternatively with counter-polyelectrolytes to form LbL films.76 A water-soluble PPV derivative (BH-PPV) was used as the positively charged polymer to fabricate the multilayered assemblies with negatively charged C60-HS by the LbL deposition technique.77 The UV/Vis spectroscopy of the multilayer showed a blue shift due to the strong interaction between individual molecules in the densely packed films. The series of Kiessig fringes in small angle X-ray diffraction suggest that the BH-PPV/C60-HS film is uniform and flat and the thickness of one bilayer can be calculated to be about 21 Å. The LbL films fabricated by this method were used to study the photoinduced charge transfer property. The result showed that a steady and rapid cathodic 5.5 μA cm−2 photocurrent response was found in the six-bilayer system. The photocurrent increases with increasing bilayer number as long as the film is relatively thin (until the sixth bilayer) both the probability of charge recombination and the film's electrical resistance affect the photoelectric conversion. By incorporating d electrons into the conjugated organic system from transition metals this can enhance its hyperpolarizability and nonlinear susceptibility. Meanwhile, this electrostatic interaction can be used in the self-assembly progression. An ultrathin film containing a water-soluble anionic silver(I)/L-Histidine (Ag-His) complex and the cationic BH-PPV was fabricated by the above LbL technology. The total thickness of the film was calculated to be about 24 nm and 1.6 nm for one bilayer (Fig. 7C). The AFM image (Fig. 7B) showed that the height variation of the surface was about 7 nm and the mean interface roughness was measured to be 1.03 nm, indicating that the film possesses a well-ordered nanoscopic structure. The NLO properties of a 20 bilayer film of BH-PPV/Ag-His were investigated with Z-scan measurements. The normalized power transmittance indicated a strong saturated absorption behavior and the nonlinear absorption coefficient α2 of the film was −3.9 × 10−5 m W−1. The closed-aperture configuration indicates that the BH-PPV/Ag-His film has a negative sign for the nonlinear refraction and exhibits a strong self-defocusing behavior with the effective third-order refractive index to be −4.78 × 10−12 m2 W−1.78
 Fig. 7  (A) The procedure for the fabrication of Ag-His/BH-PPV films by alternate deposition. (B) AFM image of a 10-bilayer BH-PPV/Ag-His film. (C) Small-angle X-ray diffraction pattern of a fifteen-bilayer film of BHPPV/Ag-His. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 @ 2005 Wiley-VCH. 
Zhang developed a new electrostatic complex formation by introducing single charged molecules into LbL films with high loading and in a controllable manner.79 The single charged sodium 9-anthracenepropionate (SANP) was used to form a macromolecular complex with positively charged poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) PDDA to form a macromolecular complex. By the alternating deposition of the PDDA–SANP complex with poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) at the liquid–solid interface, multilayer films were fabricated. In comparison, the SANP diffused into LbL films of PDDA/PSS is much larger than that in the diffusion method and the amount of SANP incorporated into the films is controllable by adjusting the initial concentration of SANP in the PDDA–SANP complex solution. More importantly, the anthracene moiety in SANP can undergo photo-cycloaddition to produce a photocyclomer under UV irradiation. The quantum yield of photocycloaddition is about four times higher than that in the solution, making this LbL film act as a nanoreactor (Fig. 8).79
 Fig. 8  (A) Illustration of the hierarchical self-assembly. (B) Absorption spectra of the multilayer film under UV irradiation for different times. (C) Fluorescence spectra of SANP aqueous solution (line 1) and multilayer film before (line 2) and after UV irradiation (line 3). Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 @ 2005 American Chemical Society. 
Polymers with hydrogen bond donors and acceptors can be employed as building blocks for fabricating hydrogen-bonded LbL assemblies, which was first demonstrated by Rubner and Zhang et al. in 1997.80,81 For example, poly(acrylic acid) as the hydrogen bond donor and poly(2-vinylpyridine) as the hydrogen bond acceptor were fabricated into a multilayer film assembly via hydrogen bonding. Furthermore, FT-IR spectroscopy demonstrated that the multilayer film was not assembled via electrostatic attraction but a rapid hydrogen bonding process.82 Normally, multilayered films based on hydrogen-bonded tend to be affected by the environmental conditions, for the hydrogen bonds are easily destroyed by changing the environment. However, taking this feature, the hydrogen-bonded LbL assembly can be used to fabricate erasable polymer films.83 Granick reported an erasable polymer films. They first fabricated multilayers in a sequence of 10 steps of sequential assembly by the intramolecular association of carboxylic acid units within poly(methacrylic acid) molecules at low pH. Then the deposited multilayers were immersed in solution at different pH levels. They found that the unique aspect of self-assembly method is reversibility: multilayers could be selectively destroyed after creation. When the pH of the solution was lower than 6.9, the multilayers were stable but dissolved when the pH was raised above this point. Also the pH range for this transition was very sharp. Erasability was also controllable by changing the ionic strength, because the free ions reduce the intensity of electrostatic repulsion between given numbers of ionized groups within a multilayer assembly. The external electric field will shift the equilibrium between an acid's neutral and charged states.
Other types of interactions, such as charge-transfer interactions,84 electrochemical deposition85 and molecular recognition86 also emerged as driving forces in LbL assembly. For example, Rydzek et al. reported the covalent LbL construction of polyelectrolyte multilayer (PEM) films via an efficient electrochemically triggered Sharpless click reaction catalyzed by Cu(I).87 The Cu(I) was obtained from the reduction of Cu(II) in the solution, so the construction of multilayers can be controlled by the application of a mild potential.
2.5 Self-polymerization aggregate nanostructures of organic π-conjugated polymers
Polydiacetylenes (PDA) are one of the most widely investigated conjugated polymers because of their quasi-1D electronic structure, fast and large nonlinear responses, and very fast photoconducting properties.88 They have been constructed into nanorods, wires, planes, helical ribbons, and so on. The assistance of noncovalent forces, such as hydrogen bonds,89 hydrophobic interactions90 and π–π stacking91 provides an efficient method for creating these organic 1D nanostructures. 1,4-diacetylene polymerization was discovered by Wegner in 1969.92 It could take place in the solid state via a topochemical reaction. Meanwhile, the reactive monomers need to be preorganized at a distance commensurate with the repeat distance and a close approach of the reacting carbon atoms is also necessary. The Lauher group have prepared several new classes of polydiacetylenes using a supramolecular host–guest strategy.93–95 For example, they chose oxalamide host substituents to cocrystallize with the diacetylene guest molecule, typically through hydrogen bonding. Calculated from the crystal data, the oxalamide host molecules form an α-network with a repeat distance of 4.97 Å and the neighboring C(1)–C(4) atoms were 3.38 Å apart, which is near the ideal value. After heating the single crystals, the central atoms of the diacetylene moiety pivot around an inversion center bringing the reacting C(1)–C(4) carbon atoms of neighboring molecules together. Thus, the 1,4-diacetylene polymerization reaction happened.93,95 Some others molecules such as terminal diacetylene also could be induced by this host–guest approach.94,96,97 A diacetylene with two phenol hydroxyl formed cocrystals with the host oxalamide, where the layers of guest and the host curved into each. The diacetylene polymerization takes place in a triple-helix “cage”, yielding a unique structure with a tubular helix of host molecules wrapped around a pair of polydiacetylene chains.94 Besides, triene and triacetylene derivatives,97,98 and muconic acid and sorbic acid derivatives99,100 have been reported to undergo topochemical polymerizations.
Stupp reported a set of diacetylene-derivatized peptide amphiphiles (PA1 and PA2) (Scheme 2) that react to form conjugated polydiacetylene backbones following self-assembly into cylindrical nanofibers. The efficiency of polymerization has much to do with the architecture of PAs. It is high when the peptidic segment is in a linear structure (PA1), while decreased in a branched construction (PA2) due to the poor molecular packing within the fibers. Interestingly, the circular dichroism signal of the PDA band changes sign at different temperatures due to chiral induction by the β-sheets. Furthermore, the polymerization of monomers in peptide amphiphile assemblies by a rigid conjugated backbone leads to mechanical robustness and insolubility, also reflecting a high degree of internal order in these structures (Fig. 9).101
 Scheme 2  Chemical structure of the selected conjugated polymers. 
 Fig. 9  Temperature-dependent CD spectroscopy of PA1 before (A) and after (B) irradiation. TEM images (C) and AFM height profiles (D) of irradiated PA1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 @ 2008 American Chemical Society. 
There are facile methods to polymer monomers in solid-state under thermal or photochemical energy. Recently, a new method to construct polymers into nanoscale supramolecular materials was developed by the associated effect of self-polymerization and self-assembly (Fig. 10). That the monomers are able to self-polymerize by UV light and the self-polymerized polymers are able to be self-assembled by noncovalent forces are two key conditions for the direct formation of polymer aggregate nanostructures. The monomer 6-carbazol-9-ylhexa-2,4-diyl-1-ol (CYDIOL) in chloroform solution was applied onto a piece of copper foil and irradiated with UV light for 2 h before the solvent was completely evaporated. Nanowires with diameters of 50–120 nm and lengths of several micrometers were obtained. These nanowire arrays exhibited excellent FE properties with a turn-on field (Eto) of 8.2 V μm−1 at 10 μA cm−2 and the maximum current density is larger than 5 mA cm−2 at an applied field of 15 V μm−1. The work function of the poly CYDIOL nanowires is around 3.05 eV, which is much smaller than that of graphite (4.34 eV).102 The method presents a new concept for fabricating conducting polymer nanowires and it may have great potential for further applications on fabricating supramolecular material-based conducting polymers.
 Fig. 10  The self-assembled nanostructures on copper foils: (A) without the polymerization process and (B) the large area of ordered polydiacetylene nanowires (C) with some entangled polydiacetylene nanowires. (D) Schematic illustration of the poly-CYDIOL nanowires by self-assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10 and 102 @ 2005 American Chemical Society, @ 2008 Wiley-VCH. 
Itoh synthesized 7,7,8,8-tetrakis(alkoxycarbonyl) quinodimethanes with methoxy, ethoxy, isopropoxy, benzyloxy, chloroethoxy, and bromoethoxy as alkoxy groups, and investigated their polymerization in the crystalline state. All of the monomers could be afforded one or two crystal forms in different recrystallization conditions. The monomer crystals were subjected to polymerization by irradiation and heating. The result showed that topochemical polymerizations of the quinodimethane monomers might take place when they are packed in the crystals with parameters of θ1 = 30–33°, θ2 = 83–89°, ds = 7.0–7.6 Å, and dcc = 3.8–4.2 Å.103
In any case, this method is material dependent, it needs careful molecular design to realize the specific assembly by utilizing noncovalent forces.
3 Self-assembly of inorganic/polymer hybrid materials
Modification through organic conjugated polymers have been explored to control the self-organization properties and morphologies for fabricating novel nanoscale devices. Recently, a series of polymers with organic functional groups to functionalize the surface of gold nanoparticles (GNPs) has been investigated. Conjugated molecules PPE-F(1–3) with different contents of the furan pendant were designed and synthesized for use in self-assembly with gold to produce gold nanoparticles.90 The maleimide modified GNPs (MA-Au) were linked covalently to conjugated copolymers through a thermally activated retro-Diels–Alder reaction to produce the hybrid materials. The as-prepared nanoassemblies show homogeneous status and well-defined interfaces, which facilitate the electronic interaction between the polymer and GNPs. Obviously, after the formation of hybrid nanocomposites, the fluorescence of the conjugated polymer was quenched through energy transfer as well as electron transfer. At a low molar ratio of MA-Au and PPE-F, the distance between the polymer and gold particles was decreased by the efficient chemical reaction, making the excited-state electron transfer between the two components and little quenching of the fluorescence happened. The high molar ratio of MA-Au and PPE-F results in deficient cycloaddition between maleimide and the furan pendant. In this case, long-range energy transfer dominates the fluorescence quenching. Meanwhile, the molar ratio also affects the assembly/disassembly behavior of GNPs. This sensing property of gold nanoparticles showed a smart assay for monitoring the process of the Diels–Alder reaction (Fig. 11).104 Since the disulfide group of the polymer could bind the AuNPs effectively, the conjugated polymer poly(p-phenylene ethynylene) (PPE-bipy-SS) containing pendent disulfide and bipyridine groups was synthesized to prepare the polymer-stabilized gold nanoparticles. Through the absorption and fluorescence spectra and TEM, it can be concluded that the AuNPs interact with the polymer. The fluorescence of the PPE-bipy-SS were quenched strongly after connecting with AuNPs, for the surface of the AuNPs make the polymer chains of PPE-bipy-SS connect together and closer to the surface, thus allowing more interaction for energy transfer. The third-order nonlinear optical properties of colloidal solutions of PPE-bipy-SS-AuNPs were investigated by the Z-scan technique. Through comparison with the PPE-bipy-SS, the gold-nanoparticle protected by the PPE-bipy-SS colloid solutions show an exceptional nonlinear absorption effect, which simultaneously contains the saturated absorption resulting from third-order nonlinearity and a large reverse-saturated absorption resulting from fifth-order nonlinearity.105
 Fig. 11  Illustration for the Diels–Alder reaction leading to the ordered AuNPs self-assemblies. (A) Fluorescence quenching efficiency of the conjugated copolymer PPE-F versus MA-Au. (B) Fluorescence emission spectra. TEM images (C–F) of PPE-F3-Au nanocomposites with different ratios of PPE-F3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 @ 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Sun reported a polymer-mediated self-assembly of magnetic nanoparticles with control of assembly thickness and dimension. Functional polymers such as poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) and poly(ethylenimine) (PEI) were previously deposited on a substrate. The ligand-exchange experiment was carried out to replace oleic acid/oleylamine around FePt nanoparticles to give polymer protected nanoparticles and a strong monolayer particle assembly was formed. The process can be applied to any sized and shaped substrate, which is an efficient method for fabricating a FePt-based nanodevice.106 Schmid and co-workers have obtained two dimensional arrangements of metal quantum dots using substrates coated with poly(ethylenimine) (PEI). It was suggested that the PEI modified on the surface of AuNPs could effectively order the cubic and hexagonal packing arrangements.107
There is interest in fullerene derivatives as building blocks for superconductors, photoconductors and new optical materials, attributing to their excellent electron accepting capabilities. The incorporation of fullerene moieties into polymer systems showed the interesting optical and electronic properties. A series of fullerene derivatives were introduced into conjugated polymers to construct hybrid materials by covalent and non-covalent bonds. For example, a polymer (TCNEO-C60-PC) (Scheme 1) containing TCNEO-C60 covalently linked to polycarbonate (PC) showed a remarkable improvement in the optical limiting properties for the strong intramolecular action between the TCNEO-C60 moiety and PC unit.108,109 Besides covalently blending the C60 and polymer together, supramolecular assembly is also a potential way to obtain bulk heterojunction material. A new polymer (U-PPV) bearing a uracil moiety (as electron donor) and a new compound (DAP-C60) containing a 2,6-diacylamidopyridine unit (as electron acceptor) can be constructed into the supramolecular system by hydrogen bonding. We utilized the strong three-point hydrogen bond between uracil and 2,6-diacylamidopyridine to build a supramolecular polymer system. The assembly process was detected by 1H-NMR spectra. Fluorescence quenching experiments further indicated the strong interaction between the donor and acceptor part.110,111
4 Self-assembled aggregate nanostructures of carbon polymers
There are many carbon allotropes in nature such as graphite and diamond, and many novel carbon allotropes such as fullerene, carbon nanotube, and grapheme, have been successfully synthesized. Recently, a new form of carbon allotrope-graphdiyne was synthesized by a chemical method in Li's group. This kind of carbon allotrope is a combination of sp2 and sp hybridized carbons and predicted to be the most stable of the various diacetylenic non-natural carbon allotropes.112 The large area graphdiyne (GD) films can be fabricated on the surface of copper via a cross-coupling reaction using hexaethynylbenzene in a facile way. The films grown on the surface of copper foil are continuous and uniform (Fig. 12B). The conductivity of the graphdiyne is calculated as 2.516 × 10−4 S m−1, which is comparable with silicon, indicating excellent semiconducting properties.113 Also, the controlled growth of one-dimensional graphdiyne nanotube (GDNT) arrays was accomplished by the association of a template technique and catalyzed cross-coupling reaction. The formed GDNTs are well defined, with smooth surfaces and diameters of about 200 nm and a wall thickness of about 40 nm. The wall thickness of the GDNTs decreased to 15 nm with the length unchanged after annealing at 650 °C for 6 h. The field emission properties of GDNT arrays and graphdiyne films were investigated for the first time. Annealed GDNT exhibits high performance field emission arrays with a turn-on field of 4.20 V μm−1, a threshold field of 8.83 V μm−1, and work function of 4.29 eV.114 Besides (GDNT), graphdiyne nanowires (GDNWs) have been successfully constructed by a vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth process using ZnO nanorod arrays on a silicon slice as a substrate. The SEM images indicated that the surface of the GDNWs is smooth and uniform (Fig. 12C and D). TEM and HRTEM (Fig. 12E and F) show that the lattice fringe of the particle is 0.26 nm and the lattice fringe of the nanowire is 0.203 nm, indicating that the nanowire is crystalline. The electrical properties of the graphdiyne nanowires were investigated by recording typical current–voltage (I–V) curves. The average conductivity of GDNWs was about 1.9 × 103 S m−1 (Fig. 12G), which is larger than that of graphdiyne and most other semiconductors. The average mobility of GDNWs was about 7.1 × 102 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is of the same order of magnitude as graphene.115 These promising results showed that GD is a new ideal candidate in the electronic and photoelectric materials field.
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic outline of the synthesis of graphdiyne nanoscale films, (B) SEM and TEM images of a large area graphdiyne film, SEM (C and D), TEM (E) and HRTEM (F) images of GDNWs. (G) Typical current–voltage (I–V) curves of GDNWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, 113 and 115 @ 2010 American Chemical Society, 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5 Promising potential applications of conjugated polymer nanostructures
5.1 Photoconductivity
Photoconductivity is an optical and electrical phenomenon in which the electrical conductivity of the material is enhanced under illumination relative to the dark conductivity due to the absorption of electromagnetic radiation.65 Recently, our group fabricated a single CdS–PPy semiconductor hybrid nanowire that exhibited remarkable performance on a light controlled diode. The typical I–V curve of an individual CdS nanowire reveals highly insulating properties in the dark with a photoresponse detected upon increasing the white-light illumination power. The CdS–PPY heterojunction nanowire is similar to an individual CdS nanowire and does not exhibit any diode effect. However, the semiconductor p–n junction nanowire shows a strong photo-dependent rectifying effect.30 The photoconductivity of the PBPB–CdS heterojunction nanowire arrays, with diameters of 300 nm produced by AAO templated synthesis have been studied with an applied bias of 30 V. The rectification ratios of the diode are 29.9, 116.2, 129.7 with the enhancement of illumination intensity in the dark to 22.6 mW cm−2 and 45.8 mW cm−2, respectively (Fig. 13).31 The interesting photoelectrical properties developed here will have great influence on both basic nanoscience research and the device application field of nanotechnology.
 Fig. 13  (A) An SEM image of the PBPB–CdS nanowire and its element map scanning (B). Models of the surface polymer chains (C) and of PBPB and the nanowire arrays between two electrodes (D). (E) Typical I–V curves for PBPB–CdS heterojunction nanowire arrays under light illumination with different intensities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 @ 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.2 Organic photovoltaics
A solar cell is an electrical device that can convert sun light energy directly into electrical energy by the photovoltaic effect. It is a sustainable way to utilize the clean solar energy resource. Until now there have been many silicon solar cells applied in the market. However, the high cost has limited their popularization.116 In contrast, polymer-based solar cells have attracted a great deal of attention because they have the potential to be inexpensive, easily solution-processed, and highly stable. Recently, there has been tremendous progress in the development of polymer-based organic solar cells focused on new materials, device designs, and processing methods.117 Photo-induced electron transfer has been extensively investigated in the solar energy harvesting systems. Efforts are focused on multiplex systems with the aim to construct artificial light energy harvesting systems. A series of covalently linked copolymers containing porphyrin, fullerenes and perylene bisimides analogs were synthesized for the purpose of improving the light-harvesting capacity and charge separation efficiency for potential application in solar cells.118–123 In polymer solar cells (PSCs), one of the most fundamental issues is the selection of suitable materials to serve as donors (p-type) and acceptors (n-type) to form an efficient heterojunction structure. In past years, PTh derivatives are the most used p-type conjugated polymers (donors), and fullerene and its derivatives PCBM and PC70BM are the most important n-type materials (acceptors). Numerous studies have focused on the fabrication and optimization of P3HT/PCBM based PSC devices. The efficiency polymer-based solar cells can achieve is up to 9.2%.124 Meanwhile, it is critical to control the morphology of the donor–acceptor (D–A) active layer to achieve highly efficient PSCs. A series of PSCs were fabricated and their photovoltaic properties were investigated considering several influencing factors on the device performances by post annealing treatment. Jo and Kim et al. demonstrated that a mild solvent annealing led to an improved performance of solar cells (Voc = 0.60 V, Jsc = 11.09 mA cm−2, FF = 63%, and PCE = 4.14%) due to the well-ordered and stable morphology of the P3HT nanofibers/PCBM bulk heterojunction.125
Fiber-based organic photovoltaics devices were recently introduced as an alternative to the planar bulk heterojunction solar cell. Especially, the unique 1D device architecture has been applied in organic semiconductor nanostructures.126,127 Moreover, polymer nanowires could be combined with inorganic nanowires and/or nanoparticles to create various hybrid solar cells. Nanowires of p-type polymer semiconductors have also been explored in bulk heterojunction cells. Wang and co-workers128 used the melt assisted wetting of the AAO templates to prepare ordered P3HT–PCBM core–shell nanorods arrays for use in solar cells and a photovoltaic efficiency of up to 2.0% PCE was reported. They further fabricated a large-scale high-density (1010 cm−2) polymer nanopillars, using a combination of the AAO template method and nanoimprint lithography. After fabricating, PCBM was deposited on top of the ordered P3HT nanopillars. An efficiency of 2.57% was obtained in the nanoimprinted solar cells, which represented an almost 2 fold increase compared with the bilayer devices (1.44%).129
As described in Section 2, a single CdS–PPY semiconductor hybrid nanowire fabricated by means of AAO templates has also been explored in heterojunction cells. The p–n heterojunction nanowire solar cell, finished with gold electrodes to collect charges, showed a Jsc of 0.043 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.15 V, and FF of 26.5%, yielding a PCE of 0.018%. Although the photovoltaic efficiency is low, the fundamental studies will definitely be helpful to understand the working mechanism of organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells on the nanoscale, and this kind of organic/inorganic p–n junction nanowires are a promising building block for developing nanoscale solar power conversion systems (Fig. 14).29
 Fig. 14  (A) Dark/light J–V data of a CdS nanowire device, (B) PPY nanowire device. (C) Dark/light J–V data of typical single CdS–PPY nanowire solar cells with device lengths of 7.428 (a), 6.922 (b), and 6.597 mm (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29 @ 2010 American Chemical Society. 
5.3 Sensors
Conjugated polymers could be viewed as a collection of short, conjugated units kept in close proximity by virtue of the polymer backbone.130 The structure and sequence of the repeating units can be widely varied and modified, which allows the polymers to be tailored to suit diverse targets and potentially achieve high selectivity. The changing output optoelectronic signals, such as absorbance, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), electrical conductivity, and fluorescence efficiency, which arise from collective phenomena between the preorganized functional units could be easily detected.131 As a result, a variety of conjugated polymers containing molecular recognition sites have been reported as sensing materials.
Heavy metal ions, such as mercury which is a notorious heavy metal, pose severe risks for human beings and other organisms. A variety of conjugated polymers containing molecular recognition sites designed as sensing materials for Hg2+ ions have made great progress. A poly(p-phenyleneethynylene) polymer with a bipyridyl ligand in the pendent side chains (PPE-bipy) showed a high sensitivity to the Hg2+ ion. Bipyridyl groups are strong ligands for various transition metal ions and were designed as the receptor in the polymer. A significant decrease in fluorescence intensity of PPE-bipy was shown when a methanol solution of Hg2+ ions was added to the dilute THF–EtOH solution of PPE-bipy. Meanwhile, the absorbance band of PPE-bipy at 399 nm decreased and showed a blue-shift. Further, the absorbance at 399 nm completely disappeared after adding a great amount of Hg2+, which led to a visual color change from a slight yellow to a colorless solution, which can be detected with the naked eye. Meanwhile, PPE-bipy showed a high selectivity toward Hg2+ ions and was found to have an almost identical response to other background metal ions. The detection limit was found to be 8.0 nM in a THF–EtOH (1:1, v/v) solvent system.132
Water solubility is a required ability for ion sensors for environmental and biologic applications. A water-soluble poly(para-phenylene) derivative with pendant thymine and sulfonate units (PBTS) was reported to detect metal ions in aqueous solution.133 The sulfonate groups were covalently linked to the side chain of the conjugated polymer to improve its water solubility and the thymine moiety was designed in the polymer to detect Hg2+ ions. After addition of the Hg2+ ions to the aqueous solution of PBTS, the absorbance spectra showed a red-shift and the fluorescence was quenched. This phenomenon was the result of the formation of the interpolymer π-stacking aggregation induced by the specific thymine–Hg–thymine interactions. More importantly, PBTS showed a high selectivity for the Hg2+ ions to other metal ions. In addition, the formation of interpolymer π–π stacking aggregation was reversible. Adding chlorine anions into the PBTS–Hg2+ complex might form a precipitate with Hg2+ ions and breaker the thymine–Hg–thymine structures making the recovery of fluorescence.
Jang fabricated multidimensional hydroxylated poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) nanotubes with surface substructures such as nanonodules and nanorods. The surface substructures can be grown on a nanofiber surface by controlling critical synthetic conditions during vapor deposition polymerization on the polymer nanotemplate, leading to the formation of multidimensional conducting polymer nanostructures with an enhanced surface-to-volume ratio. The introduced hydroxyl groups were found to interact with the nerve agents. Representatively, the sensing response of dimethyl methylphosphonate (DMMP) as a stimulant for sarin is highly sensitive with rapid response times (less than 1 s) as well as recovery times (3–25 s) and reproducibility and reversibility from the aligned nanotubes. Hydrogen bonding was found to extrinsically affect the oxidation level of PEDOT. So the pristine PEDOT nanotubes with no functionalized hydroxyl groups did not show a remarkable response on exposure to DMMP vapors (Fig. 15).134
 Fig. 15  SEM images of HPNTs with (a) NN and (b) NR surface substructures. (c) Real-time responses of HPNTs upon cyclic exposure to DMMP (10 ppt to 50 ppb) and N2 streams. (d) Real-time response of pristine PEDOT nanotubes without hydroxyl groups to DMMP gas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 @ 2012 American Chemical Society. 
5.4 Organic light-emitting and field-emission devices
Current organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) for large area display and solid-state lighting applications are essentially 2D homogeneous thin film devices.135 The conjugated polymers showed the semi-conducting or metallic properties for their rich unpaired electrons and the p-orbitals form delocalized π bands along the backbone.136 Since 1990, conjugated polymers poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) was first reported as electroluminescence materials by Burroughes group, polymer organic light emitting diodes (P-OLEDs) have been widely used for OLED applications.137 Neher and co-workers8 reported an OLED device fabricated from aqueous dispersions of nanoparticles of poly(para-phenylene). The device from the polymer nanospheres with a mean diameter of 94 nm exhibits light emission with a current onset at the semiconducting conjugated polymer nanospheres energy (2.7 V) and a maximum brightness of 145 cd m−2. Although the device showed the lower electroluminescence onset at the nanoparticle energy gap than OLEDs fabricated from an organic solution, a slightly higher efficiency (0.5 cd A−1) of the same polymer (0.3 cd A−1) was detected. This is attributed to an enhanced electron injection from the cathode as a consequence of the in situ formation of a “stalactite”-type nanostructured cathode during aluminum evaporation. The fabrication of light-emitting devices has also been prepared by the inkjet printing of aqueous dispersions of poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV). The advantages of the aqueous dispersions are the environmental friendliness and the absence of the bead-on-a-string effect typical for high molecular weight conjugated polymers during the printing process. However, the device performance was poor with extremely high current and light emission onset voltages (50–60 V). After addition of the solid state electrolyte to the aqueous dispersions, the performance was distinctly improved with onset voltages for the current as well as for the luminance slightly above 3 V and remarkable enhanced light output.138 Light extraction efficiency for the OLED device is limited to approximately 20% and 80% due to the emitted light is trapped in the waveguide and glass modes.139 Great efforts have been made to improve the output coupling efficiency. An etchless UV-nanoimprint lithography process is developed to improve the output coupling efficiency. The electroluminance intensity of the device increased by more than 50% compared to the conventional device with a maximum luminance efficiency of 5.95 cd A−1.140
A C60 derivative poly(phenylene vinylene) (PPV)-dyad PPV–AFCAR was utilized as an additive and the conjugated POMPV as an emissive material in fabrication of OLEDs to improve device performance. The current–voltage and luminescent characteristics were investigated as a function of dopant concentration. The mixing of 1.0% PPV–AFCAR into the conjugated polymer POMPV matrix resulted in the increase of the light emitting diode’s luminance intensity and efficiency.141
Conducting polymer nanowires, such as the PTh–CdS nanorod arrays synthesized by AAO templates have been demonstrated as the nanotip emitters of field emission. For example, the PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod arrays exhibit a turn-on field (Eto) of 3.62 V μm−1 and a threshold field (Eth) of 5.85 V μm−1, while the PTh–CdS segmented nanorod arrays display a much higher turn on field of 6.72 V μm−1 and threshold field of 12.38 V μm−1. It is demonstrated that the existence of the PTh–CdS junctions at the vacuum interface (triple junction) was the main source of the electric field enhancement, which leads to superior field emission and emission stability.
The field emission properties of the one-dimensional full organic conjugated polymer PEDOT, PT34bT and PEDOT-co-T34bT nanowire arrays were investigated.142 Compared with the independent PT34bT and PEDOT nanowire array, the cross-linked copolymer of PEDOT-co-T34bT nanowire arrays showed the improved conductivity and field emission properties with excellent stability. For instance, the PEDOT-co-T34bT nanowire arrays showed an Eto of 1.83 V μm−1 and Eth of 4.50 V μm−1, which are lower than that of the PT34bT and PEDOT nanowire arrays. Meanwhile, the emission current density of PEDOT-co-T34bT nanowire arrays exceed 4 mA cm−2. The work function of PEDOT-co-T34bT was calculated to be 1.4 eV, which is much smaller than that of PT34bT and PEDOT (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  (A) J–E curves of PEDOT, PT34bT and PEDOT-co-T34bT nanowire array and (B) the corresponding Fowler–Nordheim (F–N) plot. (C) Turn-on field and threshold field of PT34bT, PEDOT and PEDOT-co-T34bT nanowire arrays; and (D) emission stability of PEDOT-co-T34bT and PT34bT nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 @ 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.5 Nanoscale field-effect transistors
The field-effect transistor is one of the most basic building blocks in electronics and nanoelectronics. Different classes of donor–acceptor copolymers have been investigated for application in the field effect transistor.143 Watson et al.144 copolymerized phthalimide acceptor units with thiophene and achieved a small π–π stacking distance of 3.6 Å and field-effect mobilities of 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1. McCullough et al.145 reported conjugated polymers based on N-alkyl dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrroles (DTP) and thiophene (TH) units. The copolymers exhibited high conductivities up to 230 S cm−1 and mobilities of up to 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1. Interestingly, the disordered isotropic systems should exhibit higher mobility than the ordered ones. The donor–acceptor copolymers could operate as not only p-type transistors, but also high-mobility n-type and ambipolar FETs. Yan et al.146 reported a highly soluble, n-channel donor–acceptor copolymer based on naphthalenediimide and thiophene that exhibited unprecedented OTFT characteristics with electron mobilities up to 0.45–0.85 cm2 V−1 s−1 under ambient conditions.
Nevertheless, polymer semiconductor nanowires suitable for charge transport studies have been prepared and their charge-transport properties have been investigated. It has been found that single nanowires of P3HT exhibit a field effect hole mobility of 0.02–0.06 cm2 V−1 s−1.147,148
A polymer semiconductor, poly(benzobisimidazobenzophenanthroline) (BBL), was an important air stable n-channel transistor. The BBL nanobelts could be prepared by a simple solution-phase process. Both the single nanobelt and nanobelt networks via field-effect transistors have the similar electron mobility of 7 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on/off current ratios to 1 × 104. The n-channel nanobelt transistors showed stability and repeatability in air for even more than 6 months, which is the most stable among current n-channel polymer transistors (Fig. 17).149 These results demonstrate that the polymer nanostructures are promising for organic electronics and nanoelectronics.
 Fig. 17  (A) Optical image of a single BBL nanobelt transistor. (B) Output characteristics and (C) transfer characteristics of a single-nanobelt transistor. (D) Optical image of network of BBL nanobelts. (E) Output and (F) transfer characteristics of the nanobelts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149 @ 2008 American Chemical Society. 
5.6 Electronic transport properties
The charge-transport properties of low dimensional conjugated polymers nanostructures are of great scientific and technological interest for the fabrication of low-cost and high performance organic electronics and nanoelectronics.150 A rich array of organic polymer material in low-dimensional structures with enhanced performance compared to conventional bulk materials has been reported widely.151 Furthermore, studies of charge transport in individual low dimensional nanostructures can provide a fundamental understanding of the nature of architecture–charge-transport relationships to produce benign materials.
As previously discussed in Section 4, the average conductivity of GDNWs is much larger than that of graphdiyne film. It has been found that the polypyrrole nanoparticles provided a higher conductivity and surface-to-volume ratio value in the order of 20 nm > 60 nm > 100 nm. Moreover, the uniformly arranged nanoparticles as a transducer with excellent sensing performance can act as novel chemical sensors in detecting ammonia gas and volatile organic compounds.152 Poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT), a liquid-crystalline conjugated polymer, could be nanoconfined in one dimensional nanochannel arrays with their backbones aligned along the grooves of the substrate. The aligned F8BT showed ambipolar semiconductor characteristics, the field effect mobilities of electrons and holes along the nanowire directions were ∼2 times larger than those in homogeneous thin films, when the chains were aligned parallel to the transport direction.153
Different types of conductive polymers nanowires filled in nanopores exhibited higher conductivity than a homogeneous thin film and the enhancement in conductivity increases with decreasing diameter.154 For example, the ratio of the conductivity of PEDOT nanowires with diameters of ∼10 nm was more than 10 times higher than the conductivity of a homogeneous film. An extended conjugation length and a better ordering of the molecules in the more confined nanostructures accounted for the diameter dependence of the conductivity. Meanwhile, the conductivity showed a temperature dependence, which could be explained as a balance between the thermodynamic constraint on a charge carrier moving to a nearby localized state of different energy and the quantum mechanical restraint on a carrier moving to a localized state of similar energy but spatially remote.154,155
6 Conclusions
As shown in this review, the conjugated polymer materials have many advantageous features – particularly high tailoring ability in terms of composition, structure, morphology, dimensions, and properties. This review has shown that the rational design and synthesis of these materials could lead to novel and specific applications. The simple combination of chemistry concepts are able to produce controlled molecular aggregates with low dimension structures based on the conjugated polymers. Many types of interactions – including the coordination of molecules, π–π interactions, hydrogen bonding interactions, electrostatic interactions, and hydrophobic interactions have been used in conjunction with various synthetic methods – including template-directed synthesis, solution phase methods, and self-assembly to prepare these nanostructures. Although much synthetic progress has been made in the past decade, more effort is still needed to be devoted to new, low cost, facile and environmentally friendly mass production processes for precisely controlling the composition, size, and shape of the nanostuctures with good reproducibility. Achievements have been made in the construction of various structures of conjugated polymers aggregates with low dimensions such as nano-wires, nano-rods, nano-fiber and nano-particles for application in fabricating devices of diodes, solar cells, transistors and sensors, especially the hybrid materials for novel and multifunctional devices. However, it is still a challenge to develop new methodologies for the controllable synthesis of various low dimensional nanostructures for next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices and field-effect transistors of conjugated polymers-based materials.
AcknowledgementsWe are grateful for financial support from the National Nature Science Foundation of China (201031006 and 90922017) and the National Basic Research 973 Program of China (2011CB932302 and 2012CB932900).
Notes and referencesJ. Pecher and S. Mecking, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6260–6279 CrossRef CAS .S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef .H. Liu, J. Xu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1496–1508 CrossRef CAS .V. Vohra, U. Giovanella, R. Tubino, H. Murata and C. Botta, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5572–5578 CrossRef CAS .G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .N. Stutzmann, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Science, 2003, 299, 1881–1884 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Chiappelli and R. C. Hayward, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6100–6104 CrossRef CAS .T. Piok, S. Gamerith, C. Gadermaier, H. Plank, F. P. Wenzl, S. Patil, R. Montenegro, T. Kietzke, D. Neher, U. Scherf, K. Landfester and E. J. W. List, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 800–804 CrossRef CAS .H. Zheng, Y. Li, H. Liu, X. Yin and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4506–4524 RSC .S. Cui, H. Liu, L. Gan, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2918–2925 CrossRef CAS .S. L. Lee, C. Y. J. Chi, M. J. Huang, C. H. Chen, C. W. Li, K. Pati and R. S. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10454–10455 CrossRef CAS .L. L. Zhang, T. T. Lin, X. Y. Pan, W. Z. Wang and T. X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9861–9869 RSC .S. Mutlu and B. G. Sonmez, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 245203 CrossRef .R. Liu and S. B. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2942–2943 CrossRef CAS .S. Padron, R. Patlan, J. Gutierrez, N. Santos, T. Eubanks and K. Lozano, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 125, 3610–3616 CrossRef CAS .G. Wang, L. C. Si, H. Yang, F. L. Cai, Z. Q. Wang and X. Duan, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 917–922 CrossRef CAS .S. L. Li, T. X. Xiao, C. Lin and L. Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5950–5968 RSC .J. Kim, Pure Appl. Chem., 2002, 74, 2031–2044 CrossRef CAS .J. Roncali, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 173–205 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Jenekhe and J. A. Osaheni, Science, 1994, 265, 765–768 CAS .R. Xiao, S. I. Cho, R. Liu and S. B. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4483–4489 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Pan, L. Pu, Y. Shi, S. Y. Song, Z. Xu, R. Zhang and Y. D. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 461–464 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhang, Z. D. Zujovic, H. Peng, G. A. Bowmaker, P. A. Kilmartin and J. Travas-Sejdic, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8877–8884 CrossRef CAS .M. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2926–2932 CrossRef CAS .Z. Cai and C. R. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 4138–4139 CrossRef CAS .C. R. Martin, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .N. Chen, C. Huang, W. Yang, S. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12982–12986 CAS .Y. Guo, Y. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, G. Li, Y. Zhao and H. Lin, Chem.–Asian J., 2011, 6, 98–102 CrossRef CAS .Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, H. Liu, S.-W. Lai, Y. Li, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang, C.-M. Che and D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 327–330 CrossRef CAS .Y. Guo, Q. Tang, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9198–9199 CrossRef CAS .N. Chen, X. Qian, H. Lin, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10804–10808 RSC .H. Lin, H. Liu, X. Qian, S.-W. Lai, Y. Li, N. Chen, C. Ouyang, C.-M. Che and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 7749–7753 CrossRef CAS .H. Lin, H. Liu, X. Qian, C. Ouyang and Y. Li, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 4397–4401 RSC .Y. Guo, H. Liu, Y. Li, G. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Song and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12669–12673 CAS .J. M. Lorcy, F. Massuyeau, P. Moreau, O. Chauvet, E. Faulques, J. Wery and J. L. Duvail, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 405601 CrossRef CAS .J. Joo, D. H. Park, M. Y. Jeong, Y. B. Lee, H. S. Kim, W. J. Choi, Q. H. Park, H. J. Kim, D. C. Kim and J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2824–2829 CrossRef CAS .Y. Guo, Y. Li, J. Xu, X. Liu, J. Xu, J. Lv, C. Huang, M. Zhu, S. Cui, L. Jiang, H. Liu and S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8223–8228 CAS .L. J. Pan, H. Qiu, C. M. Dou, Y. Li, L. Pu, J. B. Xu and Y. Shi, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 11, 2636–2657 CrossRef CAS .J. Jang and J. Bae, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1200–1202 RSC .Y. Xue, X. Lu, Y. Xu, X. Bian, L. Kong and C. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 1602–1605 RSC .K. Okada, M. Nandi, J. Maruyama, T. Oka, T. Tsujimoto, K. Kondoh and H. Uyama, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7422–7424 RSC .H. P. M. de Hoog, M. Nallani and N. Tomczak, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 4552–4561 RSC .C. Wang, Y. Kang, K. Liu, Z. Li, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 3056–3059 RSC .K. Velonia, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4224–4225 CrossRef CAS .A. P. R. Johnston, A. N. Zelikin and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3727–3730 CrossRef CAS .S. Pitchiaya and Y. Krishnan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1111–1121 RSC .D. Liu, M. S. Wang, Z. X. Deng, R. Walulu and C. D. Mao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2324–2325 CrossRef CAS .H. Gan, Y. Li, H. Liu, S. Wang, C. Li, M. Yuan, X. Liu, C. Wang, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 1723–1729 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhou, N. Chen, J. Yang, H. Liu and Y. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 688–692 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lijuan and W. Meixiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 815–820 CrossRef .Z. Zuo, Y. Guo, Y. Li, J. Lv, H. Liu, J. Xu and Y. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1940–1944 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zuo, X. Yin, C. Zhou, N. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 356, 86–91 CrossRef CAS .W. Li, Y. Yu, M. Lamson, M. S. Silverstein, R. D. Tilton and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 9419–9426 CrossRef CAS .G. Demirel, N. Malvadkar and M. C. Demirel, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 4252–4255 CrossRef CAS .A. Frenot and I. S. Chronakis, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 64–75 CrossRef CAS .D. Li and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1151–1170 CrossRef CAS .H. Fong, I. Chun and D. H. Reneker, Polymer, 1999, 40, 4585–4592 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Deitzel, J. Kleinmeyer, D. Harris and N. C. B. Tan, Polymer, 2001, 42, 261–272 CrossRef CAS .B. Sun, Y.-Z. Long, F. Yu, M.-M. Li, H.-D. Zhang, W.-J. Li and T.-X. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2134–2137 RSC .D. Edmondson, A. Cooper, S. Jana, D. Wood and M. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18646–18652 RSC .X. Y. Wang, C. Drew, S. H. Lee, K. J. Senecal, J. Kumar and L. A. Samuelson, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1273–1275 CrossRef CAS .S. Madhugiri, A. Dalton, J. Gutierrez, J. P. Ferraris and K. J. Balkus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14531–14538 CrossRef CAS .E. R. Kenawy, J. M. Layman, J. R. Watkins, G. L. Bowlin, J. A. Matthews, D. G. Simpson and G. E. Wnek, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 907–913 CrossRef CAS .D. Yang, X. Niu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Gu, L. Song, R. Zhao, L. Ma, Y. Shao and X. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4770–4775 CrossRef CAS .F. S. Kim, G. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 682–732 CrossRef .J. M. Gibson, Phys. Today, 1997, 50, 56–61 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Schoer, C. B. Ross, R. M. Crooks, T. S. Corbitt and M. J. Hampdensmith, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 615–618 CrossRef CAS .P. N. Dunn, Solid State Technol., 1994, 37, 49 Search PubMed .D. Brambley, B. Martin and P. D. Prewett, Adv. Mater. Opt. Electron., 1994, 4, 55–74 CrossRef CAS .D. Tu, S. Pagliara, A. Camposeo, G. Potente, E. Mele, R. Cingolani and D. Pisignano, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1140–1145 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Wu, C. F. Lin, H. Y. Lin, C. L. Lee and C. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3052–3056 CrossRef CAS .R. Riehn, A. Charas, J. Morgado and F. Cacialli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 526–528 CrossRef CAS .F. L. Zhang, T. Nyberg and O. Inganas, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1373–1377 CrossRef CAS .W. Lee and J. K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1187–1190 CrossRef CAS .G. Decher and J. D. Hong, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 1430–1434 CrossRef CAS .H. Xu, M. Schönhoff and X. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 517–523 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, Y. Li, J. Zhai, G. Cui, H. Liu, S. Xiao, Y. Liu, F. Lu, L. Jiang and D. B. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 6031–6038 CrossRef CAS .L. Jiang, F. Lu, Q. Chang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Li, W. Xu, G. Cui, J. Zhuang, X. Li, S. Wang, Y. Song and D. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 481–486 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, G. Zeng, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, M.-L. Peng, L.-Z. Wu and C.-H. Tung, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6679–6685 CrossRef CAS .L. Y. Wang, Z. Q. Wang, X. Zhang, J. C. Shen, L. F. Chi and H. Fuchs, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1997, 18, 509–514 CrossRef CAS .W. B. Stockton and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2717–2725 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Eur. Polym. J., 2007, 43, 2784–2791 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Sukhishvili and S. Granick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 9550–9551 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shimazaki, R. Nakamura, S. Ito and M. Yamamoto, Langmuir, 2000, 17, 953–956 CrossRef .L. Cheng, L. Niu, J. Gong and S. Dong, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 1465–1475 CrossRef CAS .J. Niu, Z. Liu, L. Fu, F. Shi, H. Ma, Y. Ozaki and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11988–11994 CrossRef CAS .G. Rydzek, J.-S. Thomann, N. Ben Ameur, L. Jierry, P. Mésini, A. Ponche, C. Contal, A. E. El Haitami, J.-C. Voegel, B. Senger, P. Schaaf, B. Frisch and F. Boulmedais, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2058–2065 CrossRef .M. Nisoli, V. Pruneri, S. Desilvestri, G. Dellepiane, D. Comoretto, C. Cuniberti and J. Lemoigne, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 590–592 CrossRef CAS .T. Shimizu and M. Masuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 2812–2818 CrossRef CAS .B. N. Thomas, C. R. Safinya, R. J. Plano and N. A. Clark, Science, 1995, 267, 1635–1638 CrossRef CAS .H. Oikawa, T. Oshikiri, H. Kasai, S. Okada, S. K. Tripathy and H. Nakanishi, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2000, 11, 783–790 CrossRef CAS .G. Wegner, Z. Naturforsch., B: Anorg. Chem., Org. Chem., Biochem., Biophys., Biol., 1969, 24, 824–832 CAS .J. W. Lauher, F. W. Fowler and N. S. Goroff, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1215–1229 CrossRef CAS .X. Ouyang, F. W. Fowler and J. W. Lauher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12400–12401 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Kane, R.-F. Liao, J. W. Lauher and F. W. Fowler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 12003–12004 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Curtis, N. Le, F. W. Fowler and J. W. Lauher, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 2313–2321 CAS .J. Xiao, M. Yang, J. W. Lauher and F. W. Fowler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 2132–2135 CrossRef CAS .T. Hoang, J. W. Lauher and F. W. Fowler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10656–10657 CrossRef CAS .A. Matsumoto, T. Tanaka, T. Tsubouchi, K. Tashiro, S. Saragai and S. Nakamoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8891–8902 CrossRef CAS .A. Matsumoto, K. Sada, K. Tashiro, M. Miyata, T. Tsubouchi, T. Tanaka, T. Odani, S. Nagahama, T. Tanaka, K. Inoue, S. Saragai and S. Nakamoto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2502–2505 CrossRef CAS .L. Hsu, G. L. Cvetanovich and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3892–3899 CrossRef CAS .H. Gan, H. Liu, Y. Li, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, S. Wang, T. Jiu, N. Wang, X. He, D. Yu and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12452–12453 CrossRef CAS .S. Nomura, T. Itoh, H. Nakasho, T. Uno, M. Kubo, K. Sada, K. Inoue and M. Miyata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2035–2041 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, M. Zhu, S. Chen, M. Yuan, Y. Guo, Y. Song, H. Liu and Y. Li, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11967–11974 CrossRef CAS .C. Li, L. Jiang, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Song, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2058–2065 CrossRef CAS .S. Sun, S. Anders, H. F. Hamann, J.-U. Thiele, J. E. E. Baglin, T. Thomson, E. E. Fullerton, C. B. Murray and B. D. Terris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2884–2885 CrossRef CAS .G. Schmid, M. Bäumle and N. Beyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 181–183 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, S. Wang, F. Li, C. Du, Z. Shi, D. Zhu and Y. Song, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 337, 403–407 CrossRef CAS .H. Fang, S. Wang, S. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, L. Fan, Z. Shi, C. Du and D. Zhu, Synth. Met., 2002, 128, 253–259 CrossRef CAS .H. Fang, S. Wang, S. Xiao, J. Yang, Y. Li, Z. Shi, H. Li, H. Liu, S. Xiao and D. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1593–1597 CrossRef CAS .H. Fang, Z. Shi, Y. Li, S. Xiao, H. Li, H. Liu and D. Zhu, Synth. Met., 2003, 135–136, 843–844 CrossRef CAS .M. Long, L. Tang, D. Wang, Y. Li and Z. Shuai, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2593–2600 CrossRef CAS .G. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46(19), 3256–3258 RSC .G. Li, Y. Li, X. Qian, H. Liu, H. Lin, N. Chen and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2611–2615 CAS .X. Qian, Z. Ning, Y. Li, H. Liu, C. Ouyang, Q. Chen and Y. Li, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 730–733 RSC .Z. G. Yin and Q. D. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 179–218 CrossRef CAS .J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .F. Lu, S. Xiao, Y. Li, H. Liu, H. Li, J. Zhuang, Y. Liu, N. Wang, X. He, X. Li, L. Gan and D. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 7444–7450 CrossRef CAS .C. Li and H. Wonneberger, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 613–636 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, N. Wang, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Li, J. Xiao, X. Xu, C. Huang, S. Cui and D. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 4880–4887 CrossRef CAS .X. He, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Liu, F. Lu, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2005, 206, 2199–2205 CrossRef CAS .C. Huang, N. Wang, Y. Li, C. Li, J. Li, H. Liu and D. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5319–5325 CrossRef CAS .N. Wang, Y. Li, F. Lu, Y. Liu, X. He, L. Jiang, J. Zhuang, X. Li, Y. Li, S. Wang, H. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 2851–2861 CrossRef CAS .R. F. Service, Science, 2011, 332(6027), 293 CrossRef CAS .J. Jo, S.-S. Kim, S.-I. Na, B.-K. Yu and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, W. Zhou, D. Xue, J. W. Liu, E. D. Peterson, W. Y. Nie and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 2035031 Search PubMed .M. R. Lee, R. D. Eckert, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, C. J. Brabec and R. A. Gaudiana, Science, 2009, 324, 232–235 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Wang, L. H. Lin, S. Y. Chen, Y. L. Wang and K. H. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 075201 CrossRef .M. Aryal, F. Buyukserin, K. Mielczarek, X. M. Zhao, J. M. Gao, A. Zakhidov and W. C. Hu, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2008, 26, 2562–2566 CrossRef CAS .K. Li and B. Liu, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 252–259 RSC .S. W. Thomas, G. D. Joly and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1339–1386 CrossRef CAS .C. Li, C. Zhou, H. Zheng, X. Yin, Z. Zuo, H. Liu and Y. Li, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 1998–2007 CrossRef CAS .J. Lv, C. Ouyang, X. Yin, H. Zheng, Z. Zuo, J. Xu, H. Liu and Y. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1588–1592 CrossRef CAS .O. S. Kwon, S. J. Park, J. S. Lee, E. Park, T. Kim, H.-W. Park, S. A. You, H. Yoon and J. Jang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2797–2802 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Tang and S. A. Vanslyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913–915 CrossRef CAS .S. P. Mucur, T. A. Tumay, S. E. San and E. Tekin, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1–11 CrossRef .J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackaym, R. H. Friendn, P. L. Burns and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS .G. Mauthner, K. Landfester, A. Köck, H. Brückl, M. Kast, C. Stepper and E. J. W. List, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 164–170 CrossRef CAS .C. F. Madigan, M. H. Lu and J. C. Sturm, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 1650–1652 CrossRef CAS .S. Jeon, J. W. Kang, H. D. Park, J. J. Kim, J. R. Youn, J. Shim, J. H. Jeong, D. G. Choi, K. D. Kim, A. O. Altun, S. H. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 223307 CrossRef .S. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Li, H. Lin, Z. Guo, S. Xiao, Z. Shi, D. Zhu, H.-S. Woo, D. L. Carroll, I.-S. Kee and J.-H. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3847–3849 CrossRef CAS .N. Chen, X. Qian, H. Lin, H. Liu and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11068–11072 RSC .H. Sirringhaus, M. Bird, T. Richards and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3893–3898 CrossRef CAS .X. G. Guo, F. S. Kim, S. A. Jenekhe and M. D. Watson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7206–7207 CrossRef CAS .J. Liu, R. Zhang, G. Sauvé, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13167–13176 CrossRef CAS .H. Yan, Z. H. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dotz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Merlo and C. D. Frisbie, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2003, 41, 2674–2680 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Merlo and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19169–19179 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, P. J. Shamberger, F. S. Ohuchi, Z. N. Bao, S. A. Jenekhe and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4712–4719 CrossRef CAS .T. Thurn-Albrecht, J. Schotter, G. A. Kästle, N. Emley, T. Shibauchi, L. Krusin-Elbaum, K. Guarini, C. T. Black, M. T. Tuominen and T. P. Russell, Science, 2000, 290, 2126–2129 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Yuan, Y. Y. Xu and A. H. E. Muller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 640–655 RSC .O. S. Kwon, J.-Y. Hong, S. J. Park, Y. Jang and J. Jang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18874–18879 CAS .Z. J. Zheng, K. H. Yim, M. S. M. Saifullah, M. E. Welland, R. H. Friend, J. S. Kim and W. T. S. Huck, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 987–992 CrossRef CAS .M. Granstrom and O. Inganas, Polymer, 1995, 36, 2867–2872 CrossRef .N. F. Mott and E. A. Davis, Electronic Processes in Non-Crystalline Materials, Clarendon Press, Oxford,  1979 Search PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Songhua Chen	Songhua Chen was born in 1985 in Fujian, China. He is now studying at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li. His research focuses on organic low-dimensionality nanomaterials.
Yongjun Li	Yongjun Li was born in 1975 in Sichuan, China. He received his Master’s degree in Chemistry from Sichuan University in 2001, and he earned his PhD in organic chemistry in 2006 at ICCAS. He is currently an associate professor in Prof. Yuliang Li's group, ICCAS, working on the design and synthesis of functional organic molecules.
Yuliang Li	Yuliang Li (Qingdao, China, 1949) is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests lie in the fields of functional organic molecular systems, covalent and noncovalent supramolecular self assembly systems, and fullerene chemistry, with a particular focus on the design and synthesis of photo-, electro-active organic/inorganic hybrid materials and nanoscale and nano-structural materials.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Model of the PBPB. (B) Model of the growth process of PBPB nanowires. (C) Nanowires show a soft characteristic. (D) SEM image, (E and F) TEM images of PBPB/ClO4− nanotubes. (G) Nanotube wall thickness variation with applied potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27 @ 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the template synthesis of the PTh–PPY segmented wire/wire and wire/tube heterojunction nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28 @ 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  CdS–PPY nanowires: (A) model; (B and C) SEM images; (D and E) TEM images and SAED pattern; (F) HRTEM image; and (G) typical current–voltage (I–V) curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29 and 30 @ 2008 American Chemical Society, @ 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of hybrid of PTh–CdS core–shell nanorods: (A) large area array, (B) top view and (C) TEM image. Top view of several PTh–CdS segmented nanorods (D and E); TEM and EDS spectra (F) of a single PTh–CdS segmented nanorod. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34 @ 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  The mechanism for the formation of rolled-up microtubes at the interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 @ 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 1  Chemical structure of the selected conjugated polymers.	 

 	Fig. 6  An illustration of the as-prepared well-ordered polymeric macroporous monoliths with formed naphthalene crystals (A). SEM images of the cross-sections of well-ordered PPV1 (a and b) and PPE1 (c and d) monoliths with different wall thicknesses. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 @ 2009 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) The procedure for the fabrication of Ag-His/BH-PPV films by alternate deposition. (B) AFM image of a 10-bilayer BH-PPV/Ag-His film. (C) Small-angle X-ray diffraction pattern of a fifteen-bilayer film of BHPPV/Ag-His. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78 @ 2005 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Illustration of the hierarchical self-assembly. (B) Absorption spectra of the multilayer film under UV irradiation for different times. (C) Fluorescence spectra of SANP aqueous solution (line 1) and multilayer film before (line 2) and after UV irradiation (line 3). Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 @ 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  Chemical structure of the selected conjugated polymers.	 

 	Fig. 9  Temperature-dependent CD spectroscopy of PA1 before (A) and after (B) irradiation. TEM images (C) and AFM height profiles (D) of irradiated PA1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 @ 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  The self-assembled nanostructures on copper foils: (A) without the polymerization process and (B) the large area of ordered polydiacetylene nanowires (C) with some entangled polydiacetylene nanowires. (D) Schematic illustration of the poly-CYDIOL nanowires by self-assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10 and 102 @ 2005 American Chemical Society, @ 2008 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration for the Diels–Alder reaction leading to the ordered AuNPs self-assemblies. (A) Fluorescence quenching efficiency of the conjugated copolymer PPE-F versus MA-Au. (B) Fluorescence emission spectra. TEM images (C–F) of PPE-F3-Au nanocomposites with different ratios of PPE-F3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 @ 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic outline of the synthesis of graphdiyne nanoscale films, (B) SEM and TEM images of a large area graphdiyne film, SEM (C and D), TEM (E) and HRTEM (F) images of GDNWs. (G) Typical current–voltage (I–V) curves of GDNWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, 113 and 115 @ 2010 American Chemical Society, 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) An SEM image of the PBPB–CdS nanowire and its element map scanning (B). Models of the surface polymer chains (C) and of PBPB and the nanowire arrays between two electrodes (D). (E) Typical I–V curves for PBPB–CdS heterojunction nanowire arrays under light illumination with different intensities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 @ 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Dark/light J–V data of a CdS nanowire device, (B) PPY nanowire device. (C) Dark/light J–V data of typical single CdS–PPY nanowire solar cells with device lengths of 7.428 (a), 6.922 (b), and 6.597 mm (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29 @ 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM images of HPNTs with (a) NN and (b) NR surface substructures. (c) Real-time responses of HPNTs upon cyclic exposure to DMMP (10 ppt to 50 ppb) and N2 streams. (d) Real-time response of pristine PEDOT nanotubes without hydroxyl groups to DMMP gas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 @ 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) J–E curves of PEDOT, PT34bT and PEDOT-co-T34bT nanowire array and (B) the corresponding Fowler–Nordheim (F–N) plot. (C) Turn-on field and threshold field of PT34bT, PEDOT and PEDOT-co-T34bT nanowire arrays; and (D) emission stability of PEDOT-co-T34bT and PT34bT nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 @ 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Optical image of a single BBL nanobelt transistor. (B) Output characteristics and (C) transfer characteristics of a single-nanobelt transistor. (D) Optical image of network of BBL nanobelts. (E) Output and (F) transfer characteristics of the nanobelts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149 @ 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
