Recent advances in copper sulphide-based nanoheterostructures  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00832A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00832A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4950-4965Recent advances in copper sulphide-based nanoheterostructures

        
          
            Maixian 
            Liu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu†
c, 
      
        
          
            Bobo 
            Gu
          
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Xunbin 
            Wei
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Gaixia 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaomei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *e, 
      
        
          
            Mark T. 
            Swihart
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Ken-Tye 
            Yong
          
        
      *f
aKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China
bNational-Regional Key Technology Engineering Laboratory for Medical Ultrasound, Guangdong Key Laboratory for Biomedical Measurements and Ultrasound Imaging, Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Medicine, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518055, China. E-mail: xugaixia@szu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, New York 14260, USA. E-mail: swihart@buffalo.edu
dMed-X Research Institute and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 1954 Huashan Road, Shanghai 200030, China. E-mail: bobogu@sjtu.edu.cn
eDepartment of Physiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518055, China. E-mail: xmwang@szu.edu.cn
fSchool of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, College of Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. E-mail: ktyong@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      3rd May 2019
    First published on 17th September 2019AbstractDue to the high mobility of copper ions in numerous structurally-related phases, copper sulphide (Cu2−xS, 0 ≤ x ≤ 1) has been widely used as a starting template to fabricate various heterostructures via cation exchange. Such nanoheterostructures can possess unique combinations of physical properties that could be useful in diverse applications. Controllable methods of fabricating copper sulphide nanoheterostructures of increasing complexity have been rapidly emerging over the past few years. In this tutorial review, we discuss recent progress in heterostructure fabrication methods using copper sulphide. We primarily focus on important reports of cation exchange-based approaches and then summarize some key emerging applications that can employ these copper-sulphide-based nanoheterostructures.
Maixian Liu
Dr Maixian Liu was born in Tianjin, China. He earned his BS degree in chemistry from Nankai University, Tianjin, China in 2010. He then moved to Dr Paras Prasad's lab at the University at Buffalo, the State University of New York to earn a PhD degree in chemistry, working on synthesis of plasmonic nanomaterials. He then moved to Dr Juliane Nguyen's lab for postdoctoral studies on nanomaterials for cancer treatment, before joining Dr Gaixia Xu's lab in 2017 to study bio-toxic effects of applied nanoparticles. Dr Liu has been focusing on developing methods to synthesize copper sulfide-based nanomaterials with controlled morphology and composition.
Yang Liu
Yang Liu earned his BS degree in Material Physics from Taiyuan University of Technology in 2013. He received his PhD in Chemical and Biological Engineering at the University at Buffalo (SUNY) under the guidance of Prof. Mark T. Swihart. He then joined in Prof. Xingchen Ye's group in the Department of Chemistry at Indiana University, Bloomington, where he is focusing on the synthesis and applications of colloidal nanocrystals and their integration into mesoscale assemblies.
Bobo Gu
Bobo Gu earned his PhD degree in Optical Engineering from Zhejiang University in 2012. After postdoctoral training at the Nanyang Technological University, he joined Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2017, where he is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Biomedical Engineering. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of functional inorganic and organic nanomaterials and exploration of their applications in sensing, imaging and therapy.
Gaixia Xu
Gaixia Xu earned her PhD in Biomedical Engineering in 2005 from Zhejiang University. From 2005 to 2007, she completed a postdoctoral fellowship in the Institute of Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. From 2007 to 2008, she completed a postdoctoral fellowship in the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics at the University at Buffalo, the State University of New York. She joined Shenzhen University in 2008 where she has been appointed full professor since 2013. Her current research interests include biomedical applications of multimode nanomaterials and novel optical imaging methods.
Xiaomei Wang
Xiaomei Wang received her PhD in Radioactive Medicine from Jinlin University in 2002 and became full professor in the School of Medicine, Shenzhen University in 2006. She joined Dr Dennis Carson's lab in 2017 as a visiting professor at the University of California, San Diego, where she focused on the preparation of a multivalent vaccine for cancer therapy. Professor Wang's research mainly focuses on comprehensive cancer therapy and study of bio-toxic effects of functional nanoparticles. Her lab is actively developing multi-target vaccines for cancer elimination and studying their anti-tumor mechanisms.
Mark T. Swihart
Mark T. Swihart is UB Distinguished Professor and Chair of Chemical and Biological Engineering at the University at Buffalo (SUNY). He earned his PhD in chemical engineering from the University of Minnesota. He is a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE). The focus of his research is the synthesis and characterization, and applications of nanomaterials using both colloidal and aerosol methods.

Key learning points
1. Cation exchange (CE) reactions have been established as a general and effective method to produce novel colloidal nanoheterostructures (NHs).
2. The formation of NHs via CE reactions strongly depends on the valence and diffusivity of incoming cations.
3. The outcomes of CE also depend upon the crystal phase, composition, and structure of the template NCs.
4. A diverse array of examples of copper sulphide-based NHs are introduced and their formation mechanisms are discussed.
5. Emerging applications of copper sulphide-based NHs are introduced to provide motivation for the design and manipulation of these novel nanostructures.

1. Introduction
Copper sulphide-based nanostructures are of interest for numerous energy- and bio-related applications. Stoichiometric copper(I) sulphide (Cu2S) is prone to loss of cations at ambient conditions due to oxidation and high mobility of copper ions. The resulting Cu2−xS adopts a rich variety of crystal phases with different ratios of copper to sulphur.1,2 Copper deficiency produces free holes in the valence band of the material, making it a self-doped p-type semiconductor.4,5 Heavily cation deficient (hole-doped) Cu2−xS exhibits strong optical absorption at near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths due to localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR).4,6 Optical energy absorbed by the LSPR of copper sulphide can be transformed to produce localized heating.7,8 This property is the basis of copper sulphide's use in NIR photothermal therapy and photoacoustic imaging.9,10 The low toxicity of copper sulphide nanoparticles, along with their strong NIR absorbance, gives them great promise as a new nanoagent for targeted cancer therapy. The NIR LSPR can also be employed in solar devices. This has been applied in harvesting of the NIR portion of the solar spectrum to boost the performance of solar cells and photocatalysts.5,11–13 Moreover, copper sulphide nanoparticles are composed of earth-abundant elements, which is important for keeping costs low and ensuring availability at any scale.
Nanoheterostructures (NHs) comprise two or more components fused into one nanoparticle.2–15 Increasing interest in fabricating these structures arises from their potential use in important applications including chemical catalysis and solar energy harvesting.11–13 Synergies between the different domains can produce property combinations that are not simple superpositions of the properties of the components.14 For example, a p–n junction can form at the interface between p-type and n-type semiconductor domains within a nanoparticle.17,18 Cooperative charge separation, in which photo-excited charge carriers are transferred efficiently into separate nanodomains, can slow charge carrier recombination. Formation of NHs can also broaden the absorbance spectra of nanostructures, which is important for fully utilizing the solar spectrum.19 Additive features can also be found in NHs. For example, Au–Cu2−xS NHs show continuous LSPR absorbance across the NIR I and NIR II wavelength ranges of relative transparency of biological media.9 The high atomic number of gold and photothermal effectiveness of Cu2−xS enable multi-modality X-ray CT and photoacoustic imaging.7
Synthesis of NHs via one-pot methods is difficult, due to the possibility of nucleating separate single-phase nanoparticles of the intended NH components, or even other phases composed of the same elements. Cation exchange (CE) is one of the most useful post-synthetic methods in NC synthesis and has been studied intensively.22 CE takes advantage of the mobility of cations in a NC lattice to convert an existing NC to another composition or phase that is difficult to obtain directly via one-pot synthesis. An extracting ligand is often needed if the metal–anion interaction in the desired product is weaker than that in the template. Incomplete CE has been widely used in synthesizing NHs. A key benefit of CE is that it greatly reduces the production of separate NCs of the target phase compared with one pot synthesis or heterogeneous nucleation of a second domain on a seed NC. With careful selection of metal sources and reaction time, precise control of NH composition can be achieved.
Ionic mobility is an important factor for successful CE and influences changes in morphology. Anionic movement could be induced by the transport of cations. Although this effect can be exploited to produce NCs with novel morphologies,23 maintaining the template geometry and anion sublattice is more often the desired behaviour. Copper chalcogenides are well-known for the high mobility of copper ions in their lattices. The library of known copper sulphide-based heterostructures covers a wide range of compositions and material combinations. For example, metallic nanostructures have been combined with copper sulphide to tune the LSPR absorbance spectrum.8,24 Although multiple structures with different shapes and sizes have been obtained, a unified mechanistic understanding of NH formation is still lacking. Difficulty in understanding CE processes involving Cu2−xS arises in part from the complexity of copper sulphide crystal phases, which may change during the formation of heterostructures.25 Achieving desired NH properties demands precise control of composition, phase, and growth orientation of each domain. In this tutorial review, we survey the most recent advances in both synthetic abilities and mechanistic understanding, aiming toward the development of a more unified view of these processes and greater ability to rationally design and predict structure and properties of NHs.
Various reviews have considered synthesis of copper sulphide nanoparticles. They have treated multiple aspects of synthetic methodology, physical properties, and potential applications, but have not devoted much attention to NHs.15,22 In this review, we first introduce mechanisms of NH formation, then describe recent synthetic advances in producing NHs via CE. We summarize reported combinations of copper sulphide and other materials and conclude by considering property-driven applications described in recent studies of copper sulphide-based NHs.
2. Advances in mechanistic understanding
The synthesis of heterostructures, which consist of two or more distinct domains within a single particle, has been exploited to produce multifunctional materials and to control charge-carrier transport across nanoscale interfaces.15 NHs have one or more boundaries between crystalline domains, with closed (e.g., core@shell)20,26 or open (e.g., Janus- or sandwich-like)27,28 geometries. Typically, the formation of heterostructures involves nucleation and growth of new domains from existing template NCs. NH formation by template-mediated processes can be classified into two different types: deposition, in which new domains grow onto template NCs to produce a heterodimer (or trimer or multimer); and ion exchange, in which the new domains partially replace the template NCs, often while maintaining the overall morphology of the template. In some cases, CE alters the morphology, due to large size differences between host and foreign cations (e.g., in Cu+ to Sn2+ exchange).14,15 Ion diffusion and vacancy migration at the heterointerfaces between domains are widely observed during formation of copper sulphide-based NHs. To ensure an efficient CE or epitaxial growth process, differences in lattice spacing across interfaces between the template and new domains should be minimized (typically to less than 5%). Large lattice mismatch between two systems creates a barrier to initiation of heterodomain growth. This constraint provides guidance for designing potential NHs based upon the lattice type and unit cell dimensions of the desired phases.
2.1 Disulphide bonds within the copper sulphide matrix
The coordination of copper in copper sulphides varies with the crystal phase. When stoichiometric, Cu+ in chalcocite Cu2S only occupies trigonal centers of S2−. At ambient conditions, Cu2S is inclined to lose copper ions, leaving behind undercoordinated S−.1 The accumulation of S− upon further loss of Cu+ leads to formation of disulphide bonds and increased hole concentration in the valence band, producing an increase in electrical conductivity. The degree of disulphide bond formation is also an indicator of the mobility of copper ions. With an increasing concentration of disulphide bonds, the copper ions are more likely to occupy tetrahedral centers and lose their mobility.
Copper mobility is very important for CE, as mobile copper ions allow in-diffusion of foreign cations. Covellite has the highest hole concentration among copper sulphide phases and can be regarded as a semi-metal rather than a semiconductor. It has the lowest Cu:S ratio among stable copper sulphide phases. Slow CE is expected for CuS based on its high fraction of tetrahedrally-coordinated copper atoms. Manna et al. demonstrated that formation of NHs of HgS–Cu2−xS and CdS–Cu2−xS was greatly accelerated by addition of ascorbic acid.29 In a parallel experiment, they first reduced the covellite to djurleite with Cu+ and found that the CE reaction readily proceeded. Both ascorbic acid and Cu+ can reduce the disulphide bond, indicating that the combination of electron donors and foreign cations can trigger simultaneous reduction of disulphide bonds and exchange of cations. Rather than using a separate reducing agent, cations in lower oxidation states, compared to their final oxidation state in the product, can act as both electron donors for disulphide bond reduction and cation sources for the CE process.25
2.2 Incompatibility of divalent cations with copper sulphide
Our groups and others have demonstrated that copper sulphide NCs exhibit valence-specific incorporation of foreign cations.27 Trivalent and tetravalent cations can enter the copper sulphide lattice and form ternary alloy phases, but divalent cations do not form such ternary alloys. Although the ionic radii of Zn2+ (74 pm) and In3+ (76 pm) are quite similar, reaction of Zn2+ with CuS consistently produces ZnS–Cu2−xS heterostructures, while reaction with In3+ mainly produces the CuInS2 ternary phase, with formation of In2S3 only in exceptional cases, and without formation of NHs.30 We carried out reactions between covellite and cations of various valences in the same study and found that M2+ ions, such as Cd2+ and Pb2+ react with CuS to produce NHs or to completely replace Cu+, but are never observed to form a ternary phase.27
We note the general absence of ternary Cu–M–S alloy crystalline phases in which M is present as a divalent cation. Even though Cu2PdS2 has been synthesized, the nanoparticles were amorphous, suggesting that Pd2+ could not be stably incorporated within the copper sulphide lattice.6 On the other hand, incorporation of M into ternary Cu–M–S alloys in which M is a trivalent or tetravalent cation, is common. In one report, one-pot synthesis of Cu2ZnSnS4 was scrutinized with Raman spectroscopy.31 The analysis clearly revealed the sequence of crystal formation. Copper sulphide was formed first, followed by insertion of Sn4+ to produce CTS. Finally, Zn2+ was incorporated into CTS to produce CZTS. The observed preference of copper sulphide to incorporate M with a valence other than 2+ is consistent with our results using a step-growth (sequential cation incorporation or exchange) method.27
Next, we consider some factors controlling the formation of heterostructures. In general, the formation of heterostructures using a Cu2−xS template via CE reactions is determined by the valence of the heterocations and their diffusion rate (which may vary for motion across different crystal planes within the anisotropic templates. Further discussion is provided in Section 2.3). Divalent cation insertion into a Cu2−xS template can lead to formation of a NH (e.g., ZnS–Cu2−xS) or to complete removal of copper (e.g. to produce ZnS). In this case, divalent cations fully replace the copper ions within any particular domain, and cannot co-exist with them in the same domain. In contrast, trivalent and tetravalent cations may only partially replace the Cu+ in the unit cell, i.e. may coexist with Cu+. Therefore homogeneous Cu–M–S alloy NCs (e.g., CuInS2 and Cu2SnS3) can be produced by cation incorporation.25 Incomplete cation incorporation (e.g. due to insufficient supply of the incoming cation) is more likely to lead to a single domain of non-stoichiometric Cu–M–S alloy than to NH formation. According to the observations and discussion of Liu et al., the cation valence selectivity arises from the conflict between charge balance and coordination environment between Cu+ and the divalent cations.27 Specifically, the cations and sulphur in most binary divalent metal sulphide and Cu–M–S ternary compounds are tetrahedrally coordinated (Table 1). For a sulphur-centred unit (one sulphur and four cations), there are only three different combinations of Cu+ and heterocations. The charge balance of the unit (a tetrahedrally-coordinated sulphur and four cations) can be described as follows:  where N is the valence of the heterocations and Z represents the fraction of this type of sulphur (coordinated to one, two, or three heterocations) in the structure, so that Z1 + Z2 + Z3 = 1. One can readily show that, when N = 2, Z1, Z2, Z3 can not all be greater than or equal to zero (or any of them equal to zero). That is, one cannot satisfy the charge balance in this tetrahedral unit by combining Cu+ with divalent cations. However, one or more combinations of Z values satisfy this relationship when N = 3 or 4. Other divalent cations such as Sn2+ and Pb2+, not only have different coordination numbers, but also larger cation radii that further decrease their compatibility with the Cu2−xS host.27,33 These conflicts and mismatches can lead to complete copper replacement or formation of heterostructures.
Table 1 Summary of the crystal group, sulphur atom stacking, and cation and sulphur coordination numbers of different copper sulphides and their CE products




Metal sulphide
Crystal group
Sulphur stacking
Cation coordination
Sulphur coordination
Ref.





a Note that coordination number of sulphur atoms in high chalcocite Cu2S is ambiguous due to the mixed occupancy of Cu sites and mixed saturation of sulphur.





Copper sulphide
Covellite CuS
Hexagonal
HCP
3 and 4
4 and 5

1, 6, 17, 24, 25, 27, 29, 32 and 33



Roxbyite Cu1.81S
Triclinic
HCP
2, 3 and 4
5 and 6

3, 5, 8, 14, 18, 21, 28 and 34–37



Djurleite Cu1.94S
Monoclinic
HCP
2, 3 and 4
6

11, 16, 20 and 23



Low chalcocite Cu2S
Monoclinic
HCP
2 and 3
4, 5 and 6

1 and 38–41



High chalcocite Cu2S
Hexagonal
HCP
2, 3 and 4








Monovalent
Binary MS
Ag2S, Au2S
Monoclinic/cubic
HCP/BCC
4/2
7/4

24 and 40



Ternary MS
Ag3CuS2, AgCuS
Tetragonal/orthorhombic
FCC
2, 3 and 4
6/5

32



Divalent binary MS
ZnS, MnS, HgS, CdS, CoS, PdS,
Hexagonal
HCP
4
4

5, 11, 12, 14, 17, 18, 21, 26–29, 34, 36, 38 and 39



Trivalent ternary MS
CuInS2, CuGaS2, CuFeS2,
Hexagonal
HCP
4
4

14, 16, 20, 23, 26, 27 and 42



Tetravalent ternary MS
Cu2SnS3, Cu3SnS4, Cu2GeS3
Tetragonal/monoclinic
FCC
4
4

25 and 27



Quaternary MS
Cu2ZnSnS4, Cu0.4Zn0.2In0.4S
Tetragonal/hexagonal
FCC
4
4

27 and 31





2.3 Cation diffusivity and other factors
The diffusivity of the incoming cation also influences formation of either homogeneous or heterogeneous structures via CE. The rate of cation diffusion can be governed by many factors including concentration of the precursors, reaction time and temperature, and other applied chemical driving forces such as the presence of species in solution that form stable complexes with a particular incoming or outgoing cation. CE incorporation through certain facets of the Cu2−xS template NCs may be slowed or prevented by strong ligand passivation of those facets, anisotropy of diffusivity, and inherent reactivity or stability of particular facets. This provides a means to control both the location and extent of CE reactions. In contrast, indiscriminate and isotropic ion-diffusion through the entire NC surface would likely to lead complete destruction of the template morphology.23,42 The formation of homogeneous ternary alloy NCs using trivalent and tetravalent cations is attributed to the relief of the above-mentioned conflict between valence and coordination, as well as preservation of the basic ordering of the sulphur sublattice after the CE process. However, in some of these cases, heterogeneous Cu2−xS–Cu–M–S (e.g., Cu2−xS@CuInS2) nanostructures can be obtained by a controlled CE process that does not go to completion. In one example, In3+ ions diffuse in from the edge of the Cu2−xS NPls but not through the top or bottom surfaces (Fig. 1e).16,20 In such cases, CE reactions preferentially occur through less well-passivated facets (e.g., edges of platelets),16 low-energy planes (e.g., low-index planes of a disordered structure),4 or stacking faults and twin boundaries.15,16 NHs formed in this manner can be considered an intermediate stage of the process of complete cation incorporation into Cu2−xS. The entire nanostructure finally evolves into a homogeneous Cu–M–S alloy if sufficient M precursor is provided. Similarly, controlled divalent cation incorporation exclusively produces NHs, while complete CE produces copper-free binary metal sulphide NCs, in which Cu+ ions are fully replaced by divalent cations.15
 Fig. 1  Gallery of NHs produced by different CE processes. (a) (Au2S–Cu1.81S)@IrxSy and (b) (PdS–Cu1.81S)@IrxSy NHs produced from Cu1.81S@IrxSy NHs. (c) Cu2−xS/CuGaS2 and (d) Cu2−xS/CuInS2 NHs produced from Cu2−xS nanorods. (e) Cu2−xS/CuInS2 NHs produced from Cu2−xS nanoplates. (f) (ZnS–CoS–ZnS)–CdS NHs produced from (g) (ZnS–Cu1.8S–ZnS)–CdS NHs. (h) CdS–ZnS–(CdS–Cu1.8S)–ZnS NHs obtained from CdS–ZnS–Cu1.8S–ZnS nanorods. (i) Schematic illustration of the results of selective cation incorporation into Cu1.81S–ZnS NHs (nanospheres). Panels (a, b, h and i) are reproduced from ref. 3, 5 and 14 respectively, with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. Panels (c and d), are reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. Panel (e) is reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Panels (f and g), are reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018. 
Other factors also influence the outcome of CE reactions of Cu2−xS NCs. The thermodynamic equilibrium of a CE reaction can be analysed by breaking the overall process into sub-steps for which Gibbs energy changes can be estimated.22 Though most of the known data for the dissociation or association energies of metal sulphides and solvation or desolvation energies of the cations are for aqueous media, even the crude estimates that can be made using those values provide a qualitative basis for understanding the CE reactions. Moreover, the hard and soft acid and base (HSAB) theory provides useful predictions of the affinities of metal ions for ligands and therefore helps to design strategies for producing new nanostructures. Basically, Cu+ is a soft acid, which can strongly bind to soft bases such as phosphines and thiols.15 For metal sulphides, when the cations in the starting materials are relatively hard acids, (e.g., Zn2+ and Cd2+) they can be easily exchanged with softer cations (e.g., Cu+, and Ag+). For example, CE reactions readily proceed when ZnS or CdS nanomaterials are reacted with Cu+ or Ag+ in a colloidal medium to form Cu2−xS or Ag2S. In contrast, when using Cu2−xS templates, the CE process can be promoted by copper-extracting ligands containing soft base functional groups (e.g., trioctylphosphine or dodecanethiol).
3. Cation exchange to produce copper sulphide–semiconductor nanoheterostructures
Recent studies of copper sulphide-based NHs have produced structures of increasing complexity. The mechanisms of heterostructure formation generalized from these reports provide valuable insights into nanostructure design and prediction. In this section, in addition to the basic mechanism of formation of NHs, we consider several new concepts generalized from recent reports and illustrate key ideas of their heterostructure design.
3.1 Regio-selectivity
Anisotropic growth on certain facets of nanoparticles is of great importance in NH synthesis, as it provides a means to manipulate the structure, and therefore optical and electronic properties, of nanoparticles. Selectivity of deposition or incorporation is determined by multiple factors including, but not limited to, coordinating ligands, lattice strain, and diffusion barriers. We note that these factors do not act alone but may influence the final structure cooperatively. The non-additive interactions between these effects and the practical difficulties that limit our ability to change factors independently make understanding complete mechanisms of NH formation difficult.
Controllable anisotropic formation of hetero-domains is difficult owing to the isotropic reactivity on symmetric nanostructures. In a recent study, Park et al. introduced a new strategy for breaking the symmetry of sulphide nanoplates to produce asymmetric NHs.3 Instead of cationic incorporation at all six corners, a thin coating of IrxSy changed locations of nucleation of Au2S and PdS domains (Fig. 1a and b). Through careful and detailed structural analysis, the authors showed that the shell of IrxSy confers anisotropic reactivity to the corners of copper sulphide NPls, imposing a kinetic constraint on the CE reaction.
Regio-selective CE has been demonstrated on copper sulphide nanorods. The anisotropic shape of nanorods allows selective CE to be limited to either their tips or sides, which can be controlled by the size and binding affinity of extracting/protecting ligands as well as lattice matching between phases. Zhai et al. demonstrated that position specificity of cation attack can be varied or even reversed by manipulating these factors.16 Reacting Ga3+ and t-DDT with Cu2−xS produced an alternating segmented heterostructure (Fig. 1c and d). When the same ligand was applied with In3+, the final heterostructure was Cu2−xS/CuInS2/Cu2−xS. The authors proposed that, for both indium and gallium, attack on the side of the rods was dominant, and that the larger mismatch between copper sulphide and copper gallium sulphide was responsible for the growth of segmented structures.
The assumption of immobilized anions is widely accepted when discussing the CE mechanism. This is not strictly correct, for the movement of cations, in order to maintain the charge neutrality, must be accompanied by anionic rearrangement unless the incoming cations very rapidly replace the outgoing ones. When CE occurs regio-selectively, limited rates of ion diffusion can induce shape evolution of the entire nanostructure. NHs can be an intermediate or final product of the CE reaction. Thus, regio-selective CE can provide a means of shape engineering. This has been employed in synthesis of Pt–Cu2−xS NHs.40 Pt–MnO was first fabricated, followed by anionic exchange with hexamethyldisilathiane. The resulting NHs were composed of Pt–MnS with MnS in the form of a hollow sphere. The hollow structure was retained after Cu+ exchange of Mn2+.
3.2 Cu2−xS–MxSy as a starting synthon
CE on copper sulphide has been used widely to build NHs. A commonly used strategy is to introduce one kind of foreign cation precursor into a colloidal dispersion of copper sulphide templates to produce a structure containing at most two domains. Multicomponent NHs with well-defined structure and interfaces between more than two domains remain rare. Increased structural complexity and sophistication requires a controllable methodology with predictable outcomes. In contrast to the binary Cu2−xS matrix, ternary Cu2−xS–MS NHs, prepared by a single CE reaction on Cu2−xS, can be applied to create previously unavailable NHs through a double CE process.
Utilizing lattice strain and differences in diffusivity, a breakthrough was made recently by Fenton et al. demonstrating the ability to build up more complex NHs using a Cu2−xS–MS NH synthon.21 The incompatibility of divalent cations with incorporation into copper sulphides was exploited to achieve nanostructures with unprecedented levels of complexity. Upon introducing divalent cations to ZnS–Cu2−xS–ZnS or CdS–Cu2−xS NHs, the authors discovered that the copper sulphide domains dissolved first to yield a new metal-sulphide. This new synthon was able to undergo further CE with Co to form ZnS–CoS–ZnS|CdS (Fig. 1f and g). Both the shape of the copper sulphide template and the order of cation addition influenced the final product structure. The lattice strain between Cu2−xS and ZnS, and between them and CdS, can be used to achieve regio-selectivity that places specific materials in desired locations. In subsequent research, Fenton et al. provided a deeper perspective on the formation of triple-component copper sulphide-based heterostructures, in which nanospheres and nanorods were used as starting templates. Reversing the order of addition of Zn2+ and Cd2+ changed the arrangement of domains due to differences in strain at interfaces between the various material combinations (Fig. 1h).5 The modularity of this approach brings a powerful new methodology and insight into the design of colloidal inorganic nanostructures.
Based on the ZnS–Cu1.81S–ZnS template, a variety of outcomes of selective CE can be obtained by using different heterocations with or without a copper-extracting agent [e.g., trioctylphosphine (TOP)].27 In addition to creating complex multi-component NH libraries, we recently explored the growth mechanism of different types of NHs. Incorporation mechanisms of indium and tin are less-well studied in the context of CE reactions on copper sulphide, as Sn can adopt difference valence states, and In can form ternary alloys or completely replace Cu. Starting from ZnS–Cu1.81S–ZnS templates, ZnS–CuInS2–ZnS NHs were obtained by partial CE, rather than formation of products containing In2S3, which would require major rearrangement of the sulphur sublattice. In contrast to Sn2+, which behaves similarly to other divalent cations upon CE, Sn4+ cannot be directly incorporated into the Cu2−xS lattice, due to the large difference in hardness in the context of the HSAB theory. Then, the excess Cu-extracting agent (here TOP) in the system can remove the Cu2−xS domain from the template, producing pure ZnS (Fig. 1i). On the other hand, when the same templates are reacted without TOP, the sandwich structures disassemble by (partially) removing the ZnS domains, (regardless of the presence of Sn4+). Thus, the complex heterostructure templates should be carefully treated during CE reactions, due to their intrinsic meta-stability. The forms of final product NCs included homogeneous NCs, heterodimers, core@shell NHs and NHs with three different domains, reflecting the fact that only certain types of cations can be incorporated into the NHs and incoming cations enter through a particular domain, rather than throughout the entire NCs (Fig. 1i).
3.3 Heterostructure formation based on solution–solid–solid (SSS) growth
Solution–solid–solid synthesis (SSS) is closely related to the better-studied solution–liquid–solid synthesis (SLS) method. The latter has been explored to produce many types of one-dimensional semiconductor nanowires. Nanoparticles of low-melting metals such as indium catalyze the fragmentation of metal organic precursors and dissolve the semiconductor to be grown as a nanowire. When the concentration of the semiconductor exceeds its solubility limit in the metal, a uniform nanowire grows out of the metallic nanodroplet. SSS differs from SLS in using a superionic semiconductor (a semiconductor with highly mobile cations such as Cu2−xS or Ag2S) as the catalyst, which remain solid during the reaction. The mechanism of SSS is illustrated in Fig. 2a. The term SSS was coined in 2013 when a generalized theory for the use of superionic semiconductors to replace metal nanoparticles in SLS was reported.43 The common characteristic of molten metal nanodroplets and superionic semiconductor nanoparticles is their mobile cations at high temperature, which confers their ability to incorporate and transport foreign cations. In each case, when the solubility limit of the foreign ions is reached, a new phase nucleates and, most often, grows as a nanorod. A key difference between the two cases is that in SSS, the catalyst retains its crystal structure which leads to anisotropy of ion diffusivity that can influence the final structure formed.
 Fig. 2  Illustration of SSS growth. (a) Scheme of SSS for producing a uniform nanowire. (b) NHs based on copper sulphide nanorods produced via CE with different zinc precursors, followed by SSS growth of unidirectional ZnS nanowire. Zn(St)2 is zinc stearate. (c and e) HAADF TEM images of ZnS–Cu2−xS–ZnS NHs and of Cu2−xS–In2S3–ZnS. (d and f) Elemental mapping analysis for (c) and (e), respectively. (g) Summary of unidirectional growth. Panel (a) is reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. Panel (b) is reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. Panel (d–g) is reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
The influence of exchange mechanism on the final heterostructure orientation and complexity was revealed by Zhai et al. through their efforts to synthesize Cu2S–ZnS hetero-nanorods.38 Cation exchange renders symmetrically aligned domains in accordance with crystallographic symmetry of matrices. An asymmetric distribution can be induced if one crystal domain possesses fluid-like ion mobility. Zhai et al. performed CE using Zn2+ sources with different anions, which selectively reacted at either the tips or the central part of copper sulphide nanorod templates. Further reaction yielded uni-directional tapered rod–rod, body/tail (tadpole-like), or barbell-like structures, depending on the location at which the initial ZnS domain nucleated. The authors suggested that the ZnS domain grew by a SSS mechanism involving insertion of Zn2+ at the interface between ZnS and Cu2−xS. Using ZnS–Cu2−xS–ZnS as starting synthon, we demonstrated a complex NH configured as Cu2−xS–InsS3–ZnS as shown in Fig. 2c–g. This structure was one of multiple reaction products when In3+ was employed to exchange with copper ions in a “sandwich” NH in the presence of TOP.27 Considering the starting matrix of ZnS–Cu1.81S–ZnS and superionic property of Cu2−xS, both ZnS and In2S3 were produced uni-directionally, resulting in the classic body–tail structure due to SSS. We confirmed that In3+ entered via the Cu2−xS domain. After incorporation of 3+ cations, Zn2+ can more easily enter the matrix to form a solid solution. The immobilization of the ZnS domain might happen first as demonstrated in CE using the same synthon without TOP. As more In3+ ions entered the matrix and copper was extracted by TOP, the concentration of In3+ reached its solubility limit and In2S3 nucleated at the CuInS2–ZnS interface, resulting in the complex three-domain structure.
3.4 Role of copper sulphide in NH synthesis
Copper sulphide is well-known for its variety of crystal phases and tunable plasmonic properties. The diversity of crystal phases enables a wide range of stable or metastable stoichiometries and crystal structures, including Cu2S, Cu31S16 (Cu1.94S), Cu9S5 (Cu1.8S), Cu29S16 (Cu1.81S), Cu7S4 (Cu1.75S), and CuS.1,2,44 The key structure parameters of commonly used copper sulphide phases are provided in the Table 1. Each phase can be partially defined by the stoichiometric ratio between copper and sulphur. However, composition alone is not sufficient to specify the phase, as illustrated by the examples of low and high chalcocite (Fig. 3). At the other compositional extreme, covellite CuS has the lowest Cu to S ratio and disulphide bonds are formed to balance the coordination and occupancy of lattice sites at this low Cu to S ratio. Other intermediate crystal phases (Cu2−xS) have different unit cell symmetries and degrees of copper deficiency, but all share the same feature of high cation mobility, allowing them to be potential candidates for CE reaction starting materials.
 Fig. 3  Crystal structures of some representative copper sulphide phases. Each crystal phase is shown with its mineral name, composition, symmetry system, and space group. Blue and yellow spheres are copper and sulphur atoms, respectively. The black lines show the boundary of each unit cell. 
Although multiple methods have been developed to interconvert copper sulphide crystal phases,4 the process of phase evolution in Cu2−xS-NH synthesis is less studied. The phase of copper sulphide during NH synthesis is an important factor in directing the outcomes of NH preparation processes. Recent advances highlight two aspects of phase behaviour of copper-sulphide-NHs. One area of study is the phase change of copper sulphide itself during the formation of NHs.1 The other is how the initial phase of the copper sulphide template influences the structure and properties of the NHs.32
Ha et al. discovered that during Zn2+ treatment of roxbyite nanoparticles, the copper sulphide nanoparticle underwent a phase transition from roxbyite to djurleite and then back to roxbyite (Fig. 4a).4 Copper-rich phases such as djurleite are more thermodynamically stable, and this provides a driving force (chemical potential gradient) for diffusion of copper ions in the initial stage of the reaction to occupy the intrinsic interstitials as Zn2+ enters the template and displaces copper ions. As the CE continues, the interface between ZnS and copper sulphide domains grows larger. Accumulated strain at the interface ultimately drives reversion of the djurleite back to roxbyite as the latter is more nearly lattice-matched to ZnS. The preservation of the roxbyite phase in NHs with ZnS was robust even in the presence of a strong extracting ligand or oxidizing reagents employed to remove the sacrificial copper sulphide layer. This further corroborated the dominant control of interface strain and provided insight into preparation of copper sulphide NHs.36
 Fig. 4  TEM images and formation mechanisms of copper sulphide-based NHs produced by a phase-selective CE process. (a) Schematic illustration and TEM images of ZnS–Cu2−xS–ZnS NHs produced from roxbyite Cu1.81S. (b and c) Structural analysis of phase-selective transformation using different starting Cu2−xS templates (hcp or fcc sulphur atom packing). (d and e) TEM images of CuS–Ag2S plate-satellite NHs synthesized from hexagonal covellite CuS nanoplates. Panel (a) is reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Panel (b) is reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. Panel (c) is reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. Panels (d and e) are reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
The phase of copper sulphide can have great influence on the structure of heterodomains. One study that highlighted its importance was reported by Fenton et al.45 Digenite Cu2−xS exchange with Mn2+ and Co2+ yielded metastable zinc blende MnS and CoS, as opposed to the wurtzite phase of these compounds, when roxbyite was used as the template (Fig. 4b).35 MnS and CoS have many polymorphs. Direct synthesis by thermal or solvothermal methods yields rocksalt MnS and CoS in nickel arsenide-type structures. The zinc blende polymorphs are rarely seen. The controlling mechanism in this case is the retention of the anionic configuration of the template, as often observed in CE reactions. Roxbyite has S2− in a hexagonal packing arrangement while digenite has cubic packing of sulphur ions (Fig. 4c). Mn2+ and Co2+ replaced the Cu+ in the lattice while leaving the anion arrangement relatively intact. Anionic movement takes more energy as the anions are much less mobile than cations. Thus, the zinc blende MnS and CoS phases are kinetically more accessible than the thermodynamic product.
The coordination of sulphur atoms varies with the phase of copper sulphide. In Table 1, we list the coordination number of both copper and sulphur in each phase. In addition to relief of lattice strain and preservation of sulphur stacking, the inheritance of coordination numbers also plays an important role in formation of NHs. While the behaviour of 2+, 3+ and 4+ cation incorporation into Cu2−xS templates can be understood based on charge balance and cation coordination, the rules governing monovalent cation incorporation are less clear. Both formation of stable binary M–S and ternary Cu–M–S nanostructures containing M1+ have been observed in colloidal synthesis. For example, our group showed the outcome of the CE reaction is affected not only by the nominal oxidation states of the elements in the template but also by their coordination numbers in the template and product NCs (Fig. 4d and e).32 Specifically, Ag3CuS2 alloy NCs were produced when using Cu1.94S templates, preserving the 6-coordinated sulphur atoms of the template. In contrast, although the sulphur atoms in covellite CuS have mixed coordination, the 4-coordinated sulphur atoms, which participate in disulphide bonds, were all converted into 5-coordinated ones during the formation of CuS–Ag2S NHs. Thus, we note that the product NCs tend to retain the coordination of both cations and anions of the templates, providing useful guidance on the structure of CE products starting from a given phase.
4. Other promising nanoheterostructures based on copper sulphide
4.1 Metal–copper sulphide NHs
Interest in synthesizing metal-semiconductor heterostructures originates from enhancement of charge separation in these structures upon optical excitation. The metallic nanodomain usually serves as a conduit for electrons to reduce reactants or to transport electrons to an electrode, boosting catalytic or device efficiency. Another possible interaction between M and S domains is plasmonic coupling. The LSPR modes of the M and CuS domains can interact to yield new modes of plasmonic oscillation. Manipulating these resonances via careful design of NHs can produce new optical properties.
The large lattice mismatch between metal and copper chalcogenides poses a challenge to the success of NH fabrication. Precise control of precursor reactivity is necessary as individual copper sulphide nanoparticles can nucleate homogenously due to high affinity between copper and sulphur. In one case, the difficulty was overcome by successive cationic exchange. In that study, gold nanospheres or nanorods (Au NS/NR) were coated with a uniform Ag nanoshell, which was then sulphurized to amorphous Ag2S.7 TOP-assisted CE facilitated replacement of Ag+ by Cd2+ to form a CdS nanoshell, which went through another CE with Cu+ to produce Au@Cu2−xS structures. However, 2.3% cadmium was left as residue in the final NHs.
Cation exchange starting from a copper sulphide matrix to grow a metallic domain is another approach. However, this approach may produce a metal sulphide instead of a pure metal domain. Au–CuX (X = S, Se, or Te) nanostructures have more often been prepared by growing CuX onto gold, based on the high stability of gold nanoparticles in harsh chemical environments. When the starting material is copper sulphide, greater care is required, as the commonly used Au precursor is a soft acid with oxidizing capability and strong affinity towards chalcogens. These features can lead to unwanted etching or uncontrollable CE to produce Au2X. In a paper published by Manna and co-workers, covellite nanoplatelets were used as templates to synthesize Au–CuS heterostructures (Fig. 5a). Use of ascorbic acid and oleylamine had tremendous influence on the resulting domain shape and composition. When Au3+ was added with or without ascorbic acid, a uniform shell of gold was grown outside the copper sulphide template. Addition of oleylamine and Au3+, however, induced growth of an Au2S shell instead of gold, accompanied by attenuation of the central part of the covellite domain. Addition of oleylamine, ascorbic acid and Au3+ drove formation of a hetero-gold domain embedded into the covellite template.24
 Fig. 5  TEM images of different types of copper sulphide-based NHs. (a and b) TEM and HRTEM images of CuS@Au2S core@shell NHs. The scale bars are 20 nm and 5 nm respectively. (c–e) Elemental maps and TEM image of hollow Cu2−xS@Ru NHs. (f–i) TEM image and elemental maps of Cu2S toroids produced from TiS2 nanoplates. (j) HRTEM images of Cu2−xS–MoS2 NHs. (k) TEM image of nano-CuS(5.3 wt%)@Cu-1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate. Panels (a and b) are reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. Panels (c–e) are reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. Panels (f–i) are reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. Panel (j) is reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. Panel (k) is reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. 
Ruthenium domains were grown onto copper sulphide via oleylamine-mediated reduction (Fig. 5c and d). The growth of Ru was achieved through a two-step reaction. Cation exchange allows Ru3+ to enter the copper sulphide matrix, followed by reduction of Ru3+ and growth of cactus-like columns. During CE, a cavity was formed within the copper sulphide.46
4.2 Copper sulphide-transition metal disulphide structures
Transition metal disulphides (TMS) exhibit exceptional electronic structures that have been widely studied for energy, electronic- and bio-related applications. The properties of TMS depend upon their chemical composition, atomic arrangement, peripheral dangling bonds, number of 2D layers, and crystal orientation. A single slab of TMS contains a layer of metal ions in which each is coordinated with six chalcogen atoms. The crystal adopts either a 1T octahedral phase or 2H trigonal prismatic phase. In early research, CE was applied to TiS2 with CuCl2.41 An intermediate heterostructure consisted of Cu2−xS on the peripheral edges while the residual TiS2 moved toward the edge, leaving a cavity in the center (Fig. 5f–i). The double-convex toroidal Cu2S nanostructure after complete CE remained single-crystalline. The reaction was guided by ion diffusion through interlayer channels.
Synthesizing Cu2−xS–MoS2 NHs has also been of increasing interest. Growth of MoS2 was induced on Cu2−xS by hot injection of a mixture of Mo5+ and S2−.37 The copper sulphide matrix was etched, producing a square ring-like nanoframe (Fig. 5j). The authors reported that addition of sulphur was important in formation of the nanoframe structure. Without sulphur, the nanoparticle retained its initial shape and size. Considering the ring-heterostructure of TiS2–Cu2−xS, one can reasonably speculate that sulphur here could help promote CE. Mo in MoS2 has a valence of 4+, indicating a redox reaction has taken place. A possible reductant is Cu+, as XPS showed Cu2+ in the heterostructure. Cu7S4@MoS2 nanoframes have more active edge sites exposed compared to regular MoS2, which could be instrumental in elevating catalytic activity.
Thermolysis of MoSn−y in the presence of Cu+ is a convenient approach to synthesize Cu2−xS–MoS2 NHs. Maiti et al. prepared Cu2−xS–MoS2 structures by decomposing (NH4)2MoS4 in the presence of Cu+–oleylamine.47 This approach finally produced octahedral hetero-structured nanoparticles as Cu2−xS–MoS2. The LSPR of copper sulphide was maintained and was polarization dependent, indicating copper deficiency within the copper sulphide domain. The mechanism was deduced through structural analysis of the interface between Cu2−xS and MoS2. The intercalation of copper ions stabilizes 1T-MoS2 rather than 2H-MoS2. Stoichiometric Cu2S, on the other hand, stabilizes 2H-MoS2. This indicates the possibility of phase control of TMS via the influence of Cu2−xS.
4.3 Copper sulphide-metal organic framework NHs
Metal–organic frameworks (MOF) comprise a class of coordination polymers that has attracted extensive attention due to its potential applications in energy and biomedicine. Over just the past 5 years, thousands of reports on MOFs have been published, with increasing attention on construction of MOF-hetero-components to reach new property combinations and applications. The interest in synthesizing copper sulphide-MOF has been kindled by the need for increased electrical conductivity of the MOF, which can boost charge transfer in fuel cells.48
Copper-based MOFs have been widely used in applications where the strong interaction of sulphur and copper is involved, such as removal of sulphur compounds. Copper sulphide domains can be grown using a MOF as a sacrificial template and copper source. MOF (TCPP = [Cu3(BTC)2·(H2O)3], [BTC = 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate]) loaded with copper sulphide can be obtained by sulphidation with thiourea (Fig. 5k).48 Here, the MOF served as copper source and sacrificial template while thiourea was the source of sulphur. The growth dynamics of copper sulphide depended on reaction time, temperature and water coordination. The hydrolysis of thioacetamide provides sulphur for the growth of copper sulphide nanoparticles, while the MOF serves as a sacrificial template.49 Copper sulphide nanoparticles were distributed on the surface of the MOF. Formation of covellite nanoparticles on TCPP-MOF was realized by treating TCPP-MOF with thiourea. The nanoparticle evolution was monitored to obtain appropriate size and maintain the properties of TCPP-MOF.
5. Property-driven applications
5.1 Theranostic platform: plasmonic coupling and multimodality
Due to the high concentration of free holes associated with copper deficiency in the copper sulphide matrix, non-stoichiometric copper sulphide exhibits tunable LSPR within the NIR I and II windows, which is suitable for deep-tissue photo-theranostics. Optical energy absorbed via the LSPR can be transformed into heat that is dissipated into the immediate environment. This effect has been extensively explored for photoacoustic imaging and photothermal therapy.
NHs based on Cu2−xS have exhibited exotic plasmonic properties, especially when the heterodomain is another LSPR-active material, such as gold. The coupled LSPRs from Cu2−xS and gold produce broad-spectrum absorption and mutually tailorable LSPR. Plasmonic extinction (εext) is described by the sum of two energy dissipation pathways, absorption (εabs) and scattering (εscat)εext = εabs + εscatPhotothermal conversion efficiency (PCE) is a parameter describing the ability to convert light energy into heat, which is directly related to εabs. In one study, the enhancement effect was numerically studied by finite-difference time domain simulation (FDTD) as shown in Fig. 6a–e.9 Gold nanorods (AuNRs) with different transverse widths were used to create AuNR @Cu7S4 core–shell or dumbbell structures. The local field enhancement on the surface was maintained after coating, but FDTD indicated that the absorption part of AuNR@Cu7S4 extinction had increased. In the dumbbell structure, the absorption accounted for almost all of the extinction with minimal scattering.
 Fig. 6  (a–e) FTDT calculation of GNR-Cu7S4 LSPR. Extinction-, absorption-, and scattering coefficient of (a) AuNRs, (b) AuNR@Cu7S4 and (c) AuNR–Cu7S4 dumbbell structure. (d and e) Field enhancement mapping of (d) AuNR@Cu7S4 and (e) AuNR–Cu7S4 dumbbell structure. (f–j) AuNR@Cu7S4 and its application in elimination of cancer cells. (f) TEM and HRTEM (a1, a2, a3) of AuNR@Cu7S4. (g) UV-vis-NIR spectra of different NHs. (h) Comparison of photothermal effect between AuNR@Cu7S4 and mixtures of AuNRs and Cu7S4 at different ratios. (i) Stability of AuNR@Cu7S4 exposed to laser. (j) Tumor elimination efficiency using either 808 nm or 1064 nm laser. Panels (a–e) are reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018. Panels (f–j) are reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. 
The plasmonic coupling between Cu2−xS and metallic nanoparticles (NPs) has attracted great interest.24 Besides expanding the capability of LSPR tailoring, the strengthened LSPR of heterostructures produced a photothermal efficiency improvement of 30% under excitation at 808 nm and 18% at 1064 nm (Fig. 6f–j). Moreover, the integrity of AuNR after irradiation was maintained by the copper sulphide nanoshell. The PT-induced cell mortality was highest when applying AnNR@Cu2−xS to HeLa cells. Notably, both 808 nm and 1064 nm lasers were employed to eliminate cancer cells, implying that the heterostructure has expanded the extinction spectrum across the NIR I and NIR II windows, which allows for selection of convenient laser wavelengths for theranostics.7
Besides LSPR coupling, recent synthesis of Cu2−xS-based NHs is aimed at multimodal therapeutics, where a single NP agent incorporates multiple functionalities. These all-in-one nanoparticles can potentially reduce discomfort of patients, who would otherwise require treatment with multiple contrast agents for complementary diagnosis (X-ray, MRI, etc.) and treatment.
Fabricating high-Z metallic structures onto copper sulphide can make the NHs responsive towards X-rays. Multimodal imaging and therapy, including CT, MRI and PTT, has been demonstrated using polyethylene glycol (PEG)-protected Au–Cu7S5@polysuccinimide@19F (Fig. 7).8 With the help of a gold domain, a mouse injected with the NH showed a much clearer X-ray CT image of the tumor position. The abundance of water in tissues causes difficulty in differentiating tumor from the immediate environment by the method of 1H-MRI. 19F on the surface of NH provided information of high enough quality to depict the profile of the tumor, as the 19F has much lower abundance in soft tissues. All these imaging modalities paved the way for accurate PTT. In this comparison, the PTT-treated tumor increased in temperature from 31.5 °C to 51.5 °C within 10 min. After just one dose of laser irradiation at 808 nm, the tumor began to shrink in size and disappeared in two weeks.
 Fig. 7  (a–f) Cu7S4–Au@PSI-19F/PEG for multimodal imaging and cancer elimination. (a) HRTEM of Cu7S4–Au NHs and their chemical modification into Cu7S4–Au@PSI-19F/PEG. Comparison of imaging quality before and after injection of Cu7S4–Au@PSI-19F/PEG, (b) X-ray-CT, (c) photothermal imaging, (d) temperature rise of hotspot in (c), and (e) 19F-MRI and 1H-MRI imaging. (f) Tumor elimination with or without NC. All panels are reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
‘PT/PA+’ is a characteristic multimodal therapeutic platform based on Cu2−xS NHs. Cao et al. synthesized pegylated MnO2 nanosheet–CuS NHs and realized trimodal imaging, including photothermal, photoacoustic, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of tumors in vivo.10 Both MRI and NIR optical imaging have high penetration but provide complementary information. The NHs could also load siRNA via charge interaction and silence the heat shock protein 70 (Hsp 70) to compromise heat resistance of cancer cells. Compared with regular cancer cells, those with downregulated Hsp 70 show much higher mortality rate in PTT, demonstrating the synergistic effect exerted by bi-modal gene therapy and PTT. In addition to the photothermal effect, the NHs also serve as catalytic centres for producing 1O2 to accomplish photodynamic therapy. An in vivo study indicated that the NH was quite efficient in imaging and killing tumors, while maintaining high biocompatibility. Note that the NH also takes advantage of the acidic tumor microenvironment that reduces Mn4+ to Mn2+ in MnO2, which increases the T1-weighted MRI signal (Mn2+ has 2 more unpaired electrons in d-orbitals than Mn4+). This also ameliorates hypoxia in cancer cells by catalyzing decomposition of H2O2 into O2, providing a reactant for PDT. This NH employed multimodality, exploited the high loading capacity of nanosized materials, and took advantage of a feature of the cellular microenvironment to create a concerted therapeutic treatment.
5.2 Solar cells and photocatalysis
Combinations of properties from different domains can have synergistic effects in applications, such as staggered band alignment for increased charge carrier lifetime.50 Non-stoichiometric copper sulphide is intrinsically a p-type semiconductor, whose junction with an n-type semiconductor can produce an electric field that drives separation of photo-induced charges. In this part, we highlight some recent examples of copper sulphide-based NHs used in photocatalysis (PC) and solar cells (SC) by briefly introducing their structure and the role of each domain in the corresponding applications.

5.2.1 Solar cells. 
Efficient charge separation is crucial for enhancement of power conversion efficiency (PCE) of quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSC). PbS is among the best solar absorbing materials due to its wide vis-to-NIR absorption. Conventional QDSSC fabrication requires the thickness of PbS QDs to reach a certain level to fully absorb the incident light. This is accompanied by a higher possibility of charge recombination. In one report, djurleite Cu2−xS was grown on PbS QDs, taking advantage of the lattice similarity between the two domains. This combination produced stronger NIR absorption, as shown in Fig. 8a–d.33 The prolonged PL lifetime for PbS–Cu2−xS indicates efficient separation between holes and electrons under illumination. In this structure, the Cu2−xS domain serves as a mediator to transport holes from photo-activated PbS towards the electrode. The PbS–Cu2−xS based device produced a power conversion efficiency of up to 8.07%, compared with 2.36% from a PbS based device of the same thickness.
 Fig. 8  (a–d) PbS–CuS NHs for efficient charge separation in QDSSC. (a) Photoluminescence of PbS QD, PbS–CuS NHs (0.06:1, 0.5:1). Inset is a schematic illustration of charge transfer after photoexcitation of PbS–CuS NHs in a solar cell. (b) PL lifetime of PbS QD and of PbS–CuS NHs. (c) J–V curves of solar cells under simulated solar irradiation and dark conditions with a light absorbing layer of either PbS QD or PbS–CuS NHs. (e–g) Liquid solar cell with CdS–Cu2S acting as electrode. (e) Explanation of enhancement of hole mobility via changing the thickness of Cu2S shell. (f) J–V curve and (g) power conversion efficiency of liquid solar cell with electrodes of different composition. Panels (a–d) are reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. Panels (e–g) are reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
Tunable band-gap via size manipulation of quantum dots implies the possibility to harness the full solar spectrum using QDs of different sizes. However, successive layer deposition can compromise the charge transfer efficiency. It is thus important to expand the light absorption range and diminish ineffective contact between materials. Copper sulphide has strong absorption in the NIR and potentially serves as a broad-band absorber for SC. In one report, CdS@Cu2−xS nanorods were synthesized and a relationship was developed between the power conversion efficiency (PCE) and thickness of the Cu2−xS shell as shown in Fig. 8e–g.13 The J–V characteristic curves indicate that CdS with a thick Cu2S layer has the highest PCE, in comparison with thin shelled, Cu2S NRs and Brass/Cu2S. The p-type Cu2S and n-type CdS are believed to create a p–n junction at their interface. Prolonging the cationic exchange decreases the thickness of CdS but increases that of Cu2S, implying easier tunnelling of holes from Cu2S to CdS. This is further demonstrated by the simulated change of total density of states (TDOS) before and after shell thickening. Compared with that of the thin Cu2S shell, the TDOS of thick shells has distinct states crossing the Fermi level, arising from Cu-d and S-p hybridization and facilitating the tunnelling of holes toward the CdS core.


5.2.2 Catalysis. 
5.2.2.1 Balancing the composition. 
Construction of NHs for water splitting requires many considerations. One of them is the possible alteration of catalytic efficiency as a function of composition. A series of Cu1.94S–ZnxCdyS was synthesized with changeable composition as shown in Fig. 9.11 The p–n junction formed between p-type Cu1.94S and n-type ZnxCdyS produces a built-in electric field that facilitates charge separation after light absorption. Cu1.94S–Zn0.23Cd0.77S was found to provide the highest efficiency in hydrogen production among all compositions, reaching 7735 μmol h−1 g−1. This result stems from the balance between efficient charge separation and number of available charges from the ZnxCdyS domain, whose absorption coefficient decreases as Zn content increases. Applying platinum onto the NHs further enhanced hydrogen production by draining electrons and catalyzing the hydrogen evolution reaction. The fast electron transfer at the interface can be attributed to the acceptable lattice mismatch (<6%) and saturation of dangling bonds.
 Fig. 9  (a–c) Cu1.94S–Zn0.23Cd0.77S NHs for H2 evolution. (a) HRTEM of Cu1.94S–Zn0.23Cd0.77S. (b) Comparison of HER efficiency with NHs of different quantity of Zn in the NHs. (c) Band alignment between each domain and band gap modification after Zn insertion into CdS domain. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
To fully exploit solar energy, NHs with broad absorption across the solar spectrum are desired. Yuan et al. synthesized Janus-like heterostructures by replacing Cu+ from roxbyite with Mn2+.34 By controlling the reaction time, Cu7S4–MnS NHs were obtained with controlled Mn/Cu ratios. A Mn/Cu ratio of 3 gave the highest hydrogen production rate of 718 μmol g−1 h−1. Band structure analysis indicates that Cu7S4–γ-MnS exhibits Z-scheme band alignment, which lies perfectly within the redox potentials for hydrogen and oxygen evolution. Importantly, the NHs produced by CE are capable of absorbing the full spectrum from violet to NIR. Plasmon-exciton coupling was suggested as a reason for enhanced hydrogen production using pure Cu7S4, which can be extended into the NHs.
5.2.2.2 Plasmonic pumping. 
The NIR-SW (short-wavelength) IR LSPR characteristic of copper sulphide phases is of great interest for expanding solar absorption to longer wavelengths. Cui et al. demonstrated that Cu7S4–Pd NHs catalyze Suzuki coupling effectively under 800–1500 nm irradiation, as shown in Fig. 10a–d. Pd is a well-known catalyst for the coupling reaction, for which the rate-limiting step is the oxidative addition of aryl halide to Pd(0), which is favoured by the positive Pd surface. Here, the LSPR generates hot holes that are pumped into the Pd domain, overcoming the small Schottky barrier, and producing a positive charge on Pd.12
 Fig. 10  (a–d) Cu7S4–Pd NHs for catalyzing Suzuki coupling. TEM (a) and HRTEM (b) of Cu7S4–Pd. (c) Comparison of coupling efficiency under different conditions. (d) Band alignment before and after contact. (e and f) Cu7S4–CdS NHs for catalyzing H2 evolution. TEM (e) and HRTEM (f) of Cu7S4–CdS NHs. (g) Comparison of H2 evolution rate using different nanostructures. (h) HER efficiency as a function of excitation wavelength compared with LSPR absorbance of Cu7S4. (i) Transient absorption after NHs are excited. The time range of Δm O.D. is from 0.4–900 ps. Panels (a–d) are reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. Panels (e–i) are reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
LSPR-pumped charge transfer has also been demonstrated in the CuS(covellite)–CdS system. A kinetic study of hole decay for CuS–CdS NHs demonstrated plasmon-induced transit charge-transfer (PITCT) facilitated hole hopping to the valence band from CuS to CdS after light excitation.17 The transfer efficiency was as high as 19%. Given that holes and electrons are confined in CuS and CdS domains, respectively, the hole hopping and, thus co-existence of holes and electrons in the CdS domain may have deleterious effect on catalytic efficiency as a result of electron–hole recombination. However, the LSPR has been proven effective in pumping electrons and catalyzing hydrogen evolution (Fig. 10e–i). In one study, p-Cu7S5 (triclinic roxbyite)–n-CdS NHs were constructed and tested in hydrogen production. Under illumination >800 nm, the NHs exhibited higher production efficiency compared with single-domain nanostructures. The transient absorption of NHs confirmed the condition of state-filling in the CdS domain by transfer of hot electrons from the Cu7S5 domain when the LSPR was excited. The lifetime of hot electrons in CdS was estimated to be 273 μs, far longer than other similar systems. Note that the p–n junction at the interface facilitates the charge transfer while blocking immediate recombination.18 The charge density in covellite is higher than that in triclinic roxbyite, so that the plasmon resonance is stronger and higher in energy in covellite. This increases the possible excitation of holes into deep states of covellite, which can be transferred to CdS in a cascading manner. These reports demonstrate the need for improved understanding of band structure rearrangement and charge transfer kinetics of various copper sulphide phases when they are used for catalysis in the form of heterostructures.
5.2.2.3 Exposition of active sites. 
The active site associated with unsaturated sulphur on MoS2 is instrumental in catalysing the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).51 An optimal structure should present the highest efficiency with low electrode overpotential. Xu et al. found that copper sulphide with a single layer of MoS2 showed better catalytic activity for HER than a multilayer one, because the former had more active sites exposed.37 The number of active sites can be controlled by reaction of Mo and sulphur precursors in the presence of copper sulphide. Another reason for combining MoS2 and other heterostructures is to produce synergistic effects. Cui et al. reported a significant improvement in catalytic activity upon coating a single layer of MoS2 onto Cu1.75S–Au NH (Fig. 11).52 Like Xu et al., they found that a single layer coating of MoS2 gave the highest enhancement compared with multi-layer coatings due to more exposed active sites. The catalyst showed excellent stability even after 5000 cycles of photoelectrocatalysis. The interplay between components contributed to the overall catalytic enhancement. Integrating Au with Cu1.75S broadened LSPR peaks of both domains, which greatly expanded coverage of the solar spectrum. The coupling also accelerated electron–hole separation. The Schottky barrier formed at the junction then hampered electron–hole recombination. Under irradiation (650 nm laser or sunlight), these contributions can effectively reduce the electric power utilized to polarize the electrode and thus reduce the overpotential. The Au domain also serves as a conductor to cascade electrons towards MoS2, where the hydrogen reduction takes place.
 Fig. 11  (a–e) Au–Cu1.75S–MoS2 for H2 evolution. (a) HRTEM of Au–Cu1.75S–MoS2. (b) Photocurrent density under laser (650 nm 1 W cm−2) excitation with a cathode applied potential −163 mV. (c) Polarization curves and (d) corresponding Tafel plots. (e) Durability test for the NCs over 5000 cycles from +0.36 to −0.44 V versus RHE at 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. 
5.3.2.4 Increase of conductivity. 
The concentration of holes in the valence band of copper sulphides is dependent on their stoichiometry, with CuS (covellite) having the highest hole concentration among all the phases. This implies that composition and phase changes associated with the growth of heterostructures of copper sulphide may have an effect on the charge mobility. Cho et al. reported a tremendous increase of electrical conductivity after copper sulphide was grown on-and-inside Cu-BTC, a copper-based MOF. Careful control of these factors can ensure copper sulphide (covellite) formation while retaining the MOF structure. The heterostructure of CuS@Cu-BTC showed a composition-dependent increase of electrical conductivity, reaching 1.8 S cm−1 when copper sulphide comprised 58 wt% of the NH.48 In a photoelectrochemical test, covellite CuS decorated TCPP showed enhanced photocurrent compared with pristine TCPP.49 Carefully controlled sulphidation was crucial to maximize the photocurrent. This can be attributed to the efficient electron–hole separation caused by the staggered band alignment between CuS and TCPP, and the enhanced charge mobility conferred by CuS. However, prolonged sulphidation decreased the photocurrent due to the loss of MOF structure. This indicates a balance must be struck when sacrificing a MOF template for growth of copper sulphide.
5.3.2.5 Catalyst poisoning from cationic exchange. 
CE reactions may lead to cation leakage into the other domain, which can have great influence on the functionality of the NH. Ilan et al. studied the possible effect of copper diffusion into CdS on its photocatalytic efficiency.39 The n-type CdS and p-type CuS are supposed to create a p–n junction at the interface, resulting in enhanced charge separation under photon excitation. This is crucial to lengthen the exciton lifetime for reactive species to interact with photogenerated electrons and holes. The CuS/CdS nano-heterostructure was synthesized via CE on a CdS nanorod with copper ions in methanol. Despite the fact that the CuS domain grew out of the tips of the original CdS, analytical TEM revealed copper ion diffusion into the central CdS domain, inducing a substantial decrease in exciton lifetime. This reduced the photocatalytic activity, which was partially recovered by selective extraction of copper ions using TOP. This research led to deeper insights into nanoheterostructure construction and challenges that must be overcome before these novel nanomaterials reach industrial applications.

6. Summary and outlook
Research on synthesis of copper sulphide based NHs has dramatically expanded the range of achievable structures over the past several years. Copper sulphide, a non-stoichiometric semiconductor, has attracted attention due to its propensity to form NHs and to provide properties that have proven useful in various applications. For this tutorial review we summarized and analysed several recent reports that provide evidence and insights regarding production of copper sulphide-based NHs. Trends in NH synthesis increasingly focus on building up more complex structures with high uniformity and selectivity. Intensive research on NH formation based on copper sulphide nanostructures has been reported, and this tutorial review aims to summarize the most important recent advances in this field. We provided our understanding of synthetic trends in copper-sulphide-based NHs and list several key applications. Research using complex NHs that are less developed remains intriguing, with potential for stronger synergistic effects achieved by combining intrinsic properties of each domain.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This project was supported by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Grant (2019M653026), National Natural Science Foundation of China (31671491 & 81772002), and Basic Research Foundation of Shenzhen (JCYJ20170817102634964 & GJHZ20170313111237888). We also thank the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (No. 61425006), the Natural Science Foundation of China (61805135), and Pujiang Talents Program (18PJ1405100).
Notes and references
Y. Liu, M. Liu and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4783–4791 CrossRef CAS .
C. Coughlan, M. Ibanez, O. Dobrozhan, A. Singh, A. Cabot and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5865–6109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, J. Park, J. Lee, A. Oh, H. Baik and K. Lee, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7996–8005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3908–3920 RSC .
J. L. Fenton, B. C. Steimle and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6771–6775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, W. Chen, G. Bertoni, I. Kriegel, M. Xiong, N. Li, M. Prato, A. Riedinger, A. Sathya and L. Manna, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1716–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ji, M. Xu, W. Zhang, Z. Yang, L. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Gu, Y. Yu, W. Hao, P. An, L. Zheng, H. Zhu and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3094–3101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, R. Jiang, C. Guo, X. Bai, S. Xu and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5890–5894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Leng, X. Zhang, F. Xu, Y. Yuan, H. Pei, Z. Sun, L. Li and Z. Bao, Small, 2018, 14, 1703077 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cao, X. Meng, D. Wang, K. Zhang, W. Dai, H. Dong and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17732–17741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Zhao, X. Wang, Q. Peng, R. Lin, Y. Wang, R. Shen, X. Cao, L. Zhang, G. Zhou, J. Li, A. Xia and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4286–4289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, Y. Li, L. Liu, L. Chen, J. Xu, J. Ma, G. Fang, E. Zhu, H. Wu, L. Zhao, L. Wang and Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6295–6301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ghosh, A. Ghosh, M. Y. Ali and S. Bhattacharyya, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6071–6081 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Liu, D. Yin, L. Qiao, Z. Fu and M. T. Swihart, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7803–7811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. De Trizio and L. Manna, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10852–10887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhai, J. C. Flanagan and M. Shim, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6161–6167 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lian, M. Sakamoto, H. Matsunaga, J. J. M. Vequizo, A. Yamakata, M. Haruta, H. Kurata, W. Ota, T. Sato and T. Teranishi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2314 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lian, M. Sakamoto, J. J. M. Vequizo, C. S. K. Ranasinghe, A. Yamakata, T. Nagai, K. Kimoto, Y. Kobayashi, N. Tamai and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2446–2450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Lee, W. C. Law, D. Zhu, M. Liu, M. Jeon, J. Kim, P. N. Prasad, C. Kim and M. T. Swihart, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4333–4339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, S. Baek, P. Park, J. H. Park, D. Y. Hwang, S. K. Kwak and S. W. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3337–3344 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Fenton, B. C. Steimle and R. E. Schaak, Science, 2018, 360, 513–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Beberwyck, Y. Surendranath and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 19759–19770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Liu and M. T. Swihart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18598–18606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, W. Chen, Y. Xie, S. K. Verma, P. Destro, G. Zhan, X. Chen, X. Zhao, P. J. Schuck, I. Kriegel and L. Manna, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2781–2789 RSC .
Y. Liu, M. Liu, D. Yin, W. Wei, P. N. Prasad and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3555–3562 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Berends, W. van der Stam, J. P. Hofmann, E. Bladt, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Bals and C. de Mello Donega, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2400–2413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Yin and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1399–1407 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Ha, A. H. Caldwell, M. J. Ward, S. Honrao, K. Mathew, R. Hovden, M. K. Koker, D. A. Muller, R. G. Hennig and R. D. Robinson, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7090–7099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, G. Bertoni, A. Riedinger, A. Sathya, M. Prato, S. Marras, R. Tu, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7531–7537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, L. Yi, N. Zhao, A. Tang, M. Gao and Z. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13152–13161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tan, Y. H. Lee, S. Pedireddy, T. Baikie, X. Y. Ling and L. H. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6684–6692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Yin and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8089–8098 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Park, J. H. Heo, S. H. Im and S. W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 785–790 RSC .
Q. Yuan, D. Liu, N. Zhang, W. Ye, H. Ju, L. Shi, R. Long, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4206–4210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Powell, J. M. Hodges and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 471–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nelson, D. H. Ha and R. D. Robinson, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8530–8541 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Cui, C. Guo, Z. Zhao, R. Jiang, S. Xu, Z. Zhuang, Y. Huang, L. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6502–6505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhai and M. Shim, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 741–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jen-La Plante, A. Teitelboim, I. Pinkas, D. Oron and T. Mokari, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 590–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Fenton, J. M. Hodges and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6168–6177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jeong, J. H. Han, J. T. Jang, J. W. Seo, J. G. Kim and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14500–14503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mu, F. Wang, B. Sadtler, R. A. Loomis and W. E. Buhro, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7419–7428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, K. Chen, M. Gong, B. Xu and Q. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3996–4000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Liu and M. T. Swihart, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13435–13447 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Fenton and R. E. Schaak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6464–6467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yoon, J. Lee, B. Seo, B. Kim, H. Baik, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, Small, 2017, 13, 1700052 CrossRef PubMed .
P. S. Maiti, A. K. Ganai, R. Bar-Ziv, A. N. Enyashin, L. Houben and M. Bar Sadan, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4489–4492 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cho, S. H. Han and M. P. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15301–15305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lu, M. Zhao, J. Chen, B. Chen, C. Tan, X. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Yang, F. Cao, Y. Yu, J. Ping, Z. Zhang, X. J. Wu and H. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 4669–4674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, L. Yang, X. Wang, Z. Wu, J. Jiang and Y. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1801988 CrossRef PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, R. Jiang, W. Lu, S. Xu and L. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602235 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Maixian Liu
	Dr Maixian Liu was born in Tianjin, China. He earned his BS degree in chemistry from Nankai University, Tianjin, China in 2010. He then moved to Dr Paras Prasad's lab at the University at Buffalo, the State University of New York to earn a PhD degree in chemistry, working on synthesis of plasmonic nanomaterials. He then moved to Dr Juliane Nguyen's lab for postdoctoral studies on nanomaterials for cancer treatment, before joining Dr Gaixia Xu's lab in 2017 to study bio-toxic effects of applied nanoparticles. Dr Liu has been focusing on developing methods to synthesize copper sulfide-based nanomaterials with controlled morphology and composition.

Yang Liu
	Yang Liu earned his BS degree in Material Physics from Taiyuan University of Technology in 2013. He received his PhD in Chemical and Biological Engineering at the University at Buffalo (SUNY) under the guidance of Prof. Mark T. Swihart. He then joined in Prof. Xingchen Ye's group in the Department of Chemistry at Indiana University, Bloomington, where he is focusing on the synthesis and applications of colloidal nanocrystals and their integration into mesoscale assemblies.

Bobo Gu
	Bobo Gu earned his PhD degree in Optical Engineering from Zhejiang University in 2012. After postdoctoral training at the Nanyang Technological University, he joined Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2017, where he is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Biomedical Engineering. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of functional inorganic and organic nanomaterials and exploration of their applications in sensing, imaging and therapy.

Gaixia Xu
	Gaixia Xu earned her PhD in Biomedical Engineering in 2005 from Zhejiang University. From 2005 to 2007, she completed a postdoctoral fellowship in the Institute of Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. From 2007 to 2008, she completed a postdoctoral fellowship in the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics at the University at Buffalo, the State University of New York. She joined Shenzhen University in 2008 where she has been appointed full professor since 2013. Her current research interests include biomedical applications of multimode nanomaterials and novel optical imaging methods.

Xiaomei Wang
	Xiaomei Wang received her PhD in Radioactive Medicine from Jinlin University in 2002 and became full professor in the School of Medicine, Shenzhen University in 2006. She joined Dr Dennis Carson's lab in 2017 as a visiting professor at the University of California, San Diego, where she focused on the preparation of a multivalent vaccine for cancer therapy. Professor Wang's research mainly focuses on comprehensive cancer therapy and study of bio-toxic effects of functional nanoparticles. Her lab is actively developing multi-target vaccines for cancer elimination and studying their anti-tumor mechanisms.

Mark T. Swihart
	Mark T. Swihart is UB Distinguished Professor and Chair of Chemical and Biological Engineering at the University at Buffalo (SUNY). He earned his PhD in chemical engineering from the University of Minnesota. He is a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE). The focus of his research is the synthesis and characterization, and applications of nanomaterials using both colloidal and aerosol methods.

Key learning points
1. Cation exchange (CE) reactions have been established as a general and effective method to produce novel colloidal nanoheterostructures (NHs).
2. The formation of NHs via CE reactions strongly depends on the valence and diffusivity of incoming cations.
3. The outcomes of CE also depend upon the crystal phase, composition, and structure of the template NCs.
4. A diverse array of examples of copper sulphide-based NHs are introduced and their formation mechanisms are discussed.
5. Emerging applications of copper sulphide-based NHs are introduced to provide motivation for the design and manipulation of these novel nanostructures.


 		 


Copper sulphide	Covellite CuS	Hexagonal	HCP	3 and 4	4 and 5	
1, 6, 17, 24, 25, 27, 29, 32 and 33

Roxbyite Cu1.81S	Triclinic	HCP	2, 3 and 4	5 and 6	
3, 5, 8, 14, 18, 21, 28 and 34–37

Djurleite Cu1.94S	Monoclinic	HCP	2, 3 and 4	6	
11, 16, 20 and 23

Low chalcocite Cu2S	Monoclinic	HCP	2 and 3	4, 5 and 6	
1 and 38–41

High chalcocite Cu2S	Hexagonal	HCP	2, 3 and 4	


	

Monovalent	Binary MS	Ag2S, Au2S	Monoclinic/cubic	HCP/BCC	4/2	7/4	
24 and 40

Ternary MS	Ag3CuS2, AgCuS	Tetragonal/orthorhombic	FCC	2, 3 and 4	6/5	
32

Divalent binary MS	ZnS, MnS, HgS, CdS, CoS, PdS,	Hexagonal	HCP	4	4	
5, 11, 12, 14, 17, 18, 21, 26–29, 34, 36, 38 and 39

Trivalent ternary MS	CuInS2, CuGaS2, CuFeS2,	Hexagonal	HCP	4	4	
14, 16, 20, 23, 26, 27 and 42

Tetravalent ternary MS	Cu2SnS3, Cu3SnS4, Cu2GeS3	Tetragonal/monoclinic	FCC	4	4	
25 and 27

Quaternary MS	Cu2ZnSnS4, Cu0.4Zn0.2In0.4S	Tetragonal/hexagonal	FCC	4	4	
27 and 31


 	Fig. 1  Gallery of NHs produced by different CE processes. (a) (Au2S–Cu1.81S)@IrxSy and (b) (PdS–Cu1.81S)@IrxSy NHs produced from Cu1.81S@IrxSy NHs. (c) Cu2−xS/CuGaS2 and (d) Cu2−xS/CuInS2 NHs produced from Cu2−xS nanorods. (e) Cu2−xS/CuInS2 NHs produced from Cu2−xS nanoplates. (f) (ZnS–CoS–ZnS)–CdS NHs produced from (g) (ZnS–Cu1.8S–ZnS)–CdS NHs. (h) CdS–ZnS–(CdS–Cu1.8S)–ZnS NHs obtained from CdS–ZnS–Cu1.8S–ZnS nanorods. (i) Schematic illustration of the results of selective cation incorporation into Cu1.81S–ZnS NHs (nanospheres). Panels (a, b, h and i) are reproduced from ref. 3, 5 and 14 respectively, with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. Panels (c and d), are reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. Panel (e) is reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Panels (f and g), are reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of SSS growth. (a) Scheme of SSS for producing a uniform nanowire. (b) NHs based on copper sulphide nanorods produced via CE with different zinc precursors, followed by SSS growth of unidirectional ZnS nanowire. Zn(St)2 is zinc stearate. (c and e) HAADF TEM images of ZnS–Cu2−xS–ZnS NHs and of Cu2−xS–In2S3–ZnS. (d and f) Elemental mapping analysis for (c) and (e), respectively. (g) Summary of unidirectional growth. Panel (a) is reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. Panel (b) is reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. Panel (d–g) is reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  Crystal structures of some representative copper sulphide phases. Each crystal phase is shown with its mineral name, composition, symmetry system, and space group. Blue and yellow spheres are copper and sulphur atoms, respectively. The black lines show the boundary of each unit cell.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images and formation mechanisms of copper sulphide-based NHs produced by a phase-selective CE process. (a) Schematic illustration and TEM images of ZnS–Cu2−xS–ZnS NHs produced from roxbyite Cu1.81S. (b and c) Structural analysis of phase-selective transformation using different starting Cu2−xS templates (hcp or fcc sulphur atom packing). (d and e) TEM images of CuS–Ag2S plate-satellite NHs synthesized from hexagonal covellite CuS nanoplates. Panel (a) is reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Panel (b) is reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. Panel (c) is reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. Panels (d and e) are reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of different types of copper sulphide-based NHs. (a and b) TEM and HRTEM images of CuS@Au2S core@shell NHs. The scale bars are 20 nm and 5 nm respectively. (c–e) Elemental maps and TEM image of hollow Cu2−xS@Ru NHs. (f–i) TEM image and elemental maps of Cu2S toroids produced from TiS2 nanoplates. (j) HRTEM images of Cu2−xS–MoS2 NHs. (k) TEM image of nano-CuS(5.3 wt%)@Cu-1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate. Panels (a and b) are reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. Panels (c–e) are reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2017. Panels (f–i) are reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. Panel (j) is reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. Panel (k) is reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016.	 
εext = εabs + εscat

 	Fig. 6  (a–e) FTDT calculation of GNR-Cu7S4 LSPR. Extinction-, absorption-, and scattering coefficient of (a) AuNRs, (b) AuNR@Cu7S4 and (c) AuNR–Cu7S4 dumbbell structure. (d and e) Field enhancement mapping of (d) AuNR@Cu7S4 and (e) AuNR–Cu7S4 dumbbell structure. (f–j) AuNR@Cu7S4 and its application in elimination of cancer cells. (f) TEM and HRTEM (a1, a2, a3) of AuNR@Cu7S4. (g) UV-vis-NIR spectra of different NHs. (h) Comparison of photothermal effect between AuNR@Cu7S4 and mixtures of AuNRs and Cu7S4 at different ratios. (i) Stability of AuNR@Cu7S4 exposed to laser. (j) Tumor elimination efficiency using either 808 nm or 1064 nm laser. Panels (a–e) are reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2018. Panels (f–j) are reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–f) Cu7S4–Au@PSI-19F/PEG for multimodal imaging and cancer elimination. (a) HRTEM of Cu7S4–Au NHs and their chemical modification into Cu7S4–Au@PSI-19F/PEG. Comparison of imaging quality before and after injection of Cu7S4–Au@PSI-19F/PEG, (b) X-ray-CT, (c) photothermal imaging, (d) temperature rise of hotspot in (c), and (e) 19F-MRI and 1H-MRI imaging. (f) Tumor elimination with or without NC. All panels are reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a–d) PbS–CuS NHs for efficient charge separation in QDSSC. (a) Photoluminescence of PbS QD, PbS–CuS NHs (0.06:1, 0.5:1). Inset is a schematic illustration of charge transfer after photoexcitation of PbS–CuS NHs in a solar cell. (b) PL lifetime of PbS QD and of PbS–CuS NHs. (c) J–V curves of solar cells under simulated solar irradiation and dark conditions with a light absorbing layer of either PbS QD or PbS–CuS NHs. (e–g) Liquid solar cell with CdS–Cu2S acting as electrode. (e) Explanation of enhancement of hole mobility via changing the thickness of Cu2S shell. (f) J–V curve and (g) power conversion efficiency of liquid solar cell with electrodes of different composition. Panels (a–d) are reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. Panels (e–g) are reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–c) Cu1.94S–Zn0.23Cd0.77S NHs for H2 evolution. (a) HRTEM of Cu1.94S–Zn0.23Cd0.77S. (b) Comparison of HER efficiency with NHs of different quantity of Zn in the NHs. (c) Band alignment between each domain and band gap modification after Zn insertion into CdS domain. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a–d) Cu7S4–Pd NHs for catalyzing Suzuki coupling. TEM (a) and HRTEM (b) of Cu7S4–Pd. (c) Comparison of coupling efficiency under different conditions. (d) Band alignment before and after contact. (e and f) Cu7S4–CdS NHs for catalyzing H2 evolution. TEM (e) and HRTEM (f) of Cu7S4–CdS NHs. (g) Comparison of H2 evolution rate using different nanostructures. (h) HER efficiency as a function of excitation wavelength compared with LSPR absorbance of Cu7S4. (i) Transient absorption after NHs are excited. The time range of Δm O.D. is from 0.4–900 ps. Panels (a–d) are reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. Panels (e–i) are reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–e) Au–Cu1.75S–MoS2 for H2 evolution. (a) HRTEM of Au–Cu1.75S–MoS2. (b) Photocurrent density under laser (650 nm 1 W cm−2) excitation with a cathode applied potential −163 mV. (c) Polarization curves and (d) corresponding Tafel plots. (e) Durability test for the NCs over 5000 cycles from +0.36 to −0.44 V versus RHE at 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
