Synthesis, modification and application of titanium dioxide nanoparticles: a review  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR08349J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR08349J
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 6709-6734Synthesis, modification and application of titanium dioxide nanoparticles: a review

        
          
            Jinqi 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhiheng 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yao 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jixian 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xuezhong 
            Gong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wenli 
            Miao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Linliang 
            Ding
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xinbo 
            Li
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jianguo 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *
      Institute of Hybrid Materials, National Center of International Joint Research for Hybrid Materials Technology, National Base of International Science & Technology Cooperation on Hybrid Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Qingdao University, 308 Ningxia Road, Qingdao 266071, China. E-mail: jianguotangde@hotmail.com; wangwei040901@163.com
Received 
      20th December 2021
    , Accepted 27th March 2022First published on 30th March 2022AbstractTitanium dioxide (TiO2) has been heavily investigated owing to its low cost, benign nature and strong photocatalytic ability. Thus, TiO2 has broad applications including photocatalysts, Li-ion batteries, solar cells, medical research and so on. However, the performance of TiO2 is not satisfactory due to many factors such as the broad band gap (3.01 to 3.2 eV) and fast recombination of electron–hole pairs (10−12 to 10−11 s). Plenty of work has been undertaken to improve the properties, such as structural and dopant modifications, which broaden the applications of TiO2. This review mainly discusses the aspects of TiO2-modified nanoparticles including synthetic methods, modifications and applications.Jinqi WangJinqi Wang received his BS degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Shandong Architecture University in 2019. He is currently pursuing an MS degree at Qingdao University under the supervision of Dr Wei Wang. His research interests mainly focus on the modification of TiO2 photocatalysts.Wei WangWei Wang received her bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2008, then continued her study at Shandong University and obtained doctor's degree in 2014. During the PhD period, she was funded by the “National Construction of High-level University Public Postgraduate Project” and assigned to the Korea Institute of Materials Science for further study. Currently, she is an associate professor in College of Materials Science and Engineering in Qingdao University and engaged in scientific research. Her research mainly focuses on transparent conductive films, organic photovoltaic devices and photocatalysts.Jianguo TangProfessor Dr. Jianguo Tang, the Fellow of Royal Society of Chemistry. His research interest focuses on hybrid materials, to pioneer new hybrids of polymer hosts with wide foreign heterogeneous species for new photonic quantum properties and technologies. His three creations on the metal ion-induced polymeric nano-aggregates (MIPAs), the new concept of polymeric solid solution of heterogeneous species, and the in situ syntheses of heteroatomic clusters in polymeric template, have formed the basis hybrid materials strategy.
1. Introduction
The world has faced two major challenges recently: energy demands and environmental pollution. Numerous efforts have been devoted to addressing these issues, among which titanium dioxide (TiO2) is recognized as one of the most promising strategies.1–5 TiO2 was first used for water splitting and investigated by Fujishima and Honda in 1972,6 since when it has been broadly applied in many areas including photocatalysts, optoelectronic devices, solar cells and so on. Compared with other metal oxides, TiO2 has broad applications due to its low cost and high chemical stability.7–11 Among the various applications, TiO2 has been largely used in heterogeneous photocatalysis. The principle of the photocatalytic process of TiO2 (Fig. 1) can be briefly explained as follows: when the energy of the photons absorbed by TiO2 exceeds the band gap, the electrons in TiO2 will be excited and transferred from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB). As a result, the holes will be left in the VB after the migration of the electrons12 (eqn (1)). Therefore, the photoinduced e− and h+ are successfully separated and transfer to the surface of the TiO2 to launch the production of H2 and O2. TiO2 + hv → e− + h+(1) e− induced reduction: 2H+ + 2e− → H2 ΔE = 0 V(2) h+ induced oxidation: 2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H ΔE = 1.23 V(3) Overall: 2H2O → 2H2 + O2 ΔG = 237.2 kJ mol−1(4)
 Fig. 1  The water-splitting process of TiO2. 
Basically, the TiO2 photocatalytic process is a photon-driven reaction process including an electron-induced reduction reaction (eqn (2)) and a hole-induced oxidation reaction (eqn (3)) as two basic steps.13,14 The free energy is ΔG (237.2 kJ mol−1) (eqn (4)) and the criterion redox potential is ΔE (1.23 V) (eqn (3)) in the water-splitting reaction. Based on the thermodynamics aspect, the CB bottoms should be limited at a higher level than the reduction potential of H+ to H2, while the top of the VBs should exceed the oxidation potential of H2O to O2. It proved that the lowest band gap energy should be 1.23 eV to initiate the reactions for the semiconductors.
Guo et al.15 iconically classified photocatalytic reactions into two processes: “downhill” reactions and “uphill” reactions. In “downhill” reactions, the energy absorbed by the TiO2 is used to induce thermodynamically favored reactions (such as the degradation of organic compounds). In “uphill” reactions, the energy absorbed is converted into chemical energy. For instance, the water splitting process of TiO2 to produce hydrogen (H2) is a typical “uphill” reaction. Furthermore, the charge carriers generated by the photon excitation must migrate to the surface and transfer to the reactants to drive the reaction, which means the photocatalytic reactions can only occur on the surface of TiO2.16
However, the photocatalytic performance of TiO2 could be limited by the large band gap (3.01 to 3.2 eV) and the fast recombination of photoexcited electron–hole pairs,17 which limit it only to absorb UV light (<400 nm), comprising less than 5% of sunlight.18 Thus, various modifications including noble metal doped TiO2 (e.g., Pt, Au, Ag, and Rh), non-noble metal doped TiO2 (e.g., Fe, Cu and Ni), metal oxide doped TiO2 (e.g., NiO, CoOx, CuO and WO3) and dual cocatalysts (e.g., metal–metal oxide cocatalysts, metal–graphene cocatalysts) have been invented to broaden the large band gap and limit the recombination of TiO2.19–21 Kumaravel22 summarised the recent advances of metal and non-metal doped TiO2 used for the production of H2. Within the doped materials described by the author, Pt–TiO2 and F–TiO2 achieve their best efficiency at around 22.6% and 21.6% for the production of H2, respectively. Padmanabhan23 has discussed the mechanism, synthetic method and interfacial charge-transfer dynamics of the graphene-doped TiO2 photocatalyst. Furthermore, the applications in photocatalytic degradation, air purification, antibacterial and biocidal disinfection, water splitting and ion photoreduction of TiO2-coupled graphene materials are discussed in detail, which further proved the rationality of the combination of the two parts.
The surface morphology and energy level are also important factors which determine the performance of TiO2 NPs. Therefore, morphological modifications such as hollow, flower-like, nanotube and mesoporous structures are investigated to achieve the improved performance of TiO2 NPs.24,25 For example, Zhang et al.26 summarised the synthetic methods and applications of mesoporous TiO2. In this review, the mechanisms and key factors of the controllable synthesis and future challenges of mesoporous TiO2 are addressed in detail. Wang et al.27 discussed the synthesis methods (solid–liquid method and solid–gas method) and the crystallization of nanotube-structure TiO2. Furthermore, the drawbacks of a long crystallization time and low degree of crystallinity are also addressed to be the further research directions in this review.
Other than applications in photocatalysts, TiO2-based modified nanomaterials have been widely applied in several areas including semiconductors, biology and medical research, energy storage and so on, as well.25 Tomás-Gamasa et al.28 reported recent advances in TiO2 used in biological fields. In this review, photodynamic therapy is concluded to be a promising strategy which needs further investigation. The various TiO2-modified materials used for CO2 reduction systems were discussed by Shehzad29 in 2018. The mechanism of CO2 reduction was discussed in a theoretical aspect and the recent advances of different modifications and applications were mentioned in this article, as well.
As mentioned above, the recent published reviews mainly focus on one single aspect in undertaking the research and there is a need for a systematic summary. In this review, a comprehensive summary of various aspects of TiO2-based materials is mainly discussed, including synthesis methods, modifications and applications. For example, the main structural modifications of TiO2 are comprehensively summarized while other reviews mainly focus on one single structure. Furthermore, the analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the different aspects of TiO2 is described in multiple paragraphs in the article. Meanwhile, the potential fields and research directions are concluded in the final section of the review, which is beneficial to a detailed understanding for researchers.
2. Synthesis method
The common synthesis methods of nano-TiO2 and modified TiO2 products are the sol–gel method, precipitation method, hydrothermal method and so on. Table 1 shows the main information on representative examples of TiO2-based materials including synthesis method, size and applications.
Table 1 Synthesis methods, size and applications of reported TiO2-based composites




Materials
 
Synthesis methods
Size
Applications
Ref.




Morphologically and structurally modified TiO2 NPs
Hollow porous TiO2
Sol–gel method
Crystal size: 5.2 nm
Degradation of MB

40



Specific surface area: 297 nm


Mesoporous TiO2 single crystals
Sol–gel method
Pore size: 20 nm
Semiconductors

41



Bulky mesoporous TiO2
Sol–gel method
Crystal size: 6.1 nm
—

42



Specific surface area: 162 m2 g−1


Average pore diameter: 5.4 nm


TiO2 nanospindles
Sol–gel method
Length: 45 nm
—

43



Width: 15 nm


Hierarchical rutile TiO2 flowers
Hydrothermal method
Width: a few hundred nm
Dye-sensitized solar cells

44



Length: 3 microns


TiO2 nanoflowers
Hydrothermal method
Rod diameter: 20–50 nm
Dye-sensitized

45



Rod length: 200 nm
solar cells


TiO2 nanotubes
Other method
Diameter after one-step anodic oxidation: 50 nm
—

46



Diameter after two-step anodic oxidation: 100 nm


Black-colored TiO2 nanotubes
Other method
Inner diameter: 80 nm
Supercapacitor

47



Thickness: 10 nm


Tube length: 10 μm


Nobel metal and non-noble metal doped TiO2 NPs
Hierarchical Au@TiO2 nanoflowers
Hydrothermal method
Average diameter: 4.5 μm
H2 production

48



Ag@TiO2
Hydrothermal method
Average particle size: 37 nm
Disinfection of water

49



Fe3+@TiO2
Sol–gel method
Diameter: 25 nm
Tetracycline degradation

50



Fe3+@TiO2
Sol–gel method
Particle size: 200 nm–250 nm
Degradation of MO

33



Janus Au@TiO2
Hydrothermal method
Crystal size: 50 nm
H2 production

51



Nd@modified TiO2
Sol–gel method
Crystal size after calcination at 500 °C: 10 nm
Photoelectrochemical cell

52



Crystal size after calcination at 800 °C: 84 nm


Nd@mesoporous TiO2@SBA-15
Sol–gel method
—
Degradation of MO

53



Pt-Doped TiO2
Hydrothermal method
20–40 nm
Oxidation of vitamin B3

54



Pt-Doped mesoporous TiO2
Sol–gel method
Vary with doped Pt
H2 production

55



Metal oxide TiO2 NPs
TiO2@mesoporous TiO2
Hydrothermal method
TiO2 layer with a thickness of 3 nm
Electron transport layer

56



CuO@TiO2
Hydrothermal method
Changed with the proportion of Ti and CuO
Electrodes for determination of glucose

57



TiO2@NiO
Other method
TiO2@NiO: 250–300 nm
H2 production

58



Carbonaceous material doped TiO2 NPs
TiO2@graphene
Sol–gel method
Agglomeration around 10–20 nm
Degradation of MB

59



TiO2@carbon
Sol–gel method
1–5 nm
Lithium-ion battery anode

60



Mesocrystalline Ti3+-TiO2@g-C3N4
Hydrothermal method
Agglomeration around 400–600 nm
H2 production

61



Graphene/TiO2
Sol–gel method
20 nm ± 5 nm
Degradation of NOx

62



Dual cocatalyst doped TiO2 NPs
F-Nb co-doped TiO2 films
Sol–gel method
With different calcination temperatures: 17.33 nm −113.45 nm
—

34



Cu@TiO2@MWCNT
Sol–gel method
Agglomeration around 300–600 nm
H2 production

63



Mesoporous Fe3O4@Ag@TiO2
Hydrothermal method
50–400 nm
Degradation of MB and MO

64



Ni@TiO2@graphene
Hydrothermal method
Thickness: 0.4–0.7 nm
Field-effect transistors

65



SiO2/TiO2@C
Hydrothermal method
—
Lithium-ion battery anode

66



Air@C@TiO2
Sol–gel method
235–330 nm
Enhancement of colour stability

67





2.1 Sol–gel method
The sol–gel method generally uses titanium alkoxide as the source of titanium. In general, sol–gel processes involve the formation of particulate materials or glass-precursor gels from titanium alkoxides. Titanium alkoxide is mixed with an organic solvent, after which the mixed solution is transferred to an aqueous solution to generate TiO2 NPs. It has the advantages of high purity, controllable pore size, low synthesis temperature and simple experimental operation procedure.30,31 For example, Yahaya et al.32 prepared TiO2 NPs by the sol–gel method using titanium isopropoxide as a starting precursor. Two precipitation conditions – centrifuge and storage precipitation – were used in the experiment. C500 and C600 (Fig. 2b and c) refer to the samples with a centrifuge condition and a calcination temperature of 500 °C and 600 °C, respectively. S500 and S600 (Fig. 2e and f) refer to the samples with a storage condition and a calcination temperature of 500 °C and 600 °C, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2a–f, the synthesized TiO2 NPs from the two conditions showed significant morphology differences compared with the TiO2 NPs before calcination, and for both conditions showed a similar trend of increments in size with respect to higher calcination temperatures.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of TiO2 NPs synthesized by the sol–gel method (a) samples synthesized by centrifuging treatment, (b) C500, (c) C600, (d) samples stored at 25 °C (e) S500, and (f) S600. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Recently, the sol–gel method has been modified by scientists to obtain TiO2-modified materials. In general, the modified sol–gel method obtains the target product at the same time as the formation of TiO2. For example, Wang et al.33 fabricated Fe-doped TiO2 NPs by a modified sol–gel method using F-127 and polyvinyl pyrrolidone (K-30) as raw materials, respectively. The synthesis process of Fe-doped TiO2 NPs is illustrated in Fig. 3a. The author used tetra-butyl titanate as the source of titanium with K-30 and F-127 acting as additives to investigate the phase transformation (the phases are discussed in section 4). As a result, K-30 promotes the transformation of anatase to rutile at high calcination temperatures while F-127 provides an inhibitory effect on the conversion of anatase to the rutile phase. The Fe-doped TiO2 photocatalyst using F-127 and K-30 as additives exhibited a higher photocatalytic degradation of MO than the no-additive samples under irradiation with UV.
 Fig. 3  (a) Scheme of the synthesis process of TiO2 NPs; (b and c) SEM images of nano-TiO2 of packing at 400 rpm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 and 35. Copyright 2021, Elsevier; Copyright 2019, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 
Ren et al.34 used the sol–gel method to fabricate F–Nb co-doped TiO2 films (TFNO) with optimal optoelectronic properties. AcAcH, MeOH and butyl titanate were used by the authors to form a light-yellow titanium sol. Simultaneously, the titanium sol was mixed with the fabricated Nb solution and stirred for 2 h to produce a Ti–Nb composite sol. Finally, trifluoroacetic acid was added to the obtained Ti–Nb sol and the Ti–Nb–F composite sol to obtain the final products. Furthermore, the as-prepared sample shows a significant anatase phase and exhibits good crystallinity.
2.2 Precipitation method
The precipitation method is performed by dissolving a soluble salt in solution and the precipitant is added to set off the salt solution reaction. After that a solid is precipitated out of the solution to prepare TiO2 NPs. The titanium source generally refers to TiCl4 or Ti(SO4)2, while NaOH and ammonia are widely used for the precipitant. The precipitate is effectively treated and calcined at different temperatures to prepare different phases of TiO2 with a uniform dispersion. TiO2 NPs prepared by the precipitation method exhibit uniform dispersion and good morphology.35
For example, Wang et al.36 prepared TiO2 NPs by two different precipitation methods using titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) and titanium oxalate [Ti(C2O4)2] as raw materials. Ti(OH)4 named as a precursor was formed in both synthetic methods. The sample was then calcined for 2 h to remove H2O and finally the crystallized TiO2 NPs were obtained. In 2019, Zeng et al.35 prepared TiO2–Fe NPs by the direct precipitation method with an impinging stream-rotating packed bed (IS-RPB) as a reactor and used it for the degradation of gaseous toluene as a typical pollutant in air. The nano-TiO2 is spherical and granular and the particle size of the samples is 25 ± 5 nm from the SEM images (Fig. 3b and c). TiO2 NPs prepared by the authors exhibit uniform dispersion and good morphology.
2.3 Hydrothermal method
The hydrothermal method refers to the reaction under conditions of high temperature and pressure. Nanomaterials generated by hydrothermal methods usually present good crystallinity and purity of the sample.37 The reaction, nucleation and growth of the precursors are performed in a hydrothermal medium. The size and crystal form of TiO2 NPs can be controlled by changing the hydrothermal reaction conditions.38 For instance, Zou et al.39 designed a one-step hydrothermal method to fabricate a target flower-like TiO2 nanostructure prepared by changing the experimental conditions.
The authors changed the morphology of the products from spindle-like structures to flower-like structures with the increase of hydrothermal temperature, reaction time and the amount of the surfactant polyvinylpyrrolidone. The photocatalytic experiments indicate that the flower-like brookite TiO2 nanostructures show high photocatalytic activity in the degradation of methylene blue under UV light irradiation.
Hong and co-workers68 performed a comprehensive study on TiO2 nanorods grown on substrates prepared by the hydrothermal method. Fig. 4a and b are the FESEM images of the TiO2 nanorods and a bare F-doped SnO2 (FTO) substrate. Owing to the equal crystal structure and a slight lattice mismatch between SnO2 and TiO2, the SnO2 layer was used on the FTO, which can act as a seed layer for the growth of the TiO2 nanorods. As shown in Fig. 4b and c the as-prepared sample forms well-aligned rod shapes. The growth process of TiO2 nanorods is described in Fig. 4d. The authors believed that the growth of the TiO2 nanorods on the FTO substrate is mainly dependent on the crystallographic orientation and grain size of the SnO2. Furthermore, the phase of the sample was assigned to brookite TiO2 as the temperature was over 200 °C.
 Fig. 4  FESEM images of (a) cross-sectional view of a bare FTO substrate and top-view (inset), (b) early stage of the growth of TiO2 nanorods, (c) typical cross-sectional view of TiO2 nanorods on the FTO substrate, (d) the growth procedure of the TiO2 nanorods, (e) TEM image of the TiO2-Ag NPs, and (f) photocatalytic test of TiO2 samples prepared with varying R = 0, 0.5, 1, 2 and 3, and P25 (from left to right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 and 77. Copyright 2016, Springer Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons Ltd. 
As mentioned above, researchers generally obtain the target composites at the same time as the formation of TiO2 by the hydrothermal method. For instance, Najafi et al.69 successfully fabricated TiO2–graphene oxide (TiO2–GO) nanocomposites (NCMs) by a facile, one-step hydrothermal method. The nanowire morphologies were grown on the surface of the GO sheets. Functional groups on the GO provided reactive and anchoring sites for the nucleation and growth of TiO2 NPs. The as-fabricated TiO2 NWs with a diameter of 5 nm and 50–60 nm in length exhibited an ideal performance in the photodegradation test.
2.4 Other methods
There are also other novel methods to synthesize TiO2 NPs with different morphologies such as the anodic oxidation technique and electrochemical self-doping.
For example, Yu et al.46 fabricated TiO2 nanotubes by a two-step anodic oxidation on a Ti substrate. The anodization process was performed at room temperature in a 100 ml two-electrode system with Ti foil and a graphite sheet as the anode and cathode, respectively. In the first anodization, the TiO2 nanotubes were formed at the applied voltage of 60 V for 2 h and then the as-grown nanotube layer was ultrasonically removed. After that the Ti foil was further immersed in the new solution for the second-step anodization at 60 V for 30 min. Finally, the samples were calcined at 450 °C in an ambient atmosphere for 2 h. The nanotube structures fabricated by one-step anodization and two-step anodization both showed a regular nanotube structure with a significant difference in diameter.
Kim et al.47 designed a novel method using electrochemical self-doping and annealing under nitrogen to fabricate a black TiO2 nanotube array (NTA). The as-prepared TiO2 NTA was thermally treated at 200 °C under atmospheric conditions leading to a red TiO2 NTA (amorphous). Then, the red TiO2 NTA was electrochemically doped by electrochemical self-doping and annealed at 450 °C under nitrogen conditions to fabricate black TiO2 NTA. The black TiO2 NTA shows an anatase phase and good crystal structure by the sharp peak in the XRD result, which further confirmed the successful preparation of TiO2.
2.5 Summary
Among the synthesis methods of TiO2-modified materials mentioned above, the sol–gel process is referred to as the most commonly used method for the preparation of TiO2 and TiO2-based products. The outstanding advantage of this process is that the source of raw materials is easily obtained and the cost is low. However, the limitation of this method is that the degree of automation is poor and the process parameters of each process must be strictly controlled, otherwise it is difficult to obtain the target products with good dispersion. Future work can be addressed at improving the type of chelating agent, the ratio of the reactants and the acidity of the solution.
The hydrothermal method has the advantages of low cost, simple experimental procedure and convenience for large-scale production. The agglomeration and high cost are the two major problems of the hydrothermal method. Using a low-temperature liquid phase in the production is the most competitive process owing to the low cost of raw materials and avoidance of agglomeration. Furthermore, it is difficult to clean and collect TiO2-based materials fabricated by the hydrothermal process due to the small particles and large specific surface area. Particles penetrate easily from the filter medium during the washing process and cause loss of the sample. Using a ceramic nanofiltration membrane may be a good way to address this problem.
The procedure and equipment of the precipitation process are relatively simple and the synthesis and refinement can be completed together during the precipitation period, which is conducive to large-scale production. However, agglomeration occurs simultaneously along with the nucleation and growth process during the preparation of TiO2-based materials by the precipitation method. The particles have a tendency to grow and form agglomerates easily in every stage from the chemical precipitation of the liquid phase and the growth of crystal grains to the washing, drying, and calcination of the precipitate. To reduce the agglomeration during the precipitation process, the steric hindrance effect of adding organic macromolecules has proved to be effective. In addition, supercritical drying, freeze drying, heterogeneous azeotropic distillation and other technologies may be ideal procedures to address the powder agglomeration.
3. Modified TiO2 NPs
3.1 Dopant-modified TiO2
As discussed above, doping with other materials could improve the properties of TiO2 owing to the extended light absorption, enhanced reactant adsorption, and promoted charge-carrier separation efficiency granted by various dopants. According to the different modifications by the doping materials, TiO2-modified materials can be roughly divided into the following categories: noble metal and non-noble metal doped TiO2 NPs,70,71 metal oxide doped TiO2 NPs,72 carbonaceous material doped TiO2 NPs23,73 and dual cocatalyst doped TiO2 NPs.19

3.1.1 Noble metal and non-noble metal modified TiO2. 
More and more research reports have shown that the incorporation of metal ions improves the properties of TiO2. From the crystallography aspect, doping metal ions into the TiO2 lattice can achieve the effect of suppressing the recombination of electrons and holes and extending the life of carriers by introducing defect positions or changing the crystallinity, thereby improving the photocatalytic performance. Furthermore, metals are optimal conductors and participate in photoelectron transfers at the surface of TiO2 which enhance the charge separation and suppress the recombination due to the formation of Schottky barriers. The Schottky mechanism can be explained as follows: when a metal contacts a semiconductor, the electrons will transfer from the high-energy semiconductor to the metal, thus leaving a positive space. The positive space in the semiconductor and the electrons in the metal will form an electric field. The electric field of the metal suppresses the migration of electrons from the semiconductor to the metal, thus enhancing the photocatalytic activity. Furthermore, the noble metal loading onto TiO2 causes a red shift in the UV-vis spectra and is responsible for the enhanced activity at low-energy irradiation.
The different metal dopants can be roughly classified into two categories: noble metals (e.g., Pt, Au, Ag, Pd, and Rh) and non-noble metals (e.g., Fe, Cu and Ni). It has been proved by scientists that the introduction of metal ions enhances the photocatalytic performance of TiO2 NPs.74–76 Pt is employed as the most common cocatalyst to accelerate the charge separation and obtain active sites, thus achieving an improved performance of TiO2. Ag, Cu, and Au play a similar role to Pt as the cocatalyst, but these three metals possess unique properties: the surface plasmon resonance effect (SPR). The surface plasmons on the surface of these metals will generate hot electrons under visible light, which accelerate the redox reactions of the photocatalysts. Furthermore, the frequency of this mechanism can be controlled by the morphology, size and nature of the different metal NPs.22 In 2021, Xiang et al.77 designed Ag–TiO2 hollow spheres through a microwave-hydrothermal method. AgNO3 was selected as the source of the Ag ion and after a hydrothermal process under microwaves, a white precipitate was obtained. As shown in Fig. 4e, the desired structure was successfully obtained. The outer surface of the hollow spheres shows that the samples are composed of plenty of nanocrystal particles about 10–15 nm in size. Furthermore, the sample synthesized by the authors was assigned to the anatase phase. Fig. 4f is the comparison of the photocatalytic activities of the commercial P25 product and the samples prepared at different ratios of Ag and Ti. P25 refers to a commercial TiO2 white powder with a particle size around 25 nm, which is mainly used for the comparison of the performance of different samples. It can be easily observed that the four samples with different amounts of Ag exhibit a better performance compared with P25 and the sample prepared at R = 2 shows the best photocatalytic properties. The enhancement of the photocatalytic properties can be attributed to the SPR effect explained above.
Pt is one of the most commonly doped metal ions recently owing to the Schottky barrier effect. For instance, Guayaquil-Sosa55 combined dopants with structural modification by the fabrication of mesoporous TiO2–Pt composites. Despite the factors discussed above, the enhanced efficiency of the sample can be attributed to the narrowing band gap. The author performed large amounts of calculations and confirmed the band gap of TiO2 was narrowed to 2.34 eV–2.99 eV, varying with the amount of Pt. Furthermore, the samples doped with different amounts of Pt possessed the same characteristic anatase peaks, which confirmed that the presence of Pt has no effect on the phase of TiO2. A new application of Pt–TiO2 was investigated by Yurdakal54 to use for the synthesis of vitamin B3 by photocatalytic oxidation. The experiments confirmed that the Pt–TiO2 obtained nearly 92% selectivity of vitamin B3.
Au ions, as one of the most popular noble metals, can be combined with TiO2 NPs. For example, Zhang et al.78 fabricated Au@TiO2 NPs to be a novel pH-controlled tri-stable photocatalyst by a dynamic self-assembly method. Other than the optimal performance obtained, a original point is that the author used the pH value to control the covalent combination, which leads to different combinations of Au and TiO2 NPs. When the pH value was up to 11, the ammonium groups on the TiO2 NPs were deprotonated, which led to the efficient formation of a covalent combination and simultaneous hetero-self-assembly of Au NPs and TiO2 NPs which reached a “highly active” state. In neutral conditions (pH = 7), the photocatalytic activity shows an “active” state that can be attributed to well-dispersed TiO2 NPs. Under acidic conditions (pH = 4), the self-aggregation of TiO2 NPs leads to a decrease of the accessible surface area and thus a transformation to the “inactive” state.
Pd combined with TiO2 has recently been investigated by researchers.75,79,80 For example, a new application of metal-doped TiO2 for producing CH4 from CO2 was achieved by Yui's group.81 The author deposited Pd on TiO2 as a photocatalyst and confirmed that the Pd–TiO2 worked more efficiently than pure TiO2. CO was observed as a major product along with a small amount of CH4 when TiO2 was used. In the case of Pd–TiO2 as the photocatalyst, the result was exactly the opposite and a large amount of CH4 was formed, which confirms that Pd–TiO2 works more efficiently than pure TiO2. The drawback of this system is that the photocatalytic behavior of Pd@TiO2 will be deactivated by the PdO which is formed by the partial oxidization of Pd on TiO2 with CH4 formation.
In 2019, Chen et al.82 designed an innovative semi-artificial photosynthetic CO2 reduction system by creating a photosynthesis biohybrid. Halobacterium purple membrane-derived vesicles were used as a starting point and further fused with Pd-deposited hollow TiO2 NPs to fabricate the final products. Pd–Hollow anatase TiO2 was chosen as the abiotic part because of the unique band structure of TiO2 and the unfavorable energetics on Pd for H2 evolution, which typically competes with CO2 reduction. Compared with the above work, the author achieved higher efficiency, with the production of CH4 reaching 451.3 μmol g−1 and the selectivity toward CH4 nearly reaching ∼95.2%. The superior performance could be attributed to the semi-artificial photosynthetic systems providing a rich electron and proton environment which could readily reduce CO2. This work develops an efficient system by combining the abiotic and biological parts, which provides a novel model for solar energy conversion.
Modification of TiO2 NPs by Fe ions (a non-noble metal) has been widely investigated by scientists and can be applied for oxidizing various poisonous gases including nitrogen, and nitrogen oxides emitted by coal-fired power plants.83 Despite the factors discussed above, TiO2 doped with Fe3+ achieved new properties: Fe3+ can be photoreduced to Fe2+, providing a pathway which enhances the selectivity of the reaction for N2 formation. Wu et al.84 proposed a new efficient strategy by doping Fe ions on TiO2 to oxidize nitric oxide (NO) to N2 and O2 and achieved an optimal performance. The mechanism of photocatalytic pathways was also classified by He et al.50 in 2019.


3.1.2 Metal oxide modified TiO2. 
To achieve improved properties of TiO2, considerable efforts have been devoted to combining various metal oxides with TiO2. Most of the metal oxides (e.g., NiO, CoOx, MnOx, IrOx, CuOx, and RuO2) could be classified as semiconductors. Doping TiO2 with other semiconductors will produce heterojunction effects, which generally form at the surface of the two different types of semiconductor. The heterojunction provides additional electric fields which accelerate the migration of the electrons and holes, thus improving the performance of the TiO2 NPs. p–n heterojunctions are the most common one, produced by combining a p-type semiconductor with an n-type semiconductor. The electrons on the n-type semiconductor near the p–n interface tend to migrate into the p-type semiconductor, producing a positively charged species before light irradiation. In contrast, the holes on the p-type semiconductor near the p–n interface tend to diffuse into the n-type semiconductor, leaving a negatively charged species. Basically, the region close to the p–n interface will be charged. While irradiating with light, the separation of the electron–hole pairs will be accelerated under the influence of the charged space. Furthermore, the modification of the surface morphology by metal oxides is another factor which affects the performance of TiO2 NPs.
In 2020, Tobaldi et al.57 doped TiO2 NPs with CuO (a p-type semiconductor) and confirmed that the samples prepared are effective in promoting glucose oxidation reactions in alkaline media operating under irradiation. Besides the p–n heterojunction effect, the enhanced electrochemical features can be partly attributed to the larger specific surface area of CuO@TiO2 NPs available for the glucose electro-oxidation, which have a smaller size than either pure CuO or TiO2. Furthermore, the author performed XRPD to investigate the phase of the sample. The result shows that the titania specimen is composed of anatase (83.3 wt%), rutile (6.9 wt%) and brookite (9.8 wt%) TiO2 polymorphs.
Recently, high-efficiency photocatalytic H2-production NiO/TiO2 NCMs were designed by Yu's group58 using an electrospinning and calcination method. The author's work is the first report of the enhanced H2-production photoactivity of NiO/TiO2 nanofibers from water splitting. The optimal NiO loading was confirmed by the author to be 0.25 wt% with a H2-production rate of 337 μmol h−1g−1. Other than the heterojunction effect, the improved properties can be attributed to the formation of Ni clusters. The photogenerated electrons can effectively reduce Ni2+ to Ni0 atoms and eventually form Ni clusters. The formed metal Ni clusters could act as an effective co-catalyst to accelerate hydrogen production and reduce the overpotential of hydrogen production. To achieve improved properties of TiO2, Yu's group designed an in situ assembled WO3–TiO2 vertical heterojunction for use in photocatalytic applications in 2021.85 TiO2 nanosheets used in the preparation were synthesized using hydrofluoric acid as the shape-control agent. The morphology of the as-prepared WO3–TiO2 NCMs is shown in Fig. 5. As shown in Fig. 5a, WO3 was successfully formed and doped on the surface of TiO2. The well-defined interface between TiO2 and WO3 (Fig. 5b) proves the construction of a face-to-face contact. The TEM and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) characterization of the WO3–TiO2 (Fig. 5c and d) further confirmed the sheet-like morphology of the components and their intimate contact. After that the optimal photocatalytic efficiency of the WO3–TiO2 heterojunctions was evaluated and further confirmed the rationality of the combination of these two materials. The mechanism of the composites was explained in the above section on the heterojunction part.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) SEM images of the WO3–TiO2 heterojunction with backscattered electrons. (c) TEM and (d) HRTEM images of the WO3–TiO2 vertical heterojunction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.3 Carbonaceous material modified TiO2. 
Carbon (C) materials possess a unique property of lower charge transfer resistance, and thus can be combined with TiO2.73,86 The introduction of carbon improves the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 by changing the red-shift of the absorption spectrum of TiO2 and expanding its band gap. For example, Zhang et al.87 fabricated a TiO2@C core–shell structure composed of a TiO2 core and a carbon shell by the novel reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization method. The as-prepared TiO2@C obtained improved properties measured by the degradation of organic pollutants.
Graphene, a 2D single layer sheet of graphite, has been investigated by researchers owing to the large specific surface area (2600 m2 g−1 in theory), zero band gap and concentration of charge carriers.88,89 Thus, TiO2 doped with graphene is another promising strategy to improve the drawbacks of both TiO2 and graphene. The chemistry reactions taking place in TiO2/graphene composites have been clarified by scientists.90,91 When TiO2 is modified by graphene, the photogenerated electrons on the CB of TiO2 tend to transfer to graphene, which leads to hole–electron separation. In a word, graphene sheets act as an electron acceptor facilitating the transfer and separation of the photogenerated electrons of TiO2, thus reducing electron–hole recombination. This theory was confirmed by Wang et al.92 in 2014 by electron paramagnetic resonance studies. Under illumination, the Pt/TiO2–rGO synthesized by the authors showed a decrease in signal corresponding to delocalized electrons in the rGO, which was accompanied by the appearance of signals corresponding to the localized electrons in TiO2. The data demonstrate that rGO upon excitation with visible light tends to inject electrons into TiO2. Upon turning off the light, the EPR signals of the TiO2 lattice-trapped electrons were preserved, which indicates that the photogenerated charges are well separated and thus result in the suppressed recombination.
In 2018, Ton and co-workers59 designed a novel method using the chemical exfoliation of graphite in titanium tetra-n-butoxide with the aid of ultrasonication. Then the sol–gel reaction was executed in the presence of dispersed graphene sheets to obtain the defectless TiO2/graphene NCMs. The broad diffraction peaks in the XRD patterns were observed at 27.8°,47.1°, and 62.5°, corresponding to the formation of the anatase TiO2 form. Giampiccolo62 fabricated TiO2/graphene hybrids synthesized through a sol–gel route for use in the degradation of NOx. Two samples, namely GTiO2S and GTiO2M, were prepared and evaluated. TiO2/graphene hybrids formed by the addition of graphene to the reaction vessel prior to initiating the sol–gel reaction followed by annealing are referred to as GTiO2S. The sample prepared by using an alternative manufacturing method involving the addition of graphene to TiO2 NPs which had already been annealed is referred to as GTiO2M. These two samples both exhibited optimal capability for both the sensing and abatement of NOx and could be employed to offer a safer environment through providing a warning of the presence of NOx. GTiO2S is proved to be more active than GTiO2M, while the two graphene-modified TiO2 samples are both proved to be more active than the unmodified samples.


3.1.4 Dual cocatalyst modified TiO2. 
Recently, TiO2 modified by dual cocatalysts has been widely investigated by scientists owing to the enhanced reactant adsorption, extended light absorption and improved charge carrier separation efficiency which can be attributed to different cocatalysts. Plenty of composites were invented to improve the performance by injecting the cocatalysts into the lattice of TiO2 or providing a transition platform of photoexcited electrons. According to various components, dual cocatalysts doped on TiO2 photocatalysts can be roughly categorized into metal–metal oxide/sulfide cocatalysts, metal–carbon cocatalysts and metal oxide/sulfide–graphene cocatalysts etc.19 For example, Javier Fernández-Catalá et al.63 doped multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) on a TiO2 support containing Cu ions to obtain Cu/TiO2–MWCNT photocatalysts. Cu-Coatings on TiO2 obtaining a better performance of TiO2 have been reported by researchers.93 Furthermore, Cu/TiO2–MWCNT composites with various Cu contents were prepared to assess the photocatalytic performance. The best activity was displayed by Cu1%/TiO2–MWCNT observed under both irradiation conditions and dark conditions, which confirms that the photocatalytic properties of TiO2 are improved through modification by dual cocatalysts.
Furthermore, a MoS2 and graphene modified TiO2 cocatalyst was synthesized by Yu's group for use in photocatalytic H2 production.94 The authors used the two-step simple hydrothermal process with growth in the presence of a layered MoS2/graphene hybrid. As shown in the TEM image, the layered MoS2/graphene serves as a novel support with the uniform distribution of TiO2 NPs on the surface (Fig. 7a). The TiO2/MoS2/graphene composite reaches a high H2 production rate of 165.3 μmol h−1. In this system, the photoexcited electrons are transferred from the CB of TiO2 not only to the MoS2 nanosheets but also to the C atoms in the graphene sheets, which can effectively reduce H+ to produce H2.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of self-assembled {001} TiO2 (b and c) TEM and HRTEM images of TiO2 NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98 and 99, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM images of TiO2/MoS2/graphene composites, (b) TEM micrograph of the Fe@Ag@TiO2 composites, (c) hollow TiO2, (d) Cu ion-exchanged hollow TiO2, TEM images of (e) HTS-0.1, (f) HTS-0.2, (g) HTS-0.3, and (h) HTS-0.35 after calcination under a N2 atmosphere, (i) the formation of hollow porous TiO2 nanospheres via encapsulation of CO2 nanobubbles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, 64, 94, 102 and 103. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry; Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2021, Korean Society of Industrial Engineering Chemistry; Copyright 2021, Elsevier; Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Dual cocatalyst modification was also investigated by Tseng et al.64 by preparing hierarchical Fe3O4@Ag@TiO2 NCMs to impart simultaneous photodegradation functions. A core/shell structure with silver (Ag) particles is applied and the introduction of Ag can form positively charged silver ions in water, adsorbing bacteria on it to obtain sterilization properties. Fe ions doped into the lattice of TiO2 can induce red-shift of the absorption edge into the visible light range to improve the performance.49 The final Fe3O4@Ag@TiO2 NCMs were of double-shelled structure with the TiO2 forming the outmost layer around the Fe3O4@Ag cores (Fig. 7b). Furthermore, the as-prepared Fe3O4@Ag@TiO2 was assigned to the anatase TiO2 structure. Besides, the sample presented superior photocatalytic degradation properties under UV irradiation, which confirms that TiO2 modified by metal–metal oxide cocatalysts exhibits superior performance.

3.2 Structural modification

3.2.1 Phase and crystal facets. 
Due to the difference of the lattice structure depending on the type of TiO62− octahedral unit sharing of edges and corners, TiO2 can be basically classified into four phases: anatase, rutile, brookite and TiO2(B). Both the crystal structures can be represented by interconnected TiO2 octahedra. The octahedral units in anatase, rutile and brookite share four, two and three edges, respectively. Furthermore, TiO2(B) exhibits four octahedral shared edges, which produces a hollandite-like phase with a layered structure.
The difference between anatase and rutile lies in the degree of distortion of the octahedra and the different connection methods of the octahedra: the rutile octahedra which belong to the orthorhombic system are slightly irregular while the anatase phase has obvious orthorhombic distortions.95 The band gap of anatase (3.2 eV) is slightly higher than that of rutile (3.0 eV) while the stability of anatase is worse than that of the rutile phase. The difference between these two phases can be responsible for the different photocatalytic and optoelectronic properties. In general, the anatase phase possesses higher activity than the rutile phase, which can be explained as follows:
(1) The higher band gap of the anatase phase gives the electron–hole pairs a more positive or negative potential, which means a higher oxidation ability.
(2) The higher photocatalytic activity can be attributed to the strong adsorption capacity of the anatase surface in H2O, O2, and OH−. The stronger adsorption capacity is beneficial for the activity.
(3) The anatase grains generally show a smaller size and a larger specific surface area during the crystallization process, which is beneficial for the photocatalytic reaction.
Compared with the phases mentioned above, brookite is rarely discussed because of the unstable properties and complicated synthesis method. Furthermore, TiO2(B) is the most unstable phase and tends to transform into rutile at high temperatures. Researchers have proved that mixed crystals composed of anatase and rutile in an appropriate ratio are generally more active than single crystals. The higher activity can be attributed to the thin rutile layer formed on the surface of the anatase phase during the crystallization process, which effectively improves the electron–hole separation efficiency.96 Furthermore, most of the TiO2-modified materials discussed in this review are mainly anatase phases.
As discussed in the above sections, catalytic reaction processes generally occur on the surface of catalysts. Thus, the arrangement of surface atoms is the other factor determining the adsorption and activation of the reaction. Therefore, the catalytic performance can be greatly adjusted by changing the selectively exposed active crystal facets. For anatase TiO2, the surface energy of the {001} crystal facets (0.90 J m−2) is much higher than that of the crystal facets {101} (0.44 J m−2) and {100} (0.53 J m−2). Plenty of studies have shown that the {001} plane has particularly high reactivity.97,98 However, the principle of minimum surface energy must be followed during the growth of NPs. In other words, crystal facets with high specific surface energy and high activity disappear quickly during the crystal growth process.
Researchers have widely investigated the properties of different crystal facets for different applications, basically following the order {001} (0.90 J m−2) > {100} (0.53 J m−2) > {101} (0.44 J m−2). For example, novel self-assembled {001} TiO2 was successfully fabricated by Yan's group and its performance in Sb removal was examined.98 The mechanism of the Sb removal can be attributed to the interactions binding the molecule onto the surface and the electrons are generally transferred from bonding orbitals in one component to antibonding orbitals in the other. Thus, a new bond is formed between the adsorbed molecule and the surface, inducing a stabilization effect (Fig. 6a). An SEM image (Fig. 6a) demonstrates that the sample prepared by the self-assembly of 5 nm thick nanosheets exposed nearly 100% {001} facets, which is an important factor related to the optimal performance as well.
Recently, TiO2 NPs with exposed {001} facets were successfully fabricated by Yu et al. using a simple HF-mediated hydrothermal method.99 TEM images confirm that the prepared samples consist of well-defined sheet-shaped structures with an average size of 70–80 nm and a thickness of 8 nm (Fig. 6b). The HRTEM image (Fig. 6c) further confirms the (001) planes of anatase TiO2 by the examination of the lattice spacing parallel to the top and bottom facets. Meanwhile, the as-prepared particles exhibit the optimal performance for solar cell anode applications. These investigations have widened the applications of TiO2 to the crystallography field.


3.2.2 Typical morphologies. 
Other than the factors discussed above, the optical and photocatalytic properties of TiO2 are often determined by factors of the macroscopic morphology and structure. Recently, plenty of modifications have focused on the morphology, and different structures of TiO2 have been invented such as hollow structures, mesoporous structures, core–shell structures, nanoflower structures and nanotube structures, etc. The TiO2 improved by structural modifications generally exhibits the properties of a high specific surface area, low density and optimal electron transfer efficiency. Several main structural modifications of TiO2 are described below.
3.2.2.1 Hollow structure. 
Due to the unique properties such as high specific surface area, high damping capacity and low thermal conductivity, the hollow TiO2 structure has great potential in many fields such as catalysts and optoelectronic devices.100 Moreover, its unique shape plays an important role in efficient solar energy transition owing to the large surface area and the enhanced light-harvesting capacity owing to the large cavity.101 The most commonly used synthetic method for the hollow structure is the template method. The template method refers to the preparation of the core–shell structure with TiO2 grown on a template such as SiO2 and Ps. After the growing procedure, the platform is removed by a chemical process or a calcination process and the hollow structure will be successfully formed.
For example, Lee et al.102 designed a Cu-doped TiO2 hollow nanostructure to obtain enhanced photocatalytic properties. The nanostructure was synthesized by a sol–gel process to coat TiO2 on the surface of SiO2, which serves as the sacrificial core. After that Cu2+ ion exchange and calcination followed by an acid etching process was performed to obtain the final products. An aqueous NaOH solution was used to remove the SiO2 core and then the hollow TiO2 nanostructure was produced (Fig. 7c). In this work, the average thickness of the TiO2 shell layer is calculated to be 50 nm. It should be noted that after Cu ion exchange and other processes, the hollow configuration was well maintained (Fig. 7d). Furthermore, the sample realized the transformation from the anatase phase to the rutile phase with the increase of calcination temperature. This work provides an ideal model of TiO2 doped with metal ions for use as efficient photocatalysts.
A typical hollow TiO2 sphere (HTS) structure was successfully synthesized using a versatile kinetics-controlled coating and carbonization method.103 The resorcinol/formaldehyde (RF) polymer resin was prepared and used for the hard templates by the extended sol–gel process. After the removal of the template, the hollow structure was successfully fabricated which can be clearly observed in the TEM images (Fig. 7e–h). One of the novel points is that the shell thickness could be increased gradually by increasing the amount of ammonia added during the preparation of the TiO2. The amount of ammonia added was 0.1 mL, 0.2 mL, 0.3 mL, and 0.35 mL, and the as-prepared samples are denoted as HTS-0.1, HTS-0.2, HTS-0.3, and HTS-0.35, respectively. The hollow structure can be clearly observed in the TEM images (Fig. 7e–h). As the amount of ammonia increased from 0.1 mL to 0.2 mL (Fig. 7e and f), the thickness of the HTS shell increased from ∼25 nm to ∼75 nm. Furthermore, the shell thickness increased from ∼80 nm to ∼160 nm when the amount of ammonia increased from 0.30 mL to 0.35 mL (Fig. 7g and h). The HRTEM image (Fig. 7h) shows that the HTS were well crystallized with a d-spacing of 0.35 nm, which refers to the crystal planes of the anatase-phase TiO2.
In 2020, Lee et al.40 reported a novel one-pot fabrication method for hollow porous TiO2 nanospheres. A sol–gel route involving CO2 nanobubble generation in aqueous solution is applied, acting as a template for the growth of crystalline TiO2. The hollow nanosphere center is surrounded by an outer shell nanocrystal structure. The author replaced H3BO3 (0.15 M) with NaHCO3 (0.3 M) in the preparation process, which is different from the synthesis of conventional liquid-phase deposition TiO2 NPs. The fabrication scheme of hollow porous TiO2 is shown in Fig. 7i. As shown in step i of the scheme, CO2 nanobubbles act as a template for the pores of TiO2 nanocrystals in the crystallization process. Then the TiO2 nanocrystals are transformed into a few hundred nm hollow structures by a self-assembly process (step ii of the scheme). As a result, aggregates of the hollow porous nanospheres are formed (step iii of the scheme). The hollow porous TiO2 nanospheres prepared by these authors exhibit superior adsorption properties, which confirms the reasonability of the hollow structure modification.
3.2.2.2 Mesoporous structure. 
The mesoporous structure provides a highly accessible surface, networked pore distribution and unique band structure.104 In the past few decades, mesoporous micro and NPs have attracted significant research interest in photocatalysis, energy storage and conversion, cell imaging, and drugs. Among various mesoporous nanomaterials, mesoporous TiO2 has been intensively investigated because of its low cost, environmentally benign nature and unique physical and chemical properties. Up until now, most endeavors have focused on the exploration of its potential in various applications. Furthermore, synthesizing mesoporous TiO2 in a highly controllable manner is crucial for promoting the performance and potential transition from the lab bench to large-scale production.
For example, Crossland et al.41 reported a general synthetic method for mesoporous single-crystalline TiO2. The synthetic process includes seeded nucleation and growth of TiO2 crystals in the silica template pores. Then the silica template was selectively etched in 2 M aqueous NaOH at 80 μC for 60 min to create mesoporous TiO2. The SEM images (Fig. 8a and b) show the successful fabrication of the mesoporous structure TiO2. Besides, the mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticle film fabricated by the author exhibits the anatase phase. Furthermore, a simpler synthetic method for mesoporous TiO2 was designed by Cho et al. using a surfactant-mediated sol–gel method.42 After the preparation of the TiO2 powder, the sample was consolidated by spark plasma sintering at 350 °C–600 °C to obtain the mesoporous TiO2. An increase of the primary TiO2 NP size was observed with increasing the consolidation temperature. Furthermore, the samples consolidated at 350 °C exhibit the largest specific surface area, up to nearly 131 m2 g−1, which is another factor contributing to the improved performance.
 Fig. 8  (a and b) SEM image of fully mesoporous TiO2 crystals grown by seeded nucleation in the bulk of the silica template, (c and d) TEM images of mesoporous TiO2 nanospheres, (e) the formation procedure of carbon-assisted mesoporous TiO2 nanospheres, (f) preparation of the 3D mesoscopic TiO2 structure, (g and h) FESEM images of the uniform mesoporous TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, 105 and 107. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
In 2018, Archana and co-workers105 fabricated mesoporous TiO2 nanospheres by using carbon spheres as a template. As shown in the TEM images (Fig. 8c and d), the mesoporous sphere-like shape was successfully fabricated with a size of 150–200 nm. The preparation of TiO2 nanospheres is illustrated in Fig. 8e. In theory, the presence of carboxyl and hydroxyl groups on the surface of the carbon possesses the potential to load other molecules and functional groups. These functional groups provide a good platform when the titanium source is introduced to form TiO2. As a result, titanium molecules are deposited on the surface of the carbon spheres and then the nucleation starts. Finally, the carbon templates are removed by an annealing process and after that mesoporous TiO2 is formed. The mesoporous TiO2 nanospheres showed the typical peaks of (101), (004), (220), (105), (204), (220) and (215) planes, which corresponded to the pure anatase phase of TiO2.
There are few reports on mesoporous rutile TiO2 which is mainly because the rutile phase is usually formed at high temperatures, which will cause the collapse of the mesoscopic pores. In 2018, Zhao's group reported the synthesis of mesoporous rutile cracked microspheres.106 During the hydrothermal process, the single micelles first aggregated to form microspheres with large amounts of n-butanol solutions produced by the hydrolysis of water and titanium sources inside the microspheres. As the hydrothermal process progresses, the vapor pressure inside the microspheres is greater than the external pressure, causing the microspheres to burst and form microspheres with cracks. The resulting microspheres have divergent pores and a high specific surface area. Most importantly, by adjusting the temperature of the water and the time for the solvent to evaporate, the number and angle of the openings of the microspheres can be controlled.
In 2021, a more complicated mesoporous TiO2 structure was fabricated by Zhao's group for energy storge applications.107 The fabrication of the microspheres is shown in Fig. 8f. Specifically, hydrogels composed of amphiphilic triblock copolymer Pluronic F127/titania oligomer micelle primitives could be initially prepared after the selective evaporation of a tetrahydrofuran (THF) precursor solution. The obtained dissociative micelle monomers are aggregated into large microemulsions after the hydrothermal method. Furthermore, HCl could initiate the crystallization of the TiO2 from the emulsion center and generate a radially aligned F127/TiO2 mesostructure. It is noteworthy that a reverse F127/TiO2 mesophase is formed owing to the solvent phase transition from aqueous to oil phase during this stage, which leads to the formation of cylindrical TiO2 nanocrystals instead of the conventional mesoporous TiO2 frameworks. Finally, after annealing under an inert atmosphere, the mesoporous TiO2 microspheres with a carbon scaffold grafted around rod-like grains are obtained. FESEM images (Fig. 8g) reveal that a uniform spherical morphology with a diameter of around 3 μm was successfully obtained. Furthermore, it can be clearly observed in the large microspheres that the mesoporous skeleton was made up of TiO2 nanorods aligned from the center to the exterior (Fig. 8g and h). The author's work combines high gravimetric and volumetric capacities with ultrafast surface redox reactions, providing a model towards practical applications of energy storage devices.
3.2.2.3 Core–shell structure. 
The core–shell structure is an ordered nano-scale assembly formed by a nanomaterial encapsulating another nanomaterial through chemical bonds or other forces. Owing to its unique structural characteristics, the core–shell structure integrates the properties and complements the deficiencies of both the internal and external materials.108 Therefore, it has broad application prospects in the photocatalytic and battery fields.100 The synthetic method of the core–shell structure can be classified into two main categories: the un-destructive and the destructive approaches.25 The un-destructive method refers to the preparation of core–shell TiO2 without destroying the lattice structure: a mesosphere exists between the crystal core and the shell. In contrast, the destructive method partially breaks the lattice structure of TiO2, which leads to the generation of an amorphous shell covering the well-crystallized core.
In 2017, Sreeja et al.49 designed a rutile Ag@TiO2 core–shell structure with an Ag core and TiO2 shell for the purification of polluted water. Almost complete inactivation of Escherichia coli can be observed in the case of Ag@TiO2 in around 35 min, while only 35% inactivation was seen in the case of TiO2. The author attributes the higher inactivation efficiency to the rapid release of OH− ions which act on the cell membranes leading to a loss of permeability in the initial stage of disinfection. Besides the core–shell structure, we believe that the enhanced performance can be attributed to the Schottky barrier between the Ag and TiO2 promoting the migration of photoexcited electrons from TiO2 and Ag. In 2016, a core–shell structure with a Ti3+ core and amorphous Ti4+ shell was designed by Yang's group to achieve a better photocatalytic H2 production performance (destructive approach).109 A hydrothermal fluorination process was used to create an amorphous layer on TiO2. The schedule of the formation of a crystalline Ti3+ core/amorphous Ti4+ shell TiO2 particle from a crystalline TiO2 particle by a two-step treatment is shown in Fig. 9a. TEM images (Fig. 9b and c) show the formation of an amorphous surface layer. As shown in Fig. 9c, the Ti3+-containing surface layer is successfully converted into an amorphous layer. Furthermore, the average H2 production rate is improved from 1.7 to 268.3 μmol h−1 by the created core/shell structure. The significant performance enhancement can be attributed to the regulated transport of electrons and holes in abundant catalytic active sites produced by the crystalline/amorphous core/shell structure.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the formation of a crystalline Ti3+ core/amorphous Ti4+ shell TiO2 particle, (b) TEM images of TiO2, (c) high-magnification TEM images of the typical edge areas of the samples, (d) schematic of the formation of the MnO@TiO2 nanoboxes, (e) TEM and (f) HRTEM images of MnO@TiO2 core–shell nanocubes, (g) schematic of the formation process of the porous core/shell TiO2, (h and i) SEM images of the porous core/shell TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109–111. Copyright 2016, Wiley; Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry; Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Novel MnO@TiO2 nanoboxes with a porous crystalline MnO core (core size ∼15 nm) and amorphous TiO2 shell (thickness ∼9.8 nm) were reported by Yang's group using a wet-chemical method (destructive method).110 The formation process of the nanoboxes is illustrated in Fig. 9d. Titanium butoxide is used to fabricate the TiO2 shell. After reaction with MnCO3 for 20 h, the MnCO3@TiO2 core–shell nanocubes were successfully obtained. Then the resulting dried powder of MnCO3@TiO2 was annealed in argon (Ar) at 350 °C for 4 h to form the MnO@TiO2 NCMs. The core–shell structure could be easily observed in the TEM and HRTEM images (Fig. 9e and f). As shown in Fig. 9f, the as-prepared NCMs show a cube-like morphology with a porous core and an amorphous shell. In 2017, Cai et al.111 synthesized a porous core/shell TiO2 nanomaterial by an alkaline solvothermal reaction (un-destructive method) combined with post-treatment (Fig. 9g). Firstly, an amorphous TiO2/oleylamine precursor was fabricated by a sol–gel method and used as a self-template for the final process. The as-prepared TiO2/oleylamine precursor was further converted into NaTiO by a solvothermal reaction in alkaline solution. After the procedure illustrated above, the HTiO sample with a core/shell spherical structure was obtained by a proton exchange process. Finally, porous core/shell TiO2 was successfully synthesized after heating at 300 °C in air. As shown in the SEM images (Fig. 9h and i), the as-prepared sample exhibits a spherical structure, and plenty of macropores (∼55 nm) can be observed on the particle surface. Fig. 9i is the SEM image of several broken spheres which further reveals the successful synthesis of the porous core/shell structure.
3.2.2.4 Nanoflower structure. 
The TiO2 flower-like structure enhances the light-scattering capability by the higher surface area and can be responsible for an enhancement of performance. The most common application of the TiO2 flower-like structure is dye-sensitized solar cells with a low dye loading as a film electrode. For example, Subramaniam et al.44 reported a synthesis method of micrometer-sized TiO2 rutile-phase flowers used as photoanodes in dye-sensitized solar cells. Different samples were obtained by heating at different oven temperatures including 150, 180 and 210 °C. TiO2 flowers exhibited a width of a few hundred nanometers and a length of up to 3 microns. SEM images of the samples made at 180 °C and 210 °C revealed the growth of nanostructures similar to flowers (Fig. 10d) and highly branched nanorods arrays, respectively (Fig. 10a–c). As shown in Fig. 10b and c, the thin films obtained at 210 °C show a flower-like shape surrounded by many nanorod branches.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of a TiO2 flower array grown at 180 °C, (b and c) SEM images of individual and an array of highly branched TiO2 nanorod structures grown at 210 °C, (d) natural flowers, (e) SEM images of as-prepared flowers, and the inset is an individual flower, (f) TEM image of the TiO2 flower structure, FESEM images of the TiO2 nanotubes fabricated by (g) one-step anodic oxidation and (h) two-step anodic oxidation, (i) SEM image of the as-prepared nanotube structure of TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44–48. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; Copyright 2013, Elsevier; Copyright 2020, Elsevier; Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry; Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
A similar structure was investigated by Feng et al.45 and applied as photoelectrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells as well. Micro-sized 3D branched flower-like TiO2 was obtained by the authors through a controlled hydrolysis followed by a hydrothermal process. As shown in Fig. 10e, the obtained TiO2 exhibited flower-like shapes in morphology and the individual flowers were composed of branched pinnate petals. Furthermore, the authors attributed the improved performance to the higher surface area, confirmed by a BET test, which enhances the light-harvesting capacity.
In 2020, Deas et al.48 fabricated hierarchical Au/TiO2 nanoflowers with a similar structure to that discussed above. The sample was confirmed by the authors to be a mixture of the anatase and rutile phases. The TEM image (Fig. 10f) shows that a 3D flower-like structure of TiO2 has been successfully prepared. Compared with 1D or 2D nanostructures, 3D flower-like TiO2 achieves an improved performance due to the higher surface area, which enhances the light-harvesting capacity. The article cited above with the significant performance obtained further confirms the reasonability of the flower-like structural modification.
3.2.2.5 Nanotube structure. 
Since the discovery of carbon nanotubes by Iijima, Japan's NEC company, in 1991, nanotube structures have been long recognized for their unique physical and chemical properties.112 Compared with other materials, nanotube structures possess the properties of large diameters, high specific surface areas and high battery capacities. TiO2 nanotubes have broad applications in the microelectronics and photoelectric conversion fields. Compared with zero-dimensional TiO2 NPs, TiO2 nanotubes possess a larger diameter and higher specific surface area which drives away the electrons from the holes to the surface more efficiently, thus enhancing the photocatalytic efficiency.113,114 The synthesis methods of TiO2 nanotubes can be classified into the solid–liquid method and the solid–gas method. In general, the solid–liquid method used to prepare TiO2 nanotubes is convenient, cheap and efficient. The disadvantage of the solid–liquid method is that the TiO2 nanotube film may detach owing to the dissolution of the bottom layer under the nanotubes in the water solution. Thus, scientists designed the solid–gas method to improve it by putting the amorphous nanotubes into a Teflon-lined stainless autoclave containing a small amount of water. With temperature increases, the liquid water will turn into water vapor, filling the autoclave to crystallize the amorphous nanotubes.27 Compared with the solid–liquid method, we believed that the solid–gas method exhibits improved structure and morphology with less collapse.
For example, Yu et al.46 prepared TiO2 nanotubes to obtain improved photoconversion efficiency. A two-step anodic oxidation (solid–liquid method) was performed by the authors and Ti foils were used in the experiment to fabricate TiO2 nanotubes. As shown in the FESEM image (Fig. 10g and h), TiO2 nanotube arrays fabricated by both anodic oxidation steps show a highly ordered nanotube shape and the arrays were tightly arranged on the Ti foil substrate. Furthermore, the sample fabricated by one-step anodic oxidation exhibits an average diameter of 50 nm while TiO2 fabricated by two-step anodic oxidation has about twice the diameter. The nanotubes fabricated by the authors are highly crystallized in the pure anatase phase. Furthermore, the author confirmed the increase of the maximum photoconversion efficiency up to 59% compared with pure TiO2.
Compared with Yu's work, a much lower diameter anatase nanotube structure was prepared by Kim47 by electrochemical self-doping of amorphous TiO2 nanotubes and a N2 annealing process (solid–gas method). Fig. 10i shows that the nanotubes fabricated exhibit a highly ordered nanopore structure. The inner diameter of the TiO2 nanotubes is 80 nm and the tube length is 10 μm (Fig. 10i). This product can be used as a supercapacitor and oxidant-generating anode owing to the enhanced electronic properties.

3.3 Summary
Loading different dopants onto TiO2 is confirmed to be an efficient route to enhance the charge-carrier separation on the catalyst surface and shift the absorption to the visible region to increase the light-harvesting capacity. Among all the metal dopants discussed above, Cu, Au (SPR) and Pt (Schottky barrier) are the most widely investigated dopants owing to their superior performance and functions, especially in the production of H2. Numerous metal dopants have been reported to enhance the efficiency of TiO2. However, there are still no suitable choices to replace the expensive Pt and Au to achieve the optimal efficiency. Efforts should be devoted to searching for more metal ions to improve the properties of TiO2. Among all the metal ions studied recently, rare earth metal ions seem to be neglected; these possess properties narrowing down the band gap of TiO2 and deserve to be investigated.
The morphologies discussed above generally possess improved properties compared with pure TiO2 owing to the high specific surface area and other unique properties. However, the synthetic methods of different structures are multi-step and time-consuming. For example, plenty of hollow structures are prepared by the two-step template method which means the template must be removed to obtain the final product. In future, one-step synthesis methods could be investigated to simplify the synthesis steps of the desired structures.
Other than the morphological modifications discussed above, a factor not mentioned in this review is that of surface functionalization. Surface functionalization of TiO2 with organic molecules is proved to be an efficient and vital routine improving the properties of TiO2. For example, salicylic acid, vitamin C and catecholates have been investigated to modify the surface and tune the properties of TiO2. These surface modifications greatly enhance the efficiency of TiO2 by improving photoabsorption in the visible range.115–119 Thus, efforts should be devoted to the investigation of effects relating to surface modification and reconstruction.
In this review, we summarized plenty of co-doped TiO2 materials combining dopants and structural modifications, such as F@Nb co-doped TiO2 films, mesoporous Fe3O4@Ag@TiO2 and Nd@mesoporous TiO2@SBA-15 composites. However, there still are dozens of typical dopants not combined with structural modifications which need further investigation.
4. Applications
As an important inorganic material, TiO2 plays an important role in gas production and solving air and pesticide pollution in environmental protection. Moreover, the optimal photoelectric performance makes it irreplaceable in the applications of chemical batteries. However, the drawbacks discussed above still remain a big challenge. Numerous efforts have recently been devoted to broadening the applications by the fabrication of different TiO2-modified materials. After the modifications, TiO2 has wide applications in photocatalysts, perovskite solar cells, Li-ion batteries and medical research areas, etc. Several main applications of TiO2-based materials are summarized below.
4.1 Photocatalysts
Owing to the low cost, chemical stability and strong photooxidative ability, TiO2 has broad applications as a photocatalyst, which is mainly used for H2 production and the removal of pollutants in water.120 H2 is the most ideal energy source in the future world, and thus an increasing interest in H2 production under solar energy has been observed.52,121 A series of strategies have been developed to transfer solar energy to laser light and split water to obtain H2 on the surface of TiO2.122 Apart from in gas production, TiO2-based materials have been widely used as photocatalysts in pollutant degradation. Chen et al.123 evaluated the strengths and weaknesses of the photocatalysts and three other pollutant treatment techniques: biological treatment, chemical precipitation treatment and membrane treatment. Basically, biological treatment is cost-effective, high output and environment friendly. It has the advantages over other technique in the degradation efficiency of colour and odor products. However, the biological process is difficult to control and does not have enough capability to remove organic waste while the concentration level is high. Chemical precipitation treatment is mainly used in the efficient removal of organic carbon and absorbable organic halogens, which are especially produced in the paper industry. The main disadvantage is that the pH value needs to be monitored accurately, and the high chemical consumption is harmful to the environment. Membrane filtration is effective, non-toxic, non-corrosive and safe to plants and animals. But a significant disadvantage lies in the permeate flux and productivity being decreased owing to membrane fouling. Among all the methods mentioned above, TiO2 photocatalysts are concluded to be the most optimal choice for the degradation of pollutants.
The pollutants in water including dyes, heterocyclic compounds, hydrocarbons and phenol can be effectively photodegraded by TiO2 NPs to produce CO2, H2O and other non-toxic inorganic substances. As discussed above, the large band gap and fast recombination still remain two challenging issues which limit the photocatalytic activity of TiO2.15 Therefore, plenty of research has been performed to extend TiO2 absorption to the visible region of the spectrum and limit the recombination, including dopants and structural modification of TiO2 to achieve the optimal performance in H2 production and pollutant degradation.124

4.1.1 H2 production. 
The as-discussed mechanism of TiO2-based materials in water-splitting to produce H2 has been clearly clarified by Miyoshi et al.125 in 2018. In the same year, Yu et al.61 achieved an efficient visible-light H2 production performance by fabricating Ti3+ doped meso-TiO2/graphite-C3N4 composites. Graphite-C3N4 (g-C3N4) has been applied as a visible light photocatalyst with a CB of 1.12 eV and a VB of 1.57 eV.126 However, the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 is limited to recombination as well, which decreases the charge separation.127 Doped TiO2 with g-C3N4 could form Z heterojunction structures, which are commonly constructed by hybridizing two semiconductors with appropriate band alignments, accelerating the transfer and separation of the electron–hole pairs and thereby obtaining a better performance.128 Therefore, Z heterojunctions are usually composed of two photocatalysts and a most important factor: an acceptor–donor (a–d) pair. Photogenerated electrons will be transfered from the CB of photocatalyst I to the VB of photocatalyst II through the a–d pair in the photocatalytic reaction. Generally, the acceptor is reduced and transformed to be the donor by reacting with the photogenerated electrons from the CB of photocatalyst I. After that, a contrary process is initiated by the photogenerated holes to oxidize the donor to be the acceptor from the VB of photocatalyst II. The optimal photocatalytic properties are obtained by the higher reduction and oxidation potential produced by the electrons accumulating on photocatalyst I and the holes accumulating on photocatalyst II. Fig. 11a shows the formation procedure of Ti3+-doped meso-TiO2/g-C3N4 composites. Ti3+-doped TiO2 mesocrystals are mainly distributed in the g-C3N4 nanosheets. Samples with different g-C3N4/TiO2 ratios of 1:9, 1:3, 1:1 3:1 and 9:1, referred to as TCN-19, TCN-13, TCN-11, TCN-31 and TCN-91, were prepared to investigate the photocatalytic activity for H2 production. The results are shown in Fig. 11b and d. TCN-31 showed the highest photocatalytic activity with TEOA as a sacrificial agent for H2 production reaching 3748.46 μmol g−1 h−1 (Fig. 11b). Meanwhile, g-C3N4 also exhibits the highest photocatalytic activity for H2 production with methanol as a sacrificial agent, which was up to 983.56 μmol g−1 h−1 (Fig. 11d). Fig. 11c and e confirm that the Ti3+-doped mesoTiO2/g-C3N4 composites maintain high photocatalytic stability. This work provides an efficient strategy to synthesize Ti3+–TiO2 nanocomposites for efficient H2 production.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of Ti3+-doped meso-TiO2/g-C3N4 composites, (b and c) the photocatalytic activities and the recyclable photocatalytic activity of TCN-31 composite with triethanolamine as a sacrificial agent, (d and e) the photocatalytic activities and recyclable photocatalytic activity of TCN-31 composite with methanol as a sacrificial agent, (f) comparisons of the photocatalytic H2 generation rates of the four rutile TiO2 photocatalysts, (g) volume of H2 generation using Janus and core–shell Au50 nm–TiO2 nanostructures, amorphous TiO2 and bare gold NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, 61 and 109. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2016, Wiley; Copyright 2012, Wiley. 
To achieve a better photocatalytic H2 production performance, a core–shell rutile TiO2 nanostructure was fabricated by Yang with a crystalline Ti3+ core and an amorphous Ti4+ shell.109 A photocatalytic H2-generation experiment from an aqueous solution containing 10 vol% methanol as an electron donor was carried out to compare the performance of four TiO2 photocatalysts (Fig. 11f). TiO2 with Ti3+ & AL shows a significantly improved photocatalytic activity in terms of H2 generation rate compared with the other three samples. The improvement is attributed to the core–shell structure in populating more surface-reaching holes than electrons under UV-vis light irradiation.
Au-NP/TiO2 composites applied in H2 production systems have been reported by researchers recently.129 For example, Seh et al.51 synthesized a original Janus Au50 nm–TiO2 photocatalyst used for efficient visible-light H2 generation. The photocatalytic activity was investigated by visible-light irradiation from a tungsten halogen lamp (cut-off filter, λ > 400 nm). Fig. 11g shows that the photocatalytic activity was significantly increased compared with core–shell Au–TiO2. The reason is that the amorphous TiO2 used is known to possess localized electronic states inside the band gap due to structural disorder, which leads to much stronger optical absorption.


4.1.2 Pollutant photodegradation. 
As mentioned above, TiO2-modified materials can be also used for the degradation of pollutants.130,131 The mechanism is explained in Fig. 12a. When light with an energy greater than or equal to the energy gap (hv ≥ Eg) irradiates the surface, TiO2 will absorb the light and transfer the electrons from the VB to CB, leaving holes in the VB. After transferring to the catalyst surface, the electrons react with O2 to form ˙O2−, which could degrade the pollutants to stable products like carbon dioxide and minerals.100 The holes left (h+) directly oxidize the pollutants or react with water to form strong oxidants (˙OH), which could further degrade the pollutants.
 Fig. 12  (a) The mechanism of TiO2 photodegradation, (b) equilibrium adsorption of MB on TiO2-P25, TiO2/rGO, and TiO2/graphene NCMs, (c) schematic illustration of the photocatalytic activity enhancement by the internal polarization of an YF-HA support, (d) light absorbance of MO in the presence of different catalyst samples, (e) degradation rate of MO by SBA-15 and TiO2-SBA-15, 0.1%, (f) photodegradation of MB in tap water and standard seawater in the presence of TiO2 coated with SrPP and CaPP, (g) scheme for the recovery of phenol by a phenol-philic adsorbent, layered silicic acid (H-mag), during the photocatalytic oxidation of benzene over TiO2, (h and i) the performance of TcPcCo/TiO2 and TcPcZn/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53, 59, 135, 138, 142 and 143. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2019, Elsevier; Copyright 2020, Elsevier; Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2005, Elsevier. 
The photodegradation process usually works in the presence of water, but the mechanism for how water affects the charge dynamics has not yet been clarified. Shirai and co-workers132 reported a preliminary theory that the water enhances hole trapping at the surface of TiO2 nanospheres, by using water-coverage-controlled steady and transient infrared absorption spectroscopy. They confirmed that the first shell of water coordination enhances the trapping ability either by binding as a ligand to the low coordinated Ti site or by H2 bonding directly to the trapping OH− and thus enhancing the ability for degradation.
Methyl orange (MO), one of the water-soluble azo dyes which is widely used in several industries including the paper, printing, and food industries, is mostly discharged in wastewater.133 MO shows a red colour in acidic medium and a yellow colour in basic medium. Owing to the change to different colours, it is usually used as the detection agent for the degradation rate of TiO2-modified photocatalysts. Methylene blue (MB), also known as methylthioninium chloride, is a kind of medication and dye which has similar properties to MO.134 However, MB and MO in wastewater are toxic and persistent, which has long-term impacts on human health. Therefore, the photodegradation of these two pollutants in wastewater has aroused much attention. In 2018, Ton et al.59 designed TiO2/graphene NCMs used for the degradation of MB. Photocatalytic test results using the decomposition of MB under visible light irradiation are shown in Fig. 12b. The TiO2/graphene NCMs possess 15 and 5 times higher activity than TiO2-P25 and conventional TiO2/reduced graphene oxide NPs, respectively.
Zhang et al.135 designed a system combining polarized hydroxyapatite (HA) films with anatase TiO2 NPs to achieve increased degradation of MO. Photocatalyst supports were synthesized from dense and stable yttrium and fluorine co-doped HA films with giant internal polarization. TiO2 NPs were further deposited on the support to accelerate the reduction of aqueous Ag+ to produce Ag0 NPs. The mechanism of this photocatalyst is illustrated in Fig. 12c. Four samples, namely yttrium/fluorine co-doped HA films (YF-HA), depolarized YF-HA films (dpYF-HA), TiO2/YF-HA and TiO2/dpYF-HA, were prepared to evaluate the photocatalytic activity by the photodegradation of MO. As shown in Fig. 12d, the TiO2/YF-HA films showed the highest rate of degrading MO compared with the other photocatalytic films.
To achieve an improved photodegradation rate of MO, a Nd–TiO2–SBA-15 photocatalyst was prepared by Wang's group using chemical deposition to attach TiO2 to a mesoporous SBA-15 molecular sieve, and the rare earth metal neodymium (Nd) was further deposited on the TiO2–SBA-15 surface.53 The as-prepared TiO2 is in the anatase phase. The highest point of the photocatalytic degradation rate was up to 90.2% obtained by the sample with Nd content of 0.3% (Fig. 12e). The authors believed that the improved performance of the Nd–TiO2–SBA-15 photocatalyst can be attributed to the increased specific surface area, which enabled it to adsorb dyes more efficiently.
Furthermore, there have been plenty of novel photocatalysts prepared by researchers with unconventional materials for use in the degradation of MB. For example, Tsumura et al.136 designed a TiO2 photocatalyst combining strontium titanate (SrTiO3) NPs with P25 TiO2 particles by reacting with strontium hydroxide aqueous solution. The introduction of Sr ions could enhance the photoactivity of TiO2 by the electrons in the CB of TiO2 being injected into the CB of SrTiO3 which suppresses the recombination of the electrons and holes. That the SrTiO3–TiO2 composites exhibit higher photocatalytic activities was also proved by Yanagida et al.137 using TiO2 particles formed on a SrTiO3 core by a short-duration acid treatment. These pieces of research with an optimal performance obtained have proved the rationality of the combination of SrTiO3 and TiO2.
A novel seawater activation of TiO2 particles encapsulated by Ca or Sr polyphosphate for use in the degradation of MB was investigated by Volhard's group.138 The TiO2 polyphosphate core–shell particles are envisaged as additives in plastic products in theory. The Ca2+ or Sr2+ cations from the poly-phosphate shell are replaced by seawater cations including Na+ and Mg2+ cations. Therefore, the polyphosphate coating dissolves and the TiO2 core is released as an active photocatalyst. As shown in Fig. 12f, TiO2 coated with calcium polyphosphate (CaPP) or strontium polyphosphate (SrPP) performed better in seawater than in tap water. After 6 h, about 47.5% of the MB was degraded in tap water and 98.9% in seawater when coated with Ca2+.
Sulfur-doped g-C3N4/TiO2 (anatase) NCMs were reported by Wang's group for use in the degradation of Congo red, another uncommon water-soluble dye.139 The improved photocatalytic activity benefited from both the 1D well-distributed structure and the Z-scheme heterojunction mentioned above. Other than the obtained optimal photodegradation efficiency, the authors also focused on the thermal stability quantitative analysis by a TGA test. An excellent thermal stability was obtained and a slight weight loss was observed, which could be attributed to the absorbed water on the TiO2 surface.
Bisphenol A (2,2-bis (4-hydroxyphenyl) propane) is a xenoestrogen leading to several adverse effects on human beings including endocrine disruption. Jaseela et al.140 fabricated mesoporous TiO2@SiO2 NPs for the removal of bisphenol A under visible light. TiO2 existing in the sample prepared at 500–600 °C was maintained in the anatase phase. When the calcination temperature increases to 700 °C, the TiO2 phase starts to transition from anatase to rutile, which confirms the high-temperature anatase-phase stability of TiO2@SiO2. Owing to the large surface area, ordered pore structure and large pore volume of the as-prepared NCMs, TiO2@SiO2 NPs possessed improved properties of photon utilization, microorganism loading and increased surface reactive sites and obtained the optimal performance.
Phenol is an important raw material for the production of certain resins, fungicides, preservatives and drugs (such as aspirin). Phenol obtained from partial oxidation of benzene is one of the most important commercial chemicals in polluted water drained by industry. However, the synthesis method of phenol is energy-consuming and often produces unwanted byproducts.141 Efforts have been made to design catalysts for use in direct benzene oxidation. Ide et al.142 prepared a TiO2 photocatalyst combined with magadiite (Na2Si14O29, denoted as Na-mag) and H2Si14O29 (denoted as H-mag). During the photocatalysis procedure, a coexisting adsorbent can selectively adsorb phenol from a mixture of phenol, benzene, and water. After that TiO2 would separate the photocatalytically formed phenol to prevent such overoxidation (Fig. 12g). H-mag adsorbed the newly formed phenol efficiently and nearly 100% recovery selectivity was observed. Furthermore, phenol obtained was barely overoxidized which proves the excellent performance of the photocatalysts. Phenol was less effectively recovered when Na-mag was used, possibly because its hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity (water/Na-mag dispersion) affects the photocatalytic performance of TiO2. Furthermore, both samples possess an improved performance compared with pure TiO2.
Meanwhile, phenol is also found to be a common chemical pollution in wastewater; it has a strong corrosive effect on skin and mucous membranes and inhibits the central nervous system or damages liver and kidney function. Therefore, Granados et al.143 designed a strategy for the photodegradation of phenol investigated by sensitizing TiO2 with Zn2+ and Co2+ tetracarboxyphthalocyanine (TcPcM), sensitizers that have visible absorption bands around 670 nm and a high stability. The TcPcM/TiO2 was further modified with Pb deposits which present a significant increase in the degradation of the phenol. As discussed above, deposition of a noble metal on TiO2 forms a Schottky barrier, which significantly increases the excited electron lifetime due to the effective traps for the CB electrons. The results of phenol photodegradation by TcPcM/TiO2 after 1 h of illumination are shown in Fig. 12h and i. TcPcZn (0.15 mmol per g TiO2) and TcPcCo (0.16 mmol per g TiO2) achieve the best performances, respectively.

4.2 Perovskite solar cells
Owing to the high efficiency, low-cost solution processability and high defect tolerance, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been recognized as the most promising solar cells.144,145 However, conventional uncoloured forms (black colour) of PSCs exhibit a huge loss of PCEs compared with the coloured forms. Therefore, the use of colour-generated filters is a promising strategy to tune the colour of solar cells by UV cutoff and colour-generation, which achieves a minimal PCE loss and improved photostability.
For instance, Yoo et al.146 fabricated a multi-nanolayer filter by multilayering high-index TiO2 with low-index SiO2 applied at colourful (red, green, blue, RGB) PSCs to obtain long-term-photostability solar cells. These PSCs reached 65% of the power conversion efficiency after continuous illumination while traditional black PSCs retained 30%. Photostability testing was carried out under AM 1.5G one sun illumination (100 mW cm−2) in a glovebox in order to evaluate the PCE. The PSC using SiO2/TiO2 NBRF retained 81% of its original PCE, while the other two maintained only 62%.
The electron transport layer (ETL) is another factor related to the performance of PSCs which provides efficient electron extraction and collection.147 Theoretically, the perovskite firstly absorbs light, and free charge carriers are spontaneously generated due to the low exciton binding energy. After that the free charge carriers will be transfered to the interface and the photogenerated electrons (holes) will be injected from the perovskite absorber to the ETL (or hole transporting layer). The electrons in the ETL and the holes in the hole transport material layers can leak as a shunt current. Based on this theory, the diffusion routine in the ETL and the transfer channel to the anode electrode dominantly determine the efficiency of PSCs. However, undesired reactions such as exciton annihilation and the recombination of the free charge carriers will seriously degrade the device performance.
However, conventional TiO2-based ETLs exhibit poor performance due to the charge recombination at the interfaces. Jeong et al.56 developed an original ETL composed of an ultrathin c-TiO2 layer hybridized with mesoporous TiO2 (mp-TiO2). mp-TiO2 (a mixture of the anatase and rutile phases) is fabricated by using one-step spin-coating of an mp-TiO2 solution. ETL-based PSCs exhibit a higher PCE of 17.51% compared with other conventional PSCs. We believe the improved performance of the Hyb-ETL can be attributed to the improved adhesion of the mp-TiO2 layer on the FTO substrate and the enhancement of the interconnections between the mp-TiO2 NPs that reduced the charge transport recombination.
Reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/mesoporous (mp)-TiO2 (anatase phase) NPs for use as an ETL were designed by Han's group.148 Compared with mp-TiO2 (0 vol% rGO) based PSCs, the PSCs designed by the authors exhibited an increase in PCE. Furthermore, the resistivity of rGO/mp TiO2 NP films is reduced to 4.94 × 104 Ω cm at 1.0 vol% rGO, while the TiO2 NP film exhibits a resistivity of 3.03 × 105 Ω cm. The decrease in the resistivity is attributed to the high mobility of the rGO that limits the interfacial resistance between TiO2 NPs, which results in superior performance.
To achieve an improved performance of PSCs, Huang and co-workers149 reported a TiO2 sub-microsphere film layer. The sub-microsphere diameter is about 250 nm and the TiO2 film is successfully coated on the substrate. The large specific surface area is believed to benefit high efficiency. Different from other works where the FTO is always covered totally, their work was performed with part of the FTO uncovered by the sub-microspheres to obtain improved properties. However, sufficient thickness of TiO2 film is still needed in DSCs because there is a lowest surface area limit for dye adsorption. Then they measured the photocurrent decay under illumination from 3 to 30 mW cm−2 to see the performance. Obviously, the authors’ work based on TiO2 sub-microsphere film shows a lower transport time, indicating better transporting performance (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  (a) Charge-transport times of PSCs based on TiO2 NPs and a sub-microsphere scaffold layer, (b) basic working principle of the TiO2/p-GaAs photocathode, (c) PEC stability and photocurrent of the ALD-grown, initially black and TiO2 film after oxidation in the temperature range from 200 to 500 °C, (d) schematic for the preparation of the solution of PFOTES-coated TiO2 NPs, (e and f) SEM images of the pentacene layers without and with the PFOTES-coated TiO2 nanoparticle layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149, 157, 160 and 161. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2020, Wiley; Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Protection layer for photoelectrochemical devices
Our society is facing a significant challenge from energy and climate change, so renewable energy is so crucial.150,151 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting that directly converts water and sunlight to H2 and O2 is seen as one of the promising strategies.6 Thus, remarkable efforts have been directed towards searching for efficient and stable semiconductors.152–154 However, the chemical instability in an open environment is a crucial problem, especially in highly acidic or alkaline electrolytes. Therefore, an effective protection layer is worthy of investigation.155,156 TiO2 thin film exhibits excellent charge transfer properties and is therefore used as a protection layer for unstable semiconductors.156–158 For example, Ros et al.159 designed a TiO2 protective layer (anatase phase) to avoid the contact between the electrolyte and the sensitive photoabsorber materials. They obtained a TiO2 protective layer grown at 100, 150, and 300 °C coated on a 5 nm film of thermally evaporated NiFe to act as a catalyst. Furthermore, TiO2 is used as the conduction band alignment between the silicon and the electrolyte and facilitates the electron transfer from the photocathode to the electrolyte.
In 2019, Cao et al.160 fabricated a TiO2 protection layer on a microstructured p-GaAs photocathode for use in PEC water splitting. TiO2 protection layers were deposited on the GaAs surface by ALD to improve the PEC stability. The working principle (Fig. 13b) of the as-prepared TiO2 protection layer can be explained as follows: the band alignment between p-GaAs and n-type TiO2 is a typical type II alignment. Upon illumination, photoexcited electrons can drift from p-GaAs to n-TiO2 and then inject into the electrolyte with a large driving force. The TiO2 layer could offer optimal protection and yielded a remarkable stability over 60 h at a photocurrent of −5 mA cm−2. Meanwhile, the much lower VB of TiO2 is convenient for blocking holes from entering the cathode interfaces, improving the charge exchange efficiency.
A new strategy was proposed by Ali-Loytty's group to enhance the stability of TiO2 by ALD for use as a protection layer.157 ALD of TiO2 was carried out at 200 °C–500 °C in a commercial ALD reactor using tetrakis titanium and water as precursors with Ar as a carrier/purge/venting gas. As shown in Fig. 13c, only a slight change in the PEC stability at 1.23 V vs. RHE in 1 M NaOH was observed upon oxidation at 200 °C. Furthermore, an increasing stability is observed after oxidation at 300 °C and above, which means a stable protection layer has been successfully fabricated. Yoo et al.161 reported an organo-compatible super-hydrophobic protection layer that can be applied on various organic semiconductors. The protection layer is fabricated by dipping organic field-effect transistors into a highly fluorinated solvent with fluoroalkylsilane-coated TiO2 NPs. Perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane (PFOTES) was chosen to introduce superhydrophobic properties onto the surface of TiO2, and the PFOTES-coated TiO2 NPs are evenly dispersed by self-assembly. The schematic for preparing the solution of PFOTES-coated TiO2 NPs is shown in Fig. 13d. SEM images (Fig. 13e and f) show that the NP layers were successfully deposited on the pentacene semiconductor. This protection layer exhibited excellent water resistance properties which can be attributed to the roughened surface and low surface energy.
4.4 Lithium-ion battery anodes
Lithium-ion batteries have recently aroused the interest of researchers due to the advantages of high energy density, long cycle life and environmentally friendly properties.122,162 The battery anode, referring to the electrode connected to the positive electrode of the power supply in the electrolytic cell, is the most important component in various batteries including lithium-ion batteries.163 Thus, plenty of experiments focusing on the lithium-ion battery anode (LIBA) are performed to achieve the optimal performance of lithium batteries. Among all proposed anode materials, TiO2-based materials are chosen for the reasons of exceptional stability, natural abundance and low cost.164,165
For example, Zhang et al. prepared SiO2/TiO2@C nanosheets for use as LIBAs.66 The nanosheets with TiO2 particles evenly distributed in the SiO2 matrix were fabricated by using acidified titanosilicate JDF-L1 as the precursor. The fabrication process is shown in Fig. 14a. First, titanosilicate JDF-L1 with evenly distributed Si and Ti atoms is originally synthesized by a seeded secondary growth method. Second, JDF-L1 nanosheets are transformed to acidized JDF-L1 (H-JDF-L1) nanosheets using an acid treatment method. The XRD test shows the diffraction peaks corresponding to the anatase phase without any rutile phase. Besides, the highly distributed TiO2 NPs can suppress the volume deformation of SiO2. In addition, the electron transfer and Li+ diffusion are further facilitated by abundant grain boundaries which can be attributed to the contact between SiO2 and TiO2. Eventually, SiO2/TiO2@C nanosheets exhibit superior performance with an ultrahigh capacity of 998 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 C.
 Fig. 14  (a) The process for the preparation of SiO2/TiO2@C nanosheets, (b) the relationships between the concentration of oxygen vacancies and the particle size of the starting TiO2, (c) cycling result comparisons up to 100 cycles at 1C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 and 166. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In 2015, a LIBA was designed by Wang's group by fabricating TiO2/carbon composites with TiO2 NPs homogeneously embedded in a carbon matrix.60 The performance of the TiO2/C nanohybrids prepared with different amounts of TiO2 from 0% to 65% was evaluated. The sample with 32% TiO2 possesses the best capacity compared with the bare carbon anode, which possesses a poor capacity of 38 mA h g−1 for 10 C and 9 mA h g−1 for 20 C. The authors confirmed the rationality of the combination of TiO2 with carbon.
A novel LIBA was proposed by Zheng's group, designed by an improved hydrogenation strategy for the controllable synthesis of oxygen-deficient anatase TiO2.166 As shown in Fig. 14b, the concentration of oxygen vacancies is gradually increased with decreasing the particle size of the starting TiO2 from 90 to 30 nm. Size-controlled TiO2 was synthesized via altering the reaction temperature and the volume of hydrofluoric acid. It can be easily seen in Fig. 14c that the pure 30 nm TiO2 shows a specific capacity of only about 83 mA h g−1 after 100 C, with the worst performance of the as-prepared sample even reaching 110 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Furthermore, the H-30 nm sample can maintain a discharge capacity of 226 mA h g−1 even after 100 cycles and 200 mA h g−1 after 200 C, which confirms the superior performance.
The introduction of TiO2 to prepare LIBAs confirms the feasibility of the combination with battery anodes. New LIBAs prepared from TiO2 should be further investigated as a promising research direction.
4.5 Medical applications
As mentioned above TiO2 could generate the photogenerated e− and h+ which can diffuse to the surface of TiO2 and react with O2 and H2O to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) including ˙OH and ˙O2− upon activation by UV light.167–169 These ROS with e− and h+ can degrade organic pollutants in air or water. Furthermore, the photoinduced ROS from TiO2 are also destructive against bacteria, therefore providing TiO2 with antibacterial properties.170
For example, Alotaibi et al.171 designed Zn and N co-doped TiO2 thin films by a chemical vapor deposition method and determined the bactericidal properties. As shown in the SEM images (Fig. 15a–c), all the films exhibit a needle-like morphology. However, as the amount of the dopants increases, the randomly aligned needles have a trend to combine to form a more featureless surface, thus reducing the surface areas. Generally, the larger surface area has a positive effect on the bactericidal activity which can be attributed to more active area exposed to the environment. As a result, the 1.0% Zn,N:TiO2 film demonstrated the highest bactericidal activity, which was assessed using a Gram-negative bacterium E. coli under UV light. The enhanced efficiency could be attributed to the increased charge carrier lifetime owing to the dopants.
 Fig. 15  SEM image of (a) 1.0% Zn,N:TiO2, (b) 1.4% Zn,N:TiO2, and (c) 2.9% Zn,N:TiO2 thin films, (d) PCL/TiO2, (e) PCL/TiO2-Ag NFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171 and 173. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
In 2021, Ponomarev et al.172 prepared Ag/TiO2 to investigate the bactericidal effect on different bacteria. The authors deposited Ag ions on PEO TiO2-based coatings, a promising material for further surface modification of Ti-based implants to improve the bactericidal properties, to form Ag-doped TiO2 coatings. The Ag-doped sample exhibits a strong bactericidal effect against a series of bacteria including E. coli U20, E. coli K261, S. aureus 839 and S. aureus 224/228.
Meanwhile, a nanofiber composed of Ag ions, TiO2 and polycaprolactone (PCL) was prepared by Karagoz's group173 for antibacterial applications. The SEM image shows that both the PCL/TiO2 (Fig. 15d) and PCL/TiO2–Ag (Fig. 15e) exhibited nanofiber structures with larger diameters. Furthermore, PCL/TiO2–Ag possesses a widened diameter distribution and an increased average diameter compared with PCL/TiO2. The antibacterial test shows that PCL/TiO2–Ag possesses higher antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus compared with PCL/TiO2, while the two samples both exhibit improved antibacterial properties compared with pure PCL nanofibers.
TiO2 also has applications in photodynamic therapy (PDT) for cancer treatment. Recently, scientists have developed bio-TiO2 hybrids, such as by combining DNA or proteins and dopamine with TiO2 for use in PDT applications. When DNA or proteins are bound with dopamine, the dopamine will act as a conductive channel between TiO2 and biomolecules which allows the transport of photogenerated holes to biomolecules. For example, Dimitrijevic's group174 bound TiO2 NPs with dopamine and realized a spatial separation of the photogenerated charges (holes localize on dopamine and electrons localize within the lattice of TiO2), which suppresses the recombination of charges. By a series of tests, the author confirmed that the major ROS produced are superoxide anions formed by the reaction of electrons with molecular O. This finding offers a new routine of using TiO2-based conjugates for medical applications.
Recently, TiO2 NPs with various modifications have been invented for cancer therapy under ultraviolet light (UV) excitation.175,176 However, this passive strategy has drawbacks because UV light cannot penetrate tissues, which limits the practical applications. Thus, photodynamic therapy using visible light has aroused the interest of researchers.116 For example, Rozhkova et al.177 utilized a platform of 5 nm TiO2 NPs tethered through a DOPAC linker to the antihuman-IL13α2R to prepare TiO2-DOPAC-anti-IL13α2R. As mentioned above, modified-TiO2 could destroy certain cancer cells. However, the large band gap allows TiO2 to be activated only by UV light. The authors combined TiO2 with electron-donating enediol ligands, obtaining a significant improvement both to the crystal structure and the photoactivity, and more importantly, narrowing the band gap to 1.6 eV and red-shifting the absorption edge to the visible region of solar light. As a result, the author confirmed that the NPs prepared could be successfully targeted to cancer cells and away from normal brain cells, which widens PDT to the visible light-driven region.
These works mentioned above widen the applications of TiO2 to both the antibacterial area and cancer treatment. However, TiO2 materials used for medical applications should be thoroughly evaluated for their long-term biological and environmental effects, which both need further investigation to realize the practical application.
4.6 Other applications
Other than the applications mentioned above, TiO2-based materials can be used in many other fields. For instance, TiO2-modified materials can be used to enhance colour stability owing to the broadband absorption in the visible range. Xue et al.67 fabricated air@C@TiO2 core–shell NPs to enhance the stability of paint colours. PS was used as the core material while the source of carbon black and TiO2 were used as the shell material functions to absorb and protect materials. The as-synthesized sample exhibits optimal performance for the enhancement of the colour stability.
TiO2 is proposed for biological applications by the separation and recovery of a broad range of biomolecules and natural products.178 For instance, Khan combined TiO2 NPs with mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNPs) to achieve improved performance of the adsorption and recovery of polyphenolic flavonoids.179 TiO2 was attached to the MSNPs, which have a higher surface area (>600 m2 g−1) with tunable pores. The samples prepared are proved to have a strong affinity toward polyphenolic flavonoids.
TiO2-Based materials have applications in architecture areas as well. For example, Reyes-Gil et al.180 fabricated TiO2 (anatase phase) nanotubes with WO3 deposited on their surface with high electrochromic activity. The preparation of the WO3/TiO2 nanotubes and photographs of the detached and attached membrane on glass are shown in Fig. 16a. After the proton intercalation, the WO3 film changes from transparent to blue (Fig. 16b). However, this film shows a high reflectance difference only at longer wavelengths. No significant visual colour change can be observed in Fig. 16c. Fig. 16d shows that the WO3/TiO2 nanotubes show a flat minimal response throughout the entire visible range (400–800 nm). Thus, the combination of these two parts has a big difference in electrochromism in terms of the wavelength range. Obviously, the WO3/TiO2 nanotubes obtained the improved electrochromic performance. This work can be used in commercial smart window projects.
 Fig. 16  (a) Scheme of the preparation of WO3/TiO2 nanotubes and photographs of the detached and attached membrane on glass. Total reflectance and photographs of (b) TiO2 nanotubes, (c) WO3 on FTO glass and (d) WO3/TiO2 nanotube membrane before and after a coloration cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
TiO2 has applications in supercapacitors, a new type of energy storage device between traditional capacitors and rechargeable batteries, which can be attributed to the excellent photoelectric characteristics.181 For instance, Zhang et al.182 successfully synthesized novel hierarchical SiO2@C/TiO2 (HSCT) hollow spheres for use as high-performance supercapacitors. The HSCT spheres successfully combine SiO2, and carbon with TiO2 and form hierarchical nanoarchitectures. Therefore, the as-prepared samples exhibit a higher specific surface area for ion transport and provide an efficient diffusivity path for other materials. Compared with pure TiO2, HSCT possesses an improved performance with faster kinetics and more efficient contacts with other ions.
TiO2-Modified materials can be used as a transistor, a variable switch controlling the current flowing based on the input voltage that can be used for detection, rectification, signal modulation and other functions. The difference from general mechanical switches is that the transistor is controlled by electrical signals, and the switching speed is fast and could reach more than 100 GHz.161 For instance, a graphene-based flexible transparent transistor doped with TiO2 and Ni-doped TiO2 was proposed by Wu's group to achieve higher carrier mobility.65 The large-area and single-layer graphene was grown on electropolished Cu foil by a thermal deposition method, and then the graphene was transferred onto a polyethylene terephthalate substrate to fabricate field-effect transistors. TiO2 NPs were heated at 500, 600, and 700 °C under an ammonia atmosphere for 4 h to fabricate Ni-doped TiO2 (N500, N600, N700). These NPs (characterized as the anatase phase) were used to alter the electrical properties by a reduction in the band gap, thus making the transistors more photosensitive to visible light instead of UV light. The work discussed above has proved the research potential of TiO2 and largely widened the applications to numerous fields.
5. Summary and outlook
In this article, TiO2 is concluded to be an ideal material which exhibits excellent photocatalytic, optical and electrical properties. The common synthetic methods of TiO2 are the sol–gel method, precipitation method and hydrothermal method, etc. However, there are still some drawbacks including the large band gap and fast recombination of electron–hole pairs. Plenty of TiO2-based materials were invented by different methods including structural and dopant modification to improve the photostability and photocatalytic properties, which is the main-stream to broaden the applications of TiO2. To date, researchers have fabricated various structures including hollow structures, mesoporous structures, core–shell structures, nanoflower structures and nanotube structures, etc. Another modification is doping TiO2 with other materials and by the different types of dopants, TiO2-modified materials can be roughly divided into the following categories: noble metal and non-noble metal doped TiO2 NPs, metal oxide doped TiO2 NPs, carbonaceous material doped TiO2 NPs and dual cocatalyst doped TiO2 NPs. Currently, numerous TiO2-based materials are being invented to widen the applications of TiO2 to photocatalysts, solar cells, battery anodes, medical research and other fields. Despite the long journey of the research into TiO2, it still has great development potential. Thus, we have summarized the outlook of the research directions and drawbacks of TiO2 and listed them as follows:
(1) There are still drawbacks in applying it to actual pollutant degradation. Poor dispersion and degeneration after long running are the main factors which constrain TiO2 for practical applications and need to be further studied. Protective layers on the TiO2 may be a suitable solution to overcome the degeneration. Furthermore, the dispersion can be improved by the preparation of TiO2 NPs with a smaller size, which is beneficial for the collection of the products as well. For synthesis with high-temperature thermal treatment, the as-prepared composite catalysts normally possess relatively high stabilities. Moreover, dopant leaching inducing active site loss still occurs over the practical operation. To address this issue, strategies including re-calcination or alkaline treatment may enhance the stability of TiO2-based materials for long-term utilization.
(2) TiO2 is more advanced and has been widely applied in the pollutant degradation field. Actually, the solar-to-chemical efficiency is still limited in the field of practical energy production despite the concentrated investigation. Learning from nature to build photosynthesis-inspired artificial systems may break these limitations.
(3) The structural modifications to improve the properties of TiO2 by increasing the surface area are discussed in detail in this review. However, it is still inactive under visible light irradiation. To our knowledge, sensitizing TiO2 with visible light active photocatalyst materials could be an efficient answer to improve the light-harvesting properties. More efforts should be devoted in the laboratory stage to the addition of binary or ternary TiO2 composites.
(4) Furthermore, plenty of new TiO2-based materials with excellent performance have been invented by various methods, which means the investigation of synthetic methods is still a promising direction. The new methods should focus on the precise regulation of the target products including the composites, the morphologies, the contact interfacial structures and the distributions of dopants and defects.
(5) The recent advances in TiO2 mainly concern one single modification route: interfacial structures or dopants. Single modification generally only improves a specific property of TiO2. Thus, it is necessary to combine different modification methods to achieve highly efficient visible-light-driven TiO2.
(6) Despite the fact that characterization techniques have been invented in large numbers in recent years, the investigation of structural changes from the microperspective and the atomic kinetics of the photoinduced charge carriers are still challenges in the photocatalytic reactions. New time-resolved and atomic-scale resolution techniques such as transient absorption spectroscopy or transient photoluminescence spectroscopy should be invented and combined to investigate the microphotocatalytic reaction mechanism.
(7) The application of TiO2-based materials in phototherapy is an emerging and pioneering cancer therapeutic modality. However, only a few papers can be retrieved, which means efforts should be devoted to this emerging field. Furthermore, challenges still remain in the enhancement of the efficiency of phototherapy for existing research. The design of more precise targeting reagents will greatly improve the targeting effect to the tumor cells and improve the efficiency of phototherapy. Meanwhile, the multifunctional combination of targeting function and integration of diagnosis with TiO2-based platforms should be further investigated.
(8) The recent works on pollutant degradation still choose MB, MO and other dyes for the evaluation of the performance. New degradation agents such as antibiotics should be selected and used to estimate the performance of TiO2-modified materials.
Overall, TiO2 has been explored for decades but still has great potential for development in numerous fields.
Author contributions
J. W. wrote the manuscript. W. W. and J. T. supervised the whole research. Z. W., Y. W., X. H. and J. L. helped with the format. X. G., W. M., L. D. and X. L. helped edit the writing. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
(1) Natural Scientific Foundation of China (Grant no. 51603109, 41806112), the Natural Scientific Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2018LE005); (2) the Program for Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (“111” plan); (3) State Key Project of International Cooperation Research (2016YFE0110800); (4) The 1st Level Discipline Program of Shandong Province of China.
Notes and references
C. Zhao, J. Wang, J. Jiao, L. Huang and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 28–43 RSC .
C. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhao, Z. Du, R. Yang and J. Tang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 2181–2208 RSC .
J. Wang, C. Zhao, L. Zhou, X. Liang, Y. Li, G. Sheng, Z. Du and J. Tang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2021, e2000757,  DOI:10.1002/marc.202000757 .
T. B. T. Dao, T. T. L. Ha, T. D. Nguyen, H. N. Le, C. N. Ha-Thuc, T. M. L. Nguyen, P. Perre and D. M. Nguyen, Chemosphere, 2021, 280, 130802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Motola, R. Zazpe, L. Hromadko, J. Prikryl, V. Cicmancova, J. Rodriguez-Pereira, H. Sopha and J. M. Macak, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 549, 1–8 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Chen, H. Tang, Y. Xiao, S. Qiu, S. Li and S. Cao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 354, 17–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, M. Xu and J. Li, Catal. Today, 2020, 376(15), 162–167 Search PubMed .
H. Xiao, W. Guo, B. Sun, M. Pei and G. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 104–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Li, W. Wang, G. Li, C. Yang, Y. Wang and J. Tang, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 105312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, G. Li, W. Wang, F. Li, C. Yang, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and J. Tang, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2021, 13, 331–341 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nam, J. H. Lim, K. C. Ko and J. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13833–13859 RSC .
Y. Yang, L. C. Yin, Y. Gong, P. Niu, J. Q. Wang, L. Gu, X. Chen, G. Liu, L. Wang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 5850–5856 Search PubMed .
J. Cai, J. Shen, X. Zhang, Y. H. Ng, J. Huang, W. Guo, C. Lin and Y. Lai, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800184 CrossRef .
Q. Guo, C. Zhou, Z. Ma and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901997 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, N. Feng, Q. Wang, J. Xu, G. Qi, C. Wang and F. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10020–10028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cho, A. Yamaguchi, R. Uehara, S. Yasuhara, T. Hoshina and M. Miyauchi, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 231101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jia, X. Zhang, K. Matras-Postolek, B. Huang and P. Yang, Carbon, 2018, 139, 415–426 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meng, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807660 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Edelmannová, K.-Y. Lin, J. C. S. Wu, I. Troppová, L. Čapek and K. Kočí, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 454, 313–318 CrossRef .
L. Ji, X. Zhou and P. Schmuki, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 2724–2730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kumaravel, S. Mathew, J. Bartlett and S. C. Pillai, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 1021–1064 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Padmanabhan, N. Thomas, J. Louis, D. T. Mathew, P. Ganguly, H. John and S. C. Pillai, Chemosphere, 2021, 271, 129506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, N. Liu and P. Schmuki, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3210–3235 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, Y. Lin and Y. H. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 122029 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, H. He, L. Xu, W. Li and D. Zhao, Rev. Mater. Sci., 2020, 7, 1702–1725 CAS .
X. Wang, D. Zhang, Q. Xiang, Z. Zhong and Y. Liao, Nanomicro Lett., 2018, 10, 77 CAS .
M. Tomás-Gamasa and J. L. Mascarenas, ChemBioChem, 2020, 21, 294–309 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Shehzad, M. Tahir, K. Johari, T. Murugesan and M. Hussain, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 98–122 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. A. Guel, L. D. Jimenez and D. A. C. Hernandez, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 35, 514–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Morales-Anzures, P. Salinas-Hernández, C. Ornelas-Gutiérrez, F. J. Tzompantzi-Morales and R. Pérez-Hernández, Catal. Today, 2020, 349, 228–234 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Yahaya, M. Z. Abdullah and A. A. Mohamad, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 651, 557–564 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. Li, Y. Ren, Z. Xia, H. Wang, W. Jiang, C. Liu, S. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Wu, N. Wang, G. Liu, S. Liu, W. Ding and Z. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 858, 157726 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, H. He, Y. Wang, Y. Gong and G. Zhao, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2021, 126, 105675–105681 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zeng, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Zhang and J. Guo, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1173–1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. Liu, X. Cao, S. Wu, C. Liu, G. Li, W. Jiang, H. Wang, N. Wang and W. Ding, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 15333–15341 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. M. M. Alsamet and E. Burgaz, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 367, 137530–137539 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Lin, M.-C. Wu, K.-P. Chiang, Y.-H. Chang, J.-F. Hsu, K.-H. Hsu and K.-M. Lee, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2021, 120, 291–299 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, X. Tan, T. Yu, Y. Li, Y. Li, R. Wang and L. Xue, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 80, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Lee and S. W. Lee, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 8274–8281 RSC .
E. J. Crossland, N. Noel, V. Sivaram, T. Leijtens, J. A. Alexander-Webber and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 495, 215–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Cho, W. H. Nam, Y. S. Lim, W.-S. Seo, H.-H. Park and J. Y. Lee, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2449–2453 RSC .
G. Peng, J. E. Ellis, G. Xu, X. Xu and A. Star, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7403–7410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Subramaniam, S. Devanathan and D. Kumaresan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36791–36799 RSC .
L. Feng, J. Jia, Y. Fang, X. Zhou and Y. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 629–636 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, Y. Zhang, F. Wang and J. Dai, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 2307–2314 RSC .
C. Kim, S. Kim, J. Lee, J. Kim and J. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7486–7491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Deas, S. Pearce, K. Goss, Q. Wang, W.-T. Chen and G. I. N. Waterhouse, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 602, 117706–117720 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sreeja and S. K. Vidya, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int., 2016, 23, 18154–18164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, H. Fang, D. J. Gosztola, Z. Jiang, P. Jena and W. N. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12516–12524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, S. Liu, M. Low, S. Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, A. Mlayah and M. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2310–2314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kot, D. Dorosz, M. Radecka and K. Zakrzewska, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 46, 12082–12094 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Xia, E. Hong, L. Bai, T. Li and B. Wang, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 652, 85–92 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yurdakal, Ş. Ö. Yanar, S. Çetinkaya, O. Alagöz, P. Yalçın and L. Özcan, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 500–508 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Guayaquil-Sosa, B. Serrano-Rosales, P. J. Valadés-Pelayo and H. de Lasa, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 337–348 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jeong, Y. H. Park, S. Bae, M. Park, H. Jeong, P. Lee and M. J. Ko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36865–36874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Tobaldi, C. Espro, S. G. Leonardi, L. Lajaunie, M. P. Seabra, J. J. Calvino, S. Marini, J. A. Labrincha and G. Neri, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9529–9539 RSC .
L. Li, B. Cheng, Y. Wang and J. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 449, 115–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. T. Ton, A. T. N. Dao, K. Kato, T. Ikenaga, D. X. Trinh and T. Taniike, Carbon, 2018, 133, 109–117 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Q. Meng, M. Wang, Y. Xiao, R. Liu, Y. Xia, Y. Yao, E. Metwalli, Q. Zhang, B. Qiu, Z. Liu, J. Pan, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan, P. Muller-Buschbaum and Y. J. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24247–24255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, X. Fan, L. An, G. Liu, Z. Li, J. Liu and P. Hu, Carbon, 2018, 128, 21–30 CrossRef CAS .
A. Giampiccolo, D. M. Tobaldi, S. G. Leonardi, B. J. Murdoch, M. P. Seabra, M. P. Ansell, G. Neri and R. J. Ball, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 183–194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fernández-Catalá, M. Navlani-García, P. Verma, Á. Berenguer-Murcia, K. Mori, Y. Kuwahara, H. Yamashita and D. Cazorla-Amorós, Catal. Today, 2020, 364, 182–189 CrossRef .
W. J. Tseng, Y.-C. Chuang and Y.-A. Chen, Adv. Powder Technol., 2018, 29, 664–671 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wu, P. Y. Tseng, P. Y. Hsieh, H. T. Chou and N. H. Tai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9453–9461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Gu, C. Yan, S. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Jin, S. Zhao, H. Wang and X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44463–44471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, F. Wang, H. Luo and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34355–34363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-P. Hong, J. Park, S. S. M. Bhat, T. H. Lee, S. A. Lee, K. Hong, M.-J. Choi, M. Shokouhimehr and H. W. Jang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 6504–6512 CrossRef CAS .
M. Najafi, A. Kermanpur, M. R. Rahimipour and A. Najafizadeh, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 722, 272–277 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan and M. Wen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 22055–22063 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Q. Wu, G. Johnson, Y. Ye, X. Li, N. Li, M. Cui, J. D. Lee, C. Liu, S. Zhao, S. Li, A. Orlov, C. B. Murray, X. Zhang, T. B. Gunnoe, D. Su and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16548–16552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, J. Cai, X. Wu and F. Zheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 443, 603–612 CrossRef CAS .
N. Justh, G. J. Mikula, L. P. Bakos, B. Nagy, K. László, B. Parditka, Z. Erdélyi, V. Takáts, J. Mizsei and I. M. Szilágyi, Carbon, 2019, 147, 476–482 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, B. Li, M. Meng, Y. Cui, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, H. Dong and Y. Feng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 1008–1017 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Selishchev, N. S. Kolobov, A. V. Bukhtiyarov, E. Y. Gerasimov, A. I. Gubanov and D. V. Kozlov, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 235, 214–224 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Jeon, D. H. Kweon, B. J. Jang, M. J. Ju and J. B. Baek, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 4, 2000197–2000216 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu, B. Cheng and H. C. Ong, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 1466–1474 CAS .
Q. Zhang, W. Z. Wang, J. J. Yu, D. H. Qu and H. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604948–1604955 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Fujiwara, U. Müller and S. E. Pratsinis, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1887–1893 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujiwara and S. E. Pratsinis, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 127–134 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yui, A. Kan, C. Saitoh, K. Koike, T. Ibusuki and O. Ishitani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2594–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, H. Zhang, P. Guo, J. Zhang, G. Tira, Y. J. Kim, Y. A. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Wen, T. Rajh, J. Niklas, O. G. Poluektov, P. D. Laible and E. A. Rozhkova, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11811–11815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Modak, P. Bhanja, S. Dutta, B. Chowdhury and A. Bhaumik, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4002–4033 RSC .
Q. Wu and R. van de Krol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9369–9375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Zeng, C. D. Easton, Q. Li, Y. Xia, Y. Yin, X. Hu, J. Hu, D. Xia, D. T. McCarthy, A. Deletic, C. Sun, J. Yu and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8775–8784 RSC .
J. Matos, S. Miralles-Cuevas, A. Ruíz-Delgado, I. Oller and S. Malato, Carbon, 2017, 122, 361–373 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Vasei, Y. Sang, H. Liu and J. P. Claverie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1903–1912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Flores-Silva, C. Borja-Hernández, C. Magaña, D. R. Acosta, A. R. Botello-Méndez and L. N. Serkovic-Loli, Phys. E, 2020, 124, 114282–114288 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Rathod, K. R. Nemade and S. A. Waghuley, Mater. Lett., 2016, 169, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Datteo, H. Liu and C. Di Valentin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5793–5804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3670–3678 RSC .
P. Wang, N. M. Dimitrijevic, A. Y. Chang, R. D. Schaller, Y. Liu, T. Rajh and E. A. Rozhkova, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7995–8002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rtimi, C. Pulgarin, R. Sanjines, V. Nadtochenko, J. C. Lavanchy and J. Kiwi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12832–12839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Günnemann, C. Haisch, M. Fleisch, J. Schneider, A. V. Emeline and D. W. Bahnemann, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 1001–1012 CrossRef .
R. Katal, S. Masudy-Panah, M. Tanhaei, M. H. D. A. Farahani and H. Jiangyong, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123384–123462 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, H. Sun, M. C. Nguyen, C. Wang, K. Ho, W. A. Saidi and J. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11553–11565 RSC .
L. Yan, J. Song, T. Chan and C. Jing, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 6335–6341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Fan and K. Lv, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2144–2149 RSC .
F. Xu, H. Tan, J. Fan, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. Xu, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000571–2000599 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, H. J. Lee and D.-S. Kim, Mater. Des., 2018, 150, 188–192 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, H. S. Jang, N. Y. Kim and J. B. Joo, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2021, 99, 352–363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. Wang, Q. Chen, H. Xu, M. Dai, M. Zhang, W. Wang and H. Song, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 535, 147641–147651 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, X. Xu, Y. Ma, H. S. Cho, D. Ding, C. Wang, J. Wu, P. Oleynikov, M. Jia, J. Cheng, Y. Zhou, O. Terasaki, T. Peng, L. Zan and H. Deng, Nature, 2020, 586, 549–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Archana, S. Harish, S. Kavirajan, M. Navaneethan, S. Ponnusamy, M. Shimomura, C. Muthamizhchelvan, H. Ikeda and Y. Hayakawa, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 449, 729–735 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lan, R. Wang, W. Zhang, Z. Zhao, A. Elzatahry, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, D. Al-Dhayan, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Chem, 2018, 4, 2436–2450 CAS .
K. Lan, L. Liu, J. Y. Zhang, R. Wang, L. Zu, Z. Lv, Q. Wei and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 14097–14105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, R. Yu, J. Qi, L. Zhang, Q. Jin and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1805754 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Liu, J. T. Irvine and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5850–5856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, X. Yang, J. L. Cheong, K. Zaghib, M. L. Trudeau and J. Y. Ying, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 4952–4961 RSC .
Y. Cai, H. E. Wang, X. Zhao, F. Huang, C. Wang, Z. Deng, Y. Li, G. Cao and B. L. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10652–10663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Quiroz, J. E. Serrano and A. Dussan, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 825, 154006–154014 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sopha, M. Krbal, S. Ng, J. Prikryl, R. Zazpe, F. K. Yam and J. M. Macak, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 104–110 CrossRef .
N. Liu, I. Paramasivam, M. Yang and P. Schmuki, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 3499–3504 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rajh, L. X. Chen, K. Lukas, T. Liu, M. C. Thurnauer and D. M. Tiede, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10543–10552 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rajh, N. M. Dimitrijevic, M. Bissonnette, T. Koritarov and V. Konda, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10177–10216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rajh, N. M. Dimitrijevic and E. A. Rozhkova, Methods Mol. Biol., 2011, 726, 63–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Xu, J.-L. Shi, H. Hao, H. Yuan and X. Lang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 758–766 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakib, A. Hosseini, I. Zhitomirsky and L. Soleymani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 50851–50861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Luo, X. Ren, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, X. Qi and C. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23265–23286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-K. Wang, M. Gao, X. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka, T. Majima and H.-Q. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naldoni, M. Altomare, G. Zoppellaro, N. Liu, S. Kment, R. Zboril and P. Schmuki, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 345–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, Y. Cheng, N. Zhou, P. Chen, Y. Wang, K. Li, S. Huo, P. Cheng, P. Peng, R. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Liu and R. Ruan, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 268, 121725–121739 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Basavarajappa, S. B. Patil, N. Ganganagappa, K. R. Reddy, A. V. Raghu and C. V. Reddy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 7764–7778 CrossRef CAS .
A. Miyoshi, S. Nishioka and K. Maeda, Chemistry, 2018, 24, 18204–18219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, J. Yu, C. Jiang and B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701503–1701534 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, W. Yang, X. Chen, J. Wang and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 337–347 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601694–1601714 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shi, K. Ueno, T. Oshikiri, Q. Sun, K. Sasaki and H. Misawa, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 953–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Naik, H. Mittal, V. S. Wadi, L. Sane, A. Raj, S. M. Alhassan, A. Al Alili, S. V. Bhosale and P. P. Morajkar, J. Environ. Manage., 2020, 258, 110029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Andronic, L. Isac, S. Miralles-Cuevas, M. Visa, I. Oller, A. Duta and S. Malato, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 320, 469–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shirai, G. Fazio, T. Sugimoto, D. Selli, L. Ferraro, K. Watanabe, M. Haruta, B. Ohtani, H. Kurata, C. Di Valentin and Y. Matsumoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1415–1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yao, B. Zhang, S. Cui, S. Yang and X. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 551, 149419–149437 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Z.-f. Cao, X. Wen, J. Wang, F. Yang, S. Wang and H. Zhong, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2017, 81, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and M. Z. Yates, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17232–17239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tsumura, K. Sogabe and M. Toyoda, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2009, 157, 113–115 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yanagida, K. Sano, T. Takei and N. Kumada, Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 125, 110762–110771 CrossRef CAS .
M.-F. Volhard, J. J. Christ, L. M. Blank and T. Jüstel, Sustainable Chem. Pharm., 2020, 16, 100251–100258 CrossRef .
J. Wang, G. Wang, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. Fan, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 56–68 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jaseela, K. O. Shamsheera and A. Joseph, J. Saudi Chem. Soc., 2020, 24, 651–662 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, Z. Chen, J. Jing and J. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 3000–3009 RSC .
Y. Ide, M. Torii and T. Sano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11784–11786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Granados O., C. A. Páez M., F. Martínez O. and E. A. Páez-Mozo, Catal. Today, 2005, 107–108, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Li, W. Cai, P. Zhang, S. Cao, Z. Chen and Z. Zang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 14369–14404 RSC .
X. Zhang, Q. Wang, W. Shen, C. Han, Y. Shao, L. A. Belfiore and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 41–66 RSC .
G. Y. Yoo, R. Azmi, C. Kim, W. Kim, B. K. Min, S. Y. Jang and Y. R. Do, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10129–10139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Umar, X. Zhang, M. S. K. Saad, A. N. A. Malek, K. Liu, N. Alias, N. A. Abdullah, X. Li, F. Liu, Z. Shi, H. Zhang, C. Li, Z. Weng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13820–13831 RSC .
G. S. Han, Y. H. Song, Y. U. Jin, J. W. Lee, N. G. Park, B. K. Kang, J. K. Lee, I. S. Cho, D. H. Yoon and H. S. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23521–23526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Zhu, Y. Ding, S. Chen, C. Zhang and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8162–8167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, R. Xia, E. Muhire, S. Jiang, X. Huo and M. Gao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 459, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, S.-P. Sun, W. D. Wu and Z. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15513–15546 RSC .
F. Yu, C. Wang, Y. Li, H. Ma, R. Wang, Y. Liu, N. Suzuki, C. Terashima, B. Ohtani, T. Ochiai, A. Fujishima and X. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Laera, L. Mirenghi, G. Cassano, L. Capodieci, M. C. Ferrara, S. Mazzarelli, M. Schioppa, D. Dimaio, A. Rizzo, M. Penza and L. Tapfer, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 709, 138190–138198 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vasu, M. B. Sreedhara, J. Ghatak and C. N. Rao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7897–7901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, R. Liu, S. Hu, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15189–15199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hannula, H. Ali-Loytty, K. Lahtonen, E. Sarlin, J. Saari and M. Valden, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1199–1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ali-Loytty, M. Hannula, J. Saari, L. Palmolahti, B. D. Bhuskute, R. Ulkuniemi, T. Nyyssonen, K. Lahtonen and M. Valden, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2758–2762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Auer, E. Portenkirchner, T. Gotsch, C. Valero-Vidal, S. Penner and J. Kunze-Liebhauser, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36828–36836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ros, N. M. Carretero, J. David, J. Arbiol, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29725–29735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, Z. Kang, Y. Yu, J. Du, L. German, J. Li, X. Yan, X. Wang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902985–1902992 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yoo, Y. Kim, M. Min, G. H. Ahn, D. H. Lien, J. Jang, H. Jeong, Y. Song, S. Chung, A. Javey and T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11062–11069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, J. Yu and H. Luo, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 8, 31–34 CrossRef .
W. Xu, T. Wang, Y. Yu and S. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 689, 460–467 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ling, Y. Bai, Y. Li, Q. Ni, Z. Wang, F. Wu and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39432–39440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ni, S. Fu, C. Wu, J. Maier, Y. Yu and L. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2259–2265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, L. Liu, G. Ji, Q. Yang, L. Zheng and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20074–20081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hou, Y. Zhang, K. Deng, Y. Chen, X. Li, X. Deng, Z. Cheng, H. Lian, C. Li and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2584–2599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sun, X. Li, Z. Wang, R. Zhang, J. Wang, K. Wang and R. Pei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12638–12643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Safavipour, M. Kharaziha, E. Amjadi, F. Karimzadeh and A. Allafchian, Talanta, 2020, 208, 120369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Matijević, Đ. Nakarada, X. Liang, L. Korićanac, L. Rajsiglova, L. Vannucci, M. Nešić, M. Vranješ, M. Mojović, L. Mi, I. Estrela-Lopis, J. Böttner, Z. Šaponjić, M. Petković and M. Stepić, J. Nanopart. Res., 2020, 22, 175–187 CrossRef .
A. M. Alotaibi, P. Promdet, G. B. Hwang, J. Li, S. P. Nair, S. Sathasivam, A. Kafizas, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 10480–10489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Ponomarev, E. A. Orlov, N. A. Malikov, Y. V. Tarasov, A. N. Sheveyko, E. S. Permyakova, K. A. Kuptsov, I. A. Dyatlov, S. G. Ignatov, A. S. Ilnitskaya, N. A. Gloushankova, B. Subramanian and D. V. Shtansky, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 516, 146068–146083 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karagoz, N. B. Kiremitler, M. Sakir, S. Salem, M. S. Onses, E. Sahmetlioglu, A. Ceylan and E. Yilmaz, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2020, 188, 109856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Nada, M. Dimitrijevic and T. Rajh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2893–2899 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yurt, M. Ince, S. G. Colak, K. Ocakoglu, O. Er, H. M. Soylu, C. Gunduz, C. B. Avci and C. C. Kurt, Int. J. Pharm., 2017, 524, 467–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Yadav, N. D. Thorat, M. M. Yallapu, S. A. M. Tofail and J. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1461–1470 RSC .
E. A. Rozhkova, I. Ulasov, B. Lai, N. M. Dimitrijevic, M. S. Lesniak and T. Rajh, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3338–3342 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kumar, N. S. Chauhan, A. Mittal and S. Sharma, BioMetals, 2018, 31, 147–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Khan, W. T. Wallace, S. Z. Islam, S. Nagpure, J. Strzalka, J. M. Littleton, S. E. Rankin and B. L. Knutson, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32114–32125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Reyes-Gil, Z. D. Stephens, V. Stavila and D. B. Robinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2202–2213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, C. P. Yang, G. L. Zhang, D. W. Shi, Q. A. Huang, H. B. Xiao, Y. Liu and R. Xiong, Mater. Des., 2016, 106, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. Cao, Z. Yin, L. Cheng and L. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29982–29991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Jinqi Wang	Jinqi Wang received his BS degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Shandong Architecture University in 2019. He is currently pursuing an MS degree at Qingdao University under the supervision of Dr Wei Wang. His research interests mainly focus on the modification of TiO2 photocatalysts.
Wei Wang	Wei Wang received her bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2008, then continued her study at Shandong University and obtained doctor's degree in 2014. During the PhD period, she was funded by the “National Construction of High-level University Public Postgraduate Project” and assigned to the Korea Institute of Materials Science for further study. Currently, she is an associate professor in College of Materials Science and Engineering in Qingdao University and engaged in scientific research. Her research mainly focuses on transparent conductive films, organic photovoltaic devices and photocatalysts.
Jianguo Tang	Professor Dr. Jianguo Tang, the Fellow of Royal Society of Chemistry. His research interest focuses on hybrid materials, to pioneer new hybrids of polymer hosts with wide foreign heterogeneous species for new photonic quantum properties and technologies. His three creations on the metal ion-induced polymeric nano-aggregates (MIPAs), the new concept of polymeric solid solution of heterogeneous species, and the in situ syntheses of heteroatomic clusters in polymeric template, have formed the basis hybrid materials strategy.
TiO2 + hv → e− + h+	(1)
e− induced reduction: 2H+ + 2e− → H2 ΔE = 0 V	(2)
h+ induced oxidation: 2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H ΔE = 1.23 V	(3)
Overall: 2H2O → 2H2 + O2 ΔG = 237.2 kJ mol−1	(4)

 	Fig. 1  The water-splitting process of TiO2.	 

Morphologically and structurally modified TiO2 NPs	Hollow porous TiO2	Sol–gel method	Crystal size: 5.2 nm	Degradation of MB	
40

Specific surface area: 297 nm
Mesoporous TiO2 single crystals	Sol–gel method	Pore size: 20 nm	Semiconductors	
41

Bulky mesoporous TiO2	Sol–gel method	Crystal size: 6.1 nm	—	
42

Specific surface area: 162 m2 g−1
Average pore diameter: 5.4 nm
TiO2 nanospindles	Sol–gel method	Length: 45 nm	—	
43

Width: 15 nm
Hierarchical rutile TiO2 flowers	Hydrothermal method	Width: a few hundred nm	Dye-sensitized solar cells	
44

Length: 3 microns
TiO2 nanoflowers	Hydrothermal method	Rod diameter: 20–50 nm	Dye-sensitized	
45

Rod length: 200 nm	solar cells
TiO2 nanotubes	Other method	Diameter after one-step anodic oxidation: 50 nm	—	
46

Diameter after two-step anodic oxidation: 100 nm
Black-colored TiO2 nanotubes	Other method	Inner diameter: 80 nm	Supercapacitor	
47

Thickness: 10 nm
Tube length: 10 μm
Nobel metal and non-noble metal doped TiO2 NPs	Hierarchical Au@TiO2 nanoflowers	Hydrothermal method	Average diameter: 4.5 μm	H2 production	
48

Ag@TiO2	Hydrothermal method	Average particle size: 37 nm	Disinfection of water	
49

Fe3+@TiO2	Sol–gel method	Diameter: 25 nm	Tetracycline degradation	
50

Fe3+@TiO2	Sol–gel method	Particle size: 200 nm–250 nm	Degradation of MO	
33

Janus Au@TiO2	Hydrothermal method	Crystal size: 50 nm	H2 production	
51

Nd@modified TiO2	Sol–gel method	Crystal size after calcination at 500 °C: 10 nm	Photoelectrochemical cell	
52

Crystal size after calcination at 800 °C: 84 nm
Nd@mesoporous TiO2@SBA-15	Sol–gel method	—	Degradation of MO	
53

Pt-Doped TiO2	Hydrothermal method	20–40 nm	Oxidation of vitamin B3	
54

Pt-Doped mesoporous TiO2	Sol–gel method	Vary with doped Pt	H2 production	
55

Metal oxide TiO2 NPs	TiO2@mesoporous TiO2	Hydrothermal method	TiO2 layer with a thickness of 3 nm	Electron transport layer	
56

CuO@TiO2	Hydrothermal method	Changed with the proportion of Ti and CuO	Electrodes for determination of glucose	
57

TiO2@NiO	Other method	TiO2@NiO: 250–300 nm	H2 production	
58

Carbonaceous material doped TiO2 NPs	TiO2@graphene	Sol–gel method	Agglomeration around 10–20 nm	Degradation of MB	
59

TiO2@carbon	Sol–gel method	1–5 nm	Lithium-ion battery anode	
60

Mesocrystalline Ti3+-TiO2@g-C3N4	Hydrothermal method	Agglomeration around 400–600 nm	H2 production	
61

Graphene/TiO2	Sol–gel method	20 nm ± 5 nm	Degradation of NOx	
62

Dual cocatalyst doped TiO2 NPs	F-Nb co-doped TiO2 films	Sol–gel method	With different calcination temperatures: 17.33 nm −113.45 nm	—	
34

Cu@TiO2@MWCNT	Sol–gel method	Agglomeration around 300–600 nm	H2 production	
63

Mesoporous Fe3O4@Ag@TiO2	Hydrothermal method	50–400 nm	Degradation of MB and MO	
64

Ni@TiO2@graphene	Hydrothermal method	Thickness: 0.4–0.7 nm	Field-effect transistors	
65

SiO2/TiO2@C	Hydrothermal method	—	Lithium-ion battery anode	
66

Air@C@TiO2	Sol–gel method	235–330 nm	Enhancement of colour stability	
67


 	Fig. 2  SEM images of TiO2 NPs synthesized by the sol–gel method (a) samples synthesized by centrifuging treatment, (b) C500, (c) C600, (d) samples stored at 25 °C (e) S500, and (f) S600. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Scheme of the synthesis process of TiO2 NPs; (b and c) SEM images of nano-TiO2 of packing at 400 rpm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 and 35. Copyright 2021, Elsevier; Copyright 2019, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.	 

 	Fig. 4  FESEM images of (a) cross-sectional view of a bare FTO substrate and top-view (inset), (b) early stage of the growth of TiO2 nanorods, (c) typical cross-sectional view of TiO2 nanorods on the FTO substrate, (d) the growth procedure of the TiO2 nanorods, (e) TEM image of the TiO2-Ag NPs, and (f) photocatalytic test of TiO2 samples prepared with varying R = 0, 0.5, 1, 2 and 3, and P25 (from left to right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 and 77. Copyright 2016, Springer Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) SEM images of the WO3–TiO2 heterojunction with backscattered electrons. (c) TEM and (d) HRTEM images of the WO3–TiO2 vertical heterojunction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of self-assembled {001} TiO2 (b and c) TEM and HRTEM images of TiO2 NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98 and 99, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM images of TiO2/MoS2/graphene composites, (b) TEM micrograph of the Fe@Ag@TiO2 composites, (c) hollow TiO2, (d) Cu ion-exchanged hollow TiO2, TEM images of (e) HTS-0.1, (f) HTS-0.2, (g) HTS-0.3, and (h) HTS-0.35 after calcination under a N2 atmosphere, (i) the formation of hollow porous TiO2 nanospheres via encapsulation of CO2 nanobubbles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, 64, 94, 102 and 103. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry; Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2021, Korean Society of Industrial Engineering Chemistry; Copyright 2021, Elsevier; Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) SEM image of fully mesoporous TiO2 crystals grown by seeded nucleation in the bulk of the silica template, (c and d) TEM images of mesoporous TiO2 nanospheres, (e) the formation procedure of carbon-assisted mesoporous TiO2 nanospheres, (f) preparation of the 3D mesoscopic TiO2 structure, (g and h) FESEM images of the uniform mesoporous TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, 105 and 107. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group; Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the formation of a crystalline Ti3+ core/amorphous Ti4+ shell TiO2 particle, (b) TEM images of TiO2, (c) high-magnification TEM images of the typical edge areas of the samples, (d) schematic of the formation of the MnO@TiO2 nanoboxes, (e) TEM and (f) HRTEM images of MnO@TiO2 core–shell nanocubes, (g) schematic of the formation process of the porous core/shell TiO2, (h and i) SEM images of the porous core/shell TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109–111. Copyright 2016, Wiley; Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry; Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of a TiO2 flower array grown at 180 °C, (b and c) SEM images of individual and an array of highly branched TiO2 nanorod structures grown at 210 °C, (d) natural flowers, (e) SEM images of as-prepared flowers, and the inset is an individual flower, (f) TEM image of the TiO2 flower structure, FESEM images of the TiO2 nanotubes fabricated by (g) one-step anodic oxidation and (h) two-step anodic oxidation, (i) SEM image of the as-prepared nanotube structure of TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44–48. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; Copyright 2013, Elsevier; Copyright 2020, Elsevier; Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry; Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of Ti3+-doped meso-TiO2/g-C3N4 composites, (b and c) the photocatalytic activities and the recyclable photocatalytic activity of TCN-31 composite with triethanolamine as a sacrificial agent, (d and e) the photocatalytic activities and recyclable photocatalytic activity of TCN-31 composite with methanol as a sacrificial agent, (f) comparisons of the photocatalytic H2 generation rates of the four rutile TiO2 photocatalysts, (g) volume of H2 generation using Janus and core–shell Au50 nm–TiO2 nanostructures, amorphous TiO2 and bare gold NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, 61 and 109. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2016, Wiley; Copyright 2012, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The mechanism of TiO2 photodegradation, (b) equilibrium adsorption of MB on TiO2-P25, TiO2/rGO, and TiO2/graphene NCMs, (c) schematic illustration of the photocatalytic activity enhancement by the internal polarization of an YF-HA support, (d) light absorbance of MO in the presence of different catalyst samples, (e) degradation rate of MO by SBA-15 and TiO2-SBA-15, 0.1%, (f) photodegradation of MB in tap water and standard seawater in the presence of TiO2 coated with SrPP and CaPP, (g) scheme for the recovery of phenol by a phenol-philic adsorbent, layered silicic acid (H-mag), during the photocatalytic oxidation of benzene over TiO2, (h and i) the performance of TcPcCo/TiO2 and TcPcZn/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53, 59, 135, 138, 142 and 143. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2019, Elsevier; Copyright 2020, Elsevier; Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2005, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Charge-transport times of PSCs based on TiO2 NPs and a sub-microsphere scaffold layer, (b) basic working principle of the TiO2/p-GaAs photocathode, (c) PEC stability and photocurrent of the ALD-grown, initially black and TiO2 film after oxidation in the temperature range from 200 to 500 °C, (d) schematic for the preparation of the solution of PFOTES-coated TiO2 NPs, (e and f) SEM images of the pentacene layers without and with the PFOTES-coated TiO2 nanoparticle layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149, 157, 160 and 161. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; Copyright 2020, Wiley; Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The process for the preparation of SiO2/TiO2@C nanosheets, (b) the relationships between the concentration of oxygen vacancies and the particle size of the starting TiO2, (c) cycling result comparisons up to 100 cycles at 1C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 and 166. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM image of (a) 1.0% Zn,N:TiO2, (b) 1.4% Zn,N:TiO2, and (c) 2.9% Zn,N:TiO2 thin films, (d) PCL/TiO2, (e) PCL/TiO2-Ag NFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171 and 173. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Scheme of the preparation of WO3/TiO2 nanotubes and photographs of the detached and attached membrane on glass. Total reflectance and photographs of (b) TiO2 nanotubes, (c) WO3 on FTO glass and (d) WO3/TiO2 nanotube membrane before and after a coloration cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
