Improved electron transfer and plasmonic effect in dye-sensitized solar cells with bi-functional Nb-doped TiO 2 /Ag ternary nanostructures   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR05652J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR05652J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2718-2729Improved electron transfer and plasmonic effect in dye-sensitized solar cells with bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructures†

        
          
            Jung Tae 
            Park
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Won Seok 
            Chi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Harim 
            Jeon
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jong Hak 
            Kim
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Yonsei University, 262 Seongsanno, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, South Korea. E-mail: jonghak@yonsei.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-2-312-6401;   Tel: +82-2-2123-7799
Received 
      23rd October 2013
    , Accepted 8th December 2013First published on 12th December 2013AbstractTiO2 nanoparticles are surface-modified via atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) with a hydrophilic poly(oxyethylene)methacrylate (POEM), which can coordinate to the Ag precursor, i.e. silver trifluoromethanesulfonate (AgCF3SO3). Following the reduction of Ag ions, a Nb2O5 doping process and calcination at 450 °C, bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructures are generated. The resulting nanostructures are characterized by energy-filtering transmission electron microscopy (EF-TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and UV-visible spectroscopy. The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) based on the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag nanostructure photoanode with a polymerized ionic liquid (PIL) as the solid polymer electrolyte shows an overall energy conversion efficiency (η) of 6.9%, which is much higher than those of neat TiO2 (4.7%) and Nb-doped TiO2 (5.4%). The enhancement of η is mostly due to the increase of current density, attributed to the improved electron transfer properties including electron injection, collection, and plasmonic effects without the negative effects of charge recombination or problems with corrosion. These properties are supported by intensity modulated photocurrent/voltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) and incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements.
1. Introduction
As requirements for renewable energy increase, new types of solar cell technologies have been attracting attention. In this regard, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been considered as promising alternatives to conventional silicon-based solar cells for transforming clean, inexhaustible sunlight into electricity due to their low manufacturing costs and relatively high energy conversion efficiencies.1 During illumination of the DSSCs, electrons are injected from the photoexcited dye sensitizer into the conduction band of the wide band gap metal oxide (e.g. TiO2), from which the electrons diffuse through the metal oxide layer and are then collected by a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) substrate. The oxide dye is regenerated via reduction by a redox electrolyte of I−/I3−. The oxidized form of the redox electrolyte diffuses to the counter electrode and completes the circuit to generate a photocurrent. Research on DSSCs has been focused on achieving a higher energy conversion efficiency based on the design of suitable photoanode structures,2–5 the synthesis of new dye sensitizers,6–8 the preparation of electrochemically stable counter electrodes,9–11 and the fabrication of optimized ion transport electrolytes.12,13 However, further improvements of device performance still remain an active area of technological research.
The wide band gap metal oxide layer is a key element because this layer performs multi-functions: (1) it serves as a substrate on which the dye sensitizers adsorb, (2) it transfers the electrons, and (3) it acts as a diffusion passage for redox electrolytes. In this regard, one way to successfully enhance the chemical and electronic properties is to introduce multi-functional doping species within the photoanode structure, such as niobium (Nb). This approach has the beneficial effect of enhancing electron transport properties such as enhanced electron injection and collection in the devices, which could further improve the short circuit current density (Jsc). In addition, the conduction band edge potential (Ecb) difference of Nb2O5 is approximately 100 mV more negative than that of TiO2. This potential difference can form an energy barrier at the electrode/electrolyte interface, leading to a decrease in the rate of charge recombination and electron back reaction loss, thus enhancing the open-circuit voltage (Voc). For example, the Huang group14 developed a Nb-doped TiO2 photoanode with enhanced electron transport properties for DSSC applications, which was further extended by other research groups.15–17 Thus, to address this issue, the construction of a Nb-doped TiO2 photoanode is a feasible and effective approach.
Another approach is to incorporate metal nanoparticles such as silver (Ag) and gold (Au) into the photoanode structure for improved chemical and electronic properties, e.g. the plasmonic effect. Localized surface plasmon resonance from metal nanoparticles can excite dye sensitizers more efficiently than incident far field light, and thus the metal nanoparticles function as light-harvesting antennae for dye sensitizers with minimal impact on other material properties.18–24 Despite the improved cell performance in the plasmon-enhanced DSSCs, the metal nanoparticles could potentially lead to problems such as increased charge recombination, the back reaction of photogenerated carriers, and detrimental corrosion caused by direct contact with the dye and the electrolyte, which would result in a lower Voc. To tackle this problem, core–shell structures have been applied which could inhibit the charge recombination, back reaction, and detrimental corrosion at the interface of the metal nanoparticles and dye/electrolyte.18,19 The Snaith group presented an effective fabrication route for plasmon-enhanced DSSCs based on the Au@SiO2 nanoparticle as a chemical additive.18 In addition, the Hammond and Belcher groups have demonstrated an enhanced plasmon effect in DSSCs and reported energy conversion efficiencies (4.4% at 100 mW cm−2 for liquid electrolytes) much greater than those without core–shell Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles.19 Nevertheless, more conventional fabrication approaches (e.g. all-in-on photoanode systems or bi-functional plasmon enhanced solar cells) remain technologically important due to their possible solar cell applications. Therefore, a systematic study is needed to clarify multi-functional doping in tandem with the plasmon effect on the chemical and electronic structure of the nanocrystalline TiO2 photoanode and its impact on the performance of photovoltaic devices.
DSSCs based on a nanocrystalline TiO2 layer as a photoanode have reached efficiency levels of 12.3%.25 In addition, for the continuous enhancement of cell performance and stability, a fundamental understanding of the optimized ion transport electrolytes is necessary. For this purpose, solid-state or quasi-solid-state DSSCs are believed to have superior long-term stability and thus have been considered as alternatives to liquid electrolyte-based DSSCs. Recently, the Kanatzidis group has reported a high efficiency of 8.5% by using CsSnI3 perovskite as a hole conductor.26 Additionally, the independent Snaith and Park groups achieved high efficiencies of 10.9% and 9.7%, respectively, by using methyl ammonium lead iodide [(CH3NH3)PbI3] and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine) 9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) as the light harvester and hole conductor, respectively.27,28 Our group also reported high efficiencies of 7.4% and 7.5% based on a graft copolymer-directed TiO2 photoanode and ionic liquid (IL)-grafted alumina (Al2O3) nanoparticles, respectively.29,30
In this work, bi-functional ternary nanostructures consisting of a TiO2 core, Ag dot, and Nb2O5 shell were synthesized via atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), selective Ag reduction, and a doping process. The resultant nanostructures were used as photoanodes in DSSCs and characterized in detail by energy-filtering transmission electron microscopy (EF-TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and UV-visible spectroscopy. The electrochemical and photovoltaic properties of DSSCs were characterized by intensity-modulated photocurrent/voltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) and incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE). Particular attention was paid to two kinds of electrolytes for the fabrication of DSSCs: (1) solid-state polymerized ionic liquid (PIL), i.e., poly(1-((4 ethenylphenyl)methyl)-3-butyl-imidazolium iodide) (PEBII), and (2) liquid electrolyte consisting of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, iodine (I2), guanidinium thiocyanate, and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in acetonitrile and valeronitrile. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no report on such a bi-functional ternary nanostructure for DSSC applications.
2. Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the preparation of the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure via subsequent ATRP, selective reduction, and a doping process. The morphological changes in three materials, i.e. pristine TiO2, TiO2–POEM, and the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure, were characterized by EF-TEM analysis, as shown in Fig. 2. EF-TEM has been demonstrated to be a very versatile and powerful tool for surface imaging at the nanometer scale of inorganic and organic materials. The spherical shape and relative uniform size (approximately 30 nm) of the pristine TiO2 could be observed by the EF-TEM micrographs (Fig. 2a). Upon combining pristine TiO2 with hydrophilic poly(oxyethylene) methacrylate (POEM) via the ATRP process, the morphology of the TiO2–POEM was changed to an interconnected structure with a polymer shell of a thickness of below 10 nm (Fig. 2b), which indicates the formation of the interactive coordination seed sites for the next steps, i.e. selective Ag nanoparticle reduction and the Nb doping process. In addition, the EF-TEM images of the TiO2–POEM indicated that the addition of the hydrophilic polymer (POEM) has no obvious influence on the TiO2 crystallite size compared to the pristine TiO2. Upon the introduction of AgCF3SO3 as a Ag precursor and subsequent selective reduction by heat, followed by the doping process with Nb(OCH2CH3)5 as a Nb-doped precursor and calcination at 450 °C, a bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure (shell/core/dot) was generated (Fig. 2c). The corresponding high magnification EF-TEM image of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure is also provided in Fig. S1.† Viewing the morphological characteristics of the bi-functional ternary nanostructure, Ag nanoparticles (dot) with a diameter of 8 to 12 nm were homogeneously distributed over the pristine TiO2 (core) nanoparticles surface and at the borders where the Nb-doped (shell) was seated.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the preparation route for the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure via three steps. 
 Fig. 2  EF-TEM micrographs of (a) pristine TiO2, (b) TiO2–POEM, and (c) the bi-fuctional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure. 
The use of Ag nanoparticles below 10 nm diameter in the photoanode has been shown to be more effective to enhance the performance of plasmonic DSSCs. A similar structure consisting of Ag nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 3 to 8 nm in the photoanode could lead to a 1.25 times higher increase in energy conversion efficiency.31 According to a previous study,23 the total number of Ag nanoparticles can be determined by Total number of Ag nanoparticles = total number of moles/number of moles per Ag nanoparticle = concentration × volume/(4/3)πr3 × ρ/Mw(1)herein, r is the radius of the Ag nanoparticle, ρ is the density, and Mw is the atomic weight.23 Using this relation, the density of Ag nanoparticles in the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure was determined to be 5.3 × 1014 cm−3.
It could be seen that the coating of the Nb-doped shell was uniform and continuous on the pristine TiO2 nanoparticles surface with approximately 5 nm thickness. As mentioned in the Introduction, there are several possible mechanisms by which the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure can cause an improvement of cell performance relating to the characteristics gained by selective Ag reduction and Nb-doping. First, the enhanced localized surface plasmon resonance effect of Ag nanoparticles in ternary nanostructures would be capable of greatly increasing the effectiveness of dye materials to harvest photons. It is well-known that when incident light excites the coherent oscillation of the free electrons of metal nanoparticles such as Ag or Au, it creates a collective oscillation of the conduction electrons called a plasmon, leading to an enhanced electromagnetic field that can then be coupled to the photoactive absorption region. In this context, the enhanced plasmon excitation of the Ag nanoparticles in the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure would increase the optical density of incoming light and improve the chance for dye molecules to generate photocurrents in the photoanode over a broad range of visible wavelengths.
Second, a wide band gap material (i.e. the Nb-doped shell) serving as an effective energy barrier at the photoanode/dye/electrolyte interface in the ternary nanostructure would energetically prevent the recombination process and delay the electron back reaction to provide a synergistic effect on cell performance. From the viewpoint of DSSC operations, irradiation of the dye molecules promotes the ground state to an excited state. Subsequently, the excited dye molecule transfers an electron diffusely through the photoanode toward the conducting substrate, although the longer the electrons spend in the photoanode, the higher the probability of their undergoing a recombination process before being collected, which often limits Voc. In this regard, the Nb-doped shell coating layer in the bi-functional ternary nanostructure would form an efficient energy barrier at the photoanode/dye/electrolyte interface, which suppresses the electron recombination process and is expected to enhance the Voc in DSSCs. Since the conduction band potential of the Nb-doped shell is approximately 100 meV negative of the potential of the TiO2 core, the electrons would facilitate injection into the electrodes; i.e., the electrons will favor the material having the more positive conduction band. A detailed discussion on the correlation between the electron recombination process and Voc in DSSCs can be found in the following analysis. In addition, when an energy barrier (Nb-doped shell coating layer) is formed at the surface of the ternary nanostructure, it is possible to not only reduce interfacial recombination but also improve electron transfer including electron injection (ηinj) and collection efficiency (ηcc) in the DSSCs, thus increasing its Jsc with respect to a control group. This expectation is in good agreement with what was seen in the IPCE spectrum of the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure.
Third, the Nb-doped shell layer in the ternary nanostructure also would have a beneficial effect on electron mobility due to facile electron transport during device operation. According to previous research on electron transfer characteristics at the photoanode and electrolyte interface, a smaller effective electron mass (m*) leads to beneficial effects on electron mobility (μ) in DSSCs.32,33 Therefore, we can expect that a wide band gap material such as Nb2O5 in the ternary nanostructure gives rise to a smaller effective electron mass (m*) compared to the control group, leading to improved electron mobility (μ) characteristics. A narrow band gap material such as TiO2 provides a high effective electron mass (m*) value (∼10 and 50 me), whereas a wide band gap material such as Nb2O5 provides a low effective electron mass (m*) value (4 me).32,33 In addition, the electrical conductivity in DSSCs is related to the electron transfer ability at the photoanode and electrolyte interface according to: σ = neμ(2)where n denotes the concentration of electrons, e is the elementary charge, and μ is the electron mobility. Considering that the concentration of electrons (n) and elementary charge (e) at the photoanode and electrolyte interface are constant under our experimental conditions, the relationship between electrical conductivity (σ) and the electron mobility (μ) can be expressed as a linear function. Therefore, the Nb-doped shell layer in the bi-functional ternary nanostructure suggests that the enhanced overall mobility of the excited electrons is related to the conductivity, which results in the enhancement of electron transport through the photoanode in DSSCs. Because the improved electron conductivity strongly influences the facile electron transport properties of the polycrystalline photoanode, it plays an important role in device applications. In addition, our suggestions about the relationship between electron transport and cell performance are consistent with a previous study by the Huang group which suggests that the change of Jsc was affected by electron transport in the photoanode network.14 The Nb-doped shell layer plays a pivotal role in not only protecting the plasmonic metal Ag nanoparticles from corrosion by the electrolyte but also inhibiting the charge trapping between the metal (Ag) and semiconductor (TiO2), which is related to the recombination and back reaction of photogenerated carriers. Similar structures consisting of plasmonic nanoparticles@metal oxides core–shell were employed to enhance cell performance without detrimental side effects on charge recombination.19,20,34 As previously stated, the effects of the selective Ag nanoparticles reduction and the Nb doping process on photovoltaic parameters such as enhanced plasmon effect, energy barrier, and facile electron transport are closely related to the alteration of the characteristic structure of the photoanode. Hence, these issues will be intensively discussed in the next section. In particular, in the subsequently outlined electrochemical studies such as IMPS and IMVS, this method proved to be sufficient for preventing Ag nanoparticles corrosion by the surrounding electrolyte.
Structural changes of the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure were investigated by XRD analysis, as shown in Fig. 3a. In particular, the enlarged pattern of the peak corresponding to (101) planes of the anatase phase TiO2 is presented in Fig. 3b. The peak locations and relative intensities for TiO2 and Ag are cited from the Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards (JCPDS) database. The pristine TiO2 nanoparticles exhibited well-developed diffraction peaks centered at 2θ = 25.5, 37.9, 48.2, 54.3, and 55.2°, which corresponded to the (101), (004), (200), (105), and (211) reflections, respectively, of the anatase phase TiO2 (ICDD-JCPDS, no. 86-1157). There was also a small portion of rutile phase in the pristine TiO2 (P25), as can be seen in the small diffraction peaks at 2θ = 27.6, 36.4, and 41.2°, assigned to the (110), (101), and (111) reflections, respectively. After the ATRP process of POEM to the pristine TiO2, two broad peaks with weak intensity appeared at 7.2 and 17.6° which were attributed to the amorphous flexible molecular structures of the POEM chains.35 In addition, the TiO2–POEM exhibited several sharp crystalline anatase phase TiO2 peaks with similar position and crystallinity as the pristine TiO2, suggesting that the crystalline structure of the TiO2 nanoparticles was not significantly altered by the polymer grafting. Thus, the POEM shell layer not only functions as interactive coordination seed sites for the following selective reduction and doping process, but also protects the TiO2 cores from reacting with the aggregates to form larger TiO2 particles. The selective Ag reduction and the Nb doping process have three remarkable effects on the structure of Nb-doped TiO2/Ag. First, upon the introduction of the Ag precursor in TiO2–POEM and subsequent selective reduction by heating, two additional peaks at 2θ values of 38 and 44° appeared that were assigned to the (111) and (200) Bragg's reflections, respectively, of the face-centered cubic structure of metallic Ag (ICDD-JCPDS Ag, no. 04-0783). This result clearly reveals the presence of highly crystalline metallic Ag nanoparticles anchored on the surfaces of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure without preferred orientations. In addition, this observation suggests that the Ag nanoparticles in the ternary nanostructure can endure thermal treatment without detachment, which is essential in fabricating the photoanode of DSSCs. Second, in contrast to our expectation, we could not see any crystalline characteristic peaks of niobium oxide in the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure. These XRD results can be explained by the fact that amorphous state niobium oxide can be crystallized to a pseudo-hexagonal Nb2O5 at a temperature of at least 600 °C.36 In other words, the crystallization process of niobium oxide certainly did not occur at 450 °C, which was chosen as the calcination temperature in this study. On the other hand, from an enlarged version of the XRD pattern (Fig. 3b), one can see that the maximum peak position for the anatase phase TiO2 (101) plane shifted to a higher 2θ value by approximately 0.1°, indicating the change of d-spacing due to epitaxial growth of the amorphous-state niobium oxide on the TiO2 matrix. The value of d-spacing can be calculated from the peak maximum using Bragg's law (3): nλ = 2dsinθ(3)where n is the positive integer, λ is the wavelength (1.5406 Å), d is the inter-planar distance, and θ is the angle from the crystal plane.37 According to the above Bragg relation, the inter-segmental d-spacing values of the pristine TiO2 and bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure were determined to be 3.49 and 3.47 Å, respectively. The decrease of d-spacing is presumably attributable to compressive strain, which arises from the differences in the bonding characteristics between niobium and oxygen. A similar effect in the Nb-doping on the TiO2 phase transformation was reported by Chen et al.38 Third, the halo pattern of amorphous POEM chains was not detected for the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag, indicating the complete removal of organic polymers via the calcination process at 450 °C. Therefore, these results support the assertion that the calcination process not only decomposes the organic material POEM (shell) from the surface of TiO2 (core) nanoparticles, but also completely replaces the coordination seed sites POEM (shell) with the doped Nb (shell). These XRD results were also supported by the Nb 3d XPS spectra for the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure, as shown in Fig. 3c. Two distinct peaks were observed with binding energies of 207.0 and 209.9 eV, corresponding to the binding energies of the Nb 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 peaks, respectively. The binding energy difference of 2.9 eV corresponds to the Nb 3d level splitting, which is consistent with the previously reported values.39 Accordingly, these XPS peaks indicate that the doped Nb (shell) was incorporated into the TiO2 lattice. The weight ratio of TiO2, Nb and Ag was approximately 11.1:1.3:1, as determined by XPS analysis.
 Fig. 3  XRD patterns of pristine TiO2, TiO2–POEM, and the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure: (a) whole range and (b) narrow range. Anatase phase TiO2 and Ag nanoparticles are denoted by A and Ag, respectively, based on the ICDD-JCPDS card for anatase phase TiO2 (no. 86-1157) and Ag (no. 04-0783), respectively. (c) XPS profiles of Nb 3d regions for the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure and (d) UV-visible absorption spectra of TiO2, TiO2–POEM, and the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag nanostructure in deionized water. 
For the purpose of further investigating the influence of selective Ag reduction and the Nb doping process in the TiO2–POEM template, UV-visible absorption spectroscopy was used to study the chemical alternations of the TiO2 surfaces, as shown in Fig. 3d. The onset of absorption allows us to calculate the Eg (band gap energy) value for TiO2 nanoparticles by using the Planck's eqn (4): Eg = hc/λ = 1240/λ(4)where Eg is the band gap energy (eV), h is Planck's constant, c is the velocity of light (m s−1), and λ is the wavelength (nm). UV-visible absorption spectra of pristine TiO2 nanoparticles exhibited a broad absorption peak at 330 nm, attributed to the presence of polytitanium (Ti–O–Ti)n clusters in the bulk state of TiO2.40 The Eg value of pristine TiO2 was estimated to be 3.14 eV, according to the Planck equation. Upon graft polymerization of POEM to pristine TiO2, a more broad and slightly red-shifted UV-visible absorption peak at around 300–330 nm was observed, probably related to the modification in the surface properties of TiO2 nanoparticles.41 Following the selective Ag reduction and the Nb doping process in the TiO2–POEM template, two significant characteristic absorption peaks could be seen in the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure. Upon the introduction of the Nb precursor to TiO2–POEM for the doping process, the onset of absorption was shifted slightly to a shorter wavelength (from 395 to 387 nm) compared to the pristine TiO2. This result reveals that the Nb doping process in TiO2–POEM changes the chemical environment in the TiO2 surface, that is, a small increase of band gap energy when Nb is in interstitial positions. The Eg value of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure was calculated to be 3.20 eV, which is slightly higher than that of pristine TiO2. From this result, we can anticipate that the presence of the Nb shell layer in the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure will provide a positive effect on cell performance in terms of Voc. A negative shift in the conduction band edge potential (Ecb) of TiO2 for the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure may increase the energy gap between the Fermi level (Vfb) and the potential of the I−/I3− redox species in the electrolyte (Vred), resulting in Voc. Theoretically, under illumination, the Voc value is estimated from eqn (5) Voc = |Vfb − Vred|(5)where Vfb is the potential of the Fermi level and Vred is the standard reduction potential of a redox couple.42 Assuming that Vred does not vary with the addition of Nb into the TiO2–POEM and that Vfb is located near the Ecb, it is expected that the Voc depends on the Vfb, which is related to the Ecb position. Therefore, it is expected that the introduction of Nb into the TiO2–POEM results in the enhancement of Voc not only by decreasing the charge recombination and the electron back reaction at the photoanode/dye/electrolyte interface (energy barrier effect, as shown in the Introduction), but also due to the higher Ecb with respect to the vacuum as compared to the control group (increased absolute value between the Vfb and the Vred). In addition, the Nb doped layer in the ternary nanostructure will prevent direct contact of the corrosive I−/I3− electrolyte with the Ag nanoparticles, resulting in suppressed corrosion during DSSC operations. Second, upon the introduction of an Ag precursor to the TiO2–POEM and subsequent selective reduction by heating, the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure showed a dramatic increase in the absorption spectrum in the visible range with the appearance of a broad peak ranging from 400 nm to 460 nm, which is attributed to the plasmon resonance absorption peak arising from the Ag nanoparticles.43 Compared with the UV-vis absorption spectra of Ag nanoparticles based on polymer templates in our earlier reports,43,44 the absorption peak of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure exhibited a red shift to 460 nm, which is due to the higher refractive index surrounding the Ag of the inorganic material TiO2 than that of the organic polymer template. Thus, we can expect that the improved plasmon excitation in the optical density of incoming light near the surface of the Ag nanoparticle in the ternary nanostructure is capable of significantly enhancing the light harvesting efficiency, leading to the higher energy conversion efficiency of DSSCs.
The mechanism underlying the photovoltaic performance improvement in the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure was investigated by measuring the electron transport and charge recombination properties through IMPS and IMVS measurements. Diffusion coefficients (Dn), electron lifetime (τr), electron diffusion length (Ln), and electron collection efficiency (ηcc) results as functions of Jsc derived from IMPS and IMVS measurements are shown in Fig. 4a–d, respectively. The Dn and τr in the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag nanostructure can be obtained by fitting the frequency-dependent response using the following analytical relations: τt = 1/2πft(6) Dn = d2/2.35τt(7) τr = 1/2πfr(8)where ft is the characteristic frequency at the minimum of the imaginary component of the IMPS result, τt is the electron transport time, d is the thickness of the photoanode, and fr is the characteristic frequency at the minimum of the imaginary component of the IMVS result. The competition between the transport and recombination of electrons is reflected in the Ln and ηcc values of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag nanostructure, which can be expressed as: Ln = (Dnτr)1/2(9) ηcc = 1 − τt/τr(10)where Dn is the diffusion coefficient, τr is the electron lifetime, and τt is the electron transport time in the previous IMPS and IMVS analysis.45–48
 Fig. 4  (a) Diffusion coefficients (Dn), (b) electron lifetime (τr), (c) electron diffusion length (Ln), and (d) electron collection efficiency (ηcc) as functions of the Jsc for the two solid electrolyte DSSCs fabricated from pristine TiO2 and the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanode measured by IMPS and IMVS. 

Fig. 4a shows that the Dn values of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag-based DSSC are always greater than those of the pristine TiO2 over the light intensity ranges. Furthermore, the τr and Ln values of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag-based cell were greater than those of the pristine TiO2-based cell, as shown in Fig. 4b and c. This significant improvement of electron transport and reduced charge recombination in the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure can be understood by examining two basic causes. The first reason is related to the enhanced mobility and conductivity of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag nanostructure arising from the smaller effective electron mass within the Nb-doped shell, resulting in improved electron transport for a longer distance with less diffusive hindrance. The second is associated with the wide band gap material Nb-doped shell in the bi-functional ternary nanostructure, which can afford an effective energy barrier at the photoanode/dye/electrolyte interface to reduce the possibility of electron trapping for charge recombination and electron back reaction while enhancing the electron injection efficiency (ηinj). In addition, under the illumination state, the Voc related to the recombination or back reactions occurring at the photoanode and electrolyte interface can be described with the following equation: Voc = (RT/nF)ln(AI/(nok1(I3−) + nok2(D+)))(11)where R is the molar gas constant, T is the temperature, F is the Faraday constant, n is the reaction order for triiodide (I3−) and electrons, A is the electrode area, I is the incident photon flux, no is the concentration of accessible electron states in the conduction band, and k1 and k2 are the kinetic constants of the back reaction of the injected electrons with triiodide (I3−) and the recombination of these electrons with oxidized dyes (D+), respectively.49 Therefore, we can expect that Voc will depend logarithmically on the inverse of the kinetic constant of the back reaction of the injected electrons with I3− (k1) and the recombination of these electrons with D+ (k2). Accordingly, the reduced possibility of electron trapping for charge recombinations and electron back reactions of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag nanostructure implies that ηinj and Voc can be enhanced by wide band gap material Nb-doped shells introduced as energy barriers in DSSCs. Furthermore, the ηcc is also a significant factor that directly influences cell performance since it is related to the competition between transport and the recombination of electrons. From Fig. 4d, we observe a higher ηcc in the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag nanostructure-based DSSC compared to that of pristine TiO2. In addition, the ηcc for Nb-doped TiO2/Ag cells remained nearly constant under various light intensities while a decreasing tendency in the ηcc was observed for pristine TiO2 cells under high light illumination conditions, which leads to an enhanced Jsc of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag-based cells even at high illumination. In addition, it is noted that the exposed Ag nanoparticles on the TiO2 nanoparticles are insulated from the electrolyte via the Nb-doped shell, inhibiting the charge recombination at the Ag/electrolyte interface while not affecting the regeneration of the dye from the electrolyte. The dye loading was not significantly different among TiO2, Nb-doped TiO2 and the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure (Fig. S2†), indicating a small effect of the Nb-shell on the dye anchoring. Also, the long-term stability effect of the Nb-shell on dye loading was not clear when measured after 7 days. However, the suppression of the electron recombination process by the Nb shell was confirmed by EIS curves of DSSCs measured under dark conditions (Fig. S3†).
The localized electric fields by the plasmonic metal nanoparticles can excite dyes more effectively than the incident far field light for increased light harvesting efficiency. In addition, the enhancement of DSSC performance with energy barrier doping in the nanostructured photoanode is either associated with improved electron transport, the suppression of recombination, or the shift of the conduction band. Therefore, to reveal the effect of the plasmonic metal nanoparticle and the energy barrier doping in the nanostructured photoanode, the absolute IPCE values as a function of wavelength for the devices composed of pristine TiO2 and Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanodes were measured and are shown in Fig. 5a. The IPCE is determined by the light harvesting efficiency of the sensitized TiO2 photoanode (ηlh), the efficiency of electron injection from the excited sensitizer into the photoanode conduction band (ηijh), and the electron collection efficiency of photo-generated charge carriers (ηcol).50 In particularly, the ηlh is related to the light management characteristic by a sensitizer. The other significant parameters include the ηijh and ηcol associated with the cascading energy band matching, the electron diffusion coefficient (Dn), and the electron lifetime (τr). As can be seen in Fig. 5a, the DSSC using the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanode showed a better photoelectrical response, with an IPCE obviously higher than that of the pristine TiO2-based device over the entire visible light wavelength range. Compared to the pristine TiO2 device, the incorporation of the Nb-doped shell and Ag nanoparticle dot in the bi-functional ternary nanostructure device led to a 20% increase in the IPCE around 525 nm. The improvement in the IPCE value suggests that devices based on bi-functional ternary nanostructures have better ηlh and more ηijh and ηcol behavior than those of pristine TiO2. ηlh can be increased by plasmon-enhanced light absorption by Ag nanoparticles, while ηinj, and ηcol can be improved by Nb-doped shell surface treatment by effectively insulating the exposed Ag nanoparticles from the oxidized form of the electrolyte, as shown in previous IMPS/IMVS studies. Furthermore, a slight red shift of the IPCE spectra was observed for the DSSC with the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure, which is due to the increase in the refractive index of the environment resulting from plasmonic coupling between the metal particles.51 The increase of the IPCE value was smaller than that of the overall absorption value, which is because the optimized thick photoanodes have little effect on photo-absorption in the strong absorption range of dye sensitizer,23 as similar results were reported previously.19,52 For example, the Hammond and Belcher group observed a slight increase in the IPCE value compared to the optical density when metal@oxide core–shell nanostructures were incorporated.19 Also, the Lee group found that the increase of the optical density in the plasmonic TiO2/core–shell structure leads to a slight enhancement of the IPCE value.52
 Fig. 5  (a) Absolute and (b) normalized IPCE spectra of the solid electrolyte DSSCs based on pristine TiO2 and the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanode, and using a solid electrolyte of poly(1-((4-ethenylphenyl)methyl)-3-butyl-imidazolium iodide) (PEBII). 
On the other hand, the spectrally selective improvement of light harvesting is considerable in the normalized IPCE spectra for these two devices, as shown in Fig. 5b. Notably, the IPCE value of DSSCs based on Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructures showed a significant broadening at 550–650 nm as compared with pristine TiO2. Such broadening of the spectrum domain suggests increased light harvesting in this range, which is attributed to the enhanced plasmonic effect by the Ag nanoparticles in the ternary nanostructure which maximizes device performance. There was a slight difference between the wavelength maximum in the IPCE spectra (with electrolyte and dye sensitizer) and the absorption peak with Ag nanoparticles in UV-visible spectroscopy (without electrolyte and dye sensitizer) for the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure. The maximum peak position of IPCE was red-shifted from the UV-vis absorption peak, which is due to optical interference of the Ag nanoparticles by the electrolyte and/or the Ru based sensitizer in the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure. Similarly, Hupp et al. observed a red shift in the wavelength maximum in the IPCE spectra relative to the absorption peak when Ag nanoparticles were introduced to enhance solar cell performance.31 A significantly higher IPCE value in the higher wavelength region could be related to the improved electron transfer properties of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure. Kim et al. observed that TiO2 nanoparticles functionalized with Nb exhibited an enhanced IPCE value in the higher wavelength region than those of the control group.53
The performances of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanodes were evaluated in DSSCs with N719 Ru-dye, a Pt-coated counter electrode, and two types of electrolytes (solid and liquid type) under one sun (AM 1.5) illumination, as shown in Fig. 6. In addition, reference devices were fabricated using pristine TiO2 and Nb-doped TiO2 as the photoanode materials. The device parameters including Voc, Jsc, FF, and η are tabulated in Table 1 for easy comparison. The thickness of the photoanode was approximately 7 μm. The solid electrolyte DSSCs fabricated with the pristine TiO2 photoanode and the solid electrolyte showed η as low as 4.7%, mostly due to a lower Jsc value (10.2 mA cm−2). After the surface of the photoanode was treated with the Nb precursor (Nb-doped TiO2), Jsc was increased to 11.7 mA cm−2 with a similar FF of 0.54, while Voc was slightly improved to 0.85 V. Subsequently, the η of the DSSC was improved to 5.4%. In particular, the Jsc was found to be highly improved for the DSSC with the Nb-doped TiO2, attributable to the smaller effective electron mass (m*) and the wide band gap characteristics of the Nb-doped shell structure, which could enhance electron transfer properties such as electron injection and collection in the DSSCs. Some possible contributions to the improved Voc value include the reduced charge recombination, electron back reaction loss, and the raising of the Ecb of the photoanode by the Nb-doped shell structure. The increase of the Ecb of the photoanode by the Nb-doped shell structure was also characterized using optical absorption spectra (Fig. S4†). The optical absorption spectra of the Nb-doped TiO2 photoanode was slightly shifted to a shorter wavelength with a band gap transition. This result suggests that Ecb has a negative shift with Nb doping in the TiO2 lattice, which is consistent with the results reported by Nikolay et al.17 The Voc of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure was similar to that of Nb-doped TiO2, but the Jsc of the former (14.8 mA cm−2) was 1.26 times higher than that of the latter (11.7 mA cm−2). Thus, the η (6.9%) of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure was 28% higher than that of the Nb-doped TiO2 (5.4%), indicating the important role of Ag nanoparticles. It should be noted that a solid polymer electrolyte DSSC with 6.9% efficiency at 100 mW cm−2 is among the highest observed for N719 dye.29,30,54–58 As previously discussed, the Jsc value was interpreted by correlating the IPCE with the light harvesting properties: Jsc = qηIPCEI0 = qηlhηinjηcolI0(12)where q is the elementary charge, ηIPCE is the IPCE efficiency value, I0 is the light flux, ηlh is the light harvest efficiency of a cell, ηinj is the electron injection efficiency, and ηcol is the electron collection efficiency.57 Therefore, the drastic improvement in Jsc comes from the increased ηlh by the plasmonic-enhanced Ag nanoparticles in the bi-functional ternary nanostructure, which leads to increased η values. In addition, it is noted that metallic nanoparticles such as Ag and Au are not only good plasmonic-enhanced materials, but also often serve as recombination sites for photogenerated charge carriers, which often limits Voc. However, the Nb-doped shell in the bi-functional ternary nanostructure has a good affinity to Ag nanoparticles, effectively insulating the exposed Ag nanoparticle sites from the oxidized form of the electrolyte which could help prevent corrosion problems of metal nanoparticles. Therefore, the adsorption of the Nb-doped shell onto the exposed Ag nanoparticle sites substantially retards the charge recombination between the Ag nanoparticles and the electrolyte, leading to the effective utilization of the plasmonic effect without any side effects. Similar results were obtained for the DSSCs fabricated with liquid electrolytes in which iodine was used, as shown in Fig. 6b and Table 1. The Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure showed a smaller increase in Voc than expected in the solid electrolyte DSSCs. In order to clearly investigate the effect of the Nb shell on Voc values, the thickness of the TiO2 photoanode was increased from 7 to 14 μm, in which the overall Voc values are reduced due to insufficient pore-infiltration of the solid electrolyte (Fig. S5 and Table S1†). The positive effect of the Nb shell on Voc values was clearly observed for high thickness of the TiO2 photoanode. It is therefore concluded that a considerable efficiency enhancement in the DSSC fabricated with Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanodes is due to the synergy of improved electron transfer including electron injection and collection, and the plasmonic effect. The bi-functionalities of the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructures could suggest a new strategy for enhancing the performances of various photo-electrochemical devices.
 Fig. 6  
J–V curves of DSSCs fabricated using pristine TiO2, Nb-doped TiO2, and the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure at 100 mW cm−2 upon using (a) a solid PEBII electrolyte and (b) a liquid electrolyte consisting of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, I2, guanidinium thiocyanate, and 4-tert-butylpyridine in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic properties of three types of DSSCs fabricated using TiO2, Nb-doped TiO2 and the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure with solid and liquid state electrolytes at 100 mW cm−2. The thickness of the electrode is approximately 7 μma




Photoanode
Electrolyte

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)





a Solid electrolyte: poly(1-((4ethenylphenyl)methyl)-3-butyl-imidazolium iodide), PEBII, and liquid electrolyte: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide/I2/guanidinium thiocyanate/4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile and valeronitrile.





TiO2
Solid
0.84
10.2
0.54
4.7


Liquid
0.71
12.2
0.64
5.5


Nb-doped TiO2
Solid
0.85
11.7
0.54
5.4


Liquid
0.73
14.1
0.65
6.8


Nb-doped TiO2/Ag
Solid
0.85
14.8
0.55
6.9


Liquid
0.73
16.1
0.64
7.6




3. Conclusions
This study presents a novel method for the preparation of a bi-functional ternary nanostructure for DSSC applications with an Ag dot and a Nb2O5 shell adsorbed onto the TiO2 core. TiO2 nanoparticles were surface-modified with hydrophilic POEM long chains, which can coordinate to Ag and Nb precursors via the ATRP process. Using a combination of selective reduction and doping processes, bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructures were prepared. The DSSCs based on the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag photoanodes showed a higher efficiency than those with pristine TiO2 or Nb-doped TiO2. Upon using PEBII as a solid PIL electrolyte, a high energy conversion efficiency of 6.9% at 100 mW cm−2 could be achieved. The remarkable enhancement of the photovoltaic performance is mainly attributed to the improved electron transfer properties including electron injection, collection, and plasmonic effects without unintentionally introducing other complications such as an increased charge recombination or corrosion problems. We believe that research aiming to enhance light management in other solar cell devices can take advantage of this investigation.
4. Experimental section
Materials
Commercial TiO2 (P25) was purchased from Degussa, Germany. 2-Chloropropionyl chloride (CPC, >97%), triethylamine (TEA, >99.5%), 4-(dimethylamino) pyridine (DMAP, >99%), poly(oxyethylene methacrylate) (poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate, POEM, Mn = 475 g mol−1), 1,1,4,7,10,10-hexamethyltriethylene-tetramine (HMTETA), copper(I) chloride (CuCl), silver trifluoromethanesulfonate (AgCF3SO3 >99%), niobium ethoxide (Nb(OCH2CH3)5), titanium(IV) bis(ethyl acetoacetato)diisopropoxide, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, iodine (I2), guanidinium thiocyanate, 4-tert-butylpyridine, sodium hydroxide (NaOH), 1-butylimidazole, 4-chloromethylstyrene, lithium iodide (LiI), ethyl acetate, magnesium sulfate (MgSO4), and 2,2′-azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN), and chloroplatinic acid hexahydrate (H2PtCl6) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Methylene dichloride (MC, 99.8%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.9%), acetonitrile (99.9%), butanol (99.9%), 2-propanol (99.9%), chloroform (99.9%), ethanol (99.9%), diethylether (99.9%), and valeronitrile were purchased from J. T. Baker. Deionized water (>18 MΩ m) was obtained with a water purification system made by Millipore Corporation. Ruthenium dye (535-bisTBA, N719) and Surlyn (60 μm thick) were purchased from Solaronix, Switzerland. A fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-conducting glass substrate (TEC8, 8 ohms sq−1, 2.3 mm thick) was purchased from Pilkington, France. All the solvent and chemical reagents used in the experiments were obtained from commercial sources as guaranteed grade reagents and used without further purification.
Preparation of the hybrid inorganic/organic template (TiO2–POEM)
Hybrid inorganic/organic templates (TiO2–POEM) were synthesized according to the two-step synthetic ATRP method.59 In the first step, 3.68 g of DMAP was mixed with 20 ml of MC and 2.8 ml of TEA at 0 °C with ice. Next, 4.8 ml of CPC in 20 ml of MC was added to the solution. Subsequently, 20.0 g of TiO2 in 100 ml MC was added dropwise to the solution and then the solution was purged with nitrogen for 30 min. The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 24 h. After the reaction, the resulting solution was precipitated into methanol, and the product was separated by centrifugation. Finally, TiO2–Cl nanoparticles were obtained and dried in a vacuum oven overnight at room temperature. In the second step, 8 ml of POEM was dissolved in 10 ml of DMSO. Next, 0.0264 g of CuCl and 0.072 ml of HMTETA were added to the solution, and 2 g of TiO2–Cl nanoparticles were subsequently added. The solutions were purged with nitrogen for 30 min and the mixture was placed in a 90 °C oil bath for 24 h. After polymerization, the resulting solution was precipitated into methanol and the product was separated by centrifugation. The product was washed with methanol several times to remove impurities. Finally, TiO2–POEM templates were obtained and dried in a vacuum oven overnight at room temperature.
Preparation of the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanode
A FTO-coated conductive glass was sequentially cleaned in isopropanol and then in chloroform, and subsequently dried overnight in air before device fabrication. After the cleaning, the FTO glass was treated with a titanium(IV) bis(ethyl acetoacetato)diisopropoxide as a compact TiO2 block layer, followed by heating to 450 °C for 2 h, holding for 30 min, and cooling to 30 °C for 8 h. Next, the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure solution was deposited onto the FTO glass using the doctor blade technique. In detail, the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure solution was prepared by a combination of selective reduction and a doping process. To begin, as-synthesized TiO2–POEM templates (0.01 g) were dispersed in 1 ml of ethanol with 0.002 g of AgCF3SO3 for 2 h. After aging for 2 h, treatment of the resulting mixture solution with heating to 50 °C for 3 h led to the selective reduction process of Ag+ ions to Ag nanoparticles on the TiO2–POEM templates. After that, 1 ml of ethanol solution containing 0.002 ml of Nb(OCH2CH3)5 was added into the selective reduction TiO2–POEM/Ag solution for doping the Nb shell, and the reaction solution was then stirred for 12 h at room temperature in the dark. After casting the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure solution onto FTO glass, the photoanodes were aged at room temperature under 80% relative humidity for 30 h. Next, the prepared bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanode-coated FTO glasses were sintered at 450 °C for 30 min, and cooled to 30 °C over 8 h. Subsequently, the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure was sensitized with the ruthenium solution 10−4 M in ethanol at 50 °C for 2 h in a dark room. Finally, the dye-sensitized solar cell photoanodes were immersed in absolute ethanol for 5 min to remove non-adsorbed dye on the surface. In addition, the pristine TiO2 photo photoanodes (made from commercially available TiO2 nanoparticles) Degussa P25 were used as a standard sample, according to previously reported procedures.59,60
Preparation of the counter electrode
A FTO-coated conductive glass was used for a counter electrode. The glasses were cleaned by sonication in isopropanol and then in chloroform. The counter electrodes were fabricated by thermally depositing H2PtCl6 solution (4 wt% in isopropanol) onto the conductive FTO glass followed by thermal sintering at 450 °C for 30 min and cooling to 30 °C over 8 h.
Fabrication of DSSCs
Particular attention was paid to two types of electrolytes for the fabrication of DSSCs: (1) solid-state polymerized ionic liquid (PIL), i.e., poly(1-((4 ethenylphenyl)methyl)-3-butyl-imidazolium iodide) (PEBII), and (2) liquid electrolyte consisting of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, iodine (I2), guanidinium thiocyanate, and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in acetonitrile and valeronitrile. For the solid electrolyte DSSCs, an I2-free PIL electrolyte solution in acetonitrile was directly cast onto the photoanode, according to previously reported procedures.29,54 First, a 2 wt% dilute PIL electrolyte solution was cast onto a dye-adsorbed photoanode and evaporated very slowly for easy penetration of the electrolytes through the nanopores of the TiO2 layer. Next, a 10 wt% PIL electrolyte solution was cast onto the photoanode and covered the counter electrode. Both electrodes were then superimposed and pressed between two glass plates to achieve slow evaporation of the solvent and a thin electrolyte layer. The cells were placed in a vacuum oven for one day for complete evaporation of the solvent. In the case of the liquid system, the photoanode and counter electrode were sealed together in a sandwich configuration using a hot-melt 60 μm thick Surlyn film. The inter-electrode space was filled with an electrolyte by a vacuum back-filling method. The holes were sealed using a small piece of hot-melt 60 μm thick Surlyn film and a microscope cover slip. The liquid electrolyte was composed of 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.03 M I2, 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (v/v, 85:15).
Material characterization
Energy-filtering transmission electron microscopy (EF-TEM) pictures were obtained in order to observe the morphology of the photoanodes using a Philips CM30 microscope operating at 300 kV. For EF-TEM measurements, the dried films were dispersed in ethanol; next, a drop of this solution was placed onto a standard copper grid, followed by evaporation of the solvent in air. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiment was performed on a Rigaku 18 kW rotating anode X-ray generator, with Cu Ka radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) operated at 40 kV and 300 mA. The 2θ range was from 5° to 60°, with a scanning speed of 3° min−1, and the distance from the sample to the detector was 185 mm. Surface compositions of the photoanodes were investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using a VG Scientific ESCALAB 220 spectrometer equipped with a hemispherical energy analyzer. A nonmonochromatized Al K X-ray source (h = 1486.6 eV) was operated at 12.5 kV and 16 mA under an analyzer chamber pressure less than 10−6 Pa. UV-visible spectroscopy was performed with a spectrophotometer (Hewlett Packard) in the range 200 to 800 nm. The photoanode thickness was measured by an alpha-step IQ surface profile (KLA Tencor).
Solar cell characterization
Intensity modulated photocurrent/voltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) measurements were carried out on an electrochemical workstation equipped with a frequency response analyzer under a modulated red light emitting diode (635 nm) driven by a source supply, which can provide both DC and AC components of the illumination. The frequency range was set from 0.01 Hz to 10 MHz. The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured with a spectral resolution of 5 nm using a 300 W xenon lamp and a monochromator equipped with order sorting filters (K3100). The IPCE value was calculated using the following equation: IPCE = hcI/λp(13)where h and c represent Planck's constant and the speed of light in a vacuum, respectively. I is the photocurrent density (mA cm−2). λ and p are the wavelength (nm) and the intensity (mA cm−2) of the incident monochromatic light, respectively. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of DSSCs were measured under illumination (AM1.5, 1 Sun) using a Keithley Model 2400 (1000 W xenon lamp, Oriel, 91193). A typical cell had an active area of ca. 0.16 cm2 and was masked using an aperture of the same area during the I–V measurements. A correction for the spectral mismatch between the simulated light and natural sunlight was made against a certified reference Si solar cell (Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy System, Mono-Si + KG filter, Certificate no. C-ISE269) for a sunlight intensity of one (100 mW cm−2). This calibration was verified with an NREL-calibrated Si solar cell (PV Measurements Inc.). The DSSCs' temperature was maintained at 25 °C throughout the measurement time using a Peltier cooling apparatus. The photoelectrochemical performances were calculated by the following equations: FF = VmaxJmax/VocJsc(14) η (%) = VmaxJmax100/Pin = VocJscFF100/Pin(15)where Jsc is a short-circuit current density (mA cm−2), Voc is an open-circuit voltage (V), Pin is an incident light power, FF is the fill factor, η is an overall energy conversion efficiency, and Jmax (mA cm−2) and Vmax (V) are the current density and voltage in the J–V curve, respectively, at the point of maximum power output.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Korea Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (KCAP) (2009-0093883), the Core Research Program (NRF-2012R1A2A2A02011268), and the Energy Efficiency & Resources of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) (20122010100040), and Converged Energy Materials Research Center program of Defense Acquisition Program Administration and Agency for Defense Development.
Notes and references
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
M. McCune, W. Zhang and Y. Deng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, O. Buyukcakir, M. W. Mara, A. Coskun, N. M. Dimitrijevic, G. Barin, O. Kokhan, A. B. Stickrath, R. Ruppert, D. M. Tiede, J. F. Stoddart, J.-P. Sauvage and L. X. Chen, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, M. Woodroof, K. Lee and G. N. Parsons, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Park, D. K. Roh, R. Patel, E. Kim, D. Y. Ryu and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8521 RSC .
D. G. Brown, P. A. Schauer, J. Borau-Garcia, B. R. Fancy and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, X. Yang, J. Li, F. Zhang and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, N. He, Z. Ning, Q. Zhang, F. Guo, L. Chen, W. Wu, J. Hua and H. Tian, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Kung, H.-W. Chen, C.-Y. Lin, K.-C. Huang, R. Vittal and K.-C. Ho, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. Liu, G. Liu, Y. Rong, Y. Yang, H. Wang, Z. Ku, M. Xu, C. Zhong and H. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. R. Jennings and Q. Wang, ChemsusChem, 2013, 6, 2124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Law, S. C. Pathirana, X. Li, A. Y. Anderson, P. R. F. Barnes, A. Listorti, T. H. Ghaddar and B. C. O'Regan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, X. Mou, J. Wu, D. Zhang, L. Zhang, F. Huang, F. Xu and S. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 509 CrossRef .
M. Yang, D. Kim, H. Jha, K. Lee, J. Paul and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2032 RSC .
E. Barea, X. Xu, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, T. Ripolles-Sanchis, F. Fabregat-Santiago and J. Bisquerta, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3414 CAS .
T. Nikolay, L. Larina, O. Shevaleevskiy and B. T. Ahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1480 CAS .
M. D. Brown, T. Suteewong, R. S. S. Kumar, V. D'Innocenzo, A. Petrozza, M. M. Lee, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, X. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, W. T. Chen and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, J. Qi, D. Wang and Z. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6914 CAS .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dang, J. Qi, M. T. Klug, P.-Y. Chen, D. S. Yun, N. X. Fang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kawawaki, Y. Takahashi and T. Tatsuma, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2865 RSC .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
S. H. Ahn, W. S. Chi, D. J. Kim and J. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3901 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Chi, D. K. Roh, S. J. Kim, S. Y. Heo and J. H. Kim, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5341 RSC .
N. C. Jeong, C. Prasittichai and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lü, F. Huang, X. Mou, Y. Wang and F. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3719 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tennakone, P. V. V. Jayaweera and P. K. M. Bandaranayake, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 158, 125 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawawaki, Y. Takahashi and T. Tatsuma, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2865 RSC .
J. T. Park, J. H. Koh, J. K. Koh and J. H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghicov, S. Aldabergenova, H. Tsuchyia and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Park, K. J. Lee, M.-S. Kang, Y. S. Kang and J. H. Kim, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2007, 106, 4083 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Chen, S. Chappel, Y. Diamant and A. Zaban, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4629 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. M. Smarsly and I. Djerdj, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6624 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tang, H. Liu, L. Sun, E. Zheng and G. Cheng, Eur. Polym. J., 2007, 43, 4210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. J. Brus, Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 5566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Peter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2630 RSC .
J. T. Park, J. H. Koh, J. A. Seo, Y. S. Cho and J. H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 8301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Park, J. H. Koh, J. A. Seo, D. K. Roh and J. H. Kim, Macromol. Res., 2009, 17, 301 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. F. Barnes, L. Liu, X. Li, A. Y. Anderson, H. Kisserwan, T. H. Ghaddar, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O'Regan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. v. d. Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11194 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, J. E. Moser and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. C. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Reinhard, M. Siu, H. Agarwal, A. P. Alivisatos and J. Liphardt, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ding, B. J. Lee, M. Yang, H. S. Jung and J.-K. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 415 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kim, M. J. Ju, I. T. Choi, W. S. Choi, H.-J. Choi, J.-B. Baek and H. K. Kim, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 16380 RSC .
Q. Li, J. Zhao, B. Sun, B. Lin, L. Qiu, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Lu and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, X. Chen, J. Zhao, L. Qiu, Y. Zhang, B. Sun and F. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6674 RSC .
G. Wang, L. Wang, S. Zhuo, S. Fang and Y. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2700 RSC .
J. T. Park, J. H. Prosser, D. J. Kim, J. H. Kim and D. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Park, W. S. Chi, D. K. Roh, S. H. Ahn and J. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 26 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Park, J. H. Koh, J. A. Seo and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17872 RSC .
J. T. Park, R. Patel, H. Jeon, D. J. Kim, J.-S. Shin and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6131 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr05652jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the preparation route for the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure via three steps.	 

 	Fig. 2  EF-TEM micrographs of (a) pristine TiO2, (b) TiO2–POEM, and (c) the bi-fuctional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure.	 
Total number of Ag nanoparticles = total number of moles/number of moles per Ag nanoparticle = concentration × volume/(4/3)πr3 × ρ/Mw	(1)
σ = neμ	(2)
nλ = 2dsinθ	(3)

 	Fig. 3  XRD patterns of pristine TiO2, TiO2–POEM, and the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure: (a) whole range and (b) narrow range. Anatase phase TiO2 and Ag nanoparticles are denoted by A and Ag, respectively, based on the ICDD-JCPDS card for anatase phase TiO2 (no. 86-1157) and Ag (no. 04-0783), respectively. (c) XPS profiles of Nb 3d regions for the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure and (d) UV-visible absorption spectra of TiO2, TiO2–POEM, and the bi-functional Nb-doped TiO2/Ag nanostructure in deionized water.	 
Eg = hc/λ = 1240/λ	(4)
Voc = |Vfb − Vred|	(5)
τt = 1/2πft	(6)
Dn = d2/2.35τt	(7)
τr = 1/2πfr	(8)
Ln = (Dnτr)1/2	(9)
ηcc = 1 − τt/τr	(10)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Diffusion coefficients (Dn), (b) electron lifetime (τr), (c) electron diffusion length (Ln), and (d) electron collection efficiency (ηcc) as functions of the Jsc for the two solid electrolyte DSSCs fabricated from pristine TiO2 and the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanode measured by IMPS and IMVS.	 
Voc = (RT/nF)ln(AI/(nok1(I3−) + nok2(D+)))	(11)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Absolute and (b) normalized IPCE spectra of the solid electrolyte DSSCs based on pristine TiO2 and the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure photoanode, and using a solid electrolyte of poly(1-((4-ethenylphenyl)methyl)-3-butyl-imidazolium iodide) (PEBII).	 
Jsc = qηIPCEI0 = qηlhηinjηcolI0	(12)

 	Fig. 6  
J–V curves of DSSCs fabricated using pristine TiO2, Nb-doped TiO2, and the Nb-doped TiO2/Ag ternary nanostructure at 100 mW cm−2 upon using (a) a solid PEBII electrolyte and (b) a liquid electrolyte consisting of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, I2, guanidinium thiocyanate, and 4-tert-butylpyridine in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile.	 


TiO2	Solid	0.84	10.2	0.54	4.7
Liquid	0.71	12.2	0.64	5.5
Nb-doped TiO2	Solid	0.85	11.7	0.54	5.4
Liquid	0.73	14.1	0.65	6.8
Nb-doped TiO2/Ag	Solid	0.85	14.8	0.55	6.9
Liquid	0.73	16.1	0.64	7.6
IPCE = hcI/λp	(13)
FF = VmaxJmax/VocJsc	(14)
η (%) = VmaxJmax100/Pin = VocJscFF100/Pin	(15)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr05652j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
