Inkjet-printed optoelectronics  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR08220C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR08220C
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 965-993Inkjet-printed optoelectronics

        
          
            Zhaoyao 
            Zhan
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Jianing 
            An
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuefan 
            Wei
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Van Thai 
            Tran
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hejun 
            Du
          
          
        
      *
      School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Ave, 639798, Singapore. E-mail: zhanhit@hotmail.com; mhdu@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      20th October 2016
    , Accepted 6th December 2016First published on 7th December 2016AbstractInkjet printing is a powerful and cost-effective technique for deposition of liquid inks with high accuracy, which is not only of great significance for graphic applications but also has enormous potential for the direct printing of optoelectronic devices. This review highlights a comprehensive overview of the progress that has been made in optoelectronics fabrication by the inkjet printing technique. The first part briefly covers the droplet-generation process in the nozzles of printheads and the physical properties affecting droplet formation and the profiles of the printed patterns. The second section outlines the recent activities related to applications of inkjet printing in optoelectronics fabrication including solar cells, light-emitting diodes, photodetectors and transparent electrodes. In each application field, the challenges with the inkjet printing process and the possible solutions are discussed before a few remarks. In the last section, a brief summary on the progress of inkjet printing fabrication of optoelectronics and an outlook for future research effort are presented.Zhaoyao ZhanDr Zhaoyao Zhan received his B.E. and M.E. degrees in materials science and engineering from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2006 and 2008, respectively, and his Ph.D. degree from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2013. During 2014–2016, he had worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden. Now he is working as a research fellow at NTU, Singapore. He has co-authored one book chapter, and published more than 40 technical papers with citations close to 600 and a H-index of 14. His current research interests include carbon nanomaterials (carbon nanotubes, graphene), printed electronics and sensors.Jianing AnDr Jianing An received her B.E. from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China in 2009 and her Ph.D. from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore in 2014. She has been working as a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University since 2014. Her research focuses on fs laser-based 3D printing of micro/nanostructures for electrical and optical applications.Yuefan WeiDr Yuefan Wei is a research fellow in the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering of Nanyang Technological University. She received both her B.E. and M.E. in Materials Science and Engineering from Tianjin University in 2006 and 2008, respectively. She obtained her PhD degree from Nanyang Technological University in 2013. Her research interest and expertise are fabrication, physics and characterization of photovoltaic materials and devices, chemical vapor deposition and hydrothermal synthesis of nanostructured materials, three dimensional (3D) printing technology, energy conversion and storage, photoelectrochemical cells, and self-cleaning technology.Van Thai TranMr Van-Thai Tran received his Bachelor's degree from the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Ho Chi Minh University of Technology, Vietnam in 2014. Since August 2014 he has been pursuing his Ph.D. study in the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore under the supervision of Prof. Du Hejun and Dr Yang Hongyi (SIMTech, Singapore). His research interests include additive manufacturing and functional material applications, with a particular focus in the field of zinc oxide and MEMS devices.Hejun DuDr Hejun Du is currently an associate professor in the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He obtained both B.E. and M.E. from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China, and his PhD from Imperial College, UK. His research interests include (1) numerical and computational methods for engineering applications; (2) MEMS and microfluidics; (3) smart materials and their engineering applications. He has published over 200 international refereed journal papers, more than 100 conference papers and a few invited book chapters. His journal papers were cited over 4000 times in the SCI with a H-index of 36.
1. Introduction
The fast-expanding market of optoelectronic devices, including photodetectors, light emitting diodes (LEDs), photovoltaics, and displays, calls for innovative production of nanostructures from optoelectronic materials in a low-cost, high-throughput, and large-scale fashion.1,2 The candidates of optoelectronic materials should be, ideally, compatible with silicon and flexible electronics for integration, and also adapted to low-temperature solution processing.3
The solution-processable materials fall into diverse categories including soluble semiconducting polymers or their precursor molecules, colloids, and organic or inorganic nanoparticles (NPs).4 The inorganic NPs show a relatively high stability in the ambient environment. Owing to the tunability of the formulations and rheology and thereby of designing inks for variant printing techniques and applications, the solution-processable materials could readily lend themselves to printing. The low-temperature nature of the printing process allows for the fabrication of devices on various types of substrates, ranging from conventional flat and rigid substrates to the emerging flexible and even curved ones, paving the way to the development of flexible and conformable electronics.
Among all forms of printing techniques, inkjet printing is a powerful and cost-effective technique for deposition of liquid inks with high accuracy, which is not only of great significance for graphic applications but also has enormous potential for the direct printing of optoelectronic devices. The peculiar characteristics offered by inkjet printing include additive patterning, reduced material consumption, maskless and non-contact deposition, low cost, and the capability of large-scale manufacturing.1 The direct writing feature of inkjet printing enables deposition of numerous thin films with the ease of altering the design from batch to batch. Moreover, inkjet printing is capable of depositing a given material in pre-determined sites on a substrate that has pre-existing patterns, where contamination or damage of patterns would be induced with other deposition processes.
This review highlights recent advancements of inkjet printing-based fabrication, in terms of active deposition and electrode deposition, of optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells, LEDs, photodetectors, and transparent electrodes. The inkjet printing techniques are able to overcome these challenges existing in traditional fabrication processes, therefore producing new functionalities and/or boosting the cost-effectiveness and performance of the existing ones.
2. Principles of inkjet printing technology
2.1 Droplet formation
Inkjet printing, based on a drop-by-drop deposition fashion, has been invented and used for typewriting and recording for over 50 years. The droplets of ink with low viscosity are ejected by a nozzle in the printhead and can be formed through either a continuous or a drop-on-demand (DOD) manner. In the continuous operating process, an ink-supply pump pressurizes the ink and ejects it from the nozzle, generating a stream of liquid droplets. In the course of droplet generation, the droplets are selectively charged by the electric voltage applied to the nozzle. The charged droplets will be deflected by an electric voltage on the deflection electrode and separated from the uncharged ones. After that the charged droplets will reach the print substrate, while the uncharged ones which are not used for printing are caught by the gutter and carried back to the ink tank. The advantage of continuous printing is the high frequency of droplet generation and printing. Nowadays, however, the DOD system is more widely employed because it has lower system complexity and offers higher controllability and accuracy of droplet displacement.5,6
In a DOD system, the ink droplets are jet from the nozzle by pulses generated by a thermal resistor, a piezoelectric transducer, a thermal buckling or an acoustic wave. A thermal printhead uses a thin film resistive heater to rapidly vaporize a thin layer of the ink liquid (within a few microseconds) to form a fast expanding bubble which pressurizes the ink solution (see Fig. 1). The pressure for actuation should approximate the saturated vapor pressure of the ink liquid at its superheat limit. Consequently, the pressurized droplet in the nozzle will be ejected from the nozzle, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. Thermal DOD technology features simple design and low costs, however it is confined to vaporizable inks due to the requirement of the bubble formation. The elevated operating temperature (ca. 300 °C) makes it inappropriate for polymer-based printing. The piezoelectric DOD system has been widely employed to bypass this limitation. In the piezoelectric printhead, a piezoceramic transducer is electrically stimulated to induce mechanical actuation according to its resonant modes. The mechanical pulse of the piezoelectric membrane propagates into the nozzle, pressurizing the ink solution, and ejecting one droplet from the nozzle (as shown in Fig. 1). Thus, the volume and final velocity of a droplet also rely on the driving voltage on the transducer. In practice, a printhead usually integrates a big and dense nozzle array containing a large number of separate nozzles to promote the printing production.
 Fig. 1  Droplet formation process in a thermal and piezoelectric inkjet nozzle. 
The formation of ink jets starts from ejection and stretching of the liquid, followed by detachment of the liquid from the nozzle, contraction of the liquid ligament, breakup of the liquid ligament into main drops and satellites, and finally merging of the main drops and satellites.5 The control of drop generation and subsequent flight of the jetted inks requires profound studies into the liquid properties at high shear rates, stretching and contraction of fluid ligaments, drop generation and flight, as well as the aerodynamic and electrostatic interactions of the fluid drops in flight. In the flight, smaller satellite drops would also be created slightly after the drop formation, which recombine with the primary drops after a few periods. Although satellite formation is quite common during the droplet formation, it could be minimized or even eliminated by judiciously selecting the printing parameters.5 Generally, the formation of droplet is affected by the ink's fluid properties. Fromm7 introduced a dimensionless number Z to categorize the fluid properties and to analyze the mechanics of drop formation in printheads:Z = (dργ)1/2/τwhere ρ, γ and τ are the density, surface tension and viscosity of the ink, respectively, and d is a characteristic length, which is the nozzle diameter in the case of DOD printheads. By refining the prediction of Fromm, Reis et al.8 proposed that the ink droplet could be formed when Z ranges from 1 to 10 after studying alumina wax suspensions with a range of concentrations. The lower limit of the Z number is determined by the viscosity dissipating the pressure pulse, while the creation of satellites rather than a single droplet is the determinant of its upper limit. Furthermore, when Z is in the range of 1 < Z < 14, the droplet volume rises with the increase of Z, which is in accordance with Fromm's prediction. However, in practice, systems with Z numbers much larger than 10 are also printable if the satellites recombine with the primary droplet in few periods. Schubert et al.9 found that various solvents that have low viscosities in the range of 0.4 to 2 mPa s and surface tensions in the range of 23 to 73 mN m−1 are also printable although their calculated Z numbers are in the range of 21 to 91. The vapor pressure of the solvents was found to be the crucial factor of the printability. For solvents with vapor pressures higher than approximately 100 mmHg, the printed droplets are unstable or even no droplets could be produced.
The non-contact nature of inkjet printing allows for the deposition of nanomaterial inks on a wide range of substrates including polymers, oxides, metals, and biomaterials. Another advantage of inkjet printing is the feasibility of printing arbitrary patterns over a large working area. In addition, the use of nanomaterials in the dispersion overcomes the solubility limitations of the inks, resulting in higher stability of the printing process. However, some precautions should be taken to prevent precipitation or aggregation of dispersion-based nanomaterials in the ink for long-term printing, because the precipitation or aggregation of the ink contents is the main contribution to clogging of the nozzle, leading to the ‘first drop problem’. The pre-printing cleaning, capping or stirring of the ink will be beneficial to alleviate the ‘first-drop problem’ effect.
Generally, for DOD printheads, the ink viscosity must be within the range of 1–30 mPa s. Because the piezoelectric transducer and resistive heater only generate limited power, printing high-viscosity materials is difficult for conventional inkjet printing. Usually, several picoliters of the ink are ejected in order to produce patterns with feature sizes of 20–50 μm and a thickness lower than 1 μm. This coarse resolution is caused by the combined effects of droplet diameters which are usually larger than ∼10–20 μm and placement errors which are in the range of ±10 μm at the standoff distances of ∼1 mm. In electrohydrodynamic (EHD) printing, which uses electric fields rather than a resistive heater, piezoelectric transducer or acoustic wave to eject the ink liquid, the droplets are created by a fine jet generated at the apex of the conical ink meniscus at the tip of the nozzle (see Fig. 2).10 Unlike conventional inkjet printing processes, EHD printing pulls the liquids rather than pushing them, thus printing of the high viscosity ink is not challenging for EHD printing. The advantages of EHD printing include high resolution (submicron), flexibility in the ink formulation design, and easy jetting without clogging the nozzle. EHD printing has enormous potential in printing of complex and high-resolution features and is opening up new ways toward nanotechnology.
 Fig. 2  Structure of nozzles and schematic illustration of a high-resolution EHD printer. (a) SEM images of a glass microcapillary nozzle (2 μm internal diameter). The entire outer surface of the nozzle and its inner surface near the tip are coated with functionalized gold. The tip region is shown in the magnified images on the right panel. (b) Configuration of the nozzle and the substrate for printing. The ink droplet was ejected from the nozzle to a moving substrate to produce the line patterns. (c) Setup of an inkjet printer. The gold-coated nozzle was connected to a grounded electrode under the substrate by a power supply. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group. 
2.2 Control of pattern morphology and feature size
Ink volatility and viscosity are critical parameters of controlling the pattern morphology. Non-uniform films are easily formed due to the ‘coffee-ring’ effect or central ‘mountaintop’ effect which induces capillary12 or Marangoni13 flows during the evaporation of the ink solvents. Coffee-ring edges usually appear when NPs in the ink accumulate along the perimeter of the drying droplet due to inhomogeneous evaporation of the solvents.14 The uneven morphology leads to the formation of electric defects.
To overcome the coffee-ring effect, the evaporation process of the solvent has been modified by introducing drying agents, precisely controlling the humidity in the ambient environment during the solvent evaporation, or tuning the heating rate.14–17 In an optimized solvent mixture, the drying agent has a higher boiling point (B. P.) and a lower surface tension compared with the main solvent. During the drying, the main solvent having a lower B. P. and higher surface tension evaporates faster at the contact line creating an outward flow, which is gradually delayed as the contact line approaches the solvent with a larger fraction of the drying agent. Meanwhile, an inward flow (Marangoni flow) will be developed by the surface-tension gradient over the whole droplet. The outward and Marangoni flows continuously circulate the ink contents inside the fluidic droplet, producing a uniform assembly of the ink contents. The drying process of a droplet inkjet-printed with a mixed-solvent ink is schematically shown in Fig. 3, where chlorobenzene (CB) is the main solvent, and dodecane is the drying agent. Fig. 4 presents the non-uniform and uniform surface profiles of Al2O3 NPs respectively produced by a water single-solvent ink and a dimethylformamide (DMF)/water mixed-solvent ink.14 The addition of DMF could greatly improve the final inkjet-printed pattern profile by introducing the recirculating flow. The heating process is also found to be critical in controlling the coffee-ring effect, since the solvent evaporation is also highly dependent on the heating process. Gradual heating could effectively restrict the convection flow during the evaporation in a printed low-viscosity Ag (Ag) NP ink, causing the lines to become convex with the homogeneously and very densely packed NPs, which greatly enhances the electrical conductivity of inkjet-printed Ag lines.17
 Fig. 3  The process of droplet drying after inkjet printing with a mixed-solvent ink. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11, Copyright 2008, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 4  SEM images and the corresponding height profiles of an Al2O3 ink droplet. The Al2O3 NPs were produced with the ink of: (a) water single-solvent and (b) DMF/water mixed-solvent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14, Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
Apart from the long-standing coffee-ring effect, the morphology of printed patterns could also be greatly affected by many other factors, such as the aerodynamic effect, electrostatic interaction of droplets, satellites, and interaction between the liquid ink and the substrate. It is quite challenging to print long-distance and continuous lines, with controlled feature sizes and morphology.5 To minimize the feature size of the printed patterns, it is essential to limit ink spreading on the surface. Changing the surface energy of the substrate and creating patterned chemical/physical structures on the substrate are efficient methods to control the wetting behavior of the droplets on the substrate and to increase the printing resolution. The droplets on a non-wetting substrate tend to partially recede or even completely rebound, while the ones on a wetting surface are prone to spread away,18 giving a flat-disk-shaped pattern with a diameter larger than the original droplet, resulting in very coarse printed structures. Although dewetting treatment could to some extent improve the pattern resolution, bulges will be formed on lines that are unstable on substrates with too low surface energy, which would locally broaden the printed graphics and degrade the continuity of printed features. In addition to surface energy modification, pre-patterning the surface with varying wettabilities or surface topographies in different regions of the substrate could benefit reducing the spreading of the ink solution. Ultrafine gaps can be created by a self-aligned printing method that relies on differentiation of wettability.19 Another scenario lies in optimizing the ink materials and formulations, which not only influence the droplet formation process, but also prescribe the printing resolution and the device performance. The utilization of an ultrafine nozzle is desirable for printing patterns with small feature size if the clogging could be avoided by using low viscosity inks with fine NPs. Addition of special additives into the ink dispersion is also useful for tuning the viscosity of the ink and benefiting inkjet printing of high-resolution patterns.18
3. Applications
3.1 Solar cells
Solar cells could directly convert solar irradiation into electrical energy and thus offer the promise to relieve our reliance on the long-standing fossil energy resources which have caused serious environmental issues to our home planet. The use of solar cells, however, has not been expanded yet due to the unfavorable cost. Since the first report of organic solar cells by screen printing,20 this technique has been presenting promise of developing industrially scalable low-cost fabrication processes. However, the ever growing demand for improved performance has led to an expanding interest in inkjet printing which enables printing features with higher resolution, resulting in lower shadowing losses and reduced manufacturing costs. In addition, inkjet printing technology allows for the deposition of active materials in specific areas of the pre-patterned substrate. The first demonstration of inkjet printing of a thin-film library of donor/acceptor systems used in bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells was reported by Marin et al.21 In addition, the morphology studies on inkjet-printed films with atomic force microscopy (AFM) suggested the formation of homogeneous structures. Then Steirer et al.22 systematically investigated the critical parameters for both inkjet and ultrasonic spray deposition of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) thin films on commercial indium tin oxide (ITO) for organic photovoltaic device fabrication. Their study showed that the efficiency of organic solar cells with an inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS hole conducting layer were comparable with that of solar cells fabricated through the traditional spin-coating process. The drop spacing and the substrate temperature are critical parameters in inkjet printing; while for ultrasonic spray coating, the substrate temperature and the solution flow rate will play critical roles. PEDOT:PSS films produced by optimized inkjet printing, ultrasonic spraying and spin coating were compared in a prototypical BHJ organic solar cell which employs a poly(3-hexylthiophene) and 6,6-phenyl-C61-butric acid-methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) blend as the absorber. The results revealed that the efficiencies of the devices fabricated by the three processes were comparable (in detail, the efficiencies were 3.3% 3.5% and 3.6%, for inkjet printing, spray deposition, and spin coating respectively). Furthermore, hybrid transparent conductive films prepared by inkjet printing PEDOT:PSS and other conductive components have also been demonstrated for replacing the ITO transparent electrodes in organic solar cells, which will be covered in section 3.4.3.
It is found that the morphology of inkjet-printed films could be dramatically tuned by using additives, and thus affects the properties of organic optoelectronics and the overall performance of the devices. Xia et al.23 fabricated organic solar cells by using a blend of poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT) with poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorene-co-bis-N,N′-(4-butylphenyl)-bis-N,N′-phenyl-1,4 phenylenediamine) (PFB), and organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) by using a blend of F8BT with poly(9,9-di-octylfluorene-co-N-(4-butylphenyl)diphenylamine) (TFB). They compared the devices with a film produced by either inkjet printing or spin-coating. It has been discovered that the rapid drying of the small inkjet-printed droplets resulted in a finer phase separation, producing OLEDs and organic solar cells with even better performances and a higher efficiency than those prepared by the traditional spin coating method. However, a critical issue with the films produced by inkjet printing is the non-uniformity in thickness, which may be due to the use of only a single solvent p-xylene. This problem could be possibly alleviated by using a solvent mixture. Hoth et al.24 used a blend of P3HT:PCBM in a mixed solvent of o-dichlorobenzene and mesitylene to inkjet print organic solar cells on PEDOT:PSS coated ITO, where Ca:Ag was deposited as the top cathode. They also suggested that by optimizing the ink solvent formulation, the morphological and interfacial properties of the printed P3HT:PCBM blend photoactive layer could be significantly improved. For example, a mixture of high and low boiling solvents, 68% of ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) and 32% of mesitylene could print organic solar cells with an intimate morphology in the P3HT:PCBM blend, giving a better solar cell performance with a larger short-circuit current of 8.4 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 0.54 V, a filling factor of 0.64, and a higher power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.9%. While, the device prepared with the inkjet-printed P3HT:PCBM blend with the tetralene solvent shows a much large roughness and a poor distribution of PCBM in the P3HT domain, thus, outputting a poor performance. More recently, Hoth et al. further improved the performance of inkjet-printed organic solar cells by using the combined regioregularity(RR)-96%-P3HT and the ODCB/mesitylene solvent mixture to control ink drying and film formation processes. They have obtained a suitable gelation time, improved the morphology of the P3HT:PCBM layer, and achieved an impressive PCE of 3.5%.25 Eom et al. reported P3HT:PCBM blend organic solar cells produced with the inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer, and suggested that the addition of a certain amount of the glycerol and ethylene glycol butyl ether (EGBE) surfactant into PEDOT:PSS inks improved the surface morphology and conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer, resulting in enhanced performance of the organic solar cells. Using the optimized ink formulation of PEDOT:PSS to print the hole transporting layer and the P3HT:PCBM blend as the photoactive layer, they have achieved a PCE of 3.16% in P3HT:PCBM based BHJ solar cells.26
They further demonstrated the organic solar cells fabricated by inkjet printing both the photoactive P3HT:PCBM layer and the PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer, and the results suggested that adding high B. P. additives, including 1,8 octanedithiol (ODT), ODCB and chloronaphthalene (Cl-naph), into the photoactive dispersion in the CB solvent drastically affected the morphological and optoelectronic properties, and overall solar cell performance. A device printed from an ODT-formulated ink exhibited the best overall performance with a PCE of 3.71%. Thus, developing a proper formulation of multi-component inks to tune the morphological properties of the inkjet-printed BHJ solar cells is an essential step for the inkjet printing of high performance organic photovoltaics. The inclusion of high B. P. additives enables a controlled drying and thus allows for sufficient time for film formation of the photoactive layer, thereby improving the crystallinity of the photoactive polymer. Moreover, the wettability of the P3HT:PCBM inks on the PEDOT:PSS layer could also be enhanced, thus the produced active layer would have high uniformity and a fine film morphology and also the coffee-ring effect would be decreased.28
Though inkjet printing technology has manifested its versatility in fabricating active components and/or hole conducting layers, the development of an ambient environment compatible inkjet printing process is highly desirable. Aernouts et al.29 have demonstrated inkjet-printed P3HT:PCBM blend solar cells in the ambient environment by utilizing a polymer: fullerene blend dissolved in a mixture of the main solvent CB and the high B. P. solvent tetrahydronaphthalene (THN). They found that a balance between ink viscosity and surface wetting is critical to a smooth active layer with a small surface roughness, producing devices with a PCE of 1.4% under simulated AM1.5 conditions. The addition of a high B. P. solvent could also help to prevent clogging of the nozzle. Recently, Jung and co-workers27 reported the fabrication of all-inkjet-printed, air-processable organic solar cells with the structure of PEDOT:PSS/poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)]:[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCDTBT:PC70BM)/ZnO/Ag. A high-conductivity PEDOT:PSS aqueous dispersion was printed to replace ITO as the anode. 5 wt% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and 0.1 wt% fluorosurfactant were added into the PEDOT:PSS ink to prepare a highly conductive and uniform film. A PCDTBT:PC70BM (at ratio of 1:4) donor/acceptor blend dispersed in a 5:4:1 volume mixture of the CB, mesitylene (MT) and chloroform (CF) ternary solvent, was then printed onto the PEDOT:PSS layer. It was found that the inkjet-printed PCDTBT:PC70BM blend layer presented similar morphological properties (see Fig. 5) and excited state dynamics with its spin-coated counterparts. The all-inkjet-printed organic photovoltaic devices exhibited an average PCE of 2%. A noteworthy advantage in this work was that all the fabrication and measurement processes were performed in air at room temperature. The performance could be drastically improved to 5% by depositing the cathode via evaporation. The effects of additives on the inkjet-printed organic solar cells are summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic structure of an all-inkjet-printed, air-processable organic solar cell and (b) energy level alignment of each component. All the four layers are produced by a single nozzle inkjet printer and all processes have been conducted in the ambient environment. The AFM images of inkjet-printed PCDTBT:PC70BM films (c) spin-coated from 100% CB; (d) spin-coated from a solvent mixture of 50% CB, 40% MT and 10% CF; and (e) inkjet printing from a solvent mixture of 50% CB, 40% MT and 10% CF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27, Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
Table 1 Effects of additives on performance of inkjet-printed organic solar cells




Printed materials
Solvents
Additives
Performance and reasons




PEDOT:PSS22
Diluted with 75% DI water
—
PCE = 3.3%, comparable with that of spin-coated devices.


F8BT:PFB23

p-Xylene
—
PCE ∼ 2% at a wavelength of 380 nm, which is higher than spin-coated devices, due to finer phase separation.


P3HT:PCBM24,25
ODCB/mesitylene
—
PCE = 2.9%–3.5%
The solvent mixture controlled ink drying and improved the film morphology.


Tetralene
PCE = 1.29%


PCDTBT:PC70BM27
ODCB/mesitylene
—
PCE = 4%
The addition of chloroform leads to a homogeneous active layer.


Chloroform
PCE = 5%


PEDOT:PSS26
Tetralene
—
PCE = 2.09%
The additives improved the surface morphology and conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer.


Glycerol/EGBE
PCE = 3.16%


P3HT:PCBM28
Chlorobenzene
—
PCE = 1.97%
The additives improved the film morphology, light absorption and reduced recombination losses.


ODT
PCE = 3.71%




Despite its versatile roles in organic solar cell fabrication, inkjet printing of inorganic solar cells remains a challenge. The suspended particles in inorganic inks have a strong tendency to agglomerate, leading to an increase in viscosity and thus clogging of the nozzles. These challenges could be mitigated or eliminated by designing ink formulations, for example, replacing the inorganic NPs in the ink with their dissolvable precursors could greatly alleviate the ink agglomeration and clogging of nozzles. Wang et al.30 have fabricated chalcopyrite CuInxGa1−xSe2 (CIGS) thin film solar cells by inkjet printing CIGS precursors on a molybdenum (Mo) electrode, followed by selenization of the printed CIGS precursor to form CIGS light absorber layers, and deposition of n typed CdS layers and ZnO window layers, as shown in Fig. 6. They achieved inkjet-printed CIGS solar cells with a short circuit current, open circuit voltage, filling factor, and total area PCE of 29.78 mA cm−2, 386 mV, 0.44, and 5.04%, respectively. Pi et al. have also demonstrated inkjet printing the silicon quantum dots (Si-QD) ink onto polycrystalline Si solar cells, and found that the PCE of polycrystalline Si solar cells could be improved by 2% (from 17.2% to 17.5%), which was attributed to both the down-shifting absorption band from the UV zone (<400 nm) to a long wavelength around 773 nm, and also the absorption enhancement by porous Si-QD films on the solar cell surface.31 The successful demonstration of inkjet printing of inorganic layers will significantly extend the application of the inkjet printing technique in solar cell fabrication.
 Fig. 6  (a) Fabrication steps of CIGS solar cells. (b) Top view of a real device. (c) I–V characteristics of the CIGS solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
In the past decade, hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells have emerged as a competitive solution for solar energy harvesting, with the PCE boosting from the initial 2.2% to over 20%.33,34 It has been revealed that the ideal photovoltaic properties of the perovskite materials (CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx), including appropriate and tunable direct band gaps, high mobilities of electrons and holes,35 high absorption coefficients, excellent (balanced) carrier transport diffusion lengths (100 to 1000 nm),36 and high defect tolerance, contributed to the upsurge of the PCE. Furthermore, the perovskite materials are solution-processable, low-cost, and suitable for inkjet printing. Wei et al. have demonstrated inkjet printing perovskite solar cells with a planar structure where a nanocarbon layer with a precisely controlled pattern and interface was utilized as the hole-extraction layer, as shown in Fig. 7a–e.32 They found that the CH3NH3PbI3 photoactive layer could be readily inkjet-printed and converted by the formulating ink precursor (nanocarbon and CH3NH3I) for in situ transformation of the PbI2 layer. After printing, an interpenetrating seamless interface could be instantly constructed between the CH3NH3PbI3 active layer and the carbon hole-extraction electrode, which remarkably reduced the charge recombination, as shown in Fig. 7c, e and f. The final device structure of the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C solar cells is displayed in Fig. 7f. The energy level diagram in Fig. 7g indicates the charge transfer and transport processes in the solar cells. When the solar cell is under light excitation, electron–hole pairs are generated in the CH3NH3PbI3 layer, and then electrons and holes will transfer to the conduction band and the valence band of CH3NH3PbI3, respectively. Due to the proper energy level alignment, the electron will be injected from the conduction band (∼3.86 eV) of CH3NH3PbI3 to the conduction band of TiO2 (∼4.00 eV), and finally collected by the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass. Meanwhile, the holes are accepted by the nanocarbon layer through the C/CH3NH3PbI3 interface from the valence band of CH3NH3PbI3 to C, as shown in Fig. 7g. Consequently, a considerably higher PCE up to 11.60% was produced by the perovskite solar cell, as displayed in Fig. 7h and i. This method demonstrates a major step towards fabricating highly efficient perovskite solar cells in a low-cost, large-scale, metal-electrode-free manner.
 Fig. 7  (a) Fabrication flowchart for inkjet printing the C/CH3NH3PbI3 planar perovskite solar cells. For comparison, another fabrication strategy was also demonstrated in a separate step 3 and 4 to convert PbI2 into CH3NH3PbI3; (b) SEM image (cross-section view) of the TiO2 compact layer deposited by TiCl4 treatment. (c) SEM image (cross-section view) of the multiple spin-coated TiO2/PbI2 thin film. (d, e) Cross-sectional SEM images and the corresponding schematic illustration of inkjet-printed TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C solar cells from the C ink (d) and the C + CH3NH3I ink (e); (f) a basic configuration; (g) energy level diagram; (h) J–V characteristics; (i) the wavelength-dependent IPCE profiles of the solar cells respectively fabricated from the C ink and the C + CH3NH3I ink. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
The above examples indicated that inkjet printing is a cost-effective processing candidate for the incorporation of photovoltaic devices into electronic applications or production of photovoltaic modules. Though the present performance of inkjet-printed devices could not fulfill the requirement of commercial applications, the progress made thus far is promising.
3.2 Light emitting diodes
As emerging optoelectronic devices, LEDs could emit light with high luminous efficacy and brightness. Intensive studies have been carried out for employing semiconductor colloidal nanocrystals (NCs) and organic semiconductors as constitutional components in LEDs, including the color filter, the emitting layer, and the hole-transport layer.1,38 The process of optimizing LED device structures usually needs adjustment of different layer thicknesses and determination of optimal device designs. Repeated device fabrication and measurement procedures are in turn required for the optimization, which normally consume a lot of time and materials.1 Inkjet printing, which is based on a direct writing process and avoids the use of any mask, is thus a suitable technique for combinatorial studies of various devices.39,40
Tekin et al.41 utilized the inkjet printing technique to study the effects of various side chains and film thicknesses on the emission properties of six different poly(phenylene-ethynylene)/poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPE/PPV)-based π-conjugated polymers. Thanks to the inkjet printing technique, they could examine the influences of various parameters (side chain and film thickness) in a parallel manner. The results suggested that the emission wavelength of the printed polymers was strongly dependent on inter-chain interactions which are stronger for thicker films and varied with side chains. In addition, the emission color could be significantly changed by annealing by increasing the aggregation of polymer chains.
Photoluminescence (PL) of inkjet-printed CdTe NPs was demonstrated by the same group.37 An aqueous mixture of surfactant stabilized CdTe NPs with 1 wt% polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and varied concentrations of ethylene glycol (0–20 vol%) was inkjet-printed on both ITO and glass. They observed that the coffee-ring formation was drastically suppressed with 2 vol% of glycol, while films with a lower roughness were only produced when PVA was included in the mixture, demonstrating the key role of the solvent mixture in controlling the morphology of the final films. The PL results demonstrated that strong emission would come out when CdTe NPs were embedded in the PVA matrix. But when poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) was used as the matrix, the emission of CdTe NPs was weakened. The enhancement in the PL intensity of the films where the CdTe NPs were embedded in PVA was attributed to the increase of the inter-particle space, preventing the inter-particle interaction that results in self-quenching of the PL (Fig. 8a). In the films printed from the mixture of large particles (3.5 nm) and small particles (2.6 nm), the gradual decrease of the emission intensity of the small particles (green-emitting), and the gradual increase of the PL intensity from the larger particles (red-emitting) were observed, indicating the Förster resonant energy transfer process where the energy transfers from the smaller donor NPs to the larger accepter NPs, as shown in Fig. 8b. This method in principle can be used for practical LED fabrication, considerably reducing the process and environmental fluctuations and uncertainties in sequential processing of varied device configurations.
 Fig. 8  (a) Optical images of an inkjet-printed library of CdTe NCs/PVA composite layers emitting at different wavelengths. The PVA content in the solution used for printing was systematically varied from left to right panels in each row: from 0 to 1.4 wt% with an increment step of 0.2 wt%. The corresponding molar ratios of PVA/CdTe NCs in the films are from 0 (0/1.6 × 10−8) to 21.9 with an increment step of 3.12. (b) Photograph of an inkjet-printed library containing mixed green-and red-emitting CdTe NCs (top). The corresponding PL spectra (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, Copyright 2006, John Wiley and Sons. 
Inkjet printing was also employed to prepare OLEDs based on small molecules which were commonly prepared through vacuum processes. Jung et al.42 demonstrated that fabrication of OLEDs by inkjet printing 5 wt% tris(2-phenylpyridine)iridium(III) (Ir(ppy)3) doped in the 4,4′-bis(carbazol-9-yl)biphenyl (CBP) ink as the light emitting material on a 40 nm-thick 4,4′,4′′-tris(carbazol-9-yl)triphenylamine (TCTA) hole transporting layer. The OLEDs exhibited high performance with high power and the external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) of 29.9 lm W−1 and 11.7% respectively.
Haverinen et al.43 have reported bright LEDs from inkjet-printed CdSe/ZnS quantum dots (QDs) sandwiched between a hole transporting polymer and a 1,3,5-tris(2-N-phenylbenzimidazolyl (TPBi)) electron transport layer. Octadecylamine stabilized CdSe/ZnS QDs were dissolved in CB and inkjet-printed in air onto the cross-linked poly(N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine) (poly-TPD) layer. Subsequently the printed structure was covered by 20 nm of the TPBi electron transport layer and also a LiF/Al cathode through vacuum deposition. The LEDs showed an EQE and a brightness of 0.19% and 381 cd m−2 (at 15.9 V), respectively. Furthermore, inkjet printing of CdSe/ZnS QDs also extended its display applications by printing devices on a pre-patterned substrate with a quarter video graphics array. The structure of the device was designed as glass/ITO/poly-TPD/printed QDs/TPBi/LiF/Al, with 243 pixels under common cathode. The operational voltages which were defined at a brightness of 1 cd m−2 of devices for 10 drops per pixel are 6 V and for 15 drops per pixel are 10.6 V. The maximum brightness of 150 cd m−2 can be obtained at around 12 V and 16 V for the device with 10 and 15 drops per pixel, respectively (Fig. 9). This study also demonstrated that control of the emitted color could be simply achieved by optimizing the number of printed drops per pixel. Wood et al.44 reported a planar, full-color alternative current driven-electroluminescence display comprising inkjet-printed luminescent CdSe/ZnS QD thin films which first absorb blue electroluminescence from a phosphor layer consisting of ZnS:Cu powders and then emit photons at a longer wavelength characteristic of the CdSe/ZnS QD band gap. They inkjet-printed the CdSe/ZnS QDs and polyisobutylene (PIB) ink on ITO to form the red–green–blue emission layers and coated the phosphor layer on the top of the QD–PIB composite layer. It was also found that the coffee-ring effect could be suppressed by optimizing the ratio of octane to hexane in the solvent mixture. The control over luminance and color is critical for specific display applications and it could be tuned by optimizing the thickness of the QD–polymer composite layer.
 Fig. 9  (a) Emission spectra of devices with ten drops per pixel (dashed curve) and 15 drops per pixel (solid curve); (b) luminance vs. applied voltage. Inset: An optical photograph of QD LEDs (243 pixels with a common cathode) at the operation voltage of 12 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2009, AIP Publishing LLC. 
Singh et al.45 fabricated OLEDs by inkjet printing a polymer ink which comprises poly(9-vinylcarbazole) (PVK) as a hole transporting polymer and 2-4-biphenylyl-5-4-tertbutyl-phenyl-1,3,4-oxadiazole (PBD) as an electron transporting polymer. Ir-based phosphorescent macromolecules anchored on a polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (Ir@POSS) molecule were also added in the ink as a luminescent dye. The device demonstrated a peak luminance of more than 6000 cd m−2 with a relatively low turn-on voltage of 6.8 V (defined at a luminance of 5 cd m−2), and a quantum efficiency of 1.4%. However, it was indicated that the interface roughness (resulting from the coffee-ring effect) of the printed layers significantly determines the device performance. They further boosted the peak luminance to 10000 cd m−2 with peak quantum efficiencies of around 2.5%.46 Lee et al.47 developed an inkjet printing technology for realization of multilayer printing (both light emitting layer and hole transporting layer) by controlling the wetting conditions and aligning the multilayer visually. They have successfully fabricated an OLED and demonstrated the basic working of OLEDs by sequentially inkjet printing a hole injection layer with the PEDOT:PSS ink and a light emitting layer using the poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV) ink, although the device could not meet the requirement of commercialization in terms of the brightness and the operating voltage.
Due to good compatibility between the solution process and the direct patterning method, the inkjet printing method has been developed for OLED multicolor displays. Yang et al.48 demonstrated the first polymer light emitting logo by inkjet printing, wherein the light emitting area was defined by the printed PEDOT film. Then the inkjet-printed logo was covered by a spin-coated electroluminescent polymer MEH-PPV (serving as buffer layer) to seal the pin-holes. Afterwards they extended the inkjet printing technique to fabricate multicolor OLED displays with controlled patterning of red–green–blue multicolor organic light emitting pixels.49 They used the blue-emission PVK as the buffer layer (prepared by spin-coating), while the inkjet-printed dopants, 4-dicyanomethylene-2-methyl-6-(p-dimethylaminostyril)-4H-pyran (DCM) and tris (4-methyl-8-quinolinolato)Al(III)(Almq3), were printed on the top of the PVK buffer layer. By employing the buffer layer (blue-emission PVK) as the hole transport layer, multicolor OLEDs were fabricated, where the orange-red emission was obtained from the PVK/DCM bilayer structure and green–blue emission was obtained from the PVK/ALmq3 bilayer structure. However, the device performance of the inkjet-printed OLEDs could not compete with that of the OLEDs fabricated by the thermal sublimation process. Kobayashi et al.50 demonstrated an OLED display by inkjet printing the light emitting polymer PPV for a green emitter and PPV with Rhodamine 101(R-PPV) for a red emitter. Subsequently, poly(di-octyl fluorine) (F8) was spin-coated on the top of the PPV layer operating as an electron-transferring layer or a blue emitter. The device was driven by a thin film transistor (TFT) substrate and displayed a multicolor image using the TFT-LED display. The display panel was about 2-inch large with a pixel size of 11 × 82 μm2 and a line pitch of 52 μm. The brightness of the display was about 30 cd m−2, consuming 0.7 W of power.
Inkjet printing of real full-color LED display with high resolution is a stride toward commercial applications. Gohda et al.51 have demonstrated a 3.6-inch, 202-ppi full-color AMPLED display using the inkjet printing technique. They printed three organic layers, a hole transport layer, an interlayer and an emission layer with a 7 picoliter inkjet printhead on a continuous grain-Si active-matrix backplane, as shown in Fig. 10a. High resolution was achieved by utilizing a smaller printhead and also appropriate surface treatment of the substrate. The ink formulation is also crucial to control the surface roughness of the printed organic layer, determining the final performance of the OLED display. By judiciously optimizing the printing process and ink formulation, they have achieved very high resolution (202-ppi) display using the inkjet printing technique (Fig. 10b). Chen et al.52 also reported an inkjet-printed 65-inch OLED panel with 34 ppi. The panel was prepared by inkjet printing solution-processable organic materials for the hole injection layer (HIL), the hole transporting layer (HTL) and the emitting layers (EML) for multiple colors (red, green and blue) on the TFT backplane (Fig. 11a). It was discovered that fine-tuning the dry rate in a vacuum after printing benefits the production of uniform pixels, as shown in Fig. 11b. They further successfully demonstrated a 200-ppi OLED panel fabricated by the inkjet printing technique.53 They found that the resolution of the printed pattern was determined by the machine accuracy and the drop displacement accuracy. By optimizing the bank angle and width, the droplet displacement accuracy could be improved, further enhancing the resolution of the printed patterns. Another important factor affecting the resolution is the ink volume which determines the droplet diameter and the final accuracy of the patterns, as displayed in Fig. 11c.
 Fig. 10  (a) A cross sectional scratch showing the schematic structure of an inkjet-printed full-color AMPLED display; (b) an example of the picture of a high-resolution display. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, Copyright 2006, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the inkjet-printed OLED structure; (b) light-on image of the 65-inch OLED display panel; (c) the pixel design for the 200-ppi resolution panel. (a–b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 52, Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 53, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
The resolution could be further improved by optimizing the design of the pixel pattern. In addition, EHD printing which could generate droplets smaller than the nozzle aperture will provide a solution to printing of LEDs for high-resolution display. Kim et al.54 demonstrated high-resolution printing of QDs layers with a precisely controlled thickness and lateral resolution down to submicron meter as active layers in QD LEDs with EHD inkjet printing. The ink composes QDs (CdSe/CdZnSeS green or CdSe/CdS/ZnS red core/shell QDs) dispersed in organic solvents. By applying a bias voltage between a substrate and a metal-coated glass capillary, the ink flow could be pulled through the fine opening (e.g., 5 μm) at the end of the nozzle. The AFM characterization results suggested that the profile of the printed patterns could be precisely controlled with height resolution in tens of nm and lateral resolution in sub-μm. The QD layer thickness is a crucial factor determining the performance of a QD LED. Arbitrary patterning of QD layers could be realized by the simultaneously programmed movement of the substrate and control of the voltage. The final green QD LEDs consisting of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/printed CdSe/CdZnSeS QDs/ZnO/Al showed the maximum luminance and an EQE of 36000 cd m−2 and 2.5%, respectively. The maximum luminance and EQE of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/printed CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al red QD LED are 11250 cd m−2 and 2.6%, respectively, as shown in Fig. 12. The EHD inkjet printing of organic small-molecule OLEDs with a pixel width as small as 5 μm has also been demonstrated recently.55 EHD inkjet printing of small-molecule emission layers with a flawless surface and a uniform morphology results in the highly-efficient and reliable operation of OLEDs surpassing those OLEDs fabricated by conventional inkjet printing technology. It is believed that the ability to print high-resolution small-molecule OLEDs represents the substantial potential of EHD inkjet printing for high-definition and low-cost displays in future.
 Fig. 12  QD LEDs fabricated by EHD inkjet printing of homogeneous QD arrays (a, b) schematic illustration and photographic description of QD LEDs. (c, d) Electroluminescence images of green and red QD LEDs. The stage speeds for green and red QDs were 50 μm s−1 and 30 μm s−1, respectively. (e, f) Plots of current density–voltage (J–V), luminance–voltage (L–V) and EQE of green QD LEDs. (g, h) Plots of J–V, L–V, and EQE of red QD LEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The performance of inkjet-printed LEDs is summarized in Table 2. The application examples present the promise offered by inkjet printing technology for LED fabrication for signage and personalized electronics. The inkjet printing fabrication of LEDs has obvious advantages in reducing material costs, increasing the production speed, flexibility, precision and the scale-up ability. However there are still challenges, such as contamination and parasitic current paths, which are being addressed through ongoing research in the architecture of LED devices. As the technology becomes more widely available and refined, we could expect its impact on industrial coatings, smart surfaces and lighting.
Table 2 Performance of inkjet-printed LEDs




Printed ink
LED or display structure
Performance




DCM:Almq349
ITO/PEDOT/PVK/DCM:Almq3/Ca
Luminance is around 25 cd m−2, EQE is 0.05%, which is lower than that of devices fabricated by thermal evaporation, due to the presence of the residual moisture and oxygen.


CdSe/ZnS QDs43
ITO/poly-TPD/printed QDs/TPBi (20 nm)/LiF (1.5 nm)/Al (180 nm)
EQE of 0.19%, brightness of 381 cd m−2 at 15.9 V.


PVK:PBD:Ir@POSS45
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK:PBD:Ir@POSS/BCP/LiF/Al
Peak luminance is 6000–10000 cd m−2, EQE of 1.4%–2.5%, which is lower than that of spin-coated devices, due to the coffee-ring effect.


CBP:Ir(ppy)342
ITO/TCTA (40 nm)/CBP:Ir(ppy)3 (20 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Alq3 (40 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (100 nm)
EQE is 11.7%, power efficiency is 29.9 lm W−1, comparable with that of devices fabricated by vacuum deposition.


PPV, R-PPV50
ITO/PEDOT/PPV/F8/cathode(blue)
The luminance of the 2 inch display was about 30 cd m−2, consuming 0.7 W power.


ITO/PEDOT/R-PPV/F8/cathode(green)


ITO/PEDOT/F8/cathode(red)


PEDOT–PSS, interlayer (IL) and light emitting layer (LEP)51
ITO/PEDOT:PSS (60 nm)/IL (10 nm)/LEP (80 nm)/Ba/Al
Luminance is 200 cd m−2; EQE is 4% at the window.


The addition of high boiling point solvents results in the flat surface flatness and smooth resultant film


Hole injection layer (HIL), the hole transporting layer (HTL) and the emitting layers (EML) for multiple colors (red, green and blue)52,53
ITO/HIL/HTL/EML(red:green:blue)/ETL/Al
Luminance is 200 cd m−2.


CdSe/CdZnSeS QDs and CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs54
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/printed QDs/ZnO/Al
CdSe/CdZnSeS QDs: luminance and EQE are 36000 cd m−2 and 2.5%; CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs: luminance and EQE are 11250 cd m−2 and 2.6%.




3.3 Photodetectors
Photodetection is extremely important for a wide spectrum of applications ranging from environmental and biological research, to military applications, and thus attracting plenty of attention.56–58 The consideration in designing a photodetector is application-specific, depending on the sensitivity to light intensity, on the spectral response and also on the response speed. The photodetectors could also be categorized into photodiodes and photoconductors based on their operation mechanisms. Photodetectors have demonstrated their strong impact on current technology in our daily life.59 In this section, we will highlight the photodetectors realized by inkjet printing process.
The most commonly used donor–acceptor layer in organic photodetectors is the P3HT and PCBM blend, because of the extensive investigations already conducted on organic BHJ solar cells. Lilliu et al.62 demonstrated organic photodiodes fabricated by inkjet printing the photoactive BHJ and/or the hole conducting layer. The device structure featured a stack of glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS as the bottom electrode, an inkjet-printed P3HT:PCBM blend as the photoactive layer, and evaporated Ca and Ag as the cathode. They also compared the performance of devices with spin-coated and inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layers. The device with the spin-coated hole transporting layer produced a responsivity of 0.32 A W−1, corresponding to 63% peak EQE, and an inkjet-printed one showed a comparable responsivity of 0.27 A W−1 and an EQE of 62%. Wojciechowski et al.63 demonstrated miniaturized highly sensitive biosensors with an inkjet printing organic photodiode based on the P3HT:PCBM blend photoactive layer and the PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer. The photodetector showed a responsivity of 0.25 A W−1 at 532 nm. The miniaturized biosensor system including a disposable glass slide and the organic photodiode could detect Staphylococcal enterotoxin B with sensitivity as high as 0.5 ng mL−1, which is better than the typical ELISA-based laboratory tests and comparable to sensitivity of the biosensors using CCD- and PMT-based detection.
A fully inkjet-printed organic photodetector was reported by Lavery et al.64 They printed Ag NPs as the cathode, a ∼1 μm thick blend of PFB and F8BT as the active layer and PEDOT:PSS as the top electrode. A fluorosurfactant was introduced to the PEDOT:PSS ink to improve the wettability so that PEDOT:PSS could also be directly inkjet-printed on the photoactive blend with good uniformity. The photodetector worked at a high luminance (∼100–400 × 103 lux) and showed an EQE peak of 5.9% at 400 nm with a dark current density of 1 nA cm−2 at 1 V reverse bias. The poor uniformity of the inkjet-printed layer was the main cause to short-circuit or current leakage, considering the small thickness of the photoactive layer prepared by inkjet printing. Azzellino et al.60 have succeeded in inkjet printing of an organic photodiode based on the P3HT:PCBM blend photoactive layer and the PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer with much enhanced performance and reproducibility by improving the morphology of the photoactive layer and the hole conducting layer, as shown in Fig. 13a and b. The excellent control obtained in the printing process results in a high production yield and reproducibility. An average thickness of about 120 nm and a coffee-ring free profile photoactive P3HT:PCBM blend could be obtained by mixing 1,2-dichlorobenzene and mesitylene solvents to make use of the Marangoni effect, alleviating the coffee-ring effect. Inkjet printing of a small volume of the ink and proper post-treatment could contribute to the high performance of the inkjet-printed organic photodetector. The photodetector showed a responsivity of 0.39 A W−1 at 525 nm at a reverse applied bias voltage of 0.9 V, the EQE higher than 60% in a wide range with a wavelength of up to 600 nm, and with a peak of 83% at 525 nm (Fig. 13c–d).
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic description of an inkjet-printed photodetector. An Ag stripe was used for electrical contact to the PEDOT:PSS layer in order to minimize resistive losses; (b) optical image of a device: the dashed square, which is the overlap between the vertical Ag stripe and the horizontal PEDOT:PSS stripe defines the device area; (c) dark current and photocurrent (incident power density 3 mW cm−2) of the photodetector. (d) EQE spectrum (squares) measured at a bias of 0.9 V (incident power density: 10 mW cm−2) and a normalized active layer absorbance (black solid line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 60, Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. 
Apart from the polythiophene based organic light absorbing semiconductor, Pace et al.65 demonstrated the possibility of inkjet printing active blends comprising fullerenes and small conjugated molecules. A blend based on a narrow band gap conjugated molecule 7,7′-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-silolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′] dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(6-fluoro-4-(5′-hexyl-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]) thiadiazole (T1) and fullerene PCBM as the photoactive layer, where a small amount of P3HT was added into the blend to improve the printability of fullerenes and a small conjugated molecule ink on flexible polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrates. A poly(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-(alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)) (PFN) was inserted between the bottom electrode and the active material as an interlayer to decrease the electrode work function difference and enhance its wettability. The spectral response was extended up to 750 nm, owing to the narrow band gap small conjugated molecules. In addition, an all-organic, semi-transparent device could be fabricated fully by the inkjet printing method by replacing the Ag bottom electrode with a printed PEDOT:PSS/PFN electrode. The EQEs were measured to be 30% and 60% at ∼550 nm for the ternary blend and a P3HT:PCBM one in the semitransparent configuration respectively. Kim et al.66 fabricated organic phototransistors with a suspended top-source and drain contact structures by inkjet printing a 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) pentacene (TIPS pentacene) film as the photoactive material. Under a steady-state white light intensity of 9–13 mW cm−2, the phototransistor outputs a photocurrent to dark current ratio over 106 and a responsivity of 0.11 A W−1 at a gate voltage of −10 V and a bias voltage of 1 V. Polymer phototransistors have also been achieved by inkjet printing a diketopyrrolopyrrole-thiazolothiazole copolymer (PDPPTzBT) as the photoactive layer on a bottom gate and bottom contact structure.61 The authors first defined the electrode areas by inkjet printing a pure solvent to selectively remove the PMMA photoresist. After electrode deposition and lift-off, the channel length could be defined, as shown in Fig. 14a–d. With this method, the minimum channel width could reach 700 nm. The PDPPTzBT was also deposited onto the channel area by inkjet printing the ink formulation of PDPPTzBT in a mixed solvent of dichlorobenzene/toluene (v/v = 95/5), followed by thermal annealing in a glove box filled with nitrogen at 120 °C for 5 min (Fig. 14e and f). The final devices showed a very high responsivity (106 A W−1) under weak illumination at a wavelength of 650 nm, as displayed in Fig. 14g and h. Upon irradiation, drain current raised within 1 s, however, after light was switched off, drain current did not decay to the dark current but stayed at steady level the for at least 104 s, due to the persistent photoconductivity (PPC). The PPC effect could be erased by applying an opposite gate voltage.
 Fig. 14  (a) A layer of PMMA resist (3 nm thick) is spin-coated on a silica substrate. (b) Organic solvents were inkjet-printed on PMMA to define the source and drain electrodes. (c) Subsequent deposition of the Ti adhesion layer and Au electrodes. (d) Lift-off of PMMA by ultrasonic cleaning. (e) AFM image of the PDPPTzBT film inkjet-printed across the channel region (L = 0.7 μm). (f) The corresponding phase image of the inkjet-printed film. (g) Transfer characteristics of the transistor in the dark and under illumination. (h) Current response of a device to on/off illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61, Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
Though the organic semiconducting materials are most commonly utilized to provide a proof-of-concept device fabrication feasibility, many inorganic semiconducting materials are also examined to extend the optical absorption window of photodetectors. Inorganic nanomaterials include NPs,56,58 nanowires (NWs),19,28,67–69 nanotubes,70,71 2D nanomaterials56,72–75 in which nanoscale phenomena such as plasmonic effects and quantum confinement76–78 play a crucial role. Nanostructured materials greatly benefit from the quantum size effect, wherein the band gap and optoelectronic property of the material are highly size-dependent. The solution process also enables the inkjet printing of these inorganic NP inks into the photoactive layer of the photodetector. For example, Börberl et al.4 fabricated a highly sensitive photodetector by inkjet printing the HgTe NPs/CB ink on interdigitated Ti/Au electrodes, they achieved the maximum specific detectivity of 3.2 × 1010 cm Hz1/2 W−1 under 1 nW of illumination at 1.4 μm. A six-layer device presented a sensitivity of 65 mA W−1 at 10 V. In addition, the photoresponse behavior of HgTe NP photodetectors could be well tuned by taking advantage of the size-dependent quantum effect. By changing the NP size, the responsivity spectrum could be well modulated, allowing the extension of the spectral response up to 3 μm. Various NP layers were printed to optimize the film thickness to absorb sufficient light (Fig. 15). The inorganic NPs such as CdSe NPs could also been inkjet-printed onto flexible substrates with an office inkjet printer.79
 Fig. 15  (a) Optical image of the interdigitated electrodes overlapped by an array of printed NP stripes. (b) I–V-curves of a photodetector with 6 printed layers in the dark and under illumination with 1 μW and 42 μW. (c) Sensitivity spectra of devices with 1, 2, 4, and 6 printed layers, bias voltage was 10 V. (d) Plots of the normalized photocurrent spectra of another two HgTe NP samples with a larger NP size (HgTePD2: 4 nm, HgTePD3: 6 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2007, John Wiley and Sons. 
Due to excellent electronic and optical properties, graphene (G) has been widely investigated as an electrical contact and a photoactive layer; besides, the solution processibility of graphene oxide (GO) enables fabrication of graphene-based photodetectors by full inkjet printing technology. Manga et al. formulated an ionic solution ink by mixing titanium(IV) bis(ammonium lactate) dihydroxide (TBA) and GO nanosheets, and printed the ink on coplanar graphene-based electrodes, producing a fully inkjet-printed photodetector.80 This ink needs a suitable viscosity to allow for inkjet printing, improving the solubility of GO in ethanol based solutions and the rapid hydrolysis of titanate by using aqueous solutions. Finally the devices were reduced in hydrazine vapor overnight and then heated in a vacuum to obtain reduced GO (rGO) electrodes and TiO2-G hybrid films. The final device output showed a peak EQE of 85% and a specific detectivity of 2.33 × 1012 cm Hz1/2 W−1 at around 325 nm. The spectral response of the detector was up to a wavelength of 750 nm but detectivity quickly decreased to 9.4 × 1011 cm Hz1/2 W−1 in the visible spectrum range (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  A two-terminal photodetector produced by inkjet printing with graphene films as electrodes and TiO2-G hybrid thin films as the channels. (a) I–V characteristics of a photodetector measured in darkness and under white light illumination. Inset: Schematic diagram of the inkjet-printed graphene-TiO2 photodetector. (b) Photoconductive gain for varying concentrations of graphene in the composite under ambient conditions. (c) Detectivity vs. wavelength, with a −5 V bias voltage. (d) Photocurrent under different levels of light illumination. (e) Photocurrent response time of a photodetector under 100 mW cm−2 white light illumination. (f) Plot showing the rise time and fall time of 100 ms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to the dissoluble GO, other carbon based materials have also been printed to function as an electrode in fully inkjet-printed photodetectors with inorganic active layers. An example is demonstrated by Finn et al.81 who inkjet-printed a planar photoconductor with an ink composed of liquid-exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets as the photoactive layer and liquid-exfoliated graphene as the interdigital electrodes. The fabrication process could be carried out at a lower temperature (below 70 °C) on a commercial flexible substrate, and the current of the printed photodetector increases by a factor of 10 when exposed to an illumination of 640 mW cm−2 at a wavelength of 532 nm. A mixture of carbon nanotubes (CNT) and semiconducting NPs was inkjet-printed as a hybrid photoactive layer of a hybrid photodetector.82 CNTs were deposited via inkjet printing, while NPs were coated by dip-coating dispersion of CdTe NPs onto the printed substrates. When the light is switched on, the change in drain–source voltage was examined while keeping the source–drain current at a constant value of 1 mA. The ratio between voltage change and incident power was around 20 mV W−1 and 15 mV W−1 for phototransistors with and without CdTe NPs respectively. Gohier et al.83 demonstrated the fabrication of infrared photodetectors by inkjet printing CNT films on flexible pre-patterned Ag electrodes (deposited by inkjet printing Ag NPs on polyimide (PI) substrates). The photosensor showed a significant resistance drop of −0.35% within 10 s under illumination of the 850 nm laser beam with a power density of 0.5 mW mm−2 at 0.2 V bias. The initial resistance can then be fully recovered when the laser was turned off after the same time period. The response of the CNT based infrared photosensor was attributed a bolometric effect. Later on, Li et al.84 also demonstrated MoS2 photodetectors by inkjet printing dispersion of liquid-exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets in terpineol as the photoactive layer, while inkjet printing the Ag NPs dispersion as electrodes. Upon incident illumination, the current rises fast, followed by a slow decay, forming the upward peaks. On turning off the incident light, the carrier generation rate decreases rapidly and thus carrier recombination dominates, resulting in a rapid decay in current. Gradually, the thermal release of the trapped carriers contributes to a slow current rise to the original dark current level. This forms the downward valleys.
Apart from the above mentioned solution-processable inorganic NPs and 2D nanomaterials, various light sensitive metal oxides also have strong competitiveness in inkjet printable photodetectors, especially for UV light detection. Indium doped zinc oxide (IZO) films and TiO2 NWs, both exhibiting a photoresponse in the UV region, have showcased this possibility. IZO-based phototransistor fabricated by inkjet printing showed a current on/off ratio of four orders in magnitude, and the rise and decay times of 5 ms and 10 ms respectively.85 Chen et al.86 demonstrated inkjet printing of high-performance TiO2 NW based UV photodetectors. They first printed a commercial Ag NW suspension in isopropanol (IPA) onto flexible and transparent polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates to form the electrode patterns, then another layer of TiO2 NWs was also inkjet-printed onto the electrode patterns to fabricate a UV photodetector with >80% visible transmittance. The printed UV photodetectors presented high an on/off ratio of 2000 and also fairly a low dark current of 10−12–10−14 A. Under a 2 V bias voltage, the detectors responded to UV illumination with rise and decay times of 0.4 s and 0.1 s respectively. A summary of performance of inkjet-printed photodetectors is shown in Table 3.
Table 3 Performance of inkjet-printed photodetectors




Printed ink
Device structure
Performance




P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS62
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Ag
Inkjet PEDOT:PSS device: responsivity and EQE are 0.27 A W−1 and 62% at −5 V, which are comparable with that of devices with spin-coated PEDOT:PSS.


P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS63
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al
Responsivity and EQE are 0.25 A W−1 and 50%–60% at 532 nm.


PFB:F8BT and PEDOT:PSS
PEDOT:PSS/PFB:F8BT/Ag
EQE is 5.9% at 400 nm with a dark current density of 1 nA cm−2 at 1 V reverse bias.


P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS60
PEN/Ag/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag
Responsivity is 0.39 A W−1 at 525 nm at a reverse bias of 0.9 V, the EQE is in the range of 60%–83%.


T1:P3HT:PC70BM65
PEN/PEDOT:PSS/PFN/T1:P3HT:PC70BM/PEDOT:PSS
EQE was measured to be 30%.


TIPS pentacene66
Au/TIPS pentacene/Au phototransistor with ITO/PVP as back gate
Photocurrent to dark current ratio is higher than 106 and the responsivity is 0.11 A W−1 at a gate voltage of −10 V and a bias voltage of 1 V


PDPPTzBT61
Au/PDPPTzBT/Au short channel phototransistor with SiO2/Si as back gate
Responsivity is up to 106 A W−1


Mixture of zinc acetate dehydrate indium acetate, and 2-ethanolamine in isopropanol85
Au/IZO/Au, IZO-based phototransistor with SiO2/Si as back gate.
The device is effectively turned on in about 5 ms and turned off in 10 ms. The photosensitivity is about four orders of magnitude in the depletion region, 10 times higher than that in the accumulation region.


HgTe NPs4
Au/HgTe Nps/Au
The maximum specific detectivity of 3.2 × 1010 cm Hz1/2 W−1 under 1 nW of illumination at 1.4 μm, responsivity is up to 65 mA W−1 at 10 V.


TBA:GO80
Graphene/TBA:GO/graphene coplanar TiO2:GO hybrid photodetectors
Peak EQE was 85% and specific detectivity was 2.33 × 1012 cm Hz1/2 W−1 at around 325 nm.


Liquid-exfoliated MoS2 and graphene81
Graphene/TBA:GO/graphene coplanar photodetector
Current increased by a factor of 10 when exposed to illumination of a 532 nm laser with an intensity of 640 mW cm−2.


CNT films83
Ag/CNT/Ag photodetector
Resistance dropped to −0.35% within 10 s under illumination of the 850 nm laser beam with a power density of 0.5 mW mm−2 at 0.2 V bias.


TiO2 NWs and Ag NWs86
Ag/TiO2 NWs/Ag photodetector
The on/off ratio is up to 2000 and the low dark current is around 10−12–10−14 A. Under a 2 V bias, the detectors responded to UV light with rise and decay times of 0.4 s and 0.1 s respectively.




The above examples confirm the great potential of applying the inkjet printing technique in the photodetector fabrication process, which allows for the production of a performance comparable with that of other devices fabricated by the conventional techniques, including vacuum deposition and spin-coating. The versatility of this technique has been clearly demonstrated by the reported studies where varied materials, structures and patterns were used after a systematic optimization of the ink.59 Further effort toward large-scale application of this technique lies in improvement in fabrication yield, resolution, and device performance.
3.4 Transparent electrodes
From section 3.1 to section 3.3, we have discussed the recent advances in inkjet printing of solar cells, LEDs and also photodetectors. However, apart from the photoactive layer, the transparent electrodes (TEs) are also essential elements in various optoelectronic devices. In the past decade, the demand for transparent conductive electrodes has been persistently soaring due to the increasingly expanding market of various daily electronics ranging from touch screen displays to solar cells, and there is no doubt that the market will continue spurring in the foreseeable future.2 A general requirement in the sheet resistance of TEs is in the range of 10–103 Ω sq−1 at a transparency of ≥90%, which is also application specific. A sheet resistance of 400–1000 Ω sq−1 is adequate for many applications in touch screens, and of 10–50 Ω sq−1 is already suitable for OLEDs and solar cell applications.87,88 Currently, the commercially used TEs in most optoelectronic devices are made of ITO, which is usually prepared by vacuum deposition. However, there are serious issues related to the use of such ITO-based TEs in terms of sustainable development due to both technical and economic restrictions. First, the price of the element indium is becoming more expensive because of its ever increasing consumption and scarcity. Second, the ITO deposition process needs to be conducted in a high vacuum at high temperatures, and usually wastes a large part of the ITO source. Furthermore, the brittleness and the high temperature process could not be compatible with flexible, and stretchable requirements of current optoelectronic devices.89 Inkjet printing enabled by a solution process will provide an effective alternative to the traditional ITO technology. The expanding class of inks for printing TEs includes conductive organic polymers, transparent conducting oxides (TCOs), metal NW networks, graphene, and CNTs. In the next section we will briefly present TEs fabricated by inkjet printing these nanomaterials and their hybrids.

3.4.1 Conductive organic polymer inks. 
The conductive organic polymers are one of the indispensable components in current organic optoelectronics. The solution-processibility enables us to build flexible optoelectronics in a large-scale, cost-effective manner. Several conducting polymers, such as polypyrrole, polyaniline and PEDOT have been well studied and widely used in optoelectronics. Taking PEDOT as an example, its application potential lies in its important properties such as excellent electrical conductivity, optoelectronic properties, and thermally stability (up to 230 °C). However, its solubility problem has hampered the fabrication involved with inkjet printing. This could be overcome by mixing it with a water-dispersible polystyrene-sulfonate (PSS), by charge-balancing counterion doping polymerization, which yields water-dispersible PEDOT:PSS.90 By appropriate modification, PEDOT:PSS films could possess very good conductivity comparable with most widely used ITO films while having enough optical transparency, and thus it is a competitive candidate to replace ITO in optoelectronics.91–93 The formulated PEDOT:PSS aqueous dispersion is very stable in water and has excellent versatility to be deposited into films by various kinds of processes,94 including spin coating,95,96 spray coating,93 and inkjet printing.26,27
As a matter of fact, Ballarin et al.97 have found that there was no obvious distinction in the surface morphology and electrochemical characteristics between continuous PEDOT:PSS films fabricated by inkjet printing and by spin-coating, indicating that inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS films could be an efficient and clean alternative. The thickness of the PEDOT:PSS films increased linearly with the increase of the coating layers. Kwon et al.98 proposed that the resistance of the printed PEDOT:PSS films decreased for thicker films, which could be attributed to the increased hopping paths for charge carrier transport when the thickness of the film increased. However, there is always a trade-off between the high conductivity and low optical absorption of the film.
The solvent properties are one the most essential factors determining the final film properties. The inclusion of a high B.P. solvent to control the wetting behavior, surface tension, evaporation and drying of droplets on the substrate is a widely adopted strategy to design the feature of the printed patterns. Ummartyotin et al.99 demonstrated PEDOT:PSS films deposited by inkjet printing an aqueous dispersion of PEDOT:PSS NPs. By optimizing the particle size, the surface tension, and the viscosity of the ink, PEDOT:PSS films were successfully inkjet-printed on flexible cellulous substrates, whilst retaining its transparency feature and enhanced the electrical conductivity. Eom et al.26,28 have also systematically investigated inkjet printing of PEDOT:PSS layers, and found that the morphology and conductivity of the inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS films could be well improved by adding high B. P. solvents such as glycerol and the ethylene glycol butyl ether surfactant. Natori et al.100 found that the conductivity of printed films also depended on the substrates, for example the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS layers printed on PET is different from that of the film on polyester. The most significant improvement in sheet resistance was realized by printing PEDOT:PSS onto polyester with a small addition of glycerol in the ink. The decrease in the sheet resistance was attributed to the decreased roughness of the substrate and the surfactant glycerol which reduces the solution's surface tension and leads to smoother films.
The inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS films were also explored as TEs for various kinds of optoelectronics. The chemical doping of PEDOT:PSS was proven to be an effective method for inkjet printing the PEDOT:PSS films with high transparency and conductivity simultaneously, toward fabrication of ITO-free optoelectronic devices.101–104 Ma et al.104 fabricated transparent and flexible touch sensors based on inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS films as TEs and inkjet-printed poly(methylsiloxane) as a dielectric layer. Yoshioka et al.40 have demonstrated the preparation of PEDOT:PSS films with area-specific conductivity by selectively inkjet printing a hydrogen peroxide ink and varying the oxidation state of PEDOT:PSS. Jung et al.27 have demonstrated that inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS films could be directly used as both hole conducting layers and the anode for organic photovoltaic solar cells. They deposited the PEDOT:PSS films directly on glass by inkjet printing the ink of the high-conductivity PEDOT:PSS aqueous suspension as the anode. The inclusion of 5 wt% DMSO and 0.1% fluorosurfactant into the ink benefits high conductivity and uniform morphology. By printing PEDOT:PSS/PCDTBT:PC70BM/ZnO/Ag layers in sequence, the organic solar gave a PCE of 2%; by replacing the inkjet-printed Ag cathode with evaporated Ag, the PCE was drastically improved to 5%. The interesting observation is that the solar cells with an inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS anode showed comparable performance with those based on ITO TEs. Chou et al.105 have reported inkjet printing of PEDOT:PSS TEs for OLED with high performance. They found that the addition of the IPA solvent to the aqueous ink could effectively adjust the viscosity and surface tension of the ink. They also found that the performance of OLEDs of inkjet printing could be comparable with that of devices fabricated by spin-coating, and the sheet resistance of the inkjet-printed films was decreased 10-fold in magnitude, comparing with that prepared by the spin-coating technique. Micro-Raman spectroscopic characterization suggested that the improved electric properties were ascribed to a longer effective conjugation length of PEDOT chains in inkjet-printed PEDOT:PSS films.


3.4.2 Metal oxide inks. 
TCOs are a family of metal–oxide materials bearing both optical transparency and electrical conductivity, and have been widely used as TEs in various current daily electronics. A typical TCO group includes the most widely used ITO, FTO, and also aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO). Most scientific studies and current industrial applications mainly involve the vacuum deposition processes, which cause a lot of practical technical issues in applications and also bring about the cost and environmental concerns. Inkjet printing of metal oxides will provide a greener, more efficient, and more cost-effective alternative to the current mainstream vacuum technology.
The ink used for inkjet printing of TCO TEs could be either TCO precursors or synthesized TCO NCs. The synthesis of TCO NCs through solution phase processes is a promising strategy for the deposition of TCO films. A typical example of the metal oxide ink which one could come out easily should be the ITO ink, because it has been widely used in current optoelectronic devices. The implementation of inkjet printing enables us to precisely control the position and amount of ITO ink drops, which would greatly reduce the material consumption. Kim et al.106–108 demonstrated the fabrication of ITO TEs for cost-efficient organic solar cells by inkjet printing ITO NPs. After performing a rapid thermal annealing at 450 °C, they directly obtained patterned ITO electrodes with an average transmittance higher than 80% and a sheet resistance of around 200 Ω sq−1 without using a traditional photolithography process. Another strategy implemented to reduce the consumption of the scarce element indium was doping the indium oxide with other elements.89,109 The transparent zinc- and tin-co-doped indium oxide (IZTO) electrode with a sheet resistance of as low as 20.6 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of up to 81.29% was obtained by applying rapid thermal annealing on the inkjet-printed IZTO TEs in a nitrogen/oxygen mixture atmosphere.109 Titanium (Ti)110 was also used to dope In2O3, after an optimized rapid thermal annealing process, the inkjet-printed Ti-doped In2O3 (ITiO) film showed a sheet resistance of 37.41 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 85.40%. These results suggested that the degree of interconnection of the ITiO NPs critically affects the sheet resistance, optical transparency, and surface morphology of the final ITiO electrode.
The solution synthesis enables one to control the size, morphology, and composition of the TCO NCs simultaneously. Other advantages related to the use of TCO NC inks in the inkjet printing technique include the compatibility with flexible and stretchable substrates, and the simple and straightforward deposition manner. A lot of efforts have been made to synthesize TCO NC inks in solution over the past few years.89 Among all solution synthetic processes, hot injection has been intensively studied for the synthesis of colloidal NCs in recent years. In a typical hot injection synthesis process, a chemical reaction will happen between the injected source and the mother solution and NCs will form in a localized environment. This method has been successfully employed to synthesize AZO111 and ITO112 NCs with simultaneous control of their size and doping level. Uniform NC films of up to the centimeter scale have been assembled from these NCs and presented impressive electrical conductivity (356 Ω sq−1) and optical transparency (93% in visible spectra range) after appropriate thermal treatment. Ito et al.113 proposed a high-yield hot-injection synthetic process that was able to produced crystalline, monodisperse TCO NCs at a temperature lower than the decomposition temperature of the source. A rapid esterification reaction was initiated by slowly injecting the metal oleate complex into oleyl alcohol at 230 °C. This protocol can be used to synthesize different types of NCs, including ITO, iron oxide and ZnO and so on.
The hot inject synthetic process has two disadvantages. First, the ability to scale up the process is limited by the small dose adopted to promote high-quality doping. Second, the doping quality is strongly dependent on the injection parameters and the dopant. The optimization of these parameters for the preparation of other NCs is highly time-consuming, thus greatly hindering the scaling up of the production of various NC inks for industrial applications.
To overcome the limitation of the hot injection method, Song et al.114 developed a general one-pot process for the preparation of various kinds of TCO NCs, which could be readily scaled up to a production of 10 g per pot. The synthesized TCO NCs (Fig. 17) have good crystallinity, uniform morphology, narrow size distribution, and well-controlled doping level. The final colloids could sustain good dispersion capability over 1 year and hence could be used as inks to print high-performance TE films. The resulted TCO NC based TEs showed high performance in solution-based devices. Gaspera et al.115 reported a non-injection synthetic process for the production of monodispersed ZnO-based NCs with Al, Ga, or In dopants. The synthetic method is highly reproducible and permits dopant/Zn atomic ratios of over 15%. Another advantage of this method is that the synthesis could be even performed at a precursor concentration greater than 0.2 M with reaction yields higher than 90%. The resulting colloidal dispersions present good electric conductivity after being assembled into films and excellent transparency in the visible spectral range. Luo et al.116 also presented the fabrication of high quality TEs by wet-chemical deposition of antimony doped tin oxide (ATO) NCs. They also found that OLED fabricated on ATO NC-based TEs exhibited a performance comparable to that of commercial ITO-based devices. These above mentioned advances indicate the potential of solution processes for production of high-quality metal oxide NC colloidal inks for ink-jet printing of next-generation TEs. However, the as-printed TEs are not suitable for various optoelectronic devices. UV treatment could effectively remove the organic compounds in the TCO NC films and shorten the interspacing between TCO NCs, improving the conductivity of the printed TCO TEs.117 Short-ligand exchange was also demonstrated to be a versatile method to increase the conductivity of the NC films.118 The printed films have a wide spectrum of applications such as TEs in LEDs, and solar cells without the use of any conventional lithography processes, thus indicating that the inkjet printing of TEs is a viable alternative to the vacuum sputtering of ITO TEs for various solution-processable optoelectronic applications.
 Fig. 17  Application of the one-spot method for the synthesis of different types of TCO NC inks. (a, b) TEM images of ZnO NCs. The inset in (b) is an HRTEM image of an individual ZnO NC; (c) TEM image of AZO; (d) TEM image of GZO; (e) TEM image of IZO. The inset in (e) is the SAED pattern of IZO NCs. (f) STEM image and elemental mappings of IZO NCs. (g) TEM image of Ga2O3 NCs; (h) TEM image of In2O3 NCs; (i, j) TEM image of ITO NCs; (k) optical image of ITO NC powders synthesized on a larger scale. (l) Photograph of 30 ml of ITO NC ink re-dispersed in toluene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 


3.4.3 Metal based inks. 
Recently, considerable efforts have been made to explore the applications of metal NC inks in various fields, such as flexible and stretchable electronics, implantable medical devices, flexible and stretchable displays, OLEDs, and organic solar cells. Various metal-based inks including Au NPs/NWs, Ag NPs/NWs119,120 and Cu NPs/NWs121,122 have been demonstrated as conductive inks. Impressive advances have been made with the corresponding flexible and stretchable electrodes.
The Ag NW dispersion is possibly the most widely used metal-based conductive ink for TE preparation.123 A typical synthetic method for Ag NWs is by reducing Ag nitrate in the presence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) in ethylene glycol as the reaction medium and reductant.124,125 The as-prepared Ag NWs can be well dispersed into diverse solvents, including water, ethanol, and IPA, to prepare suspension inks for inkjet printing of TEs. The sheet resistance and optical transparency of the resulting films are critically dependent on the thickness and also the post-deposition treatment. For Ag NW-based TEs, the sheet resistance and optical transparency are usually in the ranges of 1–100 Ω sq−1 and 80–90%,88,120,126–128 respectively, being comparable with those of ITO films. Because of their high electrical conductivity and optical transparency, Ag NW-based TEs serve as good candidates for device integration in the existing applications. The Ag NW-based TEs were prepared by drop-casing the Ag NW ink onto a glass substrate followed by post-deposition annealing at 200 °C for 20 min. The resulting TEs presented a sheet resistance in the range of 1–100 Ω sq−1, which depends on coating density.119 Due to the solution process and high performance as TEs, the Ag NW networks have been proved to be a promising alternative to the current ITO-based TEs for organic solar cells.129,130
Compared with Ag NWs, copper (Cu) NWs are less expensive, because the price of Cu is 100 times lower and the abundance of Cu is 1000 times higher, while, the electrical conductivity of Cu NWs is almost the same as that of Ag NWs, which could be good enough for most optoelectronic devices. In this regard, the utilization of the Cu NW ink for conductive film preparation has become popular in recent years.131–133 Two general approaches have been developed for Cu NW synthesis: ethylenediamine (EDA)-mediated and alkylamine-mediated synthesis. TEs fabricated with Cu NW inks have shown a sheet resistance as low as 51 Ω sq−1 at 93% optical transmittance. However, Cu NW-based conductive films have a serious drawback that Cu is less stable in oxygen and moisture ambient environment than other noble metals. Various strategies have been proposed to improve the stability of Cu NW films. Wiley et al.134 proposed that growing a nickel shell-coating on Cu NWs could effectively improve the oxidation resistance of Cu NWs. Won et al.135 reported the oxidation-resistant Cu NW based composite electrodes with high transparency and conductivity. The strategy first involved treating of the Cu NWs with lactic acid to remove the organic capping layer and the oxides or hydroxides on the surface of Cu NWs, creating a direct electrical current transport pathway in the Cu NW network; subsequently embedding the Cu NWs into the AZO film to dramatically enhance their stability and resistance to oxygen and moisture. The resultant Cu NW@AZO composite TEs exhibited an impressively low sheet resistance (35.9 Ω sq−1) at an optical transmittance of 83.9% at 550 nm. Song et al.136 developed a synthetic method to prepare a new Cu@Cu4Ni NW conductive elastomer composite with ultrahigh stability. They synthesized Cu NWs with a protective Cu4Ni alloy shell in situ grown on Cu NW surface through a one-pot method. The final Cu NWs have highly crystalline alloyed shells, clear and abrupt interfaces, lengths more than 50 μm, and smooth surfaces. New elastomers were formed by cladding the Cu@Cu4Ni NW network with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). The final flexible composite TEs presented a sheet resistance of 62.4 Ω sq−1 at an optical transparency of 80% which are superior to those of typical ITO/PET electrodes.
Despite the promising application potential of metal Ag and Cu NWs, the TE enabled by inkjet printing of either Ag or Cu NWs have been rarely demonstrated. Very recently, Finn et al.128 have reported Ag NW networks prepared by direct inkjet printing of the Ag NW ink onto a polymer substrate. They found that the dilution of the ink suspension and addition of diethylene glycol (DEG) could improve the printability of the Ag NW ink. The optimized NW concentration was 0.85 mg ml−1 and the IPA:DEG volumetric ratio was 0.85:0.15, for the best printing performance with stable droplet generation and movement. The solvent evaporation during and after deposition is also critical to form a high-performance TE film. The intermediate drying step during a print session in a vacuum at a pressure of 0.1 mPa and temperature of 110 °C for 30 min to slowly evaporate the solvent is critical to obtain a conductive Ag NW network. Lu et al.137 demonstrated an inkjet-printed AgNW film as a top electrode for semitransparent organic solar cells. They found that the addition of ethylene glycol into the Ag NW ethanol dispersion was very critical to prevent nozzle clogging. The optical and electrical measurement results showed that the sheet resistance of the printed Ag NW decreased dramatically from 2190 Ω sq−1 to 26.4 Ω sq−1 with the increase of printing times from 3 to 9, whereas the average transparency of the printed Ag NW films over a 400–800 nm wavelength just decreases slightly from 95% to 83%. Note that the 7-time-printed Ag NW layer has an average sheet resistance of 44.9 Ω sq−1 and an average transparency of 86.4%, which are close to that of the widely used ITO electrodes.
Metal NP dispersions are ideal inks for inkjet printing of conductive traces. Ag NPs were commonly used for electrode printing in a wide range of electronic devices.59,88,138–140 Layani et al.141 also demonstrated inkjet printing of Ag grid TEs from the Ag NP ink on transparent plastic substrates. The inkjet-printed TEs showed a low sheet resistance (1–5 Ω sq−1) at a high transparency of 83% in the range of 400–800 nm, which could be superior to those of many TEs used in optoelectronics. The light reflection on the wide metal grid is the main cause for the reduction in the transparency of the metal grid TEs. Shrinking the width of the metal grid line was believed to be an effective method to reduce the light reflection on the metal grid. Jang et al.142 have fabricated invisible Ag-grid (less than 10 μm) by EHD inkjet printing of Ag NP inks. As one expected, the improvement in the electrical conductivity of the TEs was at the cost of the optical transparency as the Ag-grid pitch decreased. After annealing at 200 °C under near-infrared, the EHD inkjet-printed 150 μm Ag-grid pitch TEs presented a sheet resistance of 4.87 Ω sq−1 and a transmittance of 81.75%. Schneider et al.143 have employed EHD inkjet printing to print Au and Ag grids with line widths from 80 to 500 nm with Au and Ag NP inks. The high-resolution was achieved with the help of the high resolution NanoDrip printing mode. This EHD inkjet printing process demonstrated the capability of printing high-aspect-ratio structures (nanowalls or NWs) with a high resolution, significantly decreasing the sheet resistance while maintaining the high-level optical transparency. The EHD inkjet printing also provided flexibility in designing the application specific TEs, for example, both low sheet resistance with a relatively low transparency (8 Ω sq−1 at a transmittance of 94%) and high transmittance with a relatively high sheet resistance (97% at a sheet resistance of 20 Ω sq−1) have been demonstrated by changing the printing parameters.
The coffee-ring effect is normally considered as a negative factor in inkjet printing. However, by appropriately designing the coffee-ring pattern, it also helps to form excellent TEs. Layani et al.138 demonstrated that the coffee-ring effect could be used to inkjet print transparent conductive patterns. The TEs were achieved by forming a 2D array of interconnected Ag NP rings. The interconnected Ag patterns were fabricated by inkjet printing the Ag NP ink (0.5 wt%, ∼20 nm Ag NPs) on plastic substrates. The width and height of the rim of the individual rings are less than 10 μm and 300 nm respectively. The diameter of the ‘hole’ surrounded by the rim is about 150 μm; thus the whole array of the interconnected rings is highly transparent. The rims of the rings consist of self-assembled, closely packed Ag NPs, making the individual rings and the whole ring array highly conductive. The whole interconnected ring array presented a high transparency of 95% and a low sheet resistance of ∼4 Ω sq−1, which were better than those of traditional ITO TEs. Another strategy to form TEs based on metal NPs is by printing metal grids with both good optical transmittance and electrical conductivity.
The current issues with the inkjet printing of metal-based TEs include the clogging of the printer nozzle due to the high tendency of precipitation of metal contents in the ink, the rough surface of the printed TEs and also the instabilities in the ambient environment. The clogging problem could be alleviated by proper design of the ink formulation,137 passivation on the printed surface will help to reduce the surface roughness,144 and the stabilities could be readily improved by encapsulation.145–147


3.4.4 CNT based ink. 
CNTs are composed of one-atom-thick sheets of carbon with a hexagonal structure in a cylindrical-hollow-wall configuration. There are single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) and multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs), and their length could range from less than a micrometer to centimeters.70,71,148 For SWCNTs, the electronic properties are determined by their chiral structures, one third of them are conducting, and two thirds of them are semiconducting. The intrinsic electrical resistivity was found to be around 10−6 Ω cm for individual SWCNT and 3 × 10−5 Ω cm for single MWCNT.87,149 Because of their excellent electrical properties, solution processability, mechanical flexibility, and potential for low-cost and large-scale production, thin films made of randomly distributed CNTs were extremely promising for the fabrication of flexible TEs.
The printing of CNTs has several advantages, such as low material consumption, low equipment costs, high throughput, and additive fabrication. CNT inks for high-quality TE printing can be prepared by combining the CNT dispersions with suitable additives, depending on the required printing method. The dispersion medium could be water or organic solvents, and the concentration of CNTs is in a wide range from 0.01–10 mg ml−1. Concentration limitation is very essential for most of the printing methods, which require suitable viscosity and surface tensions of the ink (such as inkjet or flexo), but less critical compared to screen printing. Despite their high hydrophobicity and tendency to aggregate, CNTs can be dispersed well in many solvents by proper surface chemical modification or with the help of solubilizing additives, including surfactants, cellulose derivatives, and conducting polymers, and thus can then be used as inks for printing. Chemical modifications of the CNTs with functional groups favor the interactions between CNTs and the dispersing medium. The major issue related to organic solvents without using dispersing agents is the low CNT concentration limit, which is lower than 0.1 g L−1.2 The advantages of water-based CNT inks include the high concentration limit and also high safety during the printing process. To obtain stable aqueous dispersions of CNTs, various kinds of surfactants such as Triton X-100,150,151 sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDS),150,152 and CTAB,153 were widely used to stabilize the CNT content. When a surfactant is added into a water-based CNT ink, with the help of hydrophobic tails, the surfactant molecules are attached onto the surface of each CNT, which create a barrier around the perimeter of the CNT to physically mitigate the van der Waals forces between the CNTs in close proximity. In addition, because of the hydrophilic heads in capping surfactants on CNTs, there is a repulsive chemical force between CNTs which also helps to stabilize the CNT dispersion. Azoubel et al.154 reported a MWCNT ink with a good inkjet printing performance at a concentration of 10 mg ml−1, dispersed in water with a 0.5 wt% polymeric dispersant, and 0.1 wt% of the wetting agent. The printing of CNTs has been well summarized recently by several groups,155,156 here we will only focus on the inkjet printing of CNTs for TE applications.
Generally, for SWCNT-based TE films, the sheet resistance and optical transmittance are typically in the range of 60–870 Ω sq−1 and 70–90% respectively, depending on the SWCNT dispersion, the film thickness and the deposition process. Direct inkjet printing of the CNT ink into patterns was first demonstrated by Vajtai et al.158 who first chemically modified the surface of the MWCNT surface using oxidants (HNO3 or KMnO4) to create oxygen-containing functional groups which would be beneficial for preparing a stable aqueous MWCNT ink. Patterns with a sheet resistance of 40 kΩ sq−1 were achieved by multiple prints. The conductivity of printed MWCNT-based electrodes could be greatly enhanced by multiple prints, however, the transparency will degrade accordingly. Some groups even achieved MWCNT-based electrodes with a sheet resistance less than 1 kΩ sq−1 by printing multiple layers, the lowest sheet resistance of 78 Ω sq−1 was realized after a total of 200 prints, as demonstrated by Chen et al.,159 but the transmittance was only 10%. Mustonen et al.160 have formulated a composite ink of functionalized SWCNTs and PEDOT:PSS, and printed composite TEs having a sheet resistance of 1 kΩ sq−1 and an optical transparency of 70% after 30 prints, they could also print higher transparency patterns (∼90%) with however a much higher sheet resistance of ∼10 kΩ sq−1. An electroluminescent device with two printed CNT electrodes was also demonstrated recently. The transparent back electrode was fabricated by rod coating of MWCNT films, and the counter electrode was fabricated by inkjet printing MWCNT films on transparent flexible substrates. The electroluminescent device gave an intense emission after applying a bias between the two printed MWCNT electrodes.154
Similar to the case of inkjet printing of Ag TEs from the Ag NP ink,138 the coffee-ring effect is also not always a bad thing. Lee et al.161 reported the fabrication of circular rings by inkjet printing the water-based SWCNT ink. Most of the SWCNT contents concentrated at the rims due to the coffee-ring effect. They found that weak oxidants such as UV/ozone could also be able to create oxygen-containing groups on SWCNTs and to enhance the dispersion stability of the SWCNTs in a water-based solvent. The TEs were achieved by inkjet printing the interconnected or stacked rings; a sheet resistance of 870 Ω sq−1 and an optical transparency of 80% (at 550 nm) were achieved in the TEs after 40 prints. Shimoni et al.157 have also inkjet-printed transparent conductive patterns, and arrays of interconnected CNT circular rings on flexible substrates by using the coffee-ring effect. Direct fabrication of these rings was realized by inkjet printing an aqueous-CNT dispersion, which concentrated and self-assembled at the rims of the patterns. The electrical performance of the printed CNT films could be much improved by post-printing treatment with hot nitric acid, after which a sheet resistance of 156 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 81% at 600 nm was achieved. This makes CNT-based TEs very competitive for various electronic applications, as demonstrated in electroluminescent devices (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  (a) Mechanical profilometer result of a printed CNT ring with a 300 nm thickness. (b) The corresponding optical profilometer result of the CNT ring. (c) Optical image of printed CNT rings forming a transparent conductive film. (d) A flexible electroluminescent device prepared by the printed CNT rings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157, Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although CNT inkjet printing is relatively new, it has been demonstrated to be very promising for printing mechanically flexible and chemically stable TEs. However, there still exist a few issues including high sheet resistance, low transparency, and large roughness. Only after overcoming these issues, inkjet printing could become a mature method for CNT deposition. The high roughness could be well negated by depositing another layer of transparent conductive materials, for example deposition of PEDOT onto the inkjet-printed CNT films could effectively smooth the surface.144 Other post-printing chemical treatments could also improve the conductivity of CNT films through various mechanisms, including removing the organic residues on CNTs and improving the CNT–CNT contact, or doping the CNT films.144,162,163


3.4.5 Graphene based ink. 
Graphene is a 2D material consisting of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms with a honey-comb lattice.164 Due to its unique structure and superior physical, chemical, electronic, and optical properties, graphene has been paid plenty of attention since its first exfoliation from graphite in 2004.72,73,164–170 Graphene possesses exceptional in-plane conductivity and low sheet resistance even though it only has a single atomic layer. Light absorption by a defect-free graphene is estimated to be 2.3% while its sheet resistance could be as low as 60 Ω sq−1. Recent progress in the preparation and characterization of graphene suggest it as one of best candidates for TE fabrication through solution processes. Liquid dispersions of graphene nanosheets could be very promising for deposition by solution processes, including spin coating, roll-to-roll processing, and inkjet printing. Bulk graphite powder can be exfoliated into single graphene nanosheets or few-layer graphene flakes, which depends on the exfoliation method. The chemical exfoliation of graphite flakes in solvents is the most promising process for large-scale production of graphene and solution-phase processing of a graphene ink.171–173
The first demonstration of inkjet printing of graphene was conducted by Huang et al.174 who studied inkjet printing of a series of graphene-based inks. Under optimized conditions, high-quality graphic patterns could be fabricated by inkjet printing water-soluble single-layered or few-layered GO-based inks on various kinds of flexible substrates, ranging from paper, PET to PI. After thermal reduction, the printed graphene-based patterns showed a high electrical conductivity which increased with the number of printed layers. More importantly, these printed patterns retained the same conductivity over several bending cycles, indicating their application potential in flexible TEs. Then Kong et al.175 inkjet-printed graphene TEs on flexible substrates with GO dispersion in water, and then reduced GO with infrared light at 200 °C for only 10 min. By optimizing the distance between the adjacent droplets and the printing layers, the final reduced GO TEs gave a sheet resistance as low as 0.3 MΩ sq−1 at an optical transparency of 86%.
One disadvantage of printing the aqueous graphene ink is that a reduction process (either thermal treatment or chemical reduction) is needed to restore the conductivity of the graphene sheet,176–179 which is undesirable for many applications. Few-layer graphene flakes produced by the liquid-exfoliation method could restore the electrical conductivity of graphene to a large extent and thus present promising application potential in TEs. Torrisi et al.180 reported inkjet printing of graphene based thin films with the ink composed of liquid phase exfoliated few-layer graphene nanosheets in the organic solvent N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP). The merit of this process relies on the high quality of the resultant graphene flakes, due to the oxidization-free process. They used the graphene ink to inkjet print graphene thin film transistors with a mobility of up to ∼95 cm2 V−1 s−1, and also transparent and conductive patterns with an optical transparency of up to 80% and a sheet resistance of 30 kΩ sq−1. It was found that the wettability of the substrate to the ink is quite critical to the final feature of the printed graphene patterns, the silane groups in the molecular structure of hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) could promote the adhesion of metallic particles to the substrate. Similarly, HMDS may also improve the adhesion between graphene flakes and the substrate, thus promoting the assembly of graphene flakes into a regular network. However the ink based on graphene flakes dispersed in organic solvents always suffers from low concentration or toxicity. A high printing efficiency requires high stability and also a high concentration of the graphene dispersion-based ink. Li et al.181 developed an ink formulation based on graphene flake dispersion in non-toxic terpineol for inkjet printing of graphene patterns. The graphene ink was prepared by first exfoliating graphite flakes in DMF, and exchanging DMF with terpineol to distil due to the large difference between their boiling points. The graphene content could be greatly concentrated after solvent exchange and distillation. To prevent graphene sheet aggregation during DMF evaporation, a certain amount of polymer (ethyl cellulose) was added into the graphene/DMF suspension as a stabilizer. Finally, the stabilizer can be effectively removed through a post-printing annealing at 300–400 °C in air for 1 h. After polymer stabilization, graphene/terpineol dispersions could reach a concentration of around 1 mg ml−1 and remain stable for at least several weeks. The resultant inkjet-printed film showed a sheet resistance down to 30 kΩ sq−1 and an approximate 80% transmittance at a wavelength of 550 nm.
The key factor of controlling the concentration of the graphene dispersion is to prevent the graphene flake from aggregating. The graphene flakes dispersed in an organic solvent could be dramatically concentrated by using a specific stabilizer, and the conductivity of the inkjet-printed graphene patterns could also be improved by post-printing annealing. A concentrated graphene ink was obtained by liquid exfoliation of graphite powders in an environmentally benign solvent ethanol with ethyl cellulose (EC) as a stabilizer. Subsequently, the obtained graphene/EC powders were re-dispersed in a mixture with a cyclohexanone:terpineol ratio of 85:15, and the graphene concentration could be as high as 3.4 mg ml−1.182 During solvent evaporation, the polymeric stabilizer EC encapsulates the graphene flakes, and thus proper post-printing annealing is needed to restore the electrical conductivity of the printed graphene films. After a thermal annealing at 250 °C for 30 min, the treated graphene films presented a resistivity of 4 mΩ cm and a uniform morphology, good compatibility with flexible substrates and also excellent tolerance to bending strains. Majee et al.183 have shown that the a high concentration (up to 3.2 mg ml−1) graphene ink could be obtained by shear-exfoliation of graphite powers in the organic solvent NMP with most of the graphene flakes being ∼4 layers thick and 160 nm in diameter. The graphene ink could be well inkjet-printed on various substrates. After 10 prints and a thermal annealing at ∼350 °C for 150 min, graphene TEs with a sheet resistance of 260 Ω sq−1 and a transparency of 86% were readily achieved.
The current low performance of inkjet-printed graphene TEs limits their application in many optoelectronics, such as LEDs, and solar cells; the fabrication of TEs with low sheet resistance and high transmittance remains a critical challenge. Recent progress indicate that inkjet printing of hybrid films could possibly provide an alternative solution to the issues with single-component inks.


3.4.6 Hybrid inks. 
Though countless demonstrations of inkjet printing of TEs have been reported, and significant progress has been made in terms of cost and scalability of the production, and performance of TEs currently, the performance of inkjet-printed TEs has not matched the requirements of practically commercial applications. For example, the sheet resistance of the inkjet-printed TCO NC films is not optimal for optoelectronics. The large surface roughness of the metal NW films also applies some limits to optoelectronic device fabrication. The tube–tube junctions within the CNT bundle may block the inter-tube charge transport thus increasing the resistivity of the CNT films. Graphene films also face a similar dilemma, GO films need high temperature or harsh chemical processing to restore the electrical conductivity, the liquid-exfoliated graphene nanosheets have lower defects, but are smaller in size, degrading the charge transport capability in the printed films. For Ag grids, the large void area tends to fall short in charge collection, the Ag NW films also presents a high NW-to-NW junction resistance. Recent progress indicate that inkjet printing of hybrid films could possibly provide an alternative solution to the issues with the development of transparent conducting technologies.
For example, the inkjet-printed Ag grids have excellent electrical conductivity and transparency, but fall short in roughness and charge collection efficiency. The combination of Ag grids with conductive films will be beneficial to alleviate these issues. Jeong et al.184 have proposed a strategy to improve the conductivity of the inkjet-printed ITO films by inserting an Ag grid pattern between the inkjet-printed ITO layers, forming ITO/Ag grid/ITO hybrid TEs. At an Ag grid pitch size of 3 mm, the hybrid electrode presented an impressive sheet resistance of 2.86 Ω sq−1 with an optical transmittance of 74.06%, and a figure of merit of 17.35 × 10−3 Ω−1. Hwang et al.185 also implemented a similar scenario to reduce the sheet resistance of inkjet-printed ITO TEs by patterning the Ag grid between two ITO layers. With an Ag-grid separation distance of 2 mm, the Ag-grid embedded ITO films gave a sheet resistance lower than 3.4 Ω sq−1 after proper post-print annealing. By inserting the Ag-grid, the electrical properties of the Ag-grid/ITO hybrid film (2 mm Ag grid pitch) were significantly improved while the optical transmittance slightly reduced to 82% due to the light reflection of Ag grids, but is still comparable to the 87% transmittance of the pure ITO films. Combinations of Ag grids with conductive organic films also provide a more effective charge collection, due to the filling effect of the conductive organic matrix. Murali et al.186 developed Ag grid/PEDOT:PSS TEs by inkjet printing both PEDOT:PSS and Ag NP inks. At an Ag grid pitch size of 1 mm, the Ag grid/PEDOT:PSS hybrid TEs had a sheet resistance of 10.3 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 73% which represented a ∼10% reduction in optical transmittance compared to that of inkjet-printed Ag-grid free PEDOT:PSS films. The organic solar cells based on these hybrid TEs could be comparable with those using ITO. Kahng et al.187 described the fabrication of hybrid TEs based on inkjet-printed Ag grids and CVD grown graphene films, and demonstrated their application in organic solar cells. It was found that the graphene/Ag grid TEs showed a better performance compared with the Ag grid. The enhancement was attributed to the void filling effect of graphene films on Ag grid electrodes that have a large void area of ∼2 × 2 mm2 per each square grid pattern. CNTs have also been incorporated into Ag NW films to enhance the charge transport by providing extra local electron transport pathways between the adjacent Ag NWs composing the backbone electrode of Ag NW mesh.188 The implementation of this multiscale hierarchical approach, which combines the advantages of materials of different dimensions and of their properties, provides efficient pathways for electron transport, demonstrating a novel strategy for designing highly stretchable and conductive TEs.
As we know, the big change with the graphene- and CNT-based TE technology mainly lies in the fact that it is difficult to achieve good conductivity and high transparency simultaneously. For CNT-based electrodes, the tube-to-tube junction resistance mainly contributes the large sheet resistance of the CNT films. As for the graphene based TEs, nevertheless, because the size of graphene needs to be limited in a safe range which is smaller than 1/20 of the diameter of a small nozzle, thus the charges need to hop between small graphene sheets, which increases the electrical resistance.180 Recently, some researchers have shown that some metal NPs have the capability to improve the conductivity of carbon nanomaterials. Li et al.189 demonstrated that a layer of fine Au NPs could significantly improve the electrical conductivity of CNT fibers, and the Au NPs not only increased the carrier density in CNTs, but also facilitated the charge transport between the CNTs. Ag nanostructures with different morphologies have also been included into the graphene nanosheets to improve their conductivity though the mechanism is still unclear.123,190–192 Li et al.192 presented a method to assemble Ag nanotriangle platelets (Ag NTP) and Ag polyhedral NPs onto GO to form the ink formulations. After reduction, the inkjet-printed Ag NTP-rGO pattern displays a low sheet resistance of 170 Ω sq−1 with a transmittance of 90.2%, demonstrating a significant improvement in the performance of graphene-based TEs. Table 4 summarizes the performance of various TEs fabricated by inkjet printing techniques.
Table 4 Performance of inkjet-printed TEs




Printed materials
Solvents
Processing conditions or additives
Performance




PEDOT:PSS26
Tetralene
Glycerol/EGBE
The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS increased from 7.82 × 10−1 to 1.52 × 102 S cm−1 by adding 6 wt% glycerol and to 1.64 × 102 S cm−1 by adding 0.2 wt% EGBE.


PEDOT:PSS100
Water
Glycerol
The resistance of printed PEDOT:PSS films decreased from 4 MΩ m−1 to 0.0134 MΩ m−1 of 10 prints after being modified by glycerol.


PEDOT:PSS27
Water
5% DMSO and 0.1% fluorosurfactant
Additives helped in improving conductivity and wettability and increasing the solar cell performance.


PEDOT:PSS105
Water
IPA
Transparency was higher than 90%, resistance of the printed film was 290.63 ± 16.99 × 104 Ω m−2 which is much lower than that of spin-coated films.


ITO NPs106–108
Ethanol or water
Rapidly annealed at 450 °C for 4 min.
A transmittance of ∼85% and a sheet resistance of ∼200 Ω sq−1.


ITiO NPs110
Ethanol
Rapidly annealed at 500 °C for 4 min
A sheet resistance of 37.41 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 85.40%


IZTO NPs109
Ethanol
Rapidly annealed in N2/O2 at 700 °C for 5 min.
A sheet resistance of 20.6 Ω sq−1 and an optical transparency of 81%.


Ag NWs128
IPA
Addition of 15% DEG into IPA
The lowest sheet resistance was observed to be 8 Ω sq−1, transmittance ∼50%.


Ag NWs137
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
A sheet resistance of 44.9 Ω sq−1 at a transparency of 86.4%; a sheet resistance of 26.4 Ω sq−1 at a transparency of 83%.


Ag NPs138
Water
Stabilized by poly(acrylic acid)
Ag interconnected rings: a transparency of 95% and a low sheet resistance of ∼4 Ω sq−1.


Ag NPs141
Water
Stabilized by poly(acrylic acid) sodium salt
Ag grids: a sheet resistance of 1–5 Ω sq−1 at a high transparency of 83% in the range of 400–800 nm.


Ag NPs142
Water
Annealing at 200 °C under near-infrared
Ag girds: a sheet resistance 4.87 Ω sq−1 and a transmittance of 81.75%.


Ag NPs and Au NPs143

N-tetradecane
Annealed at 150 °C for 10 min for Ag grids; annealed at 250 °C for 30 min for gold grids
A sheet resistance of 8 Ω sq−1 at a transmittance of 94%; a sheet resistance of 20 Ω sq−1 at a transmittance of 97%.


ITO NPs and Ag NPs184
ITO NPs in water; Ag NPs in triethylene glycol monoethyl ether
Annealed at 450 °C in N2/O2 for 4 min
ITO/Ag grid/ITO film: a sheet resistance of 2.86 Ω sq−1 with an optical transmittance of 74.06%, and a figure of merit of 17.35 × 10−3 Ω−1 at an Ag grid pitch size of 3 mm.


PEDOT:PSS and Ag NPs186
Water and DMF
Annealed at 150 °C for 15 min
The PEDOT:PSS/Ag grid/PEDOT:PSS has a sheet resistance of 10.3 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 73%.


MWCNT158
Water
Surface modification with HNO3 or KMnO4
A sheet resistance of 40 kΩ sq−1 by multiple prints.


SWCNT159
Water
1 wt% Sodium dodecyl sulfate
A sheet resistance 78 Ω sq−1 at a transmittance of 10%.


PEDOT:PSS:SWCNT160
Mixture of ethanol and water
Surface modification of SWCNT
A sheet resistance of 1 kΩ sq−1 and an optical transparency of 70% after 30 prints; a transparency of ∼90% with however a much higher sheet resistance of ∼10 kΩ sq−1.


SWCNT161
Water
Oxidized with UV/ozone
SWCNT interconnected rings: a sheet resistance of 870 Ω sq−1 and an optical transparency of 80% (at 550 nm) after 40 prints.


SWCNT157
Water
Surfactants: polymeric dispersant SOLSPERSE 46000 (1.5 wt%) and wetting agent Byk 348 (0.2 wt%). Post-treatment: dipping the samples for 10 min in 70% HNO3 solution
SWCNT interconnected rings: a sheet resistance of 156 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 81% at 600 nm.


GO174
Water
Reduced in Ar/H2 at 400 °C for 3 h
Electrical conductivity: 900 S m−1 after 25 prints.


GO175
Water
Reduced with infrared light at 200 °C for only 10 min
A sheet resistance of 0.3 MΩ sq−1 at an optical transparency of 86%.


Graphene nanosheets180
NMP
Treated substrate with HDMS to improve adhesion
Thin film transistors with the mobility of up to ∼95 cm2 V−1 s−1, an optical transparency up to 80% and a sheet resistance of 30 kΩ sq−1.


Graphene flakes181
Terpineol
Annealed at 300–400 °C in air for 1 h
A sheet resistance down to 30 kΩ sq−1 and approximate 80% transmittance at a wavelength of 550 nm.


Graphene nanosheets183
NMP
Annealed at 350 °C for 150 min
A sheet resistance of 260 Ω sq−1 and a transparency of 86%.


Ag NPs-GO192
Water
Reduced by hydrazine at 110 °C in vacuum for 3 h.
The printed film has a sheet resistance of 170 Ω sq−1 with a transmittance of 90.2%.




Concerns with TEs prepared with inkjet printing metal-based inks include the stability due to oxidation, since Cu and Ag are easily oxidized in humid or acidic environments. In addition, NW-to-NW junction resistance is the main cause to the high electrical resistance in transparent metal NW films. 2D graphene nanosheets are transparent, conductive, and hydrophilic, and also gas impermeable, and are thus suitable as a coating and a protective layer for metal NW-based TEs.147 As shown in Fig. 19a, the optical transmittance of Ag NW based and Ag NW-rGO based TEs almost have no significant change with the exposure time; however, the sheet resistance of Ag NW TEs increased by more than 2.5 times when it is exposed to 70% RH at 70 °C for 8 days; but the sheet resistance of Ag NW-rGO TE films only increased by 50% under the same exposure conditions, as displayed in Fig. 19b. Both the Ag NWs and Ag NW-rGO are quite transparent, indicating that the rGO could not only greatly improve the resistance of Ag NW to thermal oxidation but also retain the high transparency of the TE. Lee et al.193 have described hybrid TEs based on graphene and Ag NWs, and their uses as transparent and stretchable electrodes. These graphene-capped Ag NW hybrid TEs showed excellent electrical properties (sheet resistance ∼33 Ω sq−1), high transmittance (∼94% in the visible range), robust stability against electric breakdown and oxidation, and also impressive mechanical flexibility and stretchability. Dou et al.194 reported a solution-based approach to wrap the surface of ultrathin Cu NWs with GO nanosheets. The solution process offers possibility for inkjet printing. After deposition, high-quality Cu-rGO core–shell NW-based transparent conductive electrodes could be obtained by reducing the GO through a mild thermal annealing. The core–shell NW structures enabled the production of high-performance, low-cost Cu NW based TEs which could maintain stability over 200 days in air and have a sheet resistance of ∼28 Ω sq−1, and a haze of ∼2% at a transmittance of ∼90% in visible light, demonstrating the merits comparable to ITO and Ag NW TEs. In addition, the 2D graphene were also expected to tightly hold metal NWs to enhance the charge transport between the metal NWs and create a smooth film surface.195 Liang et al.196 demonstrated the preparation of TEs based on an Ag NW percolation network modified with GO nanosheets. The GO nanosheets wrapped around Ag NWs and soldered the Ag NW junctions and thus dramatically reduced the inter-NW junction resistance without heat treatment or mechanical pressing. The GO-wrapped Ag NW network had a sheet resistance of 14 Ω sq−1 with 88% transparency at a wavelength of 550 nm, indicating the promising application in most fully flexible optoelectronic devices. Thus the inclusion of graphene into metal NW-based electrodes opens a new way to produce large-area, flexible, highly conductive and transparent metal NW/graphene TEs. Though the examples listed here were not prepared by inkjet printing, the same strategies could also work well for inkjet-printed metal-based TEs.
 Fig. 19  (a) Transmittance of TE made of Ag NW and Ag NWs-rGO as a function of time. (b) Sheet resistance of TE made of Ag NW and Ag NW-rGO as a function of exposed time. (c) Optical images of Ag NW (left) and Ag NW-rGO (right) based films on glass substrates. (d) SEM image of Ag-rGO film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 

4. Outlook
In this review, we have attempted to provide a summary of the applications of the inkjet printing technique in optoelectronics fabrication. The material deposition processes for optoelectronic device fabrication including solar cells, LEDs, photodetectors TEs, etc. currently involve the use of solution processes (such as spin-coating, spray-coating, doctor blading, and screen printing) or vacuum deposition approaches. In some cases, inkjet printing which has traditionally been used in the graphical and publishing industries has recently been employed to deposit one or more layers of devices. Considering the high cost of lithography steps in industrial manufacturing and the urgency to minimize the number and complexity of these steps, inkjet printing provides an attractive, material-conserving alternative for some applications. Compared with traditional deposition approaches, inkjet printing has many advantages including processing flexibility, low cost and low material wastage. In addition, inkjet printing is also an ideal process for depositing a given material on a substrate with pre-existing patterns and devices that would, otherwise, be contaminated and/or damaged if another deposition process was used. Nevertheless, the local nature of inkjet printing also brings up issues that do not exist in traditional deposition processing, such as nozzle clogging, coffee-ring effect, wetting behavior of the ink on the substrate, the feature morphology, resolution and so on. A better understanding of the fluidic behavior of the droplet flight and the interactions with the substrate or previously deposited layers is fundamental to advance further development in this very exciting field. Significant progress has been achieved in recent work to alleviate such drawbacks on film quality and device performance, as shown in the application examples. Given the impressive recent progress and versatile nature of inkjet printing, we anticipate a promising future of this technology in optoelectronic device fabrication.
Notes and references
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Börberl, M. V. Kovalenko, S. Gamerith, E. J. W. List and W. Heiss, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3574–3578 CrossRef .
G. D. Martin, S. D. Hoath and I. M. Hutchings, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2008, 105, 012001 CrossRef .
H. P. Le, J. Imaging Sci. Technol., 1998, 42, 49–62 CAS .
J. E. Fromm, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1984, 28, 322–333 CrossRef .
N. Reis, C. Ainsley and B. Derby, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 094903 CrossRef .
B.-J. de Gans, E. Kazancioglu, W. Meyer and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 292–296 CrossRef CAS .
J.-U. Park, M. Hardy, S. J. Kang, K. Barton, K. Adair, D. K. Mukhopadhyay, C. Y. Lee, M. S. Strano, A. G. Alleyne, J. G. Georgiadis, P. M. Ferreira and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 782–789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Lim, W. H. Lee, H. S. Lee, J. H. Lee, Y. D. Park and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Nature, 1997, 389, 827–829 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pesach and A. Marmur, Langmuir, 1987, 3, 519–524 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oh, J. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, H. Kim, H. G. Yoon, S.-N. Lee and J. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, S359–S363 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang and W. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 649, 687–693 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Li, X. Sun and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12544–12548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Changjae, N. Masaya and S. Katsuaki, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2012, 22, 035016 CrossRef .
M. Kuang, L. Wang and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6950–6958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Noh, N. Zhao, M. Caironi and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 784–789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Shaheen, R. Radspinner, N. Peyghambarian and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2996–2998 CrossRef CAS .
V. Marin, E. Holder, M. M. Wienk, E. Tekin, D. Kozodaev and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 319–324 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, J. J. Berry, M. O. Reese, M. F. A. M. van Hest, A. Miedaner, M. W. Liberatore, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2781–2786 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and R. H. Friend, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 6466–6471 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Hoth, S. A. Choulis, P. Schilinsky and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3973–3978 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Hoth, P. Schilinsky, S. A. Choulis and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2806–2813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Eom, S. Senthilarasu, P. Uthirakumar, S. C. Yoon, J. Lim, C. Lee, H. S. Lim, J. Lee and S.-H. Lee, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 536–542 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, A. Sou, K. Banger, D.-H. Ko, P. C. Y. Chow, C. R. McNeill and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400432 CrossRef .
S. H. Eom, H. Park, S. H. Mujawar, S. C. Yoon, S.-S. Kim, S.-I. Na, S.-J. Kang, D. Khim, D.-Y. Kim and S.-H. Lee, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1516–1522 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aernouts, T. Aleksandrov, C. Girotto, J. Genoe and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033306 CrossRef .
W. Wang, Y.-W. Su and C.-H. Chang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2616–2620 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pi, L. Zhang and D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 21240–21243 CAS .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 13455–13459 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, S. Orlandi, T. Matsui, S. Aghazada, M. Cavazzini, J.-P. Correa-Baena, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Mosconi, K.-H. Dahmen, F. De Angelis, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt, G. Pozzi, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15017 CrossRef .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tekin, P. J. Smith, S. Hoeppener, A. M. J. van den Berg, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. de Gans, P. C. Duineveld and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
T. X. Sun and G. E. Jabbour, MRS Bull., 2002, 27, 309–315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yoshioka and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1307–1312 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tekin, H. Wijlaars, E. Holder, D. A. M. Egbe and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 4294–4298 RSC .
S.-H. Jung, J.-J. Kim and H.-J. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 6954–6958 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Haverinen, R. A. Myllyla and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 073108 CrossRef .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J. Chen, M. S. Bradley, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2151–2155 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Singh, T. Kondou, H. Chae, J. Froehlich, S. Li, A. Mochizuki and G. E. Jabbour, Mater. Res. Soc. Fall Meeting,  2008, vol. G13, p. 7 .
M. Singh, H. S. Chae, J. D. Froehlich, T. Kondou, S. Li, A. Mochizuki and G. E. Jabbour, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 3002–3005 RSC .

          S. H. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, K. Kang and H. Kang, International Symposium on Optomechatronic Technologies,  2009, pp. 71–76 .
J. Bharathan and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 2660–2662 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Chang, J. Liu, J. Bharathan, Y. Yang, J. Onohara and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 734–737 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kobayashi, S. Kanbe, S. Seki, H. Kigchi, M. Kimura, I. Yudasaka, S. Miyashita, T. Shimoda, C. R. Towns, J. H. Burroughes and R. H. Friend, Synth. Met., 2000, 111–112, 125–128 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gohda, Y. Kobayashi, K. Okano, S. Inoue, K. Okamoto, S. Hashimoto, E. Yamamoto, H. Morita, S. Mitsui and M. Koden, SID Symp. Dig. Tech., 2006, 37, 1767–1770 CrossRef CAS .
P.-Y. Chen, C.-L. Chen, C.-C. Chen, L. Tsai, H.-C. Ting, L.-F. Lin, C.-C. Chen, C.-Y. Chen, L.-H. Chang, T.-H. Shih, Y.-H. Chen, J.-C. Huang, M.-Y. Lai, C.-M. Hsu and Y. Lin, SID Symp. Dig. Tech., 2014, 45, 396–398 CrossRef .
P.-Y. Chen, C.-C. Chen, C.-C. Hsieh, J.-M. Lin, Y.-S. Lin and Y. Lin, SID Symp. Dig. Tech., 2015, 46, 1352–1354 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Kim, M. S. Onses, J. B. Lim, S. Nam, N. Oh, H. Kim, K. J. Yu, J. W. Lee, J.-H. Kim, S.-K. Kang, C. H. Lee, J. Lee, J. H. Shin, N. H. Kim, C. Leal, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, G. Kim, B. R. Lee, S. Ji, S.-Y. Kim, B. W. An, M. H. Song and J.-U. Park, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13410–13415 RSC .
Z. Zhan, L. Zheng, Y. Pan, G. Sun and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2589–2595 RSC .
L. Xu, X. Li, Z. Zhan, L. Wang, S. Feng, X. Chai, W. Lu, J. Shen, Z. Weng and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20264–20271 CAS .
Z. Y. Zhan, C. Liu, L. X. Zheng, G. Z. Sun, B. S. Li and Q. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20471–20475 RSC .
K. Fukuda, T. Sekine, D. Kumaki and S. Tokito, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3916–3920 CAS .
G. Azzellino, A. Grimoldi, M. Binda, M. Caironi, D. Natali and M. Sampietro, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6829–6833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Cheng, L. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Guo, W. Hu, G. Yu and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4683–4689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lilliu, M. Böberl, M. Sramek, S. F. Tedde, J. E. Macdonald and O. Hayden, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 610–615 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Wojciechowski, L. C. Shriver-Lake, M. Y. Yamaguchi, E. Füreder, R. Pieler, M. Schamesberger, C. Winder, H. J. Prall, M. Sonnleitner and F. S. Ligler, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 3455–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Lavery, G. L. Whiting and A. C. Arias, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 682–685 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pace, A. Grimoldi, D. Natali, M. Sampietro, J. E. Coughlin, G. C. Bazan and M. Caironi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6773–6777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, J.-I. Han, M.-K. Han, J. E. Anthony, J. Park and S. K. Park, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1529–1533 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soci, A. Zhang, B. Xiang, S. A. Dayeh, D. P. R. Aplin, J. Park, X. Y. Bao, Y. H. Lo and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1003–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, C. Tay, Z. Zhan, C. Zhang, L. Zheng, T. Venkatesan and S. Chua, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 7032–7036 RSC .
X. Huang, Z. Zhan, K. Pramoda, C. Zhang, L. Zheng and S. Chua, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5163–5165 RSC .
J. An, Z. Zhan, S. V. H. Krishna and L. Zheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 237, 16–22 CrossRef CAS .
J. An, Z. Zhan, H. K. S. V. Mohan, G. Sun, R. V. Hansen and L. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2215–2222 RSC .
P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4285–4294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Bao and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3677–3694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhan, J. Sun, L. Liu, E. Wang, Y. Cao, N. Lindvall, G. Skoblin and A. Yurgens, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8634–8641 RSC .
Y. Zhang, T. Liu, B. Meng, X. Li, G. Liang, X. Hu and Q. J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1811 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhan, J. N. An, H. C. Zhang, R. V. Hansen and L. X. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1139–1144 CAS .
C. Tian, D. Jiang, B. Li, J. Lin, Y. Zhao, W. Yuan, J. Zhao, Q. Liang, S. Gao, J. Hou and J. Qin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2162–2166 CAS .
Z. Zhan, L. Liu, W. Wang, Z. Cao, A. Martinelli, E. Wang, Y. Cao, J. Chen, A. Yurgens and J. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 2021–2027 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu and L. Y. Lin, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2014, 26, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Manga, S. Wang, M. Jaiswal, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5265–5270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Finn, M. Lotya, G. Cunningham, R. J. Smith, D. McCloskey, J. F. Donegan and J. N. Coleman, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 925–932 RSC .
E. Katzir, S. Yochelis, Y. Paltiel, S. Azoubel, A. Shimoni and S. Magdassi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 196, 112–116 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gohier, A. Dhar, L. Gorintin, P. Bondavalli, Y. Bonnassieux and C. S. Cojocaru, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 063103 CrossRef .
J. Li, M. M. Naiini, S. Vaziri, M. C. Lemme and M. Östling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6524–6531 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, E. Girgis, V. Ström, W. Voit, L. Belova and K. V. Rao, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
S.-P. Chen, J. R. Duran Retamal, D.-H. Lien, J.-H. He and Y.-C. Liao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 70707–70712 RSC .
A. Teichler, J. Perelaer and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1910–1925 RSC .
A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Small, 2014, 10, 3515–3535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9760–9774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Jiang, J. Xu and J. Yu, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 302, 157–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13082–13088 CAS .
M. Vosgueritchian, D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. McCarthy, C. A. Hanley, L. J. Brennan, V. G. Lambertini and Y. K. Gun'ko, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 764–770 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551–1566 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ballarin, A. Fraleoni-Morgera, D. Frascaro, S. Marazzita, C. Piana and L. Setti, Synth. Met., 2004, 146, 201–205 CrossRef CAS .
I. W. Kwon, H. J. Son, W. Y. Kim, Y. S. Lee and H. C. Lee, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1174–1177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ummartyotin, J. Juntaro, C. Wu, M. Sain and H. Manuspiya, J. Nanomater., 2011, 2011, 606714 Search PubMed .
A. Y. Natori, C. D. Canestraro, L. S. Roman and A. M. Ceschin, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2005, 122, 231–235 CrossRef .
I. A. Grimaldi, A. D. G. Del Mauro, R. Diana, F. Loffredo, P. Morvillo, F. Villani and C. Minarini, AIP Conf. Proc., 2012, 1459, 167–169 CrossRef CAS .
A. De Girolamo Del Mauro, R. Diana, I. A. Grimaldi, F. Loffredo, P. Morvillo, F. Villani and C. Minarini, Polym. Compos., 2013, 34, 1493–1499 CrossRef .
J. Ha, J. Park, J. Ha, D. Kim, S. Chung, C. Lee and Y. Hong, Org. Electron., 2015, 19, 147–156 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, F. Ribeiro, K. Powell, J. Lutian, C. Møller, T. Large and J. Holbery, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21628–21633 CAS .
W.-Y. Chou, S.-T. Lin, H.-L. Cheng, M.-H. Chang, H.-R. Guo, T.-C. Wen, Y.-S. Mai, J.-B. Horng, C.-W. Kuo, F.-C. Tang, C.-C. Liao and C.-L. Chiu, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 3718–3723 CrossRef CAS .
H.-K. Kim, I.-K. You, J. B. Koo and S.-H. Kim, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 211, 33–36 CrossRef CAS .
J.-A. Jeong, J. Lee, H. Kim, H.-K. Kim and S.-I. Na, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1840–1844 CrossRef CAS .
J.-A. Jeong and H.-K. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, e105–e108 CrossRef .
J. Kim, S.-I. Na and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 424–432 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Lee, J.-A. Jeong, S.-W. Choi, J. Kim and H.-K. Kim, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2015, 73, 531–535 CrossRef CAS .
R. Buonsanti, A. Llordes, S. Aloni, B. A. Helms and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4706–4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Lee, G. Li, M. A. Petruska, D. C. Paine and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13410–13414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ito, S. Yokoyama, T. Zaikova, K. Masuko and J. E. Hutchison, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 64–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, S. A. Kulinich, J. Li, Y. Liu and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 472–476 CrossRef .
E. Della Gaspera, A. S. R. Chesman, J. van Embden and J. J. Jasieniak, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9154–9163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Luo, D. Bozyigit, V. Wood and M. Niederberger, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4901–4907 CrossRef CAS .
E. Della Gaspera, M. Bersani, M. Cittadini, M. Guglielmi, D. Pagani, R. Noriega, S. Mehra, A. Salleo and A. Martucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3439–3448 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, M. A. Petruska and S. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12017–12021 CAS .
S. De, T. M. Higgins, P. E. Lyons, E. M. Doherty, P. N. Nirmalraj, W. J. Blau, J. J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, T. Zhang, H. Zhou, S. C. Price, B. J. Wiley and W. You, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4075–4084 CAS .
T. Öhlund, A. K. Schuppert, M. Hummelgård, J. Bäckström, H.-E. Nilsson and H. Olin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18273–18282 Search PubMed .
S. Jang, Y. Seo, J. Choi, T. Kim, J. Cho, S. Kim and D. Kim, Scr. Mater., 2010, 62, 258–261 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Chen, D. S. Ghosh, V. Mkhitaryan and V. Pruneri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11756–11761 CAS .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 833–837 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, I. Lee, T.-S. Kim and J.-Y. Lee, Small, 2013, 9, 2887–2894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Preston, Z. Fang, J. Murray, H. Zhu, J. Dai, J. N. Munday and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1248–1254 RSC .
W. J. Scheideler, J. Smith, I. Deckman, S. Chung, A. C. Arias and V. Subramanian, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3248–3255 RSC .
D. J. Finn, M. Lotya and J. N. Coleman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9254–9261 CAS .
S.-B. Kang, Y.-J. Noh, S.-I. Na and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 122, 152–157 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, D. S. You, K. Lim, S. Park, S. Jung, C. S. Kim, D.-H. Kim, D.-G. Kim, J.-K. Kim, J. Park, Y.-C. Kang, J. Heo, S.-H. Jin, J. H. Park and J.-W. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4177–4184 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Rathmell and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4798–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, S. Gong, Y. Chen, L. W. Yap and W. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5707–5714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, R. Wang, M. Wen, D. Weng, X. Cui, J. Sun, H. Li and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14283–14286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Rathmell, M. Nguyen, M. Chi and B. J. Wiley, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3193–3199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Won, A. Kim, D. Lee, W. Yang, K. Woo, S. Jeong and J. Moon, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e105 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, J. Li, J. Xu and H. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6298–6305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, J. Lin, N. Wu, S. Nie, Q. Luo, C.-Q. Ma and Z. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 093302 CrossRef .
M. Layani, M. Gruchko, O. Milo, I. Balberg, D. Azulay and S. Magdassi, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3537–3542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Y. Kim, M. Amani, G. H. Ahn, Y. Song, A. Javey, S. Chung and T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2819–2826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Gu, Q. Zhang, J. Wu, Y. Long and Z. Fan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4007 CAS .
M. Layani, P. Darmawan, W. L. Foo, L. Liu, A. Kamyshny, D. Mandler, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4572–4576 RSC .
Y. H. Jang, J. H. Kim and D. Y. Byun, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46, 155103 CrossRef .
J. Schneider, P. Rohner, D. Thureja, M. Schmid, P. Galliker and D. Poulikakos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 833–840 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, K. Ryu, X. Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. Tompson and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1880–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-B. Song, Y. S. Rim, F. Liu, B. Bob, S. Ye, Y.-T. Hsieh and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24601–24607 CAS .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, M. Cui, J. Wang, J. Chen, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 2501882 Search PubMed .
Y. Ahn, Y. Jeong and Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6410–6414 CAS .
L. X. Zheng, M. J. O'Connell, S. K. Doorn, X. Z. Liao, Y. H. Zhao, E. A. Akhadov, M. A. Hoffbauer, B. J. Roop, Q. X. Jia, R. C. Dye, D. E. Peterson, S. M. Huang, J. Liu and Y. T. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 673–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bachtold, M. Henny, C. Terrier, C. Strunk, C. Schönenberger, J.-P. Salvetat, J.-M. Bonard and L. Forró, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 274–276 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rastogi, R. Kaushal, S. K. Tripathi, A. L. Sharma, I. Kaur and L. M. Bharadwaj, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 328, 421–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, W. Zhou, D. L. Ho, K. I. Winey, J. E. Fischer, C. J. Glinka and E. K. Hobbie, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1789–1793 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Islam, E. Rojas, D. M. Bergey, A. T. Johnson and A. G. Yodh, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 269–273 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Ryabenko, T. V. Dorofeeva and G. I. Zvereva, Carbon, 2004, 42, 1523–1535 CrossRef CAS .
S. Azoubel, S. Shemesh and S. Magdassi, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 344003 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Tortorich and J.-W. Choi, Nanomaterials, 2013, 3, 453 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, W. Gao, S. Emaminejad, D. Kiriya, H. Ota, H. Y. Y. Nyein, K. Takei and A. Javey, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4397–4414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shimoni, S. Azoubel and S. Magdassi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11084–11089 RSC .
K. Kordás, T. Mustonen, G. Tóth, H. Jantunen, M. Lajunen, C. Soldano, S. Talapatra, S. Kar, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2006, 2, 1021–1025 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chen, H. Chen, J. Qiu and C. Zhou, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 594–603 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mustonen, K. Kordás, S. Saukko, G. Tóth, J. S. Penttilä, P. Helistö, H. Seppä and H. Jantunen, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2007, 244, 4336–4340 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-I. Lee, S. Kim, K.-J. Lee, N. V. Myung and Y.-H. Choa, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 536, 160–165 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. A. Ng, T. H. Lysia, T. Huiwen and C. H. P. Poa, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 205703 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Z. Geng, K. K. Kim, K. P. So, Y. S. Lee, Y. Chang and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7758–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim and A. K. Geim, Science, 2007, 315, 1379–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lu, H. H. Yang, C. L. Zhu, X. Chen and G. N. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4785–4787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 487–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Soldano, A. Mahmood and E. Dujardin, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2127–2150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Tung, M. J. Allen, Y. Yang and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 25–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, Y. Huang, J. Liang, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 675–684 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, L. T. Le, Y. Li, J. L. Zunino and W. Lee, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 13467–13472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sun, L. Zheng, Z. Zhan, J. Zhou, X. Liu and L. Li, Carbon, 2014, 68, 748–754 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Torrisi, T. Hasan, W. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Lombardo, T. S. Kulmala, G.-W. Hsieh, S. Jung, F. Bonaccorso, P. J. Paul, D. Chu and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2992–3006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, F. Ye, S. Vaziri, M. Muhammed, M. C. Lemme and M. Östling, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3985–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Secor, P. L. Prabhumirashi, K. Puntambekar, M. L. Geier and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1347–1351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Majee, M. Song, S.-L. Zhang and Z.-B. Zhang, Carbon, 2016, 102, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
J.-A. Jeong, J. Kim and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1974–1978 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Hwang, B.-Y. Jeong, J. Moon, S.-K. Chun and J. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2011, 176, 1128–1131 CrossRef CAS .
B. Murali, D.-G. Kim, J.-W. Kang and J. Kim, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 1801–1806 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kahng, M.-K. Kim, J.-H. Lee, Y. J. Kim, N. Kim, D.-W. Park and K. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 86–91 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lee, J. Ham, J. Lee, S. Hong, S. Han, Y. D. Suh, S. E. Lee, J. Yeo, S. S. Lee, D. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5671–5678 CrossRef CAS .
Q. W. Li, Y. Li, X. F. Zhang, S. B. Chikkannanavar, Y. H. Zhao, A. M. Dangelewicz, L. X. Zheng, S. K. Doorn, Q. X. Jia, D. E. Peterson, P. N. Arendt and Y. T. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3358–3363 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Kholmanov, C. W. Magnuson, A. E. Aliev, H. Li, B. Zhang, J. W. Suk, L. L. Zhang, E. Peng, S. H. Mousavi, A. B. Khanikaev, R. Piner, G. Shvets and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, S. R. Das, C. Jeong, M. R. Khan, D. B. Janes and M. A. Alam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5150–5158 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Guo, X. Zhang and Y. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19095–19101 CAS .
M.-S. Lee, K. Lee, S.-Y. Kim, H. Lee, J. Park, K.-H. Choi, H.-K. Kim, D.-G. Kim, D.-Y. Lee, S. Nam and J.-U. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2814–2821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, F. Cui, Y. Yu, G. Khanarian, S. W. Eaton, Q. Yang, J. Resasco, C. Schildknecht, K. Schierle-Arndt and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2600–2606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. K. Moon, J. I. Kim, H. Lee, K. Hur, W. C. Kim and H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1112 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, L. Li, K. Tong, Z. Ren, W. Hu, X. Niu, Y. Chen and Q. Pei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1590–1600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Zhaoyao Zhan	Dr Zhaoyao Zhan received his B.E. and M.E. degrees in materials science and engineering from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2006 and 2008, respectively, and his Ph.D. degree from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2013. During 2014–2016, he had worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden. Now he is working as a research fellow at NTU, Singapore. He has co-authored one book chapter, and published more than 40 technical papers with citations close to 600 and a H-index of 14. His current research interests include carbon nanomaterials (carbon nanotubes, graphene), printed electronics and sensors.
Jianing An	Dr Jianing An received her B.E. from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China in 2009 and her Ph.D. from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore in 2014. She has been working as a postdoctoral research fellow at Nanyang Technological University since 2014. Her research focuses on fs laser-based 3D printing of micro/nanostructures for electrical and optical applications.
Yuefan Wei	Dr Yuefan Wei is a research fellow in the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering of Nanyang Technological University. She received both her B.E. and M.E. in Materials Science and Engineering from Tianjin University in 2006 and 2008, respectively. She obtained her PhD degree from Nanyang Technological University in 2013. Her research interest and expertise are fabrication, physics and characterization of photovoltaic materials and devices, chemical vapor deposition and hydrothermal synthesis of nanostructured materials, three dimensional (3D) printing technology, energy conversion and storage, photoelectrochemical cells, and self-cleaning technology.
Van Thai Tran	Mr Van-Thai Tran received his Bachelor's degree from the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Ho Chi Minh University of Technology, Vietnam in 2014. Since August 2014 he has been pursuing his Ph.D. study in the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore under the supervision of Prof. Du Hejun and Dr Yang Hongyi (SIMTech, Singapore). His research interests include additive manufacturing and functional material applications, with a particular focus in the field of zinc oxide and MEMS devices.
Hejun Du	Dr Hejun Du is currently an associate professor in the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He obtained both B.E. and M.E. from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China, and his PhD from Imperial College, UK. His research interests include (1) numerical and computational methods for engineering applications; (2) MEMS and microfluidics; (3) smart materials and their engineering applications. He has published over 200 international refereed journal papers, more than 100 conference papers and a few invited book chapters. His journal papers were cited over 4000 times in the SCI with a H-index of 36.

 	Fig. 1  Droplet formation process in a thermal and piezoelectric inkjet nozzle.	 
Z = (dργ)1/2/τ

 	Fig. 2  Structure of nozzles and schematic illustration of a high-resolution EHD printer. (a) SEM images of a glass microcapillary nozzle (2 μm internal diameter). The entire outer surface of the nozzle and its inner surface near the tip are coated with functionalized gold. The tip region is shown in the magnified images on the right panel. (b) Configuration of the nozzle and the substrate for printing. The ink droplet was ejected from the nozzle to a moving substrate to produce the line patterns. (c) Setup of an inkjet printer. The gold-coated nozzle was connected to a grounded electrode under the substrate by a power supply. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  The process of droplet drying after inkjet printing with a mixed-solvent ink. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11, Copyright 2008, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images and the corresponding height profiles of an Al2O3 ink droplet. The Al2O3 NPs were produced with the ink of: (a) water single-solvent and (b) DMF/water mixed-solvent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14, Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic structure of an all-inkjet-printed, air-processable organic solar cell and (b) energy level alignment of each component. All the four layers are produced by a single nozzle inkjet printer and all processes have been conducted in the ambient environment. The AFM images of inkjet-printed PCDTBT:PC70BM films (c) spin-coated from 100% CB; (d) spin-coated from a solvent mixture of 50% CB, 40% MT and 10% CF; and (e) inkjet printing from a solvent mixture of 50% CB, 40% MT and 10% CF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27, Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

PEDOT:PSS22	Diluted with 75% DI water	—	PCE = 3.3%, comparable with that of spin-coated devices.
F8BT:PFB23	
p-Xylene	—	PCE ∼ 2% at a wavelength of 380 nm, which is higher than spin-coated devices, due to finer phase separation.
P3HT:PCBM24,25	ODCB/mesitylene	—	PCE = 2.9%–3.5%	The solvent mixture controlled ink drying and improved the film morphology.
Tetralene	PCE = 1.29%
PCDTBT:PC70BM27	ODCB/mesitylene	—	PCE = 4%	The addition of chloroform leads to a homogeneous active layer.
Chloroform	PCE = 5%
PEDOT:PSS26	Tetralene	—	PCE = 2.09%	The additives improved the surface morphology and conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer.
Glycerol/EGBE	PCE = 3.16%
P3HT:PCBM28	Chlorobenzene	—	PCE = 1.97%	The additives improved the film morphology, light absorption and reduced recombination losses.
ODT	PCE = 3.71%

 	Fig. 6  (a) Fabrication steps of CIGS solar cells. (b) Top view of a real device. (c) I–V characteristics of the CIGS solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Fabrication flowchart for inkjet printing the C/CH3NH3PbI3 planar perovskite solar cells. For comparison, another fabrication strategy was also demonstrated in a separate step 3 and 4 to convert PbI2 into CH3NH3PbI3; (b) SEM image (cross-section view) of the TiO2 compact layer deposited by TiCl4 treatment. (c) SEM image (cross-section view) of the multiple spin-coated TiO2/PbI2 thin film. (d, e) Cross-sectional SEM images and the corresponding schematic illustration of inkjet-printed TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C solar cells from the C ink (d) and the C + CH3NH3I ink (e); (f) a basic configuration; (g) energy level diagram; (h) J–V characteristics; (i) the wavelength-dependent IPCE profiles of the solar cells respectively fabricated from the C ink and the C + CH3NH3I ink. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Optical images of an inkjet-printed library of CdTe NCs/PVA composite layers emitting at different wavelengths. The PVA content in the solution used for printing was systematically varied from left to right panels in each row: from 0 to 1.4 wt% with an increment step of 0.2 wt%. The corresponding molar ratios of PVA/CdTe NCs in the films are from 0 (0/1.6 × 10−8) to 21.9 with an increment step of 3.12. (b) Photograph of an inkjet-printed library containing mixed green-and red-emitting CdTe NCs (top). The corresponding PL spectra (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, Copyright 2006, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Emission spectra of devices with ten drops per pixel (dashed curve) and 15 drops per pixel (solid curve); (b) luminance vs. applied voltage. Inset: An optical photograph of QD LEDs (243 pixels with a common cathode) at the operation voltage of 12 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, Copyright 2009, AIP Publishing LLC.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A cross sectional scratch showing the schematic structure of an inkjet-printed full-color AMPLED display; (b) an example of the picture of a high-resolution display. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, Copyright 2006, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the inkjet-printed OLED structure; (b) light-on image of the 65-inch OLED display panel; (c) the pixel design for the 200-ppi resolution panel. (a–b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 52, Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 53, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  QD LEDs fabricated by EHD inkjet printing of homogeneous QD arrays (a, b) schematic illustration and photographic description of QD LEDs. (c, d) Electroluminescence images of green and red QD LEDs. The stage speeds for green and red QDs were 50 μm s−1 and 30 μm s−1, respectively. (e, f) Plots of current density–voltage (J–V), luminance–voltage (L–V) and EQE of green QD LEDs. (g, h) Plots of J–V, L–V, and EQE of red QD LEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

DCM:Almq349	ITO/PEDOT/PVK/DCM:Almq3/Ca	Luminance is around 25 cd m−2, EQE is 0.05%, which is lower than that of devices fabricated by thermal evaporation, due to the presence of the residual moisture and oxygen.
CdSe/ZnS QDs43	ITO/poly-TPD/printed QDs/TPBi (20 nm)/LiF (1.5 nm)/Al (180 nm)	EQE of 0.19%, brightness of 381 cd m−2 at 15.9 V.
PVK:PBD:Ir@POSS45	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK:PBD:Ir@POSS/BCP/LiF/Al	Peak luminance is 6000–10000 cd m−2, EQE of 1.4%–2.5%, which is lower than that of spin-coated devices, due to the coffee-ring effect.
CBP:Ir(ppy)342	ITO/TCTA (40 nm)/CBP:Ir(ppy)3 (20 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Alq3 (40 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (100 nm)	EQE is 11.7%, power efficiency is 29.9 lm W−1, comparable with that of devices fabricated by vacuum deposition.
PPV, R-PPV50	ITO/PEDOT/PPV/F8/cathode(blue)	The luminance of the 2 inch display was about 30 cd m−2, consuming 0.7 W power.
ITO/PEDOT/R-PPV/F8/cathode(green)
ITO/PEDOT/F8/cathode(red)
PEDOT–PSS, interlayer (IL) and light emitting layer (LEP)51	ITO/PEDOT:PSS (60 nm)/IL (10 nm)/LEP (80 nm)/Ba/Al	Luminance is 200 cd m−2; EQE is 4% at the window.
The addition of high boiling point solvents results in the flat surface flatness and smooth resultant film
Hole injection layer (HIL), the hole transporting layer (HTL) and the emitting layers (EML) for multiple colors (red, green and blue)52,53	ITO/HIL/HTL/EML(red:green:blue)/ETL/Al	Luminance is 200 cd m−2.
CdSe/CdZnSeS QDs and CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs54	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/printed QDs/ZnO/Al	CdSe/CdZnSeS QDs: luminance and EQE are 36000 cd m−2 and 2.5%; CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs: luminance and EQE are 11250 cd m−2 and 2.6%.

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic description of an inkjet-printed photodetector. An Ag stripe was used for electrical contact to the PEDOT:PSS layer in order to minimize resistive losses; (b) optical image of a device: the dashed square, which is the overlap between the vertical Ag stripe and the horizontal PEDOT:PSS stripe defines the device area; (c) dark current and photocurrent (incident power density 3 mW cm−2) of the photodetector. (d) EQE spectrum (squares) measured at a bias of 0.9 V (incident power density: 10 mW cm−2) and a normalized active layer absorbance (black solid line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 60, Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) A layer of PMMA resist (3 nm thick) is spin-coated on a silica substrate. (b) Organic solvents were inkjet-printed on PMMA to define the source and drain electrodes. (c) Subsequent deposition of the Ti adhesion layer and Au electrodes. (d) Lift-off of PMMA by ultrasonic cleaning. (e) AFM image of the PDPPTzBT film inkjet-printed across the channel region (L = 0.7 μm). (f) The corresponding phase image of the inkjet-printed film. (g) Transfer characteristics of the transistor in the dark and under illumination. (h) Current response of a device to on/off illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61, Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Optical image of the interdigitated electrodes overlapped by an array of printed NP stripes. (b) I–V-curves of a photodetector with 6 printed layers in the dark and under illumination with 1 μW and 42 μW. (c) Sensitivity spectra of devices with 1, 2, 4, and 6 printed layers, bias voltage was 10 V. (d) Plots of the normalized photocurrent spectra of another two HgTe NP samples with a larger NP size (HgTePD2: 4 nm, HgTePD3: 6 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2007, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  A two-terminal photodetector produced by inkjet printing with graphene films as electrodes and TiO2-G hybrid thin films as the channels. (a) I–V characteristics of a photodetector measured in darkness and under white light illumination. Inset: Schematic diagram of the inkjet-printed graphene-TiO2 photodetector. (b) Photoconductive gain for varying concentrations of graphene in the composite under ambient conditions. (c) Detectivity vs. wavelength, with a −5 V bias voltage. (d) Photocurrent under different levels of light illumination. (e) Photocurrent response time of a photodetector under 100 mW cm−2 white light illumination. (f) Plot showing the rise time and fall time of 100 ms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, Copyright 2010, John Wiley and Sons.	 

P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS62	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Ag	Inkjet PEDOT:PSS device: responsivity and EQE are 0.27 A W−1 and 62% at −5 V, which are comparable with that of devices with spin-coated PEDOT:PSS.
P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS63	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al	Responsivity and EQE are 0.25 A W−1 and 50%–60% at 532 nm.
PFB:F8BT and PEDOT:PSS	PEDOT:PSS/PFB:F8BT/Ag	EQE is 5.9% at 400 nm with a dark current density of 1 nA cm−2 at 1 V reverse bias.
P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS60	PEN/Ag/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag	Responsivity is 0.39 A W−1 at 525 nm at a reverse bias of 0.9 V, the EQE is in the range of 60%–83%.
T1:P3HT:PC70BM65	PEN/PEDOT:PSS/PFN/T1:P3HT:PC70BM/PEDOT:PSS	EQE was measured to be 30%.
TIPS pentacene66	Au/TIPS pentacene/Au phototransistor with ITO/PVP as back gate	Photocurrent to dark current ratio is higher than 106 and the responsivity is 0.11 A W−1 at a gate voltage of −10 V and a bias voltage of 1 V
PDPPTzBT61	Au/PDPPTzBT/Au short channel phototransistor with SiO2/Si as back gate	Responsivity is up to 106 A W−1
Mixture of zinc acetate dehydrate indium acetate, and 2-ethanolamine in isopropanol85	Au/IZO/Au, IZO-based phototransistor with SiO2/Si as back gate.	The device is effectively turned on in about 5 ms and turned off in 10 ms. The photosensitivity is about four orders of magnitude in the depletion region, 10 times higher than that in the accumulation region.
HgTe NPs4	Au/HgTe Nps/Au	The maximum specific detectivity of 3.2 × 1010 cm Hz1/2 W−1 under 1 nW of illumination at 1.4 μm, responsivity is up to 65 mA W−1 at 10 V.
TBA:GO80	Graphene/TBA:GO/graphene coplanar TiO2:GO hybrid photodetectors	Peak EQE was 85% and specific detectivity was 2.33 × 1012 cm Hz1/2 W−1 at around 325 nm.
Liquid-exfoliated MoS2 and graphene81	Graphene/TBA:GO/graphene coplanar photodetector	Current increased by a factor of 10 when exposed to illumination of a 532 nm laser with an intensity of 640 mW cm−2.
CNT films83	Ag/CNT/Ag photodetector	Resistance dropped to −0.35% within 10 s under illumination of the 850 nm laser beam with a power density of 0.5 mW mm−2 at 0.2 V bias.
TiO2 NWs and Ag NWs86	Ag/TiO2 NWs/Ag photodetector	The on/off ratio is up to 2000 and the low dark current is around 10−12–10−14 A. Under a 2 V bias, the detectors responded to UV light with rise and decay times of 0.4 s and 0.1 s respectively.

 	Fig. 17  Application of the one-spot method for the synthesis of different types of TCO NC inks. (a, b) TEM images of ZnO NCs. The inset in (b) is an HRTEM image of an individual ZnO NC; (c) TEM image of AZO; (d) TEM image of GZO; (e) TEM image of IZO. The inset in (e) is the SAED pattern of IZO NCs. (f) STEM image and elemental mappings of IZO NCs. (g) TEM image of Ga2O3 NCs; (h) TEM image of In2O3 NCs; (i, j) TEM image of ITO NCs; (k) optical image of ITO NC powders synthesized on a larger scale. (l) Photograph of 30 ml of ITO NC ink re-dispersed in toluene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Mechanical profilometer result of a printed CNT ring with a 300 nm thickness. (b) The corresponding optical profilometer result of the CNT ring. (c) Optical image of printed CNT rings forming a transparent conductive film. (d) A flexible electroluminescent device prepared by the printed CNT rings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157, Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

PEDOT:PSS26	Tetralene	Glycerol/EGBE	The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS increased from 7.82 × 10−1 to 1.52 × 102 S cm−1 by adding 6 wt% glycerol and to 1.64 × 102 S cm−1 by adding 0.2 wt% EGBE.
PEDOT:PSS100	Water	Glycerol	The resistance of printed PEDOT:PSS films decreased from 4 MΩ m−1 to 0.0134 MΩ m−1 of 10 prints after being modified by glycerol.
PEDOT:PSS27	Water	5% DMSO and 0.1% fluorosurfactant	Additives helped in improving conductivity and wettability and increasing the solar cell performance.
PEDOT:PSS105	Water	IPA	Transparency was higher than 90%, resistance of the printed film was 290.63 ± 16.99 × 104 Ω m−2 which is much lower than that of spin-coated films.
ITO NPs106–108	Ethanol or water	Rapidly annealed at 450 °C for 4 min.	A transmittance of ∼85% and a sheet resistance of ∼200 Ω sq−1.
ITiO NPs110	Ethanol	Rapidly annealed at 500 °C for 4 min	A sheet resistance of 37.41 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 85.40%
IZTO NPs109	Ethanol	Rapidly annealed in N2/O2 at 700 °C for 5 min.	A sheet resistance of 20.6 Ω sq−1 and an optical transparency of 81%.
Ag NWs128	IPA	Addition of 15% DEG into IPA	The lowest sheet resistance was observed to be 8 Ω sq−1, transmittance ∼50%.
Ag NWs137	Ethanol	Ethylene glycol	A sheet resistance of 44.9 Ω sq−1 at a transparency of 86.4%; a sheet resistance of 26.4 Ω sq−1 at a transparency of 83%.
Ag NPs138	Water	Stabilized by poly(acrylic acid)	Ag interconnected rings: a transparency of 95% and a low sheet resistance of ∼4 Ω sq−1.
Ag NPs141	Water	Stabilized by poly(acrylic acid) sodium salt	Ag grids: a sheet resistance of 1–5 Ω sq−1 at a high transparency of 83% in the range of 400–800 nm.
Ag NPs142	Water	Annealing at 200 °C under near-infrared	Ag girds: a sheet resistance 4.87 Ω sq−1 and a transmittance of 81.75%.
Ag NPs and Au NPs143	
N-tetradecane	Annealed at 150 °C for 10 min for Ag grids; annealed at 250 °C for 30 min for gold grids	A sheet resistance of 8 Ω sq−1 at a transmittance of 94%; a sheet resistance of 20 Ω sq−1 at a transmittance of 97%.
ITO NPs and Ag NPs184	ITO NPs in water; Ag NPs in triethylene glycol monoethyl ether	Annealed at 450 °C in N2/O2 for 4 min	ITO/Ag grid/ITO film: a sheet resistance of 2.86 Ω sq−1 with an optical transmittance of 74.06%, and a figure of merit of 17.35 × 10−3 Ω−1 at an Ag grid pitch size of 3 mm.
PEDOT:PSS and Ag NPs186	Water and DMF	Annealed at 150 °C for 15 min	The PEDOT:PSS/Ag grid/PEDOT:PSS has a sheet resistance of 10.3 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 73%.
MWCNT158	Water	Surface modification with HNO3 or KMnO4	A sheet resistance of 40 kΩ sq−1 by multiple prints.
SWCNT159	Water	1 wt% Sodium dodecyl sulfate	A sheet resistance 78 Ω sq−1 at a transmittance of 10%.
PEDOT:PSS:SWCNT160	Mixture of ethanol and water	Surface modification of SWCNT	A sheet resistance of 1 kΩ sq−1 and an optical transparency of 70% after 30 prints; a transparency of ∼90% with however a much higher sheet resistance of ∼10 kΩ sq−1.
SWCNT161	Water	Oxidized with UV/ozone	SWCNT interconnected rings: a sheet resistance of 870 Ω sq−1 and an optical transparency of 80% (at 550 nm) after 40 prints.
SWCNT157	Water	Surfactants: polymeric dispersant SOLSPERSE 46000 (1.5 wt%) and wetting agent Byk 348 (0.2 wt%). Post-treatment: dipping the samples for 10 min in 70% HNO3 solution	SWCNT interconnected rings: a sheet resistance of 156 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 81% at 600 nm.
GO174	Water	Reduced in Ar/H2 at 400 °C for 3 h	Electrical conductivity: 900 S m−1 after 25 prints.
GO175	Water	Reduced with infrared light at 200 °C for only 10 min	A sheet resistance of 0.3 MΩ sq−1 at an optical transparency of 86%.
Graphene nanosheets180	NMP	Treated substrate with HDMS to improve adhesion	Thin film transistors with the mobility of up to ∼95 cm2 V−1 s−1, an optical transparency up to 80% and a sheet resistance of 30 kΩ sq−1.
Graphene flakes181	Terpineol	Annealed at 300–400 °C in air for 1 h	A sheet resistance down to 30 kΩ sq−1 and approximate 80% transmittance at a wavelength of 550 nm.
Graphene nanosheets183	NMP	Annealed at 350 °C for 150 min	A sheet resistance of 260 Ω sq−1 and a transparency of 86%.
Ag NPs-GO192	Water	Reduced by hydrazine at 110 °C in vacuum for 3 h.	The printed film has a sheet resistance of 170 Ω sq−1 with a transmittance of 90.2%.

 	Fig. 19  (a) Transmittance of TE made of Ag NW and Ag NWs-rGO as a function of time. (b) Sheet resistance of TE made of Ag NW and Ag NW-rGO as a function of exposed time. (c) Optical images of Ag NW (left) and Ag NW-rGO (right) based films on glass substrates. (d) SEM image of Ag-rGO film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
