Development and challenges of LiFePO 4 cathode material for lithium-ion batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00029A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00029A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 269-284Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsDevelopment and challenges of LiFePO4 cathode material for lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Li-Xia 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhao-Hui 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wu-Xing 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xian-Luo 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ji-Tao 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yun-Hui 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            John B. 
            Goodenough
          
          
        
      c
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Materials Processing and Die & Mould Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China. E-mail: huangyh@mail.hust.edu.cn.;  Fax: +86 27 87558241;   Tel: +86 27 87558241
bCollege of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
cTexas Materials Institute, ETC 9.102, The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station, C2200Austin, TX 78712, USA
Received 
      10th April 2010
    , Accepted 2nd July 2010First published on 14th October 2010AbstractThe olivine LiFePO4 now stands as a competitive candidate of cathode material for the next generation of a green and sustainable lithium-ion battery system due to its long life span, abundant resources, low toxicity, and high thermal stability. In this review, we focus on LiFePO4 and discuss its structure, synthesis, electrochemical behavior, mechanism, and the problems encountered in its application. The major goal is to highlight some recent development of LiFePO4 with high rate capability, high energy density, and excellent cyclability resulting from conductive coating, nanocrystallization, or preparation.Lixia Yuan received her PhD at Wuhan University in 2007. She worked as a post-doctoral researcher in Tsinghua from 2007–2009. She is now assistant professor at Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Her research interests are lithium rechargeable batteries.John B. Goodenough and Yun-Hui HuangProf. Yunhui Huang received his Ph.D in 2000 at Peking University. He worked as a JSPS foreign researcher at the Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan, from 2002 to 2004. In 2004, he joined The University of Texas at Austin, USA, where his research work focused on anode materials for solid oxide fuel cells and cathode materials for lithium rechargeable batteries. He joined Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 2008 as a Chair Professor in Materials. He won the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of China in 2008.Prof. John B. Goodenough is a member of the US National Academy of Engineering. He won the prestigious Japan Prize in 2001 and the Enrico Fermi Award in 2009 for his innovative work on lightweight rechargeable batteries. He received the 2001–02 Cockrell School of Engineering Billy and Claude R. Hocott Distinguished Centennial Engineering Research Award. Dr Goodenough is also a member of the University of Texas at Austin Texas Materials Institute.

Broader context
Great attention has been paid to electric vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles in an attempt to relieve the pressure from increasing oil price and environmental issue. After years of development, the promising cathode material LiFePO4 is used for the sustainable batteries with high capacity and high power density for such vehicles. This review presents an overview of research and development of LiFePO4. In particular, we highlight the main approaches of synthesis and material processing of LiFePO4 aiming to improve the electrical and ionic conductivities which are the major challenges for its application in high-rate lithium-ion batteries.

1. Introduction
Chemical energy is portable stored energy and electrical energy is efficiently transmitted over long distances to do work at a demand point. Fossil fuels and biomass have traditionally provided societies with portable chemical energy; electric power, largely obtained from fossil fuels, is made available through a power grid. Our transport of people and goods is largely dependent on an “oil grid”. The rise in population and sophistication of modern society increases our dependence both on fossil fuels and centralized stations that power an electricity grid; both have their attendant vulnerabilities, which is why, worldwide, energy conservation, reduction of air pollution from the use of fossil fuels, and the economic harnessing of energy sources other than fossil fuels are now national priorities.
The most widely available alternative energy sources are wind and radiant-solar energy. Like the energy from hydropower, the energy from wind is first converted into electricity for transmission to end points to do work or for storage. Nuclear and radiant-solar energy are also convertible into electricity. However, the demand for electrical energy varies diurnally whereas nuclear energy is constant while wind and radiant-solar energy are variable on a different time scale. Therefore, an electric power network utilizing alternative energy sources would be dependent on massive electrical energy storage; the capacity of the present electric-power grid to store energy is limited.
A rechargeable battery provides an efficient storage of electrical energy as chemical energy; but the storage capacity of the individual cell of a battery is limited, and the construction of large stationary batteries containing many cells to be used at a centralized facility is, at present, prohibitively expensive. A more efficient and cost-effective way to use batteries for electrical energy storage has been in portable electric devices: e.g.cell phones, laptop computers, power tools, and electric vehicles. The plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) is particularly attractive for large-scale electrical energy storage since the electrical energy can be stored in commuter vehicles during off-peak demand and without contributing to distributed air pollution. However, the cost of the battery for even the PHEV presently limits the commercial potential of this alternative. The greater convenience and higher energy density of the chemical energy stored in gasoline compared to that in battery electrodes makes it difficult for a large, all-electric vehicle to compete with the modern family car powered by the internal-combustion (IC) engine, and the oil network on which our modern transportation system mainly depends is well-established. Nevertheless, the rechargeable battery offers the most promising possibility of displacing a large fraction of our oil consumption by providing distributed storage of electricity generated by centralized and/or dispersed alternative energy sources. The PHEV offers massive distributed energy storage. The lithium-ion rechargeable battery is considered to be the most promising candidate for the PHEV because of its superior energy density compared to conventional rechargeable batteries.1–6
A battery consists of several electrochemical cells. Each cell stores chemical energy in two electrodes of different electrochemical potential, a reductant (the anode) and an oxidant (the cathode). Inside a cell, the electrodes are kept apart by an electronic insulator (the separator), but they are in electrical contact through a conductor of positive ions that is also an electronic insulator (the electrolyte). The chemical reaction between the two electrodes has two components, positively charged ions and negatively charged electrons that, on discharge, pass from the anode to the cathode where they neutralize one another, but the neutralizing electronic current is forced to flow outside the cell where it can be measured as an electric current I at a voltage V. Collection of the electrons from the anode to a negative post for delivery to the external circuit and their delivery to the cathode from a positive post during discharge is performed by metallic conductors (the current collectors). If electrons are prevented from flowing (open circuit), cations flow from the anode to the cathode to create a positive charge on the cathode, a negative charge on the anode until the resulting electric field between the two electrodes equalizes the electrochemical potentials μA and μC of the two electrodes. The open-circuit voltage (OCV) of the cell is VOC = (μA − μC)/e(1)where e is the magnitude of the electronic charge.
During discharge, the losses are associated with ionic motion across electrode/electrolyte interfaces and within the electrolyte cause the voltage V to decrease by an amount η = VOC − V(2)
The voltage loss η is called the polarization or the overvoltage. The effective energy density stored in a cell is QV/W, where the specific capacity, Q/W, is the amount of electronic charge Q transferred from the anode to the cathode in a complete discharge, i.e. for the chemical reaction to go to completion, and W is the weight of the cell. The specific capacity Q/W decreases as the electronic current I increases because, as discussed below, the chemical reaction at the cathode depends on diffusion of the working cation into a host cathode structure as well as in the electrolyte. In order to minimize η and maximize the Q/W for a desired power output, the electrodes of an individual battery cell have a large surface area, a small separation between the electrodes, and a surface area that remains in contact with the electrolyte as the volume of an electrode changes during charge and discharge. In order to retain contact between the electrodes and the electrolyte, liquid electrolytes or elastic polymers are used as the electrolyte with solid electrodes.
The chemical energy of a cell is restored in a rechargeable battery by applying a voltage that reverses the flow of cations and electrons. The efficiency of the electrical energy storage in a rechargeable battery is (3)where Vdis and Vch are the voltages during discharge and charge, respectively. If the two voltages are nearly the same over the entire state of charge of the battery, the storage efficiency is excellent. The state of charge refers to the capacity of a battery after a partial discharge or charge.
The several cells of a battery are connected in series to give a specified V and in parallel to give a desired Q. The larger the energy density QV/W of the individual cell, the smaller the number of cells needed and therefore the lower the cost of the battery.
Two factors limit the voltage V that is attainable in the individual cell, the window of the electrolyte and the intrinsic limits of the electrodes. The window of the electrolyte is Eg = ELUMO − EHOMO(4)where the LUMO and the HOMO are, respectively the lowest unoccupied and highest occupied molecular orbitals of the electrolyte. Thermodynamic stability requires a μA of the anode below the ELUMO and a cathode μC above the EHOMO. If μA is above the LUMO, the electrolyte is reduced by electrons from the anode; and if μC is below the HOMO, the electrolyte is oxidized by transferring electrons to the cathode. The window of an aqueous electrolyte is about 1.23 eV. In order to achieve a higher cell voltage that is stable over time, a non-aqueous electrolyte with a larger window is needed; it may be an organic liquid, an ionic liquid, a polymer, or a solid. The H+ ion is mobile when there is no water. The Li+ ion as the working ion, on the other hand, is mobile in a non-aqueous electrolyte, and batteries using the Li+ ion as the working ion in their cells are lithium-ion batteries. Carbonates are organic liquids that dissolve a sufficient concentration of Li salts for a Li+-ion conductivity σLi ≈ 10−2 S cm−1; these organic liquids are the most commonly used electrolytes in a lithium-ion cell since they offer the highest σLi of the non-aqueous electrolytes. The carbonates have a LUMO and a HOMO at about 1.0 and 4.3 eV, respectively, below the μA of Li0, which corresponds to an Eg = 3.3 eV, Fig. 1. The effective window can only be increased by the formation of a Li-permeable passivation layer on one or both of the electrodes.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the relative electron energies in a lithium ion battery. μLiC6, μLTO represent the electrochemical potentials of the graphite anode and Li4Ti5O12 anode respectively, μLNM is the electrochemical potential of the cathode, e.g. Li1−xNi0.5Mn1.5O4electrode. 
A solid cathode for a rechargeable battery consists of a host structure into which the working ion can be inserted/extracted reversibly over a large solid-solution range. The solid cathode of a lithium-ion battery is a transition-metal compound; the Li+ ions inserted/extracted are charge-compensated by electrons that enter/leave d states of the transition-metal ions. It is the solid-solution range of the reversible Li insertion into the cathode host structure that defines the charge Q of the specific cell capacity Q/W. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the d states into/from which the electrons move have energies above or at the top of the anion-p bands of the host. Where the d electrons are localized at a cation, the d-electron manifold represents a redox couple that is separated by a finite energy from the next formal valence state, Fig. 2(a). Where a redox couple approaches the top of the anion-p bands, covalent admixture of the anion-p and cation-d orbitals is large enough for the d states to become itinerant, and the cathode Fermi energy EFC = μC becomes pinned at the top of the anion-p bands on oxidation, Fig. 2(b). In this case, no significant step in the voltage is seen on passing from one formal mixed valence to another (e.g.Ni(III)/Ni(II) to Ni(IV)/Ni(III) in an oxide host) on extraction or insertion of Li+ ions from or into energetically equivalent interstitial sites of the host. Where the d-states of interest lie well below the top of the anion-p bands, oxidation of the cathode on Li+-ion removal introduces p-band holes that can be trapped irreversibly in antibonding states of an anion-anion bond as in a disulfide (S2)2− or peroxide (O2)2− ion, Fig. 2(c). Therefore, the energy of the top of the anion-p bands becomes an intrinsic limit for the voltage versusLi+/Li0 obtainable with a cathode insertion-compound host. Early attempts to make a lithium-ion battery used layered TiS2 in which the TiS2 layers of edge-shared octahedra are held together by van der Waals forces. The Li insertion into LixTiS2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) consisted of intercalation of the Li+ ions between the TiS2 layers with reduction of the Ti4+ to all Ti3+ in LiTiS2 at a voltage decreasing with x from about 2.4 to 2.0 V. For this voltage to compete with an aqueous-electrolyte battery, it was necessary to have a Li or Li–Al alloy as the anode with a μA above the LUMO of the carbonate electrolyte, which proved to be unsafe. In the layered sulfides, the top of the S-3p bands is about 2.7 eV below the μA of Li0, which is a poor match to the window of a carbonate electrolyte. It was this limitation that led Goodenough7,8 to investigate the layered Li1-xMO2oxides with M = Co or Ni; the Li1−xCo1−yNiyO2 cathode gives a voltage V ≈ 4.0 V versusLi+/Li0, but O2 is evolved before all the Li is extracted because the top of the O-2p band is 4.0 eV below the μA of Li0 in these layered oxides. Manufacture of a discharged battery was not appreciated by the battery companies until engineers at the SONY Corp., Japan, showed that insertion of Li into graphitic carbon gives a safer anode than Li0 or a Li–Al alloy.9 The carbon anode is charged by extracting Li from a discharged cathode. With carbon as the anode and Li1−xCoO2 as the cathode, the SONY Corp. introduced the cell phone and launched the wireless revolution. The Li1−xCoO2 cathode has a high volume energy density (tap density) useful for hand-held devices.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the energy vs. density of states for the transition-metal redox couples and the O anion-p bands relative to the cathode Fermi energy. 
The commercial success of the wireless revolution and the interest in achieving a commercially viable PHEV stimulated a worldwide effort to find alternative oxide cathode hosts containing cheaper and less toxic components than Co, but to date only three useful oxide host structures have been identified: the layered Li1-xMO2 providing 2D Li+-ion transport, the cubic Li1 ± x[Mn2]O4 spinels supporting 3D Li+-ion transport,10 and the ordered olivines Li1-xMPO4 with 1D Li+-ion channels.11 Although Li1-xCoO2 still dominates the market for hand-held devices because of its superior volume energy density, it is not a practical choice for the cathode of an EV battery for the following reasons:
(1) Reversible extraction of Li from Li1-xCoO2 is limited to x ≈ 0.5, which gives a relatively low specific capacity of about 140 mAh g−1.12 (Note: )
(2) O2 evolution on overcharging (x > 0.5) gives a high pressure inside a sealed cell, which raises safety concerns.13,14
(3) Co is only 20 parts per million of Earth's crust, which makes it too expensive and its availability too limited for a mass market.
(4) Co is toxic.
On the other hand, it is difficult to order Li+ and Ni(III) in LiNiO2, and the spinel Lix[Mn2]O4 gives a one-volt step from 4.0 V to 3.0 V at x = 1, which limits its practical reversibility capacity also to one Li per two transition-metal ions. Moreover, Mn2+ dissolves from the surface in the 4-V domain to cause a capacity fade with cycling unless ionic substitutions are introduced that reduce the capacity even further.15,16 On the other hand, the introduction of Mn(IV) lowers the top of the O-2p bands; the layered δLi2MnO3·(1 − δ)Li(Ni0.5−xCo2xMn0.5−x)O2 evolves O2 only at 4.7 V17 and the spinel Li[Ni0.5Mn1.5]O4 allows reversible cycling to 5.0 V with complete access to both the Ni(III)/Ni(II) and Ni(IV)/Ni(III) formal valences without a step between them.18 However, at these large voltages, a passivation layer must form on the surface of the cathode particles to prevent oxidation of a carbonate electrolyte. In contrast, the olivine host FePO4 allows a reversible insertion of Li to LiFePO4 with a theoretical specific capacity of 170 mAh g−1 at a V = 3.45 V versusLi+/Li0, which is well within the window of polymer as well as the carbonate electrolytes. It is, therefore, an inexpensive, environmentally benign, safe cathode capable of thousands of charge/discharge cycles without degradation.11,19,20 Although the Li+ ions move in 1D channels, the LiFePO4 particles form as platelets with perpendicular 1D channels that are not blocked by Li/Fe disorder or by stacking faults if the platelets are small. However, the two-phase insertion reaction, which is responsible for the constant Vversus state of charge, limits the electronic and ionic conductivity and therefore the rate capability where the cathode particles are too large.21–23 This limitation can be alleviated by coating the particles with carbon24,25 or another Li-permeable phase.26 Therefore, LiFePO4 is considered to be a leading contender for the cathode of the large-capacity batteries needed for the PHEV. In this paper, we discuss the considerable research that has been done to improve the performance of the LiFePO4 cathode, to elucidate the Li-ion insertion/extraction mechanism, to optimize the distribution of the carbon coating, and to find synthetic routes that reduce the production cost with particular emphasis on recent developments.
2. Structure of LiFePO4

        LiFePO4 has the ordered-olivine structure, space groupPnma. The oxygen atoms are located in a slightly distorted, hexagonal-close-packed arrangement. The phosphorus atoms occupy tetrahedral sites; the iron and lithium atoms occupy octahedral 4a and 4c sites, respectively. Each FeO6 octahedron is linked with four FeO6 octahedra through common corners in the b–c plane, forming zigzag planes. The LiO6 octahedra form edge-sharing chains along the b-axis. One FeO6 octahedron has common edges with two LiO6 octahedra. PO4 groups share one edge with an FeO6 octahedron and two edges with LiO6 octahedra as shown in Fig. 3.3
 Fig. 3  The crystal structure of olivine LiFePO4 in projection along [001].3 
The delithiated phase FePO4 has essentially the same structure as LiFePO4 but the FePO4 host framework deforms slightly to orthorhombic symmetry. Table 1 shows the interatomic distances (in Å) for LiFePO4 and FePO4 as obtained from single-phase Rietveld refinement of X-ray powder-diffraction data.27 The data are in very good agreement with those obtained viaNeutron powder diffraction.23 With extraction of lithium from LiFePO4, the volume decreases by 6.81% and the density increases by 2.59%. The structural similarity between LiFePO4 and FePO4 not only avoids capacity degradation resulting from severe volumetric changes during the charge–discharge process, but also effectively compensates the volume changes of the carbon anode during lithiation and delithiation. This explains to a large extent the truly excellent electrochemical cyclability of the system.
Table 1 Interatomic distances (in Å) for LiFePO4 and FePO4 as obtained from single-phase Rietveld refinement of X-ray powder-diffraction data.27




 

                  LiFePO4

                  FePO4




Li–O(1) × 2
2.167(7)
—


Li–O(2) × 2
2.095(5)
—


Li–O(3) × 2
2.164(7)
—


Fe–O(1)
2.220(11)
1.944(9)


O(2)
2.084(12)
1.921(11)



                  O(3) × 2
2.268(7)
2.154(6)



                  O(3)′ × 2
2.095(7)
2.048(6)


P–O(1)
1.512(11)
1.507(11)


O(2)
1.573(14)
1.474(12)



                  O(3) × 2
1.504(7)
1.542(7)





        LiFePO4 also has excellent thermal stability, because of the strong covalent P–O bonds in the (PO4)3− polyanionic clusters. Both LiFePO4 and FePO4 structures remain unchanged in N2 or O2 atmosphere up to 350 °C.11 Moreover, DSC tests have given no evidence of any potentially troublesome reactions between the electrolyte and LiFePO4 cathode under charged and discharged conditions up to 85 °C.28 The preservation of the host framework makes the material stable upon cycling with no temperature limitations, and no loss of oxygen also makes the material safe. However, it was recently reported that long-term air exposure at moderate temperature can lead to severe oxidation for LiFePO4–C nanocomposites.29 An intermediate compound between olivine and tavorite LiFePO4(OH), the formula of which may be written as LixFePO4(OH)x, is formed due to moisture driven aging. With a simple thermal treatment, pristine structure of LiFePO4 can be regenerated and the performance can be recovered.
3. Electrochemical performance of LiFePO4 and its derivatives
3.1 Electrochemical properties of LiFePO4
The small distortion of the LiFePO4 host framework on removal of Li makes the two-phase LiFePO4 = FePO4 + Li+ + e− reaction, which results in a flat V = 3.45 V versusx in LixFePO4 in accordance with the Gibbs phase rule. This voltage lies in the window of the carbonate electrolyte, which gives the LiFePO4 cathode an excellent electrochemical stability with no apparent capacity fade after 1000 cycles. However, a two-phase reaction with neither phase having any significant Fe3+/Fe2+ mixed valence11,23 makes poor the kinetic capability of uncoated, large particles of LiFePO4. Although the theoretical capacity of LiFePO4 = FePO4 + Li+ + e− is 170 mAh g−1, based on the reaction of “LiFePO4 ↔ FePO4 + Li+ + e”, the first attempt in 1997 to extract Li from LiFePO4 only achieved a Q of about 0.6 e− per formula unit, and the reversible capacity decreased with increasing current density.11 Andersson et al.28 and Takahashi et al.30 reported that the capacity of LiFePO4 was also strongly dependent on temperature; but even at 80 °C, the theoretical capacity of 170 mAh g−1 could not be reached. The process obviously demonstrated characteristics of diffusion-controlled reactions. Typical early charge/discharge curves for LiFePO4 at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 4.28 These studies showed that the limiting process is a combination of low lithium-ion phase-boundary diffusion and low electronic conduction in the two end phases, which prevents the full conversion of LiFePO4 to FePO4, and FePO4 to LiFePO4. This conclusion was supported by the fact that addition of some unidentified “electronically conductive material” can dramatically enhance the kinetics capability and the availability of active LiFePO4.31–34
 Fig. 4  Typical charge/discharge curves for LiFePO4 at a current density of 23 mA g−1 at (a) 23, (b) 40, and (c) 60 °C.28 
As can be seen in Fig. 3, the Li+ ions move in 1D channels along the b axis, and 1D channels can become blocked by ionic disorder, by foreign phases, or by stacking faults. There is little ionic disorder in LiFePO4, but insufficient reducing conditions during synthesis can leave foreign phases with Fe3+ ions that block the 1D channels, and larger particles are more subject to stacking faults. Interruption of Li+ diffusion hinders the motion of a LiFePO4/FePO4 phase boundary, which removes portions of the cathode from access to a reversible Li insertion. Early reports of the Li+-ion diffusion coefficient gave different results, all of them much lower than that of LiCoO2 (5 × 10−9 cm2s−1). Franger et al. reported that the Li+ diffusion coefficient is around 10−13–10−14 cm2s−1 for LiFePO4.35 The coefficient obtained from the galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is about 1.8 × 10−14 cm2s−1 for LiFePO4 and 2.2 × 10−16 cm2s−1 for FePO4.36 The values of 2 × 10−14 and 1.4 × 10−14 cm2s−1 were also reported for the charging and discharging LiFePO4 electrode, respectively, with systematic cyclic voltammetry (CV).37 Since the LiFePO4 system works on a two-phase mechanism, the concentration gradient of the Li+ ions is abnormal, which means the diffusion cannot be described simply by Fick's law. Therefore, the obtained diffusion coefficients do not reflect the real Li+ diffusion. Moreover, electrochemical experiments do not distinguish between mass transfer in the bulk and across the interfaces, which makes them powerless to elucidate the microscopic diffusion mechanism in the cathode. More and more researchers tend to use computational predictions, such as first-principle calculations38,39 and atomistic simulations,40 to investigate the diffusion process of Li+ ions in LiFePO4. Although the models and methods used are different and the values of the activation energy are controversial, it is generally accepted that the lowest activation barrier lies along the b axis and the Li+ diffusion can only occur through one-dimensional channels.38–41 More recently, a long-awaited experimental evidence for this model has been provided by Nishimura et al.42 who combined high-temperature powder neutron diffraction with maximum-entropy considerations.
The existence of 1D channels for Li+ imposes a difficult structural constraint. Fortunately, small LiFePO4 particles are generally platelets with the Li channels oriented parallel to the short dimension; recent experiments on the phase change occuring on Li+-ion removal suggest that this morphology allows the Li+ ions to move cooperatively within channels in a successive wave to give a moving phase boundary between the two phases.43 Therefore, despite the 1D channel for Li+-ion motion, 10C charge and discharge rates can be achieved with LiFePO4 cathodes. Morgon et al.39 suggest that the diffusion rate for pure LiFePO4 should be higher than that of LiCoO2. However, the 1D channel is easily blocked by impurities or defects to lower the diffusion coefficient and the availability of active volume. In this scheme, synthesis of highly-pure LiFePO4 is likely to improve the diffusivity of Li+ ions. Since it is difficult to obtain the ideal crystal and the electronic conductivity of the ideal crystal is poor, the strategy to prepare highly pure LiFePO4 is not sufficient.
In order to obtain the power density to meet the requirements of practical applications, both improved Li+-ion diffusion and a high electronic conductivity are necessary. During the charging/discharging process, insertion/extraction of Li+ ions must be accompanied by electron transfer to keep the charge balance. If electrons cannot be transferred rapidly, the electron mobility will limit the Li+ insertion/extraction process to give a deteriorated electrochemical property.
3.2 Electrochemical properties of LiFePO4 derivatives
Although the rate capability of pure LiFePO4 is unsatisfactory, it remains a potential cathode material for the PHEV battery because it contains only plentiful, low-cost, environmentally friendly materials and can be cycled thousands of times over years without degradation. Since its discovery in 1997, many researchers have tried to improve the performance of this material through various approaches. Now, 90% of its theoretical capacity can be used with acceptable rate capabilities.35,44,45 In this section, we will introduce the recent development in detail.

3.2.1 Conductive coating. 
It is common to use electron and Li+-ion conductive coating of LiFePO4 particles to improve the electronic conductivity. Carbon coating is the most efficient way since carbon is always deposited in situ on the surface of LiFePO4 particles during synthesis in a reducing atmosphere. The pioneering work was carried out by Armand et al.,24,25 who showed that LiFePO4 with a carbon coating can achieve almost the theoretical capacity. Following this work, numerous articles discussed the synthesis, the electrochemical behavior, and the problems associated with LiFePO4/C composites.
Many kinds of carbonaceous organic compounds, such as sucrose,46–49glucose,50 some carbonaceous polymers,44,51–53 and even the carbon-containing precursors (oxalate, acetate, carbonate, citrate)54–56 can be used as carbon sources. Different synthesis routes such as solid state reaction,57–61spray pyrolysis,62–64 sol–gel,56,65–67 and coprecipitation68–70 can be employed to prepare LiFePO4/C. A seven-order-of-magnitude increase in the electronic conductivity was obtained by adding sucrose to produce carbon on LiFePO4 raw materials with spray pyrolysis; the final product showed an excellent electrochemical performance.64 Therefore, the effects of carbon coating on LiFePO4 particles have been investigated in detail. Researchers have noted that the electrochemical properties of LiFePO4 are strongly influenced by the quality of the carbon coating, including the amount of carbon,71,72 the degree of graphitization,30,73,74 the morphology56,75 and the distribution of the carbon on the LiFePO4 surface.44 The degree of graphitization of the carbon, which is mainly determined by the carbon source and the sintering temperature,52,53,74 is the most important factor for the conductivity and rate behavior of LiFePO4. The sp2carbon is much more effective than sp3carbon for Li+-ion diffusion through the coat. LiFePO4 that is coated with more graphitic carbon shows higher conductivity and exhibits better electrochemical performance. The sp2/sp3 ratio and disordered/graphene (D/G) ratio can be determined by Raman spectroscopy, and H/C ratios can be detected from elemental analysis.74,76
In addition to improving the conductivity of LiFePO4, carbon can also act as a nucleating agent to decrease the particle size of the final product. Moreover, the carbon acts as a reductant to avoid formation of undesirable ferric impurities.74,77 Recently, Zaghib et al.78 reported that carbon coating can change the surface conditions of LiFePO4, especially for the small particles of large surface areas. They observed that before carbon coating, the particles were surrounded by a disordered, 8 Å thick surface layer in which the iron ions were in the low-spin (S = 1/2) Fe3+ configuration, whereas carbon coating at 750 °C reduced the disorder at the surface and switched the Fe3+ ions in the surface layer to a high-spin (S = 5/2) configuration.78 Excess carbon may lead to the generation of by-products such as Fe2P33,74 whose effect on the electrochemical performance is still under debate.74,79 Too much carbon will seriously decrease the tap density of LiFePO4. Hence, it is necessary to optimize the carbon content. In general, the optimal carbon content in LiFePO4/C is less than 5 wt%.
Research on carbon coating has also focused on controlling the morphology and distribution of carbon deposited on the surface of the LiFePO4 particles. Much effort has been made to obtain LiFePO4 with a complete, homogeneous, thin coating of carbon that ensures the LiFePO4 particles can get electrons from all directions and the Li+ ions can penetrate through the carbon without appreciable polarization. Wang et al.44 designed a method of in situpolymerization to obtain LiFePO4/C nanoparticles with a core-shell structure by coating FePO4 completely with polyaniline (PANI) as an intermediate step (see Fig. 5). The LiFePO4/C nanocomposite with the core-shell structure shows a discharge capacity of 168 mAh g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 (about 0.6 C), with less than 5% discharge capacity loss over 1100 cycles. Furthermore, it can deliver a capacity of 90 mAh g−1 at a current density of 10 A g−1 (about 60 C), indicating a high-power capability. In recent years, a number of papers have reported the preparations of LiFePO4/C particles prepared by solution-based templating.45,75,80,81 The templating techniques have a competitive advantage in controlling the morphology of the particles. Lim et al.80 have reported two different cathodes containing hollow LiFePO4 nanowires prepared respectively via the hard templates KIT-6 and SBA-15, both of which demonstrated good rate capability at 10 C with more than 89% capacity retention of the initial capacity. Doherty et al.75,81 obtained a series of porous LiFePO4/C composites whose pores can span from 10 to 100 nm depending on the template. The LiFePO4/C with the largest pores, around 100 nm diameter, gave the best discharge capacities with 160 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C and 115 mAh g−1 at 5 C. The great improvement of the rate capability for the LiFePO4/C composites mentioned above should be attributed not only to the addition of the proper carbon, but also to the novel architecture of the carbon coat.
 Fig. 5  Two-step preparation process for the LiFePO4/C particle via an in situpolymerization that restricts the size of the particles.44 
We emphasize that the outstanding electrochemical performance also profits from the decrease of the particle size which can provide shorter diffusion lengths and a larger electrolyte/electrode contact area for the Li insertion and extraction reaction compared with micrometre particles. The particles mentioned above are generally less than 200 nm, some even less than 40 nm.44 In fact, not only for LiFePO4, but also for the LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, or V2O5, nano-sized materials generally present better rate capability than the micrometre-sized materials.82,83 A large particle size not only means a long solid-state diffusion pathway for the lithium ions and electrons; it also makes the 1D diffusion channels of the lithium ions more easily blocked, limiting the performance of LiFePO4 significantly. Researchers have gradually realized that control of the particle size with a conductive coat by optimizing the synthesis conditions is an effective strategy to improve the rate capability of LiFePO4. In addition, as proved by XPS analysis, carbon coating can minimize the structural reorganization at the interface between the LiFePO4 electrode and electrolyte,84 which has a major negative effect for all nano-sized electrodes.
In addition to rate capability, energy density, especially volumetric energy density, needs to be considered. In general, the more the carbon content, or the smaller the particle size, the lower the tap density. To increase the power density of cathode materials without significantly affecting their main advantage of high energy density, a novel architecture and morphology may have a special significance, especially for LiFePO4/C. Dominko et al.55,56,72,85 employed a sol–gel route to prepare a submicron-sized LiFePO4 sample that was coated by a continuous, nanometre-thick carbon film. The sample contained interconnected and hierarchically organized pores in the meso and macro range that formed a well-distributed 3D electrical network within the composite; it showed a decent electrochemical performance, of more than 140 mAh g−1 at 0.5 C rate during continuous cycling. Moreover, the sample exhibited a really high tap density of ca.1.9 g cm−3, almost the highest among all the values reported.
Alternatives to carbon coating include some metal additives, like silver or copper; these can also improve considerably the kinetics of LiFePO4 without altering the crystal structure.32 However, this method is much more expensive than carbon coating and it is not an ideal choice for mass production. Attaching conductive polymers, such as polypyrrole (PPy) and polyaniline (PANI) to LiFePO4/C particles is another effective and cheap way to improve the rate capability and capacity of LiFePO4. Huang et al. adopted electrochemical deposition34 and simultaneous chemical polymerization86 to prepare the LiFePO4/PPy and LiFePO4/PANI composite cathodes. Such cathodes showed an excellent rate capability; the specific capacity reached almost the theoretical value at low rates and retained more than 70% at a high rate of 20 C, as shown in Fig. 6. The conductive polymer not only serves as a conductive additive, but also works as a binder and makes contact with the current collector, thereby replacing dead-weight carbon in the cathode. Moreover, PPy and PANI are electrochemically active, which can contribute capacity to the composite cathode. Compared with cathodes containing inactive carbon additive and PTFE or PVDF binder, this type of composite cathode can exhibit both higher power density and higher energy density.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of charge rate capability for C-LFP, C-LFP/16%PPy-ED, C-LFP/7% PPy-Chem, and C-LFP/7% PANI-Chem. The data were obtained by charging at various rates after discharging at 0.1 C. “ED” refers to “electrodeposited”, “Chem” to “polymerized chemically”.86 
In summary, conductive coating on LiFePO4 efficiently solves the problem of low rate capability, the main bottleneck of LiFePO4 for applications, and greatly promote the development of this cathode to accelerate the development of PHEVs.


3.2.2 Heterogeneous doping. 
In 2002, Chiang and his colleagues79 claimed they raised the electronic conductivity of bulk LiFePO4 by 8 orders of magnitude to 10−2 S cm−1 through low-level doping with some supervalent cations (Nb5+, Ti4+, W6+), which is comparable to that of LiCoO2 and LiMn2O4. The resulting nano-size particles showed a capacity close to the theoretical one at low charge/discharge rates, and the capacity retained more than 80 mAh g−1 with little polarization at rates as high as 10 C. This paper has drawn a surge of interest, and many cations, including V5+,87,88Ti4+,89–91Cr3+,92Al3+,93–95Nb5+,96,97Zn2+,98Mg2+,99–101Mo6+,102La3+,103 have been employed as dopants in the nano-sized LiFePO4 system. Even multi-element doping104–106 and anion doping107–109 were carried out. However, the origin of the increased conductivity is still under controversy. Debate is mainly focused on whether the supervalent ions are actually doped into the lattice or whether the improved conductivity is due to surface conductive phases formed during the preparation process. Armand et al.110 suggested that the “doping effect” may be masked by the “carbon effect” due to the residual carbon (about 1.5 wt%) of the carbonaceous precursors used (e.g., oxalate, carbonate, alcohol oxide). Later on, Nazar et al.111 found that the improvement in conductivity of the composition of LixZr0.01FePO4 (x = 0.87–0.99) was indeed due to the additional carbon arising from organic precursor and the highly conductive iron phosphide Fe2P formed at high temperature under the reducing atmosphere used. A similar conclusion was also made by Delacourt et al.112
It is not surprising that this controversy over doping has stimulated considerable theoretical interest, especially on the change in Li+-ion diffusion caused by the doping. Saiful Islam et al.40,114 applied atomistic simulations to study the dependence of Li+-ion migration on intrinsic defects and dopant incorporation within a LiFePO4 crystal. They examined the trends in dopant-substitution energetics for a range of cations with charges varying from +2 to +5 and drew the conclusion that LiFePO4 is not tolerant to aliovalent doping on either Li or Fe sites; aliovalent doping could not yield mixed-valent Fe3+/Fe2+, which demonstrates that the aliovalent cation doping may contribute nothing to enhancement of the bulk electronic conductivity. On the contrary, aliovalent doping at a Li site has been claimed to block Li+-ion diffusion in the channels. Chen et al.38 prepared Cr-doped LiFePO4 samples and found that the electronic conductivity was enhanced, but the electrochemical performance was not improved. They ascribed the reason to blocking of 1D pathways by the Cr ions at Li-sites, but a Cr surface layer could be blocking Li+-ion transfer to the bulk. Nazar and his colleagues113 found from neutron and X-ray diffraction studies that dopants are primarily located at Li-sites and the charge of the aliovalent dopants is balanced by lithium vacancies, indicating that an enhanced rate of Li+ insertion cannot be due to the dopants. No convincing evidence exists for an increased rate capability due to aliovalent doping into bulk LiFePO4.


3.2.3 Antisite defects and stoichiometry. 
Atomic-scale research on defects in the LiFePO4 crystal lattice could provide a detailed insight into its electrochemical performance. Fisher et al.114 investigated ion exchange in the olivine crystals LiMPO4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni) with atomistic simulation. They proposed that the cation antisite defect, in which Li and M ions exchange positions (edge-sharing “M1” and corner-sharing “M2” sites) is the most favorable intrinsic defect in the structure. This assumption was supported by Chung et al.,115 who also suggested that such defects might be intrinsic for LiFePO4. They directly visualized at an atomic scale the disordered occupations by Fe atoms on Li sites in a LiFePO4 crystal with an ordered olivine structure by using a high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). Since Li+-ion migration in LiFePO4 occurs preferentially only along 1-D channels ([010]pnma), these lattice defects would impede the diffusion path easily, especially the Fe·Li defects (Fe2+ ions occupy the M1 sites instead of Li+). The Fe·Li defects in LiFePO4 may not only block lithium transport along the fastest diffusion path in the [010] direction, but also lead to a structural instability due to the additional electrostatic repulsion induced by their high valence number. Furthermore, it was found that there exists a strong dissymmetry for the Li–Fe ion exchange. It is almost impossible to generate Li at Fe sites. The excess usage of lithium source in the synthesis process usually leads to the formation of a Li3PO4 impurity rather than Li at Fe sites.
Therefore, to achieve fast lithium intercalation, stoichiometry of nano-sized particles is the first factor that needs to be considered. In Li-deficient samples, the antisite Fe·Li along with Li vacancies, i.e., the complex defects Fe·Li + V′Li·, are always observed. In the Li-excess samples, the Li3PO4 impurity is easily formed, which acts as an inert mass during the electrochemical process.116 The reaction temperature is another critical factor to obtain the ordered stoichiometric LiFePO4 phase because the antisite defect is temperature-dependent and sensitive to experimental synthesis conditions. In Chung's work,115 no Li defect was observed after an anneal at 800 °C. Whittingham's group12,117 found that the olivine LiFePO4 synthesized hydrothermally at a temperature below 180 °C gave poor electrochemical properties due to 7% disordered iron atoms at Li+-sites that block the diffusion of lithium in the tunnel structure. Increasing the hydrothermal temperature or a prolonged following sintering process at a higher temperature can resolve the problem of disorder in samples prepared hydrothermally at 180 °C.
If antisite iron cations in the crystal are inherent and can't be removed absolutely, proper control of the distribution of these defects in the crystal lattice may have a surprising effect to improve the effective lithium mobility during the insertion/extraction reaction. More recently, Chung et al.118 reported that the distribution of antisite defects in LiFePO4 could be adjusted to avoid the blockage by antisite iron ions in most of the lithium channels. Furthermore, they confirmed that doping with a small amount of niobium in LiFePO4 could have a significant structural advantage for attaining a high rate capability due to adjustment of an atomic-scale defect array, which could be a contributing factor in Chiang's report of 2002.79
Deviation from stoichiometry may lead to the formation of second phases that play active roles in improving the electrochemical performance of LiFePO4. Ceder et al.119 reported high-power LiFePO4 with a fast Li-conducting surface phase prepared through controlled off-stoichiometry. Surface phases permeable to Li include Li3PO4, Fe2P and Li4P2O7. Similar LiFePO4 composites with a Li-conductive inorganic layer deposited on the surface was reported by Rho et al.33 We re-emphasize that all these LiFePO4 materials were nano-scaled and therefore much more sensitive to surface effects than micrometre-sized materials.

4. Other challenges that LiFePO4 faced
4.1 Low tap density
The theoretical density of LiFePO4 is only 3.6 g cm−3, much lower than those of LiCoO2 (5.1 g cm−3), LiNiO2 (4.8 g cm−3) and LiMn2O4 (4.2 g cm−3). As a result, the tap density of LiFePO4 powder is relatively low. In general, most LiFePO4 materials have an actual density of only 1∼1.4 g cm−3, far lower than that of commercially-used LiCoO2 (>2.2 g cm−3).120 The low tap density seriously limits the volumetric power density of a lithium-ion battery to be used in a hand-held device.
For a powder material, the tap density depends not only on the theoretical density, but also on the particle morphology, including particle size, geometric shape, and particle distribution. Generally, the smaller the particle size and the more the carbon content, the lower the tap density. As for LiFePO4, the particle size and carbon coating are both important for rate performance. Moreover, spherical particles usually have higher tap density than those with irregular shapes. The irregular particles result in a lot of vacant space between the particles and bad fluidity of the powders. Niet al.121 adopted a molten-salt method to prepare spherical LiFePO4 that showed a tap density of 1.55 g cm−3. Xie et al.122 obtained a tap density as high as 1.8 g cm−3 with spherical LiFePO4 particles prepared via a route of controlled crystallization. The high density with spherical particles may be attributed to much less agglomeration and the “bridge formation” phenomena that are found within powders composed of irregular particles.120,122
Although the bulk conductivity is generally improved by adding a Li-permeable coat, the additive lowers the electrode's overall capacity, especially the volumetric capacity. The coat (carbon) on the LiFePO4 particles as well as the carbon black (CB) and binder (PTFE or PVDF) used to fabricate the cathode film all lower the energy density. Calculation based on the theoretical density (LiFePO4: 3.6 g cm−3; PTFE: 2.2 g cm−3; CB: 1.8 g cm−3) shows that the volume energy density of LiFePO4 decreases by 25% if the LiFePO4 cathode contains 10% CB and 5% PTFE.12 Since carbon coating is an efficient approach to enhance the electronic conductivity of LiFePO4, there is almost no other choice for this purpose at present. Hence, it is vital to lower the carbon content in the final cathode as much as possible without affecting the electrochemical performance. Optimizing the amount of carbon additive, controlling the degree of graphitization, morphology and distribution in the cathode, or employing novel material architectures has proven to be helpful for superior performance.55,56,72,85 Electrochemically-active conductive polymers are potential candidates to substitute for both carbon black and binder in an LiFePO4 cathode.34,86
4.2 Poor low-temperature performance
Poor low-temperature performance is another shortcoming of LiFePO4 batteries for electric vehicles. According to the data reported at the 45th Battery Symposium in Japan, the discharge capacity of the Sanyo 18650 battery is 888 mAhg at 25 °C, but only 375 mAh g−1 at 0 °C,123,124 which is far below the requirement for electric vehicles. LiFePO4 itself and the electrolyte are both responsible for the poor low-temperature performance. The electrolyte of LiFePO4 cells is the conventional LiPF6-EC/DMC/EMC system. The low diffusion coefficient of Li+ with LiPF6 salt and the high freezing point (36.4 °C) of EC result in poor conductivity of the electrolyte at low temperature, especially below −20 °C. The activation energies for Li transport across the electrode/electrolyte interface and for movement of the two-phase boundary within the cathode particles make the Li+-ion diffusion rate-limiting below ∼20 °C. To increase the Li+-ion conductivity of the electrolyte, new lithium salts are needed; to increase the rate of Li insertin into LiFePO4, reducing the particle size and controlling the distribution of any antisite defects appear to be the best strategies.
5. Li-insertion/extraction mechanism
Since the lithium insertion/extraction process is critical to cathode performance, it attracts constant attention. The lithium extraction/insertion process in “LixFePO4” is commonly described as a two-phase reaction, in good agreement with the ∼3.45 V vs.Li+/Li plateau on the cycling profile between LiFePO4 and FePO4.11,19 The dynamics of extraction or insertion of lithium for LiFePO4, which works on a two-phase mechanism, is quite different from that for the layered LiTiS2, which works on a one-phase solution process. Fick's law cannot be simply used to define the Li+-ion diffusion process in LiFePO4. The character of the two-phase mechanism is still under debate. Controversy is focused on the following issues: (1) Is there an intermediate phase existing during the Li+-ion insertion/extraction process of LiFePO4? (2) If an intermediate phase exists, is it composed of a solid solution (LixFePO4) or is it just an ordering of the two end-members (LiFePO4 and FePO4)? (3) What is the geometry of the interface between FePO4 and LiFePO4? (4) Where is the second phase nucleated? (5) What is the dynamics of the Li-motion within this material? (6) Is it possible to drive the well-established two-phase insertion process into a single-phase one at room temperature?
The two-phase mechanism has been generally accepted, especially for material with enough large particles (for example: particle size > 100 nm). There are at least 4 models proposed to explain the two-phase reaction of LiFePO4: the “shrinking core” (“core–shell” model),11 the “mosaic model”,23 the recent “new core-shell”68 and domino-cascade125 models.
The shrinking-core model (see Fig. 7) proposes the formation, upon charge, of an FePO4 shell with migration of an FePO4/LiFePO4 interface into each particle from the surface with a continuous shrinking of the LiFePO4 core. The reverse phenomenon appears upon discharge. Extraction of the Li from the unconverted LiFePO4 at the center of the larger particles is not efficient, which leads to the capacity loss. The subsequent “mosaic model” proposed by Anderson and Thomas is essentially similar to the shrinking-core model except for introduction of the possibility that extraction/insertion of lithium starts at different nucleation sites.23 These two models are generally called “the conventional two-phase mechanism”.
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of shrinking-core model, adapted from ref. 23. 
The shrinking-core model can explain some experimental phenomena on the macro scale, and it is still used to describe the electrochemical process in LiFePO4.126,127 However, this model is powerless to describe the microprocess of lithiation/delithiation in LiFePO4 because it does not take into account the anisotropy arising from the 1D lithium motion within LiFePO4. Moreover, the model itself lacks support of direct and convincing experimental evidence. In recent years, experimental results on the atomic scale have definitely invalidated the shrinking-core model.68,125,128
Laffont et al.68 proposed a “new core-shell” model based on studies with high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS). According to this model, Li+-ion migration in its 1D channels is asynchronous. During charge, lithium ions in the center of the platelet particles are extracted first and move outward; whereas during discharge, Li+ insertion starts from the periphery. Hence, the LiFePO4/FePO4 system always keeps a structure with a shell of FePO4 and a core of LiFePO4, as seen in Fig. 8 (adapted from ref. 68 and 128). This model accounts well for 1D migration perpendicular to the platelets. The result of the HREELS study unambiguously supports the view that the nanometre interfacial region consists of two end members, FePO4 and LiFePO4, and not a solid solution LixFePO4 that changes with a gradient of x ranging from 0 to 1 by moving from FePO4 to LiFePO4. This two-phase mechanism is attributed to the nature of the two phases. The phase having the smaller unit-cell volume would be more likely to be located in the core of the particles rather than at the periphery, as has also been suggested by Prosini.129 The “new core-shell” model is also mostly consistent with the experimental results of the SEM and HRTEM study except for a difference in the geometry of the interface between the LiFePO4 and FePO4 domains, which can lie in either the b–c plane130 or in the (110), c plane.68 The interface geometries may be caused by the topology of the domain nucleation, which can vary with different samples.68,128
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the “new core-shell” model, adapted from ref. 68 and 130. 
More recently, a “domino-cascade” model was proposed by Delmas et al.84,125 In this scheme, there is a concentration gradient of charge carriers at the boundary between FePO4 and LiFePO4 domains, which would lead locally to a significantly higher ionic and electronic conductivity compared with the two end-member phases. Therefore, the growth of one phase at the expense of the other one is considerably faster than the nucleation of a new domain. According to this model, when the lithium insertion/extraction starts in a given particle, the particle rapidly becomes either totally charged or totally discharged. One basic difference between the “new core-shell” and the “domino-cascade” model is the character of the interface. The former supports the coexistence of LiFePO4 and FePO4 regions inside each particle68 while the latter proposes the coexistence of LiFePO4 and FePO4 particles that are single-domain.125 Recently, Zaghib et al.128 observed the existence of both LiFePO4 and FePO4 phases at the surface of particles with a delithiation degree of 50% by Raman spectroscopy, which appears to confirm the “new core-shell” model. A similar result was observed previously for the LixFePO4 sample with x = 0.11, which indicated that the region detected, i.e., the few-nanometre thick shell of the particle, is a two-phase system.131
The possible existence of a solid-solution LixFePO4 region is another subject of basic importance for the dynamics of the extraction or insertion of lithium in the LiFePO4-FePO4 system. Many researchers deny the existence of any solid solution LixFePO4. However, several studies have shown that a solid solution LixFePO4 can exist at high temperature, for example at 450 °C, at any value of x in the range 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.132–135 It becomes multiphase on decreasing the temperature and eventually transforms into LiFePO4 and FePO4 on aging at room temperature.132 This detection of the intermediate phases of Li0.75FePO4 and Li0.5FePO4 above a critical temperature implies that a single-phase region might be stabilized at room temperature. Yamada et al.136 provided experimental evidence that LixFePO4 can be described as a mixed-valent Fe3+/Fe2+ intermediate consisting of LiαFePO4 and Li1 − βFePO4 phases at room temperature. Here, α and β are both related to the defects, particle size, and polarization level. These parameters are small for large particles with diameter d ≥ 45 nm. The miscibility gap between FePO4 and LiFePO4 decreases upon decreasing the particle size to below 100 nm, so that the solid solution may be stabilized below a critical size, smaller than 45 nm, and a complete solid solution may be achievable below about 15 nm at room temperature.137 More exciting, Gibot et al.138 proved that it is possible to drive the well-established two-phase room-temperature insertion process in LiFePO4 into a single-phase one by modifying the material's particle size and cation ordering by in situ experimental measurements, as seen in Fig. 9. Fig. 9a shows the charge/discharge galvanostatic curve of the 40 nm LiFePO4 (red line) compared with the 140 nm LiFePO4 (blue line); Fig. 9b gives the results of the corresponding in situXRD measurements. In Fig. 9a, 40-nm LiFePO4 presents a sloping curve, which is usually characteristic of a single-phase reaction. The in situXRD measurements show a slight and continuous shift in the Bragg peaks on charge and a progressive shift of the Bragg peaks back to their initial position on discharge, which is also the characteristic of a single-phase reaction.
 Fig. 9  Electrochemical and structural characterization of the 40 nm LiFePO4.138 (a) Charge/discharge galvanostatic curve at C/40 of the 40 nm LiFePO4 (red line) compared with the two-phase profile of the 140 nm LiFePO4 (blue line). (b) In situXRD measurements. 
Another detail on the charge/discharge profiles that is commonly neglected is the slope of the discharge profile at low potential. Various LiFePO4 materials, including carbon-coated, aliovalent-cation-doped, micrometre-sized, or nanometre-sized LiFePO4, all have a sloped part (region II) besides the flat plateau (region I) of the charge-discharge curves (see inset Fig. 10). The origin of this Vversus state-of-charge slope is still not clear. Wu et al.139 observed that the capacities corresponding to region I and region II are both dependent on the discharge rate (see Fig. 10). At discharge rates less than 20 C, the capacity of region II decreases with increasing rate, similar to region I. At discharge rates higher than 20 C, the capacity of region II remains almost constant (about 10 mAh g−1), obviously different from region I. This observation indicates that an energetically favored lithium-storage process does not depend on kinetics, which implies that the capacity of region II may correspond to an interfacial Li storage similar to that reported for nanometre-sized, layered transition-metal oxides at low potential.140
 Fig. 10  Variation of the region I, II, and total capacities versus discharge rate for the LFP-NP@NPCM nanocomposite electrode. Inset: typical Galvanostatic-discharge profile indicating the regions cycled at a rate of C/9.139 
Here, it must be noted that the studies reviewed in this section involved a finite range of particles size, particle morphology, synthesis condition, and charge or discharge state. For example, some were coated by carbon84,125,128 while some not.68,130,138 Most measurements were not done in situ. All these factors may have an effect on the results, leading to an imprecise understanding of the reaction mechanism of intercalation/deintercalation. Therefore, it can be expected that the controversy will go on and the lithium insertion-extraction mechanism will still be debated as nano-sized crystallites receive more and more attention.
6. Synthesis of LiFePO4
Preparation that can control the morphology, particle size, cation order, and other important parameters is critical to the success of an electrode material. Although LiFePO4 is inherently low-cost and non-polluting, a clean, low-cost manufacturing process is also required for a practical application. The major drawbacks of the poor rate capability of LiFePO4 can be alleviated by coating with a conductive species and minimizing particle size. Since lithium ion motion in LiFePO4 occurs through one-dimensional channels with little possibility of crossing between channels and these 1D paths are easily blocked by defects or impurities, the electrochemical properties are very sensitive to any structural defect. Therefore, it is essential to ensure complete ordering of lithium and iron ions, to eliminate stacking faults, and to avoid undesirable impurities. Whichever synthesis method is employed, the final product should fulfill the following three fundamental requirements to reach an excellent electrochemical performance: (1) Li channels that are not blocked; (2) particles small enough to provide a high surface area and short diffusion paths for ionic transport and electron tunneling; (3) a complete, but thin coating with a conductive phase to ensure that the LiFePO4 particles get electrons from all directions and that ions can penetrate through the coat without appreciable polarization. When Goodenough's group first reported LiFePO4 as a cathode material, they prepared it via solid state reaction.11 Since then, many procedures have been used to prepare LiFePO4 with much better electrochemical properties. These procedures can be divided into solid state reactions and solution chemistry.
Whichever way is used, the precursor mixture usually consists of a stoichiometric amount of an iron salt, a lithium compound, and a phosphate. For the solid-state process, the starting materials are commonly Fe(II)-acetate11,54 or Fe(II)-oxalate,45,79,128Li2CO3,45,79 and mostly ammonium phosphate. These materials can decompose at a relatively low temperature without generation of undesirable solid phases. In general, the starting mixture first decomposes at about 200 °C to release NH3, then the oxalates are decomposed at 300–400 °C to release CO2; after regrinding, they are calcined at a temperature ranging from 400 to 800 °C for 8–24 h. The solid routes always need a long-time sintering process at high temperature to achieve a pure phase. If a mechanical alloying process is used, the sintering time can be significantly reduced. In order to get an ideal electrochemical performance, a short-time milling usually needs a following long-time thermal treatment141,142 whereas a long-time milling just needs a following short-time thermal treatment.143,144 In addition, ball milling helps both homogeneity and reduction of the particle size. In most cases, Fe(III) compounds such as Fe2O3 and FePO4, are much cheaper and more stable than Fe(II) salts, but Fe(III) precursors need a reductive gas like Ar + 15%H2 to form the ferrous LiFePO4.74 With an Fe(III) compound as the iron source, carbon thermal reduction is used; a calculated amount of carbon added to the precursor reduces Fe(III) to Fe(II) effectively at high temperature. In this case, carbon serves as the reducing agent; no additional reductive gas is needed. However, the carbon thermal reduction always needs a very high temperature to get a high-quality LiFePO4/C composite. Too high temperature may generate some undesired impurities, such as phosphide, Fe2O3 and Li3Fe2(PO4)3, and always leads to uncontrollable particle growth and agglomeration. If a polymer is used as a carbon source, complete Fe3+ reduction can occur at a temperature below 700 °C, even as low as 400 °C.74 In this case, the reduction of Fe3+ is due to hydrogen gas coming from decomposition of the polymer, not to carbon-thermal reduction. Some carbon-containing compound or another compound containing a doping element can be added into the precursor either before the second grinding step or at the beginning, to obtain LiFePO4/C144–146 or doped LiFePO4 samples.79,111 It should be noted that the electronic conductivity of in situcarbon coating is strongly dependent not only on the sintering temperature, but also on the type of organic precursor.74 As a conventional method, solid-state synthesis is limited for controlling particle growth and agglomeration. The final product always has large particles with irregular morphology.
Compared to the solid-state approach, solution chemistries (sol–gel, co-precipitation, spray pyrolysis, and hydrothermal reaction) are well-known for their advantages in tailoring the size and morphology of the nanostructure, which makes them powerful routes to prepare LiFePO4. The solution route starts from a precursor in liquid solution. The precursor solution can provide intimate mixing of the starting ingredients at the atomic level, thus allowing fine particles of high purity to be produced by rapid homogeneous nucleation. In addition, a wide range of reactants for the solution method are available. Some compounds, such as iron chloride and iron sulfate, which are not suitable for a solid-state reaction, can be used successfully in the solution method because Cl− and SO42− can be dissolved in the solution and removed with the solution.47,147–151 With this method, some impurities can also be removed with the solution, which reduces the requirement of purity for the reactants and thus lowers fabrication costs. To reduce Fe(III) in solution, some reducing agents, such as oxalic acid70 or ascorbic acid152,153 can be used. Similar to the solid route, solution synthesis, either the sol–gel65–67 or the co-precipitation69,70 or the hydrothermal reaction,12,154,155 also needs a sintering process at high temperature for a certain period of time. Hydrothermal synthesis has been successfully used to transform transition metal oxides into high-quality nanostructures.83 It is the most common way to prepare nano-sized LiFePO4. The hydrothermal route for LiFePO4 was pioneered by Whittingham's group47 and developed further by other researchers.155–158 The initial results showed that the olivine phase, checked by X-ray diffraction, can be easily synthesized via a hydrothermal process, but the product gave poor electrochemical properties. Examination of the lattice parameters showed that there are about 7% iron atoms mis-located at the lithium sites. These iron atoms block the diffusion of Li+ ions, which is responsible for the poor electrochemical performance. With a following heat-treatment at 700 °C, the cation disorder can be largely eliminated.12 Recent studies have suggested that the electrochemical performance can be improved by modifying the conditions of the hydrothermal synthesis.155,157,158 For example, adding some reducing agents, such as ascorbic acid or sugar, can prevent the formation of a surface ferric film.152,153 Increasing the reaction temperature to 175 °C can minimize the disorder of the cation ions.117 Addition of an organic surfactant may also be necessary. As an example, CTAB (hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide) is helpful to obtain LiFePO4 samples with a high surface area.154,159,160 The hydrothermal method has been successfully used to prepare LiFePO4 in large batches.150,161
The sol–gel method has been used to optimize the distribution of the carbon in the LiFePO4/C composite. Dominko et al. chose Fe(III) citrate as a precursor to obtain a wired, porous LiFePO4/C material with a high tap density of ca. 1.9 g cm−3.56 The material can operate at a rate up to 50 C. Wang et al. prepared a LiFePO4/C nanocomposite with a core-shell structure via the in situpolymerization restriction method.44 The materials obtained with the above strategies exhibit a carbon coat with a mixed conducting 3D network that seems to be superior to the nanoparticles coated with a thin carbon layer.
Many solution methods, (e.g., hydrothermal,40,151,162 sol–gel,163 and co-precipitation,68) can achieve plate-like crystals. Interestingly and fortunately, the small-particle platelets all have the Li channels (b-axis) oriented parallel to the short dimension. This morphology favors short diffusion lengths for the Li+-ion while the external conductive carbon coating provides connectivity for facile electron diffusion to give a high-rate performance.
Control of impurities in LiFePO4 is another synthetic challenge. Many impurities, such as Li3Fe2(PO4)3, Li2P2O7, Fe2P, FeP, Fe2O3, FePO4, and Li3PO4, can appear in this material, depending on the precursor, preparation mode, and growth parameters. For example, the phase Li3Fe2(PO4)3 is often found during the formation of LiFePO4 if oxygen contamination occurs either at elevated temperatures or under hydrothermal conditions. Some of the impurities benefit the electrochemical performance by improving the conductivity while some may poison the performance seriously. For example, Fe2P is a highly conductive species that can increase the conductivity significantly.33,79 It is a common impurity formed at high temperature,59 particularly in the presence of a reducing agent such as carbon. Nevertheless, some research has found that Fe2P can limit the rate of diffusion of Li across the coat, and the iron in it might diffuse to the electrolyte of the batteries.164,165 Therefore, an all-sided understanding about the effects of the impurities, including the positive and the negative, is necessary. How to control the generation of impurities in the material, to avoid the harmful impurities, and to achieve the beneficial phases is important for the synthesis of LiFePO4.

        FePO4 is another common impurity of LiFePO4. According to the literature, at least 4 crystalline forms of FePO4 are known and the descending order of their electrochemical activity is: amorphous > orthorhombic > monoclinic > trigonal.166–168 The trigonal FePO4 is almost electrochemically inactive. During the preparation process of LiFePO4, different crystalline types of FePO4 except orthorhombic phase may form depending on temperature. If a lithium source is absent, an amorphous FePO4·2H2O can appear at low temperature; the dihydrate converts at high temperature to the thermally stable but electrochemically inactive trigonal FePO4 (also called the tetrahedral form), which always grows as a glassy phase.12,169 Although the lithium ions can insert and be extracted from some types of FePO4 successfully, some capacity is lost due to the lack of a Li source. A sufficient lithium source is needed during synthesis to ensure that FePO4 is not formed. More recently, Axmann et al.116 prepared a series of samples by wet-chemical synthesis with deviation from stoichiometry (a few mol % Li deficiency or excess in the precursor) and found that excess of lithium only resulted in a Li3PO4 impurity phase that was inactive but did not poison the electrochemical performance. On the other hand, a lithium deficiency in the starting materials led to formation of a homogeneous solid solution with Li deficiency due to an identified complex defect that is not a simple Li vacancy. Their results illustrate that a sufficient lithium source is necessary for the preparation of LiFePO4.
An inert (usually nitrogen or argon) or slightly reductive atmosphere (argon or nitrogen with addition of a small amount of hydrogen) is used to protect Fe(II) from being oxidized or to reduce Fe(III) to Fe(II) during sintering. However, residual Fe(III) or metallic Fe is often present in the final product. It was reported that both trivalent Fe2O3 and Li3Fe2(PO4)3 could form if sintering at above 800 °C.20 The formation of the Fe(III) impurities is due to a small amount of oxygen included in the inert gas flow and/or residual air trapped in the small pores of the reactant particles.20,74,77 Up to now, the negative effects of the Fe3+ impurities on the electrochemical performance is not very clear. Julien et al.74 compared the specific capacity vs. cycle life at 60 °C between the optimized sample without maghemite impurity and the sample contaminated with 0.3% maghemite impurity; they found that their capacity decreased by 1 and 8%, respectively, over the same cycles, indicating that preparation of a phase-pure LiFePO4 sample is critical for good performance even if an Fe(III) impurity is not what is responsible for dilution of the iron.
Although many routes have been used to prepare LiFePO4 in the laboratory, the solid state reaction is almost the only one adopted for commercial production on a large scale. However, it doesn't mean that the solid-state route is the ideal one. Some clean, easily controlled, and more economical synthetic routes for producing LiFePO4 still need to be explored. The hydrothermal route is promising. As noted above, the hydrothermal method has also been used to prepare LiFePO4 in large batches successfully. More recently, Niet al.154 reported an ascorbic-acid-assisted hydrothermal process at 230 °C for only 30 min followed by a carbon-coating heat treatment at 600 °C for 1 h; their LiFePO4/C delivered a capacity of 162 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C, 154 mAh g−1 at 1C, and 122 mAh g−1 at 5 C. Manthiram et al.170 demonstrated an efficient and rapid microwave irradiated solvothermal method to prepare nano-scaled LiFePO4 within a short reaction time (5–15 min) at a temperature as low as 300 °C without requiring any post annealing treatment.
Conclusions
In addition to a long lifespan, abundant resources, low toxicity, and high thermal stability, the olivine LiFePO4 material optimized by carbon coating and nanotechnology also displays an excellent rate capability for powering EVs or HEVs. Without doubt, LiFePO4 has become a competitive candidate for the cathode of the next-generation lithium-ion batteries to integrate into an energy system closely related to global environmental issues, especially the large-scale batteries needed for EVs. We have reviewed the development and challenges for the LiFePO4 cathode material, including the defects in the crystal and the mechanism of lithium insertion/extraction. Synthesis procedures are focused on controlling the morphology, particle size, cation order, and impurities of LiFePO4 as well as its doped and coated derivatives.
In the future, it can be anticipated that LiFePO4 will continue its ongoing improvement with carbon coating, nanocrystallization, or material processing. There remain plenty of opportunities for tailoring the architecture and morphology to obtain more desirable properties. Further work is needed to ensure that the batteries can withstand operation at the high and low temperatures required by EVs or HEVs. Systematic studies on the mechanism of lithium insertion/extraction are helpful for a better fundamental understanding of the relationship between the structure and electrochemical characteristics. The nano-scale LiFePO4 material has drawn more attention due to its remarkable rate capability; however, the interfacial behavior between electrode and electrolyte that strongly influences the cyclability of the nano-LiFePO4 cathode is not clear. For realization of a wide industrial application, some clean, easily controllable routes to produce high-quality LiFePO4 material at low cost should be continuously developed.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Distinguished Young Scientists (Grant No. 50825203), the 863 program (Grant Nos. 2009AA03Z225 and 2009AA035200), the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 20803042) and the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (Grant No. 2008CDA026).
References
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104(10), 4245 CrossRef CAS .
K. Smith and C. Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 662 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Christophersen, G. L. Hunt, C. D. Ho and D. Howell, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 998 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mitzushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783 CrossRef CAS .

          J. B. Goodenough and K. Mizushima, U.S. Patent, 4,302,518,  1980 .
K. Ozawa, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 69, 212 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, W. David, P. G. Bruce and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1983, 18, 461 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188 CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dahn, E. W. Fuller, M. Obrovac and U. V. Sacken, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 69(3–4), 265 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Macneil and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148(11), A1205 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1997, 25, 1 CrossRef CAS .
C. Julien, A. Rougier and G. A. Nazri, Solid-state Chem. Inorg. Mater., 1997, 453, 647 Search PubMed .
M. M. Thackeray, S. H. Kang, C. S. Johnson, J. T. Vaughey, R. Benedek and S. A. Hackney, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3112 RSC .
Y. S. Lee, Y. K. Sun, S. Ota, T. Miyashita and M. Yoshio, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 989 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy, C. Masquelier, S. Okada and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144(5), 1609 CAS .
A. Yamada, S. C. Chung and K. Hinokuma, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takahashi, S. Tobishima, K. Takei and Y. Sakurai, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 283 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Streltsov, E. L. Belokoneva, V. G. Tsirelson and N. K. Hansen, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 1993, 49, 147 CrossRef .
A. S. Andersson and J. O. Thomas, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 498 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ravet, J. B. Goodenough, S. Besner, M. Simoneau, P. Hovington and M. Armand, J. Electrochem. Soc. Abstr., 1999, 99–2, 172 Search PubMed .
N. Ravet, Y. Chouinard, J. F. Magnan, S. Besner, M. Gauthier and M. Armand, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 503 CrossRef .
K. S. Park, S. B. Schougaard and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 848 CrossRef .
A. S. Andersson, B. Kalska, L. Haggstrom and J. O. Thomas, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 130, 41 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Andersson, J. O. Thomas, B. Kalska and L. Häggström, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3(2), 66 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cuisinier, J. F. Martin, N. Dupre, A. Yamada, R. Kanno and D. Guyomard, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 238 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takahashi, S. Tobishima, K. Takei and Y. Sskurai, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 508 .
P. P. Prosini, D. Zane and M. Pasquali, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3517 CrossRef CAS .
F. Croce, A. D. Epifanio, J. Hassoun, A. Deptula, T. Olczac and B. Scrosati, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A47 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Rho, L. F. Nazar, L. Perry and D. Ryan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A283 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Huang, K. S. Park and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153(12), A2282 CrossRef CAS .
S. Franger, F. L. Cras, C. Bourbon and H. Rouault, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A231 CrossRef CAS .
P. Prosini, M. Lisi, D. Zane and M. Pasquali, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 45 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. W. Yu, C. Fietzek, W. Weydanz, K. Donoue, T. Inoue, H. Kurokawa and S. Fujitani, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A253 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ouyang, S. Shi, Z. Wang, X. Huang and S. L. Chen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 104303 CrossRef .
D. Morgan, V. A. Vander and G. Ceder, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7(2), A30 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Islam, D. J. Driscoll, C. A. J. Fisher and P. R. Slater, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5085 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Yao, S. Martin and D. Vaknin, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 2016 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Nishimura, G. Kobayashi, K. Ohoyama, R. Kanno, M. Yashima and A. Yamada, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 707 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Chen, X. Song and T. J. Richardson, Proceedings of the Int. Meeting on Lithium Batteries, Biarritz, France,  June 18–23, 2006 (Abstract 361) Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, E. Hosono, K. Wang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lee, H. Yi, W. J. Kim, K. Kang, D. S. Yun, M. S. Strano, G. Ceder and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2009, 324, 1051 CAS .

          N. Ravet, S. Besner, M. Simoneau, A. Valle'e, M. Armand and J. F. Magnan, (Hydro-Quebec) European Patent 1049182A2,  2000 .
S. Yang, P. Y. Zavalij and M. S. Whittingham, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 505 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Bewlay, K. Konstantinov, G. X. Wang, S. X. Dou and H. K. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58, 1788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang and Y. Nuli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2135 CrossRef CAS .
S. Beninati, L. Damen and M. Mastragostino, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 875 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ravet, M. Gauthier, K. Zaghib, J. B. Goodenough, A. Mauger, F. Gendron and C. M. Julien, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2595 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Zhu, X. H. Li, Y. X. Wang and H. J. Guo, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 98, 373 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, G. C. Liang, X. Q. Ou, X. K. Zhi, J. P. Zhang and J. Y. Cui, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 423 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Song, K. Ngala, P. Y. Zavalij and M. S. Whittingham, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 239 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dominko, M. Bele, M. Gaberscek, M. Remskar, D. Hanzel, J. M. Goupil, S. Pejovnik and J. Jamnik, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 274 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dominko, M. Bele, J. M. Goupil, M. Gaberscek, D. Hanzel, I. Arcon and J. Jamnik, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2960 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, R. Cai, T. Yuan, X. Yu, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2861 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zaghib, N. Ravet, M. Gauthier, F. Gendron, A. Mauger, J. B. Goodenough and C. M. Julien, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 560 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Herle, B. Ellis, N. Coombs and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barker, M. Y. Saidi and J. L. Swoyer, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A53 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Liu, Z. X. Wang, X. H. Li, H. J. Guo, W. J. Peng, Y. H. Zhang and Q. Y. Hu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 469 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Yang, T. H. Teng and S. H. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 307 CrossRef CAS .
M. Konarova and I. Taniguchi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 3305 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Bewlay, K. Konstantinov, G. X. Wang, S. X. Dou and H. K. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58, 1788 CrossRef CAS .
N. Iltchev, Y. Chen, S. Okada and J. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 749 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kim, J. W. Choi, G. S. Chauhan, J. H. Ahn, G. C. Hwang, J. B. Choi and H. J. Ahn, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 8258 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Hsu, S. Y. Tsay and B. J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2690 RSC .
L. Laffont, C. Delacourt, P. Gibot, M. Yue Wu, P. Kooyman, C. Masquelier and J. M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5520 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Delacourt, P. Poizot and C. Masquelier, Crystalline nanometric LiFePO4, WO/2007/000251.
J. C. Zheng, X. H. Li, Z. X. Wang, H. J. Guo and S. Y. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 574 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, Y. Hu, F. McLarnon and R. Kostecki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A207 CrossRef .
R. Dominko, M. Gaberscek, J. Drofenik, M. Bele and S. Pejovnik, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A187 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, Y. Hu, F. McLarnon and R. Kostecki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A207 CrossRef .
C. M. Julien, A. Mauge, A. Ait-Salah, M. Massot, F. Gendron and K. Zaghib, Ionics, 2007, 13, 395 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Doherty, R. A. Caruso, B. M. Smarsly and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2895 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Julien, K. Zaghib, A. Mauger, M. Massot, A. Ait-Salah, M. Selmane and F. Gendron, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 63511 CrossRef .
A. Ait Salah, A. Maugerb, C. M. Julien and F. Gendron, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2006, 129, 232 CrossRef .
K. Zaghib, A. Mauger, F. Gendron and C. M. Julien, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 462 CrossRef .
S. Y. Chung, J. T. Bloking and Y. M. Chiang, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lim, C. S. Yoon and J. Cho, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4560 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Doherty, R. A. Caruso, B. M. Smarsly, P. Adelhelm and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5300 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2251 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dedryvere, M. Maccario, L. Croguennec, F. L. Cras, C. Delmas and D. Gonbeau, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7164 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dominko, J. M. Goupil, M. Bele, M. Gaberscek, M. Remskar, D. Hanzel and J. Jamnik, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152(5), A858 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20(23), 7237 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Sun, Z. Zhou, Z. G. Xu, D. G. Wang, J. P. Wei, X. K. Bian and J. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 841 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, C. S. Wang, X. Chen, S. Upreti and M. S. Whittingham, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A33 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Y. Cheng, M. Yan and Z. Jiang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2007, 11, 457 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, M. Chen, C. Chien and Y. Fu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 440 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Li, Z. Wang, L. Wu, J. Zheng and H. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2009, 70, 238 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Shin, S. B. Park, H. Jang, K. Y. Chung, W. I. Cho, C. S. Kim and B. W. Cho, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7946 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hsu, S. Tsay and B. Hwang, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 529 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie and Z. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 2063 CrossRef CAS .
R. Amin, C. Lin and J. Maier, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3519 RSC .
Z. D. Gao, Z. X. Bing, X. Jian, T. Jian, Z. T. Jun and C. G. Shao, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2006, 22, 840 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, Z. M. Shou, W. D. Dan, S. Ou, D. Rui-Ping and M. Jian, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 25, 1724–1728 .
H. Liu, Q. Cao, L. J. Fu, C. Li, Y. P. Wu and H. Q. Wu, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1553 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ou, G. Liang, L. Wang, S. Xu and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 543 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Yin, H. Wang and C. Cui, J. Inorg. Mater., 2007, 22, 627 Search PubMed .
D. Arumugam, G. P. Kalaignan and P. Manisankar, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 301 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, W. Z. Li, Y. C. Yang, X. D. Guo and W. Z. Yu, Acta Phys-Chim Sin, 2008, 24, 1498 Search PubMed .
Y. Cho, G. T. Fey and H. Kao, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2008, 12, 815 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Yang and W. H. Ke, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A729 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Cao, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2008, 12, 10170 .
D. Wang, H. Li, S. Shi, X. Huang and L. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 29558 .
L. Yang, L. Jiao, Y. Miao and H. Yuan, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 1541 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xin, Z. Xin-Bing, Y. Hong-Ming and H. J. Zi, J. Inorg. Mater., 2008, 23, 587 Search PubMed .
S. Lee, S. Cho, V. Aravindan, H. Kim and Y. Lee, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2009, 30, 2223 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ravet, A. Abouimrane and M. Armand, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 702 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Herle, B. Ellis, N. Coombs and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 147 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, L. Laffont, R. Bouchet, C. Wurm, J. B. Leriche, M. Morcrette, J. M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A913 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wagemaker, B. L. Ellis, D. Luetzenkirchen-Hecht, F. M. Mulder and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6313 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. J. Fisher, V. M. H. Prieto and M. S. Islam, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5907 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chung, S. Y. Choi, T. Yamamoto and Y. Ikuhara, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 125502 CrossRef .
P. Axmann, C. Stinner, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, A. Mauger, F. Gendron and C. M. Julien, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1636 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. J. Vacchio, S. Wang, N. Chernova, P. Y. Zavalij and M. S. Whittingham, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 178, 1676 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chung, S. Y. Choi, T. Yamamoto and Y. Ikuhara, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 543 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ying, M. Lei, C. Jiang, C. Wan, X. He, J. Li, L. Wang and J. Ren, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 543 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Ni, H. H. Zhou, J. T. Chen and X. X. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1260 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Xie, R. S. Wang, J. R. Ying, L. Y. Zhang, A. F. Jalbout, H. Ying. Yu, G. L. Yang, X. M. Pan and Z. M. Su, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2609 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Danoue, T. Inoue and M. Fujimoto, presented at the 45th Battery Symposium, Kyoto, Japan,  November 2004 Search PubMed .
S. S. Zhang, K. Xu and T. R. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 02 .
C. Delmas, M. Maccario, L. Croguennec, F. L Cras and F. Weill, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 665 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meethong, H. Y. Shadow Huang, S. A. Speakman, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1115 CrossRef CAS .
V. Srinivasan and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1517 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Ramana, A. Mauger, F. Gendron, C. M. Julien and K. Zaghib, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 555 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Prosini, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152(10), A1925 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, X. Song and T. J. Richardson, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A295 CrossRef CAS .
D. X. Gouveia, V. Lemos, J. A. C. de Paiva, A. G. Souza Filho and J. Mendes Filho, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 024105 CrossRef .
C. Delacourt, P. Poizot, J. M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 254 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, J. Rodriguez-Carjaval, B. Schmitt, J. M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Solid State Sci., 2005, 7, 1506 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Dodd, R. Yazami and B. Fultz, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A151 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, X. Song and T. J. Richardson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A627 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamada, H. Koizumi, S. Nishimura, N. Sonoyama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Nakamura and T. Kobayashi, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 357 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meethong, H. Huang, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A134 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gibot, M. Casas-Cabanas, L. Laffont, S. Levasseur, P. Carlach, S. Hamelet, J. M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 741 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wu, L. Y. Jiang, F. F. Cao, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2710 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 805 CrossRef .
C. H. Mi, X. G. Zhang and H. L. Li, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 602, 245 CrossRef CAS .
Ch. Lai, Q. Xu, H. Ge, G. Zhou and J. Xie, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 1736 CrossRef CAS .
S. Franger, F. Le Cras, C. Bourbon and H. Rouault, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 252 CrossRef CAS .
S. Franger, C. Benoit, C. Bourbon and F. L. Cras, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 1338 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Kim, M. H. Lee, W. T. Jeong and K. S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 534 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kim, G. Cheruvally, J. H. Ahn, G. C. Hwang and J. B. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 2371 CrossRef CAS .
M. Konarova and I. Taniguchi, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1029 CrossRef CAS .
M. Konarova and I. Taniguchi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 3305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Konarova and I. Taniguchi, Powder Technol., 2009, 191, 111 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, J. Lee and A. S. Teja, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2008, 44, 92 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, S. Wang and M. S. Whittingham, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 442 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jin and H. B. Gu, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 178, 1907 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. J. Vacchio, S. Wang, N. Chernova, P. Y. Zavalij and M. S. Whittingham, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 178, 1676 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ni, M. Morishita, Y. Kawabe, M. Watada, N. Takeichi and T. Sakai, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195(9), 2877 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dokko, S. Koizumi, H. Nakano and K. Kanamura, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4803 RSC .
J. Chen and M. S. Whittingham, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 855 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ellis, W. H. Kan, W. Makahnouk and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3248 RSC .
T. Muraliganth, A. V. Murugan and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5661 RSC .
S. Zhou, H. Zhou, T. Miyoshi, M. Hibino, I. Honma and M. Ichihara, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2012 CrossRef CAS .
G. Meligrana, C. Gerbaldi, A. Tuel, S. Bodoardo and N. Penazzi, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 516 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee and A. S. Teja, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 2105 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saravanan, M. V. Reddy, P. I. Balaya, H. Gong, B. V. R. Chowdari and J. J. Vittal, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 605 RSC .
G. Arnold, J. Garche, R. Hemmer, S. Strobele, C. Vogler and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 247 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, S. R. Sun, D. G. Xia, W. S. Chu, S. Zhang and Z. Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17450 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, P. Axmann, C. Stinner and G. Arnold,  2006, Extended Abstracts of the 210th ECS Meeting Cancun No206.
Y. Song, S. Yang, P. Y. Zavalij and M. S. Whittingham, Mater. Res. Bull., 2002, 37, 1249 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Prosini, M. Lisi, S. Scaccia, M. Carewska, F. Cardellini and M. Pasquali, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149(3), A297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, P. Y. Zavalij, M. Suzuki and M. S. Whittingham, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41(22), 5778 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Song, P. Y. Zavalij and M. S. Whittingham, Electrochem.Commun., 2002, 4, 239 CAS .
A. V. Murugan, T. Muraliganth, P. J. Ferreira and A. Manthiram, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 946 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
	Lixia Yuan received her PhD at Wuhan University in 2007. She worked as a post-doctoral researcher in Tsinghua from 2007–2009. She is now assistant professor at Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Her research interests are lithium rechargeable batteries.
John B. Goodenough and Yun-Hui Huang	Prof. Yunhui Huang received his Ph.D in 2000 at Peking University. He worked as a JSPS foreign researcher at the Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan, from 2002 to 2004. In 2004, he joined The University of Texas at Austin, USA, where his research work focused on anode materials for solid oxide fuel cells and cathode materials for lithium rechargeable batteries. He joined Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 2008 as a Chair Professor in Materials. He won the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of China in 2008.
	Prof. John B. Goodenough is a member of the US National Academy of Engineering. He won the prestigious Japan Prize in 2001 and the Enrico Fermi Award in 2009 for his innovative work on lightweight rechargeable batteries. He received the 2001–02 Cockrell School of Engineering Billy and Claude R. Hocott Distinguished Centennial Engineering Research Award. Dr Goodenough is also a member of the University of Texas at Austin Texas Materials Institute.

Broader context
Great attention has been paid to electric vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles in an attempt to relieve the pressure from increasing oil price and environmental issue. After years of development, the promising cathode material LiFePO4 is used for the sustainable batteries with high capacity and high power density for such vehicles. This review presents an overview of research and development of LiFePO4. In particular, we highlight the main approaches of synthesis and material processing of LiFePO4 aiming to improve the electrical and ionic conductivities which are the major challenges for its application in high-rate lithium-ion batteries.

VOC = (μA − μC)/e	(1)
η = VOC − V	(2)
	(3)
Eg = ELUMO − EHOMO	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the relative electron energies in a lithium ion battery. μLiC6, μLTO represent the electrochemical potentials of the graphite anode and Li4Ti5O12 anode respectively, μLNM is the electrochemical potential of the cathode, e.g. Li1−xNi0.5Mn1.5O4electrode.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the energy vs. density of states for the transition-metal redox couples and the O anion-p bands relative to the cathode Fermi energy.	 

 	Fig. 3  The crystal structure of olivine LiFePO4 in projection along [001].3	 

Li–O(1) × 2	2.167(7)	—
Li–O(2) × 2	2.095(5)	—
Li–O(3) × 2	2.164(7)	—
Fe–O(1)	2.220(11)	1.944(9)
O(2)	2.084(12)	1.921(11)

                  O(3) × 2	2.268(7)	2.154(6)

                  O(3)′ × 2	2.095(7)	2.048(6)
P–O(1)	1.512(11)	1.507(11)
O(2)	1.573(14)	1.474(12)

                  O(3) × 2	1.504(7)	1.542(7)

 	Fig. 4  Typical charge/discharge curves for LiFePO4 at a current density of 23 mA g−1 at (a) 23, (b) 40, and (c) 60 °C.28	 

 	Fig. 5  Two-step preparation process for the LiFePO4/C particle via an in situpolymerization that restricts the size of the particles.44	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of charge rate capability for C-LFP, C-LFP/16%PPy-ED, C-LFP/7% PPy-Chem, and C-LFP/7% PANI-Chem. The data were obtained by charging at various rates after discharging at 0.1 C. “ED” refers to “electrodeposited”, “Chem” to “polymerized chemically”.86	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of shrinking-core model, adapted from ref. 23.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the “new core-shell” model, adapted from ref. 68 and 130.	 

 	Fig. 9  Electrochemical and structural characterization of the 40 nm LiFePO4.138 (a) Charge/discharge galvanostatic curve at C/40 of the 40 nm LiFePO4 (red line) compared with the two-phase profile of the 140 nm LiFePO4 (blue line). (b) In situXRD measurements.	 

 	Fig. 10  Variation of the region I, II, and total capacities versus discharge rate for the LFP-NP@NPCM nanocomposite electrode. Inset: typical Galvanostatic-discharge profile indicating the regions cycled at a rate of C/9.139	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
