Deep eutectic solvents (DESs)-derived advanced functional materials for energy and environmental applications: challenges, opportunities, and future v ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA01659J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01659J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8209-8229Deep eutectic solvents (DESs)-derived advanced functional materials for energy and environmental applications: challenges, opportunities, and future vision

        
          
            Xiang 
            Ge
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Changdong 
            Gu
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Xiuli 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jiangping 
            Tu
          
        
      
State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, Key Laboratory of Advanced Materials and Applications for Batteries of Zhejiang Province, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. E-mail: cdgu@zju.edu.cn; changdong_gu@hotmail.com
Received 
      23rd February 2017
    , Accepted 3rd April 2017First published on 3rd April 2017AbstractDeep eutectic solvents (DESs) are a large family of solvents that show many similarities with ionic liquids. They are distinguished by the presence of a large amount of molecular components (typically hydrogen bond donors). They are more industrially promising than ionic liquids due to their low cost and tolerance to humidity (hydrolysis or hygroscopicity). As an emerging research field, DESs have already received significant research attention from chemistry scientists. The exploration of DESs used for functional materials in energy and environmental applications is still in its early stage. This review briefly introduces the basics of DESs and how they could be promising as solvents for material scientists. We summarized the application of DESs for the synthesis of materials used for energy and environmental applications. In this review, DESs have been described in view of the three main roles they play in the solution process of functional materials. Besides DESs being widely known as inert media or reactive reagents for the synthesis of materials, they can also be directly adopted as functional materials such as electrolytes for energy storage devices or as CO2 adsorbents. The present review focused on several categories of functional materials including noble metals, porous carbonaceous materials, transition metal compounds, and DESs themselves, which are synthesized or derived from DESs for potential applications in the energy and environmental fields. DESs have been demonstrated to be effective in guiding the formation of functional materials with unique structures and properties. In particular, we introduced our work on exploring a DES-thermal synthesis strategy, in which the DES is used as a solvent as well as a reagent. Recent theoretical and experimental work for understanding the structural basis of DESs has also been summarized. This review article aims to inspire scientists to use DESs as a powerful tool to push the frontiers in the field of materials, energy, and environmental science.Xiang GeXiang Ge (research ID: N-6879-2015) has been a Ph.D. candidate under the supervision of Dr Changdong Gu since 2012 in the School of Materials Science & Engineering in Zhejiang University (ZJU), China. In 2015, financed by a scholarship from China Scholarship Council (CSC), he went to Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) as a visiting student supervised by Dr Ju Li. His research interests include the synthesis of redoxable layered materials and their derivatives used in energy and environment related applications, including batteries, supercapacitors, electrocatalysis, and adsorption.Changdong GuDr Changdong Gu (researcher ID: B-3299-2008) received his Ph.D. degree in Material Science from Jilin University in 2007 supervised by Prof. J. S. Lian. He worked at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), from 2007 to 2009 as a research associate in Prof. T. Y. Zhang's group. Then he joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, as an associate professor. His research interests include the corrosion and protection of metals, energy storage and conversion materials, interfacial materials with special wettability, and the novel application of deep eutectic solvents in the synthesis of nanostructured materials. [homepage: http://mypage.zju.edu.cn/gcd].
1. Introduction
The energy and environmental crises are among the most challenging global issues in the 21st century.1–3 Human beings are taking various efforts, including purifying water with less energy, fabricating high-power batteries with less heavy metal content, generating electricity with less carbon emissions, and increasing the energy efficiency of all kinds of electronic devices, to address them.4–7 In most projects, materials science plays a fundamental role by providing solutions to design, fabricate, and evaluate the functional materials that are the key components in a system.8,9 The development of wet chemistry is indispensable for the successful synthesis of most functional materials used in energy and environmental applications. In practice, the term functional materials covers very broad research fields, such as optics, phonics, electrics, magnetism, and so on. However, in this review, functional materials only refers to those adopted for energy and environmental applications; for example, some typical materials with energy storage, energy conversion, and pollutant absorption functions. Because the solvent is one of the major components in a chemical process, whether a chemical process is green and safe often depends on the properties of the solvent. In this sense, traditional organic solvents are usually the most costly and environmentally threatening in chemical engineering. At temperatures higher than the solvent boiling point, reactions must be carried out in sealed reactors under high pressure, which is dangerous and challenging for continuous production. Therefore, it is highly desired to develop solvents that are green in nature and furthermore, that are economically affordable. Besides, new solvents with unique physical and chemical properties can provide a possibility to synthesize functional materials that cannot be obtained otherwise.
Research into ionic liquids was expected to open new frontiers in materials science.10 Indeed in their fundamental research, many exciting discoveries have been reported and summarized.10–43 However, it is still challenging to push ionic liquids into large-scale applications due to their high cost and sensitivity to air. Traditional ionic liquids have different levels of hydrolysis and hygroscopicity, depending on the specific structure (cations and anions). Generally, halogenoaluminate-type ionic liquids easily hydrolyze. Most ammonium- and imidazolium-type ionic liquids are hygroscopic.20 A recent new type of ionic liquid analogs, called deep eutectic solvents (DESs), share many similar characteristics and properties with ionic liquids, but they are much cheaper and stable in air, and thus more promising than ionic liquids for industrialization. Since the first paper that introduced a choline chloride/urea (ChCl/urea)-type DES, the last decade has witnessed tremendous advances in this field. Several excellent review papers have introduced contributions regarding DESs in the field of chemistry, including their general synthesis and properties,44 their sustainable aspects in nanoparticle synthesis,45 their use in the preparation of biodiesels,46 the biotransformations observed in DESs,30 and their involvement in polymer synthesis and organic synthesis.47,48 However, as a research field that is still in its infancy, most of the attention to date still comes from the scientific chemistry community. As shown in Fig. 1, up to Jan. 4th, 2017, there were 1368 publications listed when searching the web of science with the term “deep eutectic solvent”. This field is attracting more and more interest each year (Fig. 1a). However, only about 10% of the publications are in the field of materials science (Fig. 1b).
 Fig. 1  Publication analysis of research topics related to DESs. (a) and (b) The publication number each year and the percentage in each research field, respectively. The data is obtained from Web of Science, Jan. 4th, 2017. 
We anticipate that a review article from the perspective of material scientists might open up a new inter-discipline field that would push the frontier for materials science and DESs. In this review article, we give a brief introduction to the basic knowledge of DESs and of new functional materials synthesized from DESs. Then, we summarize the challenges in the energy and environmental fields related to materials science, where DESs could possibly make a contribution. We specifically focus on inorganic functional materials, including transition metal compounds, noble metal particles, and carbon type materials. In particular, we introduce the DES-thermal method developed by our group, where the DES is used as a multifunctional reactive reagent. New research directions, such as using DESs themselves as functional materials for energy and environmental applications, are also introduced. Finally, we further summarize the fundamental scientific questions that may guide the further development in this field.
1.1 Basic information about DESs
A. P. Abbott and coworkers carried out pioneering work in the discovery and fundamental research of DESs. Initially the discovery of deep eutectic solvents arose from the search for ionic liquids. In 2001, A. P. Abbott and coworkers obtained liquids by mixing quaternary ammonium salts and metal chloride salts.49 In this work, quaternary ammonium salts were mixed with metal chlorides to form a mixture that had a melting point around room temperature. Since both components were ionic compounds, the liquid was very similar to an ionic liquid. Following this work, A. P. Abbott and coworkers further explored mixtures of quaternary ammonium salts and other molecular hydrogen bond donors, including urea and carboxylic acids.50,51 Researchers consider these types of solvents as ionic liquids or ionic liquids analogs.38,52,53 Further detailed study showed that such deep eutectic mixtures had a significant amount of molecular components.38,54,55 DESs form when mixing two material together and the melting point of the mixture is significantly depressed, as shown in Fig. 2.50,51 Taking the DES system composed of ChCl and another hydrogen bond donor species as an example, the decrease in the melting point can be higher than 200 K.50,51 DESs have unique solvent properties. A wide range of solutes have been found to have large solubility in DESs.50,51 This property provides the possibility of using DESs as effective solvents for the solution synthesis of functional materials.56,57
 Fig. 2  (a) The starting materials are solids (choline chloride and urea in this case) with high-melting points. They form a liquid at room temperature when mixed together. (b) Graph showing the melting point of the mixture, which changes with the ratio of the species. There is a ratio where the melting point of the mixture significantly decreases. Reproduced with permission.50,51 Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2003, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
With traditional ionic liquids, researchers have already found many exciting results related to materials synthesis.10 Because ionic liquids have a fundamentally different composition compared to traditional aqueous or organic solvents, they can be used to synthesize materials that cannot be obtained otherwise. However, as we mentioned above, solvents are typically used in a large quantity in any wet chemistry process, and they should be easy to handle, economically affordable, and environmentally friendly. DESs have similar physical and chemical properties to ionic liquids, and thus have the potential to achieve the same success. DESs have a high ionic charge, high polarity, a supramolecular structure, and a high dielectric constant. They are also biodegradable, stable in air, and environmentally friendly. Therefore, DESs are a good choice for large-scale application for the synthesis of functional materials. The electrochemical-assisted synthesis of materials from DESs has already proven to be successful for the fabrication of thin films and some nanomaterials.17,58–66 However, the research using DESs as a solvent in a direct wet-chemistry strategy for the synthesis of materials is just beginning, especially for the materials related to energy and environmental applications. This field has great potential because the scalability is not a problem. Therefore, we believe a specific review article focusing on the direct synthesis of functional materials from DESs would be very meaningful for the development of materials science and DESs. In the following sections, we summarize and focus on the synthesis of several types of important functional materials that have great potential in energy and environmental applications from DESs-based systems, including noble metal nanoparticles, carbon-based materials, and transition metal compounds. Interested readers are also encouraged to learn about other successful examples of materials synthesis from DESs, including the synthesis of zeolites, perovskite crystals, and metal organic frameworks covered in other review articles and research papers.41,44,45,52,57
1.2 Challenges in the solution synthesis of materials for energy and environmental applications
Materials play a fundamental role when seeking to develop green and energy efficient strategies for tackling all kinds of engineering problems. The energy and environmental costs mostly come from two processes: the synthesis of the materials and the subsequent period when the materials are working in operation. Therefore, materials scientists are usually keen to optimize the synthesis process and to improve the performance of the synthesized functional materials.
The solvent is a major component in wet chemistry. Depending on whether the solvent can be properly recycled and to what degree it might threaten the environment often determines the final economic and environmental cost. Several industrial examples are quite representative in this field. For instance, for battery technologies, even when they contain many high-tech components, such as electrodes, binders, and electrolytes, which need extensive research and engineering, actually the most expensive procedure is to heat and recycle N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), which is an organic solvent used to make the slurry for coating the electrode. In solar cells and touch screen technology, silver nanowires are used to fabricate the conductive film to replace the indium tin oxide (ITO). Even though silver belongs to the noble metal family, the major cost of fabricating silver nanowires comes from the ethylene glycol solvent. These are typical examples that show how solvents with new properties could potentially reduce the economic and environmental costs of many widely used functional materials. Besides, flammable organic solvents have caused several serious industrial accidents in chemical plants in the past, resulting in casualties and environmental disasters. Therefore, the negligible vapor pressure and non-flammability nature of DESs could potentially make the synthesis of functional materials much safer and cheaper.
For functional materials, the performance is closely correlated with their composition and structure. The surface properties are important in many energy and environmental applications, such as supercapacitors, catalysis, solar cells, and adsorbents.67,68 However, based on thermodynamics, crystallized materials have only a few morphologies exposing the low-index crystal planes in an equilibrium state. In other words, the formation of nanostructured materials with enhanced functional properties needs good control of the reaction kinetics. Therefore, the solvent property is fundamental for the successful synthesis of materials with high surface activities. Because deep eutectic solvents have high viscosity and high ionic strength, they can perform as a soft template for the growth of functional nano-sized particles with special morphology and properties. Another feature of deep eutectic solvents is their low vapor pressure. This allows a reaction to proceed at high temperature and ambient pressure. Therefore, a sealed high-pressure reactor is no longer a necessity. Such a high-temperature, ambient pressure protocol is not only safe, but also provides the possibility of using various chemical synthesis skills to design specific reactions. For example, we invented a “hot-injection” method based on a choline chloride/urea (CU)-type DES to synthesize various transition metal compounds for Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors, and for use in electrocatalysis and adsorption for water treatment.69–75 By injecting water into a heated CU system as a reaction initiator and temperature controller, the nucleation process and growth process can be decoupled, thus allowing the formation of nanomaterials with a uniform size and special nanostructure, as we will systematically introduce in this review. Finally, the solvent property and the special coordination environment could endow DESs themselves with the capability to act as electrolytes or gas adsorbents.
2. DESs used as reaction media for solution synthesis of functional materials
2.1 Noble metal particles
Catalysts play a very important role in most energy conversion systems, such as fuel cells and water splitting devices. Noble metals are commonly high performance catalysts.76 The catalytic property is determined by the surface property of the materials. Therefore, it is desirable to synthesize noble metal nanoparticles with a high surface area and high-index surface planes. Nanoparticles with a special morphology could have exposed high-index crystal planes, which could significantly enhance the catalytic performance of the catalyst. DESs are perfect structural directing agents for controlling the synthesis of well-defined ordered nanocatalysts. S. G. Sun and coworkers reported the synthesis of gold star-shaped nanoparticles by reacting HAuCl4·4H2O with L-ascorbic acid in a ChCl/urea-type DES.77 As shown in Fig. 3, the exposed (331) high-index facets contribute to the improved catalytic property during the reduction of H2O2. It is worth emphasizing that in this protocol, no seeds or stabilizers were used and the synthesis could be performed at room temperature. This means that DESs are qualified as structure-directing agents. The same group also proved the possibility of the synthesis of an alloy-type Pd–Sn noble metal supported on CNT.78 Besides, DESs are conductive. This provides the possibility to use electricity to tune the reaction process. The same group also demonstrated the synthesis of Pt particles with various shapes from DESs assisted by electrochemistry.79–81 The Pt particles produced had various morphologies, including nanoflowers, icosahedrons, etc. Hence, platinum with different exposed facets could be selectively prepared. Ethanol catalysis experiments were used to demonstrate the different catalytic performance of Pt with different morphologies. Similarly, Hammons et al. explored the electrodeposition of palladium nanoparticles from the ChCl/urea-type DESs.82 They believed that the DES would adsorb on the surface of the electrodeposited particles and stabilize the particles by forming an ionic layer that would neutralize the surface charge locally. In this way, the deposited Pd could form a 2D ensemble. This example shows how the unique properties of DESs can be used to obtain noble metal materials that are different from those obtained with molecular solvents.
 Fig. 3  (a–f) TEM images of pentagonal gold nanoparticles grown from ChCl/urea-type DES (g) SEM images of the gold nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. 
The growth of noble metal nanowires from DESs is also possible. Mariana Chirea and coworkers studied the formation of Au nanowires by reducing HAuCl4 with NaBH4 in different types of DESs, as shown in Fig. 4.83 Two different types of DESs, including ChCl/urea and ChCl/EG, were used. By comparing the observed results when using the two different DES systems, they concluded that the different growths and assembly behaviors were influenced by the property of the DESs. The ChCl/EG system had a lower viscosity and higher conductivity based on the higher mobility of holes.38 Besides, the coordination atmosphere was different. Therefore, gold nanowires with an average width of ∼17 nm were produced in ChCl/EG, while the widths of the gold nanowires produced in ChCl/urea were ∼23 nm. Both gold nanowires could efficiently convert p-nitroaniline to diaminophenylene. This work demonstrated the potential of DESs in the synthesis of noble metal nanoparticles with a high-index surface plane in a simple and scalable way.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the chemical synthesis of gold nanowires from ChCl/EG (A) and from ChCl/urea (B) type DESs. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Carbon-based materials
Carbon represents a large family of materials that are important for constructing composites for a wide range of applications, including catalysis, sensing, energy storage and conversion, environment protection, and biomedicine.84–86 Carbonaceous materials with a desired porous structure and doping are often used in energy and environmental applications where the surface properties are important. DESs can direct the formation of pores during the synthesis of porous carbon materials. The polycondensation of resorcinol-formaldehyde (the RF reaction) has mostly been studied as the reaction mechanism for the synthesis of carbon from DESs. Francisco del Monte and coworkers contributed pioneering work to establish this field.47,87–94 In 2010, they explored the suitability of using ChCl/EG (1:2 molar ratio)-type DESs as solvents for the polycondensation of resorcinol with formaldehyde.89 Monolithic carbon was obtained after carbonizing the RF gel at 800 °C. The DESs were found to introduce textures into the carbon materials. As shown in Fig. 5, the RF gel or carbon prepared from pure water is dense (surface area of 7 m2 g−1), while the DES solvent was able to assist the formation of pores (surface area up to 170 m2 g−1). They further analyzed the underlying chemistry, conversion yields, carbon content, and surfaces areas. Because DESs can well disperse other carbon materials, such as carbon nanotubes, they were also able to prepare homogeneous carbon–carbon nanotube composites.
 Fig. 5  SEM comparison of RF gel and annealed carbon synthesized in water and DES. (a, c, and e) Images of the RF gel precursor synthesized in water, water–DES, and DES solvent, respectively. (b, d, and f) Images of the carbonized materials using (a), (c), and (e) RF gels as the precursor, respectively. Bars are 10 μm in (a), 5 μm in (b), (c) and (d), and 2 μm in (e) and (f). Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Because resorcinol is a hydrogen bond donor, this reagent can be used as the component to obtain DESs by mixing with ChCl. Therefore, this type of DES can be used directly as the precursor to obtain an RF gel based on the RF polycondensation reaction. Besides, earlier work by Morris's group demonstrated that the DESs can be used as templates for the formation of zeolite analogs.41,52 This implies that the DESs have the potential to template the formation of hierarchical porous carbon. Francisco del Monte and coworkers also investigated the usage of resorcinol/ChCl-type DES as a carbonaceous precursor and as a templating agent for the synthesis of hierarchical porous carbon monoliths.88 To investigate the possibility to control the property of the RF gel and the carbonized carbon, they also explored the introduction of urea to form a ternary resorcinol/ChCl/urea DES as a precursor and solvent. As shown in Fig. 6, they found that the introduction of urea turned the colorless resorcinol/ChCl DES into a blue solvent. The upfield chemical shift of the 1H NMR signal indicated the formation of a resorcinol–ChCl–urea complex. Such a supermolecular structure can guide the growth process during the RF polycondensation reaction. Fig. 6b–e show the RF gels and carbons obtained in the ChCl/resorcinol and ChCl/resorcinol/urea DESs systems. During the polycondensation process, the RF reaction gradually ruptures the DES structure, leading to a segregation process resembling spinodal-decomposition. The creation of texture and pores during the spinodal-decomposition process was also observed by the same group during the freeze-drying process of DES.87 Therefore, by controlling the composition of the DES and other parameters, the RF reaction and subsequent carbonization can result in a carbon material with a tunable structure. A carbon monolith with a remarkable surface area of up to 600 m2 g−1 and a narrow mesopore size distribution.88 Further work showed that the incorporation of Fe(CH3COO)2 can improve the graphitization during carbonization at moderate temperatures (∼800 °C). This moderate temperature is critical to preserve a decent value for the surface area and nitrogen content, resulting in a bimodal porous carbon monolith with high electrical conductivity.92
 Fig. 6  (a) Ternary ChCl/urea/resorcinol DES (left) and binary ChCl/resorcinol DES, respectively. (b) and (c) are the RF gel synthesized from ChCl/urea/resorcinol and ChCl/resorcinol-type DES, respectively. (d) and (e) Images of the carbonized materials using (b) and (c), respectively. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
DESs are economically acceptable to synthesize carbon-related materials. Compared with the ionic liquid systems, DESs have similar advantages for designing the structure and functional group of the carbon. Therefore, materials fabricated from DESs have the potential to satisfy the technological requirements in many energy and environmental applications. Francisco del Monte and coworkers also carried out application-oriented research in several fields. They showed that the hierarchical porous/CNT composites synthesized from DES have a high surface area and conductivity. Also, they exhibit capacitance retention at high current densities as electrodes in supercapacitor applications.91 This work has the potential to impact future technology for fast energy storage and extraction in an efficient way. For environmental protection, CO2 separation and storage is a hot research topic. The hierarchical carbons synthesized from DES have a bicontinuous porous structure and thus a high capacity for CO2 adsorption, as well as a high selectivity for separating CO2/N2 or CO2/CH4 in a mixed gas.93 As shown in Fig. 7, the DESs derived carbon can have different composition and structure depending on the composition of the DES. The carbon performs as a good adsorbent for CO2 uptake in both equilibrium and dynamic conditions.93 Besides, catalysis is another wide research field. The performance of the catalyst is highly dependent on the designed surface area and its properties. The hierarchical nitrogen-doped carbons prepared from DESs were found to be very effective metal-free electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).94 Recently, DESs were also found to be interesting reagents for carbon modification. For example, DES-functionalized CNTs can be a good adsorbent for mercury removal from water.95
 Fig. 7  Schematic of carbon monoliths with different structures and doping from different DES systems. The adsorption performances were also investigated. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
3. DESs used as reactive reagents for the solution synthesis of functional materials
3.1 Transition metal compounds via DES-thermal strategy
A key feature of transition metal elements is that they have d orbitals that are not fully filled. Therefore, they often have multiple valence states and are easy to form complexes. Besides, for many elements, the energy state of the d electron is similar to the s electron in the outer shell, endowing the transition metal elements with unique electron properties. These features make transition metal compounds important in many energy and environmental applications that involve the transfer of electrons. It is promising to develop a facile strategy to synthesize transition metal compounds with unique phase and morphology. There are several works that explore the potential to use DESs as inert solvents to synthesize transition metal compounds in a traditional chemical process.96 An ionothermal route has been proposed using ethaline (ChCl/EG) to prepare core–shell nanoparticles comprising amorphous Ni–P cores shelled with crystalline Ni3P as prospective anode materials for lithium-ion batteries.97 We attempted to optimize these DES-thermal strategies. Our group tried to focus on the ChCl/urea-type DES as active reagents during the chemical synthesis. Because urea decomposes at high temperature and releases alkaline species, we were able to use DES directly in a one-pot strategy to synthesize various transition metal compounds with a tunable structure without the need for an additional reagent, structure-directing agent, or surfactant. We noticed that ChCl/urea system was reductive and could be used to reduce graphene oxide.53 It was also possible to synthesize SnOx nanoparticles from this system in a fast protocol by directly heating the ChCl/urea dissolved with Sn ions.98 These findings inspired us to consider DES as a self-reactive solvent for the facile synthesis of other important transition metal compounds. We thus developed a pressure-assisted method and hot-injection method to synthesize various 3d transition metal (Ni, Co, Mn, Fe) compounds and then studied their performance in energy and environmental applications, as we introduce and discuss below.
3.2 Pressure-assisted DES-thermal method for transition metal complexes
In the ChCl/urea system, the heating process results in the decomposition of urea and the accumulation of volatile species in the solution. By directly heating the DES dissolved with metal ions in a sealed container, we were able to synthesize several special transition metal compounds from the system. When heating a ChCl/urea system dissolved with Ni2+, a pure purple Ni[NH3]6Cl2 phase with high yield can form.69 As shown in Fig. 8, the formed Ni[NH3]6Cl2 shows an open octahedral morphology. To explain the formation mechanism of such a unique open octahedral structure, we proposed a kinetic-to-dynamic control growth mechanism (Fig. 8e). Ni[NH3]6Cl2 is a typical face-cubic-center (f.c.c.) phase. The surface energy (Esurf) of a f.c.c. crystal can be determined as follows: Esurf (111) < Esurf (100) < Esurf (110).99,100 The growth rate would follow the same trend. As a consequence, the Ni[NH3]6Cl2 would expose the most close-packed (111) plane to form a octahedral morphology. This is also called the “Bravais law” and can be used to predict the growth of particles controlled by thermodynamics in the equilibrium state. As the reaction proceeds, the kinetics of the reaction might decrease due to the consumption of the reagents. At this stage, the inner stress in the (111) plane would accumulate and leads to its exfoliation. Meanwhile, the high surface energy of the (110) planes would provide more active sites for the crystal to grow on the edges. The preferential growth of the edge and the exfoliation of the (111) planes would finally lead to the formation of the unique open octahedral morphology. This nickel amine chloride complex is a good functional material in ammonia storage technology. Storing ammonia can be an indirect way to store hydrogen for fuel cells, which avoids the serious challenges of direct hydrogen storage.101–107 Further annealing the octahedral Ni[NH3]6Cl2 could lead to the formation of porous NiCl2 with a collapsed octahedral morphology. NiCl2 can be used as a potential active cathode to construct sodium-ion batteries (ZEBRA cell) versus a liquid sodium negative electrode.108 The advantage of NiCl2/Na cells is that they may be assembled in the discharged state. Also, the positive electrode is mostly made of solid materials, which can reduce the corrosivity and make the cell safer.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of the Ni[NH3]6Cl2 complex growing in its early stage. (b) and (c) Ni[NH3]6Cl2 octahedrons with exfoliated facets. (d) Magnified edge of the Ni[NH3]6Cl2 octahedron. (e) Proposed kinetic-to-dynamic growth mechanism for the unique open octahedron. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One special property of DES is that the DES system has a high ionic strength compared to regular organic solvents. This provides the possibility for nanocrystals to assemble in a very different way. We found that by directly heating a ChCl/urea solution dissolved with MnCl2 in a sealed system, a calcite-type MnCO3 phase can be obtained.72 It is interesting that in a certain temperature range, the MnCO3 particles are mesocrystals. Mesocrystals are particles with superstructures with a crystallographically ordered alignment of nanoparticles. They can diffract an electron beam in a similar way to a single crystal.109–115 As shown in Fig. 9b and c, the rhombohedral MnCO3 particle is a typical mesocrystal. We systematically studied the crystallization mechanism of the MnCO3 particles, as shown in Fig. 9a. Nucleated clusters of MnCO3 form during the decomposition of the ChCl/urea solvent upon heating. They then assemble in a non-classical crystallization mode through an oriented-attachment process. This process is strongly influenced by the charge property of the DES solvent. We suppose that when the reaction proceeds at a relatively low temperature, the ChCl/urea solvent decomposes slowly and maintains a relatively high polarity. This high polarity of the solvent might screen the dipoles inside the crystals, thus facilitating the arrangement of the primary nanoparticles. On the other hand, higher temperature leads to a kinetic controlled mode when the reaction proceeds. The rapid nucleation of nanoparticles results in the formation of randomly oriented nanoparticles. Furthermore, by using these MnCO3 mesocrystals with different structures as precursors, a widely used manganese oxides phase with a unique structure can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 9d and e, the MnCO3 mesocrystals can transform into mesoporous MnOx in a topotactic transformation process. The Mn element and the mesoporous structure are beneficial to enhancing the surface activity. We showed that the manganese oxides could be endowed with fast adsorption ability when the property structure is controllably designed. The MnOx obtained by annealing a MnCO3 precursor synthesized at 180 °C could remove 95% Congo red at room temperature in only one minute. Adsorption might be one of the most practical techniques in water treatment.116 Considering the scalable and facile preparation, this work should have a profound impact in environmental applications.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the assembly process of the MnCO3 mesocrystal. The solution is a ChCl/urea-type DES dissolved with Mn2+ and was heated in a sealed container. (b) and (c) SEM and TEM images of a rhombohedral MnCO3 mesocrystal. (d) and (e) The porous MnOx annealed from the MnCO3 precursor with different morphologies. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
3.3 Layered transition metal hydroxides and their derived materials
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are a large family of ionic lamellar compounds made up of positively charged brucite-like layers with compensating anions in the interlayer region.117–120 LDHs have the general formula of [M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2][An−]·zH2O, where M2+ and M3+ are divalent and trivalent metal cations, respectively, and An− is a non-framework species that would compensate the positive charge of the brucite layers. The unique interlayer chemistry and tunable structure make LDHs very useful in many applications (electrochemical energy storage, photochemistry, ion-exchange, catalysis, etc.).73,117–163 Many other related materials derived from LDHs also have various important applications.164,165 The DES-thermal method might open new frontiers in the synthesis of LDHs and related materials with novel properties. One special feature of DES compared to water or other organic solvents is that the DES system has negligible vapor pressure. From the chemical synthesis point of view, we are able to carry out a reaction at high temperature but ambient pressure. Our group demonstrated that in a ChCl/urea-type DES, heating would result in the accumulation of alkaline species. The injection of water would then introduce a large amount of OH− that precipitates the metal ions. Meanwhile, the rapid decrease in temperature during the water injection would decouple the nucleation and growth process, resulting in the formation of uniform LDHs in a fast way. For example, when injecting water into a hot ChCl/urea solution dissolved with Ni2+, α-Ni(OH)2 nanoflowers with a uniform size would form rapidly (Fig. 10a).69 The injection also quenched the reaction as the temperature decreased. By annealing in air, the α-Ni(OH)2 transforms into mesoporous nanoflower with a surface area of 72.9 m2 g−1, which is much higher than the NiO transformed from β-Ni(OH)2 nanosheets (17.5 m2 g−1).166 When tested as an electrode in aqueous alkaline condition, the mesoporous NiO showed a fast activation process in five cycles (Fig. 10b). We highlight that the DES-thermal protocol is facile, versatile, and environmentally friendly.
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image and corresponding SEAD patterns of the nickel hydroxide obtained by the hot-injection method from a ChCl/urea-type DES. (b) Electrochemical cycling performance of the NiO annealed from the nickel hydroxide precursor. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For nickel hydroxide, it has been taken for granted that nickel hydroxide converts to NiO during annealing. However, we found that hexagonal close-packed (h.c.p.) Ni could form from α-Ni(OH)2 synthesized from the ChCl/urea DES system.74 The unconventional solvent property of DES has a profound influence on the interlayer chemistry of the synthesized LDHs (Fig. 11a). We proposed that the solvent effect favors the formation of a Ni–N bond between Ni2+ and intercalated OCN−. The Ni–N bond is weaker than the commonly formed Ni–O bond. The metallic Ni would form when the Ni–N bond is broken during the annealing (Fig. 11b). Other reductive species from the ChCl/urea solvent might also intercalate and lead to the reduction. The introduction of metallic Ni into the NiO matrix could improve the conductivity and reduce the phase-transition-resistance, thus showing a general improvement for various applications, including the electrocatalysis of methanol, Li-ion cells, and electrochemical energy storage in aqueous alkaline cells. To verify that the ChCl/urea solvent is necessary for the unique self-reduction process, we further studied the synthesis of Ni and Co hydroxides synthesized from an aqueous system using NCO− as the precipitate.163 The α-Ni(OH)2 did not show self-reduction even though NCO− intercalated into the interlayer region. This shows that the direct formation of Ni–N bonds in DES is based on the unique solvent effect of DES.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic emphasizing the interlayer chemistry of LDHs synthesized from the DES system. (b) Anomalous self-reduction phenomenon of nickel hydroxide synthesized from ChCl/urea DES. It can transform into hexagonal close-packed Ni when annealed in an Ar atmosphere without a reductant. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The “hot-injection” method is a very general strategy for the synthesis of layered hydroxides. Our group also studied the formation of α-Co(OH)2 with an unconventional structure from DES.70 It was found that when the reaction temperature was 210 °C, the formed α-Co(OH)2 had an interlayer spacing of 11.2 Å in its (003) plane, much larger than the commonly observed 7.9 Å for α-Co(OH)2 intercalated with CO32−. The α-Co(OH)2 with expanded layer spacing had improved charge storage performance in alkaline aqueous media. Furthermore, when annealing the hydroxide in air to produce the spinel Co3O4, the structure of the precursor was found to have a profound influence on the structure of the Co3O4. The α-Co(OH)2 nanosheets with expanded interlayer spacing could be used to produce mesoporous 2D Co3O4 (Fig. 12a and b). However, when annealing α-Co(OH)2 with a 7.9 Å interlayer spacing and underdeveloped 2D morphology, only Co3O4 particles with a collapsed structure were obtained (Fig. 12c). Compared with the collapsed Co3O4 particles, the mesoporous Co3O4 have improved performance as active materials in aqueous alkaline media and as Li+ storage hosts. Using both transient and steady state electrochemical diagnosis, we proposed that the enhanced performance is due to the buffered volumetric change.
 Fig. 12  (a) and (b) SEM images of α-Co(OH)2 synthesized from ChCl/urea and annealed Co3O4, respectively. (c) Schematic of the interlayer chemistry and expanded layer spacing of α-Co(OH)2, and showing how the structure of the precursor can influence the structure of the annealed oxides. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Traditional methods to synthesize LDH with expanded layer spacing often involve the ion-exchange method.118,152 The discovery of α-Co(OH)2 with expanded interlayer spacing synthesized from the DES system using a hot-injection method provides a more efficient alternative method. We were also able to obtain CoFe LDH, a useful material that shows electrochemical activity in several important energy related applications.71 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements were carried out and showed that the CoFe LDH obtained from the DES had a rich interlayer chemistry.71 Besides, cobalt with a tetrahedral coordination was also observed, resulting in the formation of CoFe LDH nanosheets with an interlayer spacing of 11.3 Å.71 As is well known, water has a profound influence on the physiochemical properties of the ChCl/urea system, including the coordination environment, decomposition rate, and polarity. It was demonstrated that the way water is injected is the key to the formation of phase-pure CoFe LDH with a 11.3 Å interlayer spacing. A “two-stage” water injection method was developed to control the reaction process. The instant nucleation and the change of the solvent physiochemical properties can help in the preparation of obtaining a high-quality product. The expanded interlayer spacing was found to support a general improvement in its electrochemical activity due to a possible “electrolyte buffering reservoir” effect.167 The experimental results proved that the CoFe LDH with a 11.3 Å interlayer spacing showed a generally higher activity as the active material in the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and in aqueous alkaline batteries.
The “hot-injection” method is versatile also for the synthesis of iron-based compounds. Chen and coworkers synthesized iron oxide as catalysts using a co-precipitation, oxidative, or reductive method in DESs.168,169 Our group found that Fe2O3 nanospindles assembled with nanoparticles can be directly synthesized in one step by using the “hot-injection” method.75 In this process, the ChCl/urea is reactive and no additional precipitant was needed. Besides, the DESs were able to guide the assembly process of the Fe2O3 nanospindles. The nanospindles showed single-crystal like diffraction behavior toward electrons, indicating an oriented-attachment growth process in the DES solvent.
The layered structure of LDHs can be used to prepare other important materials with unique structures. For example, spinel-type oxides are a large family of functional materials with many applications. Among various spinel oxides, cobalt iron oxides have the best adsorption performance among several MFe2O4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) ferrites in water treatment applications. However, further structural design is needed to optimize its performance. Simply sizing down adsorbents to the nano-scale cannot guarantee a large adsorption capacity and fast kinetics, which might be a result of the aggregation of isotropic nanoparticles.170 Engineering the nanomaterials into porous 2D sheets could facilitate adsorption while avoiding aggregation. However, cobalt iron oxide with a spinel crystal structure does not tend to form a 2D morphology without a template of a 2D precursor. CoFe LDH with its layered structure can serve as an ideal precursor for the synthesis of spinel cobalt iron nanosheets. Using the CoFe LDH synthesized from ChCl/urea as the precursor, mesoporous cobalt iron oxide with magnetism could be obtained.73 When the CoFe LDH was subjected to electron-radiation, the transformation from 2D sheets to mesoporous nanosheets could be directly observed (Fig. 13a). The crystallographic relationship might be the reason for the topotactic transformation process. As shown in Fig. 13c, LDHs viewed from [001] and spinel viewed along [111] both have a 3-fold symmetry. When LDHs transform into a spinel, the displacement of atoms is not obvious, but the atom density in LDH is smaller than that in the spinel. Therefore, LDHs can transform to the spinel with lattice contraction but basically reserve their morphology. This structural basis provides the possibility for the preparation of mesoporous spinel nanosheets using LDHs by simply heating. The obtained mesoporous cobalt iron oxide nanosheets show fast removal and good adsorption capacity for organic waste (305 mg g−1 in 5 min for Congo red, Fig. 13d). The materials can also adsorb toxic heavy metal ions. Furthermore, the magnetic adsorbents can be easily separated using a magnet. This method should have practical significance for environmental applications because the precursor can be prepared through a fast, simple, surfactant-free, and high-yield DES-thermal method.
 Fig. 13  (a) TEM electron-radiation experiment to simulate the transformation process of CoFe LDH to mesoporous cobalt iron oxide nanosheets. (b) HADDF-STEM mapping image of cobalt iron oxide. (c) Schematic of the crystallographic structure during the LDH-to-spinel thermal transformation process. (d) Evidence of the efficient adsorption performance of the magnetic spinel cobalt iron oxide in water treatment. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
3.4 Decomposition process of DESs
The structure of DES has been studied by several theoretical and experimental works.171–176 Though DESs show many similar properties with ionic liquids that are composed of discrete bulky ions, they have different structures and consist of eutectic mixtures consisting of a quaternary ammonium salt and a hydrogen-bond donor. The dramatic decrease in the melting point comes from the following factors: (a) increased interactions between the anion and hydrogen bond donor; (b) decrease in the lattice energies with the presence of bulky ions, and (c) entropy increase.44,51 The fundamental understanding of the thermodynamics and transport properties of DESs is relatively less studied compared to ionic liquids and molecular organic solvents.48,175 For a ChCl/urea-type DES, molecular dynamic simulations and vibrational analysis show the extensive formation of N–H⋯OC and N–H⋯Cl− hydrogen bonds. The snapshots of the MD simulation results (Fig. 14) show the groups surrounding a Cl− anion.175 The results suggest that the system packs in such a way to maximize its hydrogen bond network between the different moieties.
 Fig. 14  Molecular dynamic simulations and vibrational analysis of ChCl/urea-type DES. Two snapshots showing the clusters surrounding a chlorine anion. The colour of the atoms: white: hydrogen, cyan: carbon, blue: nitrogen, pink: chlorine, red: oxygen. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
As we introduced above, the DES-thermal method is versatile and efficient for the synthesis of various transition metal compounds with unique structures. In particular, the ChCl/urea system is reactive at high temperature. Therefore, it would be beneficial to gain an insight on how the structure of the solvent would change during heating. Consequently, our group studied the thermal decomposition process of ChCl/urea.71,72,74Fig. 15a gives the TG-DSC analysis of the ChCl/urea under an Ar atmosphere. The solvent had a gentle weight loss at 125–225 °C and a rapid weight loss at 225–300 °C. Both processes were endothermic. It is clear that this solvent decomposes under two different stages. It is rational to infer that the second decomposition process is related to choline chloride considering that it is relatively more stable than urea. Besides, for pure urea, it would start to decompose at ∼80 °C. It becomes more stable in the ChCl/urea system due to the extensive formation of hydrogen bonds in the DES system. We also measured the conductivity of the ChCl/urea solvent after thermal treatment at 150 °C for different times under sealed condition. As shown in Fig. 15b, the conductivity increased a little at the beginning and then gradually decreased as the heating time increased to ∼8 h. This indicates that at high temperature, the polarity of the solvent would decrease due to the weaker ionic strength.72
 Fig. 15  Analysis of the pyrolysis process of ChCl/urea. (a) TG-DSC curve measured under Ar at a heating rate of 1 K min−1. The dotted red line is the background DSC curve. (b) Conductivity of ChCl/urea decomposed at 150 °C in a sealed container. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Further analysis of the thermal decomposition process was performed by NMR and FTIR analysis. The ChCl/urea solvent was kept at 150 °C or 210 °C for 40 minutes, cooled and then stabilized for two weeks. Fig. 16a and b show the 1H NMR and FTIR spectra of the as-prepared and thermally-treated ChCl/urea-type DES. In the 1H NMR spectra, the pristine ChCl/urea has sharp peaks at 3.20 ppm and 6.05 ppm and a broad peak at 4.75 ppm, corresponding to hydrogen in –CH3 from ChCl, –NH2 from urea, and –OH from ChCl and water impurity.74 When thermally treated at 150 °C, the 1H NMR signal corresponding to NH4OH was observed.177 At this stage, the supramolecular structure of the DES is not destructed by the partial decomposition of urea. When further heated to 210 °C, the original signal of DES was significantly broadened with the formation of lots of disordered peaks around 2.5–4.5 ppm. This indicates the decomposition of both urea and ChCl in a complicated reaction process. The FTIR analysis (Fig. 16b) shows that during heating, the peaks within the range of 1700–1100 cm−1 corresponding to –NH2, –CH3, and –CN become weaker and broadened, implying that the thermal decomposition of DES is accompanied with the cleavage of the bonds around nitrogen atoms and the subsequent formation of other complex molecules, such as cyanate salts.
 Fig. 16  (a) and (b) 1H NMR and FTIR spectra of the as-prepared and thermally-treated ChCl/urea-type DES. The peak positions and their integrals are indicated on the top and bottom, respectively. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2015, Royal society of chemistry. 
The above experimental results provide qualitative information about the chemistry during the DES-thermal process. The temperature and heating time can be designed for controlling the decomposition degree of the ChCl/urea system. More detailed information can be gained by investigating the decomposition chemistry of pure urea and ChCl. The decomposition process of urea has been studied under different conditions. The possible products from urea decomposition reported in the literature are collected in Fig. 17.90,178–180 Generally speaking, at temperatures below 200 °C, the decomposition of urea leads to the accumulation of molecules that would easily hydrolyze if water is added. The hydrolization would then produce OH− and CO32−, which would precipitate the metal ions. Meanwhile, ChCl is a typical quaternary ammonium salts and undergoes Hoffman elimination under alkaline conditions. At temperatures higher than ∼250 °C, the reaction becomes very complicated with the possible cyclization reaction and the formation of various dimers, trimmers, and possible oligomers. From the above analysis, it is obvious that controlling the temperature, heating time, and water content would be the most efficient way to control the structure of the functional materials synthesized using the DES-thermal method. We expect that more quantitative chemical analysis of the thermal decomposition process of DES would be of great help in pushing this research field.
 Fig. 17  Possible decomposition products from urea and choline chloride during pyrolysis. This figure is qualitative because the urea decomposition process is also influenced by the atmosphere, pressure, heating rate, and other parameters. 
4. DESs as functional materials for energy and environmental applications
Due to the intrinsic property of DESs, they can perform as functional materials directly in some specific applications. Up to now, they have shown potential to be used as electrolytes and adsorbents for CO2 capture. Some other applications, such as using DESs as lubricants or chromic materials, might also offer promising research directions.19,181
Recent research has shown DESs can be used as electrolytes for electrochemical energy storage/conversion devices, including lithium-ion batteries,182 supercapacitors,183 and flow batteries.184,185 DESs have a wider electrochemical window (wider operating voltage) than aqueous electrolytes, therefore providing higher energy density. Besides, they are more suitable for large-scale applications compared with ionic liquid and organic electrolytes due to their better environmental compatibility. Meriem's group studied a N-methylacetaminde (MAc)-based DES as an electrolyte for lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors.182,183,186 The high dielectric constant, high dipolar moment, and negligible vapor pressure provide DESs with many advantages. For example, mixing lithium salts (LiTFSI, LiNO3, or LiPF6) directly with MAc at a molar ratio of 1:4 gives a DES mixture that has a wide electrochemical stability window of 4.7 to 5.3 V on Pt and demonstrates passivating behavior toward the aluminum current collector.182 The temperature dependence of the ionic conductivity and viscosity can be described using the Vogel–Tammann–Fulcher equation, indicating a strong interaction between Li+, X−, and MAc. This electrolyte has advantages for constructing lithium batteries that can work at high temperature. A test unit using LFP/DES/LTO showed good performance at 80 °C, indicating promise for the realization of safer and environmentally friendly LIBs.
LiTFSI-MAc has a good conductivity up to 10 mS cm−1 at 80 °C, making this DES system favorable for supercapacitors.183 As shown in Fig. 18, the selected DES can provide an operating voltage up to 2.6 V. Electrochemical analysis indicated that the mechanism of ions adsorption can be described by double-layer adsorption on the surface or by the insertion of desolvated ions into the ultramicropores. Compared to the organic electrolytes, DESs are the safer choices. A symmetrical AC (active carbon)/DES/AC device showed stability during continuous charge/discharge cycling. The efficiency gradually reached 99.9% after 100 cycles, indicating a possible wetting of the electrolyte/electrode interface during operation.
 Fig. 18  Three-electrode cyclic voltammograms of activated carbon in LiTFSI-MAc (xLi+ = 0.25) at scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Two reversible peaks of lithium-ion insertion (1)/(1′) and (2)/(2′) are observed beyond a cell voltage of 2.2 V. The inset illustrates the ions in the negative electrodes consisting of porous activated carbon before and after polarization. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Redox flow batteries (RFBs) are suitable for large-scale stationary energy storage. RFBs work with two heterogeneous redox reactions occurring at a positive and negative electrode, respectively. Chakrabarti's group studied a series of DESs for vanadium-based RFBs.187 The ChCl/ethylene glycol-type DES was chosen as the electrolyte for charge/discharge tests using non-aqueous all-vanadium acetylacetonate. They found that the coulombic efficiency of this system was similar to that with an acetonitrile (CH3CN) electrolyte, indicating the promise of using DESs as suitable electrolytes for future evaluation.187 Besides, researchers also found that it is possible to develop a more cost-effective system using materials with higher availability. For example, all-copper type and Fe2+/Fe3+ redox couples can work successfully using DES as electrolytes.184,185
The capture of carbon dioxide is an important yet challenging technology to alleviate global warming. Ionic liquids show the potential for CO2 separation owing to their inherent advantages and have thus been proposed as alternatives to overcome the drawbacks of conventional sorbents. This field depends on the cost and efficiency of the sorbent materials.188 Compared with ionic liquids, DESs are more economical alternatives for CO2 capture.188 However, the research work in this area is relatively scarce and undeveloped. The performance of CO2 capture is dependent on the structure and components of the DES. Considering the high designability of DESs, it is possible to develop DESs with promising adsorption capacity. Several types of DES have been studied as CO2 adsorbents, including ChCl-based DES,189–191 lactate-based DES,192,193 and phosphonium- and ammonium-based DESs.194 Sarmad and coworkers summarized that the solubility of CO2 in DES depends on the temperature, pressure, and the molar ratio of the salt/hydrogen bond donor (HBD).188 Generally, the CO2 solubility increases with increasing pressure, decreasing temperature, and decreasing water content.195 The type of salt and the molar ratio of salt/HBD highly affects the CO2 absorption capacity.188,196 However, it has been pointed out that there is a serious divergence among the data obtained from different literature sources,197 thus requiring systematic studies to determine the actual microscopic mechanism. Molecular dynamic modeling indicates that the contact of CO2 with DES would lead to the development of highly dense layers, leading to fast adsorption of CO2 in the outer region.198
As mentioned above, it is possible to optimize the structure and components of the DES for better performance. One representative work in this regard is the design of a ternary DES tasked toward CO2 capture.199 As shown in Fig. 19, researchers designed a task-specific ternary DES composed of ChCl, glycerol (Gly), and a superbase (SB). The SB served to deprotonate the alcohol groups of ChCl and Gly, producing alkoxide anions capable of reacting with CO2 reversibly to form alkylcarbonate salts. The reaction could proceed under ambient conditions. At the optimized condition, a ChCl:Gly:DBN (1,5-diazabicyclo[4.3.0]-non-5-ene) with the molar ratio of 1:2:6 could uptake 103 mg CO2 per gram of sorbent. The capture reaction could be easily reversed by the application of mild heat under an inert gas flow. Besides its high performance, the sorbent was simple to make, contained no halogen, and was stable over repeated capture/regeneration cycles.
 Fig. 19  Ternary DES comprising ChCl, glycerol, and one superbase for CO2 capture and release. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
5. Summary and outlook
DESs systems have attracted more and more interest as an emerging research field, particularly in the chemistry field. Scientists are striving to understand their fundamental structure and physiochemical properties. In this review paper, we highlight the great potential of DESs for the synthesis of functional materials that have high performance for energy and environmental applications. DESs are particularly promising for the fabrication of materials with unique structures compared to organic solvents and ionic liquids. The advantages of DESs over other solvents can be described as following: (a) their non-conventional solvent effect can direct the growth of materials; (b) the preparation of DESs is easy, scalable, and low cost; (c) they are biodegradable, renewable, and non-toxic, making them environmentally friendly; (d) they have chemical inertness with water (easy storage).44
DESs play three main roles in controlling the synthesis of functional materials. Besides being widely known as inert media or reactive reagents in wet chemistry, they are also used directly as functional materials for energy and environmental applications. We summarized recent research works focusing on several categories of functional materials, including noble metals, porous carbonaceous materials, transition metal compounds, and DESs themselves, which are synthesized or derived from DESs for potential energy and environmental applications. Unlike the traditional concept to use DES as reaction media, we emphasize that considering DESs (in particular ChCl/urea) as reactive multifunctional solvents can open up new frontiers for the synthesis of transition metal compounds. The unique structure of eutectic mixtures can be elaborately designed and controlled to guide the growth of functional materials. Based on the specific thermolysis process of the DES, a “hot-injection” strategy was developed for the rapid synthesis of uniform layered hydroxides with novel interlayer chemistries for electrochemical applications. This strategy is powerful because the nucleation process and growth process are decoupled. Besides, the annealed oxides are often mesoporous, which can make them good adsorbents for environmental applications. Furthermore, if the DES-thermal method is carried out in a sealed container, the accumulated pressure from urea decomposition can result in the formation of some unique crystals, such as open octahedral Ni[NH3]6Cl2 and mesocrystal MnCO3. The understanding of the thermolysis process of ChCl/urea systems was also given. Besides, DESs themselves show promising properties in the energy and environmental fields, such as being electrolytes for energy storage devices or CO2 adsorbents.
This review paper aims to inspire scientists in the field of materials science, energy, and the environment to see the potential of DESs. For example, the DES-thermal method may be extended for the synthesis of other important transition metal compounds as well. It is also meaningful to explore other DES systems. For example, other hydrogen bond donors can be used to form DESs for the synthesis of functional materials. On the fundamental aspect, we believe more quantitative chemical analysis would be helpful for understanding the behavior of reactive DESs at high temperature. Understanding the following aspects would provide powerful knowledge for the task-specific design of the synthesis of functional materials from DESs: (a) understanding the detailed chemistry during the thermolysis process would provide significant insight for DESs. (b) Many research results have emphasized that a small amount of water would have a great influence on the property and performance of DESs. Though there are some theoretical works trying to describe the structure of water–DES mixtures, it would be desirable to have a further understanding of the role of water in other specific conditions. (c) The production of complex molecules from DESs and the possible doping/insertion/coordination with the products deserve more efforts to be elucidated.
Last but not least, DESs also show some interesting and uncommon properties,200 such as the reversible thermochromic behavior of DESs with metal chlorides;181 the dissolution of poorly soluble compounds for bioavailability.201 Therefore, DESs themselves would be promising functional materials considering their easy availability and cost effectiveness. Obviously, DESs deserve further exploration and exploitation in countless fields. It is rational to predict that DESs will have practical industrial impact in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51271167) and the Program for Innovative Research Team in University of Ministry of Education of China (IRT13037).
References
T. Sasaki, Y. Ukyo and P. Novák, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 569–575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, B. Ding, J. Pan, J. Han, P. Nie, Y. Zhu, Q. Sheng and H. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23268–23273 CAS .
G. Xu, J. Han, B. Ding, P. Nie, J. Pan, H. Dou, H. Li and X. Zhang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1668–1674 RSC .
J. Hu, X. U. Zou, A. Stein and P. Bühlmann, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 7111–7118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, K. Korf, Y. Kambe, Z. Tu and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 498–502 CrossRef .
L. Cheng, W. Huang, Q. Gong, C. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Li and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(30), 7860–7863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, C.-A. Wang and J.-T. Ma, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 18894–18898 RSC .
K. Liu and C.-A. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 281, 399–403 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu and C.-A. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 48, 147–150 CrossRef CAS .
T. Torimoto, T. Tsuda, K. i. Okazaki and S. Kuwabata, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1196–1221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, S. C. Jung, K. G. Lee, J.-G. Kim, H. Park, T. J. Park, S. B. Lee, Y.-K. Han and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2453–2460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zheng, X. Liu, Z. Yan and L. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2008, 3, 115–122 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ma, J. Yu and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 261–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gebresilassie Eshetu, M. Armand, B. Scrosati and S. Passerini, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13342–13359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6664–6668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, G. Frisch and K. S. Ryder, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg. Chem., 2008, 104, 21–45 RSC .
A. P. Abbott, G. Frisch and K. S. Ryder, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2013, 43, 335–358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dai, Y. Ju, H. Gao, J. Lin, S. Pennycook and C. Barnes, Chem. Commun., 2000, 243–244 RSC .
C. Ye, W. Liu, Y. Chen and L. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2244–2245 RSC .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071–2084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Greaves and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1096–1120 RSC .
J. Le Bideau, L. Viau and A. Vioux, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 907–925 RSC .
M. Petkovic, K. R. Seddon, L. P. N. Rebelo and C. S. Pereira, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1383–1403 RSC .
A. Vu, X. Li, J. Phillips, A. Han, W. H. Smyrl, P. Bühlmann and A. Stein, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4137–4148 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies and R. K. Rasheed, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 3769–3774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Biswas and C. e. N. e. R. Rao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 6123–6129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, J. Lian, J. Ma, T. Kim and W. Zheng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 4449–4455 CAS .
H. Li, X. Duan, J. Ma and W. Zheng, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2012, 47, 25–30 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, X. Duan, J. Lian and W. Zheng, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 2550–2559 RSC .
P. Domínguez de María and Z. Maugeri, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2011, 15, 220–225 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lloyd, T. Vainikka, M. Ronkainen and K. Kontturi, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 109, 843–851 CrossRef CAS .
M.-J. Deng, J.-K. Chang, C.-C. Wang, K.-W. Chen, C.-M. Lin, M.-T. Tang, J.-M. Chen and K.-T. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3942–3946 CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, N. Tachikawa, M. Forsyth, J. M. Pringle, P. C. Howlett, G. D. Elliott, J. H. Davis, M. Watanabe, P. Simon and C. A. Angell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 232–250 CAS .
K. Haerens, E. Matthijs, K. Binnemans and B. Van der Bruggen, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 1357–1365 RSC .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed and P. Shikotra, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6497–6499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ren, Y. Hou, W. Wu and W. Liu, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2010, 55, 5074–5077 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, J. van Spronsen, G.-J. Witkamp, R. Verpoorte and Y. H. Choi, J. Nat. Prod., 2013, 76, 2162–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, R. C. Harris and K. S. Ryder, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 4910–4913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Maginn, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 373101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mourad, L. Coustan, P. Lannelongue, D. Zigah, A. Mehdi, A. Vioux, S. A. Freunberger, F. Favier and O. Fontaine, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 446–453 CrossRef PubMed .
E. R. Cooper, C. D. Andrews, P. S. Wheatley, P. B. Webb, P. Wormald and R. E. Morris, Nature, 2004, 430, 1012–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Rogers and K. R. Seddon, Science, 2003, 302, 792–793 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Pena-Pereira and J. Namieśnik, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1784–1800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, K. D. O. Vigier, S. Royer and F. Jérôme, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7108–7146 RSC .
D. V. Wagle, H. Zhao and G. A. Baker, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2299–2308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao and G. A. Baker, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2013, 88, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .
D. Carriazo, M. C. Serrano, M. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4996–5014 RSC .
C. Ruß and B. König, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2969–2982 RSC .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, H. L. Munro, R. K. Rasheed and V. Tambyrajah, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2010–2011 RSC .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed and V. Tambyrajah, Chem. Commun., 2003, 70–71 RSC .
A. P. Abbott, D. Boothby, G. Capper, D. L. Davies and R. K. Rasheed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9142–9147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Parnham, E. A. Drylie, P. S. Wheatley, A. M. Slawin and R. E. Morris, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 5084–5088 CrossRef .
C. Gu, H. Zhang, X. Wang and J. Tu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11807–11815 RSC .
C. D'Agostino, R. C. Harris, A. P. Abbott, L. F. Gladden and M. D. Mantle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21383–21391 RSC .
C. Florindo, F. S. Oliveira, L. P. N. Rebelo, A. M. Fernandes and I. M. Marrucho, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 2416–2425 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karimi and M. J. Eshraghi, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 696, 171–176 CrossRef CAS .
R. Boston, P. Y. Foeller, D. C. Sinclair and I. M. Reaney, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 542–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, A. Ballantyne, R. C. Harris, J. A. Juma and K. S. Ryder, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 718–726 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Abbott, R. C. Harris, G. Frisch, J. Hartley, F. Holyoak and G. R. Jenkin, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2172–2179 RSC .
E. L. Smith, A. P. Abbott and K. S. Ryder, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(21), 11060–11082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. You, C. Gu, X. Wang and J. Tu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 206, 3632–3638 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu and J. Tu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10132–10140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Gu, Y. H. You, Y. L. Yu, S. X. Qu and J. P. Tu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2011, 205, 4928–4933 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, C. Gu, X. Wang and J. Tu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, D642–D648 CrossRef CAS .
A. Renjith and V. Lakshminarayanan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3019–3028 CAS .
A. Li, Y. Chen, K. Zhuo, C. Wang, C. Wang and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 8786–8790 RSC .
G. Xu, H. Dou, X. Geng, J. Han, L. Chen and H. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 308, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, J. Yuan, X. Tao, B. Ding, H. Dou, X. Yan, Y. Xiao and X. Zhang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3066–3074 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge, C. D. Gu, Y. Lu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13454–13461 CAS .
X. Ge, C. D. Gu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 911–923 CAS .
X. Ge, C. D. Gu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17066–17076 CAS .
X. Ge, C. D. Gu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 438, 149–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ge, C. D. Gu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 454, 134–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ge, C. D. Gu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1004–1007 RSC .
Q. Q. Xiong, J. P. Tu, X. Ge, X. L. Wang and C. D. Gu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430–6437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Liao, Y. X. Jiang, Z. Y. Zhou, S. P. Chen and S. G. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 9240–9243 CrossRef .
R.-X. Wang, Y.-J. Fan, Z.-R. Liang, J.-M. Zhang, Z.-Y. Zhou and S.-G. Sun, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 60400–60406 RSC .
L. Wei, Y.-J. Fan, H.-H. Wang, N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou and S.-G. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 76, 468–474 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, Z.-Y. Zhou, S.-P. Chen, C.-D. Xu, D. Su, M. E. Schuster and S.-G. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11152–11154 RSC .
L. Wei, Y.-J. Fan, N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, X.-Q. Zhao, B.-W. Mao and S.-G. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 116, 2040–2044 Search PubMed .
J. A. Hammons, T. Muselle, J. Ustarroz, M. Tzedaki, M. Raes, A. Hubin and H. Terryn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14381–14389 CAS .
M. Chirea, A. Freitas, B. S. Vasile, C. Ghitulica, C. M. Pereira and F. Silva, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3906–3913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. He, N. Zhao, C. Shi, E. Liu and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5422–5431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. He, N. Zhao, C. Shi, X. Du, J. Li, H. Li and Q. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1128–1132 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, Q.-b. Yan, A. Kushima, X. Zhang, J. Pan and J. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 568–574 CrossRef CAS .
M. a. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer, C. R. Mateo and F. del Monte, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5509–5515 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Carriazo, M. a. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6146–6152 CrossRef CAS .
M. a. C. Gutiérrez, F. Rubio and F. del Monte, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2711–2719 CrossRef .
A. Querejeta-Fernández, M. Parras, A. Varela, F. del Monte, M. García-Hernández and J. M. González-Calbet, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6529–6541 CrossRef .
M. C. Gutiérrez, D. Carriazo, A. Tamayo, R. Jiménez, F. Picó, J. M. Rojo, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10533–10537 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Carriazo, M. C. Gutiérrez, R. Jiménez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2013, 30, 316–320 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lopez-Salas, E. Oliveira Jardim, A. Silvestre-Albero, M. C. Gutierrez, M. L. Ferrer, F. Rodriguez-Reinoso, J. Silvestre-Albero and F. del Monte, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 12220–12228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. López-Salas, M. C. Gutiérrez, C. O. Ania, M. A. Muñoz-Márquez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 478–488 Search PubMed .
M. K. AlOmar, M. A. Alsaadi, T. M. Jassam, S. Akib and M. Ali Hashim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 497, 413–421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Dong, Y.-J. Hsu, D. S.-H. Wong and S.-Y. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8867–8872 CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Lu, C.-D. Gu, X.-L. Wang and J.-P. Tu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7942–7950 RSC .
H. Zheng, C.-D. Gu, X.-L. Wang and J.-P. Tu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 1–9 Search PubMed .
C. Gu and T.-Y. Zhang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12010–12016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1153–1175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takimoto and Z. Hou, Nature, 2006, 443, 400–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Z. Sørensen, J. S. Hummelshøj, A. Klerke, J. B. Reves, T. Vegge, J. K. Nørskov and C. H. Christensen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8660–8668 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Klerke, C. H. Christensen, J. K. Nørskov and T. Vegge, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2304–2310 RSC .
C. H. Christensen, T. Johannessen, R. Z. Sørensen and J. K. Nørskov, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 140–144 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Doonan, D. J. Tranchemontagne, T. G. Glover, J. R. Hunt and O. M. Yaghi, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 235–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2108–2117 CrossRef CAS .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Ellis and L. F. Nazar, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16, 168–177 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e100 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, C. Lu, Y. Qin, C. Liang, M. Zhao, S. Yang, Z. Sun and X. Song, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, W. Liu, J. Cai, S. Chen, X. Zhao, H. Zhou and L. Qi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 933–940 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Q. Song and H. Cölfen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1301–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Niederberger and H. Cölfen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3271–3287 RSC .
T. Wang, H. Cölfen and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3246–3247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cölfen and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5576–5591 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Ali, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5073–5091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and D. O'Hare, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4124–4155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aisawa, Y. Ohnuma, K. Hirose, S. Takahashi, H. Hirahara and E. Narita, Appl. Clay Sci., 2005, 28, 137–145 CrossRef CAS .
N. Iyi, H. Yamada and T. Sasaki, Appl. Clay Sci., 2011, 54, 132–137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Zhou, T. Zhang, M. He, Y. Wang, X. Yang and Y. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 263, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, L. Hu, M. Chen, Y. Yan and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 24, 934–942 CrossRef .
P. Vialat, C. Mousty, C. Taviot-Gueho, G. Renaudin, H. Martinez, J.-C. Dupin, E. Elkaim and F. Leroux, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4831–4842 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 675–694 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gardner, K. M. Huntoon and T. J. Pinnavaia, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1263–1266 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, H.-S. Wang, H.-F. Wang, Q. Zhang, G.-L. Tian, J.-Q. Nie and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4516–4522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Tian, S. Liu, L. Wang, X. Qin, W. Lu, G. Chang, Y. Luo, A. M. Asiri and A. O. Al-Youbi, Analyst, 2012, 137, 1325–1328 RSC .
R. Ma, K. Takada, K. Fukuda, N. Iyi, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 86–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2006, 485–496 RSC .
Z. Gu, J. Atherton and Z. P. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 51, 3024–3036 RSC .
N. Iyi, T. Matsumoto, Y. Kaneko and K. Kitamura, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33, 1122–1123 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hibino, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5482–5488 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kobayashi, X. Ke, H. Hata, P. Schiffer and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, R. Ma, N. Iyi, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 371–378 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sim, C. Jo, T. Yu, E. Lim, S. Yoon, J. H. Lee, J. Yoo, J. Lee and B. Lim, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 14880–14884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Rives and M. a. Angeles Ulibarri, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1999, 181, 61–120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, S. Gai, F. He, N. Niu, P. Gao, Y. Chen and P. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 11667–11675 RSC .
J. Fang, M. Li, Q. Li, W. Zhang, Q. Shou, F. Liu, X. Zhang and J. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 85, 248–255 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-A. Hu, Y.-L. Xie, Y.-X. Wang, H.-Y. Wu, Y.-Y. Yang and Z.-Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2737–2741 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, S. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Yu, J. Wen and R. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Cheng, J. Fang, Y. Yang, F. Liu and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 134, 309–318 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wimalasiri, R. Fan, X. S. Zhao and L. Zou, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 134, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, W. Zhou, J. Feng, H. Wang, Y. Liang, Z. Fan and J. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2025–2032 CAS .
A. Clearfield, M. Kieke, J. Kwan, J. Colon and R.-C. Wang, J. Inclusion Phenom. Mol. Recognit. Chem., 1991, 11, 361–378 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Z. Liu, L. Li, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3809–3813 RSC .
V. Rives and S. Kannan, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 489–495 RSC .
S. J. Kim, Y. Lee, D. K. Lee, J. W. Lee and J. K. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4136–4139 CAS .
G. Abellán, J. A. Carrasco, E. Coronado, J. Romero and M. Varela, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3723–3731 RSC .
G. Hu and D. O'Hare, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17808–17813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, R. Ma, M. Osada, N. Iyi, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4872–4880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, J. Liang, X. Liu and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19915–19921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, J. Liang, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 613–620 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ma, Z. Liu, K. Takada, N. Iyi, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5257–5263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, R. Ma, Y. Ebina, N. Iyi, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 861–867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Li and X. Duan, in Layered double hydroxides, Springer,  2006, pp. 193–223 Search PubMed .
A. Forticaux, L. Dang, H. Liang and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3403–3409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, J. E. Zhu, L. Zhang, X. Chen, H. Zhang, F. Zhang, S. Xu and D. G. Evans, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4240–4246 RSC .
C. Yu, J. Yang, C. Zhao, X. Fan, G. Wang and J. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3097–3104 RSC .
J. Yu, B. Martin, A. Clearfield, Z. Luo and L. Sun, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9448–9451 RSC .
Y. Zhang, B. Cui, C. Zhao, H. Lin and J. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7363–7369 RSC .
F. Gu, X. Cheng, S. Wang, X. Wang and P. S. Lee, Small, 2014, 2044–2050 Search PubMed .
C. Li, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Small, 2014, 10, 4469–4486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ge, C. Gu, Z. Yin, X. Wang, J. Tu and J. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Gu, X. Ge, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14228–14238 CAS .
H. Liang, L. Li, F. Meng, L. Dang, J. Zhuo, A. Forticaux, Z. Wang and S. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5702–5711 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Y. Zhang, S. Xu, X. Lei and F. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5288–5294 CAS .
M.-Y. Cheng and B.-J. Hwang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2007, 2, 28–33 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. H. Dong, Z. G. Wang, F. X. Zhang and J. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2758–2764 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, S. Xie, J. Zhang and R. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2013, 112, 177–179 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, S. Xie, X. Huang and X. Qiu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 322, 152–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Li, Y. Wang, L. Zhao and Q. Jiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 181, 72–79 CrossRef .
D. V. Wagle, G. A. Baker and E. Mamontov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2924–2928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. García, M. Atilhan and S. Aparicio, J. Mol. Liq., 2015, 211, 506–514 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, Y. Jia, Y. Jing, H. Wang and K. Hong, J. Mol. Model., 2014, 20, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yue, Y. Jia, Y. Yao, J. Sun and Y. Jing, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 65, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Perkins, P. Painter and C. M. Colina, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 10250–10260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. Li, X. Wu and G. Li, J. Mol. Model., 2013, 19, 2433–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Querejeta-Fernández, J. C. Hernández-Garrido, H. Yang, Y. Zhou, A. Varela, M. Parras, J. J. Calvino-Gámez, J. M. González-Calbet, P. F. Green and N. A. Kotov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3800–3812 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Podsiadło, Thermochim. Acta, 1995, 256, 375–380 CrossRef .
P. M. Schaber, J. Colson, S. Higgins, D. Thielen, B. Anspach and J. Brauer, Thermochim. Acta, 2004, 424, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
L. Stradella and M. Argentero, Thermochim. Acta, 1993, 219, 315–323 CrossRef CAS .
C.-D. Gu and J.-P. Tu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1220–1227 RSC .
A. Boisset, S. Menne, J. Jacquemin, A. Balducci and M. Anouti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20054–20063 RSC .
W. Zaidi, A. Boisset, J. Jacquemin, L. Timperman and M. Anouti, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4033–4042 CAS .
D. Lloyd, T. Vainikka and K. Kontturi, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 100, 18–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Miller, J. S. Wainright and R. F. Savinell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A796–A803 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boisset, J. Jacquemin and M. Anouti, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 102, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bahadori, M. Hashim, N. Manan, F. Mjalli, I. AlNashef, N. Brandon and M. Chakrabarti, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A632–A638 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarmad, J.-P. Mikkola and X. Ji, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10(2), 324–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Leron, A. Caparanga and M.-H. Li, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2013, 44, 879–885 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Leron and M.-H. Li, Thermochim. Acta, 2013, 551, 14–19 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Leron and M.-H. Li, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2013, 57, 131–136 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Zubeir, M. H. M. Lacroix and M. C. Kroon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 14429–14441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Francisco, A. van den Bruinhorst and M. C. Kroon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3074–3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ali, M. K. Hadj-Kali, S. Mulyono, I. Alnashef, A. Fakeeha, F. Mjalli and A. Hayyan, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2014, 92, 1898–1906 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, H. Dong, S. Zhang, X. Lu and X. Ji, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2014, 59, 3344–3352 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Trivedi, J. H. Lee, H. J. Lee, Y. K. Jeong and J. W. Choi, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2834–2842 RSC .
G. García, S. Aparicio, R. Ullah and M. Atilhan, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 2616–2644 CrossRef .
G. Garcia, M. Atilhan and S. Aparicio, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 21413–21425 CAS .
L. L. Sze, S. Pandey, S. Ravula, S. Pandey, H. Zhao, G. A. Baker and S. N. Baker, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 2117–2123 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang and K. H. Row, Monatsh. Chem. Chem. Mon., 2013, 144, 1427–1454 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Morrison, C. C. Sun and S. Neervannan, Int. J. Pharm., 2009, 378, 136–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Xiang Ge	Xiang Ge (research ID: N-6879-2015) has been a Ph.D. candidate under the supervision of Dr Changdong Gu since 2012 in the School of Materials Science & Engineering in Zhejiang University (ZJU), China. In 2015, financed by a scholarship from China Scholarship Council (CSC), he went to Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) as a visiting student supervised by Dr Ju Li. His research interests include the synthesis of redoxable layered materials and their derivatives used in energy and environment related applications, including batteries, supercapacitors, electrocatalysis, and adsorption.
Changdong Gu	Dr Changdong Gu (researcher ID: B-3299-2008) received his Ph.D. degree in Material Science from Jilin University in 2007 supervised by Prof. J. S. Lian. He worked at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), from 2007 to 2009 as a research associate in Prof. T. Y. Zhang's group. Then he joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, as an associate professor. His research interests include the corrosion and protection of metals, energy storage and conversion materials, interfacial materials with special wettability, and the novel application of deep eutectic solvents in the synthesis of nanostructured materials. [homepage: http://mypage.zju.edu.cn/gcd].

 	Fig. 1  Publication analysis of research topics related to DESs. (a) and (b) The publication number each year and the percentage in each research field, respectively. The data is obtained from Web of Science, Jan. 4th, 2017.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The starting materials are solids (choline chloride and urea in this case) with high-melting points. They form a liquid at room temperature when mixed together. (b) Graph showing the melting point of the mixture, which changes with the ratio of the species. There is a ratio where the melting point of the mixture significantly decreases. Reproduced with permission.50,51 Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2003, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–f) TEM images of pentagonal gold nanoparticles grown from ChCl/urea-type DES (g) SEM images of the gold nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the chemical synthesis of gold nanowires from ChCl/EG (A) and from ChCl/urea (B) type DESs. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM comparison of RF gel and annealed carbon synthesized in water and DES. (a, c, and e) Images of the RF gel precursor synthesized in water, water–DES, and DES solvent, respectively. (b, d, and f) Images of the carbonized materials using (a), (c), and (e) RF gels as the precursor, respectively. Bars are 10 μm in (a), 5 μm in (b), (c) and (d), and 2 μm in (e) and (f). Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Ternary ChCl/urea/resorcinol DES (left) and binary ChCl/resorcinol DES, respectively. (b) and (c) are the RF gel synthesized from ChCl/urea/resorcinol and ChCl/resorcinol-type DES, respectively. (d) and (e) Images of the carbonized materials using (b) and (c), respectively. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of carbon monoliths with different structures and doping from different DES systems. The adsorption performances were also investigated. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of the Ni[NH3]6Cl2 complex growing in its early stage. (b) and (c) Ni[NH3]6Cl2 octahedrons with exfoliated facets. (d) Magnified edge of the Ni[NH3]6Cl2 octahedron. (e) Proposed kinetic-to-dynamic growth mechanism for the unique open octahedron. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the assembly process of the MnCO3 mesocrystal. The solution is a ChCl/urea-type DES dissolved with Mn2+ and was heated in a sealed container. (b) and (c) SEM and TEM images of a rhombohedral MnCO3 mesocrystal. (d) and (e) The porous MnOx annealed from the MnCO3 precursor with different morphologies. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image and corresponding SEAD patterns of the nickel hydroxide obtained by the hot-injection method from a ChCl/urea-type DES. (b) Electrochemical cycling performance of the NiO annealed from the nickel hydroxide precursor. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic emphasizing the interlayer chemistry of LDHs synthesized from the DES system. (b) Anomalous self-reduction phenomenon of nickel hydroxide synthesized from ChCl/urea DES. It can transform into hexagonal close-packed Ni when annealed in an Ar atmosphere without a reductant. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) and (b) SEM images of α-Co(OH)2 synthesized from ChCl/urea and annealed Co3O4, respectively. (c) Schematic of the interlayer chemistry and expanded layer spacing of α-Co(OH)2, and showing how the structure of the precursor can influence the structure of the annealed oxides. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) TEM electron-radiation experiment to simulate the transformation process of CoFe LDH to mesoporous cobalt iron oxide nanosheets. (b) HADDF-STEM mapping image of cobalt iron oxide. (c) Schematic of the crystallographic structure during the LDH-to-spinel thermal transformation process. (d) Evidence of the efficient adsorption performance of the magnetic spinel cobalt iron oxide in water treatment. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Molecular dynamic simulations and vibrational analysis of ChCl/urea-type DES. Two snapshots showing the clusters surrounding a chlorine anion. The colour of the atoms: white: hydrogen, cyan: carbon, blue: nitrogen, pink: chlorine, red: oxygen. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Analysis of the pyrolysis process of ChCl/urea. (a) TG-DSC curve measured under Ar at a heating rate of 1 K min−1. The dotted red line is the background DSC curve. (b) Conductivity of ChCl/urea decomposed at 150 °C in a sealed container. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) and (b) 1H NMR and FTIR spectra of the as-prepared and thermally-treated ChCl/urea-type DES. The peak positions and their integrals are indicated on the top and bottom, respectively. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2015, Royal society of chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Possible decomposition products from urea and choline chloride during pyrolysis. This figure is qualitative because the urea decomposition process is also influenced by the atmosphere, pressure, heating rate, and other parameters.	 

 	Fig. 18  Three-electrode cyclic voltammograms of activated carbon in LiTFSI-MAc (xLi+ = 0.25) at scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Two reversible peaks of lithium-ion insertion (1)/(1′) and (2)/(2′) are observed beyond a cell voltage of 2.2 V. The inset illustrates the ions in the negative electrodes consisting of porous activated carbon before and after polarization. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Ternary DES comprising ChCl, glycerol, and one superbase for CO2 capture and release. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
