Conjugated branch modulated optical characteristics of multibranched push–pull molecules composed of quinoxaline and triphenylamine groups: transition ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC02606F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02606F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 12795-12808Conjugated branch modulated optical characteristics of multibranched push–pull molecules composed of quinoxaline and triphenylamine groups: transition of the conjugated branch from unusual effects to usual effects†

        
          
            Quan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiatian 
            Liu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiujun 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ning 
            Sui
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hanzhuang 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ran 
            Lu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqi 
            Zhang
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Yinghui 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aFmtosecond Laser laboratory, Key Laboratory of Physics and Technology for Advanced Batteries, College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China. E-mail: zhangjiaqi@jlu.edu.cn; yinghui_wang@jlu.edu.cn
bCollege of Physics, Talent Program of Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China
cCollege of Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, P. R. China
dKey Laboratory of Automobile Materials, Ministry of Education, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China
Received 
      21st June 2022
    , Accepted 5th August 2022First published on 6th August 2022AbstractIn order to improve the optoelectronic performance of π-conjugated molecules with electronic donors and electronic acceptors, people often choose multi-branch molecule structures, which can enhance the charge transfer ability. In this work, the photo-physical characteristics of (E)-4-(2-(3-methylquinoxalin-2-yl)vinyl)-N,N-diphenylaniline (QTPA1) and 4,4′-((1E,1′E)-quinoxaline-2,3-diylbis(ethene-2,1-diyl))bis(N,N-diphenylaniline) (QTPA2) in monodisperse systems and aggregated states were investigated in detail, showing that the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of oligomers is apparently enhanced in high-polarity solutions and decreased in low-polarity solvents instead, after the oligomer is linked with a conjugated branch. Based on the pump–probe and pump–dump–probe, this unusual phenomenon is assigned to the polarity-dependent intramolecular charge transfer (CT) mechanism of oligomers induced by the conjugated branch. In the PL of aggregated state and the two-photon fluorescence (TPF), increasing the conjugated branch has a positive effect on the PL characteristics that the PL performance of QTPA2 is higher than that of the aggregated QTPA1. In the aggregated state, QTPA2 has a larger degree of π electron conjugation, which suppresses intramolecular vibrations and reduces the energy loss caused by non-radiative processes. In addition, the two-photon absorption section of QTPA2 keeps higher in comparison with that of QTPA1 owing to the enhancement of the intramolecular dipole intensity, leading to the enhancement of TPF. This research could elucidate the physical mechanism underlying the optoelectronic performance and help us develop novel organic optoelectronic materials with high performance.
Introduction
Over the past two decades, organic optoelectronic materials have been considered as alternatives to their inorganic counterparts for optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs),1,2 field-effect transistors,3 and solar cells,4 owing to their low cost,5 solution-processed fabrication,6 and flexible devices.7 In order to accelerate the commercial application of organic optoelectronic devices, a large number of organic conjugated materials have been synthesized recently. In most cases, the conjugated materials are composed of electron-donating (D) groups, electron-accepting (A) groups and π-conjugated groups, which display an apparently different photo-physical process from that of inorganic semiconductors.8 Generally speaking, increasing the number of π-conjugated units can enhance the molecular dipole moment of D–π–A oligomers via affecting the charge-transfer (CT) ability, which can apparently improve the photo-physical characteristics and performance of organic optoelectronic devices.9–11 For example, Choi et al. exhibited that addition of π-conjugated branches can improve the carrier mobility in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) based on new π-conjugated multi-branched molecules.12 Li et al. exhibited that addition of linear alkylthio groups can significantly improve the power conversion efficiency of 2D-conjugated bithienyl-benzodithiophene-alt-fluorobenzotriazole copolymers in polymer solar cells.13 Goodson et al. demonstrated that the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of organic molecules (PRL dye series) can be significantly improved with the increase in branches containing a donor–π–acceptor system.10 Rogers et al. found that the addition of moderately long alkyl pendants on the fluorene bridging group not only imparts additional solubility to materials, but also increases the effective two-photon cross section.11 Our previous work demonstrated that the addition of electron acceptors (such as functionalized β-diketones difluoroboron complexes) can significantly improve the photoluminescence (PL) properties such as high PL intensity and long PL lifetime of push–pull chromophores.14 Recently, we have proved that linking the tert-butyl unit to difluoroboron β-diketonate pull–push chromophores can lead to the red-shift of absorption and fluorescence peaks and accelerate the fluorescence relaxation rate.15,16 In brief, increasing the conjugated group is one of the most effective methods to improve the optoelectronic performance of organic conjugated materials at present.
Recently, two types of D–π–A-type aminostyrylquinoxaline derivatives, (E)-4-(2-(3-methylquinoxalin-2-yl)vinyl)-N,N-diphenylaniline (named QTPA1) and 4,4′-((1E,1′E)-quinoxaline-2,3-diylbis(ethene-2,1-diyl))bis(N,N-diphenylaniline) (named QTPA2), were synthesized via Knoevenagel condensation reactions,17 which exhibit wide-range emission color turn-ability in the presence of pressure or acids. In addition, increasing the conjugated branch was found to play an unusual role in the PL performance of oligomers in the low-polarity solution that the PLQY of QTPA2 with two conjugated branches is lower than that of QTPA1. However, this unusual phenomenon has not been further confirmed in other optical fields such as nonlinear optics or aggregation photoluminescence. This unusual phenomenon has been reported in previous research, in which increasing a conjugated branch also weakened the PL intensity of pyran derivatives (named DCM) in monodisperse systems.18 Apparently, the strategy of adding conjugated groups to enhance the luminescence properties of organic optoelectronic materials has some limitations. If the corresponding physical mechanism cannot be explained clearly, it will affect the design of future organic oligomers and the performance improvement of optoelectronic devices based on organic oligomers.
In this study, we employed many steady spectroscopies to probe the photo-physical characteristics of QTPA1 and QTPA2 in the monodisperse system and the aggregated system and analyze the role of conjugated branches in the linear and nonlinear optical characteristics. The results indicate that the PL intensity only decreases in the low-polarity solution after the addition of a conjugated branch in the oligomers, whose mechanism is analyzed based on the pump–probe and pump–dump–probe technique. In the two-photon fluorescence and the aggregation PL, increasing a conjugated branch is able to improve the PL characteristics, whose origin is also discussed in detail. These studies will help us further understand the optical characteristics of D–π–A oligomers.
Experimental methods
Materials
The materials were offered by Ran Lu group in Jilin University and the corresponding concentration in our experiment was about 5 × 10−4 mol L−1. The solutions were loaded in a 1 mm–thick quartz cuvette during the measurements. All measurements in monodisperse systems were performed at room temperature.17
Thin films
The glass substrates were cleaned with deionized water, toluene, acetone and ethanol in sequence. The QTPA1 and QTPA2 films were achieved by spin-coating the QTPA1 and QTPA2 stock solution at 1000 rpm for 2 min in a N2-filled glovebox for spectroscopy measurements.
Experimental section
The steady-state absorption was measured using a UV-vis absorption spectrometer (Purkinje, TU-1810PC). The PL measurements were conducted using a fiber optic spectrometer (Ocean Optics, USB4000) at an excitation wavelength of 405 nm. The PL dynamics were detected by the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC)28 technique. The temperature-dependent PL spectra were recorded using a home-built system, which involves a fiber spectrometer (Ocean Optics, Maya, 2000pro) and a temperature controller (Oxford instruments, Optistat DN-V). The correlated color temperature (CCT) values were tested by employing the white LED test, using commercially available UV-emitting LED chips with the peak emission centered at 375 nm, which were used as the excitation source for the down-conversion white LED.
Pump–probe and pump–dump–probe spectral measurements
The femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy was reported elsewhere19 and the corresponding excitation wavelength was 400 nm. The polarization direction of excitation and probe beams was horizontal.
The pump–dump/push–probe system was pumped by a re-generatively-amplified femtosecond Ti: sapphire laser centered at 800 nm at a repetition rate of 500 Hz. The amplified beam was split into three paths. In the first path, white light continuum, acting as the probe pulse, was generated by focusing an 800 nm (1.55 eV) pulse onto a 5 mm-thick quartz cuvette filled with water, and the wavelength range was from 400 nm (3.1 eV) to 780 nm (1.55 eV). In the second path, the 400 nm pump laser was generated by doubling the 800 nm (1.55 eV) pulse via a 1 mm-thick β-barium borate (BBO) crystal. The third path was used to pump an optical parametric amplifier (TOPAS-C, Light Conversion) to prepare the dump pulse centered at 490 nm and 590 nm, respectively. The excitation pulses were sent to a delay line and modulated using a synchronized optical chopper (Terahertz Technologies Inc., C-995) at a frequency of 250 Hz. The time-dependent TA spectra were recorded using a highly sensitive spectrometer (Avantes AvaSpec-2048 × 16). The polarization direction of the excitation and the probe pulse was horizontal. The excitation spot was ∼0.3 mm in diameter.
Nonlinear optical measurements
Two-photon absorption cross-section measurements were carried out by employing an open-aperture Z-scan technique with a focal length of lens of 100 mm, and a pulse energy of 250 nJ, and the laser beam was modulated using an optical chopper at a rate of 500 Hz, 800 nm. The samples were placed in a 1 mm-thick quartz cuvette for the optical measurements. The signals were measured using a photodiode and then traveled through a lock-in amplifier (SR830, DSP), which was able to obviously suppress noise outside a narrow frequency interval, before they reached the computer. Before changing the sample, the two-photon absorption transmission spectrum of pure solvent was scanned, and then the laser light intensity was turned down until there was no solvent signal. This was done to eliminate the interference of the non-linear effect of the solvent itself. Two-photon fluorescence measurements were carried out using a CCD detector (Ocean Optics, USB4000), in which the wavelength of femtosecond laser is about 800 nm.
Results and discussion
The solution-dependent normalized absorption and photoluminescence spectra of QTPA1 and QTPA2 are shown in Fig. 1(A) and (B). As the solvent changes from toluene (TOL) to dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), the polarity of solvent apparently enhances. The absorption peak of QTPA1 red shifts from 421 to 437 nm and that of QTPA2 varies from 429 to 438 nm. Apparently, the difference between the absorption peaks is gradually diminishing, reflecting that the effect of the increased conjugated branch on steady absorption apparently weakens in high-polarity solvents. Similar phenomena have also been previously reported in the literature, which were ascribed to a greater degree of exciton delocalization between the chromophores in dimers.20 In this study, the absorption edge only red-shifts a little with the solvent polarity, suggesting that the electronic cloud of QTPA1 and QTPA2 in ground states is insensitive to the solvent polarity.21–27 The PL peak of QTPA1 in TOL is located at 506 nm and that in dimethylformamide (DMF) shifts to 620 nm. In dipolar solvents, the dipole moment of the excited D–π–A molecules is stronger than that of the surrounding solvent molecules, resulting in an energy transfer process from the excited QTPA molecules to the surrounding solvent molecules via dipole–dipole interactions.17,28 Therefore, the excited state of D–π–A molecules has a stronger solvent dependence compared to the ground state. Therefore, it is not surprising to observe such a large PL red-shift in high-polarity solvents. Similar phenomena can be observed in the solution of QTPA2, in which the PL peak of QTPA2 in TOL is located at 507 nm and that in DMF shifts to 658 nm. The shift of PL peak in QTPA2 is larger than that in QTPA1, as the solvent changes from TOL to DMF. This indicates that QTPA2 is more sensitive to the solvent polarity, after the addition of a conjugated branch in the oligomer.29,30 In other words, the difference in PL peaks between QTPA1 and QTPA2 gradually enhances with the polarity of solvent, suggesting that the effect of the increase in the conjugated branch on steady PL becomes obvious in high-polarity solvents. Based on steady spectra data, the role of the increased conjugated branch gradually weakens in the ground state but enhances in the excited state, as the polarity of the solvent enhances.
 Fig. 1  Solvent-dependent normalized absorption and photoluminescence spectra of QTPA1 (A) and QTPA2 (B) in monodisperse systems (excitation wavelength (λex: 400 nm)). (C) Relationship between the PLQY and solvent polarizability of two samples. (D) and (E) Relationship between the Stokes shift and solvent polarizability of two samples, respectively. 
In order to further analyze the role of conjugated branches in PL characteristics of D–π–A oligomers, we measured the photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs) of QTPA1 and QTPA2 as a function of the orientation polarizability f(ε,n) (as shown in Fig. 1(C)), which was determined by the solvent polarity.31 It was found that the PLQY of QTPA1 is apparently higher than that of QTPA2, before Δf exceeds 0.24. Under such condition, increasing the conjugated branch restricts the PLQY in the low-polarity solvent, which is opposite to the previous reports.15,16 Apparently, this is an unusual phenomenon for increasing the conjugated branch in the optical characteristics of D–π–A oligomers. As Δf exceeds 0.24, the PLQY of QTPA2 begins to exceed that of QTPA1, suggesting that the enhancement in conjugated branch can improve the photoluminescence characteristics in solvents with high polarity. The Stokes shifts (va − vf) of QTPA1 and QTPA2 as a function of Δf are given in Fig. 1(D) and (E), which are simultaneously fitted according to the Lippert–Mataga relation (as shown in Note S1, ESI†).31 The results can offer the information of the dipole moment difference of the solute between S0 and S1 states, which is beneficial for the analysis of the emission state of D–π–A oligomers. In Fig. 1(D), the evolution of Stokes shifts at different Δf can be divided into two parts and the knee point is located at 0.24, which is consistent with that in Fig. 1(C). This suggests that the photo-physical mechanism of QTPA1 in low-polarity solvents is different from that in high-polarity solvents. Moreover, the evolution of Stokes shift in QTPA2 is different from that in QTPA1, which almost linearly enhances with Δf (as shown in Fig. 1(E)), suggesting that the corresponding mechanism of QTPA2 hardly changes with the polarity of solvents. Apparently, increasing the conjugated branch can be responsible for the different tendency between QTPA1 and QTPA2.22–24,32
In order to investigate the unusual photoluminescence phenomenon occurring in the low-polarity solution as mentioned above, the photo-excitation relaxation process of QTPA1 and QTPA2 in solvents with low (TOL) and high (DMF) polarities was probed by employing the pump–probe technique. When QTPA1 is resolved in TOL (in Fig. 2(A)), the pump–probe spectra involve a positive band from 400 to 450 nm corresponding to the ground-state bleaching (GSB) signal, and a negative spectral feature from 500 to 800 nm representing the excited-state absorption (ESA) signal. It should be noted that there is a positive signal between 450 nm and 500 nm, and it decays rapidly for the initial 2 ps and then becomes a negative signal, suggesting that the valley should be related to the stimulated emission (SE) signal that originated from the local excitation (LE),33 reflecting that a LE state appears in the photoexcitation relaxation of excited QTPA1. According to the spectral feature at about 1 ps, the LE state undergoes a rapid vibrational relaxation and forms the LE′ state. After that, the excited QTPA1 relaxes from the LE state to the hybridization between the LE state and the CT state (HLCT),25,34,35 owing to the variance in the GSB signal in the initial 6 ps. With a long delay (as shown in Fig. 2(B)), the TA features all monotonous decays, corresponding to the relaxation characteristics of HLCT.36,37 Herein, the position of ESA peak located at 650 nm is almost invariable with the delay time, implying that the solvent–solute interaction is too weak to be considered.38,39 Herein, the LE state occupies the dominant position of the HLCT, in which the HLCT state can be responsible for the PL of QTPA1.40–42 The relaxation mechanism of excited QTPA1 in toluene is given in Fig. 2(C). There is a three-state system, involving the ground state, LE state and CT state in the relaxation process of excited QTPA1. After photoexcitation, the excited QTPA1 begins to relax from the LE state to the LE′ state via rapid vibrational relaxation, followed by a decay to ground state via passing the HLCT that is composed of LE and CT states.
 Fig. 2  (A) and (B) Transient absorption spectrum of QTPA1 in TOL and (C) the corresponding relaxation mechanism. 
As the polarity of solvent enhances, the solute–solvent interaction becomes strong, which can affect the relaxation mechanism of D–π–A oligomers.25,34 As shown in Fig. 3(A), the TA spectra at 0.2 ps are composed of three components. Via comparing the steady absorption and PL spectra in Fig. 1(A), it can confirm that the GSB signal is located at 400 to 450 nm and the ESA signal covers from 450 to 800 nm, in which a small positive signal exists at 575 nm, corresponding to the SE signal. This situation is closely related to the LE state. After photoexcitation, the SE signal shows a rapid large-scale shift in the frequency region within the initial 2 ps, reflecting the conversion from the LE state to the HLCT state. Then, the SE signal keeps shifting in the frequency region from 2 to 67 ps, corresponding to the energy transfer from the HLCT state to the HLCT′ state, which is related to the interaction between excited QTPA1 and the high-polarity solvent molecules.43 Under such condition, the vibration relaxation process in the LE state disappeared in the DMF. As shown in Fig. 3(B), the TA signal decays with time, but the variance is much little, reflecting that the lifetime of the HLCT′ state is relatively long. As illustrated in Fig. 3(C), the situation of QTPA1 in high-polarity solutions is changed. The LE state and CT state can hybridize to form HLCT, and then the solute–solvent interaction can facilitate the excited QTPA1 to form the HLCT′ state in high-polarity solvents, in which the excited QTPA1 will relax to the ground state from HLCT′.44
 Fig. 3  (A) and (B) Transient absorption spectra of QTPA1 in DMF and (C) the corresponding relaxation mechanism. 
If another conjugated branch is linked into QTPA1, the relaxation process of QTPA2 may become simpler. As shown in Fig. 4(A) and (B), the GSB signal (located at 400 to 462 nm), the SE signal (located at 462 to 515 nm) and the ESA signal (located at 515 to 800 nm) in the TA spectra of QTPA2 all increase simultaneously within the initial 6 ps and then decay with time. Herein, the spectral signature from the LE state to the HLCT state that appeared in the TA spectrum of QTPA1 disappears. This phenomenon should be attributed to the tougher competition and transform between the LE and CT states in QTPA2. A stronger CT state that appears in QTPA2 not only suppresses the formation of the LE state but also makes it easier for the CT state to have dipole–dipole interactions with the solvent and form CT′ state.45 The related physical process is shown in Fig. 4(C). The CT state is dominant in the relaxation of excited QTPA2. After photoexcitation, the CT state interacts with the solvent molecule to form the CT′ state, and then relaxes back to the ground state, which is accompanied by the PL process of QTPA2. The TA spectra of QTPA2 in DMF are shown in Fig. 5(A) and (B), in which its GSB signal is before 470 nm and the ESA signal is between 470 nm and 660 nm. The small spectral feature from 650 to 800 nm should be assigned to the SE signal. Apparently, the relaxation rate of GSB and ESA signals is slower in comparison with that of GSB and ESA in toluene, causing a reduced rate of radiation decay.46 The main reason is that with the increase in polarity, the charge separation distance increases, and the CT state wave function likely overlaps poorly with the ground state in DMF.9 As shown in Fig. 5(C), the relaxation mechanism of QTPA2 in DMF is similar to that in TOL, in which the CT state is dominant in the relaxation process. Considering the polarity of DMF is stronger than that of TOL, a strong dipole–dipole interaction will occur with the CT state and form the CT′ state together with DMF molecules.10
 Fig. 4  (A) and (B) Transient absorption spectra of QTPA2 in TOL and (C) the corresponding relaxation mechanism. 
 Fig. 5  (A) and (B) Transient absorption spectra of QTPA2 in DMF (C) the corresponding relaxation mechanism. 
The transient absorption data shows that the PL signal of QTPA1 in toluene is determined by the LE state of the HLCT state and that in DMF is dependent on the CT state of the HLCT′ state. Apparently, the polarity of the solvent causes the variance in the photoexcitation mechanism of excited QTPA1. If a new conjugated branch is linked into QTPA1, the new photoexcitation mechanism is different from that of QTPA1, in which the CT′ state determined the emission process of excited QTPA2, no matter the solvent owns low polarity or high polarity. Moreover, the relaxation mechanism of QTPA2 almost remains unaltered with the polarity of the solvent. Considering that the LE state can reduce the energy loss related to the non-radiative channels compared to the CT state, QTPA1 owns a more efficient fluorescence yield in comparison with that of QTPA2.44 In the high-polarity solution, the emission state of QTPA1 was determined by the HLCT′ state, which is controlled by the CT state, and that of QTPA2 is also CT’ state. Therefore, the CT state plays a distinctive role in the emission process of QTPA1 and QTPA2, whose relaxation rate may determine the PL intensity of QTPA1 and QTPA2 in DMF.
In order to quantitatively analyze the above-mentioned results, global fitting was performed, which can characterize the lifetime and spectral information of transient species appearing in the relaxation process of excited samples.47,48 As shown in Fig. 6(A) and (B), three components have been extracted after the global fitting. In TOL, the first component with a lifetime of 1.7 ps corresponds to the vibration relaxation process from the vibration excited state of LE state to the vibrational ground state of LE state (corresponding to the LE′ state). The second component with a lifetime of 14 ps corresponds to the equilibrium process between the LE and CT states in the HLCT state. In addition, the third component corresponds to the decay process from the HLCT state to the ground state, whose lifetime is 1.26 ns. In DMF, the first component with a lifetime of 1 ps corresponds to the equilibrium process between the LE and CT states in the HLCT state. The second component of about 8.6 ps corresponds to the solvation process from the HLCT state to the HLCT′ state. In addition, the third component corresponds to the decay process from the HLCT′ state to the ground state.49,50 Apparently, the enhancement of solvent polarity changes the relaxation mechanism of QTPA1, which can be responsible for its variance in Stokes shift as a function of Δf (in Fig. 1(D)). Fig. 6(E) and (F) show the population proportion of each component of QTPA1 in TOL and DMF, respectively. As mentioned above, the emission of QTPA1 is HLCT state in toluene and HLCT′ state in DMF and the variance of their relaxation rates can be responsible for the decrease in PLQY with the solvent polarity, as shown in Fig. 1(C).51
 Fig. 6  Global fitting results of QTPA1 in TOL (A), DMF (B) and QTPA2 under the same pump fluence in TOL (C) and DMF (D). Population changes over time of QTPA1 in TOL (E) and DMF (F), and QTPA2 in TOL (G) and DMF (H). 
As for QTPA2, two transient components have been extracted in Fig. 6(C) and (D). In both solvents, the first component with a lifetime of about 1–2 ps is assigned to the relaxation process from the initial CT state to the CT′ state, which is affected by the interaction with solvent molecules. The second component with a lifetime exceeding 1 ns corresponds to the relaxation process from the CT′ state to the ground state. Fig. 6(G) and (H) show the population proportion of each component of QTPA2 in TOL and DMF, respectively. As the polarity of the solvent enhances, the relaxation process from CT to CT′ state is shortened, reflecting that the interaction between solute and solvent molecules can rapidly reach equilibrium, since the polarity of DMF is higher than that of toluene. Therefore, the relaxation process of the CT′ state that interacts with the solvent possesses a long lifetime owing to the solvent cage effect.52 It should be noted that the emission state of QTPA2 is CT′ state, as the solvent changes from toluene and DMF. Under such condition, the relaxation of CT′ state in toluene is rapider than that in DMF; therefore, the PLQY of QTPA2 in toluene is higher than that in DMF, as illustrated in Fig. 1(C). From the results of transient absorption and global fitting, it can be observed that the chromophore transform from the LE state to the CT state as the solvent polarity increases.53 For the emission of the LE state, the non-radiative process with the CT state causes additional energy loss, which reduces the PLQY. Moreover, the relaxation rate of the HLCT state in QTPA1 is higher than that of the CT′ state in QTPA2, as they are in the low-polarity solvent (TOL). Therefore, increasing the conjugated branch causes the unusual PL characteristics under low dipole conditions. In the high-polarity solution, the relaxation rate of the CT′ state in QTPA2 is rapider than that of HLCT′ state in QTPA1; therefore, the PLQY of QTPA2 is higher than that of QTPA1 in a high-polarity solution, as exhibited in Fig. 1(C).
The unusual effects induced by increasing the conjugated branch is close to the relaxation rate of emission state, which is dependent on the intermediate state related to the CT state in oligomers. In order to further analyze the characteristics of intermediate state, the pump–dump–probe (PDP) spectroscopy was employed.54,55 The wavelength of the dump pulse was 490 nm (in TOL) and 590 nm (in DMF), which overlapped with the PL of QTPA1 and QTPA2 in TOL. All kinetic curves were tested under the same conditions. As for QTPA1 in TOL (shown in Fig. 7(A)), the pump–dump–probe kinetic curve overlaps the normal pump–probe curve in the first 15 ps. When the excited QTPA1 was perturbed by the dump pulse, the amplitude of TA signal was attenuated immediately and followed by a slight recovery process. After this, the dump kinetics decays at the same decay rate as the unperturbed kinetics. The drastic reduction in the ESA signal after 15 ps results from the population loss of the HLCT state.56,57 A large number of transient species can only stay in the LE state, after the excited QTPA1 is dumped. Then, a ultrafast recovery process appears in the TA curves, suggesting that some new transient species relax to the HLCT state from the LE′ state.37 By taking the difference between the pump–probe curve and the pump–dump–probe curve, the −ΔΔT/T curve can be obtained. Based on the exponential fitting, the recovery time of 13 ps was obtained for the HLCT state, which is close to the formation time of the HLCT state obtained by the global fitting. This further confirms that the results of global fitting are effective. If the polarity of solvent enhances, the TA dynamics of QTPA1 decay in magnitude only after being perturbed by the dump pulse. No ultrafast recovery process occurs (as shown in Fig. 7(B)). The kinetic curves obtained by the difference between the dynamics without perturbation and the dynamics after perturbation (−ΔΔT) show monotonic decay. For cases where a large number of transient species occupy the CT state, the population reduction perturbed by the dump pulse cannot be replenished from anywhere. The kinetic decay rate after perturbation will also be close to the original rate.58,59 For QTPA2 (as shown in Fig. 7(C) and (D)), the situation is almost the same as that of QTPA1 in DMF, as shown in Fig. 7(B). After the excited QTPA2 in toluene is perturbed, there is a rapid signal amplitude decay, exhibiting that no other components except the CT state appear in the relaxation process of the excited QTPA2 in TOL and DMF. Moreover, it exhibits that the relaxation rate of ESA after dump pulse is the same as that without disturbance, confirming that the excited state of QTPA2 only belongs to the CT state. Apparently, the introduction of the conjugated branch enhances the intramolecular CT ability for QTPA2, causing the evolution from LE to CT to disappear, no matter QTPA2 is in low-polarity solutions or high-polarity solutions.
 Fig. 7  Kinetics traces of QTPA1 in TOL (A) and DMF (B) at 600 nm and those of QTPA2 in TOL (C) and DMF (D) at 550 nm in the pump–probe (black) and pump–dump–probe experiments (red). The pump wavelength is 400 nm and the dump wavelengths are 490 nm for QTPA1 and 590 nm for QTPA2, respectively. Illustration: the dynamic curve obtained by the difference between the kinetic results without the dump pulse and the dump pulse under the same light intensity, respectively. 
As mentioned above, the PLQY decreases with the conjugated branch in the low-polarity solution. In order to further analyze the role of conjugated branches in other optical performance, nonlinear optical tests were employed, in which the concentration of QTPA1 and QTPA2 in solution is fixed at 5 × 10−4 M. QTPA1 in TOL and DMF can emit photons, as shown in Fig. 8(A) and (B), after they are excited by a femtosecond laser at 800 nm. The absorption spectra of QTPA1 in TOL and DMF suggests that the PL dose not originate from single-photon excitation. The integrated PL intensity (IPLI) vs the excitation intensity is summarized in Fig. 8(C). In double logarithmic coordinates, the IPLI almost linearly enhances with the pump intensity and the corresponding slop is much close to 2, suggesting that the two-photon fluorescence (TPF) can be responsible for this PL phenomenon.16,54 Moreover, Fig. 8(C) suggests that the PL intensity gradually decreases with the polarity of the solution. Similar phenomena can be observed in the TOL and DMF solutions of QTPA2, which also exhibit apparent two-photon fluorescence (TPF) characteristics and exhibit similar tendencies. In addition, the TPF spectra of QTPA1 and QTPA2 both were observed slightly narrower and shifted in comparison with one-photon excited ones, no matter the polarity of solution is low or high. This phenomenon should be assigned to the reabsorption effect.60,61 For the nonlinear optical performance, it was found that the TPF intensity of QTPA2 is stronger than that of QTPA1 in both low-polarity and high-polarity solutions, reflecting that adding a conjugated branch can play a positive role. In other words, the unusual phenomenon disappeared in the nonlinear TPF characteristics. In order to understand the physical origin behind this phenomenon, the two-photon absorption (TPA) cross-sections of QTPA1 and QTPA2 were probed by employing the femtosecond Z-scan technique.54,55,62 As shown in Fig. 8(D), the Z-scan data can be plotted as an intensity-dependent transmission curve.63 The transmittance decreases as the sample gets closer to the laser focus (z = 0), which is attributed to the nonlinear absorption process. It should be noted that the transmittance of QTPA1 at z = 0 gradually decreases with the polarity of the solvent. Two-photon absorption transmission curves of QTPA2 also follow the same tendency. The nonlinear absorption coefficient (β) and the TPA cross-section (σ) can be calculated using the same method (specific method is given in Note S2, ESI†). The obtained β values of QTPA1 are 1.5 × 10−2 cm GW−1 in TOL and 4.2 × 10−2 cm GW−1 in DMF. The calculated values of TPA cross-section σ of QTPA1 are 1236.51 (TOL) and 3462.24 GM (DMF), respectively. The obtained β values of QTPA2 are 4.1 × 10−2 cm GW−1 in TOL and 7 × 10−2 cm GW−1 in DMF. The calculated values of TPA cross-section σ of QTPA2 are 3379.81 GM (TOL) and 5770.4 GM (DMF), respectively. It is obvious that the TPA cross-section of QTPA2 is always higher than that of QTPA1, no matter the solvent is TOL or DMF. Therefore, the TPF of QTPA2 is higher than that of QTPA1. The addition of the conjugated branch can significantly enhance the TPA cross section owing to their increased chromophore density and cooperative interaction among the chromophores.64,65 The TPA and TPF properties of QTPA2 in monodisperse systems are very sensitive to the strong dipole coupling between the solvent and the solute. The pump–probe and pump–dump–probe data exhibit that the intramolecular CT characteristics of QTPA2 are higher than those of QTPA1, in both the low-polarity solution (TOL) and the high-polarity solution (DMF). Therefore, the TPF and TPA characteristics of QTPA2 are higher than those of QTPA1.66 The oligomers with multiple branches like QTPA2 are suitable for the application of two-photon imaging.
 Fig. 8  Nonlinear optical properties of monodisperse QTPA1 and QTPA2. Two-photon fluorescence (TPF) spectra of QTPA1 in TOL (A) and DMF (B). (C) Integrated TPF intensity as a function of the pump intensity. (D) Two-photon absorption transmission curves based on the Z-scan technique of QTPA1, in which the non-linear effect of the solvent itself has been excluded. 
The role of the conjugated branch was analyzed in monodisperse systems, in which the performance of single-photon and two-photon photoluminescence was discussed, considering that the formation of D–π–A oligomers for optoelectronic applications such as LEDs,67 solar cells,4 or FETs3 occurs in the aggregated state. It should be noted that the aggregated film of QTPA1 and QTPA2 is based on the spin-coating and the solvent is TOL. Then, the photoluminescence characteristics of aggregated oligomers should be discussed, in which the role of conjugated branch can be further analyzed. Color temperatures of QTPA1 and QTPA2 films are given in Fig. 9(A), exhibiting that the Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage chromaticity (CIE) coordinates of QTPA1 and QTPA2 are (0.345, 0.596) and (0.413, 0.541), and their correlated color temperature values calculated according to the coordinates are 5520 K and 3792 K,68 respectively. Obviously, QTPA1 and QTPA2 show potential in OLED applications.68 In the aggregated state, the PL spectra apparently red-shift in comparison with that in solutions, owing to the strong intermolecular interaction69 and the increased degree of planarization of the molecular conformation.70,71 The former can change the position of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). Generally speaking, the position of HOMO may shift up and that of LUMO may shift down, which finally narrow the band gap of aggregated oligomers causing a red-shift of PL. The latter changes the structure of molecules and can further adjust the intermolecular interaction originating from the π–π interaction, which also participate in the red-shift of the PL.
 Fig. 9  (A) Color temperature of QTPA1 and QTPA2 films. (B) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of QTPA2 film in the temperature range of 77–295 K. (C) Temperature-dependent peak position of QTPA1 and QTPA2 films in the temperature range of 77–295 K. 
Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the QTPA1 film in the temperature range of 77–295 K are given in Fig. 9(B) and those of QTPA2 film are given in Fig. S2 (ESI†). When the temperature gradually decreases to 77 K, the emission intensities of QTPA1 and QTPA2 together enhance and the emission maximums show a little red-shift. The nature of the enhanced emission characteristics should be associated with a more efficient radiative electron transition in the aggregated state at low temperatures than that at room temperature. At low temperatures, non-radiative processes such as ground-state vibrational relaxation caused by thermal energy are reduced, and the radiation rate is accelerated simultaneously, which enhances the PL characteristics.72,73 Even though the unusual PL phenomenon was observed in solutions, the PLQY of aggregated QTPA2 was slightly higher than that of QTPA1 in the range of 295–77 K (as shown in Fig. 10(B)), exhibiting that increasing the conjugated branch plays a positive role in the aggregated state.74–76 According to the previous report,73 the intermolecular charge transfer apparently enhances, since the distance between the electron-donor and the electron-acceptor from different oligomers is shorter than that from the same oligomer, which originates from the π–π interaction. For such oligomers with a higher degree of conjugation, the rigidity of the molecular structure and the coplanarity increase, which leads to the enhancement of PL via restricting the vibration of chemical bonds of oligomers. This is due to the π electrons of QTPA2 that have a higher degree of conjugation than those of QTPA1; therefore, the intramolecular transitions and intersystem crossing processes in QTPA2 apparently decrease. These factors all result in less energy loss via non-radiative transitions and higher fluorescence efficiency in QTPA2.77
 Fig. 10  Temperature-dependent PL dynamics. (A) PL dynamics of the QTPA1 and QTPA2 films at different temperatures. Inset shows that PL dynamics under 77 K is fitted as a sum of two single-exponential decays r(t) and two single-exponential decays are shown as u(t1) and u(t2). (B) Average lifetime of fitting results as a function of temperature. (C) Radiative lifetime of fitting results as a function of temperature. 
In order to understand the effect of conjugated branches in the aggregate state system, the radiative and non-radiative lifetimes of QTPA1 and QTPA2 at different temperatures were analyzed. The test and calculation method of PLQY at different temperatures are given in Note S3 (ESI†). It is interesting to find that the PLQY of QTPA1 is always higher than that of QTPA2. The time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) results are shown in Fig. 10(C). Herein, we obtain their radiation lifetime (the specific method is given in the ESI†).69,78 Their radiative lifetimes all decrease with the decrease in temperature, especially for QTPA1. At room temperature, the non-radiative lifetime of QTPA1 is longer than that of QTPA2 due to the increased π electron conjugation and co-planarity of molecules in QTPA2. In this situation, adding the conjugated branch can improve the PL by reducing the intersystem spanning process of molecules and non-radiative processes such as intramolecular vibrations. As the temperature decreases, the difference in non-radiative lifetime between QTPA1 and QTPA2 gradually decreases, because non-radiative processes gradually disappear at low temperatures. Therefore, the photo-physical properties of QTPA in the monodisperse system are apparently different from those in the aggregation state system.69,79,80
Conclusions
We systemically analyzed the role of conjugated branches in monodisperse systems and aggregated states by PL behaviors. Adding a conjugated branch can decrease the PLQY of D–π–A oligomers in low-polarity solutions and improve the PL characteristics in high-polarity solutions, which induce an unusual phenomenon. The pump–probe and pump–dump–probe data show that addition of conjugated branches changes the photoluminescence mechanism, in both low- and high-polarity solutions, which originated from the variance in the intramolecular charge transfer mechanism. The addition of the conjugated branch can improve the two-photon fluorescence and the photoluminescence of the aggregated state. The former benefit from the enhancement of two-photon absorption cross section and the latter are assigned to the reduction in the intersystem spanning process of molecules and non-radiative processes. These experiments demonstrated the value of QTPA molecules in practical applications. Moreover, the final results provide help for systemically understanding the strategy of increasing the conjugated branch and further understanding their applications in molecular engineering of optoelectronic conjugated oligomers.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through the contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21573094, 11774122, 11574112, 61575079 and 61804063), National Science Fund for Young Scholars (No. 11904123), the National Key Research and Development Program (No. 2017YFA0403704), and Nature Science Foundation of Jilin Province Grant (No. 20180101279JC and 20190201208JC), Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, Jilin University (No. 202005).
References
R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. Dos Santos, J. L. BreÂdas and M. L. W. R. Salaneck, Electroluminescence in conjugated polymers, Nature, 1999, 397, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, 
            et al., Highly efficient solid-state near-infrared emitting material based on triphenylamine and diphenylfumaronitrile with an Eqe of 2.58% in nondoped organic light-emitting diode, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7521–7529 CrossRef .
Y. Zang, D. Huang, C. A. Di and D. Zhu, Device engineered organic transistors for flexible sensing applications, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4549–4555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, H. Yan, B. Yang, D. Liu, W. Li, H. Ade and J. Hou, A wide band gap polymer with a deep highest occupied molecular orbital level enables 14.2% efficiency in polymer solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7159–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, C. Yang, H. Yao, J. Zhu, Y. Wang, G. Jia, F. Gao and J. Hou, Efficient semitransparent organic solar cells with tunable color enabled by an ultralow-bandgap nonfullerene acceptor, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29 Search PubMed .
D. Di Carlo Rasi and R. A. J. Janssen, Advances in solution-processed multijunction organic solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1806499 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen and F. C. Krebs, Roll-to-roll fabrication of polymer solar cells, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 36–49 CrossRef .
T. Kumpulainen, B. Lang, A. Rosspeintner and E. Vauthey, Ultrafast elementary photochemical processes of organic molecules in liquid solution, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10826–10939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Stewart, M. J. Dalton, S. L. Long, R. Kannan, Z. Yu, T. M. Cooper, J. E. Haley and L. S. Tan, Steric hindrance inhibits excited-state relaxation and lowers the extent of intramolecular charge transfer in two-photon absorbing dyes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5587–5596 RSC .
G. Ramakrishna and T. Goodson, Excited-state deactivation of branched two-photon absorbing chromophores: A femtosecond transient absorption investigation, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 111, 993–1000 CrossRef PubMed .
J. E. Rogers, J. E. Slagle, D. G. McLean, R. L. Sutherland, B. Sankaran, R. Kannan, L.-S. Tan and P. A. Fleitz, Understanding the one-photon photophysical properties of a two-photon absorbing chromophore, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 5514–5520 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Kim, T. W. Lee, J. E. Lee, K. H. Kim, M. J. Cho, D. H. Choi, Y. D. Han, M. Y. Cho and J.-s Joo, New semiconducting multi-branched conjugated molecules bearing 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene-based thiophenyl moieties for organic field effect transistor, Macromol. Res., 2009, 2099(17), 491–498 CrossRef .
H. Bin, Z. G. Zhang, L. Gao, S. Chen, L. Zhong, L. Xue, C. Yang and Y. Li, Non-fullerene polymer solar cells based on alkylthio and fluorine substituted 2D-conjugated polymers reach 9.5% efficiency, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4657–4664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-C. Chi, M.-C. Ni, Y.-H. Wang, N. Sui, W.-Y. Wang, R. Lu, Y.-Q. Yang, W.-Y. Ji and H.-Z. Zhang, Influence of electronic acceptor on the excited state properties of push–pull chromophores, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 346, 221–224 CrossRef CAS .
X.-C. Chi, Y.-H. Wang, Y. Gao, N. Sui, L.-Q. Zhang, W.-Y. Wang, R. Lu, W.-Y. Ji, Y.-Q. Yang and H.-Z. Zhang, Acceptor number-dependent ultrafast photo-physical properties of push–pull chromophores using time-resolved methods, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 698, 127–131 CrossRef CAS .
X.-C. Chi, R. Lu, G. Yu, Y.-H. Wang, S.-H. Zhou, N. Sui, W.-Y. Wang, M.-C. Ni, Y.-Q. Yang and H.-Z. Zhang, Role of tert-butyl in the linear and nonlinear optical property of push–pull chromophores, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 351, 240–244 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, J. Sun, O. Simalou, H. Wang, J. Peng, L. Zhai, P. Xue and R. Lu, Multi-stimuli-responsive fluorescent aminostyrylquinoxalines: Synthesis, solvatochromism, mechanofluorochromism and acidochromism, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 151, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tong, Y. Dong, M. Häußler, Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, H. S. Kwok and B. Z. Tang, Molecular packing and aggregation-induced emission of 4-dicyanomethylene-2,6-distyryl-4h-pyran derivatives, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 428, 326–330 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Wang, N. Sui, Y. Wang, X. Chi, Q. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Ji, L. Zou and H. Zhang, Exciton relaxation dynamics in photo-excited Cspbi3 perovskite nanocrystals, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ramakrishna and I. Theodore Goodson, Excited-state deactivation of branched two-photon absorbing chromophores: A femtosecond transient absorption investigation, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 993–1000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kapusta, M. Wahl, A. Benda, M. Hof and J. Enderlein, Fluorescence lifetime correlation spectroscopy, J. Fluoresc., 2007, 17, 43–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Stewart, R. Kannan, T. A. Grusenmeyer, J. M. Artz, S. L. Long, Z. Yu, T. M. Cooper, J. E. Haley and L. S. Tan, Effects of Intramolecular hydrogen bonding and sterically forced non-coplanarity on organic donor/acceptor two-photon-absorbing molecules, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 19398–19407 RSC .
H. Song, K. Wang, Z. Kuang, Y. S. Zhao, Q. Guo and A. Xia, Solvent modulated excited state processes of push–pull molecule with hybridized local excitation and intramolecular charge transfer character, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 3894–3902 RSC .
G. He, L. L. Zhou, H. Song, Z. Kuang, X. Wang, Q. Guo, H. Y. Lu and A. Xia, Insights into the effect of donor ability on photophysical properties of dihydroindeno[2,1-C]fluorene-based imide derivatives, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 7514–7522 RSC .
W. Li., L. Dandan, S. Fangzhong, M. Dongge, W. Zhiming, F. Tao, X. Yuanxiang, Y. Bing and Y. Ma, A twisting donor-acceptor molecule with an intercrossed excited state for highly efficient, deep-blue electroluminescence, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2797–2803 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Niu, X. Zhu, Q. Peng, H. Y. Lu, A. Xia and C. F. Chen, Tetrahydro[5]helicene-based imide dyes with intense fluorescence in both solution and solid state, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2993–2995 RSC .
Y. J. Cho, S. K. Jeon, S.-S. Lee, E. Yu and J. Y. Lee, Donor interlocked molecular design for fluorescence-like narrow emission in deep blue thermally activated delayed fluorescent emitters, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5400–5405 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Aberg and J. E. Backvall, Investigation of a possible solvent cage effect in the reduction of 4-aminocyclohexanone by a hydroxycyclopentadienyl ruthenium Yydride, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9169–9174 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, C.-J. Wang, L.-H. Liu and Y.-B. Jiang, Reversal of the intramolecular charge transfer in P-dimethylaminobenzanilides by amido anilino substitution, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12432–12440 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, I. M. Ranasinghe and T. Goodson, Ultrafast fluorescence investigation of excitation energy transfer in different dendritic core branched structures, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9562–9563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Whitby, Y. Ben-Tal, R. MacMillan, S. Janssens, S. Raymond, D. Clarke, J. Jin, A. Kay and M. C. Simpson, Photoinitiators for two-photon polymerisation: Effect of branching and viscosity on polymerisation thresholds, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 13232–13239 RSC .
W. Zhang, J. Kong, D. Hu, M. Tao, X. Niu, S. Vdović, D. Aumiler, Y. Ma and A. Xia, Solvation-dependent excited-state dynamics of donor–acceptor molecules with hybridized local and charge transfer character, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 5574–5582 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, C. H. Kim and T. Joo, Multifaceted ultrafast intramolecular charge transfer dynamics of 4-(dimethylamino)benzonitrile (Dmabn), J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 370–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hayaki, Y. Kimura and H. Sato, 
            Ab initio study on an excited-state intramolecular proton-transfer reaction in ionic liquid, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 6759–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Glasbeek and H. Zhang, Femtosecond studies of solvation and intramolecular configurational dynamics of fluorophores in liquid solution, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 1929–1954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, S. Long, X. Wan, Y. Li, Y. Niu, Q. Guo, Q.-M. Wang and A. Xia, Ultrafast relaxation dynamics of phosphine-protected, rod-shaped Au20 Clusters: Interplay between solvation and surface trapping, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 18288–18293 RSC .
Z. Kuang, Q. Guo, X. Wang, H. Song, M. Maroncelli and A. Xia, Ultrafast ground-state intramolecular proton transfer in diethylaminohydroxyflavone resolved with pump–dump–probe spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4174–4181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, 
            et al., Employing ∼100% excitons in oleds by utilizing a fluorescent molecule with hybridized local and charge-transfer excited state, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1609–1614 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Dias, 
            et al., The role of local triplet excited states and D-a relative orientation in thermally activated delayed fluorescence: Photophysics and devices, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600080 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Gao, N. Sui, Q. Wang, L. Y. Pan, M. C. Ni, R. Lu, H. Z. Zhang, Z. H. Kang, L. Li and Y. H. Wang, Scanning ultrafast spectral dynamics of triphenylamine-modified vinylbenzothiazole derivative: Role of solvent polarity and temperature, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 7603–7609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Kong, D. H. Hu, M. Tao, X. M. Niu, S. Vdović, D. Aumiler, Y. G. Ma and A. D. Xia, Solvation-dependent excited-state dynamics of donor–acceptor molecules with hybridized local and charge transfer character, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 5574–5582 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. He, L. L. Zhou, H. W. Song, Z. R. Kuang, X. Wang, Q. J. Guo, H. Y. Lu and A. D. Xia, Insights into the effect of donor ability on photophysical properties of dihydroindeno[2,1-C]fluorene-based imide derivatives, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 7514–7522 RSC .
M. Park, D. Im, Y. H. Rhee and T. Joo, Coherent and homogeneous intramolecular charge-transfer dynamics of 1-tert-butyl-6-cyano-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline (Ntc6), a rigid analogue of Dmabn, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 5125–5134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. B. Dias, S. Pollock, G. Hedley, L.-O. Pålsson, A. Monkman, I. I. Perepichka, I. F. Perepichka, M. Tavasli and M. R. Bryce, Intramolecular charge transfer assisted by conformational changes in the excited state of fluorene-dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide co-oligomers, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19329–19339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bagchi and B. Jana, Solvation dynamics in dipolar liquids, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1936–1954 RSC .
J. Hu, H. Zhu, Y. Li, X. Wang, R. Ma, Q. Guo and A. Xia, Enhanced fluorescence of [[5′-(4-hydroxyphenyl)[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-Yl]methylene]-PRopanedinitrile (Niad-4): Solvation induced micro-viscosity enhancement, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 18750–18757 RSC .
I. H. Van Stokkum, D. S. Larsen and R. Van Grondelle, Global and target analysis of time-resolved spectra, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1657, 2004, 82–104 Search PubMed .
J. J. Snellenburg, S. P. Laptenok, R. Seger, K. M. Mullen and I. H. M. V. Stokkum, Glotaran: A java-based graphical user interface for the R package timp, J. Stat. Softw., 2012, 49, 1–22 Search PubMed .
H. Zhu, M. Li, J. Hu, X. Wang, J. Jie, Q. Guo, C. Chen and A. Xia, Ultrafast investigation of intramolecular charge transfer and solvation dynamics of tetrahydro[5]-helicene-based imide derivatives, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, 
            et al., Multifunctional benzo[4,5]thieno[3,2-B]benzofuran derivative with high mobility and luminescent properties, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 12250–12258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Ren, M. Mao and Q. H. Song, The equilibria and conversions between three excited states: The Le state and two charge transfer states, in twisted pyrene-substituted tridurylboranes, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2970–2972 RSC .
D. A. Braden, E. E. Parrack and D. R. Tyler, Solvent cage effects. I. Effect of radical mass and size on radical cage pair recombination efficiency. II. Is geminate recombination of polar radicals sensitive to solvent polarit, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 211, 279–294 CrossRef .

          J. R. Lakowicz and B. R. Masters, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Die Naturwissenschaften, 3rd edn,  1991, vol. 78, p. 456 Search PubMed .
X. Gao, N. Sui, Q. Wang, L. Pan, X. Chi, H. Zhang, R. Lu, Z. Kang and Y. Wang, Scanning the optical properties of 4-(1,1-difluoro-1h-1λ4,10λ4-benzo[4,5]thiazolo[3,2-C][1,3,2]oxazaborinin-3-Yl)-N,N-diphenylaniline in mono-disperse and aggregation systems, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 13266–13275 RSC .
X. Gao, N. Sui, Q. Wang, L. Pan, M. Ni, R. Lu, H. Zhang, Z. Kang, L. Li and Y. Wang, Scanning ultrafast spectral dynamics of triphenylamine-modified vinylbenzothiazole derivative: Role of solvent polarity and temperature, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 7603–7609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Corp, E. J. Rabe, X. Huang, J. Ehrmaier, M. E. Kaiser, A. L. Sobolewski, W. Domcke and C. W. Schlenker, Control of excited-state proton-coupled electron transfer by ultrafast pump–push–probe spectroscopy in heptazine-phenol complexes: Implications for photochemical water oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 9151–9160 CrossRef CAS .
E. Busby, E. C. Carroll, E. M. Chinn, L. L. Chang, A. J. Moule and D. S. Larsen, Excited-state self-trapping and ground-state relaxation dynamics in poly(3-hexylthiophene) resolved with broadband pump–dump–probe spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2764–2769 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Fitzpatrick, C. N. Lincoln, L. J. van Wilderen and J. J. van Thor, Pump dump probe and pump repump probe ultrafast spectroscopy resolves cross section of an early ground state intermediate and stimulated emission in the photoreactions of the Pr ground state of the cyanobacterial phytochrome Cph1, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 1077–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Busby, E. C. Carroll, E. M. Chinn, L. Chang, A. J. Moulé and D. S. Larsen, Excited-state self-trapping and ground-state relaxation dynamics in poly(3-hexylthiophene) resolved with broadband pump–dump–probe spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2764–2769 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bodapati, G. R. Dey, G. R. Ramteke, K. N. Krishnakanth, S. V. Rao, K. V. J. Jose and S. K. Das, Carbazole-based pi-conjugated 2,2′-bipyridines, a new class of organic chromophores: Photophysical, ultrafast nonlinear optical and computational studies, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 185, 18 CrossRef .
A. Y. Tolbin, V. K. Brel, B. N. Tarasevich and V. E. Pushkarev, Low-symmetry a(3)B type pentachlorocyclotriphosphazene substituted phthalocyanine with improved nonlinear optical properties: Synthesis, spectroscopic and ab initio/(Td)Dft study, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 174, 6 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, N. Sui, Z. Kang, X. Li, H.-z Zhang, J. Zhang and Y. Wang, Temperature-dependent and nonlinear optical response of double perovskite Cs2agbibr6 nanocrystals, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 119 Search PubMed .
R. Ho-Wu, S. H. Yau and T. Goodson, Linear and nonlinear optical properties of monolayer-protected gold nanocluster films, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 562–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Chung, K.-S. Kim, T.-C. Lin, G. S. He, J. Swiatkiewicz and P. N. Prasad, Cooperative enhancement of two-photon absorption in multi-branched structures, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 10741–10745 CrossRef CAS .
P. Macak, Y. Luo and H. Agren, Simulations of vibronic profles in two-photon absorption, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 330, 447–456 CrossRef CAS .
O. Varnavski, P. Bäuerle and T. Goodson III, Strong coupling in macrocyclic thiophene investigated by time-resolved two-photon excited fluorescence, Opt. Lett., 2007, 32, 3083–3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Wang, W. Y. Hou, Y. W. Hao, W. S. Jiang, H. L. Chen and Q. Q. Zhang, Novel yellow solid-state fluorescent-emitting carbon dots with high quantum yield for white light-emitting diodes, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2021, 250, 119340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Wang, W. Y. Hou, Y. W. Hao, W. S. Jiang, H. L. Chen and Q. Q. Zhang, Novel yellow solid-state fluorescent-emitting carbon dots with high quantum yield for white light-emitting diodes, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2021, 250, 119340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bednarz, V. A. Malyshev and J. Knoester, Low-temperature dynamics of weakly localized frenkel excitons in disordered linear chains, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 3827–3840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-induced emission, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5361–5388 RSC .
N. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Fan, L. Zhou, S. Trepout, J. Guo and M. H. Li, Fluorescent polymersomes with aggregation-induced emission, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4025–4035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Tessier, C. Javaux, I. Maksimovic, V. Loriette and B. Dubertret, Spectroscopy of single Cdse nanoplatelets, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6751–6758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qian, E. Xu, N. Sui, Y. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Song, Z. Kang and H. Zhang, Studying of the photoluminescence of Meh-Ppv-Au nanoparticles hybrid system, J. Mod. Opt., 2014, 62, 387–391 CrossRef .
D. Chuan, D. Li-hua, W. Yu-xia, L. Jun-fen and W. Yan-li, Spectroscopy behavior of 6-mercaptopurine, azathiopurine, and 8-azaguanine, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2003, 59, 3131–3137 CrossRef .
J. J. Lamb, G. Røkke and M. F. Hohmann-Marriott, Chlorophyll fluorescence emission spectroscopy of oxygenic organisms at 77 K, Photosynthetica, 2018, 56, 105–124 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu and P. F. Barbara, Low-temperature single-molecule spectroscopy of Meh-Ppv conjugated polymer molecules, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11321–11326 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Yang, K.-L. Liau, C.-M. Wang and C.-Y. Hwang, Substituent-dependent photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer in N-aryl-substituted trans-4-aminostilbenes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12325–12335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Makarov, S. Guo, O. Isaienko, W. Liu, I. Robel and V. I. Klimov, Spectral and dynamical properties of single excitons, biexcitons, and trions in cesium–lead–halide perovskite quantum dots, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2349–2362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Platt, M. J. Kendrick, M. Loth, J. E. Anthony and O. Ostroverkhova, Temperature dependence of exciton and charge carrier dynamics in organic thin films, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84 Search PubMed .
M. Zhou, S. Long, X. Wan, Y. Li, Y. Niu, Q. Guo, Q. M. Wang and A. Xia, Ultrafast relaxation dynamics of phosphine-protected, rod-shaped Au20 clusters: Interplay between solvation and surface trapping, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 18288–18293 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02606fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Solvent-dependent normalized absorption and photoluminescence spectra of QTPA1 (A) and QTPA2 (B) in monodisperse systems (excitation wavelength (λex: 400 nm)). (C) Relationship between the PLQY and solvent polarizability of two samples. (D) and (E) Relationship between the Stokes shift and solvent polarizability of two samples, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) and (B) Transient absorption spectrum of QTPA1 in TOL and (C) the corresponding relaxation mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) and (B) Transient absorption spectra of QTPA1 in DMF and (C) the corresponding relaxation mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) and (B) Transient absorption spectra of QTPA2 in TOL and (C) the corresponding relaxation mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) and (B) Transient absorption spectra of QTPA2 in DMF (C) the corresponding relaxation mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 6  Global fitting results of QTPA1 in TOL (A), DMF (B) and QTPA2 under the same pump fluence in TOL (C) and DMF (D). Population changes over time of QTPA1 in TOL (E) and DMF (F), and QTPA2 in TOL (G) and DMF (H).	 

 	Fig. 7  Kinetics traces of QTPA1 in TOL (A) and DMF (B) at 600 nm and those of QTPA2 in TOL (C) and DMF (D) at 550 nm in the pump–probe (black) and pump–dump–probe experiments (red). The pump wavelength is 400 nm and the dump wavelengths are 490 nm for QTPA1 and 590 nm for QTPA2, respectively. Illustration: the dynamic curve obtained by the difference between the kinetic results without the dump pulse and the dump pulse under the same light intensity, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  Nonlinear optical properties of monodisperse QTPA1 and QTPA2. Two-photon fluorescence (TPF) spectra of QTPA1 in TOL (A) and DMF (B). (C) Integrated TPF intensity as a function of the pump intensity. (D) Two-photon absorption transmission curves based on the Z-scan technique of QTPA1, in which the non-linear effect of the solvent itself has been excluded.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Color temperature of QTPA1 and QTPA2 films. (B) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of QTPA2 film in the temperature range of 77–295 K. (C) Temperature-dependent peak position of QTPA1 and QTPA2 films in the temperature range of 77–295 K.	 

 	Fig. 10  Temperature-dependent PL dynamics. (A) PL dynamics of the QTPA1 and QTPA2 films at different temperatures. Inset shows that PL dynamics under 77 K is fitted as a sum of two single-exponential decays r(t) and two single-exponential decays are shown as u(t1) and u(t2). (B) Average lifetime of fitting results as a function of temperature. (C) Radiative lifetime of fitting results as a function of temperature.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc02606f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
