Recent advances in flexible organic light-emitting diodes  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC03230C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC03230C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9116-9142Recent advances in flexible organic light-emitting diodes

        
          
            Rui-Peng 
            Xu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yan-Qing 
            Li
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jian-Xin 
            Tang
          
          
        
      
Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: yqli@suda.edu.cn
Received 
      29th July 2016
    , Accepted 4th September 2016First published on 5th September 2016AbstractThe emergence of smartphones and televisions with curved displays indicates that flexible organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) are marching steadily toward commercialization. Regardless of the significant step forward from laboratory to industry, flexible OLEDs are still facing enormous obstacles and challenges in realizing truly wearable, deformable, printable and low-cost electronic products for the future. How to develop highly flexible electrodes, optimize the device efficiency and greatly extend the operation lifetime are among the most important issues to be solved. In this regard, this review summarizes the recent achievements in flexible transparent conductive electrodes, device fabrication as well as light extraction technologies. Furthermore, the device operation stability is discussed with a focus on device degradation mechanisms and encapsulation methods. Some future prospects on new opportunities and research challenges in flexible OLEDs are also covered.
Rui-Peng Xu
Ruipeng Xu received his BS degree in physics from Soochow University in 2013. Then, he joined the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) as a graduate student under the supervision of Prof. Jian-Xin Tang. His research interests focus mainly on organic device physics and interface engineering of organic light-emitting diodes as well as photovoltaic cells.
Yan-Qing Li
Yan-Qing Li received her BSc degree in physics from Zhejiang University, MPhil degree and PhD degree in Materials Science from City University of Hong Kong. She is now a professor at the Institute of Nano Functional & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. Her main research interests lie in organic and inorganic/organic hybrid materials and devices with a focus on flexible electronics, involving the synthesis, characterization, and device integration of metal and semiconductor nanostructures and thin-films for a range of device applications including light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and smart windows.
Jian-Xin Tang
Jian-Xin Tang received his BSc degree in physics from Zhejiang University, and PhD degree in Physics and Materials Science from City University of Hong Kong. In 2008, he was appointed professor at the Institute of Nano Functional & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. His research areas/interests span device physics and surface science on organic light-emitting diodes and photovoltaic cells, including localized electronic state and charge barrier formation at organic interfaces, and novel device architectures to improve device performance with interface modification for carrier transport and light manipulation.
1. Introduction
Over the past three decades significant progress has been made in flexible electronics, of which flexible organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) open up an exciting range of possibilities for applications in lightweight, portable, wearable and even deformable displays, sensors, as well as solid-state lighting.1–8 Since the first high-efficiency bilayer small molecule OLED was demonstrated in 1987,9 scientists have long been committed to integrating OLEDs with flexible substrates due to their outstanding features, including self-luminous properties, wide viewing angle, low power consumption, compatibility with solution processing, etc. A fully flexible OLED made from a soluble conducting polymer was successfully fabricated on a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate in the early 1990s, yielding an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of about 1%,10 and then flexible OLEDs based on small molecules were developed by vacuum deposition.11 Afterwards, flexible OLED technology has progressed rapidly in both flexibility and device performance with developments in aspects of substrates, materials science, device fabrication and encapsulation. To date, flexible OLEDs have been used in a large number of state-of-the-art electronic products, indicating the success in commercialization as the most promising alternatives for next generation displays and lighting technologies in the future.
Mechanical flexibility, the most attractive feature of flexible OLEDs, is strongly dependent on the development of substrates and transparent conductive electrodes (TCEs). Unlike the conventional OLEDs fabricated on rigid glass with an indium-tin-oxide (ITO) electrode, the fabrication of flexible OLEDs requires highly flexible substrates possessing the properties such as high optical transparency, good mechanical bending capability, low surface roughness, low oxygen/moisture penetrability, and superior thermal expansion stability.12–14 To date, metal foil,15,16 thin glass,17,18 and several plastic materials [e.g., PET,19–21 polyimide (PI),22 polyethylene naphthalate (PEN),7,23 polyethersulfone (PES),24etc.] have been explored to serve as flexible substrates for flexible optoelectronic devices. It is also noteworthy that some stretchable devices have been demonstrated on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) or rubber substrates at the laboratory stage, heralding that stretchable electronic devices are around the corner.25,26 Yet, none of these materials can meet all the requirements as compared in Table 1.27 The practical development of foldable, wearable electronic devices at present is thus challenging due to the restriction of flexible substrates. Another major challenge for flexible devices is to replace the traditional ITO electrode with novel flexible TCEs that possess superior mechanical flexibility, electrical conductivity and optical transparency. Regardless of the use of carbon-based materials, metal networks, and hybrid composites, the winner in the race to replace ITO remains uncertain. Nevertheless, it is clear that the one to take the crown must be compatible with flexible substrates and accessible to large-scale manufacturing with low cost.
Table 1 Comparison of flexible substrates27




 
Pros
Cons




Metal foil
Barrier property
Flatness (needs insulator)


Thermal conductivity
Surface breakage in R2R process


Thinness
Needs top emission


Thermal durability








Thin glass
Barrier property
Breakage during


Thinness
Manufacturing


Thermal durability
Product breakage






Plastic with barrier film
Flexibility
Barrier property


Thinness
Thermal durability


Light weight






Besides exploring appropriate flexible substrates and TCEs, optimizing OLED architectures is a crucial point for the development of flexible OLEDs. The methods of device fabrication processes directly determine the performance of the terminal products for the commercial application. Generally, vacuum deposition is used to fabricate small molecule OLEDs and metal electrodes because of the ease of obtaining efficient multilayer devices. However, problems such as inefficient use of material, poor scalability, high equipment cost, and high vacuum pressure prevent the mass manufacturing of OLED-based products.28 In contrast, solution processes, e.g., spin-coating, slot-die coating, inkjet printing, screen printing, etc., were successively developed to not only simplify the fabrication process but also greatly reduce the cost.29–31 Nevertheless, solution-processed devices usually exhibit a poor optoelectronic performance, particularly for full-colour displays due to difficulties in patterning.
As for the materials used in OLEDs, two qualitative milestones have been achieved over the past years. One is the introduction of phosphorescent materials, leading to a near 100% internal quantum efficiency (IQE) by means of harvesting both singlet and triplet molecular excitation states.32,33 The other one is the invention of thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) materials, which exhibit efficient up-conversion of triplet excitons into singlet excited states and thus a high rate of fluorescence decay with both photoluminescence (PL) and internal electroluminescence (EL) quantum yields of nearly 100%.34,35 In spite of the full use of excitons inside the organic emitters, the EQE for conventional OLEDs constructed in a planar architecture on ITO substrates is as low as ∼20% since the majority of the emitted light is trapped in the glass or plastic substrates (substrate mode) and ITO/organic medium (waveguide mode) because of the refractive-index mismatch between these layers. On the other hand, it has been proved that the lifetime of an OLED will remarkably decrease in the presence of moisture, oxygen or impurities.36 The common encapsulation approach to OLEDs on rigid substrates by using glass caps is not compatible with flexible devices. Hence, the ultimate performance of flexible OLEDs lies less in the organic emitters, but rather in the use of flexible TCEs, light extraction schemes and device encapsulation techniques.
This review provides an overview of recent advances in flexible OLEDs. We first summarize the recent progress in flexible TCEs, device fabrication and light extraction methods highlighting on the issues of device efficiency and fabrication compatibility faced by each technology. By giving a brief discussion about device degradation mechanisms, several encapsulation methods are addressed to illustrate the current status of device operation stability. Finally, the conclusion and outlook are provided for the future development of flexible OLEDs and applications.
2. Flexible TCE technology
Flexible TCEs are typically thin films prepared on flexible substrates to transmit light and conduct electric current simultaneously,37 which are obviously the basis to determine the mechanical flexibility of flexible electronics. The flexibility of flexible TCEs, which is measured by uniaxial tensile strain or repeated bending,38 is the first property to be taken into account. To date, ITO has been the most widely used electrode for rigid optoelectronic devices. However, it suffers from some fatal flaws, such as the scarcity of indium on the earth with prices soaring in the near future, high mechanical brittleness and poor adhesion to plastic substrates, which make ITO electrodes unsuitable for flexible electronic devices.26,39 As a consequence, the development of alternatives to replace ITO is placed on the agenda.
In addition to the mechanical flexibility of a freestanding thin film to serve as a flexible TCE, two other parameters are critical: transmittance (T) and sheet resistance (Rsh). There is an approximate relationship between these two parameters, which can be given by the formula: (1)where λ is the wavelength, and σopt and σdc are the optical and direct current (DC) electrical conductivities of the material, respectively.37–39 To estimate the quality of a flexible TCE, λ is generally quoted at 550 nm, and a larger value of the σopt/σdc ratio corresponds to a higher T and a lower Rsh, indicating better quality of flexible TCEs. Given that flexible TCEs on substrates should at least meet the minimum industry standards, namely T ≥ 90% in the visible range and Rsh ≤ 100 Ω □−1, the σopt/σdc ratio has to be larger than 35.
To date, significant progress has been made for a breakthrough on flexible TCEs. Various methods have been proposed to fabricate flexible TCEs with attractive electrical and optical properties on various flexible substrates, including carbon-based materials [e.g., conducting polymers,40–45 graphene,46–50 single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs)51–54], metal networks (e.g., metal grids,55–60 metal nanowires19,22,61–65), and hybrid composites [e.g., dielectric/metal/dielectric (DMD),66–73 polymer–metal,74 nanowire–polymer,75,76 or other combinations21,77–84].
2.1 Carbon-based flexible TCEs

Conducting polymers. 
As early as the 1970s, Shirakawa et al. found that polyacetylene was conductive, which conceptually helped in launching the field of conducting polymers. Afterwards, a variety of polymers such as polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole, poly(N-vinylcarbazole), polythiophene, and their derivatives were developed to be in the metallic state. Although polyacetylene was not commercialized due to its instability in air and difficulty in processing, the subsequent PANI and polythiophene materials have become the most successful conducting polymers. These two materials and their copolymers can have greatly enhanced conductivities via appropriate doping methods, remarkable mechanical flexibility, solution processability, and optical transparency, which make them promising candidates for flexible TCEs.
PANI is usually doped by camphor sulfonic acid (CSA) to form a soluble complex of PANI:CSA, which can be dissolved in m-cresol and spin-cast on various flexible substrates (e.g., PET and PES) to obtain transparent films. The first flexible OLED was fabricated by using such a PANI:CSA film on PET as the anode.10 This flexible TCE had an optical transmittance greater than 70% at visible wavelengths and a surface Rsh of ∼100 Ω □−1. Then, Lee et al. demonstrated a novel self-stabilized dispersion polymerization (SSDP) method to synthesize the PANI:CSA conducting polymer with a further improved σdc of ∼600 S cm−1.85 Compared with the conventional casting method, a thickness-controlled drop-casting (TCDC) method was developed that could produce PANI:CSA electrodes with thickness-independent conductivities, optical transmittance of about 85% at 550 nm, and a Rsh of ∼90 Ω □−1.40 However, PANI is relatively difficult to process as compared to other conventional polymers, and the conductivity of PANI:CSA electrodes is relatively low due to its complex morphology.86 In addition, PANI typically has a reduced transmission across the visible spectrum with an absorption peak at 440 nm. Therefore, finding a way to solve these problems is the crux of the matter.
Among all the conducting polymers investigated previously, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulphonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is the most extensively used polythiophene-based material for flexible TCEs.87–94 Currently, PEDOT:PSS is being commercialized under the trademark Clevios. At an early stage of development, a significant current drop was observed in OLEDs with PEDOT:PSS anodes because these electrodes prepared from an aqueous dispersion involve an excess amount of PSS and poor chain alignment, leading to a conductivity as low as ∼1 S cm−1.89 This limitation is most frequently overcome by doping a second solvent such as ethylene glycol (EG), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), sorbitol and glycerol.87,89–94 As shown in Fig. 1a, it has been demonstrated that adding a co-solvent can remove excess PSS and rearrange the nano-crystal domains,43,87 resulting in a remarkable increase in the electrical conductivity as large as 2–3 orders of magnitude.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic model of structural modification in PEDOT:PSS with the addition of co-solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Highly flexible and stretchable polymer OLEDs on 1.4 mm PET foil substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) The amorphous PEDOT:PSS grains (left) are reformed into crystalline PEDOT:PSS nanofibrils (right) via a charge-separated transition mechanism (middle) induced by a concentrated H2SO4 treatment. (d) DC conductivities of PEDOT:PSS films treated with various concentrations of H2SO4 and with various drying temperature (inset of d). (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
White et al. demonstrated a kind of ultrathin, highly flexible and stretchable polymer-based OLED on 1.4 mm PET foil substrates, as shown in Fig. 1b.42 The flexible TCE was prepared by PEDOT:PSS from stock Clevios PH1000 with 5 vol% DMSO and 0.5 vol% Zonyl FS-300 fluorosurfactant (Fluka), and the devices were operable under extreme flexing conditions with radii of curvature under 10 mm.42 Meanwhile, such a flexible TCE has also been used for perovskite solar cells showing exciting efficiency and stability.95 However, it is noted that the ultrathin PET foil on the nanometre scale is quite rough, which is undesirable for device stability. To further improve the PEDOT:PSS performance, Kim et al. developed a H2SO4 post-treatment method.88 The spin-coated PEDOT:PSS films were treated with concentrated H2SO4, causing a significant structural rearrangement in the PEDOT:PSS with the removal of PSS and the formation of crystallized nanofibrils via a charge-separated transition mechanism (Fig. 1c and d) with σdc as high as 4380 S cm−1.88 Unfortunately, such a strong acid treatment is not compatible with plastic substrates. A transfer printing method was thus developed recently, which could transfer the H2SO4-treated PEDOT:PSS films onto various substrates. Fig. 2 describes the transfer process for H2SO4-treated highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films.45 The PEDOT:PSS film transferred onto a PEN substrate exhibited excellent electrical conduction (Rsh ≈ 46 Ω □−1) with a 90% transmittance at a wavelength of 550 nm. The outstanding flexibility property of PEDOT:PSS allows the preparation of flexible TCEs on large-area substrates and compatibility with solution processing.96 Yet, some critical issues remain for the widespread use of PEDOT:PSS as a flexible TCE for reliable integration with flexible electronics, including the weak cohesion, vulnerability to moisture due to its hygroscopic property,90 and its self-emission of a somewhat blue or green tinge.97
 Fig. 2  Transfer process for highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films treated with concentrated H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 


Graphene. 
Since monolayer sp2-bonded carbon atoms are exfoliated from graphite crystals, graphene shows extremely prominent physical and electrical properties. Monolayer graphene is almost transparent with a transmittance exceeding 97.7%.98,99 Among all the tested flexible TCEs, graphene exhibits the best bending capability. Particularly, graphene holds the electronic properties with a two-dimensional gas of electrons, leading to a high mobility of up to 106 cm2 V−1 s−1 and superior in-plane conductivity.100 These properties promote graphene to be a competitive candidate for practical utilization in flexible TCEs.
However, large-scale pattern growth of high-quality graphene is one of the most significant obstacles to using this material for flexible TCEs. Fig. 3 shows the relationship between the quality and price of various methods for mass production of graphene.101 Apparently, the mechanical exfoliation approach is not scalable because it can only produce small area graphene films. Instead, approaches such as liquid-phase exfoliation, thermal reduction of graphene oxide (GO) and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) were developed to realize large-area fabrication.98 Liquid-phase exfoliation is typically based on a strategy that exposes graphite to organic solvents or aqueous solutions with a surfactant, such as N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA),98 DMF,102 NMP,103 sodium cholate,104 and (NH4)2S2O8/H2SO4 system,105 and then obtaining graphene dispersions by sonication and centrifugation, as shown in Fig. 4a. These dispersions can be used to deposit flakes by spray coating, vacuum filtration or drop casting.103,106 For the thermal reduction of GO, the graphene is realized through solution processing of graphite into graphite oxide, which is then reduced back by using reducing agents or high temperature annealing after the deposition as a thin film on substrates. Mohanty et al. reported that solution-dispersed graphene can be easily obtained via a high-throughput, ultrafast hydride chemistry process (Fig. 4b).107 Meanwhile, Zhao et al. produced large-area films of reduced GO (Fig. 4c).108 Later, Parvez et al. used a vacuum filtration method in association with dry transfer to fabricate large-area and highly conductive graphene films on PET, showing great potential as flexible TCEs for organic electronics (Fig. 4d).102 However, the graphene films prepared by solution-processed methods show a relatively high Rsh (ranging from 103 to 106 Ω □−1) due to the poor interlayer junction contact resistance and structural defects formed during the vigorous exfoliation and reduction processes.109 Consequently, there is still a long way to go for solution-processed graphene in the applications of commercial electronic devices.
 Fig. 3  Relationship between the quality and price of graphene using various methods for mass production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Ultrasonication exfoliates graphite flakes in aqueous solution with sodium cholate and the photograph of a 90 μg mL−1 graphene dispersion in sodium cholate six weeks after it was prepared. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of a typical reduction process of graphite oxide (GO) with photographs of glass vials containing a dispersion of GO in methanol (left) and a stable dispersion of reduced graphite oxide (rGO) in bulk methanol (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (c) Optical images of GO and HI acid reduced GO sheets on SiO2/Si and PET substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (d) Transfer and patterning process of exfoliated graphene solution onto a PET substrate as a flexible TCE for organic electronics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Compared with solution-processed methods, CVD realizes large-scale and high-quality graphene production. Kim et al. developed a simple CVD method to grow few-layer graphene on thin nickel layers by using CH4:H2 under a flowing argon atmosphere at temperatures up to 1000 °C, which could be easily transferred onto PDMS substrates showing a very low Rsh of 280 Ω □−1 and an optical transparency of ∼80% (Fig. 5a).109 Recently, Ni has further been replaced with Cu in the CVD growth process due to the high solubility of carbon on Ni foils. Only a small amount of carbon would be dissolved in Cu when the surface was fully covered with graphene, leading to the termination of the growth process.110 This method opens up a new route to precisely fabricate high-quality graphene films. For example, Kang et al. demonstrated the growth of a large-scale monolayer graphene film synthesized by CVD on Cu foil, which could be multiply transferred onto a PET substrate with layer–layer chemical doping treatments, resulting in a graphene film with a Rsh as low as ∼43 Ω □−1 and an optical transmittance of ∼89% (Fig. 5b).111 It is impressive that Bae et al. transferred CVD-grown monolayer 30-inch graphene films to PET foil by roll-to-roll processes (Fig. 5c).46 After p-type doping with HNO3, the transferred four-layer graphene films provided a Rsh as low as ∼30 Ω □−1 with a transmittance of T ≈ 90% (Fig. 5d).46 Then, Kobayashi et al. demonstrated a 100 m-long graphene transparent conductive film transferred to PET with a Rsh as low as 150 Ω □−1.48 These achievements grant graphene great potential to be more superior than ITO and conducting polymer films as flexible TCEs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of as-grown graphene films on thin (300 nm) nickel layers and thick (1 mm) Ni foil (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Roll-to-roll transfer and layer-by-layer doping process of multiple stacked transparent flexible graphene films on PET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Roll-to-roll production of a 30-inch graphene film transferred onto a PET sheet for transparent electrodes. (d) Sheet resistance comparison of various graphene and ITO. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2010, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Note that graphene flexible TCEs offer properties competitive with those of ITO films, and have been successfully used in flexible OLEDs with excellent performance. As shown in Fig. 6a, Han et al. incorporated a self-organized gradient HIL (GraHIL) composed of PEDOT:PSS and a tetrafluoroethylene-perfluoro-3,6-dioxa-4-methyl-7-octenesulphonic acid copolymer to modify the HNO3 or AuCl3 doped four-layer graphene anode, resulting in not only an increase in the surface work function but also a decrease in Rsh.112 The white flexible OLEDs with the graphene anode exhibited a much higher current efficiency (16.3 cd A−1) than those with the ITO anode (10.9 cd A−1), as shown in Fig. 6a.112 Instead, Li et al. used single-layer graphene p-doped with triethyloxonium hexachloroantimonate (OA) as the flexible anode in white OLEDs, reaching a power efficiency of 90 lm W−1 at 1000 cd m−1 (Fig. 6b).113 In addition to the p-type doped graphene used as the anode, graphene has been n-doped by NH3:H2 or polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) to serve as a cathode, making the inverted devices possible.114
 Fig. 6  Device structure and performance of white OLEDs on a four-layer graphene anode (a) and a single-layer graphene anode (b). Inset in (a) is the photograph of the operating white OLED on graphene anode. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
From a theoretical point of view, graphene is an ideal material to fabricate flexible TCEs because its σdc/σopt ratio can reach 330 via substrate-induced doping to be high enough for use as industrial TCEs.115 Yet, the requirements of high-temperature and complicated steps for the growth and transfer of graphene films inevitably limit the production cost of graphene-based flexible TCEs. Seeking novel and cheaper ways for the growth of graphene is a necessity for its practical use. Another issue for the use of graphene-based flexible TCEs is overcoming the defect limitation originating from graphene preparation (Fig. 7a) and transfer processes (Fig. 7b), which include overlapped grain boundaries, pinholes, wrinkles and microcracks.50 In a word, graphene flexible TCEs should be prepared reproducibly with high quality at low cost over a large area before their commercialization.
 Fig. 7  (a) Defects generated by partial surface coverage of the CVD-grown graphene. (b) Macroscopic defect created during the transfer processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 


Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs). 
The structures of SWCNTs can be conceptualized as a monolayer graphene rolled-up in certain directions, so that the electrical, optical, and mechanical properties of SWCNTs have many similarities to those of graphene. Individual carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have a mobility in excess of 105 cm2 V−1 s−1 along the carbon nanotube axis,116 and the theoretical maximum conductivity of a SWCNT network is ∼90000 S cm−1. In this ideal situation, the SWCNT film can have a low Rsh of 10 Ω □−1 and a high transmittance of 92%.38,117 SWCNT networks also exhibit durable sheet conductance under bending. Benefiting from the great mechanical flexibility, SWCNTs seem to find niche applications in flexible electronic devices.
Large-area deposition technologies for SWCNT-based flexible TCEs involve both dry and wet processing methods.118–123 Dry methods include catalytic CVD118 or collecting a CNT aerosol,119 then transferring onto flexible substrates. The CVD methods could obtain highly aligned SWCNTs, but inextricably entangling a mixture of one-third of metallic SWCNTs (m-SWCNTs) and two-thirds of semiconducting SWCNTs (s-SWCNTs) owing to their different diameters and chiralities. Blackburn et al. studied the optical and electrical properties of transparent conductive films made from precisely tuned ratios of metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs, revealing that the formation of interjunctions between s-SWCNTs and m-SWCNTs greatly increases the film resistances (Fig. 8a).121 Another problem is that the incorporation of contaminants during the CVD process can influence CNT properties and often requires costly thermal annealing or chemical treatment for their removal, which in turn introduce defects in CNT sidewalls and shorten the CNT length.54 Meanwhile, many approaches such as arc-discharge, laser ablation, and high pressure carbon monoxide (HiPCO) have been proposed to synthesize a SWCNT powder, which is now commercially available.118 By dispersing the SWCNT powder in organic solvents, superacids, or aqueous solutions with surfactants to assist with sonication, printable inks can be obtained after the centrifugation process.120 Based on these inks, wet methods such as vacuum-filtration, slot die coating, spray coating, inkjet printing, etc. enable printing on a large scale and at low cost, which imply a more appropriate method for industrial manufacturing of SWCNT-based flexible TCEs (Fig. 8b).122 In Fig. 8b and c, the slot-die coating method and the performance of a kind of vacuum-filtration fabricated SWCNT film are presented, respectively.122,123
 Fig. 8  (a) Absorbance spectra of a range of films with varying m- and s-SWCNT contents and AFM images of semiconductor-enriched (top right) and metal-enriched (bottom right) transparent SWNT films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (b) CNT conductive films being coated by slot-die coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2011, Materials Research Society. (c) Transmission of SWCNT films as a function of wavelength for films fabricated by vacuum filtration with various sheet resistance values (left) and sheet resistance as a function of transmittance of SWCNT films at 550 nm for various CNT densities (right). The inset is a photograph of a transferred SWCNT film on flexible PET substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 
As SWCNTs show great potential for use as flexible TCEs, significant efforts have been devoted on improving the performance of SWCNT-based flexible TCEs. Wu et al. fabricated a transparent SWCNT film with an area of 10 cm diameter and a thickness of 50 nm via a vacuum-filtration method, showing the transmittance to be greater than 70% over the visible spectrum.124 Zhang et al. obtained an optimized SWCNT film by using vacuum-filtration and transferring the film on the filtration membrane to a flexible PE substrate with the assistance of a PDMS stamp (Fig. 9a), revealing a typical Rsh of ∼160 Ω □−1 and an optical transmittance of 87%.125 This SWCNT film was used successfully to make OLEDs with high stabilities and long lifetimes.125 It should be noted that the vacuum-filtration method is to some extent limited with respect to the film size and production efficiency. Later, Geng et al. found that the post-treatment of SWCNT films sprayed on PET with acids (e.g., HNO3 and H2SO4) can significantly improve the film conductivity.126 Kaskela et al. demonstrated an aerosol CVD process to dry-deposit large-area SWCNT networks, which can be chemically doped with HNO3 to reach a Rsh as low as 110 Ω □−1 and an optical transmittance of 90%.119 Furthermore, SWCNTs can be deposited from a chlorosulfonic superacid solution onto PET substrates, which exhibit a Rsh of 60 Ω □−1 and an optical transmittance of 90.9%, respectively.52 In order to achieve stretchable devices, Sekitani et al. developed a printable elastic conductor comprising SWCNTs that were uniformly dispersed in a highly elastic fluorinated copolymer rubber by using an imidazolium ion-based ionic liquid and a jet-milling process.127 Based on this SWCNT-based TCE, a stretchable display was constructed that could be stretched by 30–50% and spread over arbitrary curved surfaces (Fig. 9b).127
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the dry transfer process for SWCNT films and the photograph of a flexed SWCNT film on a PE sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (b) Printed elastic conductors on a PDMS sheet, the comparison of stretchability and conductivity as a function of SWCNT content, and a demonstration of a stretchable display that can be spread over arbitrary curved surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Despite the high optical transparency and mechanical flexibility of SWCNT-based TCEs, the relatively high network sheet resistances and rough surface morphologies (∼10 nm) present two major obstacles for using SWCNTs as TCEs.51 Principally, the film conductivity was typically affected by the CNT purity, the m-SWCNT/s-SWCNT ratio, and the doping level. While some preliminary attempts for realizing additive-free dispersion of SWCNTs have achieved good results,53 the purification of SWCNTs is challenged by inevitable impurities such as catalyst particles and amorphous or non-tubular carbon. Even more frustratingly, separating the s-SWCNT and m-SWCNT mixture for m-SWCNT-based TCEs involves complex processes, which certainly lead to low output and high cost. Doping with HNO3128 and SOCl2,121 or depositing films from superacids52 can largely increase the film conductivities, whereas these methods have been proved unstable for practical use. In addition, protruding CNTs from the TCEs will cause rough surface morphologies which always result in device shorting.51 To overcome this issue, a passivation layer was applied on top of the SWCNTs. For example, Ou et al. used a PEDOT:PSS-modified SWCNT film as the anode in OLEDs, leading to not only reduced film surface roughness but also remarkably increased device performance.128 In brief, the use of SWCNTs as flexible TCEs remains stagnant and is highly dependent on breakthroughs on the aforementioned issues.

2.2 Metal networks as flexible TCEs
Metals are widely used as electrodes in electronics and optoelectronics due to their extremely high conductivities. Unfortunately, metals are usually opaque in bulk or thick films, which limits the use of metals as TCEs. To solve the problem of film opacity, the use of metal grid structures and metal nanowire networks is found to provide a potential route.
Metal grids are usually in forms of two dimensional gratings or hexagonal meshes which are either deposited by thermal evaporation using a shadow mask, patterned by lithographic methods, or printed.58,129,130Fig. 10 displays several typical metal nanomeshes and the corresponding flexible TCEs. The hollows within the networks are nearly 100% transparent. Therefore, the transmittance of metal grid flexible TCEs can be tuned simply by changing the metal coverage rate (that is, the line width of the metal nanomesh). Calculations demonstrate that metal grids with optimized line widths to perfect conditions are substantially more transmissive than ITO with an identical Rsh. For example, a calculated nanopatterned Ag film electrode can achieve an optical transmittance of 90% and a Rsh of 0.8 Ω □−1,131,132 whereas a fabricated metal grid electrode typically exhibits an optical transmittance around 80%.55,133 In addition, the metal grids protruding from the substrates (micrometer scale) are relatively thicker than ultrathin organic layers (nanometer scale), making such flexible TCEs unsuitable for device applications. An effective method is to embed the metal nanomesh into substrates instead of depositing it on the substrate surface (Fig. 10a).134 With the combination of an Ag-embedding architecture into PI substrates and a 20 nm-thick layer of magnetron sputtered amorphous ITO, Kang et al. obtained an Ag grid electrode with very smooth surface, high transparency (optical transmittance ∼93% at a wavelength of 550 nm), and high conductivity (Rsh ∼ 13 Ω □−1).133 The flexible OLEDs constructed on this flexible TCE exhibit a performance similar or superior to that of devices on traditional ITO–glass substrates.58 However, the use of ITO in this kind of flexible TCE really sacrifices the flexibility under repeated bending conditions.
 Fig. 10  (a) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of a Ag nanomesh with a pitch size of 7.5 μm embedded into a PET substrate, and photograph of an embedded Ag nanomesh on a 6-inch scale PET substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2015, IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) SEM image and transmittance spectra of Au nanomesh electrodes made by grain boundary lithography. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Optical images of PET with embedded hexagonal Ag networks (PEANs) as a transparent conductive electrode and a large-area flexible white OLED using PEAN as the anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Zhou et al. developed a flexible TCE using PET with embedded Ag networks (PEANs), as shown in Fig. 10c, whose fabrication process involves Ag paste scratch technology, nanoimprinting lithography, and precise pattern photolithography.59 The Ag networks have a periodic hexagonal structure with 150 μm period, ∼2 μm height, and ∼3 μm line width. Thus, the PEANs exhibit a transmittance >87%, an average haze value of ∼4.3% over the visible spectrum, and a Rsh < 5 Ω □−1. While the network period is several orders of magnitude larger than the visible wavelength, light diffraction and scattering can be minimized to the greatest extent. White flexible OLEDs were fabricated on PEAN electrodes, achieving a power efficiency of 106 lm W−1 at a brightness of 1000 cd m−2 with the combination of light out-coupling scheme. More recently, Li et al. constructed a high-performance flexible planar heterojunction perovskite solar cell based on this PEAN electrode, indicating the availability of PEAN as a flexible TCE for optoelectronics.60
Besides the advantages possessed by periodic metal grids, metal nanowire networks have a prominent advantage of direct deposition from liquid dispersions via solution processes, e.g., spray coating,135–137 roll-to-roll welding,63 and transfer printing techniques.138 To date, the most widely used metal nanowires have been silver nanowires (AgNWs), which can be uniformly dispersed in ethanol solvent to form a high-quality ink (Fig. 11a).62 Owing to the intrinsic metallic nature and high aspect ratio of AgNWs, ultrathin random networks grown on plastic substrates have great potential to be mechanically flexible, highly conductive and transparent. For example, Lee et al. reported a AgNW electrode on PET with a Rsh of 5 Ω □−1 and a transmittance of 92% via mechanical and chemical welding processes (Fig. 11b).63 Baik et al. fabricated a AgNW electrode in combination with cysteamine-functionalized Ag nanoparticles using a scalable bar-coating method (Fig. 11c), exhibiting a low Rsh of 24.1 Ω □−1, a transmittance of 96.4% and a haze of only 1.04%.64 Chang et al. demonstrated the fabrication of solution-processed MoOx-treated (s-MoOx) AgNW flexible TCEs utilizing low-temperature (sub-100 °C) processes. The AgNW-based flexible TCEs achieved a transmission of up to 96.8%, a low Rsh of 29.8 Ω □−1, and a low haze value of 0.90% (Fig. 11d and e).83 In addition, Liang et al. made an elastomeric flexible TCE comprising a thin percolation network of AgNWs embedded in the surface layer of a rubbery poly(urethane acrylate) (PUA) matrix for polymer OLEDs (Fig. 11f–h).135 The resulting elastomeric polymer OLED exhibits rubbery elasticity at room temperature and can emit light when exposed to strains as large as 120% (Fig. 11i).135
 Fig. 11  (a) AgNW ink in ethanol solvent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of a roll-to-roll welding process for planarized AgNW electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of AgNWs for combination with CA-Ag NPs. The inset shows an aqueous suspension of Ag NWs (0.5 wt%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) Photograph of a AgNW flexible TCE with a bending radius of 3 mm, and (e) the resistance of s-MoOx-treated AgNW flexible TCE and ITO during repeated bending tests. The inset shows the magnified results of s-MoOx-treated AgNW flexible TCE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) SEM image of a AgNW coating on glass substrate; (g) optical photograph of a AgNW coating on a PUA film; (h) transmittance spectra of a neat PUA film and AgNW–PUA composite films with specified sheet resistance, and (i) photograph of a flexible OLED wrapped around the edge of 400 mm-thick cardboard. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
In analogy to the use of SWCNTs, metal networks serving as flexible TCEs suffer from the problems of surface roughness and poor adhesion to the substrate surface.122,139,140 As shown in Fig. 12a and b, embedding metal networks into substrates is an effective solution to overcome these problems, where a buffer layer like PEDOT:PSS is usually introduced for the fabrication of flexible OLEDs to avoid short-circuiting.19,59,65,137,141 It is well known that the complexity and high cost of the fabrication process severely hinder the development of periodic metal grids. However, metal nanowire networks are prone to degradation due to the severe junction resistances between nanowires, and light scattering induced metal nanowires also results in a large haze for TCEs. Consequently, new technologies are required to handle these issues. For example, the replacement of AgNWs with copper nanowires (CuNWs) can potentially reduce the production cost (Fig. 12c).142–144 To simplify the process complexity, Spechler et al. used sol–gel deposited titania to encase AgNWs embedded in a PI substrate achieving a <1 nm smooth surface (Fig. 12d).22 Wu et al. demonstrated a metal nanotrough network TCE, showing a Rsh of ∼2 Ω □−1 and a transmittance of 90% with superior bending and stretching abilities (Fig. 12e and f).145
 Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of AgNW embedded into a PDMS layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (b) Fused AgNW junctions embedded into PMMA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM image of CuNWs with length of more than 50 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) AgNWs embedded in a PI substrate with a titania sol–gel coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic of metal nanotroughs and UV-vis spectra of various metal nanotrough networks on glass substrates; (f) Au nanotrough networks on PET substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
2.3 Composite flexible TCEs
TCEs comprising two or more material components may provide superior electrical and optical properties due to synergistic effects. As discussed above, the combination of SWCNTs or AgNWs with PEDOT:PSS can not only reduce the surface roughness but also remarkably decrease the contact resistance.39,75,76 Also, incorporating graphene into metal grids can reduce the defects of graphene and simultaneously improve the conductivity of metal grids. For example, the fabricated metal grid/graphene TCE exhibited a Rsh as low as ∼20 Ω □−1 with a transmittance of 90% (Fig. 13a).79Fig. 13b shows a flexible TCE consisting of a GO-soldered AgNW network composite on a PET film with a Rsh of 14 Ω □−1 and a transmittance of 80%.21 The polymer-based OLED fabricated by this flexible TCE can survive after 100 stretching cycles between 0 and 40% strain and can be stretched up to 130% linear strain at room temperature (Fig. 13b).21 Li et al. reported a SWCNT/AgNW-nanocomposite TCE, showing that the light extraction efficiency of the resulting polymer OLEDs can potentially reach 361% over control devices on ITO–glass substrates (Fig. 13c).80 More recently, Kang et al. fabricated a new class of polymer–metal hybrid flexible TCEs that possess low Rsh (<10 Ω □−1), high transparency (>95% at 550 nm) and extreme flexibility (bending radius < 1 mm) (Fig. 13d and e).74 This kind of composite flexible TCE allows the fabrication of efficient, flexible and printable OLEDs that outperform ITO-based devices (Fig. 13d).74
 Fig. 13  (a) Metal grid/graphene hybrid transparent electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) AgNW percolation network soldered with GO and the stretchable flexible OLEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Cross-sectional structure and photograph of a solution-processed flexible SWCNT/AgNW-nanocomposite electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) Schematic illustration and (e) photograph of polymer–metal hybrid transparent electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) such as ITO, ZnO, indium zinc oxide (InZnO), zinc tin oxide (ZTO), TiO2, and MoO3 are not suitable for flexible TCEs because of their brittle nature. However, this shortcoming can be improved by adopting a TCO/metal/TCO sandwich structure which enables high flexibility due to the metal interlayer and provides high transmittance by the antireflective effect of this structure.68–72 Motivated by this concept, Xu et al. precisely designed a nanostructured metal–dielectric composite electrode (NMDCE) with a structure MoO3/Ca:Ag alloy/MoO3 on PET for high-performance white flexible OLEDs. The NMDCE has a greatly improved surface morphology, conductivity and mechanical stability, resulting in a substantial increase in EQE and power efficiency to 47.2% and 112.4 lm W−1, respectively (Fig. 14a).73 Morales-Masis et al. fabricated an indium-free anode for large-area flexible OLEDs by using defect-free ZTO to form a ZTO/Ag/ZTO trilayer TCE, showing a Rsh of 9 Ω □−1 (Fig. 14b).146 More interestingly, Kim et al. demonstrated two composite flexible TCEs with structures ZnS/Ag/MoO3 and ZnS/Cs2CO3/Ag/ZnS as the anode and cathode, respectively.147 As shown in Fig. 14c, the use of these two TCEs allows the successful fabrication of transparent OLEDs on PET substrates with high flexibility.147 Although significant progress has been made on composite flexible TCEs, the apparent limitation of these proposed structures is the relatively complex fabrication process. Therefore, it is imperative to find ways for simplifying the manufacturing process.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustrations of fabrication steps for NMDCE on plastic substrates, and performance stability comparison of flexible OLEDs on ITO and NMDCE electrodes under repeated bending tests. Insets show the photographs of corresponding electrodes after continuous bending. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Brightness–voltage characteristics and photograph (inset) of orange small-molecule OLEDs fabricated with ZTO/Ag/ZTO and ITO anodes, and photograph of a curved 3.5 × 11.5 cm−2 small-molecule flexible OLED fabricated on the ZTO/grid anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Transmittance spectra and photograph of transparent flexible OLEDs (with anode ZnS 24 nm, capping layer ZnS 22 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
3. Device fabrication technology
3.1 Vacuum vapor deposition
To date, most of the organic emitters in small-molecule OLEDs as well as the top electrodes have been usually deposited via high-vacuum thermal evaporation for both laboratory research on OLED prototypes and industrial manufacturing of commercialized devices. By heating the source materials in a vacuum chamber and using a fine metal mask (FMM),148 patterned RGB coatings of OLED active materials can be simply deposited onto substrates that are located closely behind the mask. Even though this vacuum thermal evaporation (VTE) technique is easy and effective to achieve high-quality full-colour OLED displays, limitations are present in process control, scalability and cost effective manufacturing capabilities. Especially for flexible OLEDs, it will encounter problems in procedures operated at high temperatures because of the relatively poor thermal stability of plastic substrates.
To overcome the limitations of the VTE technique, an improved technology called organic vapor phase deposition (OVPD) was invented as shown in Fig. 15a.149 The deposition process takes place in the presence of a precise amount of carrier gas (e.g., nitrogen or argon) for transporting the organic molecules through the boundary layer onto the cooled substrate in a hot-wall deposition chamber. Because of the carrier gas and hot chamber walls, OVPD enables not only high-efficiency use of organic materials by preventing the adsorption on the chamber walls, but also highly controlled growth rates by tuning the pressure and temperature within the reactor. The low operation temperature on the device substrates makes this technique more suitable for plastic flexible TCEs. Moreover, the carrier gas used in OVPD allows the deposition of organic materials at a relatively high pressure of 10−3–10 Torr and prevents any contamination of the substrates. Regardless of the fact that significant progress has been made on the OVPD method, the process in a vacuum chamber obviously results in high production cost, low yield and limited device size.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic cross-section of a hot-walled OVPD reactor showing the growth process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2004, Nature Publishing Group. (b) A typical device fabrication process with a combination of spin coating and vacuum evaporation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
3.2 Solution processing
Solution processing may provide a cost-efficient and size-scalable route to the mass production of large-area flexible OLED panels. Spin coating as a well-established solution processing technology has been commonly used in the deposition of polymer films and devices.135,150 Currently, almost all the polymer-based flexible OLEDs reported in the scientific literature are fabricated by the combination of spin coating and vacuum vapor deposition (see Fig. 15b), which involves a coating and thermal annealing procedure to acquire uniform polymer films and the subsequent vacuum deposition of top electrodes. Although polymeric materials are suitable for a solution process, they are plagued by limited reproducibility in the device performance due to batch-to-batch variations of molecular weight, polydispersity, regioregularity and purity.151 Given that small molecules have a well-defined molecular structure offering more reproducibility, solution-processable small molecules for OLEDs have been developed recently to be compatible with the spin coating process.28,30,152,153 Recently, Aizawa et al. demonstrated solution-processed multilayer OLEDs using small molecules, achieving record power efficiencies of 36, 52 and 34 lm W−1 at 100 cd m−2 for blue, green and white OLEDs, respectively.30 However, the spin coating process has some limitations in terms of multilayer deposition because solution-based coating of one layer can dissolve the layer beneath it. Other limitations in solution processing include the low material utilization rate, large area deposition and lateral film patterning. Since the general spin coating method is not completely compatible with high throughput production, it is highly desirable to improve the solution process so that it can be performed as a continuous process for industrial manufacturing.
A continuous roll-to-roll production line can be built using a combination of cleaning, printing and coating, annealing as well as packaging modules, enabling high-speed, low-cost and large-area production of OLED devices on flexible substrates. As a state-of-the-art solution process, roll-to-roll processing consists of several different printing and coating techniques such as gravure printing, screen printing, inkjet printing, blade coating, slot-die coating, spray coating, etc. These printing and coating techniques all rely on the same principle of transferring ink to substrates that have been successfully utilized for the high-throughput fabrication of functional layers and electrodes for both polymer and small molecule based OLEDs. Several years ago, Youn et al. demonstrated the fabrication of OLEDs by a blade-slit coating method under ambient conditions.154 Tekoglu et al. reported gravure printed small molecule flexible OLEDs, revealing ∼67% higher luminance efficiency compared to a spin-coated pristine device.155 Another example is that Ju et al. proposed the method of fabricating thin and regular films for OLEDs using the electrospray deposition method, where the thin film fabricated by this method showed better surface roughness than the spin-coated sample.156Fig. 16a shows an OLED panel fabricated in a roll-to-roll manufacturing line, exhibiting large area and high throughput.27 For actual industrial production, people have always been pursuing an all-solution inline process that is able to manufacture flexible OLEDs under ambient conditions, and thus to greatly reduce the fabrication costs.157 Recently, Sandstrom et al. showed the possibility of fabricating large-area OLEDs under uninterrupted ambient conditions using a slot-die coating method and the fabricated flexible sheets exhibited bidirectional and uniform light emission (Fig. 16b).158 Furthermore, fully printable OLEDs have been successfully demonstrated by printing conducting Ag-paste cathodes on top of organic layers (Fig. 16c and d).159
 Fig. 16  (a) Fabricated OLED panel in roll-to-roll manufacturing line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2015, SID. (b) Photograph of the slot die roll coater and close-up photograph of the slot-die head during the coating of an active layer stripe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Schematic illustration of the full-color display structure with an inkjet-printed cathode, and (d) photograph of the fabricated full-color display. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Since the multilayer flexible OLED devices need to be manufactured by printing several layers continuously, the key point is to judiciously select an appropriate series of printing and coating techniques to set up the inline roll-to-roll platform. As shown in Fig. 17, printed flexible OLED devices require a series of printing and coating techniques.160 Among them, screen printing inherently allows the formation of thick films, which is usually performed for metal electrodes that need high conductivities. Gravure printing is useful for the printing of organic transporting layers and active layers due to its advantages, including high resistance to a wide variety of solvents, high throughput and high lateral resolution on the micrometre scale. However, the low viscosity nature of the functional inks and the complex patterning process give rise to problems for these two techniques. Inkjet printing is able to carry out thin-film material deposition and super-fine patterning by any low-viscosity liquid simultaneously without contact with the substrate, indicating the superior capability of manufacturing true RGB high-resolution flexible OLEDs. Recently, various films such as graphene electrodes,161 AgNW electrodes,162 and organic active layers163–165 have been deposited by inkjet printing. Zheng et al. demonstrated the production of all-solution processed high-resolution OLED displays by ink-jetted conducting nanoparticles as the cathode, showing great potential for the industrial roll-to-roll manufacturing of flat panel displays.159 However, inkjet printing has its own limitations in terms of the wettability of substrates, ink properties, drop thickness variability and equipment technology, so that further development of this method is needed. Spray coating is another non-contact deposition technique that might be scaled up for the mass production of large-area flexible OLEDs because of its low-cost and high-efficiency features. This deposition technique has already been reported in the literature for the preparation of electrode films such as AgNW/PEDOT:PSS composite TCEs,166 graphene/PEDOT:PSS composite TCEs,167 and nanoparticle-based Ag top contacts.168 However, spray coating does not inherently allow for control of the pattern, prohibiting its application in the preparation of the active layer matrix for true-colour displays.
 Fig. 17  Typical structure of a printed flexible OLED and the related fabrication technologies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2013, SID. 
As discussed above, multilayer structures deposited by solution-processing techniques have a thorny problem that solution-based coating of one top layer may dissolve the bottom layer. This challenging issue requires careful choice of the materials and solvents to achieve orthogonal solubilities between adjacent layers. Recently, Höfle et al. successfully achieved fabrication of fully solution processed tandem OLEDs in an inverted device architecture by employing WO3/PEDOT:PSS/ZnO/PEI as a charge generation layer (CGL), where a 90 nm modified PEDOT:PSS layer was utilized between the ZnO and WO3 layers to make the CGL impenetrable to the subsequently used solvents.169 Pu et al. presented a nine-layered structure of twofold-stacked multi-OLEDs by only solution-based processes with phosphomolybdic acid hydrate (MoO3)12·H3PO4·(H2O)x (PMA) as the electron-accepting material for the CGL. The solvents of every layer were carefully chosen to ensure insolubilities of adjacent layers, allowing the successful stacking of the nine layers by a series of solution processes.170 Moreover, Chiba et al. inserted a neutralized PEDOT:PSS layer between acidic PEDOT:PSS and ZnO nanoparticles to prevent reaction between these two materials.171 By using a solution-processed CGL, having a PEDOT:PSS/neutralized PEODT:PSS/ZnO/PEIE structure, they successfully fabricated highly efficient twofold tandem green and white phosphorescent OLEDs by solution processes.171 Besides printed conducting Ag-paste cathodes, an alternative solution proposed by Yang et al. is the use of the D-sorbitol modified conducting polymer PEDOT:PSS as a transparent conductive adhesive (TCA) to laminate a top electrode onto the luminescent polymer.172 In such a method, Lin et al. demonstrated an efficient transparent small-molecule OLED with lamination of the top transparent electrode, providing a simple and effective approach for the fabrication of flexible devices.173
4. Light extraction technology
The utilization of phosphorescent and TADF materials as organic emitters has boosted the IQE of OLEDs from 25% to nearly 100%, indicating that the carriers can be thoroughly liberated to generate photons.32–35 Unfortunately, the majority of generated photons in the organic emitters of flexible OLEDs are confined within the organic layer, the TCE and the substrate due to the large difference in the refractive indices n of organic layers/TCE (norg ≈ 1.7–2.1), plastic substrates (nsub ≈ 1.5–1.7) and air (nair ≈ 1). As shown in Fig. 18, the light confinements can be catalogued as the substrate mode, waveguide (WG) mode, surface plasmon polariton (SPP) mode and metallic electrode absorption.174–176 The relationship of EQE and IQE is given by EQE = IQE × ηout, where ηout is the out-coupling efficiency (the ratio of the total number of photons out-coupled in the forward direction to the number of injected electrons).177 It is obvious that the bottleneck of the device efficiency in flexible OLEDs lies directly in light extraction, which remains challenging for device optimization. Typically, the ηout value of the standard OLED constructed in a planar architecture is around 20%, limiting the maximum EQE value even when the IQE value achieves 100%. Therefore, enhancing the ηout value provides the greatest potential for a substantial increase in EQE and thereby the efficiency of flexible OLEDs. In the last decade, although various techniques have been explored to extract the trapped light in glass-based conventional devices, only a few pertinent studies have been conducted on flexible devices. Appropriate light extraction schemes for flexible OLEDs are indispensable to be developed.
 Fig. 18  Various modes of light out-coupling losses in a typical flexible OLED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2011, KIM and Springer. 
First of all, one general scheme to out-couple the substrate mode is substrate surface modification in the way of introducing structures such as microlens arrays (MLAs)178,179 or pyramidal arrays174 on the backside of the substrate (Fig. 19a), or using high-index substrates to match the refractive indices between the substrate and TCE (Fig. 19b).180 For example, Lee et al. reported that the ηout enhancement of flexible OLEDs on PET substrates was achieved using O2 plasma treatment to form a sub-micrometer-sized pattern (∼500 nm in height) on the substrate backside for extracting the light from the substrate to air with a resulting improvement of luminance by 70% (Fig. 19c).181 Recently, Xiang et al. introduced moth-eye nanostructured arrays on the backside of PET substrates fabricated by soft nanoimprint lithography (NIL) (Fig. 19d).182 As shown in Fig. 19e and f, the optical modeling of this out-coupling structure qualitatively reveals a relatively stronger electric field intensity on the nanostructured surface compared to that of the bare PET substrate, indicating a more efficient light extraction by the nanostructured substrate.182
 Fig. 19  (a and b) Cross-sections of an OLED to illustrate the light propagation, showing that (a) half-sphere and (b) high-refractive-index substrates can be applied to increase light out-coupling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Sub-micrometer patterns on the backside of a PET substrate for enhancing light out-coupling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d–f) Device structure of a flexible OLED with a moth-eye nanostructured PET substrate (d); field intensity distributions of plane wave light at λ = 520 nm passing through flat PET (e) without and (f) with a moth-eye out-coupling layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g and h) OLED devices on regular glass substrates (g) and industrial-grade PEN with high-refractive-index and built-in scattering properties (h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (i and j) Schematic of the OLED device structure on flexible plastic with metal electrodes (i), schematic energy-level diagram of the optimized OLED and the photograph of a large-area flexible OLED (j). Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Then, compared with the out-coupling of confined photons in substrate modes, extracting the light within the WG modes is challenging due to the requirements of modifying the internal structure of OLEDs. Various methods have been explored to enhance the extraction of the waveguided light within the organic/ITO layers, such as using high-refractive-index (n ≥ 1.8) substrates in place of standard glass,23,180 replacing ITO electrodes with composite TCEs,183 inserting a low-index silica aerogel layer184 or a photonic crystal layer185,186 between the ITO and glass substrate, embedding low-index grids in the organic layers,187 applying Bragg diffraction gratings188 or quasi-periodic buckling structures189 to the substrates, designing suitable microcavities,190etc. According to Snell's law, high-refractive-index substrates can effectively reduce the total internal reflection at the substrate/ITO interface (see Fig. 19b), allowing more light to exit the device.180,191 Correspondingly, a significant out-coupling enhancement of the light confined in the substrate modes can be obtained for flexible OLEDs using the high-refractive-index and built-in scattering properties of industrial-grade PEN (n = 1.7) (Fig. 19g and h).23 These flexible OLEDs possess power efficiency and EQE values close to 100 lm W−1 and 30%, respectively.23 By introducing mirror-like microcavity structures like dielectric mirrors and transflective thin-metal mirrors at the anode or cathode side, a strong optical microcavity effect will take place, thus enhancing the out-coupling of light in the forward direction due to an enhanced spontaneous emission rate. Microcavities change the modal distribution favoring radiation modes and alter the local density of optical states leading to a significant spectral narrowing and high purity multiple colour generation. Based on this strategy, Li et al. fabricated an ITO-free OLED by embedding an organic stack in a microcavity with a thick Ag mirror and a semi-transparent Ag mirror, and the colour can be tuned by varying the thickness of the organic stack.192 Cho et al. achieved a fivefold enhancement in luminance with microcavity two-unit tandem OLEDs.193 Lee et al. reported a kind of efficient down-conversion white OLED with a FIrpic-based blue OLED, which used a microcavity to tune the FIrpic emission spectrum to shorter wavelengths, thereby matching the excitation spectra of the yellow and red phosphorescent materials.194 However, the emission spectra of microcavity-based OLEDs exhibit a strong dependence on the viewing angle such that the microcavity effect needs to be eliminated by some compensation measures. Instead of the use of high-refractive-index flexible substrates and microcavity structures, the oxide/metal/oxide stack flexible TCEs provide an alternative that enables the use of flexible plastic substrates and substantial out-coupling enhancement of the light in OLEDs. For instance, a stacked flexible TCE consisting of a high-index Ta2O5 optical coupling layer, an electrically conductive gold layer and a hole-injection MoO3 layer (i.e., Ta2O5/Au/MoO3) allows the realization of high-efficiency flexible OLEDs with the maximum EQE up to an extremely high value of 63% for green emission (Fig. 19i and j).183 The Bragg diffraction grating has been used for light extraction, whereas this structure also causes the angular and viewing angle-dependent out-coupling enhancement of the guided light for a specific grating period. Moreover, the fabrication of Bragg diffraction gratings is often accompanied by complicated and high-cost fabrication procedures. To overcome the aforementioned problems, Koo et al. developed a quasi-periodic buckling structure that enabled the out-coupling of the waveguided light propagating along any direction with a wide spectral range, and more importantly, the compatibility for applications in flexible devices.189 The comparison of the out-coupling performances of a 1D grating, 2D grating, and a quasi-random nanostructure is displayed in Fig. 20.195 It is shown that the power flux in a flat device is localized around the dipole source, while nanostructures can significantly affect the optical field distribution within the device and thus effectively increase the out-coupling probability of the emitted light. Especially for quasi-random nanostructures with broadened periodicity, the emission directionality can be randomized, leading to the superiority of color stability over the visible wavelength range for a large variation of viewing angles. As reported by Wang et al., the resulting EQE and current efficiency of the flexible OLEDs using a quasi-random out-coupling structure were 1.51 and 1.43 times that of a conventional device used as a comparison, respectively.195
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of nanostructured flexible OLEDs with 1D grating, 2D grating, and quasi-random nanostructures. (b) Optical simulations of the far-field intensity distribution for flexible OLEDs with a flat structure, 1D grating, 2D grating, and a quasi-random nanostructure, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Finally, about 40% of the generated light in conventional OLEDs is dissipated as scattered light or as a non-radiative emission at the metal–organic interface due to SPP modes (Fig. 18).175 The SPP modes generally cannot radiate unless they are excited under certain conditions such as the incorporation of wavelength scale periodic microstructures, diffraction gratings or nanoparticles (NPs).196,197 Once the resonant energy of the excited surface plasmons overlaps the emission energy, the trapped light can be recovered to air modes to significantly increase the ηout value. The first two strategies have the potential to reduce SPP losses but may introduce new leakage or optical dissipation channels, and require additional and potentially complex fabrication.198 In contrast, the localized surface plasmon (LSP) excited by metallic NPs is easier to realize due to the unique advantage in tunability by altering the type, size, geometry, and interparticle distance of the NPs. Xiao et al. reported the SPP-enhanced EL in OLEDs by incorporating chemically synthesized Au NPs with a diameter of 40–50 nm into a spin-coated PEDOT:PSS film as a hole injection layer, achieving an increase of 25% in the EL intensity and efficiency.199 Recently, platinum–cobalt (Pt3Co) alloy NPs were incorporated to excite LSPs, which thereby increase the light-scattering and light-out enhancement simultaneously.176 Instead of the metal NP-induced LSP excitation, the nano-patterning of organic emitters provides a new route to control the LSP resonance. For example, Zhou et al. introduced deterministic aperiodic nanostructures (DANs) into a PEDOT:PSS hole injection layer on a PEAN flexible TCE by the soft NIL technique.59 The optical behaviour of the organic emitter patterned with DANs in flexible OLEDs can be understood in terms of the transverse-electric (TE) and transverse-magnetic (TM) propagating modes and resonances associated with SPP modes. Compared to the device without an out-coupling structure (Fig. 21a), it is clear that the DAN-based out-coupling structure allows efficient photon flux transfer from a guided-mode resonance to leaky modes [i.e., Kx/(2π/p) < K0] for both TM (Fig. 21b) and TE (Fig. 21c) polarized light and the SPP modes can be excited as a consequence of the corrugated metal electrode. As a consequence, the use of such an out-coupling structure can simultaneously extract light in waveguide modes and reduce the surface plasmonic losses, which leads to an EQE of nearly 50% with angular color stability in flexible OLEDs.59 Most recently, Xu et al. applied the NIL techniques to transfer biomimetic quasi-random nanostructures into a NMDCE (Fig. 22a).73 The NMDCE can effectively reduce the surface plasmon losses and enable the broadband and angle-independent outcoupling enhancement of the waveguide light. As depicted in Fig. 22b–d, the normalized cross-section intensity field distributions (at 520 nm) with propagation of flexible OLEDs on different plastic substrates calculated by the finite difference time domain (FDTD) approach show that a greater fraction of emitted light is coupled to the substrate through the grooves of quasi-random nanostructures in a NMDCE, resulting in a remarkable outcoupling enhancement.73 Regardless of the rapid progress in the plasmonic effect on light manipulation in OLEDs, the light extraction of SPP modes remains a complicated task because it requires precisely controlled parameters for practical use in flexible OLEDs. To liberate the light trapped in SPP modes is therefore a long-term research subject.
 Fig. 21  Comparison of calculated dispersion diagrams of TM (or TE) polarized light as a function of frequency and the in-plane wave vector Kx in the first Brillouin zone of OLEDs: without an out-coupling structure (a) and with a deterministic aperiodic out-coupling structure for TM polarized light (b) and TE polarized light (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 22  (a) Device structure of a flexible OLED with biomimetic quasi-random nanostructures. (b–d) Normalized cross-section field-intensity distributions (at 520 nm) with propagation of OLEDs on (b) ITO, (c) MDCE, and (d) NMDCE using the FDTD method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
5. Device operation stability
In addition to the efficiency, operational stability is another serious issue for the development of high-performance flexible OLEDs. Normally, OLED devices for commercial applications should achieve a minimum lifetime of 10000 hours for the half-luminance degradation (T50), which is defined as the duration time for the luminance to reduce from the initial intensity to 50%. Enormous numbers of studies have been devoted to improving the device operation stability of OLEDs in the past decades.200–209 In general, the degradation in OLEDs occurs through a long-term intrinsic decrease in the EL efficiency of the devices and the formation of nonemissive dark spots during operation (Fig. 23a).36
 Fig. 23  (a) Optical microscope image of OLEDs working under the atmospheres with moisture (left) and pure oxygen (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2001, Wiley-VCH. (b) A cross-sectional SEM image of the Al2O3/alucone multilayer layers deposited on the polymer substrate by ALD and MLD processes; (c) thin-film encapsulated OLEDs on barrier coated flexible substrates. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2011, IOP Publishing Ltd. (d) The flexible lamination encapsulation process using thick stainless steel (STS) or metal foil. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
It is a quite complex problem to identify what the intrinsic degradation mechanisms are in OLEDs because they are highly dependent on the materials and device architectures used.201 A specific example is that the degradation of blue phosphorescent emitters is far more rapid than that of fluorescent emitters, which has long been a stubborn industrial problem.202 Different chemical and electrochemical analysis techniques such as voltammetry techniques, electric field profiling, photoluminescence, as well as high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) have been used to study the intrinsic degradation mechanisms.210 Current results illustrate that electro- or photochemical reactions, ionic species migration, interfacial effects, and molecule-specific degradation play important roles in intrinsic device degradation.203 Electro- or photochemical reactions are identified as the key factor that leads to the deterioration of organic molecules in the devices, which may be caused by corrosion, exciton reactions, charge carrier reactions, charge accumulation, and changes in the electric field profile due to molecular reorientation.211 Interfacial reactions usually take place at metal/organic interfaces, resulting in electrode delamination and thus catastrophic failure of the OLED device. In order to clarify the chemistry-related degradation mechanisms, Kondakov et al. studied the structures of degradation products in degraded OLEDs and found that the key step in operational degradation is the homolytic cleavage of weaker bonds.212 Schmidbauer et al. summarized the different chemical processes responsible for the intrinsic degradation of state-of-the-art OLEDs, drawing a conclusion that structural features and moieties can be detrimental to operational stability.211 Lin et al. comprehensively explored the intrinsic chemical stability of a series of organic materials with typical electron-accepting moieties of S–O, P–O, and C–O, suggesting that the bond strength of the weak chemical bonds of the molecules would determine the intrinsic chemical stability of the organic materials in their excited and charged states.213 In addition, balanced charge transport and injection have been verified to largely account for the device lifetime through the studies of different host materials,204,205 emissive layer dopants,206 and transporting layer dopants.207 For instance, Cho et al. synthesized a universal host material for both TADF and phosphorescent OLEDs with proper HOMO/LUMO levels, thereby greatly improving the device lifetime.204 Bin et al. used air-stable and low-temperature-evaporable n-type dopants 2-(2-methoxyphenyl)-1,3-dimethyl-1H-benzoimidazol-3-ium iodide (o-MeO-DMBI-I) to modify the electron-transport layer so that the device efficiency and stability were enhanced by the improved balance of holes and electrons in the emissive layer.207
For the external degradation issue, the growth of dark spots can be attributed to the dust particles deposited during the fabrication process and the permeation of water vapor and oxygen (Fig. 23a).36 More specifically, the impurities provide defect sites for the invasion of moisture, leading to the electrochemical reduction of water at the metal electrode/organic interface and thereby the creation of bubbles by the released hydrogen below the electrode surface. Furthermore, oxygen penetration results in the oxidation of the electrode and the organic layer, as well as the electrode delamination. Consequently, the current conduction will be inevitably blocked by the metal electrode delamination, eventually producing dark spots in the light-emitting area.
An effective way to prevent the moisture/oxygen-induced degradation is to develop appropriate encapsulation methods for flexible OLEDs. Nowadays, thin film encapsulation (TFE) is suggested as the most promising method to accomplish flexible device protection.209 This method can be performed by various low temperature deposition techniques such as Barix™ multilayer encapsulation,214 atomic layer deposition (ALD)/molecular layer deposition (MLD),215 and plasma enhanced ALD (PEALD) processes.216 The Barix™ multilayer encapsulation scheme introduces alternating Al2O3 and polyacrylate layers (dyad) as the encapsulation film, offering barriers on both the bottom and top sides of the device stacks for long-term stability (Fig. 23b).203 The organic/inorganic multilayers not only function as high quality oxygen and moisture barriers, but also smoothen the plastic substrate so as to reduce the mechanical damage and increase the device thermal stability. Based on such a TFE method, the water–vapor transmission rate (WVTR) is claimed to approach the 10−6 g m−2 day−1 target in order to reach a minimum OLED lifetime of 10000 hours. However, the combination of alternating nonvacuum-based polymer deposition processes and vacuum-based deposition processes is time-consuming and costly, which forms major obstacles for mass production. ALD and PEALD are superior techniques that promise highly uniform thin-film coatings with atomic-scale thickness control. The ALD processes are realized by sequential exposure of the surface to be coated to a metal–organic precursor and a reactant (H2O, O3, NH3, etc.). In this way, several types of thin encapsulation films such as Al2O3, TiO2, ZrO2, SiO2 and Si3N4 can be deposited (Fig. 23c).203 Meyer et al. reported Al2O3/ZrO2 nanolaminates prepared by ALD at a temperature of 80 °C as thin encapsulation layers, and the WVTR of a 130 nm-thick nanolaminate was determined to be 4.7 × 10−5 g m−2 day−1.217 A similar value was also achieved by a 50 nm-thick Al2O3/TiO2 nanolaminate thin film.216 However, these achievements do not yet sufficiently satisfy the requirements of flexible OLED applications. In addition, given the low throughput of the ALD method, further improvements on the TFE methods are necessary.
On the other hand, the bending characteristics of a sheet under the bending condition are limited by the breakability of the materials, especially for inorganic ones, regardless of being several tens of nanometers thick. The mechanical degradation of flexible devices after bending usually involves the growth of microcracks under stress, film cracking/channeling and debonding.218 To overcome this problem, we can use elastomeric substrates and conductors to create ordered buckles on the OLEDs, which permit high stretchability and excellent mechanical robustness.219 Besides the careful choice of bendable materials, optimizing the device structural aspects such as the bending stress distribution of the entire structure can suppress the mechanical degradation. Recently, a variety of new flexible encapsulation methods focusing on structure design have been explored. Park et al. developed a novel flexible encapsulation method called Flex Lami-capsulation (Fig. 23d), in which OLEDs were encapsulated in a laminar structure that consists of a thin metal foil and a rubbery polymer layer.208 Han et al. utilized UV-curable cycloaliphatic–epoxy hybrid materials (hybrimer) as a buffer layer to cap the 3.5 dyad moisture barrier encapsulated flexible OLEDs, where the hybrimer could strategically adjust the neutral axis (NA) position, thus allowing multilayer structures to release the cyclic bending stress. The device coated by the hybrimer achieved an almost identical performance to that of nonbending samples in spite of 30-day exposure to 30 °C and 90% R.H. after a bending test with a radius of 1 cm.220 In particular, it is worth noting that these encapsulation methods are suitable for the roll-to-toll fabrication of flexible OLEDs, and the process is very simple, fast, low-cost, and scalable, providing a potential route to the effective encapsulation of flexible electronics.
6. Conclusions and perspectives
Flexible OLEDs hold great promise for the optoelectronics industry, potentially opening the door to low-cost, full-color, low-power and wearable displays. To date, flexible electronics products have sprung up and would possibly change many aspects of our life. All of the progress is inseparable from the development of flexible OLED technology, which encompasses numerous research topics involving flexible electrode design, device fabrication, light manipulation, device architectures, mechanisms of device degradation and device encapsulation. The topic associated with flexible TCEs lays the foundation for the realization of flexible electronics. Various flexible TCEs made of conducting polymers, graphene, SWCNTs, metal networks and their composites are reviewed to evaluate the quality and compliance with demanding flexible OLEDs, both from their electrical conductivity and optical transparency points of view. To date, some of the proposed flexible TCEs have proven to be highly flexible, bendable or even stretchable, compatible with solution processing and with great potential to be prepared with high throughput. Based on the overview of device fabrication, spin-coating and vacuum deposition as the main device fabrication technologies at present are obviously not the best options for industrial mass production due to their high production costs and low production yields. Adopting low-cost roll-to-roll fabrication processes such as slot-die coating, screen printing and inkjet printing is a general trend to fabricate flexible OLEDs. As envisioned by researchers and companies in this field, it is promising that large-area flexible devices will be printed by inks. Furthermore, we have systematically discussed the light extraction technologies, device degradation mechanisms and encapsulation methods for flexible OLEDs. Integration of appropriate out-coupling structures and encapsulation layers is of utmost importance for the device efficiency and operation stability. In particular, it is noteworthy that nanoimprint lithography is an extremely effective technique to introduce out-coupling structures into flexible devices for remarkably improving the device efficiency.
The market for flexible displays has yet to bloom on account of the numerous obstacles and challenges existing in flexible OLEDs. Primarily, the most fundamental difficulty is to discover suitable materials for flexible substrates, which must be highly flexible, impermeable, smooth, transparent, physically and thermally stable and above all economically viable. In view of the lack of such an ideal material to date, inevitable compromises must be made. Currently, PET and PEN are widely used as substrates for flexible electronics, while their low melting temperatures and high permeability limit the processability and stability for device fabrication. Furthermore, flexible TCEs have severe problems in achieving smooth surface morphology, patterning, highly stable doping, and most importantly, large-area production at low cost. Specifically, PEDOT:PSS films are vulnerable to moisture, and SWCNT- or metal network-based films suffer from high surface roughness and haze values, while the growth and transfer processes of graphene are rather complicated. These drawbacks seriously hinder their practical applications as flexible TCEs. In addition, the fabrication technologies for flexible OLEDs are just getting started, most of which are still confined to the laboratory. Especially for light extraction and device encapsulation, the development of methods that are reproducible on manufacturing lines will be of great challenge. As for flexible displays, another critical issue that should be addressed is the realization of flexible thin-film transistors with good performance and high reliability to construct the driver circuits.
Scientific and technical development always offers new opportunities for innovative products. Inspired by the tremendous achievements in flexible OLEDs, researchers as well as companies are pushing for the development of flexible displays and solid-state lighting. At the same time, many other relevant flexible electronic devices, including fibre-shaped polymer light-emitting electrochemical cells,221,222 all-organic optoelectronic sensors,223 flexible supercapacitors,224,225 and electronic skins226,227 are being investigated with encouraging progress. With the accelerating flexible OLED research process, a new era for flexible electronics is approaching. Electronic products that can be bent, twisted and even folded up will undoubtedly become a reality in the near future.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant No. 2014CB932600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61520106012, 91433116, 61522505, 11474214), Jiangsu Science and Technology Department (Grant No. BK20140053), Qing Lan Project, Bureau of Science and Technology of Suzhou Municipality (Grant No. SYG201525, ZXG201422), the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, and the project of the Priority Academic Program Development (PAPD) of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.
Notes and references
A. B. Chwang, M. Hack and J. J. Brown, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2005, 13, 481 CrossRef .
M.-C. Choi, Y. Kim and C.-S. Ha, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2008, 33, 581 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Science, 2010, 327, 1603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, H. J. Kwon, S. Lee, H. Shim, Y. Chun, W. Choi, J. Kwack, D. Han, M. Song, S. Kim, S. Mohammadi, I. Kee and S. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, M. S. White, E. D. Glowacki, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 770 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, D. Luo, M. Li, M. Xu, J. Zou, H. Tao, L. Lan, L. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1255 RSC .
X. Tang, L. Ding, Y.-Q. Sun, Y.-M. Xie, Y.-L. Deng, Z.-K. Wang and L.-S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 12399 RSC .
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gustafsson, Y. Cao, G. M. Treacy, F. Klavetter, N. Colaneri and A. J. Heeger, Nature, 1992, 357, 477 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gu, P. E. Burrows, S. Venkatesh, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Opt. Lett., 1997, 22, 172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. MacDonald, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 4 RSC .
A. Sugimoto, H. Ochi, S. Fujimura, A. Yoshida, T. Miyadera and M. Tsuchida, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2004, 10, 107 CrossRef CAS .

          A. C. Michael Hack, Y.-J. Tung, R. Hewitt, J. Brown, J. P. Lu, C. Shih, J. Ho, R. A. Street, L. Moro, X. Chu, T. Krajewski, N. Rutherford and R. Visser, MRS Proceedings, 2005, 870, H3.1.1.
Z. Xie, L.-S. Hung and F. Zhu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 381, 691 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jun Hyuk, C. Jong Hyun, H. Ji Ho, J. Jang, S. Hyun Soo, J. Jae Kyeong, M. Yeon Gon and C. Ho Kyoon, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2006, 53, 1273 CrossRef .
S. M. Garner, M. He, P.-Y. Lo, C.-F. Sung, C.-W. Liu, Y.-M. Hsieh, R. Hsu, J.-M. Ding, J.-P. Hu, Y.-J. Chan, J. Lin, X. Li, M. Sorensen, J. Li, P. Cimo and C. Kuo, J. Disp. Technol., 2012, 8, 590 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garner, S. Glaesemann and X. Li, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2014, 116, 403 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim and J. W. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18574 CAS .
X. Yang, E. Mutlugun, C. Dang, K. Dev, Y. Gao, S. T. Tan, X. W. Sun and H. V. Demir, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, L. Li, K. Tong, Z. Ren, W. Hu, X. Niu, Y. Chen and Q. Pei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Spechler, T.-W. Koh, J. T. Herb, B. P. Rand and C. B. Arnold, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7428 CrossRef .
E. Kim, H. Cho, K. Kim, T. W. Koh, J. Chung, J. Lee, Y. Park and S. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Jou, C.-P. Wang, M.-H. Wu, H.-W. Lin, H. C. Pan and B.-H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6626 RSC .
T. Cheng, Y. Zhang, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, L. Li, D. Chen, T. Hajagos, Z. Ren, S. Y. Chou, W. Hu and Q. Pei, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tsujimura, J. Fukawa, K. Endoh, Y. Suzuki, K. Hirabayashi and T. Mori, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2014, 22, 412 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Yook and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Chang, W. H. Lin, P. C. Wang, J. I. Taur, T. A. Ku, W. T. Chen, S. J. Yan and C. I. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aizawa, Y. J. Pu, M. Watanabe, T. Chiba, K. Ideta, N. Toyota, M. Igarashi, Y. Suzuri, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5756 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, T. Yasuda, H. Komiyama, J. Lee and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 5, 4019 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Forrest, M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley and M. E. Thompson, Nature, 1998, 395, 151 CrossRef .
B. Minaev, G. Baryshnikov and H. Agren, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1719 RSC .
S. Hirata, Y. Sakai, K. Masui, H. Tanaka, S. Y. Lee, H. Nomura, N. Nakamura, M. Yasumatsu, H. Nakanotani, Q. Zhang, K. Shizu, H. Miyazaki and C. Adachi, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Uoyama, K. Goushi, K. Shizu, H. Nomura and C. Adachi, Nature, 2012, 492, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schaer, F. Nüesch, D. Berner, W. Leo and L. Zuppiroli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 116 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ellmer, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 809 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, S. Pei, L. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De, P. E. Lyons, S. Sorel, E. M. Doherty, P. J. King, W. J. Blau, P. N. Nirmalraj, J. J. Boland, V. Scardaci, J. Joimel and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Lee, S. H. Park, H. Back and K. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 487 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vosgueritchian, D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 421 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. White, M. Kaltenbrunner, E. D. Głowacki, K. Gutnichenko, G. Kettlgruber, I. Graz, S. Aazou, C. Ulbricht, D. A. M. Egbe, M. C. Miron, Z. Major, M. C. Scharber, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 811 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, H. Park, S. Kim, W. Son, I. W. Cheong and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2014, 2, 7288 RSC .
Y.-F. Liu, J. Feng, Y.-F. Zhang, H.-F. Cui, D. Yin, Y.-G. Bi, J.-F. Song, Q.-D. Chen and H.-B. Sun, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 478 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kim, H. Kang, J. H. Lee, S. Kee, S. H. Lee and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, M. Agrawal, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kobayashi, M. Bando, N. Kimura, K. Shimizu, K. Kadono, N. Umezu, K. Miyahara, S. Hayazaki, S. Nagai, Y. Mizuguchi, Y. Murakami and D. Hobara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 023112 CrossRef .
T. H. Bointon, G. F. Jones, A. De Sanctis, R. Hill-Pearce, M. F. Craciun and S. Russo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Lee, J.-H. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 336 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, J. Li, J. Liu, G. Gruner and T. Marks, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 155202 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Hecht, A. M. Heintz, R. Lee, L. Hu, B. Moore, C. Cucksey and S. Risser, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 169501 CrossRef .
W.-B. Liu, S. Pei, J. Du, B. Liu, L. Gao, Y. Su, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2330 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kang and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1391 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, M. J. Motala, X. Guo, S. I. Park, Y. Xiong, J. Yoon, R. G. Nuzzo, J. A. Rogers and J. A. Lewis, Science, 2009, 323, 1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Jang, S.-K. Lee, S. H. Cho, J.-H. Ahn and S. Park, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3535 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, S. Lee, M. Song, D. G. Kim, D. S. You, J. K. Kim, C. S. Kim, T. M. Kim, K. H. Kim, J. J. Kim and J. W. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300474 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, H. Y. Xiang, S. Shen, Y. Q. Li, J. D. Chen, H. J. Xie, I. A. Goldthorpe, L. S. Chen, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Meng, Y. M. Yang, G. Xu, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, J. You, G. Li, Y. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De, T. M. Higgins, P. E. Lyons, E. M. Doherty, P. N. Nirmalraj, W. J. Blau, J. J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J. Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Lee, Y. H. Kim, J. K. Kim, H. Baik, J. H. Park, J. Lee, J. Nam, J. H. Park, T. W. Lee, G. R. Yi and J. H. Cho, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11828 RSC .
M. Mol Menamparambath, C. Muhammed Ajmal, K. Hee Kim, D. Yang, J. Roh, H. Cheol Park, C. Kwak, J. Y. Choi and S. Baik, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16371 CrossRef PubMed .
K. H. Ok, J. Kim, S. R. Park, Y. Kim, C. J. Lee, S. J. Hong, M. G. Kwak, N. Kim, C. J. Han and J. W. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Choi, H.-J. Nam, J.-A. Jeong, S.-W. Cho, H.-K. Kim, J.-W. Kang, D.-G. Kim and W.-J. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 223302 CrossRef .
H. Cho, C. Yun, J.-W. Park and S. Yoo, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1163 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Choa, C.-K. Cho, W.-J. Hwang, K. Tae Eun and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3442 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ji, J. Zhao, Z. Sun and W. Xie, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1137 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cao, Y. Zheng, Z. Li, E. Wrzesniewski, W. T. Hammond and J. Xue, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Han, M. S. Lim, J. H. Park and K. C. Choi, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 3437 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kim, H. J. Kim, K. W. Seo, K. H. Kim, T. W. Kim and H. K. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Xu, Q. D. Ou, Y. Q. Li, Y. B. Zhang, X. D. Zhao, H. Y. Xiang, J. D. Chen, L. Zhou, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kang, S. Jung, S. Jeong, G. Kim and K. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Yu, W. Hu, C. H. Chang, Q. Chen and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Yu, C. H. Chang, W. Hu, X. Niu, Q. Chen and Q. Pei, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14249 RSC .
K. Y. Chun, Y. Oh, J. Rho, J. H. Ahn, Y. J. Kim, H. R. Choi and S. Baik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Matyba, H. Yamaguchi, M. Chhowalla, N. D. Robinson and L. Edman, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Z. Sun, Z. Yan, Z. Jin and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Liang, S. Y. Chou, X. Zhu, X. Niu, Z. Yu and Q. Pei, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4307 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, E. Jung, Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, E. J. Park, S. M. Cho and K. P. Loh, Small, 2014, 10, 944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, J. Liu, D. Wu, Y. Zhao, X. Shi, J. Wang, S. Huang and G. He, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4044 RSC .
J. H. Chang, K. M. Chiang, H. W. Kang, W. J. Chi, J. H. Chang, C. I. Wu and H. W. Lin, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4572 RSC .
C. Y. Chen, W. K. Lee, Y. J. Chen, C. Y. Lu, H. Y. Lin and C. C. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, D. H. Lee, K. Lee and C. W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1495 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Abd Razak, I. F. Wahab, F. Fadil, F. N. Dahli, A. Z. Md Khudzari and H. Adeli, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2015, 2015, 1 CrossRef .
J. P. Thomas, L. Zhao, D. McGillivray and K. T. Leung, J. Mater. Chem., 2014, 2, 2383 RSC .
N. Kim, S. Kee, S. H. Lee, B. H. Lee, Y. H. Kahng, Y. R. Jo, B. J. Kim and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cai, T. Xiao, R. Liu, Y. Chen, R. Shinar and J. Shinar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 153303 CrossRef .
I. Lee, G. W. Kim, M. Yang and T. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 302 CAS .
A. A. Argun, A. Cirpan and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yim, J. Park and B. Park, J. Disp. Technol., 2010, 6, 252 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Kim, L. Shao, K. Zhang and K. P. Pipe, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Glowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, T. Kawase, R. H. Friend, T. Shimoda, M. Inbasekaran, W. Wu and E. P. Woo, Science, 2000, 290, 2123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rana, J. Singh and J.-H. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2646 RSC .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, R. Li, S. R. Puniredd, Y. Hernandez, F. Hinkel, S. Wang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yi and Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11700 CAS .
A. A. Green and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Dimiev, G. Ceriotti, A. Metzger, N. D. Kim and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mohanty, A. Nagaraja, J. Armesto and V. Berry, Small, 2010, 6, 226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, S. Pei, W. Ren, L. Gao and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, H. Kim, K. S. Kim, S. K. Lee, S. Bae, J. H. Ahn, Y. J. Kim, J. B. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Han, Y. Lee, M.-R. Choi, S.-H. Woo, S.-H. Bae, B. H. Hong, J.-H. Ahn and T.-W. Lee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 105 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, S. Oida, G. S. Tulevski, S. J. Han, J. B. Hannon, D. K. Sadana and T. C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2294 Search PubMed .
J. O. Hwang, J. S. Park, D. S. Choi, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Lee, K. E. Lee, Y. H. Kim, M. H. Song, S. Yoo and S. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dürkop, S. A. Getty, E. Cobas and M. S. Fuhrer, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 35 CrossRef .
L. F. C. Pereira, C. G. Rocha, A. Latgé, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Ferreira, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 123106 CrossRef .
S. Park, M. Vosguerichian and Z. Bao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1727 RSC .
A. Kaskela, A. G. Nasibulin, M. Y. Timmermans, B. Aitchison, A. Papadimitratos, Y. Tian, Z. Zhu, H. Jiang, D. P. Brown, A. Zakhidov and E. I. Kauppinen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, G. Pitner, G. Giri, J. H. Koo, J. Park, K. Kim, H. Wang, R. Sinclair, H. S. Wong and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Blackburn, T. M. Barnes, M. C. Beard, Y. H. Kim, R. C. Tenent, T. J. McDonald, B. To, T. J. Coutts and M. J. Heben, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Hecht and R. B. Kaner, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 749 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Hu, L. Wang, Y. Zhou, G. Gruner and T. J. Marks, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, K. Ryu, X. Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. Tompson and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Geng, K. K. Kim, K. P. So, Y. S. Lee, Y. Chang and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sekitani, H. Nakajima, H. Maeda, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, K. Hata and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Ou, L. Hu, G. C. Raymond, O. K. Soo, J. Pan, Z. Zheng, Y. Park, D. Hecht, G. Irvin, P. Drzaic and G. Gruner, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Guo, T. Sun, Q. Liu, Z. Suo and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3121 Search PubMed .
T. Gao, B. Wang, B. Ding, J. K. Lee and P. W. Leu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Catrysse and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-G. Kang, H. Joon Park, S. Hyun Ahn and L. Jay Guo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1179 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Choi, S. Choo, P. H. Jung, J. H. Shin, Y. D. Kim and H. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 055305 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, L. Li, X. Niu, Z. Yu and Q. Pei, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 817 CrossRef CAS .
V. Scardaci, R. Coull, P. E. Lyons, D. Rickard and J. N. Coleman, Small, 2011, 7, 2621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gaynor, S. Hofmann, M. G. Christoforo, C. Sachse, S. Mehra, A. Salleo, M. D. McGehee, M. C. Gather, B. Lussem, L. Muller-Meskamp, P. Peumans and K. Leo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Madaria, A. Kumar, F. N. Ishikawa and C. Zhou, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 564 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Xu, D. Chen and G. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 161 RSC .
L. Hu, H. Wu and Y. Cui, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 760 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, J. Li, J. Xu and H. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Rathmell, S. M. Bergin, Y. L. Hua, Z. Y. Li and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Won, A. Kim, W. Yang, S. Jeong and J. Moon, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e132 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, D. Kong, Z. Ruan, P. C. Hsu, S. Wang, Z. Yu, T. J. Carney, L. Hu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Morales-Masis, F. Dauzou, Q. Jeangros, A. Dabirian, H. Lifka, R. Gierth, M. Ruske, D. Moet, A. Hessler-Wyser and C. Ballif, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 384 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Kim, Y. C. Han, H. C. Kim, E. G. Jeong and K. C. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7145 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Yoo, S.-H. Lee, A.-S. Lee, C.-Y. Im, T.-M. Kang, W.-J. Lee, S.-T. Lee, H.-D. Kim and H.-K. Chung, SID Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap., 2005, 36, 1344 CrossRef .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yimsiri and M. R. Mackley, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2006, 61, 3496 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, C. Shi, Q. Fu, F. Zhao, Y. Hu, Y. Feng and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5164 RSC .
L. Duan, L. Hou, T.-W. Lee, J. Qiao, D. Zhang, G. Dong, L. Wang and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6392 RSC .
T.-W. Lee, T. Noh, H.-W. Shin, O. Kwon, J.-J. Park, B.-K. Choi, M.-S. Kim, D. W. Shin and Y.-R. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1625 CrossRef CAS .
H. Youn, K. Jeon, S. Shin and M. Yang, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1470 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tekoglu, G. Hernandez-Sosa, E. Kluge, U. Lemmer and N. Mechau, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 3493 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ju, Y. Yamagata and T. Higuchi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, L. Li, X. Niu, Z. Yu and Q. Pei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16632 CAS .
A. Sandstrom, H. F. Dam, F. C. Krebs and L. Edman, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1002 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zheng, Y. Zheng, N. Liu, N. Ai, Q. Wang, S. Wu, J. Zhou, D. Hu, S. Yu, S. Han, W. Xu, C. Luo, Y. Meng, Z. Jiang, Y. Chen, D. Li, F. Huang, J. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1971 Search PubMed .
J. Hast, M. Tuomikoski, R. Suhonen, K.-L. Väisänen, M. Välimäki, T. Maaninen, P. Apilo, A. Alastalo and A. Maanineny, SID Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap., 2013, 44, 192 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, S. Lim, H. Zhang, C. D. Frisbie, L. F. Francis and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Finn, M. Lotya and J. N. Coleman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9254 CAS .
S.-H. Jung, J.-J. Kim and H.-J. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 6954 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Olivier, L. Derue, B. Geffroy, E. Ishow and T. Maindron, SPIE Organic Photonics + Electronics. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2015, p. 95661N.
A. Verma, D. M. Zink, C. Fléchon, J. Leganés Carballo, H. Flügge, J. M. Navarro, T. Baumann and D. Volz, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2016, 122, 191 CrossRef .
D. Y. Choi, H. W. Kang, H. J. Sung and S. S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 977 RSC .
X. Wu, F. Li, W. Wu and T. Guo, Vacuum, 2014, 101, 53 CrossRef CAS .
C. Girotto, B. P. Rand, S. Steudel, J. Genoe and P. Heremans, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Höfle, A. Schienle, C. Bernhard, M. Bruns, U. Lemmer and A. Colsmann, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5155 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Pu, T. Chiba, K. Ideta, S. Takahashi, N. Aizawa, T. Hikichi and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chiba, Y. J. Pu and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ouyang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2141 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lin, N.-W. Hu, H.-W. Chang, C.-Y. Lu, C.-Y. Chen and C.-C. Wu, Org. Electron., 2016, 28, 25 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Koh, J. M. Choi, S. Lee and S. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hong and J. L. Lee, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2011, 7, 77 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, D.-D. Zhang, Q.-D. Ou, Y.-H. Deng, J.-J. Zhu, L. Cheng, Z. Liu, S.-T. Lee, Y.-Q. Li and J.-X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4319 RSC .
K. Saxena, V. K. Jain and D. S. Mehta, Opt. Mater., 2009, 32, 221 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wrzesniewski, S. H. Eom, W. Cao, W. T. Hammond, S. Lee, E. P. Douglas and J. Xue, Small, 2012, 8, 2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, C. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Ding, L. Li, B. Wei and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10213 CAS .
S. Reineke, F. Lindner, G. Schwartz, N. Seidler, K. Walzer, B. Lussem and K. Leo, Nature, 2009, 459, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Lee, J. Y. Park, S. Gim, J. Ham, J. H. Son and J. L. Lee, Small, 2015, 11, 4480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Xiang, Y. Q. Li, L. Zhou, H. J. Xie, C. Li, Q. D. Ou, L. S. Chen, C. S. Lee, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Wang, M. G. Helander, J. Qiu, D. P. Puzzo, M. T. Greiner, Z. M. Hudson, S. Wang, Z. W. Liu and Z. H. Lu, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 753 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsutsui, M. Yahiro, H. Yokogawa and K. Kawano, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Do, Y. C. Kim, Y. W. Song, C. O. Cho, H. Jeon, Y. J. Lee, S. H. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1214 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Lee, S.-H. Kim, J. Huh, G.-H. Kim, Y.-H. Lee, S.-H. Cho, Y.-C. Kim and Y. R. Do, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 483 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ziebarth, A. K. Saafir, S. Fan and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 451 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Koo, S. M. Jeong, F. Araoka, K. Ishikawa, S. Nishimura, T. Toyooka and H. Takezoe, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 222 CAS .
J. Wang, F. J. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. H. Tang, A. W. Tang, H. S. Peng, Z. Xu, F. Teng and Y. S. Wang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 17, 69 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakamura, N. Tsutsumi, N. Juni and H. Fujii, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 054505 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Li, J. X. Tang, Z. Y. Xie, L. S. Hung and S. S. Lau, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 386, 128 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Cho, C.-L. Lin and C.-C. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 111106 CrossRef .
J. Lee, N. Chopra, D. Bera, S. Maslov, S.-H. Eom, Y. Zheng, P. Holloway, J. Xue and F. So, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 174 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, L.-H. Xu, Y.-Q. Li, L. Zhou, C. Li, Q.-D. Ou, J.-D. Chen, S. Shen and J.-X. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 203 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Hobson, S. Wedge, J. A. E. Wasey, I. Sage and W. L. Barnes, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1393 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Yang, K. C. Choi and C. W. Ahn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 173301 CrossRef .
J. Kohl, J. A. Pantina and D. M. O'Carroll, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 7644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, J. P. Yang, P. P. Cheng, J. J. Zhu, Z. Q. Xu, Y. H. Deng, S. T. Lee, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 013308 CrossRef .
H. Aziz, Z. D. Popovic, N. X. Hu, A. M. Hor and G. Xu, Science, 1999, 283, 1900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. So and D. Kondakov, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, Z. Chen, B. Qu, J. Luo, S. Kong, Q. Gong and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Park, H. Chae, H. K. Chung and S. I. Lee, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2011, 26, 034001 CrossRef .
Y. J. Cho, K. S. Yook and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and H. Aziz, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8733 CAS .
T. Fleetham, G. Li and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16240 CAS .
Z. Bin, L. Duan and Y. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6444 CAS .
M. H. Park, J. Y. Kim, T. H. Han, T. S. Kim, H. Kim and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liao, F. Yu, L. Long, B. Wei, L. Lu and J. Zhang, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 2344 CrossRef CAS .
S. Scholz, D. Kondakov, B. Lussem and K. Leo, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schmidbauer, A. Hohenleutner and B. Konig, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Kondakov, W. C. Lenhart and W. F. Nichols, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 024512 CrossRef .
N. Lin, J. Qiao, L. Duan, L. Wang and Y. Qiu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7569 CAS .
A. B. Chwang, M. A. Rothman, S. Y. Mao, R. H. Hewitt, M. S. Weaver, J. A. Silvernail, K. Rajan, M. Hack, J. J. Brown, X. Chu, L. Moro, T. Krajewski and N. Rutherford, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 413 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Lin, Y. N. Chang, M. H. Tseng, C. C. Wang and F. Y. Tsai, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 024005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Kim, Y. J. Jeong, T. K. An, S. Park, J. H. Jang, S. Nam, J. Jang, S. H. Kim and C. E. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 18, 1042 RSC .
J. Meyer, P. Görrn, F. Bertram, S. Hamwi, T. Winkler, H.-H. Johannes, T. Weimann, P. Hinze, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1845 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lewis, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 38 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yin, J. Feng, R. Ma, Y. F. Liu, Y. L. Zhang, X. L. Zhang, Y. G. Bi, Q. D. Chen and H. B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Han, E. G. Jeong, H. Kim, S. Kwon, H.-G. Im, B.-S. Bae and K. C. Choi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 40835 RSC .
Z. Zhang, K. Guo, Y. Li, X. Li, G. Guan, H. Li, Y. Luo, F. Zhao, Q. Zhang, B. Wei, Q. Pei and H. Peng, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 233 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Q. Zhang, K. Guo, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Wang, Y. Luo, H. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Guan, B. Wei, X. Zhu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5621 RSC .
C. M. Lochner, Y. Khan, A. Pierre and A. C. Arias, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. Yu, C. Yan, K. Li and Z. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Hwang, Z. Yu, K. Takei, J. Park, T. Chen, B. Ma and A. Javey, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Rui-Peng Xu
	Ruipeng Xu received his BS degree in physics from Soochow University in 2013. Then, he joined the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) as a graduate student under the supervision of Prof. Jian-Xin Tang. His research interests focus mainly on organic device physics and interface engineering of organic light-emitting diodes as well as photovoltaic cells.

Yan-Qing Li
	Yan-Qing Li received her BSc degree in physics from Zhejiang University, MPhil degree and PhD degree in Materials Science from City University of Hong Kong. She is now a professor at the Institute of Nano Functional & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. Her main research interests lie in organic and inorganic/organic hybrid materials and devices with a focus on flexible electronics, involving the synthesis, characterization, and device integration of metal and semiconductor nanostructures and thin-films for a range of device applications including light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and smart windows.

Jian-Xin Tang
	Jian-Xin Tang received his BSc degree in physics from Zhejiang University, and PhD degree in Physics and Materials Science from City University of Hong Kong. In 2008, he was appointed professor at the Institute of Nano Functional & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. His research areas/interests span device physics and surface science on organic light-emitting diodes and photovoltaic cells, including localized electronic state and charge barrier formation at organic interfaces, and novel device architectures to improve device performance with interface modification for carrier transport and light manipulation.

Metal foil	Barrier property	Flatness (needs insulator)
Thermal conductivity	Surface breakage in R2R process
Thinness	Needs top emission
Thermal durability	



Thin glass	Barrier property	Breakage during
Thinness	Manufacturing
Thermal durability	Product breakage


Plastic with barrier film	Flexibility	Barrier property
Thinness	Thermal durability
Light weight	

	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic model of structural modification in PEDOT:PSS with the addition of co-solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Highly flexible and stretchable polymer OLEDs on 1.4 mm PET foil substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) The amorphous PEDOT:PSS grains (left) are reformed into crystalline PEDOT:PSS nanofibrils (right) via a charge-separated transition mechanism (middle) induced by a concentrated H2SO4 treatment. (d) DC conductivities of PEDOT:PSS films treated with various concentrations of H2SO4 and with various drying temperature (inset of d). (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  Transfer process for highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films treated with concentrated H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Relationship between the quality and price of graphene using various methods for mass production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Ultrasonication exfoliates graphite flakes in aqueous solution with sodium cholate and the photograph of a 90 μg mL−1 graphene dispersion in sodium cholate six weeks after it was prepared. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of a typical reduction process of graphite oxide (GO) with photographs of glass vials containing a dispersion of GO in methanol (left) and a stable dispersion of reduced graphite oxide (rGO) in bulk methanol (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (c) Optical images of GO and HI acid reduced GO sheets on SiO2/Si and PET substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (d) Transfer and patterning process of exfoliated graphene solution onto a PET substrate as a flexible TCE for organic electronics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of as-grown graphene films on thin (300 nm) nickel layers and thick (1 mm) Ni foil (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Roll-to-roll transfer and layer-by-layer doping process of multiple stacked transparent flexible graphene films on PET. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Roll-to-roll production of a 30-inch graphene film transferred onto a PET sheet for transparent electrodes. (d) Sheet resistance comparison of various graphene and ITO. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2010, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 6  Device structure and performance of white OLEDs on a four-layer graphene anode (a) and a single-layer graphene anode (b). Inset in (a) is the photograph of the operating white OLED on graphene anode. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Defects generated by partial surface coverage of the CVD-grown graphene. (b) Macroscopic defect created during the transfer processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Absorbance spectra of a range of films with varying m- and s-SWCNT contents and AFM images of semiconductor-enriched (top right) and metal-enriched (bottom right) transparent SWNT films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (b) CNT conductive films being coated by slot-die coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2011, Materials Research Society. (c) Transmission of SWCNT films as a function of wavelength for films fabricated by vacuum filtration with various sheet resistance values (left) and sheet resistance as a function of transmittance of SWCNT films at 550 nm for various CNT densities (right). The inset is a photograph of a transferred SWCNT film on flexible PET substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the dry transfer process for SWCNT films and the photograph of a flexed SWCNT film on a PE sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (b) Printed elastic conductors on a PDMS sheet, the comparison of stretchability and conductivity as a function of SWCNT content, and a demonstration of a stretchable display that can be spread over arbitrary curved surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of a Ag nanomesh with a pitch size of 7.5 μm embedded into a PET substrate, and photograph of an embedded Ag nanomesh on a 6-inch scale PET substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2015, IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) SEM image and transmittance spectra of Au nanomesh electrodes made by grain boundary lithography. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Optical images of PET with embedded hexagonal Ag networks (PEANs) as a transparent conductive electrode and a large-area flexible white OLED using PEAN as the anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) AgNW ink in ethanol solvent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of a roll-to-roll welding process for planarized AgNW electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of AgNWs for combination with CA-Ag NPs. The inset shows an aqueous suspension of Ag NWs (0.5 wt%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) Photograph of a AgNW flexible TCE with a bending radius of 3 mm, and (e) the resistance of s-MoOx-treated AgNW flexible TCE and ITO during repeated bending tests. The inset shows the magnified results of s-MoOx-treated AgNW flexible TCE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) SEM image of a AgNW coating on glass substrate; (g) optical photograph of a AgNW coating on a PUA film; (h) transmittance spectra of a neat PUA film and AgNW–PUA composite films with specified sheet resistance, and (i) photograph of a flexible OLED wrapped around the edge of 400 mm-thick cardboard. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of AgNW embedded into a PDMS layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (b) Fused AgNW junctions embedded into PMMA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM image of CuNWs with length of more than 50 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) AgNWs embedded in a PI substrate with a titania sol–gel coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic of metal nanotroughs and UV-vis spectra of various metal nanotrough networks on glass substrates; (f) Au nanotrough networks on PET substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Metal grid/graphene hybrid transparent electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) AgNW percolation network soldered with GO and the stretchable flexible OLEDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Cross-sectional structure and photograph of a solution-processed flexible SWCNT/AgNW-nanocomposite electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2014, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) Schematic illustration and (e) photograph of polymer–metal hybrid transparent electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustrations of fabrication steps for NMDCE on plastic substrates, and performance stability comparison of flexible OLEDs on ITO and NMDCE electrodes under repeated bending tests. Insets show the photographs of corresponding electrodes after continuous bending. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Brightness–voltage characteristics and photograph (inset) of orange small-molecule OLEDs fabricated with ZTO/Ag/ZTO and ITO anodes, and photograph of a curved 3.5 × 11.5 cm−2 small-molecule flexible OLED fabricated on the ZTO/grid anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Transmittance spectra and photograph of transparent flexible OLEDs (with anode ZnS 24 nm, capping layer ZnS 22 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic cross-section of a hot-walled OVPD reactor showing the growth process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2004, Nature Publishing Group. (b) A typical device fabrication process with a combination of spin coating and vacuum evaporation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Fabricated OLED panel in roll-to-roll manufacturing line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2015, SID. (b) Photograph of the slot die roll coater and close-up photograph of the slot-die head during the coating of an active layer stripe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Schematic illustration of the full-color display structure with an inkjet-printed cathode, and (d) photograph of the fabricated full-color display. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 17  Typical structure of a printed flexible OLED and the related fabrication technologies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2013, SID.	 

 	Fig. 18  Various modes of light out-coupling losses in a typical flexible OLED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2011, KIM and Springer.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a and b) Cross-sections of an OLED to illustrate the light propagation, showing that (a) half-sphere and (b) high-refractive-index substrates can be applied to increase light out-coupling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (c) Sub-micrometer patterns on the backside of a PET substrate for enhancing light out-coupling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d–f) Device structure of a flexible OLED with a moth-eye nanostructured PET substrate (d); field intensity distributions of plane wave light at λ = 520 nm passing through flat PET (e) without and (f) with a moth-eye out-coupling layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g and h) OLED devices on regular glass substrates (g) and industrial-grade PEN with high-refractive-index and built-in scattering properties (h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (i and j) Schematic of the OLED device structure on flexible plastic with metal electrodes (i), schematic energy-level diagram of the optimized OLED and the photograph of a large-area flexible OLED (j). Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of nanostructured flexible OLEDs with 1D grating, 2D grating, and quasi-random nanostructures. (b) Optical simulations of the far-field intensity distribution for flexible OLEDs with a flat structure, 1D grating, 2D grating, and a quasi-random nanostructure, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  Comparison of calculated dispersion diagrams of TM (or TE) polarized light as a function of frequency and the in-plane wave vector Kx in the first Brillouin zone of OLEDs: without an out-coupling structure (a) and with a deterministic aperiodic out-coupling structure for TM polarized light (b) and TE polarized light (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Device structure of a flexible OLED with biomimetic quasi-random nanostructures. (b–d) Normalized cross-section field-intensity distributions (at 520 nm) with propagation of OLEDs on (b) ITO, (c) MDCE, and (d) NMDCE using the FDTD method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Optical microscope image of OLEDs working under the atmospheres with moisture (left) and pure oxygen (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2001, Wiley-VCH. (b) A cross-sectional SEM image of the Al2O3/alucone multilayer layers deposited on the polymer substrate by ALD and MLD processes; (c) thin-film encapsulated OLEDs on barrier coated flexible substrates. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2011, IOP Publishing Ltd. (d) The flexible lamination encapsulation process using thick stainless steel (STS) or metal foil. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
