Long-lived luminescence of silicon nanocrystals: from principles to applications  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP05208A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP05208A
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 26507-26526Long-lived luminescence of silicon nanocrystals: from principles to applications

        
          
            Raffaello 
            Mazzaro
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Romano
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Paola 
            Ceroni
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry “Giacomo Ciamician”, University of Bologna, and Interuniversity Center for the Chemical Conversion of Solar Energy (SolarChem), Via Selmi 2, 40126 Bologna, Italy. E-mail: paola.ceroni@unibo.it
Received 
      1st August 2017
    , Accepted 11th September 2017First published on 28th September 2017AbstractSilicon nanocrystals (SiNCs) synthesized by plasma-induced or high temperature processes (e.g., thermal disproportionation of hydrogen silsesquioxane at T > 1100 °C) display bright (photoluminescence quantum yield up to 70%) and long-lived luminescence (hundreds of μs), which can be tuned from green to red and near-infra-red spectral regions according to nanocrystal dimensions. The present review focuses on the parameters affecting the optical properties of these SiNCs, namely size, shape, surface, degree of crystallinity, and on a method to increase their brightness by functionalising SiNCs with dyes to build up a light-harvesting antenna. The final discussion presents some of the most recent examples of applications, which take advantage of the luminescence properties of SiNCs: energy conversion devices, sensors, and bioimaging probes.
Raffaello Mazzaro
Raffaello Mazzaro received his PhD in Chemistry in 2016, in collaboration between the CNR-IMM institute in Bologna and the chemistry department G.Ciamician of the University of Bologna, where he continued his activity as postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Ceroni. His interests and past activities are mainly focused on energy conversion processes performed by hybrid nanomaterials, among which silicon nanocrystals functionalized with photoactive molecules. He is currently a Kempe and Knut & Alice Wallenberg postdoctoral fellow at Luleå University of Technology, Sweden.
Francesco Romano
Francesco Romano graduated in pharmaceutical sciences at the University of Padova in 2008. He received his PhD from the University of Padova in 2012 under the supervision of Prof. Licini. After a first postdoctoral fellowship in the group of Prof. Lucarini (2013–2014), he joined the team of Prof. Ceroni. He is currently involved in the synthesis and the functionalization of silicon nanocrystals.
Paola Ceroni
Paola Ceroni is Full Professor at the University of Bologna. In 1998 she obtained her PhD degree in Chemical Sciences at the University of Bologna, after a period in the United States (Prof. Allen J. Bard's laboratory). Current research focuses on luminescent silicon nanocrystals, photoactive metal complexes and dendrimers. She is co-author of about 180 scientific papers and reviews. She is the principal investigator of an ERC Starting Grant for the development of hybrid light-harvesting antennae based on silicon nanocrystals for energy conversion.
1. Introduction
Silicon nanocrystals (SiNCs) are an emerging class of luminescent quantum dots,1–6 whose optical properties can be tuned by varying the nanocrystal size. Advantages of SiNCs include the high natural abundance of silicon, its lack of biological toxicity, and the robustness of the Si–C bond commonly employed for the functionalisation of SiNC surfaces. Surface functionalisation is necessary to prevent oxidation of nanocrystals and to obtain a stable colloidal dispersion of SiNCs.7,8 The most interesting and perhaps the most potentially useful feature of SiNCs is their bright long-lived (tens-to-hundreds of microseconds) luminescence. This property is dependent on the synthetic methodology employed and contrasting results about the correlation between dimension and emission properties (energy and lifetime) are found in the literature.9,10 The reason for the different luminescence properties of SiNCs is not clear, but it is likely to be related to the different degrees of crystallinity of the silicon nanoparticles and abundance of surface defects. Si nanocrystals synthesized by high temperature (T > 1100 °C) or plasma-induced processes usually exhibit a crystalline structure, tuneable emission from the visible to the near-infrared (NIR) spectral region (600–1200 nm), high photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQY up to 70%)11 and long emission lifetimes (hundreds of microseconds), as detailed in the following sections. On the other hand, Si nanocrystals synthesized by low temperature (<150 °C) solution procedures usually exhibit UV–blue (390–500 nm) emission, without significant size tunability, moderate photoluminescence quantum yields (10–20%), and much shorter emission lifetimes (tenth of nanoseconds).12–14 Laser ablation has also been used to produce SiNCs, but large nanocrystals with a broad size-distribution are produced and a post-treatment phase is necessary:15,16 the resulting photophysical properties are strongly affected by the liquid media and the broad size distribution.
One route to SiNCs displaying long-lived luminescence utilizes the thermal disproportionation of non-stoichiometric silicon oxide (SiOx, x < 2). The required ratio between silicon and oxygen is usually achieved by Si ion-implantation in fused silica,16 obtaining high quality but a low amount of SiNCs, or by sol–gel chemical preparation of silicon precursors (silicates, polysiloxanes, and silsesquioxanes).17 In particular, the easily processable and highly stable hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ, [HSiO3/2]n) is widely used to produce oxide-embedded SiNCs that can be liberated from the oxide matrix by etching (Fig. 1a).18,19 These hydride terminated SiNCs can be easily functionalized by thermally,10 photochemically20 or chemically induced hydrosilylation21 in order to passivate their surface (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Synthetic route for producing H-teminated Si nanocrystals (right part) by (a) a high temperature process or (b) plasma-induced synthesis. Successive passivation of the silicon surface (left part) to obtain a colloidal dispersion of SiNCs, displaying tuneable and long-lived luminescence. 
The HSQ precursor material can be obtained by hydrolysing a chlorosilane (e.g. HSiCl3) in the presence of an aryl sulfonic acid in a biphasic medium,22 or by oxidizing HSiCl3 with water at −78 °C.23
Alternatively, plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) utilizes a non-thermal plasma, created by applying an electric field to a gas mixture (e.g. SiH4, H2 and Ar) injected in a reactor.24 The electric field is produced via either a DC or a radio/microwave power supply and Si nanocrystals are then synthesized and collected on a filter or a substrate (Fig. 1b). The PECVD apparatus can produce larger amounts (tens of mg h−1) of Si nanocrystals, compared to that described in Fig. 1a, but it requires special equipment and hazardous SiH4 gas as the starting material.
A detailed description of the plethora of synthetic methodologies for production of SiNCs and functionalisation of their surface is outside the aim of the present work. Interested readers can refer to previously published reviews on the topic.8,14,25–31
Once SiNCs are synthesised, their thorough characterisation is necessary to estimate the nanocrystal size, crystallinity, purity, and surface functionalization, parameters which strongly affect the optical properties of the resulting material.6,32 For example, high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) is a powerful tool to estimate the nanocrystal dimension and crystal lattice, but it measures the size of only a limited number of nanocrystals and it can be coupled with small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measurements to get a statistical average of the size and uniformity of the nanocrystals. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements ensure that silicon nanoparticles are crystalline and have a bulk-like diamond cubic crystal structure, while Raman spectroscopy might give an insight into crystal defects and secondary structures.33 For characterizing the nanocrystal surfaces, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy is a useful tool to determine the presence of Si–H and Si–O bonds on the nanocrystal surface, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is more effective in determining the extent of surface oxidation. NMR is often used to verify the covalent bond between Si and the surface ligand. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) coupled with an estimate of the number of silicon atoms present at the surface, as expected on the basis of SiNC size, gives an estimation of the degree of functionalization of Si atoms at the surface. To date, the relatively poor characterisation of size and/or surface of most of the experimentally studied SiNCs has prevented a good correlation between results published by different authors, a problem related also to the lack of well-assessed theoretical models for anything other than hydrogen-terminated SiNCs.34
The present review will focus only on colloidal nanocrystals displaying long-lived luminescence. Porous silicon nanostructures,35 as well as short-lived luminescent SiNCs,36 will not be covered. The review will give an overview of the optical properties as a function of size, shape, surface functionalisation, degree of crystallinity, their photostability and the possibility of overcoming the low molar absorption coefficient typical of SiNCs by appending highly absorbing dyes in a light-harvesting antenna. The last part will be devoted to applications of SiNCs in the fields of light-emitting diodes, luminescent solar-concentrators, sensors and bioimaging. The choice of the selected examples is dictated not only by the intrinsic interest of the system itself or its possible applications, but also by its educational value.
2. Optical properties
The most fascinating features of SiNCs are beyond any doubt the optical properties. Those are still far to be well understood, despite the widespread effort of the community to have insights into its origin. Bulk silicon is an indirect band gap semiconductor.37Fig. 2 represents the band structure diagram of bulk crystalline Si, where the energy of electronic levels is plotted as a function of the crystal wave vector k, related to the electron momentum (ħk). For this semiconductor, the valence band maximum and the minimum of the conduction band are displaced at different k values. For moment conservation, the electronic radiative transitions are coupled to phonon relaxation (collective vibrational modes of the atoms forming the crystal) and the probability of radiative processes (both absorption and emission) is substantially lower compared to direct band gap semiconductors. For example, indirect semiconductors like Si, Ge, AgBr etc. are characterized by low absorption coefficients and photoluminescence quantum yield, compared to their direct bandgap counterparts, like InAs and GaAs.
 Fig. 2  Energy of the valence and conduction bands as a function of the wave vector k for an indirect band gap semiconductor, like Si. 
Optical properties of SiNCs are affected by different parameters: size and shape (quantum confinement effect), surface, crystallinity, and electronic interactions with appended chromophores. The influence of these parameters will be discussed in the following. The optical properties of SiNCs can also be affected by doping38–41 and coupling to plasmonic nanostructures, like Ag or Au,42–44 and interested readers can refer to previous reviews and articles.
2.1 Size effect

Band gap energy. 
The band structure is known to be strongly dependent on the size of the crystallite on the nanometre scale: the introduction of boundaries to the infinite lattice gives rise to the well-known quantum confinement effect.45 In the confinement regime, both the energy and the probability of the electronic transitions are affected by the size and the shape of the crystallite due to the discretization of the bands and the subsequent molecular-like density of states. In particular, the band gap energy, E(d) in eqn (1), increases by decreasing the size of the crystal lattice.46 To a first approximation, the quantum confined band gap energy can be described as a function of the size of the (spherical) crystallite of diameter d by the effective mass approximation:47 (1)where Eg is the band gap energy of the bulk semiconductor (1.1 eV in cubic silicon), e is the electron charge, εr is the relative permittivity of Si (11.68) and me* and mh* are the effective masses of the conduction band electrons and valence band holes. The band gap energy calculated by this simplified equation was found to successfully describe the correlation between the size and optical band gap of silicon nanocrystals (Fig. 3) produced by the synthetic procedures described in Fig. 1. The optical band gap is determined by the photoluminescence (PL) band maximum.10
 Fig. 3  (a) Normalised absorption (dashed lines) and photoluminescence (PL) spectra (solid lines) of alkyl-functionalised SiNCs with diameter in the range 2.5–7.0 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. (b) PL peak emission versus Si nanocrystal diameter adapted with permission and updated from ref. 10. Alkyl-functionalised SiNCs prepared by low temperature methods: Mg2Si reduction48–50 (empty blue symbols), SiCl4 reduction28,51,52 (solid blue symbols) and NaSi reaction with ammonium bromide53 (light blue symbols) compared to SiNCs prepared by a plasma-assisted reaction54–59 (empty red symbols) and by high temperature nucleation10,60 (solid red symbols). The black line corresponds to eqn (1). 
A closer examination of the data reported in Fig. 3 shows that eqn (1) fails to rationalise the square, triangle and circle points, which represent the photoluminescence energy of SiNCs produced by low temperature methods: they exhibit short-lived (timescale of ns) blue luminescence irrespective of their dimension. As stated in the introduction, this review will not discuss the optical properties and applications of these SiNCs.


Probability of the radiative electronic transitions. 
It is now worth considering the effect of the nanocrystal dimension on the probability of the radiative electronic transitions. The momentum conservation rule61 associated with radiative electronic transitions is expected to relax by decreasing the size of the material up to the nanometre scale.62 This effect is related to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle: Δr·Δk > 1/2, where r is the radius of the nanocrystal and k is the above mentioned wave vector of the electron or hole in the nanocrystal. The decrease of nanocrystal dimension brings about a spread in momentum that induces the overlap of electron and hole wavefunctions in k-space and thus increases the probability of the lowest energy electronic radiative transitions, which is negligible in bulk silicon.34 Indeed, a comparison of the absorption properties of bulk silicon and SiNCs evidences an enhancement of the absorption coefficient of SiNCs per Si atom both in oxide embedded nanocrystals63 and alkyl passivated ones.62 The quasi-direct nature of the optical transition in SiNCs is believed to be also responsible for the deviation of the Tauc plot from the linear dependence observed for bulk Si.54,62 However, the molar absorption coefficient of SiNCs is much lower than that reported for the lowest energy absorption band of conventional quantum dots, such as CdSe. Moreover, SiNCs exhibit quite low two-photon absorption (2PA) cross sections: the 2PA spectrum observed for SiNCs (average diameter 3 nm) in hexane shows rather moderate 2PA cross-section values (σ(2)ca. 100 GM at 850 nm),64 which are comparable to those of conventional fluorescent dyes,65,66 while being 3–4 orders of magnitude lower than the cross-sections of colloidal nanocrystals.67–71
In line with the absorption properties, a comparison of emission properties of bulk silicon and SiNCs evidences an increase of the radiative rate constant kr,72 as demonstrated by a shortening of the photoluminescence lifetime, τ = 1/(kr + knr) where knr is the rate of non-radiative processes,58 usually accompanied by an increase of the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY = kr/(kr + knr) = krτ) up to 70%.11 However, in the case of SiNCs with diameter smaller than 4–5 nm, a decrease of photoluminescence quantum yield and lifetime is often experimentally observed upon decreasing the nanocrystals’ dimension, instead of the expected increase. This effect can be related to non-radiative processes due to surface traps overwhelming spatial confinement effects.73 These non-radiative processes may play a major role upon decreasing the nanocrystal dimension, as thoroughly discussed in Section 2.3. An alternative explanation relates the decrease of photoluminescence quantum yield to the presence of a higher fraction of “dark” nanocrystals, i.e. nanocrystals completely quenched by a predominant non-radiative decay path, whereas the luminescent ones display a 100% photoluminescence quantum yield.74,75 This hypothesis is based on the lack of lifetime dispersion in size-selected ensembles of ligand-passivated SiNCs, although clear experimental proof of intrinsic 100% PLQY is lacking.
The nature of the radiative decay of SiNCs is still debated: some papers report a quasi-direct electronic transition, while other studies attribute the long-lived photoluminescence to core-states that remain highly indirect despite quantum confinement, as suggested by temperature76 and pressure77 dependent measurements.


Energy of valence and conduction bands. 
As previously described, the energy of the radiative electronic transitions (e.g. luminescence band) is directly related to the energy difference between the valence band and the conduction band, but it cannot give us information on the position of band edges. Indeed, the position of VB and CB is very difficult to determine since electrochemical measurements on SiNCs do not provide significant signals and only very few reports on the electrochemistry of SiNCs are present in the literature.78,79 As an alternative, a recent study reports on VB and CB positions, based on the analysis, within the Marcus theory, of the rate constants of photoinduced electron transfer processes with electron donors (ferrocene derivatives) and electron acceptors (quinone derivatives).80 In particular, the rate constants are influenced by the reduction potential of the quenchers, the size of the SiNCs (d = 3 or 5 nm), the solvent polarity, but not by the surface capping layer of the SiNCs (dodecyl or ethylbenzene groups), suggesting that quencher molecules can penetrate within the protecting layer.

2.2 Shape dependence
Optical properties of semiconductor nanocrystals are shape-dependent and theoretical modelling of the quantum confinement effect predicts a relation between the energy of the band gap and the dimensionality of the material.81–83 Experimentally, the production of spherical (quantum dots), elongated (quantum wires), planar (quantum wells, nanosheets) and more complex structures (tetrapods etc.) has been developed for several semiconductors, among which is silicon.84 However, the experimental control on the quality of the produced material is far from ideal. As a consequence, the analysis of the impact of the shape of the crystallite on the optical properties is difficult. According to theoretical simulations,85 a relatively small variation of the band gap energy is predicted by changing the shape from spherical to cubical or octahedral geometry. A more pronounced dependence of the emission bandwidth is expected as a function of the shape of the nanocrystal:86 cubic structure is highly desirable to achieve narrow emission bands.
2.3 Effect of surface
Surface plays a major role in determining the optical properties of nanocrystals.34,87,88 Covalent bonds of superficial Si atoms (Fig. 1) assure a robust passivation, compared to the ligand exchange commonly observed for more conventional quantum dots.

Fig. 4 reports the number of atoms per SiNC particle and the percentage of atoms on the surface, as a function of SiNC diameter. SiNCs of 2 nm are expected to comprise ca. 210 Si atoms, 37% of which are at the surface, whereas a 5 nm nanocrystal is composed of 3270 atoms, only 16% of which are at the surface.
 Fig. 4  Number of Si atoms per SiNC (red, left axis) and ratio between the number of atoms on the surface and the total number of atoms per SiNC (blue, right axis). Both values have been calculated by considering the Si unit cell as a cubic volume equal to 0.16 nm3 containing 8 Si atoms. Values under 1 nm have to be considered indicative since the spherical approximation of cubic volumes is no more valid. 
It is of utmost importance to understand the effect of surface groups on the photophysics of SiNCs, in order to achieve a good degree of control on the energy of electronic transitions, photoluminescence quantum yield and corresponding lifetime.

H-Functionalisation. 
As discussed in the introduction, one of the most commonly used methodologies of SiNC synthesis yields hydride-terminated silicon nanocrystals by etching silica around SiNCs. It is usually assumed that hydrogen has a negligible influence on the optical properties of SiNCs,34 so that hydride terminated SiNCs can be considered as a reference material, in which the optical properties are directly related to excitons generated in the core of the nanocrystals. For these SiNCs, the luminescence spans the entire visible spectrum up to the near infrared region,89 and the photoluminescence lifetimes are typically in the μs range.90 The photoluminescence quantum yield is reported to be extremely variable, ranging between 7%91 and 35%92 for comparable samples. This is likely related to the poor dispersibility of H-terminated SiNCs and the resulting difficulties in the experimental measurement. In addition, surface oxidation upon exposure to air is a key parameter91 and it is often hardly controlled, being highly accelerated upon photoexcitation93 because of the lower oxidation potential upon light excitation.94


C-Functionalisation. 
The functionalisation of SiNCs with sp3 hybridized carbon based ligands, i.e. alkyl chains, does not affect the energy of the optical transitions.77,95,96 This is consistent with the energetics of the system, since the ligands are characterized by large oxidation and reduction potentials and cannot be involved in energy or electron transfer processes upon excitation of the SiNCs. However, it is usually reported to have a dramatic effect on the photoluminescence quantum yield: for example, an increase from 1% to 25% is reported for the conversion of hydride-terminated to octadecyl-capped SiNCs.97 This is likely related to experimental uncertainties, as previously discussed, and not to electronic effects caused by non-conjugated alkyl ligands. Recently, photoluminescence quantum yield values as high as 70% and 62% were reported for alkyl passivated SiNCs obtained upon etching with XeF211 and phosphorous pentachloride,98 respectively, demonstrating the importance of an efficient surface coverage in the final optical properties. In addition, the long lifetime is maintained after the functionalization with carbon ligands,87 proving the core-related character of the emission.
The size tunability of emission bands of alkyl passivated SiNCs is only partially consistent with the Effective Mass Approximation (eqn (1)). Indeed, as highlighted by Fig. 3 and 5, the maximum of the photoluminescence band of SiNCs prepared by HSQ disproportionation or plasma-synthesis is rarely reported to be higher than 2 eV, and the relation between the PL peak energy and the nanocrystal size has been verified only in the large size regime (d > 3 nm).99 Several explanations have been proposed for the limited tunability of the emission of C-terminated SiNCs in the 1–2 nm size regime and the relative decrease in photoluminescence quantum yield: (i) the presence of non-radiative surface trap states,99 quenching the emission contribution of smaller nanocrystals and giving rise to an apparently lower energy of the core-related transition; (ii) the rise of a fast radiative channel due to resonant electron–phonon coupling.57,100,203
 Fig. 5  (a) PL spectra of size selected alkyl functionalized SiNCs with decreasing size showing the limited tunability in the visible spectrum. (b) Photoluminescence quantum yield dependence on SiNC size for selected samples reported in panel a. Adapted with permission from ref. 73. 
A very recent study on dodecyl-capped SiNCs with diameters ranging from 1.8 to 9.1 nm has reported that there is very good agreement between the effective mass approximation and the band gap energy estimated by the emission peak energy, provided that polydispersity of each sample and size-dependent absorption and photoluminescence quantum yield are taken into account. In other words, the contribution to the photoluminescence spectrum of SiNCs is dependent on the molar absorption coefficient and PLQY of the nanocrystals. Since PLQY is strongly decreased upon decreasing the SiNC diameter below ca. 3 nm, the effect is important only for small SiNCs. Moreover, a finite confinement model for the exciton provides an alternative explanation for the drop of PLQY when d < 3 nm.
The photostability of alkyl passivated SiNCs is strongly improved upon functionalization (see below) since the Si–C bonds are robust, and substantially less reactive than the Si–O or Si–F bonds,34 although the surface coverage obtained by alkyl passivation is usually incomplete and oxidation processes cannot be completely excluded. Improved resistance to air oxidation, superior hydrophobicity, and a slight blue shift of the photoluminescence band were reported by appending perfluorodecyl chains to SiNCs compared to the decyl-capped sample.101
The functionalisation of SiNCs by conjugated ligands attached to the silicon surface via sp2 carbon atoms is expected to enhance the rate of electron transfer to and from SiNCs thanks to the lower insulating nature and the lower HOMO–LUMO gap of conjugated ligands. For example, functionalisation of SiNCs by 4-ethynyl-N,N-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)aniline102,103 results in a red-shift of the luminescence, relative to their decyl-capped control counterparts, attributed to a delocalisation of electron density from the SiNC into the surface ligands. Similar results were obtained by using phenylacetylene104 and poly(3-hexylthiophene)105 as capping ligands, introducing in both cases in-gap states revealed by scanning tunnelling spectroscopy.


O-Functionalisation. 
The effect of oxygen on the surface of nanocrystals is far more debated and less assessed compared to the previously discussed surface passivation. Its role is not only of paramount importance for SiNCs prepared in an oxide matrix, but also for the colloidal ones. O-Functionalisation of colloidally dispersed SiNCs is usually accidental and detrimental for their photophysical properties, as discussed below. H-Terminated SiNCs are prone to oxidation and also C-functionalised SiNCs can be oxidised since surface coverage is never complete. Indeed, storage of SiNCs in air-equilibrated solution yields partial oxidation of the surface, particularly when SiNCs are dispersed in alcohols.106 Oxygen forms a variety of bonds with silicon, such as double bonded oxygen in the silanone bond (SiO), bridging oxygen (Si–O–Si), or single bonded oxygen in the silanol (Si–OH) and alkoxy bonds (Si–O–C–).
A collection of examples studying the influence of oxygen surface defects on the optical properties of SiNCs can be found in ref. 34, but the diversity of chemical structures of such defects and the lack of tools capable of probing individual defects prevent a thoroughly and universally accepted understanding of the roles of these defects in SiNC photophysics.107
Although the present review is focused on colloidal silicon nanocrystals, it is worth considering the optical properties of SiNCs embedded in a silica matrix to better understand the role of O-functionalisation. An accurate study108 demonstrates the coexistence of three different luminescence components in SiNCs with diameters in the range 2.5–5.5 nm, embedded in an oxide matrix (Fig. 6a): (i) a band at high energy, typically in the blue region of the visible spectrum (blue curve in Fig. 6a), characterized by a fast decay, around 10 ns, and thus referred to as the F-band; (ii) a longer lived (ca. 100 μs timescale) emission, usually called the S-band, where S stands for slow (red tail in Fig. 6a); (iii) a third band (green line in Fig. 6a) observed only by excitation with an intense UV laser source.
 Fig. 6  (a) Spectral profile of the initial amplitude of the PL decay dynamics in the 350–620 nm range (black dots). Three different contributions are evidenced by Gaussian fits: F-band (blue curve), Hot PL (green curve) and S-band (red tail). Adapted with permission from ref. 108. (b) Low-temperature (12 K) steady-state emission spectrum of the surface-oxidized SiNCs excited at 365 nm. E1 and E2 represent two Gaussian curves, corresponding to core exciton emission and donor–acceptor recombination related to surface oxide states. Adapted with permission from ref. 109. 
The position of the F-band is usually not much affected by the size of SiNCs and its origin is strongly debated: it has been attributed to a purely core intrinsic emission of small SiNCs110–112 or to oxygen defects either at the surface of SiNCs, or within the oxide matrix.113–115
The S-band is generally attributed to the radiative decay of quantum confined core excitons in the red–NIR range: it exhibits a long lifetime typical of phonon assisted radiative recombination and the expected quantum-confined effect, i.e. a decrease in energy upon increasing the size of SiNCs. Despite this, the size tunability of this band in silica embedded SiNCs is lower than the one observed for H-terminated SiNCs. The limited tunability has been attributed to either self-trapped excitons116 or to oxygen related defects (electron–phonon coupling to bridging Si–O–Si phonon at the surface of SiNCs117 or intra-gap states induced by the formation of SiO bonds).107,118–122
The third band (green curve in Fig. 6a) exhibits an inverse dependence of the luminescence band energy on the size of the nanocrystal with respect to eqn (1), and has been tentatively attributed to phononless radiative recombination of hot carriers.108
The complexity is even increased for the photophysical behaviour of colloidal nanocrystals, where the amount and the chemical nature of oxygen impurities, as well as the presence of other species in solution, are hard to control. A recent study on surface-oxidized H-terminated SiNCs with an average core size of 3.4 nm109 confirms the presence of more than one emission components: one centred at ca. 800 nm (Fig. 6b, E1) with a radiative lifetime of 420 μs and another centred at ca. 700 nm (Fig. 6b, E2) with a radiative lifetime of 190 μs, attributed to recombination of quantum confined core excitons and to donor–acceptor recombination within states associated with native oxide shells, respectively. However, the effect of oxidation of H-terminated SiNCs on the position of the emission spectrum shows opposing trends: (i) decrease of the emission energy as a function of oxidation time, attributed to a decrease of the size of the silicon crystalline core,89 and (ii) quenching of the S-band and increase of the F-band upon air exposure of H-terminated SiNCs.123
In the case of C-terminated SiNCs, surface oxidation has been reported either to enhance the typical S-band for ultrasmall nanocrystals (2.2 nm),72 or to yield the typical short-lived F-band in the blue spectral region.93


N-Functionalisation. 
The functionalisation of SiNCs with nitrogen based ligands, also in very limited amounts, usually results in a bright band in the blue region of the visible spectrum, decaying in few ns.124 The origin of this band is attributed to a charge transfer surface state due to the p-type doping of the surface by nitrogen, as suggested by photoluminescence125 and scanning tunnelling spectroscopy.126
More interesting is the effect of conjugated amines on SiNC luminescence: direct functionalisation with aryl amines results in a short-lived emission whose energy is dependent on the nature of the amine ligand, spanning from light blue (carbazole, tetrahydrocarbazole),127 to green (diphenylamine),128 yellow (1,2,3,4-tetrahydrocarbazol-4-one),129 and orange (aniline).127


Halogen-functionalisation. 
The presence of Cl, Br and I on the surface is responsible for the complete quenching of the luminescence,130 partially restored after the passivation with alkyl ligands. In addition, the preparation of chloride and bromide terminated nanocrystals yields a decrease in the size of the nanocrystal itself due to cleavage of Si–Si bonds.98

2.4 Effect of crystallinity
The presence of amorphous domains in SiNCs is hard to assess in this size range, because of (i) the low atomic number of silicon, (ii) the contribution of the surface capping layer131 and (iii) the instability of the crystal lattice under experimental observation conditions, such as HR-TEM.132
A significant increase of the photoluminescence quantum yield with the increasing degree of crystallinity of Si nanoparticles prepared by low temperature plasma synthesis has been reported.133 Notably, largely amorphous samples exhibited almost no luminescence.
The presence of an amorphous layer on crystalline SiNCs has been pinpointed134 as a possible source for the already described F-band in SiNCs, but the conclusion has been debated135 and both groups agreed that no ultimate conclusion can be drawn for samples produced with different methods,136 highlighting once again the elevated complexity of SiNC photophysics.
The smallest nanocrystals (ca. 2 nm diameter) can exhibit significant amounts of orientational bond disorder, which might influence the optical properties of the material.137 In addition, whereas silicon spontaneously arranges in a diamond-like structure, and there are very few possibilities of other polymorphs at ambient pressure and temperature,138 it has been observed that application of a tensile strain to the crystal lattice may induce a strong variation in the band structure promoting a direct bandgap behavior.139
2.5 Photostability
Photostability is one of the key properties that arouse the interest of the scientific and industrial community on semiconductor quantum dots as an alternative to conventional organic dyes. In the case of SiNCs, their photophysical properties are strongly dependent on their surface chemistry, which can be largely modified by photochemically induced reactions. For instance, the irradiation of thermally hydrosilylated SiNCs with UV light (λ = 365 nm) in an inert atmosphere brings about a 40% decrease of the photoluminescence quantum yield within 4 h under the experimental conditions reported in the paper,140 accompanied by a modest change in the emission peak energy. The drastic decrease in emission intensity was attributed to the formation of dangling bonds, confirmed by EPR measurements. Interestingly, the initial photoluminescence quantum yield value can be restored by a second thermal hydrosilylation reaction, able to passivate the formed dangling bonds and protect the nanocrystals from further photobleaching. On the other hand, white light irradiation was proved to induce no, or only a slight variation of the luminescence properties of SiNCs, with respect to UV light. Since a quantitative measurement of the number of photons absorbed by SiNCs under UV and white light irradiation was not reported, a direct comparison of the two experimental results cannot be made. Another study141 reports that irradiation by a 254 nm light source of styrene capped SiNCs in ambient atmosphere gives rise to the short-lived F-band at the expense of the S-band.
The photostability of SiNCs is quite sensitive to the presence of dioxygen, even if passivated by carbon based ligands. Fig. 7a reports the value of photoluminescence quantum yield and lifetime of dodecyl-passivated SiNCs as a function of irradiation time (λ = 420 nm) for a N2-saturated or an air-equilibrated solution:142 a strong decrease of both PLQY and lifetime is observed in the air-equilibrated solution compared to a negligible change for the N2-saturated solution. A similar trend was previously reported:143 PLQY of allylbenzene functionalized SiNCs was compared upon irradiating with a λ = 365 nm LED either in a N2 or O2 atmosphere. FTIR spectra were registered to follow the photochemical induced oxidation of SiNCs corresponding to the degradation of the optical properties. Fig. 7b shows that the presence of O2 quenches the luminescence of SiNCs with a slight blue shift of the luminescence, while irradiation in an inert atmosphere results in only a small decrease of the PLQY. Very similar results were obtained in the presence of water in the irradiation experiment.
 Fig. 7  (a) Time-evolution of PLQY (solid triangles, left axis) and excited state lifetime (empty circles, right axis) under 420 nm irradiation in N2-saturated (red symbols) and air-equilibrated (black symbols) toluene solutions.142 Dotted lines between points are only a guide to the eye. (b) PL spectra before (dashed line) and after exposure (solid line) to the conditions reported in each panel for 300 s. The PL blue shift from the initial value is reported in eV. Adapted with permission from ref. 143. 
2.6 Optical properties of SiNCs appended with chromophores at their surface
Although they have excellent emission properties, Si nanocrystals are weak light absorbers, as previously discussed. This limits the luminescence brightness, defined as the product of the molar absorption coefficient at the excitation wavelength and the photoluminescence quantum yield. Therefore, the photon energy required for photoexcitation is usually significantly higher than the peak emission energy. For example, Si nanocrystals with an emission peak at 800 nm are usually excited with light of wavelength 400 nm to achieve a reasonable emission signal. To enhance the light absorption, SiNCs can be functionalized with dyes that efficiently absorb light and funnel the excitation energy to the Si core: the resulting system is a molecular light-harvesting antenna. Up to now, only a few studies have adopted this strategy to induce light emission from Si nanocrystals, as recently reviewed by some of us.32 In the following, we will discuss only examples in which chromophores absorbing above 300 nm can sensitise the long-lived luminescence of SiNCs, while we are not discussing cases in which SiNCs are appended with chromophore absorbing below 300 nm since the molar absorption coefficient of SiNCs at λ < 300 nm is high and there is no need to build up a light harvesting antenna to sensitise SiNC luminescence.
A recent example reports light-harvesting antenna based on naphthalene chromophores in which sensitized SiNC luminescence can be observed upon naphthalene excitation, as well as upon excitation of a charge-transfer band, due to the electronic interaction between the chromophore and Si core.144 Interestingly, naphthalene functionalised SiNCs exhibit a higher photoluminescence quantum yield (4.4%) compared to decyl-capped SiNCs (<0.5%).
Two other examples of SiNCs decorated with UV absorbing ligands contain pyrene chromophores linked to the silicon core by alkyl chains of different lengths (C3 or C11, see Fig. 8a for the C3 chain).145,146 Both systems are based on two families of SiNCs with different diameters (3 and 5 nm) synthesized by thermal decomposition of hydrogen silsesquioxane.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the light-harvesting antenna based on pyrene chromophores attached to SiNCs with an average diameter of 3 nm. (b) Absorption spectra of 3 nm-SiNCs capped with dodecyl ligands (blue) or pyrene and dodecyl ligands (red line), and pyrene model compound (black dotted line) in air-equilibrated toluene. (c) Emission spectra of SiNCs schematically presented in panel (a) (solid red line) and optically matched solutions of free pyrene (dotted black line) in air-equilibrated toluene. λex = 345 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. 
In the case of 3 nm-SiNCs functionalized with pyrene chromophores, the absorption spectrum (red curve in Fig. 8b) is the superposition of the unstructured absorption profile characteristic of Si nanocrystals functionalized by dodecyl chains (blue curve in Fig. 8b) and the structured absorption band of the pyrene chromophore in the 300–350 nm region (Fig. 8b, black dotted line). This result demonstrates that no ground-state interaction takes place between the organic chromophore and the inorganic silicon core. On the basis of the molar absorption coefficients of pyrene and SiNC,10 an average number of 8 pyrene chromophores per nanocrystal is estimated. The emission spectrum (Fig. 8c, red line) shows pyrene fluorescence at 390 nm and the characteristic silicon core emission at 635 nm (PLQY = 11%)146 with lifetime of the order of 100 μs. The pyrene emission band is largely quenched, as evident by the comparison with an optically matched solution of free pyrene chromophore (Fig. 8b, black dotted line), as confirmed also by lifetime measurements and a sensitized emission of the silicon core is observed. From the analysis of the sensitized silicon core emission, the estimated energy transfer efficiency is 95%.145 The pyrene-functionalised SiNCs constitute a light-harvesting antenna with an increase of brightness of 300% compared to dodecyl-capped SiNCs, upon excitation at 345 nm.
For 5 nm SiNCs, an average of 60 pyrene chromophores per nanocrystal is estimated, pyrene fluorescence is strongly quenched, silicon core emission is peaked at 970 nm with a lifetime of 190 μs and ΦPL = 40% and the energy transfer efficiency is somewhat lower (65%).
The effect of the bridge length is evident in the luminescence properties: the sensitization efficiency is lower (70% and 30% for 3 nm and 5 nm-SiNCs) than that observed for the shorter bridge because of the longer average distance between pyrene and the Si core which slows down the energy transfer process. On the other hand, the quenching efficiency of pyrene is only slightly lower than that in the previous case because the radiative decay of the fluorescent pyrene monomer excited state competes, not only with the intramolecular non-radiative decay and the energy transfer process, but also with excimer formation. Indeed, a pyrene excimer emission at 470 nm is observed.94 The observation of excimer formation for pyrene units indicates that the pyrene is exposed significantly to the surroundings, while in the previous case it was embedded in the dodecyl layer of ligands. The interaction of pyrene with carbon allotropes, namely C60, carbon nanotubes and graphene, was investigated:147 a strong quenching of the SiNC luminescence has been reported in all cases.
SiNCs with an average diameter of 5 nm have been decorated with a mixed capping layer of dodecyl and Zn(II) tetraphenylporphyrin,148 a chromophore characterized by intense absorption in the visible spectral region and red fluorescence. The absorption spectrum (red line in Fig. 9) shows the typical porphyrin bands at 426 and 560 nm superimposed onto the characteristic tail of the silicon core. An average of 10 porphyrins per nanocrystal can be estimated. Upon excitation at 427 nm, where most of the light is absorbed by the porphyrin (Soret band), two emission bands are present (Fig. 9): one with a maximum at 655 nm typical of the porphyrin fluorescence and one peaked at 905 nm due to the Si nanocrystal emission. The intensity decay at 655 nm exhibits a lifetime of 1.2 ns, shorter than that of the free porphyrin (2.3 ns), a result in agreement with the quenching of the photoluminescence quantum yield. Based on the sensitized silicon core emission, an energy transfer efficiency of 50% has been estimated. It is worth noting that the PLQY of the silicon nanocrystal in the NIR upon direct excitation of the silicon core at 650 nm is much lower for porphyrin-functionalised SiNCs (8%) compared to dodecyl-capped SiNCs (42%). This decrease can be due to the presence of a larger number of defects in the presence of the bulky porphyrin chromophores or due to an additional quenching process, such as photoinduced electron transfer, but the authors could not discriminate between these two hypotheses.
 Fig. 9  Absorption spectra (solid lines) of SiNCs functionalised with Zn(II) tetraphenylporphyrins (red line) and dodecyl capped SiNCs (blue line) with an average diameter of 5 nm in toluene. Emission spectra (dashed lines) of porphyrin-functionalised SiNCs (red line) and an optically matched Zn(II) tetraphenyl porphyrin solution (green line) in air-equilibrated toluene at room temperature. λex = 427 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. 
Another example of a light-harvesting antenna based on SiNCs appended with visible light-absorbing chromophores is that reported in Fig. 10a: 4,7-di(2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole chromophores (ca. 18 per nanocrystal) are appended at the surface of 5 nm SiNCs together with dodecyl chains.64 Upon excitation of the chromophore at 515 nm, strong quenching (ca. 95%) of the fluorescence of the benzothiadiazole chromophore at 640 nm is observed (red line in Fig. 10b) compared with an optically matched mixture containing the free chromophore and dodecyl capped SiNCs (green line in Fig. 10b). Furthermore, the lifetime of the fluorescent excited state of the chromophore is strongly decreased (ca. 95%), i.e. from 7.9 ns for the free chromophore in toluene to 0.4 ns when bound to SiNCs. Concomitantly, sensitized NIR long-lived emission of SiNCs was observed (Fig. 10b, τ = 160 μs at 800 nm), confirming that the light absorbed by the chromophores sensitizes emission of the SiNC core. The efficiency of the sensitization was estimated to be ca. 75% and the brightness is increased 2 times compared to dodecyl-capped SiNCs upon excitation at 515 nm.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of the light-harvesting antenna based on 4,7-di(2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole chromophores attached to SiNCs with an average diameter of 5 nm. (b) Emission spectra of SiNCs schematically presented in panel (a) (solid red line) and optically matched solutions of free chromophore (green line) in air-equilibrated toluene. λex = 480 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. 
The most interesting aspect of the present system is that the 4,7-di(2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole chromophore exhibits a good two-photon absorption (2PA) cross section with band maxima at 730 and 960 nm, as measured by recording its fluorescence in toluene solution upon excitation with a continuous train of femtosecond pulses from a tuneable Ti:sapphire laser oscillator. On the other hand, the two-photon absorption cross section of SiNCs is rather poor, as previously discussed. Upon excitation of the SiNCs reported in Fig. 10a at 960 nm a sensitized luminescence of the silicon core in the NIR spectral region is observed and characterized by a close to quadratic power dependence. Upon excitation of solutions of benzothiadazole-functionalised SiNCs and dodecyl-capped SiNCs containing equal concentrations of nanocrystals with pulses of equal power, a two times higher luminescence is observed in the former case, demonstrating a two-fold increase in the 2P brightness. This system represents an example of a light-harvesting antenna working by both one-photon and two-photon excitation and it combines the 2PA properties of the appended chromophore with the long-lived and oxygen-independent luminescence in the NIR of the SiNCs, key aspects in bioimaging applications.
3. Applications
Applications of colloidal SiNCs span from photovoltaics,149 to bioimaging,150 photonics,151 photocatalysis,152 sensing153 and light emitting devices.154 In the following, we will discuss only applications which are based on the luminescence of SiNCs surface-functionalised with capping ligands, reporting the most relevant and educational examples.
3.1 Solar energy conversion devices
SiNCs embedded in oxide and polymeric matrixes or deposited on thin films are extensively used in photovoltaics.5,151 Photovoltaic applications may also take advantage of the multiple exciton generation which was observed for SiNCs,55,155–157 in which the absorption of one photon of energy higher than 2Eg leads to the formation of two excitons and is thus expected to increase the efficiency of the solar-to-electricity conversion. Since these applications are based on the absorption and charge transfer properties of SiNCs, we will not discuss them. On the other hand, SiNCs can be used as luminescent species in luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs). These devices consist of a high refractive index material, such as a polymer plate, embedded with luminescent species that extensively absorb sunlight and emit in a spectral window where conventional photovoltaic cells have high power conversion efficiency. Thanks to the total internal reflection, most of the emitted light is guided to the edges of the LSC plate, where it is absorbed by small-area photovoltaic cells. The optical and economical gain is, in principle, extremely high, in particular if the use of the LSC is extended to integrated photovoltaic windows and facades, but it is strongly limited by re-absorption of the emitted light, typical of most organic fluorophores.158 The use of Stokes-shift engineered quantum dots has recently led to a re-discovery of the field, by minimizing the overlap between absorption and emission bands.159 Among them, SiNCs, in virtue of their indirect band gap character, are intrinsically characterised by this feature and absorb mostly in the UV region, enabling high transparency in the visible spectral region. Recently, LSCs were made of large sized polylaurylmethacrylate (PLMA) plates embedding SiNCs synthesized using plasma and functionalized with dodecyl chains.160 The reported value of optical power conversion efficiency, i.e. the ratio of luminous power collected by the solar cells coupled to the LSC edges and the solar power incident on the LSC surface, was 2.85% with less than 30% of the visible light absorbed by the plate (Fig. 11a). In addition, no detrimental effect of the polymer embedding was noticed by the authors (Fig. 11b) and more than 75% of the emitted light was estimated to be waveguided to the edge of the plate, where the photovoltaic cells can be placed (Fig. 11c).
 Fig. 11  (a) Photographs of an LSC with 0.09 wt% SiNCs embedded in PLMA (dimensions of 12 cm × 12 cm × 0.26 cm) under ambient (bottom left) and ultraviolet illumination (365 nm) taken with an ultraviolet-filtered visible camera (top) and an ultraviolet-filtered infrared camera (bottom right). (b) Absorption (dashed lines) and photoluminescence (solid lines) spectra of SiNCs in toluene (black) and PLMA (red). The absorption spectrum of pure PLMA is shown as a blue dashed line. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of a portion of the same LSC as in panel a (dimensions of 3.5 cm × 3.5 cm × 0.26 cm) with the edges clear (black line) and blocked by black paint (grey line). The red curve is the difference between the black and grey spectra and represents the luminescence emitted from the device edges. Adapted with permission from ref. 160. 
3.2 Light emitting diodes (LEDs)
Conventional quantum dots are hitting the market by their use as an emissive material in light emitting diodes (LEDs) in displays, but their cadmium content poses health and environmental concerns.161 SiNCs can represent a viable non-toxic alternative. However, after the initial enthusiasm based on the first reports on the electroluminescence of SiNCs,78,162 the poor comprehension of the optical properties of SiNCs and the lack of standard methods for the synthesis of stable and processable SiNCs slowed down the development of light emitting devices based on these nanocrystals. More recently, red emitting LEDs were prepared, consisting of a layer of decyl-capped SiNCs synthesised by HSQ disproportionation, enclosed in an electron and a hole transporting layer.163 The low external quantum efficiency (EQE ca. 0.7%) observed was attributed to the low photoluminescence quantum yield of the SiNCs (about 3%) and the poor electron transfer properties associated with the insulating layer formed by capping ligands. Indeed, better performances were obtained by replacing the alkyl ligands with allylbenzene groups,164 observing increased conductivity thanks to the shorter length and higher SiNC packing density due to π–π interactions (Fig. 12a). A further improvement of the external quantum efficiency (EQE = 1.1%) at low turn-on voltages (ca. 2 V) was obtained for red-emitting SiNCs, demonstrating the importance of the use of size-separated SiNCs to improve the lifetime of the device and decrease the sensitivity of the emission wavelength to the applied voltage.165
 Fig. 12  (a) Luminance and current density plots vs. applied voltage (top) and electroluminescence (EL) spectra as a function of driving voltage (bottom) for allylbenzene passivated SiNCs. A photograph of the SiNCs-OLED under daylight is shown in the top panel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. (b) A schematic diagram of an inverted structure SiNCs-LED (top) and EL spectra as a function of applied voltage (bottom). The inset shows the photograph of light emission under a driving voltage of 12 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. 
Recently, a bottom cathode inverted structure was adopted:166 alkyl capped SiNCs produced by the plasma method were deposited on a ZnO nanoparticle thin film acting as a hole blocking layer, followed by deposition of a hole transport layer and a hole injection layer (Fig. 12b, top). The application of a potential difference ranging from 6 to 15 V results in a bright red luminescence (Fig. 12b, bottom), perfectly matching the photoluminescence spectrum obtained in solution. The external quantum efficiency is reported to be 1.1% and it can be further enhanced by adding poly(ethylene imine) as an electron injection enhancer to the low work function ITO cathode, reaching 2.7%.
A white light emitting diode (WLED) was prepared by simple spin-coating of red-emitting octadecyl-capped SiNCs and blue-green luminescent polymers: the device is characterised by a low turn-on voltage (3.5 V) and good efficiency (EQEmax = 3.5%).97
The best performing LEDs based on SiNCs were obtained by deposition of a thin layer of dodecyl passivated 3 nm (red luminescence) and 5 nm SiNCs (NIR luminescence):56,167 EQE as high as 8.6% is observed, probably due to the much higher photoluminescence quantum yield (46%) of the nanocrystals.
3.3 Luminescent sensors and probes
One of the most promising applications of colloidal silicon nanocrystals displaying long-lived luminescence consists in the development of luminescent sensors and probes. Even in the absence of any specific site for binding of an analyte, SiNCs are extremely appealing for sensing of species dissolved in solution: their long-lived luminescence can be efficiently quenched by properly chosen analytes, enabling high sensitivity of detection. Taking into account diffusional quenching processes occurring in solution, the ratio of the lifetime of the luminescent species in the absence (τ0) and in the presence (τ) of the analyte Q is related to the rate of luminescence quenching kq and concentration of the analyte Q by the following Stern–Volmer equation:94 τ0/τ = 1 + kqτ0[Q](2)
In the case of two species A and B, characterised by lifetime τ0 = 10 ns (typical of a fluorescent dye) and 100 μs (typical of SiNCs), respectively, if their luminescence is quenched by an analyte with the same concentration and the same value of kq, the quenching efficiency (ηq = τkq[Q]) will be equal to the ratio of their lifetime τ, i.e. 1:104 for A and B, respectively. This results in a 104 increased sensitivity for the B species to the same analyte.
An example of this application is the detection of nitroaromatic compounds present in explosives, a topic of obvious importance to security and forensics. SiNCs have been employed for this use both in solution168 and on solid supports.169 In particular, a filter paper substrate was dipped into an alkyl-capped SiNC dispersion: these sensors (Fig. 13) show great sensitivity to nitroaromatic compounds, as well as nitroamine and nitrate ester and represent a portable, rapid, and straightforward sensing system for on-site detection of explosives containing nitro-groups.169 These sensors were able to detect trace amounts of nitroaromatic species also in solid and gas phases:170 a detection limit as low as 6 ppb for dinitrotoluene in the vapour phase was reported. Similar properties were also observed on hybrid aerogels embedding SiNCs functionalized with poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) chains.171
 Fig. 13  (a) Photoluminescence lifetime of SiNCs upon addition of increasing concentration of dinitrotoluene (DNT). (b) Stern–Volmer plots upon addition of nitrobenzene (NB), mononitrotoluene (MNT) and dinitrotoluene (DNT) at different concentrations. (c) Images of Si–NC coated filter paper under a handheld UV-lamp without the presence of nitro compounds and in the presence of solutions of TNT, nitrate ester (PETN) and nitramine (RDX) as indicated. Adapted with permission from ref. 169. 
A different approach was proposed for the production of gelatin/SiNC composite films, consisting of alkyl passivated SiNCs embedded within a block copolymer to allow the transfer in an aqueous environment.172 Also in this paper, the luminescence of SiNCs is quenched by electron acceptors, such as 1,2-ethanediamine, 1,3-propanediamine, butylamine, n-propylamine and ethanolamine.
3.4 Bioimaging
Porous Si nano- and microparticles have been widely investigated in biological applications and porous Si probes are on the market.173 On the other hand, the use of SiNCs in the 2–10 nm range is less assessed. Nevertheless, luminescence bioimaging has the potential to become the “killer application” for SiNCs, due to their stability in biological environments, low cytotoxicity and optical properties suitable for efficient in vitro and in vivo imaging, as discussed in the following.
The first requirement to be met for a luminescent bioprobe is the possibility of obtaining a stable dispersion of luminescent SiNCs in an aqueous environment. This has been achieved by (i) encapsulation within a water-soluble carrier, such as amphiphilic polymers,19 stearic acid solid nanoparticles174 and micelles,175 often leading to the formation of nano-aggregates containing multiple SiNCs and having a size ranging from 20 to hundreds of nm; (ii) direct grafting of water solubilisable polymers at the SiNC surface, such as poly(ethyleneglycol),176,177 polyglycerol,174 poly(acrylic acid),178,179 or of highly polar functional groups on the capping ligand, such as carboxylic acids,14,180 ammonium181 and sugars.182 Unfortunately, the introduction of some of these substituents on the surface of SiNCs, in particular amines and alcohol groups, has been often described as the source of the short-lived blue luminescence band (F-band, see previous discussion). The majority of the papers employing SiNCs as bioimaging probes are based on the short-lived luminescence of SiNCs,1,150,183–185 a topic which is not the subject of the present review and we believe that the development of SiNCs with long-lived photoluminescence in the red–NIR spectral region is far more promising with respect to this application.
The optical features which make SiNCs optimal candidates for luminescence imaging are (i) emission energy tuneable to the red and NIR spectral region, compatible with the biological window; (ii) high photoluminescence quantum yield; (iii) no sensitivity to molecular oxygen, despite the long lifetime of emission, probably due to the exciton localisation in the silicon core; (iv) long-lived luminescence that enables time-gated detection in the hundreds of μs timescale. The last feature has been previously reported for lanthanide metal complexes and lanthanide nanoparticles,186 as well as porous silicon nanoparticles:187,188 it allows the removal of scattered excitation light and autofluorescence of the biological sample with low-cost equipment which requires gating times of the order of hundreds of μs, compared to the nanosecond-timescale required for more conventional CdSe quantum dots. Although the last feature is expected to have a big impact, as previously reported for porous silicon nanoparticles,187,188 only a few papers take advantage of this property and many examples report applications in the steady-state regime, in which SiNCs compete with a plethora of fluorescent dyes.
One of the first examples of SiNCs displaying long-lived luminescence as a bioimaging probe is based on the encapsulation of alkyl passivated SiNCs, produced by CO2 laser pyrolysis of silane in an aerosol reactor, in phospholipid micelles.189 These assemblies containing multiple SiNCs per micelle demonstrate high stability at different temperatures (25–90 °C) and pH values in the range 2–12, but a quite low photoluminescence quantum yield (2–4%). As a step further, the authors covalently bound SiNCs to biomolecules, including folate and antimesothelin, for targeted cancer cell imaging.190 The same group investigated the in vivo behaviour of the bioconjugated micelle encapsulated SiNCs,175 performing multi-colour NIR imaging of cancer cells in live mice. Precise localization of the tumour was achieved by subtracting the contribution of autofluorescence, thanks to the emission in the NIR region: long accumulation time (>40 h) in the cancer area was observed and these nanostructures proved to be also extremely interesting for sentinel lymph node mapping (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Sentinel lymph node imaging following localization of SiNCs in an axillary position. Autofluorescence is coded in green, and the unmixed SiNC luminescence is coded in red. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. 
Similar results in terms of PLQY, morphology and in vitro behaviour were obtained by using hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as a phase transfer surfactant.191 Another approach was based on the encapsulation of multiple alkyl passivated SiNCs in PEG terminated solid lipid nanoparticles and it demonstrated that PLQY can be preserved in water environment up to 26%.176
As previously explained, the encapsulation of SiNCs within water solubilizable species does not prevent the aggregation of SiNCs into bigger nanostructures containing tens of nanocrystals, limiting the diffusion into cells and the possibility of renal clearance, due to the lower size cut-off.192 To solve this issue, functionalisation of SiNC surface with water solubilizable functional groups was used. The challenge in this approach consists in obtaining enough colloidal and photostability in biological environments. For example, water soluble and bioconjugated SiNCs were obtained by a multi-step approach starting from undecenyl acid functionalized SiNCs, followed by functionalization with transferrin, or antimesothelin and folic acid.190
A rather different approach was recently proposed to prepare water soluble nano-aggregated SiNCs through the top-down pulverisation and etching of a Si wafer, followed by chemical passivation with an antifouling shell made of BSA (Bovine Serum Albumin) and polyethylene glycol.193 Despite their poor colloidal stability, these nanoaggregates showed interesting binding specificity to HER2-overexpressing SKOV3 cancer cells upon conjugation with the specific antibody. Interestingly, these nanoaggregates were efficient probes for time-gated imaging194 since the long photoluminescence lifetime of SiNCs allows selective detection of their luminescence. This technique allowed the authors to improve the signal to noise ratio and to combine the signal of a second probe, allowing for multiplex detection in time domain. For instance, Fig. 15 (left) reports the fluorescence image of SKOV3 and A431 cancer cells, immunostained both with the anti-HER2-conjugated SiNCs and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) conjugated with antibodies overexpressed by A431 cells. As a consequence, the signal arising from SiNCs is mostly located within SKOV3 cells, while the one of fluorescein results from A431 cells. Both the SKOV3 and A431 cancer cells appear in the short-lived component of the fluorescence image, but only the SKOV3 cancer cells immunostained with the SiNCs are visible in the long-lived component, because of the selectivity of SiNCs for this type of cells.
 Fig. 15  Steady-state PL images (left) of SKOV3 cells and A431 cells treated with SiNCs and FITC probes described in the text. The short-lived (centre) and long-lived components (right) of the PL image are obtained by integrating the time-resolved photon distribution of each pixel of the PL images over the time windows, 0 to 30 ns (red-shaded area) and 30 to 130 ns (green-shaded area) after the excitation pulse. The physical dimensions of each image are 115 μm × 115 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. 
Cytotoxicity, in vivo distribution, clearance kinetics and overall toxicity of SiNCs in living organisms have been addressed, but there is no universal agreement on these topics. Silicon is generally considered non-toxic, but the interplay between silicon nanomaterials and biological environments has to be carefully investigated, since the compatibility is not only dependent on the composition, but also the size, shape, stability and surface chemistry of the material.195 For instance, epoxide terminated SiNCs have been demonstrated to be more toxic than amine-terminated ones with respect to hepatoma cells,196 whereas SiNCs terminated with carboxylic acids, dextran or PEG display no toxicity to rat and human cells,197 being rapidly excreted from the body through renal filtration.198 An interesting study199 addresses the long-term in vivo toxicity of SiNCs passivated with FDA-approved molecules, in order to understand the role of the inorganic core. The investigated SiNCs show no toxicity, as analysed by blood tests of mice and monkeys over a 3-month period, even at an extremely high dose (200 mg kg−1). Mice showed significantly elevated levels of silicon in their liver, spleen, and kidneys that persisted over a 14-week period; this time window is inconsistent with the expected biodegradability of silicon to silicic acid in vivo and may be due to the robust passivation of the SiNCs with ethyl undecylenate and Pluronic F-127. An interesting comparison between the toxicity of Cd based quantum dots encapsulated in polymer micelles and the Si based nanostructures with similar surface composition was performed in vitro,175 where 50% cell viability (IC50) is 20 and 11 μg mL−1 for CdTe and CdHgTe, respectively, compared to >500 μg mL−1 for SiNCs.
A strong limitation of SiNCs with respect to bioimaging requirements lies in the absorption limited to the UV spectrum. This limitation can be overcome through the rational building of antenna systems based on plasmonic hybrids or organic dyes, as explained above, but, to the best of our knowledge, no example based on long lived SiNCs has been reported in biological environments. UV radiation, which is strongly absorbed by SiNCs, causes damage to biological tissues, therefore the development of SiNCs that can be excited in the red or near-infrared (NIR) spectral region is a necessary step towards their application in bioimaging. One possibility is coupling SiNCs to red or NIR absorbing dyes in order to sensitise SiNC luminescence upon excitation of highly absorbing chromophores (see Section 2.6). Another attractive possibility is represented by two-photon (2P) excitation – a non-linear optical technique, whose main advantages include increased depth of imaging, higher spatial resolution and reduced tissue photodamage.176,200–202 An example of this strategy is represented by octadecyl-capped SiNCs (diameter in the range 2.5–7.4 nm) embedded in Pluronic F127 micelles, which make them stable in aqueous solution and provide a biocompatible shell (Pluronic F127 is an FDA-approved amphiphile) which can also be functionalized by a dye.202 The resulting nanoparticles have an average size of 50–60 nm, comprise several SiNCs inside, which retain their long-lived NIR luminescence. However, the optical characterisation of the presented system is rather poor and no value of the 2PA cross section is reported. The main drawback, indeed, is the fact that SiNCs do not exhibit good 2PA cross section, as previously discussed.
A possible alternative approach is based on the construction of a light-harvesting antenna in which 2PA chromophores sensitise SiNC luminescence. An example of this approach has been previously discussed in terms of optical properties.64
4. Conclusions and outlook
SiNCs represent a niche, characterised by peculiar properties which make them unique in the realm of luminescent quantum dots: SiNCs are composed of an earth-abundant, non-toxic element, display bright and long-lived luminescence across the visible and NIR spectral regions. Moreover, they can be covalently functionalised with capping ligands to provide solubility and stability toward oxidation and/or with organic dyes to build up light-harvesting antennae: upon excitation of dyes, energy is funnelled to the silicon core, which exhibits sensitised luminescence. This working principle enables a strong increase in brightness of the resulting hybrid system, circumventing the low molar absorption coefficient typical of silicon nanocrystals.
The present review presents an overview of the main parameters affecting the luminescence properties of SiNCs (size, shape, surface functionalization and degree of crystallinity), as well as examples of applications taking advantages of the luminescence properties of SiNCs from energy conversion devices (luminescent solar concentrators and light-emitting diodes) to sensing and bioimaging probes.
We believe that a deep understanding of the parameters that determine the optical properties of SiNCs will guide the design and synthesis of new hybrid Si nanocrystals with improved optoelectronic properties. In particular, a brilliant future is envisaged for bioimaging applications since silicon is non-toxic and SiNCs combine long-lived (μs-timescale) and bright luminescence with oxygen insensitivity. Presently, other long-lived luminescent materials are being studied: (i) phosphorescent complexes of some transition metals (e.g. Pt and Pd porphyrins, [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and the like); (ii) molecular complexes of lanthanides; and (iii) lanthanide-based upconverting nanoparticles (UCNPs). The emission of the first group of compounds is highly oxygen-sensitive, a property that complicates quantitative imaging of probes' distributions in heterogeneously oxygenated biological environments. In addition, they are potentially phototoxic, since their excitation leads to the generation of singlet oxygen. Emission from lanthanide ions is oxygen-insensitive, but it is highly quenched by OH, NH and CH vibrations. The luminescence of UCNPs is oxygen-insensitive and is much less quenched than that of naked lanthanide ions, but the photoluminescence quantum yields of UCNPs are extremely low (in the order of 10−3–10−4). We believe that this rare combination of properties provides a strong incentive for further development of SiNCs as a platform for imaging materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the European Commission ERC Starting Grant (PhotoSi, 278912).
References
B. F. P. McVey and R. D. Tilley, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3045–3051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Mastronardi, E. J. Henderson, D. P. Puzzo and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5890–5898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Gonzalez, M. Iqbal, M. Dasog, D. G. Piercey, R. Lockwood, T. M. Klapotke and J. G. C. Veinot, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2608–2612 RSC .
Y. Yi, G. Zhu, C. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Li, J. Zhao and S. Yao, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 11464–11470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dasog, J. Kehrle, B. Rieger and J. G. C. Veinot, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2322–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Clark, M. Aghajamali, C. M. Gonzalez, L. Hadidi, M. A. Islam, M. Javadi, M. H. Mobarok, T. K. Purkait, C. J. T. Robidillo, R. Sinelnikov, A. N. Thiessen, J. Washington, H. Yu and J. G. C. Veinot, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 80–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Buriak, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 763–772 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kelly, E. J. Henderson and J. G. C. Veinot, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8704–8718 RSC .
L. Ondic, K. Kusova, M. Ziegler, L. Fekete, V. Gartnerova, V. Chab, V. Holy, O. Cibulka, K. Herynkova, M. Gallart, P. Gilliot, B. Honerlage and I. Pelant, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3837–3845 RSC .
C. M. Hessel, D. Reid, M. G. Panthani, M. R. Rasch, B. W. Goodfellow, J. Wei, H. Fujii, V. Akhavan and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 393–401 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Mobarok, T. K. Purkait, M. A. Islam, M. Miskolzie and J. G. C. Veinot, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 6169–6173 Search PubMed .
R. D. Tilley and K. Yamamoto, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2053–2056 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, F. Peng, F. Bao, S. Wang, X. Ji, L. Yang, Y. Su, S.-T. Lee and Y. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8350–8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, Y. Zhong, F. Peng, X. Wei, Y. Su, Y. Lu, S. Su, W. Gu, L. Liao and S.-T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14192–14195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tan, Z. Ma, B. Xu, Y. Dai, G. Ma, M. He, Z. Jin and J. Qiu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20255–20261 RSC .
K. Abderrafi, R. García Calzada, M. B. Gongalsky, I. Suárez, R. Abarques, V. S. Chirvony, V. Y. Timoshenko, R. Ibáñez and J. P. Martínez-Pastor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5147–5151 CAS .
J. A. Kelly, E. J. Henderson and J. G. C. Veinot, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8704 RSC .
C. M. Hessel, E. J. Henderson and J. G. C. Veinot, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6139–6146 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Hessel, M. R. Rasch, J. L. Hueso, B. W. Goodfellow, V. A. Akhavan, P. Puvanakrishnan, J. W. Tunnel and B. A. Korgel, Small, 2010, 6, 2026–2034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Kelly and J. G. C. Veinot, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4645–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. D. Hohlein, J. Kehrle, T. Helbich, Z. Yang, J. G. C. Veinot and B. Rieger, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4212–4216 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. M. Bank, M. E. Cifuentes and T. E. Martin, US Pat., 5010159,  1991 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, J. Ji and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1977 RSC .
U. R. Kortshagen, R. M. Sankaran, R. N. Pereira, S. L. Girshick, J. J. Wu and E. S. Aydil, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11061–11127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mangolini, E. Thimsen and U. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 655–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. He, S. S. Talukdar and M. T. Swihart, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8490–8496 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, C. H. A. Tsang, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, N. Wong, J. A. Zapien, Y. Shan and S.-T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5326–5327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rosso-Vasic, E. Spruijt, B. van Lagen, L. De Cola and H. Zuilhof, Small, 2008, 4, 1835–1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Warner, A. Hoshino, K. Yamamoto and R. D. Tilley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4550–4554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kang, Y. Liu, S.-T. Lee, M. C. Putnam, M. D. Kelzenberg, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis, C. M. Lieber, G. J. Hutchings, F. King, E. H. Stitt, P. Johnston, K. Griffin, C. J. Kiely, J. B. Park, D. W. Kim, D. Park and B. Ryu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 777–791 RSC .

Silicon Nanocrystals: Fundamentals, Synthesis and Applications, ed. L. Pavesi and R. Turan, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2010 Search PubMed .
F. Romano, Y. Yu, B. A. Korgel, G. Bergamini and P. Ceroni, Top. Curr. Chem., 2016, 374, 1–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao and P. Yin, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43602 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Dohnalová, T. Gregorkiewicz and K. Kůsová, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26, 173201 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Stewart and J. M. Buriak, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 859–869 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. P. McVey and R. D. Tilley, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3045–3051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. G. Yacobi, Semiconductor materials. An introduction to basic principles, Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York,  2003 Search PubMed .
Y. Hori, S. Kano, H. Sugimoto, K. Imakita and M. Fujii, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2615–2620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Oliva-Chatelain, T. M. Ticich and A. R. Barron, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1733–1745 RSC .
A. J. Almeida, H. Sugimoto, M. Fujii, M. S. Brandt, M. Stutzmann and R. N. Pereira, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 1–9 CrossRef .
T. Nakamura, S. Adachi, M. Fujii, H. Sugimoto, K. Miura and S. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 2–9 Search PubMed .
H. Sugimoto, M. Fujii and K. Imakita, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10956–10962 RSC .
H. Sugimoto, T. Chen, R. Wang, M. Fujii, B. M. Reinhard and L. D. Negro, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 1298–1305 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prajapati, S. Chatterjee, A. Bhattacharya and T. K. Mukherjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13325–13334 Search PubMed .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 5566 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CAS .
Y. Wang and N. Herron, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Yang, R. A. Bley, S. M. Kauzlarich, H. W. H. Lee and G. R. Delgado, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 5191–5195 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Pettigrew, Q. Liu, P. P. Power and S. M. Kauzlarich, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4005–4011 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dohnalová, A. Fučíková, C. P. Umesh, J. Humpolíčková, J. M. J. Paulusse, J. Valenta, H. Zuilhof, M. Hof and T. Gregorkiewicz, Small, 2012, 8, 3185–3191 CrossRef PubMed .
R. D. Tilley, J. H. Warner, K. Yamamoto, I. Matsui and H. Fujimori, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1833 RSC .
G. B. Teh, S. Nagalingam, R. D. Tilley, S. Ramesh and Y. S. Lim, Z. Phys. Chem., 2009, 223, 1417–1426 CrossRef CAS .
D. Neiner, H. W. Chiu and S. M. Kauzlarich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11016–11017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jia, X. Zhang, P. Lin, Z. Anthony, R. Kortshagen, U. Huang, S. Puthen-Veettil, B. Conibeer and G. Perez-Wurfl, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 55119–55125 RSC .
M. C. Beard, K. P. Knutsen, P. Yu, J. M. Luther, Q. Song, W. K. Metzger, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2506–2512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Cheng, R. Anthony, U. R. Kortshagen and R. J. Holmes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1952–1956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Brown, J. B. Miller, R. J. Anthony, U. R. Kortshagen, A. Kryjevski and E. K. Hobbie, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1597–1603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jurbergs, E. Rogojina, L. Mangolini and U. Kortshagen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233116 CrossRef .
M. Sykora, L. Mangolini, R. D. Schaller, U. Kortshagen, D. Jurbergs and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 1–4 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sun, C. Qian, L. Wang, M. Wei, M. L. Mastronardi, G. Casillas, J. Breu and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 746–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, C. Qian, K. K. Chen and G. A. Ozin, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 847–855 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Lee, J. W. Luo, N. R. Neale, M. C. Beard, D. Hiller, M. Zacharias, P. Stradins and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1583–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Sychugov, F. Pevere, J.-W. Luo, A. Zunger and J. Linnros, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 161413 CrossRef .
L. Ravotto, Q. Chen, Y. Ma, S. A. Vinogradov, M. Locritani, G. Bergamini, F. Negri, Y. Yu, B. A. Korgel and P. Ceroni, Chem, 2017, 2, 550–560 CAS .
M. Pawlicki, H. A. Collins, R. G. Denning and H. L. Anderson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3244–3266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Terenziani, C. Katan, E. Badaeva, S. Tretiak and M. Blanchard-Desce, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4641–4678 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Larson, W. R. Zipfel, R. M. Williams, S. W. Clark, M. P. Bruchez, F. W. Wise and W. W. Webb, Science, 2003, 300, 1434–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Lemon, E. Karnas, X. Han, O. T. Bruns, T. J. Kempa, D. Fukumura, M. G. Bawendi, R. K. Jain, D. G. Duda and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9832–9842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-D. Qi, D.-W. Li, P. Jiang, F.-L. Jiang, Y.-S. Li, Y. Liu, W.-K. Wong and K.-W. Cheah, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2455 RSC .
L. Martinez Maestro, E. Martin Rodriguez, F. Sanz Rodriguez, M. C. Iglesias-dela Cruz, A. Juarranz, R. Naccache, F. Vetrone, D. Jaque, J. A. Capobianco and J. G. Sole, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 5109–5115 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jin, R. Gui, J. Sun and Y. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2016, 922, 48–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dohnalová, A. N. Poddubny, A. A. Prokofiev, W. D. A. M. de Boer, C. P. Umesh, J. M. Paulusse, H. Zuilhof and T. Gregorkiewicz, Light: Sci. Appl., 2013, 2, e47 CrossRef .
M. L. Mastronardi, F. Maier-Flaig, D. Faulkner, E. J. Henderson, C. Kubel, U. Lemmer and G. A. Ozin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 337–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sangghaleh, I. Sychugov, Z. Yang, J. G. C. Veinot and J. Linnros, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7097–7104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ledoux, O. Guillois, D. Porterat, C. Reynaud, F. Huisken, B. Kohn and V. Paillard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 15942–15951 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Hartel, S. Gutsch, D. Hiller and M. Zacharias, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 1–5 CrossRef .
D. C. Hannah, J. Yang, P. Podsiadlo, M. K. Y. Chan, A. Demortière, D. J. Gosztola, V. B. Prakapenka, G. C. Schatz, U. Kortshagen and R. D. Schaller, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4200–4205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ding, B. M. Quinn, S. K. Haram, L. E. Pell, B. A. Korgel and A. J. Bard, Science, 2002, 296, 1293–1297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bae, D. C. Lee, E. V. Rhogojina, D. C. Jurbergs, B. A. Korgel and A. J. Bard, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3791–3797 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arrigo, R. Mazzaro, F. Romano, G. Bergamini and P. Ceroni, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6664–6671 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kan, T. Mokari, E. Rothenberg and U. Banin, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 155–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Buhro and V. L. Colvin, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 138–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Barbagiovanni, D. J. Lockwood, P. J. Simpson and L. V. Goncharova, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2014, 1, 11302 Search PubMed .
H. F. Wilson, L. McKenzie-Sell and A. S. Barnard, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9451–9456 RSC .
A. S. Barnard and H. F. Wilson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7969–7977 CAS .
M. Dasog, G. B. De Los Reyes, L. V. Titova, F. A. Hegmann and J. G. C. Veinot, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9636–9648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sinelnikov, M. Dasog, J. Beamish, A. Meldrum and J. G. C. Veinot, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1920–1929 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, Y. Liu, C. H. A. Tsang, D. D. D. Ma, X. Fan, N.-B. Wong and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 661–664 CrossRef CAS .
B. Goller, S. Polisski, H. Wiggers and D. Kovalev, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 1–4 CrossRef .
A. Fojtik and A. Henglein, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 221, 363–367 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fojtik and A. Henglein, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1994–1998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, G. B. De los Reyes, L. V. Titova, I. Sychugov, M. Dasog, J. Linnros, F. A. Hegmann and J. G. C. Veinot, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 595–605 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Balzani, P. Ceroni and A. Juris, Photochemistry and Photophysics: Concepts, Research, Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2014 Search PubMed .
F. A. Reboredo and G. Galli, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1072–1078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. S. Li, R. Q. Zhang, T. A. Niehaus, T. Frauenheim and S. T. Lee, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2007, 3, 1518–1526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ghosh, Y. Masuda, Y. Wakayama, Y. Imanaka, J. Inoue, K. Hashi, K. Deguchi, H. Yamada, Y. Sakka, S. Ohki, T. Shimizu and N. Shirahata, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7151–7160 CAS .
M. A. Islam, M. H. Mobarok, R. Sinelnikov, T. K. Purkait and J. G. C. Veinot, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 8766–8773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, P. Zhang, T. A. Smith, R. J. Anthony, U. R. Kortshagen, P. Yu, Y. Feng, S. Shrestha, G. Coniber and S. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12469 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. Brown, R. Krishnan, A. Elbaradei, J. Sivaguru, M. P. Sibi and E. K. Hobbie, AIP Adv., 2017, 7, 55314 CrossRef .
C. Qian, W. Sun, L. Wang, C. Chen, K. Liao, W. Wang, J. Jia, B. D. Hatton, G. Casillas, M. Kurylowicz, C. M. Yip, M. L. Mastronardi and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15849–15852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Wu, T. Zhou, A. Sellinger and M. T. Lusk, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19275 RSC .
T. Zhou, R. T. Anderson, H. Li, J. Bell, Y. Yang, B. P. Gorman, S. Pylypenko, M. T. Lusk and A. Sellinger, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3657–3663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Angı, R. Sinelnikov, A. Meldrum, J. G. C. Veinot, I. Balberg, D. Azulay, O. Millo and B. Rieger, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7849–7853 RSC .
M. A. Islam, T. K. Purkait, M. H. Mobarok, I. M. D. Hoehlein, R. Sinelnikov, M. Iqbal, D. Azulay, I. Balberg, O. Millo, B. Rieger and J. G. C. Veinot, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 1–6 Search PubMed .
W. J. I. Debenedetti, S. K. Chiu, C. M. Radlinger, R. J. Ellison, B. A. Manhat, J. Z. Zhang, J. Shi and A. M. Goforth, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9595–9608 CAS .
D. A. Kislitsyn, V. Kocevski, J. M. Mills, S. K. Chiu, C. F. Gervasi, B. N. Taber, A. E. Rosenfield, O. Eriksson, J. Rusz, A. M. Goforth and G. V. Nazin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1047–1054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. A. M. de Boer, D. Timmerman, K. Dohnalová, I. N. Yassievich, H. Zhang, W. J. Buma and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 878–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. P. Botas, R. a. S. Ferreira, R. N. Pereira, R. J. Anthony, T. Moura, D. J. Rowe and U. R. Kortshagen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10375–10383 CAS .
J. Valenta, A. Fucikova, I. Pelant, K. Kusová, K. Dohnalová, A. Aleknavičius, O. Cibulka, A. Fojtík and G. Kada, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 073022 CrossRef .
L. Ondič, K. Kůsová, M. Ziegler, L. Fekete, V. Gärtnerová, V. Cháb, V. Holý, O. Cibulka, K. Herynková, M. Gallart, P. Gilliot, B. Hönerlage and I. Pelant, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3837–3845 RSC .
K. Dohnalová, K. Žídek, L. Ondič, K. Krusová, O. Cibulka and I. Pelant, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 135102 CrossRef .
P. M. Fauchet, Phys. Status Solidi, 1995, 190, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. F. L. Tsybeskov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 49, 7821–7824 CrossRef .
G. L. Plautz, I. L. Graff, W. H. Schreiner and A. G. Bezerra, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2017, 123, 359 CrossRef .
W. D. A. M. De Boer, D. Timmerman, T. Gregorkiewicz, H. Zhang, W. J. Buma, A. N. Poddubny, A. A. Prokofiev and I. N. Yassievich, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. Martin, F. Cichos, F. Huisken and C. von Borczyskowski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 656–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Puzder, A. J. Williamson, J. C. Grossman and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 6721–6729 CrossRef CAS .
A. Puzder, A. J. Williamson, J. C. Grossman and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 97401 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Luppi and S. Ossicini, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 2130–2131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shu and B. G. Levine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7669–7677 CAS .
M. Wolkin, J. Jorne, P. Fauchet, G. Allan and C. Delerue, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 197–200 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, M. T. Swihart and H. Wiggers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 696–703 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dasog, Z. Yang, S. Regli, T. M. Atkins, A. Faramus, M. P. Singh, E. Muthuswamy, S. M. Kauzlarich, R. D. Tilley and J. G. C. Veinot, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2676–2685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. De los Reyes, M. Dasog, M. Na, L. V. Titova, J. G. C. Veinot and F. A. Hegmann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30125–30133 RSC .
O. Wolf, M. Dasog, Z. Yang, I. Balberg, J. G. C. Veinot and O. Millo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2516–2521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Q. Li, H.-Y. Wang, J.-C. Huang, R. Zhang, Q.-D. Chen, H.-L. Xu, W. Han, Z.-Z. Shao and H.-B. Sun, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e245 CrossRef .
M. Dasog, G. B. De Los Reyes, L. V. Titova, F. A. Hegmann and J. G. C. Veinot, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9636–9648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, T. Y. Luo, M. Zhou, H. Abroshan, J. Huang, H. J. Kim, N. L. Rosi, Z. Shao and R. Jin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8385–8393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dasog, K. Bader and J. G. C. Veinot, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1153–1156 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Panthani, C. M. Hessel, D. Reid, G. Casillas, M. José-Yacamán and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22463–22468 CAS .
W. Huang, S. Liu, Z. Huang, T. Dong and G. Wang, Nat. Publ. Gr., 2015, 550025, 1–7 Search PubMed .
R. Anthony and U. Kortshagen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 115407 CrossRef .
D. C. Hannah, J. Yang, N. J. Kramer, G. C. Schatz, U. R. Kortshagen and R. D. Schaller, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 960–967 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kůsová, L. Ondič and I. Pelant, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 454–455 CrossRef .
D. C. Hannah, J. Yang, N. J. Kramer, G. C. Schatz, U. R. Kortshagen and R. D. Schaller, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 960–967 CrossRef CAS .
V. Petkov, C. M. Hessel, J. Ovtchinnikoff, A. Guillaussier, B. A. Korgel, X. Liu and C. Giordano, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2365–2371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Q. Wang, Y. Kawazoe and P. Jena, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kusova, P. Hapala, J. Valenta, P. Jelinek, O. Cibulka, L. Ondic and I. Pelant, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, R. Liptak, D. Rowe, J. Wu, J. Casey, D. Witker, S. A. Campbell and U. Kortshagen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 323, 54–58 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hua, F. Erogbogbo, M. T. Swihart and E. Ruckenstein, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4363–4370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Mazzaro, F. Romano and P. Ceroni, Unpubl. data.
M. L. Mastronardi, K. K. Chen, K. Liao, G. Casillas and G. A. Ozin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 826–834 CAS .
M. Miyano, Y. Kitagawa, S. Wada, A. Kawashima, A. Nakajima, T. Nakanishi, J. Ishioka, T. Shibayama, S. Watanabe and Y. Hasegawa, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2016, 15, 99–104 CAS .
M. Locritani, Y. Yu, G. Bergamini, M. Baroncini, J. K. Molloy, B. A. Korgel and P. Ceroni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3325–3329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mazzaro, M. Locritani, J. K. Molloy, M. Montalti, Y. Yu, B. A. Korgel, G. Bergamini, V. Morandi and P. Ceroni, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4390–4397 CrossRef CAS .
A. Star, Y. Liu, K. Grant, L. Ridvan, J. F. Stoddart, D. W. Steuerman, M. R. Diehl, A. Boukai and J. R. Heath, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 553–560 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fermi, M. Locritani, G. Di Carlo, M. Pizzotti, S. Caramori, Y. Yu, B. A. Korgel, G. Bergamini and P. Ceroni, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 185, 481–495 RSC .
M. Dutta, L. Thirugnanam, P. Van Trinh and N. Fukata, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6891–6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. F. P. Mc Vey, S. Prabakar, J. J. Gooding and R. D. Tilley, ChemPlusChem, 2016, 81, 60–73 Search PubMed .
F. Priolo, T. Gregorkiewicz, M. Galli and T. F. Krauss, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 19–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Islam, T. K. Purkait and J. G. C. Veinot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15130–15133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Gonzalez and J. G. C. Veinot, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 4836–4846 RSC .
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Trinh, R. Limpens, W. D. A. M. de Boer, J. M. Schins, L. D. A. Siebbeles and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 316–321 CrossRef CAS .
D. Timmerman, J. Valenta, K. Dohnalová, W. D. A. M. de Boer and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 710–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Marri, M. Govoni and S. Ossicini, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 343–352 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Debije and P. P. C. Verbunt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 12–35 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meinardi, A. Colombo, K. A. Velizhanin, R. Simonutti, M. Lorenzon, L. Beverina, R. Viswanatha, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 392–399 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meinardi, S. Ehrenberg, L. Dhamo, F. Carulli, M. Mauri, F. Bruni, R. Simonutti, U. Kortshagen and S. Brovelli, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 177–185 CrossRef CAS .
M. McCoy, Chem. Eng. News, 2014, 92, 20–21 Search PubMed .
R. J. Walters, G. I. Bourianoff and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 143–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Puzzo, E. J. Henderson, M. G. Helander, Z. Wang, G. A. Ozin and Z. Lu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1585–1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Mastronardi, E. J. Henderson, D. P. Puzzo, Y. Chang, Z. Bin Wang, M. G. Helander, J. Jeong, N. P. Kherani, Z. Lu and G. A. Ozin, Small, 2012, 8, 3647–3654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Maier-Flaig, C. Kübel, J. Rinck, T. Bocksrocker, T. Scherer, R. Prang, A. K. Powell, G. A. Ozin and U. Lemmer, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3539–3545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yao, T. Yu, L. Ba, H. Meng, X. Fang, Y. Wang, L. Li, X. Rong, S. Wang, X. Wang, G. Ran, X. Pi and G. Qin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 673–677 RSC .
K.-Y. Cheng, R. Anthony, U. R. Kortshagen and R. J. Holmes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1154–1157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. N. Germanenko, S. Li and M. S. El-Shall, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Gonzalez, M. Iqbal, M. Dasog, D. G. Piercey, R. Lockwood, T. M. Klapötke and J. G. C. Veinot, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2608 RSC .
A. Nguyen, C. M. Gonzalez, R. Sinelnikov, W. Newman, S. Sun, R. Lockwood, J. G. C. Veinot and A. Meldrum, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 105501 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Aghajamali, M. Iqbal, T. K. Purkait, L. Hadidi, R. Sinelnikov and J. G. C. Veinot, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3877–3886 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, T. Yu, L. W. Sun, H. B. Huang, X. D. Pi and X. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1971–1976 RSC .
L. Canham, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 1573–1576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Das and N. R. Jana, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4301–4309 CAS .
F. Erogbogbo, K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, R. Hu, W.-C. Law, W. Zhao, H. Ding, F. Wu, R. Kumar, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 413–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Henderson, A. J. Shuhendler, P. Prasad, V. Baumann, F. Maier-Flaig, D. O. Faulkner, U. Lemmer, X. Y. Wu and G. A. Ozin, Small, 2011, 7, 2507–2516 CAS .
Z. Xu, Y. Li, B. Zhang, T. Purkait, A. Alb, B. S. Mitchell, S. M. Grayson and M. J. Fink, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 1–16 CrossRef .
Y. He, Z.-H. H. Kang, Q.-S. S. Li, C. H. A. Tsang, C.-H. H. Fan and S.-T. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 128–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Li and E. Ruckenstein, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1463–1467 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Clark, M. K. M. Dang and J. G. C. Veinot, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 15657–15664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Chen, K. Liao, G. Casillas, Y. Li and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500263 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Ahire, M. Behray, C. A. Webster, Q. Wang, V. Sherwood, N. Saengkrit, U. Ruktanonchai, N. Woramongkolchai and Y. Chao, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 1877–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Peng, Y. Su, Y. Zhong, C. Fan, S. T. Lee and Y. He, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 612–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chinnathambi, S. Chen, S. Ganesan and N. Hanagata, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 10–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Montalti, a. Cantelli and G. Battistelli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4853–4887 RSC .
B. del Rosal, D. H. Ortgies, N. Fernandez, F. Sanz-Rodriguez, D. Jaque and E. M. Rodriguez, Adv. Mater., 2016, 10188–10193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joo, X. Liu, V. R. Kotamraju, E. Ruoslahti, Y. Nam and M. J. Sailor, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6233–6241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gu, D. J. Hall, Z. Qin, E. Anglin, J. Joo, D. J. Mooney, S. B. Howell and M. J. Sailor, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2326 Search PubMed .
F. Erogbogbo, K. T. Yong, I. Roy, G. X. Xu, P. N. Prasad and M. T. Swihart, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 873–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Erogbogbo, C.-A. Tien, C.-W. Chang, K.-T. Yong, W.-C. Law, H. Ding, I. Roy, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22, 1081–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Chiu, B. a. Manhat, W. J. I. DeBenedetti, A. L. Brown, K. Fichter, T. Vu, M. Eastman, J. Jiao and A. M. Goforth, J. Mater. Res., 2013, 28, 216–230 CrossRef CAS .
H. Soo Choi, W. Liu, P. Misra, E. Tanaka, J. P. Zimmer, B. Itty Ipe, M. G. Bawendi and J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Biotechnol., 2007, 25, 1165–1170 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Tu, K. P. Chen, T. A. Yang, M. Y. Chou, L. Y. Lin and Y. K. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13714–13723 CAS .
C. Tu, K. Awasthi, K. Chen, C.-H. Lin, M. Hamada, N. Ohta and Y. Li, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1306–1315 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Croissant, Y. Fatieiev and N. M. Khashab, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1604634 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Shiohara, S. Hanada, S. Prabakar, K. Fujioka, T. H. Lim, K. Yamamoto, P. T. Northcote and R. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhattacharjee, I. M. C. M. Rietjens, M. P. Singh, T. M. Atkins, T. K. Purkait, Z. Xu, S. Regli, A. Shukaliak, R. J. Clark, B. S. Mitchell, G. M. Alink, A. T. M. Marcelis, M. J. Fink, J. G. C. Veinot, S. M. Kauzlarich and H. Zuilhof, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4870–4883 RSC .
C. Tu, X. Ma, A. House, S. M. Kauzlarich and A. Y. Louie, ACS Med. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 285–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, F. Erogbogbo, K. T. Yong, L. Ye, J. Liu, R. Hu, H. Chen, Y. Hu, Y. Yang, J. Yang, I. Roy, N. A. Karker, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7303–7310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. He, Q. Zheng, K.-T. Yong, F. Erogbogbo, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2688–2692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tu, X. Ma, P. Pantazis, S. M. Kauzlarich and A. Y. Louie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2016–2023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, B. Ghosh, G. Beaune, U. Nagarajan, T. Yasui, J. Nakamura, T. Tsuruoka, Y. Baba, N. Shirahata and F. M. Winnik, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9009–9019 RSC .

          Y. Yu, G. Fan, A. Fermi, R. Mazzaro, V. Morandi, P. Ceroni, D.-M. Smilgies and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. C DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b08054 .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

Raffaello Mazzaro
	Raffaello Mazzaro received his PhD in Chemistry in 2016, in collaboration between the CNR-IMM institute in Bologna and the chemistry department G.Ciamician of the University of Bologna, where he continued his activity as postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Prof. Ceroni. His interests and past activities are mainly focused on energy conversion processes performed by hybrid nanomaterials, among which silicon nanocrystals functionalized with photoactive molecules. He is currently a Kempe and Knut & Alice Wallenberg postdoctoral fellow at Luleå University of Technology, Sweden.

Francesco Romano
	Francesco Romano graduated in pharmaceutical sciences at the University of Padova in 2008. He received his PhD from the University of Padova in 2012 under the supervision of Prof. Licini. After a first postdoctoral fellowship in the group of Prof. Lucarini (2013–2014), he joined the team of Prof. Ceroni. He is currently involved in the synthesis and the functionalization of silicon nanocrystals.

Paola Ceroni
	Paola Ceroni is Full Professor at the University of Bologna. In 1998 she obtained her PhD degree in Chemical Sciences at the University of Bologna, after a period in the United States (Prof. Allen J. Bard's laboratory). Current research focuses on luminescent silicon nanocrystals, photoactive metal complexes and dendrimers. She is co-author of about 180 scientific papers and reviews. She is the principal investigator of an ERC Starting Grant for the development of hybrid light-harvesting antennae based on silicon nanocrystals for energy conversion.

 	Fig. 1  Synthetic route for producing H-teminated Si nanocrystals (right part) by (a) a high temperature process or (b) plasma-induced synthesis. Successive passivation of the silicon surface (left part) to obtain a colloidal dispersion of SiNCs, displaying tuneable and long-lived luminescence.	 

 	Fig. 2  Energy of the valence and conduction bands as a function of the wave vector k for an indirect band gap semiconductor, like Si.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Normalised absorption (dashed lines) and photoluminescence (PL) spectra (solid lines) of alkyl-functionalised SiNCs with diameter in the range 2.5–7.0 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. (b) PL peak emission versus Si nanocrystal diameter adapted with permission and updated from ref. 10. Alkyl-functionalised SiNCs prepared by low temperature methods: Mg2Si reduction48–50 (empty blue symbols), SiCl4 reduction28,51,52 (solid blue symbols) and NaSi reaction with ammonium bromide53 (light blue symbols) compared to SiNCs prepared by a plasma-assisted reaction54–59 (empty red symbols) and by high temperature nucleation10,60 (solid red symbols). The black line corresponds to eqn (1).	 

 	Fig. 4  Number of Si atoms per SiNC (red, left axis) and ratio between the number of atoms on the surface and the total number of atoms per SiNC (blue, right axis). Both values have been calculated by considering the Si unit cell as a cubic volume equal to 0.16 nm3 containing 8 Si atoms. Values under 1 nm have to be considered indicative since the spherical approximation of cubic volumes is no more valid.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) PL spectra of size selected alkyl functionalized SiNCs with decreasing size showing the limited tunability in the visible spectrum. (b) Photoluminescence quantum yield dependence on SiNC size for selected samples reported in panel a. Adapted with permission from ref. 73.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Spectral profile of the initial amplitude of the PL decay dynamics in the 350–620 nm range (black dots). Three different contributions are evidenced by Gaussian fits: F-band (blue curve), Hot PL (green curve) and S-band (red tail). Adapted with permission from ref. 108. (b) Low-temperature (12 K) steady-state emission spectrum of the surface-oxidized SiNCs excited at 365 nm. E1 and E2 represent two Gaussian curves, corresponding to core exciton emission and donor–acceptor recombination related to surface oxide states. Adapted with permission from ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Time-evolution of PLQY (solid triangles, left axis) and excited state lifetime (empty circles, right axis) under 420 nm irradiation in N2-saturated (red symbols) and air-equilibrated (black symbols) toluene solutions.142 Dotted lines between points are only a guide to the eye. (b) PL spectra before (dashed line) and after exposure (solid line) to the conditions reported in each panel for 300 s. The PL blue shift from the initial value is reported in eV. Adapted with permission from ref. 143.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the light-harvesting antenna based on pyrene chromophores attached to SiNCs with an average diameter of 3 nm. (b) Absorption spectra of 3 nm-SiNCs capped with dodecyl ligands (blue) or pyrene and dodecyl ligands (red line), and pyrene model compound (black dotted line) in air-equilibrated toluene. (c) Emission spectra of SiNCs schematically presented in panel (a) (solid red line) and optically matched solutions of free pyrene (dotted black line) in air-equilibrated toluene. λex = 345 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145.	 

 	Fig. 9  Absorption spectra (solid lines) of SiNCs functionalised with Zn(II) tetraphenylporphyrins (red line) and dodecyl capped SiNCs (blue line) with an average diameter of 5 nm in toluene. Emission spectra (dashed lines) of porphyrin-functionalised SiNCs (red line) and an optically matched Zn(II) tetraphenyl porphyrin solution (green line) in air-equilibrated toluene at room temperature. λex = 427 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation of the light-harvesting antenna based on 4,7-di(2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole chromophores attached to SiNCs with an average diameter of 5 nm. (b) Emission spectra of SiNCs schematically presented in panel (a) (solid red line) and optically matched solutions of free chromophore (green line) in air-equilibrated toluene. λex = 480 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photographs of an LSC with 0.09 wt% SiNCs embedded in PLMA (dimensions of 12 cm × 12 cm × 0.26 cm) under ambient (bottom left) and ultraviolet illumination (365 nm) taken with an ultraviolet-filtered visible camera (top) and an ultraviolet-filtered infrared camera (bottom right). (b) Absorption (dashed lines) and photoluminescence (solid lines) spectra of SiNCs in toluene (black) and PLMA (red). The absorption spectrum of pure PLMA is shown as a blue dashed line. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of a portion of the same LSC as in panel a (dimensions of 3.5 cm × 3.5 cm × 0.26 cm) with the edges clear (black line) and blocked by black paint (grey line). The red curve is the difference between the black and grey spectra and represents the luminescence emitted from the device edges. Adapted with permission from ref. 160.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Luminance and current density plots vs. applied voltage (top) and electroluminescence (EL) spectra as a function of driving voltage (bottom) for allylbenzene passivated SiNCs. A photograph of the SiNCs-OLED under daylight is shown in the top panel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. (b) A schematic diagram of an inverted structure SiNCs-LED (top) and EL spectra as a function of applied voltage (bottom). The inset shows the photograph of light emission under a driving voltage of 12 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166.	 
τ0/τ = 1 + kqτ0[Q]	(2)

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photoluminescence lifetime of SiNCs upon addition of increasing concentration of dinitrotoluene (DNT). (b) Stern–Volmer plots upon addition of nitrobenzene (NB), mononitrotoluene (MNT) and dinitrotoluene (DNT) at different concentrations. (c) Images of Si–NC coated filter paper under a handheld UV-lamp without the presence of nitro compounds and in the presence of solutions of TNT, nitrate ester (PETN) and nitramine (RDX) as indicated. Adapted with permission from ref. 169.	 

 	Fig. 14  Sentinel lymph node imaging following localization of SiNCs in an axillary position. Autofluorescence is coded in green, and the unmixed SiNC luminescence is coded in red. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175.	 

 	Fig. 15  Steady-state PL images (left) of SKOV3 cells and A431 cells treated with SiNCs and FITC probes described in the text. The short-lived (centre) and long-lived components (right) of the PL image are obtained by integrating the time-resolved photon distribution of each pixel of the PL images over the time windows, 0 to 30 ns (red-shaded area) and 30 to 130 ns (green-shaded area) after the excitation pulse. The physical dimensions of each image are 115 μm × 115 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
