One-step vapour phase growth of two-dimensional formamidinium-based perovskite and its hot carrier dynamics   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CP02652B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CP02652B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 21512-21519One-step vapour phase growth of two-dimensional formamidinium-based perovskite and its hot carrier dynamics†

        
          
            Ufuk 
            Erkılıç
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyun Goo 
            Ji
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eiji 
            Nishibori
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Hiroki 
            Ago
          
        
      *ac
aInterdisciplinary Graduate School of Engineering Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 816-8580, Japan
bGraduate School of Pure and Applied Sciences, Tsukuba Research Center for Energy Materials Science (TREMS), University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8571, Japan
cGlobal Innovation Center (GIC), Kyushu University, Fukuoka 816-8580, Japan. E-mail: h-ago@gic.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Received 
      15th May 2020
    , Accepted 15th August 2020First published on 25th August 2020AbstractFormamidinum lead iodide perovskite is one of the most promising materials for application in solar cells due to its narrow band gap and higher thermal stability. In this work, we demonstrate the facile synthesis of square-shaped formamidinium lead iodide single crystals on indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates using a one-step vapour phase deposition method. Formamidinium lead iodide-based two-dimensional layered perovskite crystals were successfully synthesized by controlling the deposition conditions. These crystals exhibited a blue-shifted photoluminescence (PL) compared to the conventional formaminium lead iodide perovskite crystals. Power law fittings of the excitation power dependent PL spectra revealed that Auger heating becomes dominant at high excitation densities. In addition, we observed an asymmetric broadening of the PL peak tail at the high energy side, indicating light emission from hot carriers even under steady-state illumination conditions. Phonon-bottleneck effect and Auger heating were considered as the main mechanisms for retardation of hot carrier cooling. Further analysis of the high energy tails using Maxwell–Boltzmann fitting revealed hot-carrier temperatures as high as 690 K. Our findings provide an important aspect of the synthetic approach of perovskites for their potential application in hot carrier solar cells.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic halide perovskite-based solar cells have recently shown great progress due to their high cell efficiencies, reaching 25.2%.1,2 They have also shown promising properties suitable for optoelectronic applications such as in high colour purity light emitting diodes (LEDs),3 wavelength-tunable lasers4 and broadband photodetectors ranging from UV-Visible to X-ray.5,6 This outstanding performance originates from the long carrier diffusion lengths, strong light absorption capability and defect tolerant structure.7,8 Formamidinium (NH2CH = NH2+ or FA+) lead iodide (FAPbI3) is one of the most studied lead iodide based perovskites, expressed generally using the formula, ABX3, where A is an organic cation, B is a metal cation (Pb2+) and X is a halide anion (I−). FAPbI3 is a promising candidate for application in solar cells, along with the widely studied methylammonium based perovskites (MAPbI3), mainly due to the smaller bandgap of FAPbI3 and higher stability of formamidinium cations.9,10
Several methods, such as spin coating,4 spray coating,11 solution self-assembly12 and chemical vapour deposition (CVD)5 have been developed for the synthesis of perovskite solar cells. Among these, CVD is an inexpensive method, allowing reproducible and high-quality scale up fabrication of perovskite solar cells. Generally, a two-step vapour deposition method has been utilized to synthesize perovskite films, crystals, and ultrathin platelets.5 In the two-step approach, evaporated inorganic precursors are first deposited on a substrate, and organic precursors are intercalated in the following step. In a more developed version of the CVD method, namely the one-step deposition method, the precursors are co-evaporated and simultaneously deposited on a substrate. The one-step deposition method is more advantageous for achieving a scalable fabrication of perovskite solar cells, as it allows the facile and rapid synthesis of perovskite crystals.13
Recently, the observation of hot carrier (HC) generation in lead halide perovskites has brought a new perspective to their application in high efficiency solar cells, exceeding the theoretical limit.14 Hot carriers are generated when a material absorbs photons with energies higher than its bandgap. The HCs rapidly thermalize within a few picoseconds through longitudinal optical (LO) phonon emissions and give their excess energy into the lattice as heat. Rapid cooling of HCs is thus one of the major reasons for efficiency loss in hybrid perovskite solar cells. In conventional single junction solar cells, energy losses induced by the thermalization of HCs have been predicted to be more than 50%.15 Therefore, hot carrier solar cells (HCSCs) were proposed to increase the cell efficiency.16
The slow cooling of HCs in HCSCs allows carrier extraction before they thermalize with the lattice and energy is lost as heat. The slow cooling of HCs can be attributed to several mechanisms, such as phonon bottleneck, acoustic-optical phonon up-conversion and Auger heating effects.14,16 Since the first demonstration of slow HC cooling in MAPbI3 perovskite thin films,17 several other perovskites, including FAPbI3, have also been shown to exhibit this phenomenon.18–20 Compared with the all-inorganic perovskites (such as CsPbIBr2), FAPbI3 shows a 10 times slower LO phonon emission rate, which can be explained by the strong phonon bottleneck effect.19 Besides, fluence-dependent studies on MAPbI3 suggested that Auger losses, which occur under higher carrier concentrations, are also effective in slowing the HC dynamics.21 However, as the observation of hot carriers in organic–inorganic perovskite is a new phenomenon, the underlying mechanisms are still under debate and further studies are required. Previously, time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) and transient adsorption methods have been extensively used to investigate the HC cooling mechanisms. However, since the solar cells operate under continuous illumination, further study of HCs under steady state conditions is also of great importance.22,23
Here, we present the synthesis of layered cubic formamidinium lead iodide (FAPI) based perovskite crystals on various substrates using a one-step CVD method. When compared with the previous reports on the FAPI perovskite crystals, our layered cubic FAPI crystals exhibited a large blueshift of the PL emission, and a clear spectral tail at higher energies. We attribute these features to the quantum confinement effect that originates in the unique layered structure, which is realized by the formation of a layered 2D structure. Moreover, noticeable broadening of high energy tails in the PL spectra with increasing excitation power densities suggested the existence of HCs in our perovskite crystals. We believe that observation of HCs in FAPI under continuous light illumination is an important step for achieving perovskite-based, highly efficient HCSCs.
Experimental
Synthesis of perovskite crystals
We synthesized FAPI perovskite crystals using two different methods, namely one-step and two-step vapour phase deposition methods. In the former method, both formamidinium lead iodide (FAI) and lead iodide (PbI2) precursors were introduced into the heating zone at the same time, while in the latter method a PbI2 film was first deposited, followed by FAI intercalation. Prior to growth of the perovskite crystal, indium tin oxide (ITO), SiO2, and c-plane sapphire substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with acetone and isopropyl alcohol for 10 min each. In the one-step vapour phase deposition method for FAPI synthesis, FAI powder (50 mg), PbI2 powder (10 mg) and the substrates were placed at the upstream, centre and downstream zones, respectively, of a tubular furnace (26 mm inner diameter) (ESI,† Fig. S1). FAI and PbI2 feedstocks were heated to 180 °C and 360 °C, respectively. The substrate temperature was kept at 130–160 °C for 5 min under a constant Ar flow (100 sccm). The furnace was then naturally cooled down to room temperature while flowing Ar.
In the two-step vapour phase deposition method, PbI2 was placed at the centre zone of the furnace, while substrates were placed at the downstream zone. PbI2 powder and substrates were heated to 360 °C and 200 °C, respectively. 5 min after the deposition of PbI2 crystals, the furnace was naturally cooled down to room temperature. Then, PbI2 crystals were converted to perovskite crystals by intercalating FAI. In this step, FAI was heated to 150 °C, while the substrate with PbI2 crystals was kept at 100 °C. FAI intercalation was carried out for 1 h under a constant Ar flow.
Characterizations
Powder X-ray diffraction profiles were recorded using a RIGAKU SmartLab diffractometer with a multilayer mirror and a D/teX Ultra 1D silicon strip detector. The single-crystal X-ray diffraction spots were measured using an RIGAKU XtaLAB-mini diffractometer with an omega scan mode. Mo-Kα radiation, α = 0.71073 Å, was used for both powder and single-crystal X-ray diffraction studies. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were acquired using a HITACHI S-4800 SEM with a 1 kV acceleration voltage. Raman and PL spectra were measured using a Nanofinder 30 instrument (Tokyo Instruments) with a 532 nm laser. UV-vis absorption spectra were collected using a Shimadzu UV-3600 spectrophotometer.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the optical image of the FAPI perovskite grains synthesized using the newly developed one-step vapour phase deposition method (ESI,† Fig. S1). Square-shaped grains with lateral sizes in the range of 5–50 μm were uniformly obtained on ITO substrates. The well-defined square grain structure suggests the single crystalline nature of the perovskite crystal. Here, we used an ITO substrate, because it allows the direct application to FAPI-based solar cells. We also confirmed the growth of the square grains on SiO2/Si and sapphire substrates (ESI,† Fig. S2). The SEM image shown in Fig. 1b indicates the layered structure of the crystals, with their thickness decreasing gradually from the grain centre to the edges. On the contrary, the conventional two-step deposition method produced FAPI perovskite crystals with hexagonal and trigonal shapes (Fig. 1c), as widely observed in the two-step vapour phase-grown perovskite crystals.5,24 In the two-step process, FAI organic molecules are intercalated with pre-deposited PbI2 crystals to convert them into FAPI perovskite crystals. Thus, the hexagonal and trigonal grain structures reflect the hexagonal lattice of the original PbI2 grains.25
 Fig. 1  Optical microscopy (a) and SEM (b) images of cubic FAPI crystals synthesized using the one-step vapour phase deposition method on an ITO substrate. Insets show the high magnification images. (c) Optical and SEM (inset) images of FAPI crystals synthesized using the two-step method. (d) An illustration of the atomic model of layered FAPI. (e) PL spectra of one-step FAPI (red line) and two-step FAPI (blue line). The PL from one-step FAPI is blue-shifted to 1.67 eV, while two-step FAPI shows PL at around 1.57 eV. 
Therefore, the newly observed square-shaped grains of the one-step perovskite crystals (Fig. 1a and b) strongly suggest the formation of the two-dimensional (2D) perovskite structure, being different from those made using the conventional two-step process. The synthesis of the square grains was achieved by tuning the growth conditions, such as substrate and feedstock temperatures, gas flow rate and amounts of feedstocks. In particular, the substrate temperature was found to greatly affect the morphology of FAPI products. The optimum substrate temperature to obtain square FAPI grains was in the range of 130–160 °C. Within this range, the grain density increased with the substrate temperature, as seen in Fig. S3 (ESI†). As the α-phase (perovskite phase) of FAPI is stable above 130 °C,26 controlling the substrate temperature is essential for synthesizing cubic FAPI crystals.
It is noteworthy that two-step vapour phase deposition did not produce such square-shaped FAPI grains. Therefore, our new one-step process seems to be based on a different growth mechanism of the FAPI grains, most likely due to the simultaneous supply of PbI2 and FAI molecules. FAPI can be synthesized by heating the feedstock in a liquid solution.27 In this case, an excess amount of FAI in the solution was found to give a specific layered structure by forming low-dimensional formamidinium compounds between the FAPI layers, which act as a spacer between the perovskite layers.27 In our case, considering the high FAI temperature (180 °C) and its continuous supply during the growth of the perovskite crystals, we expect that the layered structure in the one-step crystals can also be ascribed to the formation of low-dimensional formamidinium compounds. From the reasons discussed below, the most plausible structure for the one-step square grains is presented in Fig. 1d, showing the alternating 2D PbI4 and formamidinium organic cation layers.

Fig. 1e compares the PL spectra taken from perovskites grown using the one-step (red) and two-step (black) deposition methods. The latter exhibited luminescence at 1.57 eV, being consistent with the previous literature.23 The former, made using the one-step process, exhibited a large blueshift in the PL spectrum, with a peak at 1.67 eV. We suppose that this large blueshift originates from the quantum confinement effect of the perovskite layer, as depicted in Fig. 1d. Such quantum confinement can be realized by the presence of the formamidinium layer, which separates the 2D sheets of PbI4. A similar confinement effect was reported for the 2D Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) type layered perovskites.28 In our model (Fig. 1d), the thickness of the 2D perovskite crystal is supposed to be reduced down to a monolayer due to the periodically inserted formamidinium layers, thus increasing its bandgap.
Furthermore, one-step FAPI crystals were characterized using XRD, as shown in Fig. 2a. The XRD pattern of one-step FAPI crystals showed a diffraction peak at a low angle of 4.03°, which is typical for RP type layered perovskites.29 Three different measurements (see patterns 1, 2 and 3 in Fig. 2a) consistently gave the intense low angle peak. We also note that the intensity of higher angle peaks varied from sample to sample. This is attributed to imperfect stacking in the single crystals. The high-intensity low-angle diffraction peak can be well-indexed to the (002) reflection of the A2PbI4-type perovskite with a corresponding d-spacing of 10.1 Å. The (00l) reflections indicate that the PbI4 layers are aligned parallel to the surface with an interlayer distance of 10.1 Å.30,31 Although the literature on the XRD patterns of FA2PbI4 is very scarce, the calculated XRD spectrum of FA2PbI4 has been reported recently (see Fig. S4, ESI†).32 Our experimental data matched with the calculated pattern. Therefore, it is highly likely that one-step CVD produced a 2D layered FA2PbI4. Fig. 2b shows an atomic model of the calculated structure of FA2PbI4 with eclipsed configuration in a monoclinic crystal lattice. Here, parallelly stacked PbI4 layers are separated by formamidinium cations. The most plausible explanation for such a layered structure of FA2PbI4 synthesized using our one-step approach is that the high concentration and simultaneous supply of FAI to the substrate zone along with PbI2 vapor leads to layer-by-layer growth. Similarly, formation of low dimensional structures in solution-based perovskites was reported under excess supply of organic cations.27,33 In addition, single crystal X-ray diffraction was also performed (see Fig. S5, ESI†). Clear diffraction spots were observed confirming the single crystalline nature of the samples.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of one-step FAPI crystals. Patterns 1, 2 and 3 obtained from different positions to ensure the consistency of the data. (b) Atomic model of FA2PbI4 showing the layered structure. (00l) planes parallel to the surface are indicated with red areas. 
The structures of perovskite crystals were also characterized using Raman spectroscopy. Fig. 3a shows the Raman spectra from two-step (black line) and one-step FAPI (red line). In the case of two-step FAPI, the characteristic Raman peaks of PbI6 cages at 74, 98 and 112 cm−1 were assigned to the Eg, A1g and A2u modes, respectively. The broad peaks above 150 cm−1 correspond to the motion of the FA cations.34 In the two step perovskite crystals, as the organic cations are intercalated in a different step, the PbI6 cages still preserve their structure, which may explain the observation of the PbI6 cage related modes. Interestingly, the Raman spectrum of one-step FAPI substantially differs from that of two-step perovskite crystals. An intense and sharp peak appeared at 140 cm−1 which originates in α-FAPI.35 On the other hand, the peak that appeared at 63 cm−1 can be assigned to the rotational mode of FA cations.34 The continuous and simultaneous supply of FAI during the growth of perovskite crystals in one-step deposition allows one to obtain a complete α-phase FAPI (see Fig. S6 for the Raman spectrum of the δ-phase FAPI, ESI†). Broadening and weakening of the PbI6 cage-related peaks might be attributed to relaxation of the I–Pb–I bending and I-Pb stretching modes due to the presence of the low dimensional formamidinium layer that acts as a spacer.
 Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of one-step (red line) and two-step (black line) FAPI crystals. (b) PL (red line) and UV-vis absorbance (blue line) spectra of one-step FAPI crystals. The absorbance spectrum shows step-like features indicating a mixed layered structure. (c) PL intensity mapping for one-step FAPI crystals on ITO substrates. The inset figure shows the optical micrograph of the corresponding area. 
UV-Visible and PL spectra of the square-shaped FAPI are shown in Fig. 3b. As previously mentioned, the one-step FAPI shows a blue-shifted PL peak. PL mapping in Fig. 3c shows a uniform PL intensity except at the central areas of the crystal. Considering the pyramid like surface morphology of the crystals, revealed by SEM images, the low intensity at the centre may be caused by the laser being out of focus in these areas during the mapping. However, the mapping of the PL maximum energy position shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†) is completely homogeneous. The UV-Visible spectrum given in Fig. 3b (blue line) shows a band edge at around 800 nm that corresponds to the band gap of bulk FAPI. Furthermore, additional absorption shoulders in the layered structure were observed. However, similar absorption shoulders were also observed in the two-step FAPI (see Fig. S8, ESI†). Thus, we consider that these shoulders may originate in various thicknesses in two-step perovskite crystals as decreasing thickness increases the band gap. It should be noted that, unlike for the PL measurements, the UV-Visible measurements are from a large area (∼1 cm2). The colour contrast in Fig. 1c corresponds to the varying thicknesses, from bulk crystals to crystals as thin as a few nm thick. In contrast, the one-step perovskite crystals show a much more uniform morphology throughout the substrate.
To better understand the effect of the layered structure on the charge recombination dynamics, we measured the excitation power dependence of the PL spectrum. Normalized PL spectra of one-step FAPI crystals under various excitation densities are shown in Fig. 4a. The peak position was slightly blue-shifted with increasing power densities. The blueshift possibly originates from a photo-induced band filling effect with increasing carrier densities.23 As shown in the ESI,† Fig. S9, continuous exposure to the laser over long periods of time (up to 3 min) did not affect the peak position. Therefore, it is unlikely that laser heating had induced the observed blueshift when increasing the power density. In general, for direct band gap semiconductors, the integrated PL intensity (IPL) is proportional to a Power law function of the excitation power density,9,36 IPL ∼ Pk(1)where k provides information about the underlying recombination mechanism in the given power density range: k = 2 for free carrier recombination, k is in the range of 1 < k < 2 for excitonic recombination (both for free and bound excitons) and k < 1 for free-to-bound recombination or Auger losses.23,37Fig. 4b shows the logP–logIPL plot obtained from the excitation power dependent measurement along with Power law fittings (red lines). We observed two distinct regions, indicating two different recombination mechanisms. At the low excitation densities (<55 W cm−2), k was calculated to be 1.1, showing an almost linear dependence. This implies that recombination of free or bound excitons is dominant at this region. As the exciton binding energy of FAPI at room temperature (8.1 meV) is comparable to the room temperature thermal energy,38 the main recombination contribution at this range is expected to be from the recombination of free carriers. Under a higher excitation density (>55 W cm−2), a sublinear power dependence (k = 0.67) of the PL intensity was observed. The decrease in the slope is mainly related to Auger processes caused by increased carrier–carrier interactions at high excitation densities. A similar linear-to-sublinear transition with increasing excitation power was also reported in FAPI nanocrystals (NCs).9 Although the impact of Auger heating is negligible in bulk semiconductors, it becomes more dominant in materials with reduced dimensionality due to significant quantum confinement effect.39
 Fig. 4  (a) Normalized power dependent PL spectra of one-step FAPI crystals. With increasing powers, the high energy tail of the PL peaks broadens. (b) The logP–logIPL plot of power dependent PL and Power law fittings. From the Power law fittings of the data, two regions were defined with calculated power factors (k) of 1.1 and 0.67 for the low and high excitation density ranges, respectively. 
Furthermore, as seen in Fig. 4a, the PL peak showed broadening, tailing to higher energy, which becomes more apparent with higher excitation energies. Such broadening of the high energy tail is indicative of hot carrier photoluminescence, corresponding to the fraction of carriers that are not at equilibrium with the lattice and stay as hot carriers.20,22,23,40 The observation of hot carrier PL even at a steady state excitation implies that HC lifetimes are sufficiently retarded, enabling spontaneous emission from these HCs. To better analyse the power dependent PL spectra and to extract the HC temperatures, the high energy tail of the PL spectra was fitted using a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution function in the form of: IPL(E) = I0·e−E/kBTc(2)where E is the photon energy, kB is the Boltzmann constant and Tc is the carrier temperature.41Fig. 5a shows the PL spectrum (blue data) acquired at a power density of 12 W cm−2 and the curve fit using eqn (2) (red line). Following a previously reported procedure, the starting point of the high energy PL tail (I0) was determined to be I0 = 0.5Imax, in which Imax is the maximum PL intensity point.20 The model gave a good fit to the data (Fig. 5a), which validates that the high energy tail originates from the radiative recombination of HCs.
 Fig. 5  (a) The semi-log plot of the PL spectrum of one-step FAPI crystals under a 12 W cm−2 excitation density (blue dots), and the Maxwell–Boltzmann fitting of the high energy tail (red line). (b) Excitation density dependence of carrier temperatures calculated from Maxwell–Boltzmann fittings. (c) An illustration of the hot carrier retardation process where phonon-bottleneck and Auger heating are effective. 
The carrier temperature, Tc, was calculated for different excitation energies by fitting the PL spectra with eqn (2) (Fig. 5b). It is clear that carrier temperature increases with increasing excitation density. At a minimum excitation (12 W cm−2) Tc was calculated to be 602 K, while it reached to 692 K at the excitation density of 250 W cm−2. The estimated temperatures are comparable to those previously reported for other organic–inorganic perovskites, which were calculated from transient absorption or steady-state PL measurements.20,23
At the low excitation range (<55 W cm−2), the carrier temperature increase is limited, while the increase is more pronounced above the threshold (around 55 W cm−2). It has been suggested that depending on the excitation density (carrier concentration), different hot carrier cooling mechanisms exist.21 At low excitation densities, slow hot carrier cooling is mainly attributed to the hot-phonon bottleneck. Yang et al. suggested that the phonon bottleneck in FAPI is induced by acoustic phonon up-conversion in which low energy acoustic modes are up-converted to optical modes (LO phonons).19 Rotatable organic cations existing in FAPI (and in other organic–inorganic perovskites) show a band overlap with acoustic phonons and induce a more efficient phonon up-conversion process. Although the specific effect of the organic cation on the phonon bottleneck is still under debate,19,42 we consider that a high FAI concentration in one-step FAPI may also further improve the phonon up-conversion process. Thus, the effect of the organic cation on HC dynamics in layered perovskite crystals needs to be investigated in more detail.
At high excitation densities, Auger heating also becomes effective and further slows down the hot carrier cooling, giving a more noticeable increase in the hot-carrier temperature. Fig. 5c shows a schematic band diagram of FAPI under high excitation energy. In this figure, the phonon bottleneck (yellow area) and Auger heating (purple area) effects are summarized. Auger heating, also known as interband Auger recombination, is a three particle non-radiative process. Here, the energy of the exciton recombination is transferred to another charge carrier, exciting this carrier to higher energies, which causes the heating of the electronic system.21,39 Eventually, this heating effect slows down the HC thermalization. Experimental and theoretical studies showed that the Auger process coefficient in hybrid halide perovskites is two orders of magnitude larger than that in conventional semiconductors.43 Therefore, Auger heating becomes an important parameter in these materials. Accordingly, we consider that quantum confinement due to the layered structure in one-step FAPI (see Fig. 2b) enables efficient Auger heating compared to the bulk FAPI. Consequently, this gives rise to observation of hot carrier recombination even under continuous illumination. As Auger heating-induced HC cooling dominates under high power densities (above >550 Suns, with 1 Sun = 0.1 W cm−2), concentrator type solar cells, which operate under much higher illumination conditions than typical solar cells, can be an ideal platform to realize HCSCs in these newly reported FAPI perovskites.18,44 However, we note that the Auger process shows a third degree dependence on the carrier density, where Auger lifetime decreases with increasing carrier density.45,46 In particular, considering the high carrier density in concentrator type solar cells, the effect of high carrier density on the Auger process needs to be further investigated.
Conclusions
We demonstrated a one-step vapour phase deposition method for the growth of square-shaped FAPI crystals. The experimental results indicate the formation of a unique layered structure with alternating PbI4 and formamidinium layers, being similar to those of RP type perovskites. The layered FA2PbI4 structure is proposed based on the experimental results. The high FAI vapour supply and simultaneous deposition of PbI2 and FAI intercalation are thought to be the origin of the layered structure. These square-shaped grains showed blue-shifted PL spectra that originated from the quantum confinement of carriers in the layered 2D FAPI structure, compared to the two-step FAPI crystals. Power dependence of the PL revealed broadening of asymmetric high energy tails in the PL spectra, indicating the presence of HCs under continuous wave excitation. The HC temperatures were obtained by fitting the high energy tails to a Maxwell–Boltzmann function, with carrier temperatures up to 690 K being calculated. The underlying mechanisms of slow HC cooling were discussed. We believe that getting HCs under continuous wave conditions is an important step to achieve HCSC as typical solar cells that operate under a continuous wave. This work is expected to contribute to the understanding of how HC cooling is affected by perovskite morphology and how this can be controlled.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the JSPS KAKENHI grant numbers JP18H03864 and JP19K22113, and JST CREST grant numbers JPMJCR18I1 and JSPS A3 Foresight Program. U.E. acknowledges the IEI program scholarship supported by MEXT. We thank Dr Pablo Solís-Fernández and Satoru Fukamachi for their valuable discussion and experimental support.
Notes and references
J. Duan, H. Xu, W. E. I. Sha, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Yang and Q. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21036–21068 RSC .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies. 20200311.pdf, accessed 6 April 2020.
S. Kumar, J. Jagielski, N. Kallikounis, Y. H. Kim, C. Wolf, F. Jenny, T. Tian, C. J. Hofer, Y. C. Chiu, W. J. Stark, T. W. Lee and C. J. Shih, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5277–5284 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS .
U. Erkılıç, P. Solís-Fernández, H. G. Ji, K. Shinokita, Y.-C. Lin, M. Maruyama, K. Suenaga, S. Okada, K. Matsuda and H. Ago, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40503–40511 CrossRef .
W. Wei, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu, H. Wei, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng, T. Li, A. Gruverman, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 315–321 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahapatra, D. Prochowicz, M. M. Tavakoli, S. Trivedi, P. Kumar and P. Yadav, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 8, 27–54 RSC .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391–402 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Fang, L. Protesescu, D. M. Balazs, S. Adjokatse, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Small, 2017, 13, 1700673 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, H. Tan, H. Yuan, Z. Yang, J. Z. Fan, J. Kim, O. Voznyy, X. Gong, L. N. Quan, C. S. Tan, J. Hofkens, D. Yu, Q. Zhao and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1607 CrossRef .
S. Ulična, B. Dou, D. H. Kim, K. Zhu, J. M. Walls, J. W. Bowers and M. F. A. M. Van Hest, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1853–1857 CrossRef .
Q. Liao, K. Hu, H. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3405–3410 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, L. Gu, Y. Gao, C. Reckmeier, J. He, A. L. Rogach, Y. Yao and Z. Fan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14083 CrossRef .
S. Kahmann and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2471–2486 RSC .
Y. Da, Y. Xuan and Q. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 206–213 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Fu, Q. Xu and T. C. Sum, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802486 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, S. Bhaumik, T. W. Goh, M. S. Kumar, N. Yantara, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14350 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Wen, H. Xia, R. Sheng, Q. Ma, J. Kim, P. Tapping, T. Harada, T. W. Kee, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng, M. Green, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, S. Shrestha, R. Patterson and G. Conibeer, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14120 CrossRef CAS .
P. Papagiorgis, A. Manoli, S. Michael, C. Bernasconi, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko, A. Othonos and G. Itskos, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5799–5809 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, Q. Xu, G. Han, B. Wu, C. H. A. Huan, M. L. Leek and T. C. Sum, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1300 CrossRef .
W. Cao, Z. Zhang, R. Patterson, Y. Lin, X. Wen, B. P. Veetil, P. Zhang, Q. Zhang, S. Shrestha, G. Conibeer and S. Huang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 90846–90855 RSC .
H.-H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, S. Shao, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 243 CrossRef .
L. Niu, Q. Zeng, J. Shi, C. Cong, C. Wu, F. Liu, J. Zhou, W. Fu, Q. Fu, C. Jin, T. Yu, X. Liu and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5263–5270 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Beckmann, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2010, 45, 455–460 CrossRef CAS .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, J. Li, W. Li, N. Lin, L. Wang and J. Qiao, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 800–805 RSC .
Y. Zheng, T. Niu, X. Ran, J. Qiu, B. Li, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13860–13872 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Milić, J. Im, D. J. Kubicki, A. Ummadisingu, J. Seo, Y. Li, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900284 CrossRef .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fraccarollo, V. Cantatore, G. Boschetto, L. Marchese and M. Cossi, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 144, 164701 CrossRef .
M. Shin, J. Kim, Y.-K. Jung, T. Ruoko, A. Priimagi, A. Walsh and B. Shin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3945–3951 RSC .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Liao, P. Guo, C. P. Hsu, M. Lin, B. Wang, L. Zeng, W. Huang, C. M. M. Soe, W. F. Su, M. J. Bedzyk, M. R. Wasielewski, A. Facchetti, R. P. H. Chang, M. G. Kanatzidis and T. J. Marks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900284 CrossRef .
S. Draguta, J. A. Christians, Y. V. Morozov, A. Mucunzi, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat, J. M. Luther and M. Kuno, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 960–969 RSC .
H. Shibata, M. Sakai, A. Yamada, K. Matsubara, K. Sakurai, H. Tampo, S. Ishizuka, K. K. Kim and S. Niki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2005, 44, 6113–6114 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Fang, F. Wang, S. Adjokatse, N. Zhao, J. Even and M. Antonietta Loi, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16056 CrossRef CAS .
M. Achermann, A. P. Bartko, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Phys., 2006, 2, 557–561 Search PubMed .
H. He, Q. Yu, H. Li, J. Li, J. Si, Y. Jin, N. Wang, J. Wang, J. He, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Ye, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10896 Search PubMed .
S. A. Lyon, J. Lumin., 1986, 35, 121–154 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. E. Messing, K. Zheng and T. Pullerits, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3532–3540 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Shen and C. G. Van de Walle, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902830 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin, Z. Wang, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700792 CrossRef .
W. Rehman, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, C. Wehrenfennig, J. L. Boland, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7938–7944 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218–6227 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp02652bThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Optical microscopy (a) and SEM (b) images of cubic FAPI crystals synthesized using the one-step vapour phase deposition method on an ITO substrate. Insets show the high magnification images. (c) Optical and SEM (inset) images of FAPI crystals synthesized using the two-step method. (d) An illustration of the atomic model of layered FAPI. (e) PL spectra of one-step FAPI (red line) and two-step FAPI (blue line). The PL from one-step FAPI is blue-shifted to 1.67 eV, while two-step FAPI shows PL at around 1.57 eV.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of one-step FAPI crystals. Patterns 1, 2 and 3 obtained from different positions to ensure the consistency of the data. (b) Atomic model of FA2PbI4 showing the layered structure. (00l) planes parallel to the surface are indicated with red areas.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of one-step (red line) and two-step (black line) FAPI crystals. (b) PL (red line) and UV-vis absorbance (blue line) spectra of one-step FAPI crystals. The absorbance spectrum shows step-like features indicating a mixed layered structure. (c) PL intensity mapping for one-step FAPI crystals on ITO substrates. The inset figure shows the optical micrograph of the corresponding area.	 
IPL ∼ Pk	(1)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Normalized power dependent PL spectra of one-step FAPI crystals. With increasing powers, the high energy tail of the PL peaks broadens. (b) The logP–logIPL plot of power dependent PL and Power law fittings. From the Power law fittings of the data, two regions were defined with calculated power factors (k) of 1.1 and 0.67 for the low and high excitation density ranges, respectively.	 
IPL(E) = I0·e−E/kBTc	(2)

 	Fig. 5  (a) The semi-log plot of the PL spectrum of one-step FAPI crystals under a 12 W cm−2 excitation density (blue dots), and the Maxwell–Boltzmann fitting of the high energy tail (red line). (b) Excitation density dependence of carrier temperatures calculated from Maxwell–Boltzmann fittings. (c) An illustration of the hot carrier retardation process where phonon-bottleneck and Auger heating are effective.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp02652b

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
