Metal-free photo- and electro-catalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08704A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08704A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 23674-23698Metal-free photo- and electro-catalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction

        
          
            Tianhao 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Hu†
b, 
      
        
          
            Liming 
            Dai
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Chang Ming 
            Li
          
          
        
      *abd
aChongqing Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials & Technologies of Clean Energies, Institute of Clean Energy and Advanced Materials, School of Materials and Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P.R. China. E-mail: ecmli@swu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Materials Science and Devices, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, Suzhou, 215009, P.R. China
cCentre for Advanced Carbon Materials, School of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: l.dai@unsw.edu.au
dInstitute of Advanced Cross-Field Science and College of Life Science, Qingdao University, Qingdao, 20671, P.R. China
Received 
      4th September 2020
    , Accepted 14th October 2020First published on 19th October 2020AbstractHydrogen production as very attractive clean energy technology has sparked the accelerated development of catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) towards efficient photo- and electrolytic water splitting. In particular, metal-free catalysts are intensively investigated as good substitutes for metal-based catalysts towards the HER due to their earth-abundance, good conductivity, low toxicity and low cost. Although some reviews have surveyed metal-free catalysts for water splitting, the tremendous recent advances require an update as a guide for further development. This review mainly summarizes the recent progress on theoretical calculations, experimental approaches and fundamental insights for metal-free catalysts. In particular, the Gibbs free energy of the intermediate state, ΔGH*, is an inclusive and much more influential descriptor for HER catalysts considering advanced methods beyond density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and a fine structure and high doping content can greatly improve the catalytic activity for the HER, but make the preparation process increasingly complicated. Therefore, simple and rapid preparation routes are highly desirable and urgently required. Thus, theoretical calculations have been applied to predict the structure–activity relationship of catalysts as a guide for good design. Non-carbonaceous metal-free catalysts are also included in this survey. All these developments and accomplishments are systematically summarized and thoughtfully discussed, and the overall perspectives for the current challenges and future development in this field are offered. It is our intention that this comprehensive review will be very informative for the future design and synthesis of metal-free catalysts for the HER and attract increasing interest to explore deep scientific insights for broad important practical applications and critical advances in the field of catalysis.Tianhao LiTianhao Li received his PhD in Chemistry from the University of Toledo (USA) in 2014. He has been a faculty member in the School of Materials and Energy, Southwest University. His research activities focus on developing ionic liquid-based electrocatalysts in for water splitting.Tao HuTao Hu received his PhD from Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2018, under the supervision of Prof. Xiaohui Wang. He is currently an Assistant Professor at the Institute of Materials Science and Devices, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology. His research focuses on theoretical modeling of advanced materials for energy storage and conversion.Liming DaiProf. Liming Dai joined University of New South Wales in 2020 as a Scientia Professor and an Australian Laureate Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering. Before joining UNSW, he was the Kent Hale Smith Professor in the Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Fellow of the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering, and Fellow of the International Association of Advanced Materials. Prof. Dai’s expertise covers the synthesis, functionalization, and device fabrication of conjugated polymers and carbon nanomaterials for energy-related and biomedical applications.Chang Ming LiDr Chang Ming Li is the Professor, the Dean of School of Materials Science and Engineering of Suzhou University of Science and Technology,and Director of Chongqing Key Lab for Clean Energy and Advanced Materials, China. He worked with Motorola as a distinguished technical member and Science Advisory Board Member. Later he became Professor, Head of Bioengineering Division and Director of Centre for Advanced Bionanosystems in Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received a number of prestigious awards such as Chinese Medical Science and Technology Awards, Motorola Master Innovator Award, Nanyang Innovation and Research Awardand Australia National University Craig Visiting Professor. His research interests are functional materials, green energies and biosensors/lab-on-chips. He has published 700+ peer-reviewed journal papers, 8 book chapters and holds 264 patents with 37000+ citations/H-index of 92. He is Member of European Academy of Science, Fellow of American institute of Medicine and Biological Engineering, Foreign Member of Russian Academy of Engineering Science and RSC Fellow, serving as member of Advisory Board for Nanoscales (RSC), Joule (Cell) and Chief Editor of Materials Report: Energy.
1. Introduction
Hydrogen is considered as one of the most important green and sustainable energy sources to meet the future energy demand, which can decrease the dependence on fossil fuels, such as petroleum, coal, and natural gas, and eventually become the final solution to environmental pollution.1 Hydrogen is also an important and widely used chemical raw material for the synthesis of ammonia and in the petrochemical industry. Consequently, the annual demand for hydrogen is dramatically increasing. Nowadays, there are three main routes for the production of hydrogen in industry, namely steam-methane reforming, coal gasification, and water splitting. Unfortunately, the first two methods still consume fossil fuels and have massive CO2 emission. Thus, only water splitting is regarded as a promising and green route for future hydrogen production. Its raw material, water, is abundant and renewable, offering the possibility for sustainable hydrogen production. Besides, the products are hydrogen and oxygen, and thus there is no secondary pollution to the environment. Moreover, the electricity for water splitting can be obtained by converting renewable energy from solar, wind and hydraulic power (Fig. 1).2–4 Therefore, water splitting has become increasingly important.
 Fig. 1  Hydrogen production from renewable energy. 
However, currently, water splitting accounts for only 3–5% of industrial hydrogen production. The primary reason for this is that water splitting is not only an energy-consuming reaction, but is also a kinetically controlled electrochemical process due to sluggish interfacial charge transfer.5 It consists of two half-reactions, i.e. the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). These two half-reactions have to overcome large energy barriers, resulting in a poor energy conversion efficiency. Thus, the development of efficient, stable and robust catalysts for HER and OER is crucial.6 The process of HER is relatively faster and simpler, and researchers usually develop photocatalytic and electrocatalytic materials for HER as the first step to promote water splitting performance.
In the past few decades, photo- and electro-catalysts for the HER have been intensively investigated and summarized from various perspectives.7,8 To date, noble metal (e.g. Pt and Pd)-based materials demonstrate the best catalytic activities; however, their scarcity and high cost significantly limit their commercialization for large-scale applications. Accordingly, non-precious metal-based catalysts for the HER have been investigated to reduce or replace the noble metal catalysts, and many of them such as transition metal sulfides, nitrides, selenides and phosphides exhibit high activities with low cost.3,9 However, most of them suffer from undesirable and/or unstable changes in morphology/crystalline structure and uncontrollable agglomeration/dissolution during the HER process. This poor stability can also result in environmental issues due to the release of heavy metals into the electrolyte.
Recently, metal-free catalysts for HER have been expanded from carbon nitride (C3N4), graphene, and carbon nanotube (CNT)-based carbonaceous materials, to non-carbonaceous metal-free materials, which have been described in previous reviews.10,11 Moreover, many of these materials have shown HER performances comparable or even superior to metal-based catalysts.12 In this review, the latest developments and advances in metal-free photocatalysts and electrocatalysts for the HER in water splitting are discussed and evaluated. This review significantly updates the recent progress in the development of not only metal-free catalysts for the HER in water splitting, but also theoretical approaches. Advances in fundamental insights for these materials, together with some general information and scientific insights about metal-free HER catalysts are also presented.
2. Mechanistic understanding and material selection
For electrocatalytic water splitting, the HER occurs through the electrochemical reduction of a proton (H+) or H2O in different electrolytes: 2H+ + 2e− → H2 (acidic)(1) 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2 (alkaline)(2)where the protons come from the hydronium cation (H3O+) in acidic solution or are ionized by water in alkaline solution. During the hydrogen reduction, a multistep reaction is involved (Fig. 2). The first step is the adsorption of H+ on the catalyst surface (C, which stands for catalytic surface or cathode) (Volmer step), followed by two routes to generate H2. The first is that the adsorbed hydrogen (H*) reacts with another H+ on the catalyst surface to form H2 through electrochemical desorption (Heyrovsky step), and the other is the combination of two H* to obtain H2via chemical desorption (Tafel step). C + H+ + e− → C⋯H* (Volmer step)(3) C⋯H* + H+ + e− → C + H2 (Heyrovsky step)(4) 2C⋯H* → C + H2 (Tafel step)(5)
 Fig. 2  Mechanism of the hydrogen evolution reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13, Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Thus, the HER proceeds via either the Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel pathway (Fig. 2). The Tafel slope (b) is calculated from plotting log (current density, j) versus overpotential (η) in the onset potential range (η = b × logj + a), which can be applied to determine the reaction kinetics and mechanistic pathway for HER catalysts. When a Pt catalyst is applied, the values of the Tafel slopes are 30, 40, and 120 mV dec−1 for the Volmer, Heyrovsky, and Tafel steps as the rate-determining steps, respectively.14 Also, a good catalyst is expected to have an optimum Gibbs free energy change (ΔGH*) towards zero for hydrogen adsorption and desorption. Furthermore, the underpotential deposition (UPD) of hydrogen is usually investigated because the HER mechanism determined from the Tafel slope can be different since the intrinsic properties of catalysts vary.15 Thus, the mechanistic process of metal-free electrocatalysts for the HER may be different from that of metal-based catalysts, and some other parameters such as the exchange current density (j0) also need to be carefully studied.
It is well known that the minimum energy for overall water splitting is 1.23 eV, which requires −0.41 eV for the HER and 0.82 eV for the OER.16 For photocatalytic water splitting, it is suggested that photocatalysts should have a minimum bandgap of 1.23 eV as the ideal condition without overpotential and energy consumption of charge transfer.16 However, the energy dissipation cannot be ignored during hydrogen production in practical application, and thus a bandgap higher than 1.23 eV is necessary. Thus, photocatalysts usually have a conduction band (CB) with a lower potential than −0.41 V, and a valence band (VB) higher than 0.82 V. As shown in Fig. 3, photocatalytic hydrogen production involves photophysical and electrochemical processes. The main difference between photocatalysis and electrocatalysis for water splitting is that they have different charges. The former involves photon absorption, charge carrier generation, separation and transportation to provide electrons for proton reduction, while the latter relies on electricity to directly offer electrons for the water-splitting redox steps (HER and OER), as above mentioned. This distinction between these two catalytic processes requires us to select different electrocatalysts for efficient energy conversion processes. However, both catalytic processes share same the electrode kinetics, specifically, reactant diffusion to the electrode surface, adsorption on the electrode surface, charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface, product desorption from the electrode and diffusion in the electrolyte. They have similar charge transfer-involved surface reaction pathways, namely, the Volmer–Tafel or Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway.
 Fig. 3  Three key dynamic steps (photophysical, photochemical, and electrochemical) involved in overall water-splitting. After excitation across the band gap, the following steps occur: (1) electron/hole relaxation; (2) trapping of electrons/holes in trap states due to defects or surface states; (3) radiative and nonradiative band-edge electron–hole or exciton recombination; (4) radiative and nonradiative trapped electron–hole or relaxed exciton recombination; and (5) nonlinear and nonradiative exciton–exciton annihilation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17, Copyright (2018) the American Chemical Society. 
Under light irradiation, photocatalysts absorb photons at certain wavelengths, and photons have equivalent or greater energy than the bandgap energy of the catalyst, and thus the photon energy shifts electrons from the VB to the CB and generates empty holes in the VB simultaneously. Meanwhile, excited electrons in the CB can go back to the VB, where electron–hole recombination occurs to eliminate the free electron–hole pairs and decrease the quantum efficiency of the photocatalyst.17,18 The remaining electron–hole pairs (charge carriers) are transported to the surface active sites of the catalyst, where the HER/OER occurs. Recombination of a large proportion of electron–hole pairs is the main challenge in photocatalysis. During the HER, most research efforts are focused on exploring effective electrocatalysts and unraveling the catalytic reaction pathways. This distinction between photo- and electro-catalysis leads to different rules to select materials, where the electrocatalysts are generally metallic materials with good electronic conductivity and electrocatalytic activity, whereas photocatalysts are semiconductor materials that are capable of photon harvesting, charge separation and surface catalytic reaction.
Among the metal-free photo- and electro-catalysts for the HER, carbon-based materials are mostly utilized due to their good electrical and thermal conductivities, low cost, diverse structure, mechanical strength and lightness. Carbonaceous materials, including C3N4, graphene, and CNTs, have been applied to prepare photocatalysts or electrocatalysts for the HER in water splitting. Generally, pristine carbonaceous catalysts exhibit quite low HER activities, and thus modification strategies are frequently employed to enhance their catalytic efficiency. Heteroatom doping, constructing of composites, and structure modification are the most frequently used methods to alter the morphology, modify the surface electronic structures, and build mesoscopic structures to tailor the HER process, respectively. These optimized structures enlarge the carbonaceous HER catalyst family.
Non-carbonaceous metal-free catalysts for the HER have attracted huge interests in the research community, including boron- and phosphorous-based materials. Compared with their carbonaceous counterparts, the emerging boron- and phosphorus-based catalysts possess much higher structural complexity. These novel catalysts greatly expand the sources to explore high-performance metal-free catalysts for the HER. Their corresponding active sites and mechanism have been studied using characterization techniques and theoretical calculation approaches.
3. Approaches and advances of theoretical calculation for fundamental insights, and the paths to bridge theoretical and experimental investigations
With the rapid developments in quantum chemistry and data science, theoretical calculations play an increasingly indispensable role in predicating and interpreting the intrinsic catalytic activity for HER catalysis. Advances in density functional theory (DFT) and data mining techniques make efficient catalyst screening and complex descriptor determination possible. This section presents the recent progress dedicated to the development of pH-universal activity descriptors for the HER in alkaline solution and considers the solvation effect.19 Theoretical approaches beyond DFT such as machine learning atomistic potentials20 are also reviewed.
3.1 The importance of theoretical simulations in HER investigation
In the past decades, theoretical simulations have shown great power ranging from catalytic active site identification and catalytic mechanism clarification to novel catalytic material screening, significantly accelerating the development of catalysis. Among the extensively studied catalytic reactions, the HER, as the ‘simplest’ model reaction, is not only of a great practical importance, but also an ideal model to obtain fundamental knowledge on electrochemistry. This knowledge allows theoretical studies and their combination with experiments on the HER to serve as a bridge to connect surface science with practical catalysis design.
3.2 Theoretical approach
The most popular theoretical approach to model catalysts at the atomic scale is the well-developed DFT calculations.21 The main contribution of DFT calculations to electrocatalysis is currently in two aspects, namely energy calculation and band structure analysis. The former enables the quantitative determination of the adsorption energy, free energy diagram, and volcano plots, and the latter deduces the famous d-band theory.22 According to the Sabatier principles, the adsorption free energy of H* on the surface of a good catalyst should be not too strong or too weak. Therefore, the adsorption energy is crucial in evaluating the possible reaction pathway and identification of the HER active sites. By calculating the adsorption free energy of the initial state, H+ + e−, intermediate adsorbed H*, and final product 1/2H2, the three-state free energy diagrams of the HER can be constructed. This is important for identifying the rate-determining steps (rds) and elucidating whether the HER pathway is the Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel pathway.27 Especially, the Gibbs free energy of the intermediate state H* (ΔGH*) has been considered as a major descriptor of HER activity. When the exchange current is plotted as a function of the calculated ΔGH*, an interesting volcano-shaped curve is obtained, called the volcano plot. The volcano plot, as a bridge between the experimentally measurable exchange current and material property, is helpful for understanding the activity trend for the HER in a series of catalysts.28–30 In metal-containing HER catalysts, the d-band theory establishes a direct relationship between the surface structure, electronic structure, adsorption energy, apparent activity of a certain catalyst. Unlike noble and transition metal-based catalysts, metal-free catalysts have no d-electrons. Zheng et al. found that the ΔGH* trends in doped graphene are correlated with the valence p-orbital downshift of active C.31 Recently a linear relationship between the adsorption strength and p-band center has been proposed as an electronic descriptor of activity.32–34 Since the adsorbed H* hybrid has the p-orbital of the non-metal element, the corresponding theory is called the p-band theory here. The current framework of theoretical approaches for the HER is summarized in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Theoretical approaches for electrocatalytic HER: current status and challenges. (a) Schematic illustrating the HER mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc. (b) Adsorption energies of CHx intermediates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24 Copyright 2020, the American Physical Society. (c) Relationship between H binding energy and p-band center. (d) Volcano plot of i0 as a function of ΔGH*. (e) Calculated free-energy diagram of the HER at equilibrium potential for phosphorus carbides. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc. (f) Bond electronegativity as a new HER catalyst descriptor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
The above-mentioned methods are popularly used since they can generally give qualitative explanation of the trends in HER activity. However, the ideal three-state HER model is oversimplified in cases where accurate results are required or in environment-sensitive systems.35 For instance, the three-state diagram cannot explain the sluggish kinetics of the HER in alkaline solution.36 The pH dependence of the free energy diagrams indicates that the kinetic barrier of water dissociation may also govern the overall reaction rate when H+ in the electrolyte is insufficient. Thus, more sophisticated strategies considering water dissociation facilitate more reasonable results for the HER in alkaline media.37 The effect of an electric field on the adsorption energy of the covalently bonded H, O, and OH on the surface relative to H2O was found to be small.38 It should be noted that the three-state free energy diagram only includes the thermochemical energy, while the activation energy is ignored. This is no problem when H+ is readily available in an acidic environment; otherwise, the activation energy has to be considered. Although the activation energy can be calculated using the nudged elastic band (NEB) method in a simple system,39 assumptions have to be made to reduce the costly computation of infinitely large supercell and barriers.40 The electrochemical double layer, solvation, and hydrogen bonds need to be atomically modeled.39 In surface-sensitive electrochemical processes, hydrogen coverage and the competing adsorption of oxygen species on active centers must also be considered.30,34,41 These influence factors are prerequisites for accurate results and inevitably increase the complexity of simulation, which is too expensive for DFT.
Thus, to tackle the atomic simulation of complex systems, theoretical approaches beyond DFT are highly desirable. Efficient large-scale atomic simulation such as neural network potentials42 and machine-learned atomistic potentials43 are developing quickly. The global neural network potential is generated by learning the first principles dataset of potential energy surface from stochastic surface walking global optimization. Machine learning can also be used for multiscale, coarse-grained approaches to predict the activity of nanoparticles.47 The emerging methods show great advances in efficiency and capabilities.48,49
Different from electrocatalytic HER modeling, the main concerns of modeling the photocatalytic HER are bandgap engineering and efficient electron–hole separation. Potential good HER photocatalysts should basically possess a moderate bandgap, and good alignment with the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of H2O. Thus, the current modeling of HER photocatalysts in fact is from aspect of semiconductors. However, the bandgap, which is critical, is usually underestimated under the framework of standard DFT calculations. The most frequently used methods to obtain more accurate bandgaps are the time-consuming hybrid density functionals such as HSE.50 Furthermore, a unified theory for both electrocatalytic and photocatalytic HER is still lacking.
3.3 Combination of theoretical and experimental investigation
This part presents a critical appraisal of the combination of theoretical and experimental investigations on metal-free catalysts for the HER. Fundamental concepts and their correlation with experiment are presented to achieve a better understanding at the atomic level. In this critical appraisal, we bridge the gap between theoretical and experimental work from two aspects, i.e. atomic explanation of experimental observation by theoretical studies and prior guidance of experiments by theoretical prediction.
There are many cases in which the theoretical study successfully provides atomistic-scale explanation of experimental observations. Firstly, theoretical studies are employed to identify the HER-active sites. For example, DFT calculations helped researchers reveal that the intrinsic active sites for the HER are the carbon atoms located at the armchair edge and adjacent to the graphitic N in N-doped carbon nanosheets, well explaining the experimental observations.51 Secondly, DFT calculations enable the theoretical investigation of catalytic synergy. The strategy of integrating the theoretical and experimental means unraveled that the superior performance of ultrathin C3N4 quantum dots on graphene (CNQD@G) as a metal-free water reduction electrocatalyst arises from the bisynergistic effect, one between graphene and CNQDs and the other among the edge sites and the molecular sieve structure (Fig. 5a and b, respectively).44 Thirdly, DFT calculations are used to probe the effect of doping and functionalization. The electron donation introduced by the amine group has been proved to play an important role in the improvement of the HER catalytic activity of highly severed amine-functionalized nitrogen-doped graphene hybrids (Fig. 5c and d).45 Nitrogen doping in reduced graphene oxide (rGO) supported on a CNx backbone facilitates good electrical coupling and provides optimal hydrogen binding energy (Fig. 5e and f).46 Heteroatom-doping near the edge of g-C3N4 is a promising strategy to activate this material.53 Vigorous charge transfer across the MoB/g-C3N4 Schottky junction boosts hydrogen evolution.54 Fourthly, DFT calculations can help clarify the catalytic mechanism. The experimentally-observed high HER activity in N-doped graphene-supported g-C3N4 in ref. 34 is actually attributed to electron transfer-induced strain.55 Surface and dual electronic-modulated nanocarbon boosts the metal-free all-pH HER.56 Fluorographdiyne is a metal-free catalyst with great potential for the HER and overall water splitting under both acidic and alkaline condictions.57 Using DFT calculations to uncover the HER mechanism can also be successfully extended to covalent organic frameworks (COFs) and their derivatives.58,59
 Fig. 5  Atomistic-level explanation of experimental observation. (a) Free energy diagrams for hydrogen evolution at the equilibrium potential of CNQD@G and QD@G. (b) Volcano plot of j0 as a function of ΔGH* for CNQD@G and other catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) HER polarization curves of the catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 after iR correction. (d) Volcano plot of i0vs. ΔGH* for HT-AFNG, metal catalysts, and a typical nanostructured MoS2 catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (e) Free-energy diagram of the HER on the four N-doped configurations in CNx@N-RGO. (f) HER polarization curves of the different catalyst materials recorded in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Due to the great advances in structure exploration and synthetic technology, numerous non-metal elemental allotropes and compounds such as carbon, phosphorus, boron, and C3N4 analogues have been discovered. This progress unprecedentedly increases the exploration space of potential metal-free catalysts. Accordingly, theoretical predictions accelerate the screening of novel candidates as metal-free HER catalysts. Using ΔGH* as an activity descriptor, two 2D boron sheets, α and β12 borons, present a hydrogen adsorption free energy close to zero and are expected to be promising metal-free HER catalysts (Fig. 6a and b).30 χ3 and trigonal boron monolayers are also active catalysts for the HER with nearly zero free energy for hydrogen adsorption, metallic conductivity and abundant active sites in their basal plane.64 By high-throughput first-principles calculations, strained rings are predicted to be crucial in enhancing the HER for 2D carbon allotropes.65 Defect-activated phosphorene is predicted to have ultrahigh HER activity comparable to platinum.52 Besides, a series of novel 2D materials, including B3S and phosphorus carbide (β-PC), and C2N, are predicted to be new metal-free efficient HER electrocatalysts (Fig. 6c and d).32,41,66 The coplanar conjugated C2N–C3N heterostructure is predicted to be an efficient HER electrocatalyst.67 Ternary metal-free materials, borocarbonitrides, carbon-doped BN,68 and BxCyNz14,69 have been predicted and proven to be an excellent HER electrocatalysts. Ahuja et al. predicted h-B2O and Si2BN monolayers as novel metal-free HER catalysts with robust catalytic activity.70,71 Besides, defect-activated phosphorene for the HER demonstrates the possibility of defect engineering in HER catalyst design (Fig. 6e and f).
 Fig. 6  Theoretical predictions of novel metal-free HER catalysts. (a) Model of α-sheet boron supercell. (b) Volcano curve of exchange current (j0) as a function of the average Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*). Reprinted with permission from ref. 30 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) Optimized configurations and (d) corresponding free energies of hydrogen adsorption on 2D B3S nanosheet at different coverages (θ). Green, yellow and pink balls represent B, S and H atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Comparison of the free energy diagram in the most favored sites for perfect, MV, DV, and TV cases. Inset shows the geometries of hydrogen adsorbed above pristine phosphorene. (f) Strain modulation of the free energy for H adsorption on the DV core. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
The key breakthrough of metal-free HER photocatalysts is brought by graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and phosphorene-based materials. Due to their suitable band gaps, g-C3N4 (ref. 72 and 73) and few-layer black phosphorus16,61 are the most studied semiconductors for the photocatalysis of the HER. Recently, graphdiyne has been recognized as a hole transfer layer to fabricate quantum dot-sensitized photocathodes for hydrogen production.76 Although g-C3N4 has some limitations, such as low electrical conductivity, high recombination rate and inefficient light adsorption, theoretical studies indicate that non-metal element and molecule-modified C3N4 shows improved photocatalytic performances.77 Interestingly, atomic simulation can probe that adsorbed H2O molecules influence the HER performance of g-C3N4 (Fig. 7a and b).60 O, S, N doping was predicted to improve the water splitting reactions of phosphorene derivatives,78 and experiment validated that OH-functionalization indeed enhanced the photocatalytic HER performance of BP (Fig. 7c). The strong electronic coupling between g-C3N4 and BP was probed by DFT calculations to rationalize the superior HER of their heterostructures (Fig. 7d and e).62,63 Hexagonal SiC has been reported to be catalytically active as a result of charge spatial separation.79 By advanced computations, many new materials, including the g-C3N4 analogue C3N5,80 porous boron nitride p-BN,81 and 2D arsenide XAs (X = Si, Ge, Sn) monolayer,82 are predicted to be promising metal-free HER photocatalysts, which are awaiting experimental validation.
 Fig. 7  Metal-free HER photocatalysts. (a) Adsorption configuration of one H2O molecule at the g-C3N4 intrinsic vacancy. (b) Band edge alignment according to the vacuum level and the standard hydrogen electrode for planar g-C3N4, buckle single g-C3N4 sheet and single g-C3N4 sheet-adsorbed water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration showing the mechanism of the photocatalytic H2 evolution on ball-milled BP and bulk BP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram for the visible and NIR light-activated photocatalytic H2 evolution using BP/C3N4 in the presence of methanol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of layered g-C3N4-loaded BP quantum dots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
4. Metal-free HER catalysts for water splitting
4.1 Graphitic carbon nitride-based catalysts
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is a type of polymeric semiconductor material, which is composed of melem(tri-s-triazine) and amino groups. g-C3N4 contains an sp2-hybridized C–N and conjugation structure, resulting in a moderate band gap of around 2.7 eV and onset absorption of around 450 nm. Moreover, g-C3N4 has good physicochemical stability and can be simply prepared through thermal condensation from inexpensive and nitrogen-rich compounds, including melamine, dicyandiamide, cyanamide, and urea. Due to these properties, g-C3N4 has been applied as a promising metal-free photocatalyst for the HER in water splitting.84
However, the pristine bulk g-C3N4 possesses a low surface area and poor electrical conductivity, hindering its wide application as a catalyst for the HER.10 Also, the activity of g-C3N4 is generally low compared to noble metal and transition metal-based catalysts.
Many efforts have been conducted to enhance the photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4, including the development of new preparation methods, electronic structure modulation and nanostructure design. Firstly, doping heteroatoms in g-C3N4 is an effective strategy to introduce impurities, which modify its electronic structure to improve the HER photocatalytic performance. Some recent studies on heteroatom-doped/g-C3N4-based HER photocatalysts have been reported. Specifically, Yi and co-workers prepared carbon-rich graphitic carbon nitride (C-rich g-C3N4) possessing both nitrogen vacancies and porous structure, which increased the surface area and bandgap, reduced the charge-to-surface migration length and improved the charge mobility.74 The C-rich g-C3N4 exhibited hydrogen production of 125.1 μmol h−1 g−1 with outstanding stability, and its preparation route was quick and green (Fig. 8). Sulfur-doped two-dimensional (2D) graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets (2D-SCN) were obtained by Meng and co-workers, having a thickness of about 4.0 nm and surface area of 226.9 m2 g−1 (Fig. 9).75 The sulfur doping increased the active sites and improved the light absorption capability. The apparent quantum efficiency was ∼8.35% at 420 nm. Subsequently, amino group (–NH2)-functionalized ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) g-C3N4 (2D CN–NH2) was introduced as a photocatalyst for the HER, where the ultrathin 2D structure enhanced the mobility of the photogenerated charge carriers and amino groups increased the lifetime of the photogenerated charge carriers to enhance the HER performance.85 Also, the apparent quantum efficiency reached 13.4% at 420 nm. Boron-doped g-C3N4 quantum dots (BCNQDs) were prepared through a facile molten salt approach, and the B doping and heterojunction between g-C3N4 BCNQDs accelerated the charge separation and transfer to improve the photocatalytic activity.86
 Fig. 8  Synthetic route towards C-rich g-C3N4 with a carbon layer gradient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 9  Synthetic procedure for the preparation of 2D-SCN photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, combination with other carbonaceous materials is also an important approach to generate highly efficient g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for the HER. A graphitic carbon/g-C3N4 hybrid was fabricated with a “sandwich” layered structure. This unique structure resulted in a conjugation effect between carbon nitride and graphitic carbon, which enhanced the separation between photoexcited electrons and holes for high HER activity.87 Fan and co-worker in situ prepared carbon spheres in a g-C3N4 shell to obtain the carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell photocatalyst (Fig. 10 and 11).83 This core–shell architecture exhibited a large surface area, short diffusion distance and multichannels for electron transportation, facilitating charge separation and transfer. Thus, this g-C3N4-based composite material exhibited superior photocatalytic activity and light absorption capability. Then, a 3D-hierarchical porous carbon/graphitic carbon nitride (3D-C/g-C3N4) composite was synthesized as an efficient photocatalyst for the HER, showing an H2 evolution rate of 1610 μmol h−1 g−1.88 The 3D structure is beneficial for multiple reflections and light utilization, and the interfacial interaction of g-C3N4 and 3D carbon is beneficial for charge separation and transfer. As shown in Fig. 12, the g-C3N4 nanosheet was quickly coupled with polyfluorene polymer dots (Pdots) to generate heterojunctions (Pdot/g-C3N4), and this photocatalyst exhibited a broad light responsive range and promoted the charge separation. Pdot/g-C3N4 possessed good HER activity and provided a fast Pdot-incorporation method.89 Liu and co-workers constructed a zeolitic imidazolate framework ZIF-8-derived carbon C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composite as a photocatalyst for the HER.90 C-ZIF possessed intimate contact with g-C3N4 with a large surface area, which could be regarded as an electron acceptor to separate the photogenerated charge carriers, and also as a co-catalyst to promote the HER. C-ZIF/g-C3N4 exhibited an excellent photocatalytic H2 evolution rate, which was 2.8 times higher than that of Pt/g-C3N4. In addition, a hydrophilic conjugated polyelectrolyte (PFNBTBr) was combined with g-C3N4 nanosheets to form a PFNBTBr Pdot/g-C3N4 nanosheet heterojunction (PFNBTBr Pdot/CNNS).91 PFNBTBr Pdot/CNNS could enhance the electron transfer and charge transfer effect of Br−, reducing charge–hole pairs recombination. Meanwhile, the hydrophilicity of this material improved the surface wetting to facilitate the reaction between the reactants and excitons. Thus, PFNBTBr Pdots/CNNS exhibited an obvious improvement in photocatalytic activity for the HER, thereby reaching a hydrogen revolution rate of 1200.9 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 1.55 time higher than that of Pt/CNNS.
 Fig. 10  Schematic for (a) depolymerization-repolymerization process of g-C3N4, and (b) preparation of carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  SEM images of (a) carbon spheres, (b) complexes of carbon spheres and C3N4 gel, and (c) carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell photocatalyst. (d) TEM and (e) HR-TEM images of carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell photocatalyst. (f) Width of the g-C3N4 shell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 12  Preparation of polyfluorene Pdot/g-C3N4 nanosheet heterojunctions with the chemical structures of g-C3N4 and polyfluorenes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nanostructure design is another pivotal route to improve the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 materials, which can create more defects and increase their surface area. Ajayan and co-workers developed free-standing g-C3N4 nanosheets through the liquid exfoliation of g-C3N4 powder, and these g-C3N4 nanosheets had an approximate thickness of 2 nm and exhibited a large aspect ratio, stoichiometric N/C ratio, and high surface area.92 These unique features provided abundant active sites for the HER, increased charge transport and decreased the recombination of charge carriers, which are favorable for the HER under visible light. In a recent study, defect-engineered atomic-thick g-C3N4 with nitrogen vacancies and cyanogen groups (A-V-g-C3N4) was prepared as an HER photocatalyst (Fig. 13).93 The experimental results indicated that defect modification increased the contact sites and the electron/hole transfer distances. Moreover, the nitrogen vacancies and cyanogen groups of A-V-g-C3N4 extended the absorption wavelength to 650 nm, suppressing the quantum size effect. The preparation method avoided the shortcoming of ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets, while kept their advantages, showing a high H2 evolution rate and quantum yield of 3.7 mmol g−1 h−1 and 14.98%, respectively. As displayed in Fig. 14, Huang and co-workers recently reported a self-templating fabrication procedure to prepare hierarchical pipe-in-pipe carbon nitride with a porous bionic coral-like architecture (PCNC).94 This preparation method is eco-friendly, and melamine is the only reactant without any other reagents. This interesting structure of PCNC not only provided more active sites, but also created new heterogeneous catalytic interfaces, which resulted in a large surface area, quick mass transfer, and short charge transfer distance with a suitable bandgap, promoting the photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 13  Atomic-layer g-C3N4 for greatly extended visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Reproduced with permission. from ref. 93 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 14  Synthetic process of PCN and PCNC with an internal bionic coral-like architecture (blue: N; grey: C; red: O), and advantages of the PCN and PCNC hollow structures for photocatalytic reactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
g-C3N4 is composed of earth-abundant C and N elements, and a high content of N-doping in g-C3N4 can be applied as active sites for the HER. Accordingly, the application of g-C3N4 as an HER electrocatalyst became widespread after recent studies, where Qiao and co-workers prepared g-C3N4-coupled nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets (C3N4@NG),24 and Antonietti et al. developed highly ordered C3N4.34,95 Nevertheless, the pristine bulk g-C3N4 is not beneficial for the HER due to its small surface area and low electrical conductivity. Hence, element doping, hybridization with other carbon substrates, and structure tuning are still three crucial methods to enhance the electrocatalytic of g-C3N4 for the HER.
Element doping is the most commonly used strategy to prepare g-C3N4-based electrocatalysts for the HER. Lee and co-workers developed nitrogen-doped graphitic carbon sheets (N-GCSs) from Rubus parvifolius and aqueous ammonia, which exhibited good electrocatalytic activity for the HER.96 Moreover, researchers have combined these preparation routes to further ameliorate the HER performance. By applying the doping and hybridization strategies, Lee and co-workers obtained g-C3N4 coupled with nanoporous S/Se-doped graphene (g-C3N4@S–Se-pGr).97 The features of this g-C3N4 hybrid provided a synergistic effect, where g-C3N4 presents active hydrogen adsorption sites and S–Se-pGr facilitates electron transfer towards the HER. g-C3N4@S–Se-pGr exhibited superior electrocatalytic performances with an onset potential of 92 mV, Tafel slope of 86 mV dec−1, exchange current density of 6.27 μA cm−2, adsorption free energy of −0.13 eV and good stability, which are comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C material. Also, Zhi et al. incorporated S-doped C3N4 into mesoporous carbon to form a composite electrocatalyst (SCN-MPC), which exhibited good HER and ORR activities.98 For the HER performance, this SCN-MPC achieved an onset potential of 60 mV, Tafel slope of 51 mV dec−1 and overpotential of 145 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. This study indicated that atomic S-doping can change the electronic band structure, charge and spin densities of C3N4, providing better adsorption sites for the intermediates of the ORR and HER.
Recently, Prakash and co-workers developed a red phosphorous embedded in reduced graphene oxide–g-C3N4 composite (P-rGO–g-C3N4) (Fig. 15).99 The use of the hydrothermal synthetic process for the preparation of P-rGO–g-C3N4 increased the surface area, while the formation of rGO provided more defects and active sites for hydrogen adsorption. Furthermore, the N- and P-dopants in the material were the active sites, and rGO improved the electron transfer. All these features led to a good HER performance.
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram representing the synthesis of the metal-free triad composite P-rGO–g-C3N4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc. 
Besides, the structure tuning and hybridization strategies can also be combined with the HER catalyst preparation. As shown in Fig. 16, Yan and co-workers synthesized atom-thick C3N4 quantum dots on graphene (CNQDs@G), achieving outstanding HER activity, including an overpotential of 110 mV at 10 mA cm−2, large exchange current density of 3.67 μA cm−2 and long-term durability.44 The theoretical calculations and experimental results indicated that the excellent HER activity resulted from the bisynergistic effect of C3N4 and the quantum dots, which increased the charge transfer capacity and density of active sites. Additionally, C3N4 quantization transferred the active sites from the internal N to the edge N, which generated a different catalytic mechanism. Applying the structure tuning, doping and hybridization strategies together, carbon nitride tetrapod/nitrogen-doped graphene with a three-dimensional architecture (CNx@N-RGO) was prepared through a simple dip-coating approach, in which N-RGO layers were wrapped in carbon nitride and contained the active sites for the HER.46 This material has both structural and functional advantages for the HER. The synergy between CNx and N-RGO offers good electrical coupling and optimal binding of the hydrogen ion on the catalyst, causing a good HER performance. Besides graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were also added to prepare C3N4-based electrocatalysts. For example, a sulfur-doped carbon nitride/carbon nanotube/carbon fiber (S–C3N4-CNT-CF) composite was developed as an HER electrocatalyst in both acidic and alkaline solution.100 The hierarchical 3D CNT-CF structure had a high charge transport ability and electrical conductivity, improving the electrolyte penetration in the electrode. Subsequent sulfur doping also enhanced the HER performance. In addition, a C3N4-based material was applied in photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. A compact carbon nitride polymer (CNP) 2D film with a triazine–heptazine network fragment was prepared as a bifunctional catalyst for PEC and electrocatalytic water splitting (Fig. 17).101 In the CNP, the triazine–heptazine network contained strong visible light adsorption, enhanced conductivity, effective charge transfer and separation, resulting in an excellent PEC and HER performance in neutral and basic solutions.
 Fig. 16  (a) Synthetic process for CNQD@G hybrid. (b) AFM image of CNQD@G (inset: corresponding height curve). (c) TEM image of CNQD@G (inset: corresponding size distribution). (d) FT-IR spectra of bulk g-C3N4, CNQDs, G, and CNQD@G. (e) High-resolution C 1s XPS spectra of CNQD@G. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 17  (a) Scheme of the formation of 2D CNP film on FTO. (b) Photos of CNP/FTO, CN–Me/FTO, and CNCC/FTO. (c and d) SEM images of the top view of CNP/FTO film. (e) SEM image of the cross section of CNP/FTO. (f) AFM image of surface morphology and (g and h) thickness of 2D CNP film. (i) STEM image, (j) corresponding elemental mapping of C, N, O, and Cl, and (k) EDS spectrum of 2D CNP film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2 Graphene-based catalysts
Graphene is a 2D carbon single layer, which consists of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms with a hexagonal structure. Graphene possesses many unique physiochemical properties, including high strength, large surface area, good heat and electrical conductivity, and thus has received wide attention in recent years. Moreover, graphene can be further fabricated to form various graphitic carbon nanomaterials, such as fullerene, carbon nanotubes, carbon quantum dots and other 3D carbonaceous architectures. Numerous inexpensive materials can be applied to produce graphene and its corresponding derivatives.10 In the past few years, numerous graphene-related materials containing various structures and components have been synthesized for different applications.
However, due to its symmetric band structure, pristine graphene shows quite low electro and photo-catalytic activities for the HER.10 Thus, functionalization and modification of graphene have and applied to open its bandgap, ameliorating its catalytic activities. One common strategy is incorporating or doping heteroatoms in graphene through in situ preparation or post-treatment, where N, S, B and P doping are frequently applied. These heteroatoms can disrupt the sp2 framework and construct sp3 defects in graphene,10 varying its electronic structure. Another useful strategy is chemical modification, such as graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO), which can create many defects and functional groups in graphene. After modification, these materials contain various functionalities, generating different electronic properties. In addition, morphology and size regulation is also an important strategy to enhance the HER performance of graphene-based materials. Graphene-based materials with different sizes and morphologies, including graphene nanoribbons, graphene quantum dots, porous graphene nanostructures, and 3D graphene architectures, have been prepared. These delicately designed structures significantly improve the catalytic activity for the HER.
As mentioned above, pristine graphene cannot be directly applied as a photocatalyst due to its zero bandgap, and thus many investigations have been carried out to open its bandgap. In 2010, Teng and co-workers applied graphite oxide as a photocatalyst for HER in water splitting.103 In this material, oxygen can form sp3 hybridization on graphene to break its conjugated structure, and thus the structure and electronic properties of graphite oxide changed. Moreover, graphite oxide is a p-type material, where the charge flow causes a negative oxygen and positive carbon grid to be formed. In this report, the graphite oxide semiconductor possessed a bandgap of 2.4–4.32 eV, which can cover the energy barrier of thee HER. This study demonstrated that graphene-related materials with a delicate design can be developed as efficient photocatalysts for the HER. Recently, Chai and co-workers prepared p-type boron-doped graphene/n-type oxygen-doped carbon nitride (B-rGO/O-gC3N4), establishing electrostatic coupling between B-rGO and O-gC3N4.102 As shown in Fig. 18, O-gC3N4 was positively charged, while B-rGO was negatively charged, which showed n-type and p-type conductivities, respectively. Thus, a nanoscale p–n heterojunction structure was found at the interface of B-rGO and O-gC3N4, which generated effective and fast charge separation to boost the HER performance. Then, p-type boron-doped monolayer graphene was prepared through a one-step pyrolysis method.105 The bandgap of this graphene-based material could be tuned by varying the dopant content, and the boron atoms in graphene served as charge accepters to promote the charge transfer. Thus, the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate was significantly influenced by the boron content, which reached 219.3 μmol h−1 g−1 under the optimized conditions. In another study (Fig. 19), a g-C3N4/graphene quantum dot (g-C3N4/N-GQDs) hybrid was synthesized, exhibiting high photocatalytic performance towards the HER from water splitting.104 In the composite, g-C3N4 directly absorbs light in the range of 420–470 nm and generates electrons and holes. Meanwhile, N-GQDs can absorb visible light in the range of 600–800 nm and then emit short wavelength light (<470 nm) that can be subsequently absorbed by g-C3N4, and thus N-GQDs played unique and multiple roles to enhance the HER performance. Moreover, the relationship between the structures, morphologies, and photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4 was investigated. Afterwards, graphene-decorated g-C3N4 was prepared and further utilized as a photocatalyst for the HER/OER.106 As depicted in Fig. 20, the heterostructure of this material created an appropriate bandgap for visible-light absorption, displaying a direct and indirect bandgap of 2.51 and 1.64 eV, respectively. The band alignments were tuned to provide electrons and holes for the HER/OER. In a recent report, three-dimensional graphene oxide (3DG) porous materials were prepared using an aromatic diamine to cross link graphene oxide.107 These 3DG porous materials were utilized as efficient photocatalysts for the HER in the full spectrum range, and the 3DG reduction condition and types of diamine dramatically affected the catalytic performance. By using benzidine as a cross linker, 3DG exhibited an H2 evolution rate of 690 μmol h−1 g−1.
 Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of the preparation process of O-gC3N4/BrGO. (b) Proposed mechanism of charge separation and transfer at the p–n junction in the O-gC3N4/B-rGO nanocomposite for photocatalytic HER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 19  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the as-synthesized 15N–CNU. (c) Rate of hydrogen evolution over N-GQDs/CN–U with different amounts of N-GQDs. (d) UV-vis spectra of CN–U and 15N–CNU catalysts (inset: intersection value of the band gap). (e) Transient photocurrent curves of CN–U and 15N–CNU. (f) Upconversion PL spectra of irradiated N-GQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc. 
 Fig. 20  (a) AFM image of g-C3N4 on HOPG (inset: the corresponding FFT data). (b) Atomic-resolution STM image of g-C3N4 nanosheets on HOPG with a tunneling current of 0.5 nA and sample bias voltage of −2.0 V. (Inset: DFT-simulated STM image with a ball-stick model of g-C3N4). Scale bars of (a) and (b) correspond to 1 μm and 6.2 nm, respectively. (c) Average STS of g-C3N4 on HOPG. (d) Three-dimensional plot of electron cloud for the energy range of −0.4 to −0.2 eV under 5.0 × 10−6 (electrons/Å3). Reproduced with permission from ref. 106 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
Due to their large surface area, good mechanical strength, and high electrical and ionic conductivities, graphene-based materials are also regarded as promising electrocatalysts for the HER. However, pristine graphene is chemically inert, suggesting low electrocatalytic activity. Thus, modification is necessary for graphene-based materials to promote their HER performance. In the work by Dai and co-workers, melamine, phytic acid, and graphene oxide were pyrolyzed to prepare N, P-codoped carbon networks (MPSA/GO) with a 3D porous structure (Fig. 21).108 MPSA/GO was applied as a bifunctional catalyst for the ORR and HER, exhibiting high activities and great practical application in renewable energy technologies. Asefa et al. developed boron-doped graphene (B-SuG) using defective graphene and BH3-THF as precursors.109 B-SuG severed as an efficient electrocatalyst for the HER with a simple preparation route. Then, Chen and coworkers fabricated nitrogen-doped graphene microtubes (N-GMT).110 N-GMT possessed a unique morphology with ultra-thin walls (1–4 nm) and large inner voids (1–2 μm), preventing the aggregation of the material and improving the mass/electron transfer efficiencies in solution, and thus it exhibited high electrocatalytic HER performances in alkali solution. Also, dual-doped graphene was introduced as electrocatalysts for the HER. Nitrogen and phosphorus dual-doped multilayer nanoporous graphene (NPG900) was prepared using g-C3N4 as a soft sacrificial template.113 NPG900 had a high doping content of 3 at% for P and 11 at% for N. This catalyst showed good HER activity with an onset overpotential of 0.12 V, Tafel slope of 79 mV dec−1 and exchange current density of 24.3 mA cm−2. As shown in Fig. 22, nitrogen and fluorine dual-doped porous graphene-nanosheets (NFPGNS) were developed as a metal-free electrocatalyst for the HER.111 This material had a pyridinic N doping configuration, and its high graphitization degree is beneficial for charge/mass transfer. Moreover, its high surface areas and porous structures were in favor of possessing more active sites. DFT calculation indicated that the dual-doped graphene possessed a lower Gibbs free energy than the single-doped materials, and its corresponding electronic structure enhanced H adsorption. This multi-heteroatom doped graphene displayed much better HER activity than that of single-doped carbonaceous materials. Recently, a general potentiodynamic method was employed to prepare P and S nanodot incorporated on rGO sheets (PS-rGO), which were applied in both supercapacitors and the HER.112 The coexisting nanodots and graphene showed high conductivity and stability, demonstrating excellent supercapacitor performances and HER activities (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 21  (a) Preparation of MPSA/GO-1000. (b) LSV of various materials for hydrogen evolution in 0.5 m H2SO4. (c) Corresponding Tafel curves. (d) HER stability analysis of MPSA/GO-1000 and Pt/C. (e) LSV of selected samples for hydrogen evolution in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 22  Synthesis of NFPGNS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 23  (a) SEM image of bare carbon fabric, (b–e) SEM images of P-rGO on carbon fibers at different magnifications, and (f) SEM image of a PS-rGO-coated single carbon fiber and its mapping for C, P, and S elements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides a change in composition, graphene is usually coupled with other carbonaceous materials to optimize its HER activity. As shown in Fig. 24, nitrogen-doped truncated carbon nanotubes were put between 2D nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets to form an N-TCNT@NGS composite with a sandwich structure.114 This unique structure provided a large surface area, and facile charge and mass transport, resulting in an outstanding electrocatalytic activity and durability toward the HER with a Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1, onset overpotential of 16 mV, and overpotential of 62 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Recently, Dai and co-workers combined ultrathin exfoliated black phosphorus (EBP) with N-doped graphene (NG) to form EBP@NG (Fig. 25), containing well-designed interfaces and a unique electronic configuration.115 EBP@NG was further applied as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for the HER and OER in overall water splitting under basic electrolyte solution. According to the direct contact interface of EBP and NG, this catalyst had a large interface area and fast charge separation/transfer ability. Depending on the synergistic effect of EBP and NG, EBP@NG had good stability and activity, resulting in high electron density and optimized hydrogen adsorption/desorption abilities to promote the HER performance. Also, this synergy provided abundant positive charge sites on NG and generated OER intermediates to promote the OER activity (Fig. 26). Accordingly, EBP@NG applied in overall water splitting achieved a low cell voltage of only 1.54 V at 10 mA cm−2, which is better than Pt/C@RuO2 with 1.60 V. In addition, an N-doped graphene/carbon-rich C3N4 composite (NG/CCN) was synthesized, in which CCN in situ grew on NG.116 NG/CCN exhibited an enhanced electrochemical performance for the HER, OER and ORR, and these catalytic activities were further promoted under visible light. The van der Waal heterostructure between NG and CCN improved the light-harvesting, electron–hole pair separation and interfacial charge transfer.
 Fig. 24  Synthesis of N-TCNT@NGS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 25  (a) Liquid exfoliation of bulk BP and construction of EBP@NG. (b) Photo of an EBP dispersion with a concentration of up to 0.15 mg mL−1, showing the Tyndall effect. (c) TEM image, (d) AFM image, (e) corresponding height image, and (f) HRTEM image of EBP. (Inset: corresponding SAED pattern). (g) Bright-field TEM image and (h) dark-field TEM image with corresponding element distribution image of EBP@NG (1:8). Scale bar: (c) 50 nm; (d, g, and h) 500 nm and (f) 1 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 26  (a) HER LSV curves, (b) overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2, and (c) chronoamperometric curves of EBP@NG and other catalysts in 1 M KOH without iR-compensation. (d) OER LSV curves, (e) overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2, and (f) chronoamperometric curves of EBP@NG and other catalysts in 1 M KOH without iR-compensation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
Additionally, chemical functionalization and defect formation in graphene are also effective approaches to ameliorate its electrocatalytic performance. Three-dimensional (3D), N-doped and plasma-etched graphene (3DNG-P) was developed as a highly active HER electrocatalyst (Fig. 27).117 This metal-free catalyst had a large surface area, high N-doping content and abundant plasma-induced defects, which significantly enhanced the HER performance over a wide pH range. In acidic media, 3DNG-P exhibited an overpotential of 128 mV at 10 mA cm−2, Tafel slope of 66 mV dec−1, and exchange current density of 0.11 mA cm−2. Subsequently, Bhat et al. prepared a vitamin B12-functionalized N-doped graphene (Vit.B12-NGr) nanohybrid.118 This material was utilized as a stable and efficient electrocatalyst for both the HER and electro-oxidative sensing H2O2. Furthermore, highly torn amine-functionalized nitrogen-doped graphene (HT-AFNG) was prepared by Jiang and co-workers (Fig. 28), showing high catalytic activity for the HER.45 The amine functionality reduced the ΔGH* of the intermediate state in the HER and increased the electron transfer of HT-AFNG. Moreover, the torn structure created more active sites for the HER. This study indicated that the electron donating group can greatly influence the electronic structure of graphene to promote the HER catalytic activity.
 Fig. 27  Synthetic process of 3DNG-P. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc. 
 Fig. 28  Preparation procedure of the HT-AFNG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. 
4.3 Carbon nanotube-based catalysts
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are cylindrical molecules with a hexagonal arrangement of hybridized carbon atoms, formed by the rolling of graphene. CNTs show some exceptional thermal, mechanical, and electrical properties, and they provide a high surface area with low cost, which are widely applied for many catalytic applications. Over the past decades, numerous studies have been conducted for the development of CNT-based catalysts for the HER. Since the catalytic activities of pristine CNTs are poor towards the HER, the functionalization and treatment of CNTs are highly desirable to modify their surface chemistry. In 2014, Sun and co-workers prepared activated carbon nanotubes (p-MWCNTs-ao-cp) through acidic oxidation and cathodic pretreatment as an electrocatalyst for the HER.119 The activated CNTs demonstrated high activity and good durability, which showed an onset overpotential of 100 mV and an exchange current density of 16 μM cm−2. The experimental results suggested that the acidic groups and excellent electrical conductivity of CNT caused this high HER performance, where the acidic groups acted as proton relays and CNTs facilitated electron transport. As shown in Fig. 29, an SiC-CNT 1D–1D nanocomposite was prepared via the in situ reaction between CNTs and silicon powder, which was further applied as a photocatalyst towards the HER under visible light irradiation.120 SiC-CNTs exhibited increased visible light absorption and good separation efficiency for photogenerated holes and electrons, and CNTs increased the surface active sites, greatly enhanced the charge separation and accelerated the reaction for the HER. Thus, SiC-CNT exhibited good photocatalytic activity, with an average hydrogen production rate of 108 μmol g−1 h−1. Li and co-workers modified CNTs using an ionic liquid to form ionic liquid-functionalized carbon nanotubes (IL-CNTs) as a metal-free electrocatalyst for the HER.121 In the IL-CNTs, IL provided adequate proton adsorption and CNTs offered high conductivity, generating a good HER performance. Recently, an electronically coupled carbon donor–acceptor complex was synthesized by paring an N-doped carbon framework (MHCF, electron acceptors) and higher-Fermi-level CNTs (electron donors), whose surface could be further controlled using a carboxyl-group-rich polymer (poly(ethylene-alt-maleic acid), PEMAc) (Fig. 30).56 The as-prepared MHCF-CNTs@PEMAc was used as an efficient and robust HER electrocatalyst under all-pH range conditions. In this catalyst, interfacial charge separation was induced by the Fermi level difference between MHCF and CNTs, and N-dopant-derived intramolecular charge transfer to MHCF. These two factors synergistically modulated the hydrogen adsorption and desorption. Moreover, PEMAc modification promoted the proton concentration and buffer capacity, and improved the water adsorption and activation. Consequently, this ternary hybrid membrane exhibited outstanding HER activity and stability at all pH. In addition, DFT calculation revealed that CNTs and N-doping decreased the Gibbs free energy change, ΔGH*, to zero, and the C atoms adjacent to pyrrolic N of MHCF were identified as the active sites. In the recent study of Dai and co-workers (Fig. 31), C60-adsorbed single-walled carbon nanotubes (C60-SWCNTs) were developed as pH-universal catalysts for the ORR, OER and HER.122 C60 was regarded as an electron acceptor, creating intermolecular charge transfer between SWCNTs and C60. Thus, this metal-free material acted as efficient ORR/OER/HER trifunctional and OER/HER bifunctional electrocatalysts, exhibiting better electrocatalytic performances than Pt and RuO2. Also, this electrocatalyst showed photo-responsive electrocatalytic activities, which can be applied for the development of high performance photocatalysts.
 Fig. 29  (A) Growth process of SiC nanowires. (a) Liquid La–Ni droplet attached on MWCNT. (b) MWCNT loss and growth of the SiC nanowires at the liquid–solid interface. (c) Obtained SiC-CNT heterostructure after La–Ni catalysts were removed. (B) (a) MWCNT. (b) SiC nanotube after the vapour–solid reaction of the MWCNTs and Si vapour. (C) Charge transfer behavior at the interface between SiC and CNTs and possible photocatalytic H2-production mechanism of SiC-CNT photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 30  (a) Fabrication of MHCF-CNTs and MHCFCNT@PEMAc. (b) Photo of the flexible free-standing MHCF-CNT@PEMAc membrane (12.56 cm2). TEM images of (c) MHCF, (d) MHCF-CNTs, and (e) MHCF-CNT@PEMAc, (insets: water contact angle of the samples 938° for MHCFCNT@PEMAc and 1528° for MHCF-CNTs). (f) HAADF-STEM images and the corresponding element mapping of C, N, and O for MHCFCNT@PEMAc. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 31  (a) Charge-transfer process and ORR/OER/HER on C60-SWCNTs. (b and c) TEM images of the C60-SWCNTsn (n = 5, 10, and 15 min). Reprinted with permission from ref. 122 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
4.4 Other carbon-based catalysts
In addition to the abovementioned materials, many other types of carbonaceous metal-free catalysts have been studied as photocatalysts for the HER. In 1985, Yanagida and co-workers firstly introduced a light-responsive organic conjugated polymer, namely poly(p-phenylene), to catalyze the water reduction reaction for hydrogen production.123 Then, conjugated polymer-based metal-free photocatalysts were developed for the HER in water splitting.124 Sprick et al. prepared 15 types of conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) from phenylene and pyrene, possessing fine-tuned pore sizes.125 By varying the ratio of the monomers, these CMPs possessed a wide optical gap in the range of 1.94 to 2.95 eV, indicating the efficiency of these CMPs as metal-free photocatalysts for the HER. These CMPs showed high catalytic activities with electron donors under visible light irradiation, and CO did not influence the H2 evolution rate. Thus, CMP materials can serve as effective and robust photocatalysts. Recently, CMPs were utilized as photocatalysts to produce hydrogen under visible-light irradiation, where ionic liquids were introduced to capture water from air.128 Compared to pure water, the addition of an ionic liquid improved the photocatalytic activity due to the appropriate activation of water.
Moreover, Fukuzumi and co-workers used pyrene to form nanoparticles under laser irradiation, where cyclohexane or water could be used as the solvent.129 This pyrene nanoparticle was proven as an efficient organic photocatalyst for the HER in cyclohexane or water, and the H2 evolution rate increased with an increase in the laser intensity. As displayed in Fig. 32, metal-free half-metallic carbon nitride nanosheets (hm-C(CN)3) were developed, which could be further incorporated into an artificial nanotube array through the in situ pyrolysis of an ionic liquid.126 The micro grid mode resonance structure of hm-C(CN)3 could tune the optoelectronic coupling process and regulate the size of C(CN)3, improving the carrier transport and creating more active sites for the HER. Thus, hm-C(CN)3 showed high photocatalytic HER performances. Zhu et al. synthesized full-spectrum-responsive porphyrin supramolecular photocatalysts with a solar spectrum efficiency of 44.4% (Fig. 33), and the self-assembled tetra(4-carboxylphenyl)porphyrin (SA-TCPP) showed good photocatalytic activities for the HER and OER.127 In this supramolecular photocatalyst, the molecular dipoles and nanocrystalline structure generated a strong built-in electric field, enhancing the separation of photogenerated carriers. Also, the suitable band structure of SA-TCPP was tuned by the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of porphyrin, which led to the production of hydrogen and oxygen under visible light irradiation (Fig. 34).
 Fig. 32  Micro grid mode resonance-based artificial microstructure. (a) Preparation of MG@hm-C(CN)3, Inset: digital camera images of a bare nanoporous template (white) sample and a MG@hm-C(CN)3 sample (black). (b) Self-assembly of MG@hm-C(CN)3 nanosheets on nanoporous templates to form artificial microstructure (scale bar, 150 nm). (c) Top-view (Scale bar, 1 μm) and (d) cross-sectional (Scale bar, 200 nm) SEM images of MG@hm-C(CN)3. (e) Absorption spectra measured by an integrated sphere in the visible and near-infrared range. MG: nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide membrane (AAM), hm-C(CN)3: hm-C(CN)3 bulk material, and MG@hm-C(CN)3: hm-C(CN)3 nanosheets incorporated in AAM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
 Fig. 33  Electronic properties of TCPP. (a) Diagram of molecular dipoles and electrons distribution in three porphyrin derivatives. (b) UV-vis diffuse reflection spectroscopy of SA-TCPP supramolecular photocatalyst, and solar spectrum observed by optical fiber spectrometer. (c) Photocurrent response of SA-TCPP and untreated TCPP powder. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 34  Mechanism of the photocatalytic reactions by SA-TCPP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
For electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, many forms of carbonaceous materials have been developed as catalysts besides C3N4, graphene and CNT-based materials. C60(OH)8 was introduced as a molecular electrocatalyst for the HER in 2013.130 The hydroxyl groups in this fullerene promoted the hydrogen adsorption to obtain a good HER performance. Then, Chen and co-workers obtained N, P-dual-doped carbon from a strain of bacteria as a highly active HER electrocatalyst.131 The bacteria not only provided a high content of N and P, but also induced a large surface area and controllable pore structures in the final product. Moreover, carbonization together with ZnCl2 and cathodic treatment further increased the surface area and tuned the mesoporous structure of this material. Thus, the bacterium-derived carbon materials exhibited a low onset overpotential of 76 mV, Tafel slope of 58.4 mV dec−1 and high exchange current density of 17.2 μA cm−2. Then, an N, P-co-doped porous carbon nano-fiber network was obtained from electrochemically polymerized super molecules as an efficient HER electrocatalyst.100 During its preparation, aniline (N and C precursor) was electropolymerized with phytic acid (P and C precursor), where the hydrogen bonding between these two molecules constructed a supramolecular structure. In this material, the porous network structure could improve the electron and mass transfer, and the uniform heteroatom doping created defects and catalytically active sites to enhance the HER activity. Moreover, electropolymerization and subsequent pyrolysis produced a good interaction with the substrate, avoiding the use of binder and improving the stability. Coskun and co-workers developed a fully sp2-hybridized 3-D microporous graphitic framework (3D-MGF) as an electrocatalyst for the HER.132 This material exhibited high stability and a large surface area of 928 m2 g−1 with a narrow pore size distribution, and it combined a 3D structure with the graphitic framework, while maintaining p-conjugation and conductivity. As shown in Fig. 35, the organic polymer was also applied as a metal-free electrocatalyst for hydrogen production.58 Triformyl phloroglucinol (Tp) and 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-aminophenyl)-21H,23H-porphyrin (PAM) were reacted to form a covalent organic polymer (TpPAM), where the intrinsic chemical and electronic coupling of TpPAM synergistically optimized the proton adsorption and reduction kinetics. Thus, TpPAM exhibited good HER activity and durability with a high Faradaic efficiency.
 Fig. 35  (a) Synthesis of the metal-free covalent organic polymer (TpPAM). (b) FT-IR spectra of TpPAM, PAM, and Tp. (c) 13C-CPMAS spectrum of TpPAM. (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm with PSD (inset). (e) TEM image of TpPAM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
An N-doped tubular carbon nanostructure (NDC) was synthesized using tubular halloysite clay and dopamine hydrochloride as the template and carbon source, respectively.133 NDC was applied as a dual electrocatalyst for the HER and OER. For the HER, NDC showed outstanding electrocatalytic activity with an onset potential of 117 mV, Tafel slope of 94 mV dec−1 and a current density of 15 μA cm−2. This high activity can be related to the improved mass and charge transfer properties originating from the mesoporous structure (15–27 nm) and heteroatom doping of NDC. Subsequently, 3D porous nitrogen-doped carbon (PNC) was introduced as a metal-free electrocatalyst with superior HER and ORR activities.134 Cigarette butts mixed with dicyandiamide/methanol were carbonized to prepare PNC with an N content of 20 at%, and this high N content produced more active centers to improve the HER performance. As depicted from Fig. 36, a pyrazine-incorporated graphdiyne nanofilm (PR-GDY) was prepared with a thickness of 20 nm, which was applied as a metal-free electrocatalyst for the HER in acidic and basic conditions.135 Also, the catalytic activity of PR-GDY was much better than that of plain GDY, suggesting that the N of pyrazine boosted the catalytic activity. Recently, N, O and P-doped hollow carbons (NOPHCs) were successfully prepared by Meng et al. (Fig. 37).136 NOPHCs were demonstrated be efficient and stable electrocatalysts for both the HER and ORR under basic conditions. The heteroatom doping induced high conductivity and appropriate charge delocalization, and the hollow structure of NOPHCs contained abundant active sites. These two factors are responsible for the observed remarkable electrocatalytic activity. Nitrogen-doped carbons were designed from asphaltene with a graphene-like nanosheet texture, where N could be embedded in the carbon skeleton.137 The pyridinic and graphitic N atoms with surface defects are favorable for charge delocalization and electron migration. This porous carbon possessed a high a surface area of 2824 m2 g−1, and contained ultra- and super-micropores with a pore width of 0.4 nm. Also, this material had a uniform layered structure. Thus, the heteroatom doping, porous and microlayer structures significantly promoted the electrocatalytic activity in 0.1 M NaOH solution. Li and co-workers developed nitrogen-doped ultrathin carbon nanosheets (NCNs) as a multifunctional electrocatalyst for the ORR, OER and HER (Fig. 38).51 These NCNs were simply prepared via the pyrolysis of citric acid and NH4Cl, generating an ultrathin sheet structure with a quite high specific surface area of 1793 m2 g−1 and abundant edge defects. DFT calculations indicated that the active sites of NCNs were the C at the armchair edge and adjacent to the graphitic N, and thus these N dopants and carbon edge defects resulted in multifunctional electrocatalytic activities. For the HER performance, it had a Tafel slope of 43 mV dec−1, onset overpotential of 30 mV and overpotential of 100 mV at 10 mA cm−2 with good stability.
 Fig. 36  (a) Synthetic of TIPS-TEP. (b) Liquid/liquid interfacial synthesis of PR-GDY. (c) Photo of the liquid/liquid interfacial synthesis. (d) Scheme of PR-GDY suspended in acetone. (e) Photo of a PR-GDY film transferred on quartz. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 37  Synthesis of NOPHCs electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
 Fig. 38  Procedure for the synthesis of NCNs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.5 Non-carbonaceous metal-free catalysts
The development of non-carbonaceous catalysts for the HER is also prominent. Boron, nitrogen, phosphorous and silica have been introduced as the main elements for these metal-free catalysts towards HER. Firstly, boron phosphide has a cubic zinc blende structure, possessing outstanding chemical, electronic, thermal, and mechanical properties, and n-type boron phosphide usually shows high charge mobility and low resistivity.11,138 Therefore, n-type boronphosphide was introduced as a highly durable photocatalyst for the HER under visible light irradiation in 2016.139 This material had excellent corrosion resistance in hot concentrated mineral acids or alkali solution, exhibiting promising application in the further development of metal-free HER catalysts. Then, black phosphorus (BP) possesses an anisotropic 2D layer structure with a bandgap in the range of 0.3 to 2 eV, and thus has attracted much interest as a photocatalyst. In 2017, BP was applied as a metal-free photocatalyst towards visible light hydrogen evolution for the first time (Fig. 39).61 BP nanosheets were prepared through the ball milling method, and this material had a higher H2 evolution rate (512 μmol h−1 g−1) than g-C3N4. This remarkable HER activity is attributed to the few-layer BP structure, with a broadened bandgap to prevent electron–hole recombination. Also, ball milling increased the surface area of BP and hydroxyl groups sealed the BP nanosheet edges to make the structure stable. Recently, a partially oxidized BP nanosheet was developed by Liu et al. as a photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution.140 As shown in Fig. 40, this type of BP nanosheet was directly prepared via a facile one-step solvothermal approach, where the solvent and temperature could tune the formation and thickness of the BP nanosheet. Moreover, partial oxidation of this material improved the stability of BP to avoid degradation. The as-prepared BP nanosheet had excellent HER activity in neutral media, which was 24 times higher than that of C3N4.
 Fig. 39  (a) Scheme of the ball-milling treatment of BP with or without additive. (b) H2 evolution from water using 5 mg bulk BP (black line) and 5 mg BP-BM (red line) photocatalysts under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) (inset: H2 evolution rates of bulk BP and BP-BM). Reproduced with permission from ref. 61 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 40  Synthetic protocol and spectroscopic analysis of BP. (a) Preparation of few-layer BP nanosheets. (b) XRD pattern of the BP nanosheets obtained at 100 °C. (c) Raman spectrum of BP nanosheets. (d and e) XPS fine spectra of P 2p and O 1s of BP nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences. 
In the field of metal-free electrocatalysts for the HER, Rao and co-worker designed five types of borocarbonitrides (BCN) as electrocatalysts for the HER.14 In the presence of B and N atoms, BCN exhibited a high surface area and low charge transfer resistance. BCN showed outstanding HER activity, including an onset overpotential of 56 mV and overpotential of 70 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Also, the onset potential for BCN was −0.28 V (Ag/AgCl) while that for Pt/C was −0.23 V (Ag/AgCl). Later, Zhang et al. developed nitrogen–boron–carbon ternary nanosheets (NBCs) from g-C3N4 as efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts for the ORR and HER.141 For these NBCs, the molar ratio of nitrogen and boron was higher than that of carbon, and they maintained good electronic conductivity. The coexistence of B and N maintained the aromaticity in the micro-regions, where NBCs were constituted of sp2-C, sp2-N and sp2-B. Furthermore, the element content of NBCs could be varied by changing the proportion of the reactants during their preparation, thus tuning their ORR/HER catalytic activities. As displayed in Fig. 41, SiO2-polypyrrole hybrid nanotubes supported on carbon fibers (SiO2/PPy NTs-CFs) were designed as inexpensive and highly efficient electrocatalysts for the HER in neutral solution.142 In SiO2/PPy NTs-CFs, there was a strong interaction between SiO2 and PPy, causing charge transfer from PPy to SiO2. Thus, the negatively charged SiO2 was regarded as the center for water adsorption and activation, which greatly improved the catalytic activity and stability with a low onset potential of 70 mV, small Tafel slope of 100.2 mV dec−1 and stability for 30 h. Recently, a phosphorus-based material was also introduced as an electrocatalyst for the HER (Fig. 42).143 Porous red phosphorus nanoparticles (P-RPNPs) were synthesized using a colloidal approach. These P-RPNPs displayed good activity and superior stability in acidic electrolyte, paving a new route for electrocatalyst development towards the HER.
 Fig. 41  Preparation of SiO2/PPy NTs-CFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 42  Colloidal synthesis of P-RPNPs and their HER application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Evaluation and comparison
According to the current reports focusing on metal-free photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution, carbonaceous materials are the most frequently used metal-free catalysts due to the unique properties of carbon. C3N4 and graphene-based materials are the most well-known photocatalysts for the HER, which contain high apparent quantum efficiencies and H2 evolution rates. To the best of our knowledge, an ideal HER photocatalyst should have the following features. Firstly, the structure of these photocatalysts should have appropriate bandgaps for light absorption and overcome the energy barrier of the HER. Since many pristine carbonaceous materials only have narrow or zero bandgaps, some morphology modification and chemical functionalization are needed to broaden or even tune their bandgaps. Secondly, photocatalysts for the HER should have good visible-light harvesting ability, including wide absorption wavelength and superior light absorption capability. Finally, catalysts can provide electrons and holes for the HER, and have good charge and mass transfer properties. Moreover, this separation of electrons and holes should be bolstered to prevent electron–hole recombination, and charge transfer should be facilitated, and thus a short transfer distance is expected. Accordingly, these features can greatly influence the photocatalytic activity, and synergistically promote the HER performance. On the other hand, carbonaceous materials are also the most widely used electrocatalysts for the HER with low Tafel slopes and overpotentials. Superior electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution should contain these essential features. Firstly, electrocatalysts for HER need to possess high charge transport ability/electrical conductivity, which can improve the charge and mass transfer. Then, electrocatalysts should have sufficient active sites for hydrogen adsorption and desorption. Moreover, these materials must exhibit proper hydrogen adsorption and desorption abilities for the electrocatalysts to easily attract protons and release hydrogen to facilitate the HER process. Besides, many non-carbonaceous materials have been developed as an important component for metal-free photo- and electrocatalysts towards the HER, where N, B, and P are the main elements. Boron and phosphorus-based materials, including borocarbonitrides, boron phosphide, black phosphorus and phosphorus nanoparticles, have been recently employed with a high surface area and low charge transfer resistance, exhibiting good HER activities.
Consequently, several effective strategies have been applied to prepare catalysts that possess the above-mentioned features to promote the HER performance. Heteroatom doping or incorporation is the mostly frequently used approach to improve the catalytic activity, including in situ preparation or post-treatment, where N, O, S, P, B and Si are usually embedded in the framework of the materials. This introduction of heteroatoms is favorable to provide active sites and create structural defects, causing good catalytic activities. Moreover, dual or tri-heteroatom-doped catalysts have been developed to enhance the HER activity, and these multi-element materials have lower Gibbs free energies than that of single-doped materials under the same conditions, resulting in better HER performances. In addition, the doping or incorporation content is another critical parameter to vary the catalytic activities. Varying the heteroatom content can tune the bandgap and produce more active centers and defects. Heteroatom doping is often introduced from natural product, daily waste, common chemical reagents and biological samples as heteroatom sources, including clay, fruit juice, cigarette butts, thiourea, phosphoric acid, and bacteria. These sources are easily obtained at low cost in high abundance. Another common preparation method is chemical functionalization or combination with other materials to form composites, such as C3N4/graphene, SiC-CNT, g-C3N4/quantum dots, C60/CNTs, carbon nitride/carbon nanotube/carbon fiber, and organic conjugated polymer/CNTs. This approach can couple the merits and remedy the shortcomings of individual materials, and thus composites usually exhibit better catalytic HER activities than the individual materials. Functionalization/hybridization of carbonaceous materials can be achieved via covalent bonding or intermolecular forces. Additionally, structure design is also quite a vital strategy for the preparation of catalysts. Generally, materials should have a thin thickness and porous or hierarchical structure, such as nanosheet, nanotube array, multilayer, coral-like and core–shell architecture. These structures can create a large surface area, shorten the electron/hole transferring distance, and appropriately optimize the H adsorption/desorption ability, which can greatly boost the HER activity. The different preparation technologies, such as self-assembly, templating, ball milling, acidic oxidation, electropolymerization and cathodic pretreatment, have been proven to modify the structure effectively.
6. Conclusions and outlook
The preparation of inexpensive, highly efficient and stable catalysts that can efficiently promote photocatalytic or electrocatalytic hydrogen production from water splitting is one of the most crucial issues for green and sustainable energy generation and conversion. In the past several years, burgeoning metal-free materials have been used as photo/electrocatalysts for the HER, in an attempt to replace metal-based catalysts. Owing to the development of materials science and nanotechnology, various types of metal-free materials have been introduced as photo/electrocatalysts for the HER, such as g-C3N4, graphene, CNT-based and other none-carbonaceous materials. These earth-abundant nonmetal catalysts exhibit good catalytic activities and stabilities for photocatalytic or electrocatalytic water splitting, possessing great economic and environmental benefits.
However, despite the significant advances in metal-free catalysts, some issues and challenges should be focused and further investigated. Firstly, the activities of photo- and electro-catalysts for hydrogen production are still relatively lower than that of noble metal-based materials. Some novel metal-free materials should be developed, and innovative efforts should be made to design catalysts for further boosting the HER performance. Secondly, in order to scale up photo- or electro-catalytic systems for large-scale applications, stability is a necessary parameter since long working times and large currents are applied. Then, electrocatalytic materials for the HER are preferred to be directly applied as bulky electrodes in industrialized scaled-up devices, and thus metal-free electrocatalysts should be customized and self-supported. On the other hand, photocatalysts for the HER should be homogenously suspended in aqueous solution, and thus avoiding catalyst precipitation is quite important. Moreover, separation and collection of the photocatalyst powder from homogenous solutions, and the absorption of light during the movement of the sun are problems in their practical applications. Thus, the stability and dimensions of catalysts should be paid more attention, and the catalyst system has to be specifically designed to fit specific large-scale applications. In addition, some co-catalysts or sacrificial agents can significantly improve the HER performance using photocatalysts, but may increase the cost and environmental concerns in large-scale applications. Therefore, photocatalytic hydrogen production in pure water systems still has critical challenges in further studies. Thirdly, the preparation procedure is becoming more complicated to achieve various and high heteroatom doping with fine structures. Sometimes, pre-treatment and post-treatment of the materials are required. Moreover, solvothermal and pyrolysis methods are generally applied to obtained products, which are tedious and time consuming. Thus, the preparation routes should be simplified, and new heating methods should be introduced, such as microwave, laser irradiation and plasma-etching, which not only shorten the preparation process but also induce defects and unique structures in catalysts. In addition, the development of multifunctional metal-free catalysts is highly desirable. Water splitting involves HER and OER two half-reactions, which have different working conditions and preparation approaches for the corresponding catalysts. Therefore, it is necessary to design bifunctional metal-free catalysts for overall water splitting that can catalyze both hydrogen and oxygen production and these catalysts should have high activities in the full pH range. Further, some fundamentals should be further investigated, including the reaction mechanism and structure–activity relationship of catalysts. More intensive experimental characterizations and theoretical calculations will be essential to address these issues and challenges. Also, theoretical calculations should play a more important role, which can guide the design of catalysts before their preparation rather than rationalize their good HER performance after experiments. Finally, the research and development in this area specifically lack scaled-up work for industrialization. The reported studies on metal-free photo- and electro-catalysts were mainly conducted on small electrodes, even on glassy carbon electrodes modified with catalysts without engineering design to scale-up. Thus, for commercialization and examination of their practical applications, larger electrodes should be delicately designed and fabricated with these newly developed metal-free catalysts at larger current densities. A very challenging issue is to design large metal-free catalyst-modified electrodes with high electro- or photo-catalytic activities, while possessing a fast mass transport rate of the produced hydrogen in a specifically designed pore structure to avoid high polarization.
Although there are several challenges for metal-free catalysts for the HER, due to the booming intensive joint research and accomplishments in chemistry, physics, and materials science, it is very promising that considerable breakthroughs for this type of material will be achieved with a wide application in the near future, leading to the successful industrialization of hydrogen production by metal-free catalysts.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by National Science Foundation of China (No. 51902218), Nature Science Foundation of Suzhou University of Science and Technology (No. 341930019), “Fundamental Research Funds of the Central University” (XDJK2019C004).
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Trancik, Nature, 2014, 507, 300–302 CrossRef .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, T. Hu, X. Zhao, F. X. Hu, H. B. Yang and C. M. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104949–104955 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yao, Y. Ding and Z.-H. Lu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 3837–3874 RSC .
S. Chen, D. Huang, P. Xu, W. Xue, L. Lei, M. Cheng, R. Wang, X. Liu and R. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2286–2322 RSC .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3039–3052 RSC .
M. Z. Rahman, M. G. Kibria and C. B. Mullins, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1887–1931 RSC .
J. Hu, C. Chen, T. Hu, J. Li, H. Lu, Y. Zheng, X. Yang, C. Guo and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19484–19492 RSC .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
M. Chhetri, S. Maitra, H. Chakraborty, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 95–101 RSC .
B. E. Conway and B. V. Tilak, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3571–3594 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 RSC .
M. Z. Rahman and C. B. Mullins, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 248–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman, Y. Tang and P. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 253902 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2018, 57, 7568–7579 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kitchin, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 230–232 CrossRef .
J. Hafner, J. Comput. Chem., 2008, 29, 2044–2078 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. B. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Zheng, W. Sheng, Z. J. Xu, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Materials Today, 2020, 36, 125–138 CrossRef CAS .
F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Greeley, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, T. R. Munter, P. G. Moses, E. Skulason, T. Bligaard and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 016105–016108 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang and C.-M. L. Wu, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104603 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ran, W. Qiu, E. Song, Y. Wang, X. Zhao, Z. Liu and J. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1224–1234 CrossRef CAS .
E. Skulason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Bjorketun, S. Gudmundsdottir, G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18182–18197 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, A. P. O'Mullane and A. Du, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, 23–26 CrossRef .
C. Liu, Z. Dai, J. Zhang, Y. Jin, D. Li and C. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 19051–19055 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang and C.-M. L. Wu, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104603–104608 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 CrossRef .
A. R. Zeradjanin, J.-P. Grote, G. Polymeros and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Electroanalysis, 2016, 28, 2256–2269 CrossRef CAS .
J. Durst, A. Siebel, C. Simon, F. Hasché, J. Herranz and H. A. Gasteiger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2255–2260 RSC .
W. Fu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, M. He, L. Fang, X. Yang, Z. Huang, J. Li, X. Gu and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2019, 369, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, J. K. Nørskov, C. D. Taylor, M. J. Janik and M. Neurock, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 21833–21839 CrossRef CAS .
E. Skulason, G. S. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. Greeley, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 3241–3250 RSC .
K. Chan and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2663–2668 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, X. Li, R. Zhang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3752–3756 RSC .
S. D. Huang, C. Shang, P. L. Kang, X. J. Zhang and Z. P. Liu, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2019, 9, e1415 CAS .
J. Behler, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2015, 115, 1032–1050 CrossRef CAS .
H.-x. Zhong, Q. Zhang, J. Wang, X.-b. Zhang, X.-l. Wei, Z.-j. Wu, K. Li, F.-l. Meng, D. Bao and J.-m. Yan, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3965–3970 CrossRef CAS .
B. Deng, D. Wang, Z. Jiang, J. Zhang, S. Shi, Z.-J. Jiang and M. Liu, Carbon, 2018, 138, 169–178 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Gangadharan, S. M. Unni, N. Kumar, P. Ghosh and S. Kurungot, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2643–2652 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jinnouchi and R. Asahi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4279–4283 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, S.-D. Huang, Y.-H. Fang and Z.-P. Liu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9711–9721 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Wei and Z. P. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1485–1490 RSC .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, J. Gu, X. Zheng, M. Liu, X. Qiu, L. Wang, W. Li, Z. Chen, X. Ji and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 322–333 RSC .
Y. Cai, J. Gao, S. Chen, Q. Ke, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8948–8956 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, D. Zhang, L. Gong, L. Zhang and Z. Xia, Frontiers in Materials, 2019, 6, 00016 CrossRef .
Z. Zhuang, Y. Li, Z. Li, F. Lv, Z. Lang, K. Zhao, L. Zhou, L. Moskaleva, S. Guo and L. Mai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 496–500 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, F. Ma, Y. Jiao, E. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Catal., 2015, 332, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. Jian, L. Fang, J. Li, Z. Fang, Z. Yuan, L. Dai, X. Chen and D. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16217–16222 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xing, Y. Xue, B. Huang, H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Li and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13897–13903 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Patra, S. Khilari, R. N. Manna, S. Mondal, D. Pradhan, A. Pradhan and A. Bhaumik, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6120–6127 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, S. Lei, A. C. Wang, L. Gao, Q. Zhang, Y. Yang and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104525–104548 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Wu, L. M. Liu and S. J. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3299–3304 RSC .
X. Zhu, T. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Chen, J. Guan, X. Chen, H. Ji, P. Du and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605776–1605782 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, S. Kim, L. Mao, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang, X. Wang and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13234–13242 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, Y. Ji, Z. Dang, J. Yan, P. Li, Y. Li and S. F. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800668–1800677 CrossRef .
L. Shi, C. Ling, Y. Ouyang and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 533–537 RSC .
D. Liu, G. Zhang, Q. Ji, Y. Zhang and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25758–25765 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Y.-C. Rao, H.-H. Wu and X.-M. Duan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 27970–27974 RSC .
W. Xu, C. Chen, C. Tang, Y. Li and L. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 5661–5669 CrossRef .
D. B. Nguyen and L. N. Tran, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21124–21131 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao and M. Chhetri, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1803668 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, X. Yang, D. Singh, P. K. Panda, W. Luo, Y. Li and R. Ahuja, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 7884–7892 CrossRef CAS .
D. Singh, S. Chakraborty and R. Ahuja, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 8441–8448 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 983–999 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wirth, R. Neumann, M. Antonietti and P. Saalfrank, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15917–15926 RSC .
Z. Chen, T.-T. Fan, X. Yu, Q.-L. Wu, Q.-H. Zhu, L.-Z. Zhang, J.-H. Li, W.-P. Fang and X.-D. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15310–15319 RSC .
H. Lv, Y. Huang, R. T. Koodali, G. Liu, Y. Zeng, Q. Meng and M. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 12656–12667 CrossRef .
J. Li, X. Gao, B. Liu, Q. Feng, X. B. Li, M. Y. Huang, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3954–3957 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, J. Zhang, C. Jiang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 207, 27–34 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arra, K. R. Ramya, R. Babar and M. Kabir, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 7194–7202 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, N. Liu, Z. Guo, W. Wang, L. Guo, W. Yuan and X. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 4787–4792 RSC .
S. Qi, Y. Fan, J. Wang, X. Song, W. Li and M. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 306–315 RSC .
Q. Wan, F. Wei, Z. Ma, M. Anpo and S. Lin, Adv. Theory Simul., 2019, 2, 180074 Search PubMed .
R. Meng, X. Sun, D. Yang, J. Bao and X. Chen, Applied Materials Today, 2018, 13, 276–284 CrossRef .
L. Ma, H. Fan, K. Fu, S. Lei, Q. Hu, H. Huang and G. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7093–7103 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. Hou, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680–1681 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yan, X. She, X. Zhu, L. Xu, J. Qian, J. Xia, J. Zhang, H. Xu, H. Li and H. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 507, 145085–145093 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Li, J. Zhao, J. Wang and Z. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 618–628 CrossRef CAS .
X. An, Y. Cao, Q. Liu, L. Chen, Z. Lin, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhang, J. Long and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2017, 546, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, G. Liu, K. Song, X. Wang, H. Wang, N. Zhao and F. He, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6364–6371 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, T. Jia, H. Shi, D. Yu, W. Hong and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 303–311 RSC .
F. He, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Yu, L. Li, S. Hao and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3822–3827 RSC .
W. Zhou, Z. Hu, F. Huang, W. Hong and X. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118852–118860 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, Z. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Wan, H. Liu, W. Chen, G. Wang and R. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13805–13812 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, W. Wang, Q. Chen, Y. Pu, H. He, W. Zhuang, J. He and L. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3160–3167 RSC .
M. Shalom, S. Gimenez, F. Schipper, I. Herraiz-Cardona, J. Bisquert and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2014, 53, 3654–3658 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Jebakumar Immanuel Edison, R. Atchudan, N. Karthik and Y. R. Lee, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 14390–14399 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shinde, A. Sami and J.-H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12810–12819 RSC .
Z. Pei, J. Zhao, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12205–12211 RSC .
A. Jaiswal, S. Pal, A. Kumar and R. Prakash, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 338, 135851–135862 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, S. Yang, D. Jia, P. Da, P. He, A. M. Al-Enizi, G. Ding, X. Xie and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12878–12883 RSC .
Q. Jia, S. Zhang, Z. Gao, P. Yang and Q. Gu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 425–435 RSC .
L. K. Putri, B.-J. Ng, W.-J. Ong, H. W. Lee, W. S. Chang and S.-P. Chai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3181–3194 RSC .
T.-F. Yeh, J.-M. Syu, C. Cheng, T.-H. Chang and H. Teng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2255–2262 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Zou, L.-C. Wang, J. Luo, Y.-C. Nie, Q.-J. Xing, X.-B. Luo, H.-M. Du, S.-L. Luo and S. L. Suib, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Z. Han, W. Younas, Y. Zhu, X. Ma and C. Cao, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5145–5153 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jeong, H. Piao, S. Park, J.-H. Yang, G. Choi, Q. Wu, H. Kang, H. J. Woo, S. J. Jung, H. Kim, B. G. Shin, Y. Kim, E. H. Hwang, J.-H. Choy and Y. J. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117850–117856 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, S.-C. Cui and J.-G. Liu, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 14725–14732 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Qu, G. Shi, J. Liu, J. Chen and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2016, 55, 2230–2234 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Sathe, X. Zou and T. Asefa, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 2023–2030 RSC .
B. Zhang, H.-H. Wang, H. Su, L.-B. Lv, T.-J. Zhao, J.-M. Ge, X. Wei, K.-X. Wang, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2606–2615 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yue, S. Huang, Y. Jin and P. K. Shen, Catalysis Science & Technology, 2017, 7, 2228–2235 Search PubMed .
M. Khalid and H. Varela, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3141–3150 RSC .
H. Jiang, Y. Zhu, Y. Su, Y. Yao, Y. Liu, X. Yang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12642–12645 RSC .
S. Li, Z. Yu, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Zou, H. Yang, J. Jin and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6405–6410 RSC .
Z. Yuan, J. Li, M. Yang, Z. Fang, J. Jian, D. Yu, X. Chen and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4972–4979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, B. Hu, W. Zhao, Q. Yang, F. Yang, J. Ren, X. Li, Y. Jin, L. Fang and Q. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 317, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, Y. Ye, X. Wang, S. Peng, Z. Wei, X. Zhang and W. Liu, Appl. Catal., A, 2017, 529, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Bhat, N. Rashid, M. A. Rather, S. A. Pandit, P. P. Ingole and M. A. Bhat, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 337, 135730–135742 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cui, Q. Liu, N. Cheng, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9340–9342 RSC .
X. Zhou, X. Li, Q. Gao, J. Yuan, J. Wen, Y. Fang, W. Liu, S. Zhang and Y. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2798–2806 RSC .
T. Li, Z. Cui, W. Yuan and C. M. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 12792–12796 RSC .
R. Gao, Q. Dai, F. Du, D. Yan and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11658–11666 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yanagida, A. Kabumoto, K. Mizumoto, C. Pac and K. Yoshino, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1985, 8, 474–475 RSC .
V. S. Vyas and B. V. Lotsch, Nature, 2015, 521, 41–42 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sprick, J. X. Jiang, B. Bonillo, S. Ren, T. Ratvijitvech, P. Guiglion, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3265–3270 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, Y. Shan, Y. Hu, X. Xu, L. Long, J. Zhang, J. Dai, J. Guo, J. Shen, S. Li, L. Liu and X. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3366 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Chen, H. Zhang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1806626 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, X. Gao, X. Liu, G. Ji, L. Fu, Y. Yang, Q. Yu, W. Zhang and X. Xue, Renewable Energy, 2020, 147, 594–601 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohkubo, N. Kohno, Y. Yamada and S. Fukuzumi, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11515–11518 RSC .
J. Zhuo, T. Wang, G. Zhang, L. Liu, L. Gan and M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2013, 52, 10867–10870 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, K. Goh, W. Jiang, D. Yu, Ö. Birer, R. Jiang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7210–7214 RSC .
S. N. Talapaneni, J. Kim, S. H. Je, O. Buyukcakir, J. Oh and A. Coskun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12080–12085 RSC .
D. K. Singh, R. N. Jenjeti, S. Sampath and M. Eswaramoorthy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6025–6031 RSC .
Q. Zhang, F. Luo, Y. Ling, L. Guo, K. Qu, H. Hu, Z. Yang, W. Cai and H. Cheng, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 5194–5200 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sakamoto, R. Shiotsuki, K. Wada, N. Fukui, H. Maeda, J. Komeda, R. Sekine, K. Harano and H. Nishihara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22189–22194 RSC .
S. Huang, Y. Meng, Y. Cao, S. He, X. Li, S. Tong and M. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 239–248 CrossRef CAS .
J. Swaminathan, S. Enayat, A. Meiyazhagan, F. C. Robles Hernandez, X. Zhang, R. Vajtai, F. M. Vargas and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27697–27705 CrossRef CAS .
P. Popper and T. A. Ingles, Nature, 1957, 179, 1075 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, P. Li, W. Zhou, T. Wang, K. Chang, H. Zhang, T. Kako, G. Liu and J. Ye, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 158–163 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, B. Tian, B. Smith, M. C. Scott, Q. Lei, R. Hua, Y. Tian and Y. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 4345–4350 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qu, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Zhang and S. Dong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 618–627 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Feng, H. Xu, S. H. Ye, G. Ouyang, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2017, 56, 8120–8124 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chan, C. H. Chang and H. Y. Tuan, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2937–2940 RSC .

Footnote† Equal contributors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Tianhao Li	Tianhao Li received his PhD in Chemistry from the University of Toledo (USA) in 2014. He has been a faculty member in the School of Materials and Energy, Southwest University. His research activities focus on developing ionic liquid-based electrocatalysts in for water splitting.
Tao Hu	Tao Hu received his PhD from Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2018, under the supervision of Prof. Xiaohui Wang. He is currently an Assistant Professor at the Institute of Materials Science and Devices, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Suzhou University of Science and Technology. His research focuses on theoretical modeling of advanced materials for energy storage and conversion.
Liming Dai	Prof. Liming Dai joined University of New South Wales in 2020 as a Scientia Professor and an Australian Laureate Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering. Before joining UNSW, he was the Kent Hale Smith Professor in the Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Fellow of the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering, and Fellow of the International Association of Advanced Materials. Prof. Dai’s expertise covers the synthesis, functionalization, and device fabrication of conjugated polymers and carbon nanomaterials for energy-related and biomedical applications.
Chang Ming Li	Dr Chang Ming Li is the Professor, the Dean of School of Materials Science and Engineering of Suzhou University of Science and Technology,and Director of Chongqing Key Lab for Clean Energy and Advanced Materials, China. He worked with Motorola as a distinguished technical member and Science Advisory Board Member. Later he became Professor, Head of Bioengineering Division and Director of Centre for Advanced Bionanosystems in Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received a number of prestigious awards such as Chinese Medical Science and Technology Awards, Motorola Master Innovator Award, Nanyang Innovation and Research Awardand Australia National University Craig Visiting Professor. His research interests are functional materials, green energies and biosensors/lab-on-chips. He has published 700+ peer-reviewed journal papers, 8 book chapters and holds 264 patents with 37000+ citations/H-index of 92. He is Member of European Academy of Science, Fellow of American institute of Medicine and Biological Engineering, Foreign Member of Russian Academy of Engineering Science and RSC Fellow, serving as member of Advisory Board for Nanoscales (RSC), Joule (Cell) and Chief Editor of Materials Report: Energy.

 	Fig. 1  Hydrogen production from renewable energy.	 
2H+ + 2e− → H2 (acidic)	(1)
2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2 (alkaline)	(2)
C + H+ + e− → C⋯H* (Volmer step)	(3)
C⋯H* + H+ + e− → C + H2 (Heyrovsky step)	(4)
2C⋯H* → C + H2 (Tafel step)	(5)

 	Fig. 2  Mechanism of the hydrogen evolution reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 13, Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Three key dynamic steps (photophysical, photochemical, and electrochemical) involved in overall water-splitting. After excitation across the band gap, the following steps occur: (1) electron/hole relaxation; (2) trapping of electrons/holes in trap states due to defects or surface states; (3) radiative and nonradiative band-edge electron–hole or exciton recombination; (4) radiative and nonradiative trapped electron–hole or relaxed exciton recombination; and (5) nonlinear and nonradiative exciton–exciton annihilation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17, Copyright (2018) the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Theoretical approaches for electrocatalytic HER: current status and challenges. (a) Schematic illustrating the HER mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc. (b) Adsorption energies of CHx intermediates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24 Copyright 2020, the American Physical Society. (c) Relationship between H binding energy and p-band center. (d) Volcano plot of i0 as a function of ΔGH*. (e) Calculated free-energy diagram of the HER at equilibrium potential for phosphorus carbides. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc. (f) Bond electronegativity as a new HER catalyst descriptor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Atomistic-level explanation of experimental observation. (a) Free energy diagrams for hydrogen evolution at the equilibrium potential of CNQD@G and QD@G. (b) Volcano plot of j0 as a function of ΔGH* for CNQD@G and other catalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) HER polarization curves of the catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 after iR correction. (d) Volcano plot of i0vs. ΔGH* for HT-AFNG, metal catalysts, and a typical nanostructured MoS2 catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (e) Free-energy diagram of the HER on the four N-doped configurations in CNx@N-RGO. (f) HER polarization curves of the different catalyst materials recorded in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Theoretical predictions of novel metal-free HER catalysts. (a) Model of α-sheet boron supercell. (b) Volcano curve of exchange current (j0) as a function of the average Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*). Reprinted with permission from ref. 30 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) Optimized configurations and (d) corresponding free energies of hydrogen adsorption on 2D B3S nanosheet at different coverages (θ). Green, yellow and pink balls represent B, S and H atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Comparison of the free energy diagram in the most favored sites for perfect, MV, DV, and TV cases. Inset shows the geometries of hydrogen adsorbed above pristine phosphorene. (f) Strain modulation of the free energy for H adsorption on the DV core. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Metal-free HER photocatalysts. (a) Adsorption configuration of one H2O molecule at the g-C3N4 intrinsic vacancy. (b) Band edge alignment according to the vacuum level and the standard hydrogen electrode for planar g-C3N4, buckle single g-C3N4 sheet and single g-C3N4 sheet-adsorbed water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration showing the mechanism of the photocatalytic H2 evolution on ball-milled BP and bulk BP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram for the visible and NIR light-activated photocatalytic H2 evolution using BP/C3N4 in the presence of methanol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of layered g-C3N4-loaded BP quantum dots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Synthetic route towards C-rich g-C3N4 with a carbon layer gradient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthetic procedure for the preparation of 2D-SCN photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic for (a) depolymerization-repolymerization process of g-C3N4, and (b) preparation of carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM images of (a) carbon spheres, (b) complexes of carbon spheres and C3N4 gel, and (c) carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell photocatalyst. (d) TEM and (e) HR-TEM images of carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell photocatalyst. (f) Width of the g-C3N4 shell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Preparation of polyfluorene Pdot/g-C3N4 nanosheet heterojunctions with the chemical structures of g-C3N4 and polyfluorenes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Atomic-layer g-C3N4 for greatly extended visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Reproduced with permission. from ref. 93 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Synthetic process of PCN and PCNC with an internal bionic coral-like architecture (blue: N; grey: C; red: O), and advantages of the PCN and PCNC hollow structures for photocatalytic reactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram representing the synthesis of the metal-free triad composite P-rGO–g-C3N4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Synthetic process for CNQD@G hybrid. (b) AFM image of CNQD@G (inset: corresponding height curve). (c) TEM image of CNQD@G (inset: corresponding size distribution). (d) FT-IR spectra of bulk g-C3N4, CNQDs, G, and CNQD@G. (e) High-resolution C 1s XPS spectra of CNQD@G. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Scheme of the formation of 2D CNP film on FTO. (b) Photos of CNP/FTO, CN–Me/FTO, and CNCC/FTO. (c and d) SEM images of the top view of CNP/FTO film. (e) SEM image of the cross section of CNP/FTO. (f) AFM image of surface morphology and (g and h) thickness of 2D CNP film. (i) STEM image, (j) corresponding elemental mapping of C, N, O, and Cl, and (k) EDS spectrum of 2D CNP film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of the preparation process of O-gC3N4/BrGO. (b) Proposed mechanism of charge separation and transfer at the p–n junction in the O-gC3N4/B-rGO nanocomposite for photocatalytic HER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the as-synthesized 15N–CNU. (c) Rate of hydrogen evolution over N-GQDs/CN–U with different amounts of N-GQDs. (d) UV-vis spectra of CN–U and 15N–CNU catalysts (inset: intersection value of the band gap). (e) Transient photocurrent curves of CN–U and 15N–CNU. (f) Upconversion PL spectra of irradiated N-GQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) AFM image of g-C3N4 on HOPG (inset: the corresponding FFT data). (b) Atomic-resolution STM image of g-C3N4 nanosheets on HOPG with a tunneling current of 0.5 nA and sample bias voltage of −2.0 V. (Inset: DFT-simulated STM image with a ball-stick model of g-C3N4). Scale bars of (a) and (b) correspond to 1 μm and 6.2 nm, respectively. (c) Average STS of g-C3N4 on HOPG. (d) Three-dimensional plot of electron cloud for the energy range of −0.4 to −0.2 eV under 5.0 × 10−6 (electrons/Å3). Reproduced with permission from ref. 106 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Preparation of MPSA/GO-1000. (b) LSV of various materials for hydrogen evolution in 0.5 m H2SO4. (c) Corresponding Tafel curves. (d) HER stability analysis of MPSA/GO-1000 and Pt/C. (e) LSV of selected samples for hydrogen evolution in 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  Synthesis of NFPGNS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) SEM image of bare carbon fabric, (b–e) SEM images of P-rGO on carbon fibers at different magnifications, and (f) SEM image of a PS-rGO-coated single carbon fiber and its mapping for C, P, and S elements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  Synthesis of N-TCNT@NGS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Liquid exfoliation of bulk BP and construction of EBP@NG. (b) Photo of an EBP dispersion with a concentration of up to 0.15 mg mL−1, showing the Tyndall effect. (c) TEM image, (d) AFM image, (e) corresponding height image, and (f) HRTEM image of EBP. (Inset: corresponding SAED pattern). (g) Bright-field TEM image and (h) dark-field TEM image with corresponding element distribution image of EBP@NG (1:8). Scale bar: (c) 50 nm; (d, g, and h) 500 nm and (f) 1 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) HER LSV curves, (b) overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2, and (c) chronoamperometric curves of EBP@NG and other catalysts in 1 M KOH without iR-compensation. (d) OER LSV curves, (e) overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2, and (f) chronoamperometric curves of EBP@NG and other catalysts in 1 M KOH without iR-compensation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 115 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Synthetic process of 3DNG-P. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 28  Preparation procedure of the HT-AFNG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 29  (A) Growth process of SiC nanowires. (a) Liquid La–Ni droplet attached on MWCNT. (b) MWCNT loss and growth of the SiC nanowires at the liquid–solid interface. (c) Obtained SiC-CNT heterostructure after La–Ni catalysts were removed. (B) (a) MWCNT. (b) SiC nanotube after the vapour–solid reaction of the MWCNTs and Si vapour. (C) Charge transfer behavior at the interface between SiC and CNTs and possible photocatalytic H2-production mechanism of SiC-CNT photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Fabrication of MHCF-CNTs and MHCFCNT@PEMAc. (b) Photo of the flexible free-standing MHCF-CNT@PEMAc membrane (12.56 cm2). TEM images of (c) MHCF, (d) MHCF-CNTs, and (e) MHCF-CNT@PEMAc, (insets: water contact angle of the samples 938° for MHCFCNT@PEMAc and 1528° for MHCF-CNTs). (f) HAADF-STEM images and the corresponding element mapping of C, N, and O for MHCFCNT@PEMAc. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Charge-transfer process and ORR/OER/HER on C60-SWCNTs. (b and c) TEM images of the C60-SWCNTsn (n = 5, 10, and 15 min). Reprinted with permission from ref. 122 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Micro grid mode resonance-based artificial microstructure. (a) Preparation of MG@hm-C(CN)3, Inset: digital camera images of a bare nanoporous template (white) sample and a MG@hm-C(CN)3 sample (black). (b) Self-assembly of MG@hm-C(CN)3 nanosheets on nanoporous templates to form artificial microstructure (scale bar, 150 nm). (c) Top-view (Scale bar, 1 μm) and (d) cross-sectional (Scale bar, 200 nm) SEM images of MG@hm-C(CN)3. (e) Absorption spectra measured by an integrated sphere in the visible and near-infrared range. MG: nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide membrane (AAM), hm-C(CN)3: hm-C(CN)3 bulk material, and MG@hm-C(CN)3: hm-C(CN)3 nanosheets incorporated in AAM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 33  Electronic properties of TCPP. (a) Diagram of molecular dipoles and electrons distribution in three porphyrin derivatives. (b) UV-vis diffuse reflection spectroscopy of SA-TCPP supramolecular photocatalyst, and solar spectrum observed by optical fiber spectrometer. (c) Photocurrent response of SA-TCPP and untreated TCPP powder. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 34  Mechanism of the photocatalytic reactions by SA-TCPP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Synthesis of the metal-free covalent organic polymer (TpPAM). (b) FT-IR spectra of TpPAM, PAM, and Tp. (c) 13C-CPMAS spectrum of TpPAM. (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm with PSD (inset). (e) TEM image of TpPAM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Synthetic of TIPS-TEP. (b) Liquid/liquid interfacial synthesis of PR-GDY. (c) Photo of the liquid/liquid interfacial synthesis. (d) Scheme of PR-GDY suspended in acetone. (e) Photo of a PR-GDY film transferred on quartz. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 37  Synthesis of NOPHCs electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 38  Procedure for the synthesis of NCNs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Scheme of the ball-milling treatment of BP with or without additive. (b) H2 evolution from water using 5 mg bulk BP (black line) and 5 mg BP-BM (red line) photocatalysts under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) (inset: H2 evolution rates of bulk BP and BP-BM). Reproduced with permission from ref. 61 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 40  Synthetic protocol and spectroscopic analysis of BP. (a) Preparation of few-layer BP nanosheets. (b) XRD pattern of the BP nanosheets obtained at 100 °C. (c) Raman spectrum of BP nanosheets. (d and e) XPS fine spectra of P 2p and O 1s of BP nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 41  Preparation of SiO2/PPy NTs-CFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 42  Colloidal synthesis of P-RPNPs and their HER application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† Equal contributors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
