Two-dimensional functionalized hexagonal boron nitride for quantum dot photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA05260D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA05260D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20698-20713Two-dimensional functionalized hexagonal boron nitride for quantum dot photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation†

        
          
            Omar 
            Abdelkarim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jasneet 
            Kaur
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jiabin 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fabiola 
            Navarro-Pardo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hadis 
            Zarrin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Aycan 
            Yurtsever
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ghada 
            Bassioni
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhiming M. 
            Wang
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Gurpreet Singh 
            Selopal
          
        
      *ad and 

        
          
            Federico 
            Rosei
          
        
      *a
aInstitut National de la Recherche Scientifique, Centre Énergie, Matériaux et Télécommunications, 1650 Boul. Lionel Boulet, Varennes, Québec, J3X 1S2 Canada. E-mail: gurpreet.selopal@emt.inrs.ca; rosei@emt.inrs.ca
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering & Architectural Science, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario M5B 2K3, Canada
cAin Shams University, Faculty of Engineering, Chemistry Division, P.O. Box 11517, Cairo, Egypt
dInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, PR China
eInstitute of Micro Engineering and Nanoelectronic, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi, 43600, Malaysia
Received 
      24th May 2020
    , Accepted 14th September 2020First published on 15th September 2020AbstractWe report the design and fabrication of a heterojunction photoanode consisting of two-dimensional (2D) functionalized hexagonal boron nitride (F-h-BN) nanoflakes, introduced at the interface between SnO2 and quantum dots (QDs) (e.g. CdS and CdS–CdSe), used as a photoanode in a photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) for hydrogen (H2) generation. We highlight the effect of 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes on the carrier recombination and performance of the PEC system. In addition, the tailoring of SnO2 film thickness and incorporation of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were investigated for their effect on carrier dynamics and overall device performance. Our results show that a PEC device based on SnO2/F-h-BN/CdS QDs exhibits a 60% improvement in the saturated photocurrent density (at 1.0 V vs. RHE) compared to the control device, due to improved electron injection and reduced carrier recombination at the metal oxide/QDs/electrolyte interface. The highest saturated photocurrent density value reached 6.35 mA cm−2 (at 1.0 V vs. RHE), after thickness optimization of the SnO2 film, incorporation (0.015 wt%) of MWCNTs, and cascade CdS–CdSe QDs. In addition, the PEC system maintains 98% of the initial value of photocurrent density after four hours of continuous one sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). Our results offer a simple yet cost-effective and efficient strategy to enhance the performance of QD based PEC H2 generation and potentially other optoelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
The growing demand for a clean, sustainable, and secure supply of energy as an alternative to fossil fuels is one of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) identified by the United Nations and is perhaps the most important and urgent one to be addressed in the 21st century.1 Molecular hydrogen (H2) contains the highest amount of energy per unit weight of any molecule (142 MJ kg−1), three times larger than that of liquid hydrocarbons (47 MJ kg−1), and is considered a clean source of energy, as its only by-product during the oxidation reaction is water vapour.2 In this context, solar-driven photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) H2 generation is a promising approach to convert solar energy into a clean chemical fuel.3 An ideal PEC device consists of a photoanode and cathode made from semiconducting materials in an electrolyte solution. An exciton is generated in the photoanode upon absorption of a photon; the exciton separates into an electron–hole pair at the photoanode/electrolyte interface; holes oxidize water at the surface of the photoanode and electrons transfer to the cathode through an external circuit and reduce the water at the cathode, generating H2.4 Thus, a proper electron band alignment and interfaces of semiconducting materials of the photoanode and cathode are pre-requisites to fabricate high efficiency and stable PEC devices. During the last few years, there has been significant progress in the performance of solar technologies based on wide bandgap semiconductors sensitized with quantum dots (QDs), which allows us to harvest photons from the visible to near-infrared (NIR) region of the solar spectrum.5 Certain properties of QDs such as the possibility of multiple excitation generation6 and extraction of hot charge carriers7 before thermalization are of particular interest to further improve the performance of PEC and other optoelectronic devices. So far, several wide-bandgap semiconductor materials such as TiO2, ZnO, WO3, Fe2O3, and SnO2 have been widely used as photoanode materials to fabricate efficient and stable solar-driven PEC devices for H2 generation.8–12 Among them, SnO2 is particularly promising due to its high stability in both acidic and basic media, high electron mobility (100–200 cm2 V−1 s−1)13 which leads to faster diffusion assisted carrier transport, and a highly negative conduction band,14 which enhances the electron injection rate from the conduction band of excited QDs into SnO2. In addition, the wider bandgap (Eg = 3.6–3.8 eV) of SnO215 compared to the most commonly used photoanode semiconductor (TiO2, Eg = 3.2 eV)16 creates fewer holes under ultraviolet (UV) illumination and reduces the rate of degradation,17 eventually improving the long-term stability of the device. However, due to the low solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency of PEC devices based on SnO2, until now, the latter has been much less explored as a photoanode material. For instance, Basu et al. reported a saturated photocurrent density of 4.7 mA cm−2 for a PEC device based on a surface engineered SnO2 by TiCl4 treatment anode sensitized with CdSe/CdS “giant” core/shell QDs,18 still lower by a factor of two compared to that of its counterpart TiO2 sensitized with similar colloidal QDs (10 mA cm−2).10 This highlights that the surface engineering of SnO2 and the interface of photoanode/QDs need to be optimized to improve the performance of devices based on QDs. From this perspective, two-dimensional (2D) hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is considered as a promising passivation layer due to its outstanding optical and electrical properties. In particular, h-BN is an isomorph of graphene, transparent in the visible or NIR spectrum, and electrically insulating with a wide bandgap of 5.9 eV.19 2D h-BN can act as an energy barrier between the photoanode and electrolyte, preventing electron recombination during device operation.20 Although h-BN is chemically inert, it can be tuned through functionalization to improve its production yield, by enhancing the exfoliation process to achieve mono- or few-layer h-BN, and its dissolution in a solvent.21 Achieving mono- to few layers of h-BN is crucial to improve the performance of optoelectronic devices. The tunneling current of h-BN depends on the BN barrier thickness: as the thickness increases, there is a decrease in the tunneling current accompanied by an increase in blocking of photo-injected electrons from the light absorber to the conduction band of the electron transport layer.22 To the best of our knowledge, there is no report on the surface passivation of SnO2 mesoporous films with functionalized 2D h-BN (F-h-BN) nanoflakes to tune the interface between the electron transport layer (e.g. SnO2) and the light harvester (e.g. CdS or CdS–CdSe QDs) to improve the performance of solar-driven PEC devices for H2 generation.
Here we introduce 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes between SnO2 and QDs to engineer the surface of the SnO2 and SnO2/QD interfaces to improve the performance of solar-driven PEC devices for H2 generation. To highlight this effect, a series of PEC devices were fabricated based on SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN sensitized with CdS and CdS–CdSe QDs via successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR). The PEC device based on the SnO2/F-h-BN/CdS–CdSe QD photoanode yields a saturated current density of 6.05 mA cm−2, representing a 12% increase compared to SnO2/CdS–CdSe QDs. The improvement is due to the enhanced electron injection rate and reduced back electron transfer recombination at the SnO2/QDs/electrolyte interface. In addition, we report the effect of the thickness of the SnO2 film and the incorporation of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) (0.015 wt%), which improve charge transport23 in SnO2 mesoporous films, leading to an increase of the saturated photocurrent density and long-term stability.
2. Experimental
2.1. Materials
Glass substrates coated with a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) film with a sheet resistance of ∼ 15 ohms per square were purchased from Pilkington. Tin(II) chloride dihydrate (SnCl2·2H2O), cadmium acetate dehydrate (Cd(CH2COO)·2H2O, 98%), zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, ≥98%), sodium borohydride (NaBH4), selenium powder (Se 99.5+%), alpha-terpineol, ethylcellulose, titanium(IV) chloride (TiCl4, 0.09 M in 20% HCl), disodium sulphide nonahydrate (Na2S·9H2O ≥98%), ZrO2 nano-powder (particle size < 100 nm), oleylamine (OLA) (technical grade, 70%), trioctyl phosphine oxide (TOPO), octadecene (ODE), trioctyl phosphine (TOP) (97%), bulk hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) (powder ∼1 μm), Isopropanol (IPA, 70%), and the proton-conductive precursor of acid methane sulfonic acid (MSA) were bought from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. Methanol, acetone, ethanol, and sodium sulfite anhydrate (Na2SO3, ≥98%) were bought from VWR chemicals. SnO2 nanopowder (99.9% tin(IV) oxide) was bought from American Elements. All chemicals were used as received without further purification.
2.2. Preparation of SnO2 paste
Following the same procedures reported previously18 SnO2 nanoparticle paste was prepared. Briefly, 1 g of SnO2 nanoparticle powder was mixed with 0.5 g of ethyl cellulose. Then 1 ml of water, 1 ml of alpha-terpineol, and 5 ml of ethanol were added to the mixture while stirring. The mixture was stirred, using a magnetic stirrer, for four hours to make a homogeneous paste.
2.3. Preparation of F-h-BN
The synthesis of F-h-BN nanoflakes from bulk powder BN was carried out by liquid-phase exfoliation. The latter technique is versatile for different types of layered materials such as graphene, MoS2, and h-BN24–26 to synthesize high-quality, few-layered, and functionalized 2D nanoflakes from their bulk crystals using ultrasonication and centrifugation procedures. Specifically, BN bulk powder was dissolved in a volume mixture of IPA solvent and MSA. The solution was mixed and set for ultrasonication using a tip induced sonicator. Later, the F-h-BN solution was centrifuged using stepwise centrifugation for cycles of 30 minutes each. At each step, the pellet and supernatant were separated. The final dispersion contains few-layered F-h-BN nanoflakes well dispersed in the solvent. The final concentration of functionalized h-BN was determined to be 0.5 mg ml−1. The pellet from the final supernatant was collected and washed several times with 300 ml of IPA to remove the unreacted MSA and then dried in an oven at 80 °C for 2 h. The yield of the dispersed F-h-BN was about 60% with respect to the initial BN amount.

Photoanode preparation. 
FTO coated glass substrates were cleaned using soap and water, and then sonicated using acetone for 20 min and deionized (DI) water for 10 min and subsequently dried under a N2 gas stream. Finally, they were treated in an ozone chamber for 20 min to remove organic contamination from the FTO glass surface. A thin and compact blocking layer of SnO2 was deposited by spin coating: 75 μL of 0.4 M SnCl2·2H2O in methanol was poured on the FTO and spin-coated for 1 min with 6000 rpm. The samples were then annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. One, two, and three layers (with and without MWCNTs for the three layers) of SnO2 paste were tape cast on the FTO, let stand for 10 min at room temperature, and then annealed at 120 °C for 6 min, after each layer, and annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. Afterward, we deposited a thin passivation layer of TiO2. Briefly, SnO2 mesoporous film samples were dipped in 50 mM TiCl4 in DI water for 1 h at 70 °C, and then washed with DI water, ethanol, and dry air, and subsequently annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. For applying the F-h-BN material, the solution was sonicated for 30 min first, and then 100 μL of F-h-BN were deposited on the paste, using spin coating at 6000 rpm for 1 min, and then annealed at 130 °C for 3 h. The final film thickness was measured using a profilometer, and the thickness of the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous anode of one layer is 2–3 μm, two layers 7–8 μm, and three layers 9–10 μm.
For transient photoluminescence (PL) decay measurements, ZrO2 films were prepared by using a commercial ZrO2 nano-powder. One layer of ZrO2 was tape cast on FTO glass. The photoanode was dried for 10 min at room temperature, and then placed on a hot plate for 6 min at 120 °C. Finally, ZrO2 photoanodes were annealed in air at 500 °C for 30 min and cooled down to room temperature. The thickness of the ZrO2 mesoporous film was in the range of 8–9 μm.

2.4. Sensitization of the SnO2 film with CdS and CdSe QDs
CdS and CdS–CdSe QDs were directly grown by SILAR. In a typical procedure, for CdS QDs, the SnO2 anodes were immersed in 20 ml of 0.05 M Cd(CH2COO)·2H2O ethanolic solution for 1 min, as a Cd2+ source, washed with methanol, and then dried with inert N2 gas. They were then immersed in 0.05 M Na2S·9H2O in 20 ml of DI water/methanol (1:1) for 1 min, as a S2− source, washed in a solution of DI water/methanol (1:1), and then dried with N2 gas. This is one SILAR cycle of CdS. For CdSe QDs, a 0.03 M Cd(CH2COO)·2H2O ethanolic solution was used as a Cd2+ source and a mixture of 0.03 M Se powder and 0.06 M NaBH4 in ethanolic solution was used as a Se2− source. Subsequently, the same procedure was used for the ZnS capping layer: 0.1 M Zn(CH2COO)·2H2O, as a Zn2+ source, in 20 ml methanol, washed with the same solution, and 0.1 M Na2S·9H2O in (10 ml of DI water and 10 ml of methanol), as a S2− source.
Two sets of samples were prepared, one with 7 cycles of CdS, and then 2 cycles of ZnS. The other approach with 5 cycles of CdS, 3 cycles of CdSe, and 2 cycles of ZnS.
2.5. Sensitization of colloidal CdSe QDs for transient photoluminescence (PL) decay
Colloidal CdSe QDs with a diameter of 3.3 nm and a PL peak at ∼565 nm were synthesized via the hot injection approach.27 Briefly, TOPO (1 g) and Cd-oleate (0.38 mmol, 1 ml) in 8 ml of ODE were purged with N2 at room temperature for 30 min. The reaction system was evacuated for 30 min at 100 °C, and then the temperature was increased to 300 °C. The mixture of TOP–Se (4 mmol, 4 ml), 3 ml of OLA, and 1 ml of ODE at room temperature was quickly injected into the Cd-oleate suspension under vigorous stirring. The reaction cell was quenched with cold water after injection. Ethanol was added, and then the suspension was centrifuged. The supernatant was removed and finally, the QDs were dispersed in toluene and kept at −10 °C in a refrigerator.
2.6. Characterization

Structural analysis of the photoanode. 
Structural analyses were carried out using different techniques. Specifically, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were acquired using a Tescan LYRA 3 system for the SnO2 paste and blocking layer. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were collected using a JEOL 2100F TEM for F-h-BN. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to examine the morphology of F-h-BN nanoflakes. The chemical composition of the photoanode (SnO2 sensitized with CdS/CdSe QDs) was analyzed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and Raman spectroscopy were used to examine the composition and structure of SnO2 with and without F-h-BN. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were acquired using a VG Scientific Escalab 220i-XL system, equipped with an aluminum monochromatic source of 1486.6 eV energy, and CasaXPS software, for the elemental and bonding analysis of SnO2 with and without F-h-BN. Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) were used to study the band alignment of the photoanode.


PEC measurements. 
The PEC configuration system consists of a three-electrode cell, in which the QD sensitized SnO2 heterostructure with and without F-h-BN constitutes the working electrode. Pt was used as a counter electrode. Saturated Ag/AgCl was used as a reference electrode. The electrolyte was composed of 0.25 M Na2S·9H2O and 0.35 M Na2SO3 with pH ∼ 13, acting as a hole scavenger. The electrolyte was bubbled with N2 for 1 h to remove dissolved oxygen before using it. All photoanode samples were covered with epoxy resin, to obtain a final active surface area between 0.15 and 0.2 cm2. The potential measured with respect to Ag/AgCl is converted to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) using eqn (1). VRHE = VAg/AgCl + 0.197 + pH × (0.059)(1)
We used a class AAA Sun simulator (model SLB-300A by Sciencetech Inc.) equipped with a 300 W xenon arc lamp as a light source, with an AM 1.5G filter under one sun illumination. The light intensity was calibrated before each measurement, with the power meter adjusted to 100 W cm−2. The measurements were carried out under dark conditions, continuous illumination, and chopped illumination.
The wavelength-dependent incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was calculated according to the equation:28  where J represents the photocurrent density (mA cm−2), λ is the wavelength of the incident light (nm), and I is the intensity of the incident light (mW cm−2).


Carrier dynamics. 
Transient photoluminescence (PL) decay was used to measure the electron transfer rate for the SnO2 and F-h-BN with SnO2 photoanodes, coupled with colloidal CdSe QDs, under the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) mode with a 444 nm laser. We used a ZrO2/QD film for benchmarking, as in this case the energy levels do not favour electron transfer from the QDs to ZrO2. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out under dark conditions, for SnO2 with and without F-h-BN, by using a SOLARTRON 1260 A Impedance/Gain-Phase Analyzer, with a bias voltage of 900 mV. The tests were performed over a frequency range of 10 mHz and 300 kHz, and the AC signal was 10 mV in amplitude. All the impedance measurements were analyzed using an appropriate equivalent circuit model with Z-View software (v3.5, Scribner Associate, Inc.).

3. Results and discussion
3.1. Structural characterization of F-h-BN

Fig. 1 displays high-resolution images of the as-synthesized 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes acquired by TEM. In particular, Fig. 1(a) and (b) show the stacking of 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes, which has a distorted hexagonal shape with average lateral dimensions between 128 ± 2 nm and 167 ± 2 nm. Fig. 1(c) and (d) display atomic resolution images of 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes. The lattice spacing is ∼3.33 Å, which corresponds to the (002) plane of the hexagonal phase of BN (JCPDS file no. 00-034-0421). The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of F-h-BN nanoflakes is shown in Fig. 1(e). The calculated lattice distances for F-h-BN nanoflakes, from the SAED pattern, are indexed to the (002), (102), (100) (110), (112), and (106) planes of the hexagonal phase of BN (JCPDS file no. 00-034-0421). This confirms the hexagonal phase structure of the as-synthesized F-h-BN nanoflakes. Fig. 1(f) displays the EDS of the selected area of F-h-BN nanoflakes and confirms the presence of B and N with additional S peaks from the functional MSA group.
 Fig. 1  Structural characterization of the as-synthesized F-h-BN nanoflakes: (a) and (b) TEM images showing the stacking density of the 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes; (c) and (d) high-resolution TEM showing the atomic resolution and interplanar spacing. (e) SAED pattern. (f) Elemental analysis by EDS. 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns acquired from F-h-BN nanoflakes deposited on a glass substrate are shown in Fig. S1(a).† The main diffraction peak of F-h-BN is at 26.5°, which corresponds to the (002) plane of the hexagonal phase of BN. The peak at 55.2° corresponds to the (004) plane of BN.29
Fig. S1(b) shows the FTIR spectra of the as-synthesized F-h-BN nanoflakes. The IR peak observed at 767 cm−1 is assigned to B–N stretching (in-plane ring vibration). The high-intensity band at 900 cm−1 in F-h-BN is assigned to the bending of C–H bonds. The broad peak found at 1730 cm−1 corresponds to the stretching vibrations of CN and CO bending of MSA occurring in the F-h-BN structure.30 The peaks observed at 2848 and 2920 cm−1 correspond to the O–H groups of F-h-BN. Fig. S1(c)† shows the Raman spectra of F-h-BN nanoflakes. The G band of the F-h-BN nanoflakes is located at 1368.1 cm−1, which confirms that F-h-BN nanoflakes are composed of 2–4 layers.31 In addition, there are two small peaks observed at 1429 cm−1 and 1468 cm−1, which correspond to the sulfonic acid group of MSA, confirming the functionalization of h-BN nanoflakes.32
3.2. Structural and morphological characterization of the SnO2/F-h-BN anode
A homogeneous suspension of 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes in IPA was prepared by ultra-sonicating for three hours. Subsequently, this suspension was spin-coated onto the SnO2 mesoporous film under ambient conditions (see more details in the Experimental section) to reduce the carrier recombination at the SnO2/QDs/electrolyte interface. SEM imaging was used to identify the presence of 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes on the SnO2 mesoporous film. As a reference, SEM images of the bare SnO2 mesoporous film were also recorded. Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the SEM of bare SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous films deposited on FTO. It is difficult to distinguish the presence of F-h-BN nanoflakes in the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film due to the ultra-thin nature of F-h-BN nanoflakes and because the quantity is smaller than the detection limit of the SEM. SEM imaging was used to investigate the morphology of the SnO2 film, as shown in Fig. S2.† The SnO2 mesoporous film consists of small-sized nanoparticles (60 nm) [Fig. S2(a)†]. The porosity of the structure is shown at lower magnification in Fig. S2(b) and (c).† Highly porous films are required to load a higher amount of QDs, obtain better electrolyte penetration for efficient hole transport, and enhance the kinetics. Furthermore, to reduce the back-electron transfer from the FTO to the electrolyte, a compact SnO2 blocking layer was deposited on FTO glass via spin coating. Fig. S2(d)–(f)† show top and cross-sectional SEM images of a compact SnO2 blocking layer. The average thickness of the SnO2 blocking layer is within the 500–600 nm range.
 Fig. 2  Structural characterization. SEM image of the (a) SnO2 mesoporous film and (b) SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film. The insets show the corresponding mesoporous film at higher magnification. (c) Comparison of the UV-visible absorption spectra of SnO2 (blue color line) and SnO2/F-h-BN (red color line) mesoporous films. (d) Raman spectra of SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN; the image on the right highlights the F-h-BN peak. 

Fig. 2(c) displays the absorption spectra acquired from the bare SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous films deposited on FTO. Spin coating of F-h-BN over the SnO2 nanoparticle mesoporous film does not affect the absorption spectrum of SnO2, indicating that the F-h-BN nanoflakes cannot absorb the additional photons in the visible region or NIR region (Eg = 5.9 eV).19
To verify the presence of F-h-BN nanoflakes, we measured the Raman spectrum of bare SnO2 and the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film. Fig. 2(d) displays the systematic comparison of the Raman measurement of bare SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN nanoparticle mesoporous films. Both bare SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous films exhibit three prominent Raman peaks located at 474, 632, and 774 cm−1, corresponding to the Eg, A1g, and B2g modes, respectively. These Raman peaks confirm the rutile phase of SnO2.33,34 In addition to these peaks, there is an additional peak located at 1367 cm−1 in the case of the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film, which is mainly attributed to 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes. This confirms the presence of highly crystalline 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes with a hexagonal structure on the SnO2 nanoparticle mesoporous film.35
We obtained FTIR spectra and XRD patterns for the F-h-BN nanoflakes on the SnO2 photoanode, for further verification of the bonding (Fig. 3(a) and (b)). Fig. 3(a) shows the FTIR spectrum of the SnO2 and SnO2–F-h-BN mesoporous films. The transmittance peaks observed at 770 cm−1 in SnO2 and 730 cm−1 in SnO2/F-h-BN can be assigned to the A2u LO modes, i.e. the lattice mode due to SnO2.34 The peaks in the FTIR pattern at about 3100–3340 cm−1 are related to the stretching vibrations of water molecules or hydroxide groups absorbed at the surface of SnO2 and F-h-BN.36 The infrared peak (IR) observed around 2500 cm−1 in the FTIR spectra of SnO2/F-h-BN is due to S–H stretching and the broad peak at 1718 cm−1 corresponds to the stretching vibrations of CN and C–H bending of MSA occurring in the F-h-BN structure. In the spectrum acquired from SnO2/F-h-BN, IR peaks are observed at 1390 and 802 cm−1, assigned to B–N stretching (in-plane ring vibration) and B–N bending (out of plane vibration), respectively.24 In addition, due to the presence of sulfonic acid groups in SnO2/F-h-BN, the latter exhibited peaks at 1170 and 1045 cm−1, corresponding to the stretching vibration of SO groups of MSA. These newly appeared peaks in the FTIR spectrum of SnO2/F-h-BN confirm the presence of F-h-BN in the structure of SnO2 mesoporous films. Fig. 3(b) displays the crystalline phase comparison of the XRD peaks of SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN composite structures. The peaks of SnO2 at 2θ angles of 26.6°, 33.8°, 37.9°, 51.8°, 54.7°, 57.7°, 61.9°, 65.9°, 71.3°, and 78.7° associated with (110), (101), (200), (211), (220), (002), (310), (301), (202), (321) planes, respectively, confirm that SnO2 has a tetragonal structure (JCPDS card no. 41-1445). With the addition of F-h-BN, the diffraction peak at 26.6° associated with the (110) plane of SnO2 is slightly left-shifted by 0.1° (left plot of Fig. 3(b)), probably due to overlap with the h-BN peak at 26.6° associated with the (002) plane.37 The same case occurs at a diffraction peak located at 78.7° associated with the (321) plane of SnO2 due to overlap with the h-BN peak at 76° associated with the (110) plane38 (right plot of Fig. 3(b)). Fig. 3(c)–(h) display the elemental mapping of the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film deposited on the FTO glass substrate. Fig. 3(c) shows the selected area cross-sectional SEM image of the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film (shown in the green rectangular area). Fig. 3(d)–(h) confirm the presence of Sn, O, N, B, and Si (from the FTO glass) in the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous hybrid film. These elements are homogeneously distributed across the whole selected area, confirming the conformal coverage of SnO2 nanoparticles by F-h-BN nanoflakes.
 Fig. 3  Structural characterization of SnO2 (blue) and SnO2/F-h-BN (red) mesoporous films: (a) FTIR; (b) XRD; (c) EDS elemental mapping of the selected area of SnO2/F-h-BN; (d) Sn; (e) O; (f) N; (g) B; (h) Si. 
XPS was performed to analyze the surface composition of the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film photoanode. Fig. 4(a) displays full survey spectra acquired from the SnO2/F-h-BN hybrid mesoporous films, which confirm the presence of Sn, O, B, N, and S. The high-resolution spectrum of Sn 3d consists of two peaks located at 486.5 and 494.4 eV [Fig. 4(b)],38 while O 1s is located at 530.5 eV and 531.7 eV [Fig. 4(c)].38Fig. 4(d) shows the main peak for N 1s at a binding energy of 397.8 eV, which is attributed to N–B bonding, in agreement with Fig. 4(e), where the main peak of B 1s at a binding energy of 190.2 eV corresponds to B–N bonding.39,40 The additional peaks in N 1s and B 1s may be attributed to high-density defects at the boundaries.41 Two types of defects can occur: (i) interstitial defect in the form of N–N with 399.1 eV binding energy, as shown in Fig. 4(e); (ii) substitution defect of a nitrogen atom with oxygen, because of the closer electronegativity between oxygen and nitrogen atoms40 as shown in Fig. 4(e) at 401.3 eV for N–O bonding.42 In oxidized BN, B–O bonding shows a binding energy peak at 191.6 eV43 as shown in Fig. 4(d). The presence of S 2p and 3s, in the survey spectrum, is due to using MSA for enhancing the exfoliation of BN nanoflakes in F-h-BN.
 Fig. 4  XPS spectra acquired from the SnO2/F-h-BN photoanode: (a) a full survey scan; (b) Sn 3d; (c) O 1s; (d) N 1s; (e) B 1s. AFM analysis: (f) and (g) AFM scan of spin-coated F-h-BN nanoflakes on a silicon substrate; (h) 3D scan of the F-h-BN nanoflake. 

Fig. 4(f)–(h) display the AFM scan of F-h-BN nanoflakes spin-coated on a silicon substrate. The difference in the optical contrast of the AFM scan image is attributed to the different layers of F-h-BN nanoflakes.
AFM results confirm that there are 2–4 layers of nanoflakes with an average thickness of each nanoflake in the few nanometer range [Fig. 4(f) and (g)]. The detailed analysis to estimate the thickness of each flake of F-h-BN nanoflakes observed in the 3D profile scan is reported in Fig. S3 and Table S1.† The three-dimensional (3D) scan profile of F-h-BN is shown in Fig. 4(h). The functionalized layer of h-BN with large molecules of MSA can be observed on the surface of few-layered structured h-BN. This is confirmed from the optical contrast in the top layered nanoflakes compared to other layers of h-BN [Fig. 4(h)].
3.3. QD deposition on the SnO2–F-h-BN anode
To broaden the light-harvesting range, CdS–CdSe cascade QDs were deposited onto the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film via the SILAR approach. In this process, the first five SILAR cycles of CdS QDs were performed, followed by three cycles of CdSe QDs (see more details in the Experimental section). The presence and homogeneous distribution of CdS–CdSe cascade QDs inside the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film was confirmed by EDS elemental mapping. Fig. 5 represents the EDS chemical composition, obtained through elemental mapping of the cross-section of the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film sensitized with CdS–CdSe QDs. The elemental mapping of the selected cross-sectional area (shown in the green rectangles) of the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film deposited on the FTO glass substrate is shown in Fig. 5(a). The CdS–CdSe QDs were homogeneously distributed inside the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film. The elemental mapping confirms the presence of elemental Sn, Ti, O, Cd, S, Se, and Si in the CdS–CdSe QD sensitized SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film [Fig. 5(c)]. XRD patterns and XPS spectra were acquired to confirm the successful deposition of CdS QDs on the SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film. Fig. 5(d) displays the XRD of SnO2/F-h-BN/CdS QDs. The XRD patterns originating from pristine SnO2 mesoporous films were discussed previously [Fig. 3(b)]. There is an additional peak at 43.9° in the SnO2/F-h-BN/CdS QD photoanode, which corresponds to the (220) plane of CdS.44 However, two additional peaks at 26.5° and 52.1° (corresponding to the (111) and (311) planes of CdS) overlap with the SnO2 peaks located at 26.6° and 51.8°, associated with the (110) and (211) planes of SnO2, respectively [Fig. 5(d)]. An XPS survey scan, presented in Fig. 5(e), was acquired to analyze the surface composition of SnO2/F-h-BN, treated with TiCl4, and sensitized with CdS QDs. All elements, including Sn, Ti, O, Cd, S, B, N, and C are identified in the survey scan. The high-resolution scans for Sn, O, B, and N are displayed in Fig. 4(b)–(e). The high-resolution scan for Cd 3p consists of two peaks of binding energy 404.8 eV and 411.5 eV, respectively [Fig. 4(f)]. Similarly, two peaks are observed for the S 2p spectrum located at 161.2 eV and 162.1 eV [Fig. 4(g)]. These Cd 3p and S 2p peaks confirm the successful deposition of CdS QDs. In addition, the high-resolution spectrum of Ti 2p consists of two peaks of binding energy 458.6 eV and 464.1 eV, which confirm the deposition of Ti through the TiCl4 treatment. Finally, the mesoporous photoanode before (white color) and after sensitization with QDs (yellow color) is presented in Fig. S4.† Visual inspection confirms the deposition of CdS QDs. Thus, EDS, XRD, and XPS analysis, as well as visual inspection, confirm the successful electrochemical deposition of CdS QDs by SILAR.
 Fig. 5  EDS chemical composition analysis of the SnO2/TiO2/CdS–CdSe/ZnS photoanode: (a) cross-sectional SEM image of the photoanode; (b) elemental mapping of the elements that exist in the photoanode: (c) Sn, Ti, O, Si, Cd, S, Se, and Zn; (d) XRD patterns acquired from the SnO2/F-h-BN/CdS QD photoanode. XPS spectra acquired from the SnO2/TiO2/F-h-BN/CdS QD photoanode: (e) a full survey scan; (f) Cd 3d; (g) S 2p; (h) Ti 2p. 

PEC performance. 
The PEC performance was optimized through different phases: (i) initially, by investigating the effect of F-h-BN on a 2-layer SnO2 device with CdS QDs, (ii) secondly, the effect of the sensitizer, by changing from CdS QDs to CdS–CdSe core–shell QDs, and (iii) finally, the effect of thickness variation and incorporation of MWCNTs on the device performance and stability.
PEC cell measurements were carried out under dark, chopped and continuous illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) conditions by using a typical three-electrode configuration cell with the as-designed photoanodes as the working electrode, Ag/AgCl (saturated with KCl) as the reference electrode, and Pt as the counter electrode.

Fig. 6(b) and (c) display the current density vs. potential (vs. RHE) curves of the reference sample and the one modified with F-h-BN respectively. The saturated photocurrent density of the PEC device based on SnO2/F-h-BN/CdS at 1.0 V vs. RHE shows a significant improvement from 2.54 mA cm−2 to 4.02 mA cm−2, which is 60% higher than that of the PEC device based on SnO2/CdS. This improvement made by F-h-BN nanoflakes, where they act as an energy barrier, prevents electron recombination with the oxidized species in the electrolyte. In addition, the F-h-BN nanoflakes improve the electron transfer, with a higher injection rate, due to a shift in the electronic structure, as discussed in the Carrier dynamics section. Transient open-circuit voltage (Voc) decay measurement [Fig. 6(d)] and comparative lifetime calculation [Fig. 6(e)] were carried out to test our hypothesis. Measuring the Voc decay is a consolidated approach to evaluate the photoelectron lifetime, which in turn indicates the recombination rate of the photoexcited electrons.45 When the samples are illuminated, the electrons accumulate at the interface between the semiconductor and the electrolyte. After turning off the illumination, the recombination process occurs, which is presented as the decay of the open circuit potential [Fig. 6(d)]. A slower decay rate indicates a lower recombination rate and vice versa. Using the equation derived by Bisquert,46 we can determine the lifetime of the photogenerated electrons: τ = −kBT/e × (dVoc/dt)−1(2)where τ is the photoelectron lifetime, kB is the Boltzmann constant = 1.381 × 10−23 J K−1, T is the temperature in K, e = −1.602 × 10−19 C, and dVoc/dt is the first derivative of the open-circuit voltage with respect to time.
 Fig. 6  (a) A schematic representation of the PEC device and carrier dynamics. PEC performance under dark, light and chop conditions for the two layered SnO2/CdS/ZnS photoanode: (b) without F-h-BN; (c) with F-h-BN. Transient photovoltage decay measurement of PEC devices based on SnO2/CdS/ZnS and SnO2 + F-h-BN/CdS/ZnS photoanodes: (d) open circuit voltage decay. (e) Electron lifetime calculated from open circuit voltage decay. 
As shown in Fig. 6(e), at the same voltage, the lifetime of SnO2/F-h-BN is higher than that of the SnO2 sample. These data confirm that the addition of F-h-BN nanoflakes improves the recombination resistance, acting as a charge barrier, and improves the lifetime of the photogenerated charge carriers.
To optimize the amount of F-h-BN solution and CdS QD deposition through SILAR cycles, PEC devices were fabricated with a different amount of F-h-BN and CdS QDs SILAR cycles and their performance was recorded under identical conditions. First, the amount of F-h-BN solution was changed to 50, 100, and 200 μl, fixing 7 SILAR cycles of CdS QDs deposition. The effect of changing the amount of F-h-BN solution in the photoanode on the device performance is presented in Fig. S5.† The saturated photocurrent density of the PEC device with 50 μl of F-h-BN is 2.88 mA cm−2, while with 100 μl it is 4.02 mA cm−2, and for 200 μl it is 3.63 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. RHE. This highlights that as the amount of F-h-BN increases from 50 to 100 μl, the PEC performance increases due to better passivation of the surface traps of the SnO2 photoanode. However, when further increasing the amount of F-h-BN from 100 to 200 μl, the performance decreases because the stacking of F-h-BN nanoflakes prevents the efficient injection of the photogenerated electrons, from the QDs to the electron transport layer, as the thicker F-h-BN layers reduce the tunneling effect.
Similarly, PEC devices were fabricated using photoanodes with different amounts of CdS QDs deposited by changing the number of SILAR cycles from 5 to 7 to 9, at a fixed amount of F-h-BN (i.e. 100 μl). Fig. S6† shows the effect of changing the amount of CdS QDs on the PEC performance. The saturated photocurrent density of the photoanode with 5 cycles of CdS QDs is 2.63 mA cm−2, while with 7 cycles of CdS QDs it is 4.02 mA cm−2, and for 9 cycles of CdS QDs it is 3.3 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. RHE. This demonstrates that when the amount of QD deposition increases (5 to 7 cycles), light absorption increases, thereby promoting excitation processes. However, when it increases over a certain limit (7 to 9 cycles), the number of traps increases in the photoanode and the recombination process accelerates, leading to an overall degradation of device performance.
Thus, the best performing PEC devices were fabricated with photoanodes made of 7 SILAR cycles of CdS QD deposition and 100 μl amount of F-h-BN nanoflake surface passivation.
In the second phase optimization, we enhance the performance of the PEC device by changing the sensitizers from CdS QDs to cascade CdS–CdSe QDs. In the cascade CdS–CdSe QD architecture, CdSe QDs were grown over the previously deposited CdS QD sensitized SnO2 mesoporous photoanodes by SILAR (see more details in the Experimental Section). These panchromatic CdS–CdSe QDs offer effective light absorption in a broader range and excellent band alignment between CdS and CdSe that enable efficient electron injection from QDs to SnO2.47Fig. 7(a) and (b) show the current density vs. potential (vs. RHE) curves of the PEC devices based on the SnO2/CdS–CdSe photoanodes without and with F-h-BN, respectively. The saturated photocurrent density of the reference sample at 1.0 V vs. RHE is 5.4 mA cm−2 with an increase of 12% using F-h-BN to reach 6.05 mA cm−2. The transient Voc decay and lifetime measurements are shown in Fig. 7(d) and (e), confirming the same results as discussed before with only CdS QDs. Continuous illumination of the samples over 4 hours at a constant voltage of 0.9 V vs. RHE was performed to study the stability of the device. As shown in Fig. 7(c), the device with F-h-BN maintains 87% of the initial photocurrent density after 4 hours of continuous illumination, with a 13.5% improvement in stability compared to the reference sample, which maintains 73.5% of the initial photocurrent density. The use of three layers instead of two layers of SnO2/F-h-BN significantly improves the device stability up to 98% [Fig. 7(c)].
 Fig. 7  PEC performance of the two-layered SnO2/CdS–CdSe/ZnS photoanode. (a) Dark, light, and chop performance of the photoanode without F-h-BN. (b) Dark, light, and chop performance of the photoanode with F-h-BN. (c) Stability test for PEC devices based on SnO2, SnO2 with F-h-BN (two layers), and SnO2/F-h-BN (three layers) sensitized with cascade CdS–CdSe QDs. Transient photovoltage decay measurement comparison of PEC devices with and without F-h-BN: (d) open circuit voltage. (e) Electron lifetime. 
We also investigated the effect of varying the thickness of the SnO2 mesoporous film on the performance of the PEC device, using cascade CdS–CdSe QDs. Fig. S7† displays the current density vs. potential (vs. RHE) curves of PEC devices based on one, two, and three layers of the SnO2 mesoporous film under dark, chopped, and continuous illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) conditions. At 1.0 V vs. RHE, the current density of one-layer SnO2 is 3.6 mA cm−2 [Fig. S7(a)†], while for two layers it is 6.05 mA cm−2 [Fig. S7(b)†] and for three layers it is 5.7 mA cm−2 [Fig. S7(c)†]. The device performance improves with the increase in the SnO2 photoanode thickness from one layer to two layers, and then decreases with a further increase of the SnO2 photoanode thickness from two to three layers. This is mainly attributed to the fact that the amount of QD loading increases with the increase of SnO2 photoanode thickness, which eventually increases light absorption and hence improves device performance. However, in the case of photoanodes made of three layers of SnO2, the amount of QD loading increases compared to the case of two layers, while at the same time, the lifetime of the photo-injected electron decreases, as it takes more time to reach the back contact, so that eventually the charge collection decreases leading to the highest probability of carrier recombination, thereby degrading device performance.48,49
In addition, we studied the stability of PEC devices based on SnO2 photoanodes of different thicknesses. Fig. S7(d)† displays the comparison of the normalized current density of the corresponding PEC devices recorded as a function of time, under continuous one Sun illumination for 2 hours at 0.9 V vs. RHE. The stability of the devices increases when increasing the number of SnO2 layers in the photoanode. This trend of long-term operational stability of the PEC device is affected by the rate of photo-corrosion, which depends on the kinetics of the electrolyte as a hole scavenger. The photo-corrosion process depends on the number of photogenerated holes. The latter are a strong oxidant, capable of oxidizing the QDs, thereby degrading the operational stability of QD-based PEC devices. Due to the wide bandgap of SnO2 (Eg = 3.6–3.8 eV), it mostly absorbs UV photons and creates a smaller number of holes compared to its counterparts [e.g. TiO2 and ZnO2 (Eg 3.2 eV)], which reduces the rate of degradation of QDs under one sun illumination.17 With the increase in the thickness of the SnO2 mesoporous film (three layers), the higher number of UV photons absorbed reduces the rate of degradation of QDs compared to thin layer SnO2 photoanodes (one layer and two layers). In addition, in the case of three-layer SnO2 photoanodes, the upright contact between the electrolyte and photoanode improves the kinetics of the hole scavenger process, reducing the effect of photo-corrosion, and enhances the stability of the device.
Finally, we further improved device performance by incorporating MWCNTs into the photoanode. We selected the PEC device with the best stability (three layers of the SnO2 mesoporous film) as a reference. Then we improved the charge transport of the SnO2 mesoporous film based photoanode using an optimized amount of (0.015 wt%) MWCNTs to enhance performance.23 Fig. S8(a)–(c)† show the performance of SnO2/F-h-BN and SnO2/MWCNT/F-h-BN, and the difference between them, respectively. The performance increases by 11.75%, using SnO2/MWCNT/F-h-BN with a photocurrent density of 6.37 mA cm−2, compared to the sample without MWCNTs with 5.7 mA cm−2, using the same CdS–CdSe QDs. The lifetime increases with MWCNTs compared to that without them, as shown in Fig. S8(d) and (e).† The stability of the PEC devices with and without MWCNTs is comparable, as shown in Fig. S9(f).† Previous studies demonstrated that MWCNTs partially act as a UV blocking agent and enhance the long-term stability of PEC devices based on UV sensitive semiconductor metal oxide photoanodes (e.g. TiO2 or ZnO).23 On the other hand, SnO2 is more stable under UV light irradiation due to its wide bandgap (Eg = 3.6–3.8 eV) and produces a smaller number of holes compared to other semiconductor metal oxides (e.g. TiO2 or ZnO), making optoelectronic devices based on SnO2 stable under UV light. In addition, the amount of MWCNTs in the SnO2 mesoporous film is very small (0.015 wt%). On this basis, we believe that the partial blocking of UV photons of MWCNTs does not affect the long-term stability of PEC devices based on SnO2 photoanodes.
The IPCE measurements for PEC devices based on SnO2 mesoporous films, with and without F-h-BN, sensitized with CdS/CdSe QDs were carried out under one sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100mWcm−2). Fig. S9† shows the comparison of the IPCE values of PEC devices made of SnO2/F-h-BN/CdS–CdSe QDs and SnO2/CdS–CdSe QDs calculated at 1.0 V vs. RHE. Over the whole visible spectrum (350–800 nm), the calculated IPCE values of the PEC device based on SnO2/F-h-BN/CdS–CdSe QDs are higher than that of PEC devices made with SnO2/CdS–CdSe QDs. This trend of IPCE values shows an improvement in the efficiency at different wavelengths, which is consistent with the trend of current density vs. potential (V vs. RHE) of the corresponding PEC devices.
In addition, PEC devices were fabricated by replacing the SnO2 mesoporous electron transport layer with TiO2 to highlight the performance of SnO2 in photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation. Fig. S10† displays the comparison of the photocurrent density and long-term operational stability of PEC devices based on TiO2 and SnO2 with and without F-h-BN, sensitized with CdS/CdSe QDs. The results show that PEC devices based on TiO2 exhibit a higher saturated current density both with F-h-BN (8.1 mA cm−2) and without F-h-BN (7.28 mA cm−2) compared to PEC devices based on SnO2 with F-h-BN (6.38 mA cm−2) and without F-h-BN (5.75 mA cm−2) [Fig. S10(a)†]. However, the long-term stability of the device based on SnO2/F-h-BN is higher (by ∼11%) than that of the device based on SnO2, and also ∼16% and ∼20% higher than that of the device based on TiO2/F-h-BN and TiO2, respectively [Fig. S10(b)†]. This lower value of the saturated photocurrent density of PEC devices made with SnO2 is due to the higher non-radiative carrier recombination at the SnO2/electrolyte interface compared to the TiO2/electrolyte interface. This non-radiative carrier recombination process depends on the relative position of the conduction band edge of the metal oxide semiconductor and the redox potential value of the electrolyte. SnO2 has a more negative conduction band edge as compared to TiO2, which makes the difference between the conduction band edge of the metal oxide semiconductor and the redox potential of the electrolyte smaller in the case of SnO2 compared to TiO2. Because of this smaller difference, the photo-injected electrons in the conduction band of SnO2 are more likely to recombine with the oxidized species in the electrolyte and hence, reduce the saturated photocurrent density of the device based on SnO2. On the other hand, in the case of long-term stability, a wider bandgap (3.6–3.8 eV) of SnO2 as compared to TiO2 (3.0–3.2 eV) creates a smaller number of photo-generated holes that reduce the photo-corrosion process, leading to a more stable device based on SnO2, compared to the device based on TiO2 [Fig. S10(b)†].

3.4. Carrier dynamics
To understand the carrier dynamics of the photoanode structure with and without F-h-BN, we carried out PL electron lifetime decay and EIS measurements.
For PL measurements, the SnO2 mesoporous photoanodes with and without F-h-BN were sensitized with colloidal CdSe QDs. The CdSe QD sensitized ZrO2 photoanode was used as a reference. When the photoanode is illuminated, electrons in the QDs are photoexcited from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB). These electrons in the CB of QDs either have the possibility to recombine with holes in the VB of QDs or can be injected into the CB of SnO2. The efficient carrier transfer of the photogenerated electrons in the QDs to the CB of the metal oxide anode depends on the electronic band alignment of the CB edge of the metal oxide and CB edge of the QDs. Thus, in the case of ZrO2, there is no electron injection caused by unfavorable band-alignment and all the photogenerated electrons in the CB of QDs recombine with the holes in the VB of the QDs. The PL decay of the QDs was measured under a pulsed laser of 444 nm. All the recorded curves were fitted using exponential decay. The average lifetime (〈τ〉) was extracted by using the following equation: (3)where ai represents the fitting coefficients of the PL decay and τi represents the characteristic lifetimes, respectively.
As we already demonstrated, there is no energy transfer from the QDs to the metal oxide, where there is no spectral overlap between the absorption of the metal oxide and the PL of the anchored QDs.27,50

Fig. 8(a) displays the systematic comparison of the PL decay curves of ZrO2/QDs and SnO2/F-h-BN/QDs. The PL decay of SnO2/F-h-BN/QDs is faster than that of ZrO2/QDs due to differences in the band alignment between the ZrO2, SnO2/F-h-BN, and QDs. The faster PL decay demonstrates that the photogenerated electrons in the CB of QDs are successfully injected to the CB of SnO2/F-h-BN, as the CB of SnO2 with F-h-BN has a lower potential than that of the QDs and proper alignment of the band structure. To investigate the effect of the F-h-BN nanoflake coating over the SnO2, PL decay rates of SnO2/F-h-BN/QDs and SnO2/QDs were recorded under identical conditions. The PL decay rate of SnO2/F-h-BN/QDs is faster than that of SnO2/QDs [Fig. 8(b)]. The calculated average electron lifetime of SnO2/F-h-BN/QDs is 13.0 ± 0.8 ns, whereas for SnO2/QDs it is 52.00 ± 0.35 ns. This difference could be due to the screening of surface traps of SnO2 by surface passivation with F-h-BN nanoflakes, and a slightly negative shift in the CB minimum compared to bare SnO2 (confirmed by UPS measurements shown in Fig. S11†).
 Fig. 8  Carrier dynamics of SnO2 and SnO2 with F-h-BN. (a) PL of ZrO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN, (b) PL of SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN, (c) electric circuit used to stimulate the impedance spectra of the photoanode and (d) EIS results for SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN: the original data and their fit. M–S plot for the SnO2 photoanode with and without F-h-BN and sensitized with: (e) CdS QDs; (f) CdS/CdSe QDs. 
In addition, we also calculated the electron transfer rates (Ket) of QDs coupled with SnO2/F-h-BN and SnO2 from the difference in the electron lifetime values using the following equation: (4)where 〈τ〉 (SnO2/F-h-BN)/QDs and 〈τ〉 ZrO2/QDs are the average lifetimes of the QDs with SnO2/F-h-BN and ZrO2, respectively. The calculated electron transfer rate for SnO2/F-h-BN/QDs (Ket = 5.5 ± 0.2 × 107 s−1) is faster than that of SnO2/QDs (0.3 ± 0.04 × 107 s−1). This confirms that electron transfer from the QDs to SnO2/F-h-BN is enhanced compared to that of SnO2 alone.
EIS is a useful technique to characterize charge transport, charge trapping inside the metal oxide, and charge transfer at the interface between the metal oxide and electrolyte. During measurements, an AC sinusoidal bias potential of 10 mV is applied, with a varying frequency between 10 mHz and 300 kHz, and the response of the electrode is measured.51 The SnO2 and SnO2 with F-h-BN, without QDs, and under dark conditions were used to investigate the charge dynamics in the system. The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 8(c); R1 represents the ohmic resistance of FTO, R2 is the resistance of the semiconductor, CPE1 is used to represent the space charge capacitance, R3 is the semiconductor/electrolyte charge transfer resistance, CPE2 is used to represent Helmholtz capacitance, and Ws1 is the Warburg diffusion that occurs between the semiconductor and electrolyte at the interface.52 CPE1 and CPE2 are the constant phase elements that are used to represent the non-ideal behavior of the space charge and Helmholtz capacitances. To calculate the real capacitance, we use the following eqn (5). (5)where Ri is the charge transfer resistance, Qi is the constant phase element of each capacitance CPEx-T and n is the similarity between the constant phase element of each capacitance CPE-P and a real capacitor. The results and fitted curves are shown in Fig. 8(d) and the data for each element are presented in Table S2.† The effect of adding F-h-BN on SnO2 shows an increase in charge transfer and diffusion resistance at the semiconductor/electrolyte interfaces as expected, where the 2D material works as an energy barrier that prevents the transfer of electrons between the semiconductor and the electrolyte. Moreover, the effect of F-h-BN passivates the semiconductor. From the semiconductor charge transport resistance, F-h-BN shows lower values compared with SnO2 only, which indicates lower trap densities, due to the screening of traps by F-h-BN.
To understand the difference in the onset potential of different devices, Mott–Schottky plots (M–S plots) of PEC devices based on SnO2 photoanodes with and without F-h-BN, and sensitized with CdS QDs and CdS–CdSe QDs were recorded and are shown in Fig. 8(e) and (f), respectively. The onset potentials depend on the flat band potential values. The results of the M–S plots demonstrate that the flat band potential is different from one sample to another, which is attributed to the difference in the band structure of SnO2 with and without F-h-BN sensitized CdS QDs and CdS–CdSe QDs. Accordingly, the difference in the onset potential values is observed for PEC devices made of SnO2 photoanodes with or without the F-h-BN nanoflakes or by changing the QDs from CdS to CdSe [Table S3†].
As discussed previously concerning PL measurements, the band alignment is an essential factor that affects charge injection efficiency. The position of VB maximum, CB minimum, and the bandgap was identified using UV-Vis and UPS as shown in Fig. S11.† The bandgap values of SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN were calculated from their absorption spectra by using the classical Tauc plots. The bandgap of SnO2 is found to have increased from 3.8 eV to 3.89 eV when modified with F-h-BN, as shown in Fig. S11(a).† UPS with He I radiation (21.22 eV) was used to estimate the Fermi level and VB maximum level energy of SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN. The Fermi level and VB maximum estimated from the full UPS spectra of SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN are shown in Fig. S11(d).† Fig. S11(c) and (e)† display the estimation of the Fermi level and VB maximum of SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN, respectively. The CB minimum can be calculated from the estimated bandgap and VB maximum values. These computed values demonstrate that the CB minimum of F-h-BN treated SnO2 is slightly (in the range of eV) negatively shifted compared to that of bare SnO2. The overall band structure of SnO2/F-h-BN and SnO2 sensitized with cascade CdS–CdSe QDs and its calculation process is presented in the ESI and Fig. S11(b).† The slight negative shift in the CB minimum of SnO2/F-h-BN with respect to SnO2 without F-h-BN confirms the enhanced electron injection rate from the CB of photoexcited QDs to the CB of SnO2/F-h-BN compared to that of bare SnO2, respectively. These findings support our conclusion from the performance and stability points of view, with a higher injection rate and a lower rate of hole generation, which oxidize the QDs, due to the higher bandgap with the modified SnO2 with F-h-BN.
4. Conclusions and prospects
In summary, we fabricated a heterojunction photoanode as a component in a PEC cell for hydrogen generation. The SnO2/F-h-BN composite photoanode exhibits a 60% higher performance compared to that of the reference SnO2 photoanode. To further improve the device performance, the QDs were optimized from CdS to CdS–CdSe. The performance increases from 2.54 mA cm−2 to 5.4 mA cm−2 for the bare sample and from 4.02 mA cm−2 to 6.05 mA cm−2 for F-h-BN with an operational stability of 87%, after four hours of continuous illumination. We highlight the effect of thickness on device performance using different layers of SnO2. The optimum performance was achieved with two layers, while the best stability was achieved with three layers that retain 98% of the initial value of photocurrent density after four hours of continuous one sun illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2). We further improved the device performance by using three layers of a SnO2 mesoporous film with MWCNTs, which increases the performance by 11.75% reaching 6.37 mA cm−2. We investigated the effect of 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes using PL decay, EIS, and UPS to better understand their carrier dynamics. The use of F-h-BN nanoflakes shows less recombination, acting as an energy barrier between the photoanode and the electrolyte. Moreover, the screening effect of the F-h-BN negatively shift the CB of SnO2, which favour the charge injection process. The results of this work provide a new way to engineer the interface of PEC devices as well as other optoelectronic devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the funding from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC Discovery Grants) and the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI) for infrastructure and its operating funds. F. R. acknowledges partial salary support and funding from the Canada Research Chairs program. O. A. acknowledges the UNESCO Chair in MATECSS for a PhD Excellence Scholarship. J. K. acknowledges support from the MITACS Elevate Postdoctoral Fellowship. G. S. S. acknowledges the UNESCO Chair in MATECSS for a PDF Excellence Scholarship and is grateful to the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. Y02006023607941). Z. W. was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (Project 2013CB933301) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project 51272038). Z. W is also grateful to the Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia for a Distinguished international Professor appointment.
References
M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332–337 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schlapbach and A. Züttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
X. Tong, Y. Zhou, L. Jin, K. Basu, R. Adhikari, G. S. Selopal, X. Tong, H. Zhao, S. Sun, A. Vomiero, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2017, 13, 441–449 CrossRef .

  (a) G. S. Selopal, H. Zhao, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908762 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Zhao and F. Rosei, Chem, 2017, 3, 229–258 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H. Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2010, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef .
A. W. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X. Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543–1547 CrossRef .
H. L. Feng, W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, L. B. Li, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14826–14832 RSC .
D. J. Ham, A. Phuruangrat, S. Thongtem and J. S. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 165, 365–369 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boudjemaa, S. Boumaza, M. Trari, R. Bouarab and A. Bouguelia, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4268–4274 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Selopal, H. Zhao, G. Liu, H. Zhang, X. Tong, K. Wang, J. Tang, X. Sun, S. Sun, F. Vidal and Y. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 377–388 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Gao, Z. Wu, W. Han, Y. Wang, W. Fu and E. Xie, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 318–327 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Jarzebski and J. P. Marton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 299–310 CrossRef .
B. R. Hyun, Y. W. Zhong, A. C. Bartnik, L. Sun, H. D. Abruna, F. W. Wise and F. N. Borrelli, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2206–2212 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kim and S. H. Shim, Appl. Phys. A, 2007, 88, 769–773 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Reddy, S. V. Manorama and A. R. Reddy, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 78, 239–245 CrossRef .
G. Shang, J. Wu, S. Tang, M. Huang, Z. Lan, Y. Li and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25335–25339 RSC .
K. Basu, H. Zhang, H. Zhao, S. Bhattacharya, F. Navarro-Pardo, P. K. Datta, L. Jin, S. Sun, F. Vetrone and F. Rosei, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15273–15284 RSC .
M. H. Tahersima and V. J. Sorger, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 344005 CrossRef .
M. Shanmugam, R. Jacobs-Gedrim, C. Durcan and B. Yu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11275–11282 RSC .
K. Zhang, Y. Feng, F. Wang, Z. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11992–12022 RSC .
L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson and A. H. Castro Neto, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1707–1710 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. S. Selopal, M. Mohammadnezhad, F. Navarro-Pardo, F. Vidal, H. Zhao, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 404–414 RSC ; 
  (b) K. T. Dembele, G. S. Selopal, C. Soldano, R. Nechache, J. C. Rimada, I. Concina and A. Vomiero, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14510–14517 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Coleman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 14–22 CrossRef .
J. Kaur, M. Gravagnuolo, P. Maddalena, C. Altucci and F. Gesuel, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 22400–22408 RSC .
A. Griffin, A. Harvey, B. Cunningham, D. Scullion, T. Tian, C. J. Shih, M. Gruening, J. F. Donegan, E. J. G. Santos, C. Backes and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1998–2005 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Selopal, H. Zhao, X. Tong, D. Benetti, F. Navarro-Pardo, Y. Zhou and F. Rosei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701468 CrossRef .

          R. Van de Kol and M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, Springer, New York, USA,  2012 Search PubMed .
S. Yuan, B. Touny, C. Journet and A. Brioude, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7838–7841 RSC .
S. Su, J. Li, L. Zhou, S. Wan, H. Bi, Q. Ma and L. Sun, J. Nano Res., 2017, 46, 73–81 CAS .
F. Xiao, S. Naficy, G. Casillas, M. H. Khan, T. Katkus, L. Jiang, H. K. Liu, H. J. Li and Z. G. Juang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7196–7203 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Zhong and S. F. Parker, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2015, 5, 181363 CrossRef .
S. H. Sun, G. W. Meng, G. X. Zhang, T. Gao, B. Y. Geng, L. D. Zhang and J. Zuo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 376, 103–107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kaur, J. Shah, R. K. Kotnala and K. C. Verma, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 5563–5570 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Gorbachev, I. Riaz, R. R. Nair, R. Jalil, L. Britnell, B. D. Belle and A. K. Geim, Small, 2011, 7, 465–468 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xi, D. Qian, X. Tang and C. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 108, 232–236 CrossRef CAS .
B. Matović, J. Luković, M. Nikolić, B. Babić, N. Stanković, B. Jokić and B. Jelenković, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 16655–16658 CrossRef .
F. Lu, X. Ji, Y. Yang, W. Deng and C. E. Banks, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18791–18793 RSC .
W. Lei, D. Portehault, R. Dimova and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7121–7127 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ci, L. Song, C. Jin, D. Jariwala, D. Wu, Y. Li and F. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 430–435 CrossRef CAS .
W. Orellana and H. Chacham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 125205 CrossRef .
H. Sediri, D. Pierucci, M. Hajlaoui, H. Henck, G. Patriarche, Y. J. Dappe and F. Sirotti, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–10 Search PubMed .
L. Lin, Y. Xu, S. Zhang, I. M. Ross, A. C. Ong and D. A. Allwood, Small, 2014, 10, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
I. O. Oladeji, L. Chow, J. R. Liu, W. K. Chu, A. N. P. Bustamante, C. Fredricksen and A. F. Schulte, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 359, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Duan, S. Zhou, Z. Chen, J. Luo, M. Zhang, F. Wang and C. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 1395–1403 RSC .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Seró, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 126, 13550–13559 CrossRef .
I. Concina, G. S. Selopal, R. Milan, G. Sberveglieri and A. Vomiero, Pure Appl. Chem., 2014, 86, 575–584 CAS .
M. Q. Lokman, S. Shafie, S. Shaban, F. Ahmad, H. Jaafar, R. M. Rosnan, H. Yahaya and S. S. Abdullah, Materials, 2019, 12, 2111 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bashiri, N. M. Mohamed, C. F. Kait and S. Sufian, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2019, 49, 27–38 CrossRef CAS .
R. Adhikari, L. Jin, F. Navarro-Pardo, D. Benetti, B. AlOtaibi, S. Vanka and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 265–274 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choi, J. H. Lee, Y. J. Jang, D. Kim, J. S. Lee, H. M. Jang and K. Yong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36099 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05260dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
VRHE = VAg/AgCl + 0.197 + pH × (0.059)	(1)

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Structural characterization of the as-synthesized F-h-BN nanoflakes: (a) and (b) TEM images showing the stacking density of the 2D F-h-BN nanoflakes; (c) and (d) high-resolution TEM showing the atomic resolution and interplanar spacing. (e) SAED pattern. (f) Elemental analysis by EDS.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural characterization. SEM image of the (a) SnO2 mesoporous film and (b) SnO2/F-h-BN mesoporous film. The insets show the corresponding mesoporous film at higher magnification. (c) Comparison of the UV-visible absorption spectra of SnO2 (blue color line) and SnO2/F-h-BN (red color line) mesoporous films. (d) Raman spectra of SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN; the image on the right highlights the F-h-BN peak.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structural characterization of SnO2 (blue) and SnO2/F-h-BN (red) mesoporous films: (a) FTIR; (b) XRD; (c) EDS elemental mapping of the selected area of SnO2/F-h-BN; (d) Sn; (e) O; (f) N; (g) B; (h) Si.	 

 	Fig. 4  XPS spectra acquired from the SnO2/F-h-BN photoanode: (a) a full survey scan; (b) Sn 3d; (c) O 1s; (d) N 1s; (e) B 1s. AFM analysis: (f) and (g) AFM scan of spin-coated F-h-BN nanoflakes on a silicon substrate; (h) 3D scan of the F-h-BN nanoflake.	 

 	Fig. 5  EDS chemical composition analysis of the SnO2/TiO2/CdS–CdSe/ZnS photoanode: (a) cross-sectional SEM image of the photoanode; (b) elemental mapping of the elements that exist in the photoanode: (c) Sn, Ti, O, Si, Cd, S, Se, and Zn; (d) XRD patterns acquired from the SnO2/F-h-BN/CdS QD photoanode. XPS spectra acquired from the SnO2/TiO2/F-h-BN/CdS QD photoanode: (e) a full survey scan; (f) Cd 3d; (g) S 2p; (h) Ti 2p.	 
τ = −kBT/e × (dVoc/dt)−1	(2)

 	Fig. 6  (a) A schematic representation of the PEC device and carrier dynamics. PEC performance under dark, light and chop conditions for the two layered SnO2/CdS/ZnS photoanode: (b) without F-h-BN; (c) with F-h-BN. Transient photovoltage decay measurement of PEC devices based on SnO2/CdS/ZnS and SnO2 + F-h-BN/CdS/ZnS photoanodes: (d) open circuit voltage decay. (e) Electron lifetime calculated from open circuit voltage decay.	 

 	Fig. 7  PEC performance of the two-layered SnO2/CdS–CdSe/ZnS photoanode. (a) Dark, light, and chop performance of the photoanode without F-h-BN. (b) Dark, light, and chop performance of the photoanode with F-h-BN. (c) Stability test for PEC devices based on SnO2, SnO2 with F-h-BN (two layers), and SnO2/F-h-BN (three layers) sensitized with cascade CdS–CdSe QDs. Transient photovoltage decay measurement comparison of PEC devices with and without F-h-BN: (d) open circuit voltage. (e) Electron lifetime.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 8  Carrier dynamics of SnO2 and SnO2 with F-h-BN. (a) PL of ZrO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN, (b) PL of SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN, (c) electric circuit used to stimulate the impedance spectra of the photoanode and (d) EIS results for SnO2 and SnO2/F-h-BN: the original data and their fit. M–S plot for the SnO2 photoanode with and without F-h-BN and sensitized with: (e) CdS QDs; (f) CdS/CdSe QDs.	 
	(4)
	(5)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05260d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
