General discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD90055B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD90055B
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 207-222General discussionFirst published on 12th December 2011

Professor Hammarström opened the discussion of the paper by Professor Ishitani: In your particular case you observe that the covalently linked Ru–Re system performs better than bimolecular Ru + Re at the same concentration. It is not obvious that linked sensitizers lead to improved yields, as one may enhance recombination and reverse electron transfer etc. There are many reaction steps before the two-electron photoreduction cycle is completed. You seem to quench the Ru excited state with BNAH as a primary step. What are the main loss mechanisms leading to reduced yields in your case, and how do they differ in rate in the linked vs. bimolecular systems?

Professor Ishitani responded: The Ru(II)–Re(I) system reported in our paper has been the most efficient supramolecular photocatalyst not only for CO2 reduction but also H2 evolution to the best of my knowledge (the quantum yield based on the electron transfer from BNAH to CO2 is 30%). Although “yield” is an ambiguous word for photocatalytic reactions because the product yield is usually over 100%, I think that your main questions are (1) what processes of this efficient photocatalytic reaction lower the quantum yield, reaction rate (TOF), and stability (TN), and (2) why the supramolecular system is a better photocatalyst compared with the corresponding mixed system with the mononuclear complexes. If we could completely answer all of your questions, we could develop a super high efficiency photocatalyst. Anyway, I can give you some information on the architecture we used for constructing supramolecular photocatalysts.
There are not so many efficient photocatalysts consisting of multinuclear metal complexes, so called supramolecular photocatalysts, especially for CO2 reduction as you mentioned. Two types of reaction mechanisms can be applied for supramolecular photocatalysts: one is oxidative quenching of the excited photosensitizer unit by the catalyst unit, and another is reductive quenching by a sacrificial electron donor. Many of the former type of photocatalysts cannot work as an efficient photocatalyst mainly because of rapid back electron transfer from the reduced catalyst unit to the oxidized photosensitizer unit. The reported efficient photocatalytic reductions of CO2 using supramolecules, including the system reported in our paper, mostly proceed via the latter mechanism. In the cases of supramolecules consisting of both Ru(II) and Re(I) complexes, this situation can be easily created if we chose a symmetric bis diimine bridge ligand, even though the lifetime of the excited Ru(II) unit is so long. Although, even in these cases, back electron transfer from the reduced photosensitizer unit to the one-electron oxidized species of the reductant might also lower the efficiency, this can be depressed by accelerating an irreversible decomposition process of the one-electron oxidized species. In our cases, BNAH is a reductant, and its one-electron oxidized species, i.e. BNAH+˙ lives for a certain period, but addition of base, e.g. triethanolamine, can drastically shorten the lifetime of BNAH+˙ because of the deprotonation from this cation radical to give BNA˙ which dimerizes to give BNA2.
The intramolecular electron transfer should occur from the reduced photosensitizer unit to the catalyst unit. In this key process, the supramolecular system should be at an advantage, especially in the situation of either low concentration of the photocatalyst or low photon flux, compared with the mixed system because diffusion collision is not required.1 Actually, we observed the one-electron reduced photosensitizer in the case of the mixed system but did not observe the one-electron reduced catalyst unit in the case of the supramolecular system. The longer lifetime of the reduced form of the photosensitizer should cause its decomposition under irradiation.
The next step should be a chemical reaction of the reduced catalyst unit to give a CO2 adduct. Unfortunately, we do not know what this process is. However, we could clarify that the following second electron transfer process proceeds via excitation of the photosensitizer unit of the CO2 adduct, followed by reductive quenching with BNAH, and intramolecular electron transfer to the Re unit. This process might be also advantageous for the supramolecular system because of the same reason described above.
We also clearly showed that the oxidized product of BNAH, i.e., BNA2, quenches the excited state of the photosensitized unit with a much faster reaction rate, that should compete with the reductive quenching by BNAH as an initial process of the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. This is one of the reasons lowering TOF of CO formation after irradiation for several hours. We could recent found a way to overcome this problem by changing the reductant, and will report this result elsewhere.
1 Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 2326–2336.

Professor Perutz enquired: You showed a video of bubbles of CO forming in the presence of 1 atm CO2. Considering that the reaction forms at best 1 mol CO per mol CO2 consumed (in fact you suggested it may be less than this), it is not immediately obvious why bubbles are formed. Please could you comment on the solubilities of CO2 and CO in the solvent system employed (DMF + TEOA).

Professor Ishitani responded: Saturated concentrations of CO in organic solvents are much lower than those of CO2. See ref. 1 for information on the solubility of CO2.
Although we could not determine the exact solubility of CO2 in a DMF-TEOA mixed solution, it looked slightly lower than that in DMF (0.2M), but should be higher than 0.1 M. In the reaction solution (4 mL), 5-10 mL of CO2 (1 atm) should be dissolved. When TN reaches 200, about 10% of CO2 is converted to CO. Actually we observed increase of the pressure in the reaction vessel after long irradiation.
1 Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2000, 299, 155–163.

Professor Graetzel said: I wonder whether Professor Ishitani tested his Ir complex as an electrocatalyst in a dark reaction to obtain mechanistic details for the conversion of CO2 to CO.

Professor Ishitani responded: We reported the Ru–Re supramolecular systems, not Ir.
In the manuscript, you can see CVs of the photocatalysts. The result clearly shows that intramolecular electron transfer to the catalyst unit should smoothly proceed in the case of Ru–Re(FPh) but not in the cases of other two. This is one of the main reasons why Ru–Re(FPh) has the best photocatalytic ability for CO2 reduction.

Dr Schneider said: My questions have to do with the ratio of reduction products (CO and H2) that are observed. In your paper you report that mixtures of CO/H2 are produced when using either the dyad or two-component systems for CO2 reduction, albeit only small quantities of H2. (1) Is H2 observed for mononuclear Re cis-dicarbonyl systems? I ask because H2 is not mentioned as a CO2 reduction product in your earlier study with the mononuclear systems.1 (2) Why are small amounts of H2 observed for the dyads in your paper, but not for the analogous Re tricarbonyl dyads in your earlier work? (3) Have you ever observed thermal formation of the dicarbonyl dyad from the tricarbonyl dyad in the presence of a sacrificial donor? (4) Why is the CO/H2 ratio less with a two-component system than with the dyad? Thank you.
1 O. Ishitani et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15544.

Professor Ishitani responded: (1) A very small amount of H2 was observed when the Re(I) mononuclear complexes were used as the photocatalyst.1
(2) We observed a very small amount of H2 even when the dyads with the Re(I) tricarbonyl unit.2
(3) The answer is no for thermal reaction. The Ru–Re complex is very stable at room temperature in solution.
(4) The product selectivity (CO) was very high by using the Ru–Re complex reported in our paper. For example, the ration between CO and H2 was 255:1 after 1 h of irradiation. Prolonged irradiation made the selectivity slightly lower, probably because a small amount of the decomposed product(s) of the dyad can photocatalyze H2 evolution.
1 Organometallics, 1997, 16, 5724–5729.
2 Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 454–461.

Ms Bai asked: You mentioned that the linkage unit is important for the mechanism and application of the multinuclear (Ru–Re) catalytic system, which is connected via one flexible carbon chain; meanwhile one of the poster presentations shows a similar kind of system connected via a carbene aromatic bridge unit. Could non-directional electron transfer stabilise the different oxygen states of the catalytic centre, and therefore achieve better activity and recovery?
Could you please comment.

Professor Ishitani answered: I can give you information on the bridge ligand used for constructing supramolecular photocatalysts using both Ru(II) and Re(I) complexes. One of the most important points for the architectures is the addition of high reduction power to the Re unit as the catalyst. The redox potential of this unit should be more negative than −1.4 V vs. Ag/AgNO3.1,2 From this standpoint, a conjugated system between the two diimine sites in the bridge ligand has a weakness because introduction of the conjugation causes lowering the π* energy of the diimine unit, i.e. makes the reduction power of the one-electron reduced Re unit lower. This is the reason why we chose an alkyl chain between the diimine units in the bridge ligand. If you wish to know effects of the length of the alkyl chain, see ref. 3.
1 Organometallics, 1997, 16, 5724–5729.
2 Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 346–354.
3 J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 207, 109–114

Professor Graetzel said: Systems that use sacrificial donors instead of water as an electron source, do not convert sunlight to electric power or store sunlight in form of chemical energy. Hence quoting conversion yields for such systems can be misleading.

Professor Ishitani replied: We do not mention conversion yields of light energy to chemical energy at all in our paper. Our purpose of this project reported in the manuscript is how to improve the quantum yield, TOF, and TON of the supramolecular photocatalysts for CO2 reduction. Usage of water as an electron donor is one of our next targets.

Professor Harriman addressed Professor Hammarström: The various model systems designed to-date are basically set in two dimensional space. Is there an obvious benefit to be gained by moving towards 3D systems? I refer specifically to the problem of successive charge accumulation.

Professor Hammarström responded: I am not sure I interpret your question correctly, but yes: in 3D you spread out the redox equivalents, which may contribute to redox potential levelling for subsequent steps, and to reduce recombination and reverse electron transfer. On the other hand for useful conversion to fuels the equivalents must be focused on one catalytic centre. Therefore I am not sure it is a useful strategy in the end.

Professor Perutz opened the discussion of the paper by Professor Inoue: In the experiments that you describe, you use [PtCl6]2− as the sacrificial oxidant. Is it possible to replace the Pt(IV) complex by an oxidant comprised of Earth-abundant elements such as peroxodisulfate?

Professor Inoue responded: Yes, other oxidizing agents could be used, though hexachloroplatinate(IV) is the most reactive among the reagents so far examined. The point, however, would be that we will have to move on a system with a non-sacrificial electron acceptor in place of the sacrificial ones. To this end, we have already found that semiconductors could serve as the electron accepting system, that is, we have succeeded in constructing non-sacrificial electron acceptor systems.

Professor Harriman commented: Do you think that oxygenation of alkenes is really an alternative to water oxidation? Many alkenes can be converted to epoxides via reaction with singlet molecular oxygen so there is no need for a complicated artificial photosynthetic scheme. Maybe there is a specific reaction that we might consider. It would be a great advance in terms of publicity if we could show the world that our bio-inspired systems do have real applications—at the moment I don't feel that we have done enough in this area.

Professor Perutz added: I agree with Professor Harriman that epoxidation can be achieved by other means. However, I believe that we need to develop other oxygenation reactions that cannot be carried out so easily. These should be of interest to the fine chemicals industry if possible.

Professor Hammarström said: It is true that valuable chemicals can be generated from light-driven, two-electron oxidation to form e.g. epoxides. However, if this is presented as an alternative to four-electron water oxidation to complement fuel production one has to think about the scale. The amount of hydrogen or reduced CO2 formed in one end of the reaction, corresponding to our needs for epoxides on the other end, will be very small compared to our overall energy needs. For large scale fuel production the only viable electron source is from four-electron oxidation of water to O2.

Professor Inoue answered: It should be one of the crucial points to be considered. The situation, however, is not so simple. Of course, the total energy consumed on the Earth is much larger than that in the oxidation processes, though almost one third of the chemical processes is the oxidation one that is in a tremendously huge scale of energy. We have to be aware of that the energy system in the future would not be in a single mode, but to be composed of many possible modes depending upon the conditions for each region. Science and technology will have to provide the general society as many options as possible. I think that at least another ten years will be required to get many breakthrough-subjects in this field of renewable energy systems. No one can decide now what the best way is. In that sense, the two-electron oxidation of water by one photon excitation would surely be one the alternative ways to get through the bottle-neck of artificial photosynthesis, along with the four-electron oxidation of water by stepwise four-photon excitation which still may have a long way to go to be practically realized.

Dr Benniston opened the discussion of the paper by Dr Fujita: Most people are photo-reducing carbon dioxide in DMF. Will we ever be able to do this process in water?

Dr Fujita answered: Because of solubility problems often associated with catalysts and their reduced species, most investigators use DMF, a DMF–water mixture, or a CH3CN–water mixture as the solvent. Calvin’s group investigated CO2 reduction systems using Ru(bpy)32+ as a photosensitizer, Ni(cyclam)2+ or a related species as the catalyst, and ascorbate as an electron donor in water in the late 80s to early 90s. Also Tinnemans investigated similar systems using the related cobalt mactocycles in the 80s. Their results were compared to others in our recent paper.1
1 Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2472-2482

Prof. Dr Faunce questioned: We now know the genetic sequences of approximately 60000 different forms of the RuBisCO enzyme involved in carbon dioxide reduction in natural photosynthetic systems and comparative kinetic data is being generated. Research such as that by Jill Gready at the ANU suggests that substantially more efficient forms of RuBisCO can be engineered by mutation. Can you speculate on the relevance of this substantial body of research for your own work on carbon dioxide reduction and sequestration from the atmosphere?

Dr Fujita answered: Since we are investigating only bio-inspired, not actual biological, systems, I cannot answer your question. Biochemistry of the RuBisCO enzyme is too complicated for us.

Professor Hammarström asked: Are you saying that RuBisCo is too inefficient to be of interest for biomimetic design inspiration?

Professor Cogdell responded: RuBisCo has been the target of a huge amount of site directed mutagenesis aimed at improving either its affinity for carbon dioxide or reducing its reaction with oxygen. None of these have led to much improvement. This is not surprising since millions of years of natural selection have not been able to do any better. However there are examples of organisms, such as cyanobacteria, where carbon dioxide concentrating methods have evolved that can enhance the activity of RuBisCo. So perhaps that is the way to go.

Professor Perutz remarked: The formation of NADPH is often considered as a target for solar fuels. It is clearly a very useful hydride donor. However, we should also look at alternatives and here it may be particularly useful to understand the mechanism of action of the microbial protein carbon monoxide dehydrogenase. Armstrong et al. have linked a Ru(bpy)3 sensitiser to carbon monoxide dehydrogenase via TiO2 nanoparticles and successfully reduced CO2 photocatlytically.

Dr Fujita replied: Yes, I agree with you.

Dr Schneider said: Do you have any interest in studying proton, H-atom, and hydride transfer reactions with complexes containing more than one pbn ligand? For example [Ru(bpy)(pbn)2]2+ or even [Ru(pbn)3]2+, complexes reported by Tanaka and coworkers.1 I think it would be particularly interesting (and complicated) to do analogous studies of H-atom transfer between the their excited-state complexes and H2Q.
1 K. Tanaka et al., Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 11526

Dr Fujita replied: Yes, it would be very interesting to investigate these species provided that their excited states live long enough. The only problem in using these species is their preparation. Making the pbn ligand is not simple.

Professor Harriman continued the discussion of the paper by Professor Ishitani: Do you think it possible that we will discover a selective metal particulate catalyst? My understanding is that such materials exhibit multiple reactions and catalyse reactions in both directions. Can they be made selective by surface attachment?

Professor Ishitani responded: Unfortunately, I do not have enough information to answer this question. Although there has been no such catalyst, I think that this kind of research should be continued.

Professor Harriman said: You have described some very nice systems here for reduction of carbon dioxide. Are the results published?

Professor Ishitani replied: Not yet. They are very new results. We will publish it as soon as we can.

Professor Graetzel commented: I would like to comment that the 8 electron reduction of CO2 to methane, i.e. the methanation of CO2 or Sabbatier reaction is a surprisingly facile catalytic conversion process which can be carried out at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. Solar hydrogen produced from water would be needed to serve as a reductant.

Professor Ishitani answered: Although I do not know how the Sabbatier reaction works in moderate reaction conditions, to my best knowledge, high TOF of the Sabbatier reaction requires a high temperature, the optimum temperature range for this reaction has already been determined to be around 350 °C. As I pointed out in my presentation, we should develop new methods producing carbon resources for the chemical industry because a shortage of fossil fuels, i.e. oil and coal, directly means a shortage of carbon resources. In view of this, methane is not a suitable product of CO2 reduction but the F–T reaction can make various hydrocarbons which can be directly used in the petrochemical industry.
Anyway, both the F–T reaction and Sabbatier reaction have been recently re-evaluated as useful processes for CO2 utilization. I do not agree that we fix on only one method for both CO2 utilization and solar energy conversion as a target because all of the technologies for these purposes cannot give a clear road to the solution of these difficult problems at present. Various methods should be investigated if they have a possibility of practical implementation.

Dr Fujita responded: There is no doubt that photochemical H2 production from water is very important. While H2 is a clean energy source, it nevertheless has some problems (low energy density, difficult to transport and store, risk of explosion, etc.). H2 can be converted into more practical liquid fuels by combining it with CO2 (or CO that can be photochemically produced from CO2). Then a carbon-neutral cycle for renewable liquid fuel production and use becomes viable, since the current infrastructure can be used. It would also be advantageous if we could efficiently produce methanol and/or methane by direct photolysis or photoelectrolysis. These two products are also ideal raw materials for higher carbon-containing fuels.

Professor Uner commented: A simple thermodynamic analysis involving the heats of reaction between CO2 and H2O giving various products can tell a lot about the feasibility of a reaction in terms of the energy demands as well as the spontaneity of the reaction system. In Table 1 below, I show such an analysis for the artificial photosynthesis reactions. In the second column you see the enthalpy change of the highly exothermic reaction between CO2 and H2O (per mole of hydrocarbon product). In the third column you see the same data set reported per mole of oxygen produced. The comparison based on per mole of oxygen produced leads us a the following conclusions:
1. The energy demand of the reactions does not differ much from product to product when the comparison is based on the amount per mole of oxygen evolved during the reaction. Thus the difficulty of the oxygen evolution process is justified one more time.
2. More importantly, the data indicates that the energy demand of these reactions is not much different from the energy demand of the water splitting reaction, shown in the last row.
Table 1 
Table 1 Gibbs free energies of formation of oxygen and hydrocarbon producing reactions from CO2 and H2O




Reaction
ΔGf (kJ mol−1 HC product)
ΔGf (kJ mol−1 O2)




CO2 + 2H2O ⇒ CH4 + 2O2
801.0
400.5


CO2 + 2H2O ⇒ CH3OH + 1½O2
689.2
459.5


2CO2 + 3H2O ⇒ C2H5OH + 3O2
1306.6
435.5


H2O + CO2 ⇒ ⅙C6H12O6 + O2
2880.0
480.0


H2O ⇒ H2 + ½O2
228.6
457.2




From this table it is fair to conclude that once the water splitting reaction is done, the produced hydrogen can drive the rest of the reactions. If we compare the methane formation reaction and water splitting reaction in that table, we can easily see that once hydrogen is available from water splitting the reaction CO2 + 2H2 ⇒ CH4 +O2 is exothermic and thus spontaneous at room temperature. This is very similar to the reactions taking place in photosynthestic cells. The light driven water splitting and oxygen evolution reaction take place in lumen with the aid of absorbed photons. On the other hand, the CO2 reduction reactions or the Calvin cycle takes place in the stroma with the electron and protons transported through the membrane and are generally called dark reactions. Thus, I support Professor Graetzel’s recommendation that the efforts towards utilization solar energy in fuel generation must be focused on the water splitting reaction, with the support from the Gibbs free energy change data presented in Table 1, and from the reaction pathway example we receive from natural photosynthesis.

Professor Ishitani responded: I do not agree with this opinion because the discussion does not mention activation free energy change. If kinetic discussion is not added to this opinion, practically it has no meaning. Actually, high temperature and high pressure are required for hydrogenation of CO2 in the present stage even though it is a thermodynamically slightly exothermic reaction. The Fisher–Tropsch reaction, i.e. hydrocarbon production from both CO and H2, looks a much more reasonable choice for CO2 utilization. This is one of the reasons why we think that development of photocatalytic systems for CO2 reduction is so important. I do not believe that hydrogen evolution by solar light is a perfect enough solution to three serious problems, i.e., shortages of fuels and carbon resources and global warming. We need technologies for both the formation of CO from CO2 and H2 from water using sunlight.

Professor Burrows said: When considering artificial routes to carbon dioxide reduction, we must remember that the species present in water are likely to be very different from those in organic solvents. In water, there is a rather complex series of pH dependent equilibria involving hydrated carbon dioxide, bicarbonate and carbonate.1 The major species at neutral pH will be bicarbonate, and the reduction of this will be significantly different from that of CO2.
1 D. A. Palmer and R. van Eldik, Chem. Rev., 1983, 83, 651–731.

Professor Ishitani responded: I agree with you in thinking that photocatalysis in aqueous solution is important for constructing artificial photosynthesis using water as reductant. We do not have enough information about it mainly because of lack of good electron donors that can efficiently quench the excited state of the photosensitizer unit even in an aqueous solution. Now we are trying to investigate the photocatalysis of metal complexes in aqueous solution.

Dr Reisner addressed Professor Ishitani and Professor Cogdell :Following the earlier discussion on RuBisCo: I would like to point out that other CO2 reducing enzymes exist and have been employed for CO2 reduction. For example, the Armstrong group in Oxford used carbon monoxide dehydrogenase for light-driven CO2 to CO conversion and Judy Hirst demonstrated the reversible interconversion of CO2 to formic acid with formate dehydrogenase by protein film voltammetry.

Professor Ishitani answered: We just point out that we have already developed supramolecular photocatalytic systems which can reduce CO2 selectively to formic acid with very high TOF and TN. The manuscript describing the results has been submitted elsewhere as another paper.

Professor Harriman said: There seems to be very little research devoted to the photochemical reduction of nitrogen to ammonia. Although clearly difficult to achieve, this process has many advantages—most notably that the ammonia does not need to be isolated from aqueous solution. There are easier reduction products, such as hydrazine, but we hear nothing about nitrogen reduction. Neta did some pioneering work on developing catalysts for this reaction that seemed to show some promise, although they were not particularly effective. This seems to be a forgotten reaction.

Professor Fukuzumi added: I agree with Prof. Harriman. Nitrogen fixation under mild conditions has been a big challenge. There are now good structure models of nitrogenase available. However, it is much more important to develop good catalysts mimicking nitrogenase function to reduce dinitrogen by hydrogen to ammonia under mild conditions although this does not require solar energy.

Professor Gust replied: Although reducing nitrogen to ammonia will not solve the entire human energy problem, a large amount of current use of fossil fuels is for fertilizer production. Efficient reduction of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia using sunlight would indeed be a major scientific achievement.

Dr Fujita commented: The current worldwide annual CO2 emission is estimated to be ~30000 MMT (million metric tons) and approximately 110 MMT of CO2 are used for chemical synthesis. These numbers clearly indicate that less than 0.5% of the total emission of CO2 can be utilized in the chemical industry. This clearly indicates that we have too much CO2 to convert any significant fraction of it to useful chemical and building block materials even if our economy improves and the human population increases. Therefore we need to recycle CO2 by converting it to a liquid fuel through reactions with H2. While hydrogenation of CO2 or Fisher–Tropsch reactions are useful reactions for converting CO2 to liquid fuels under conditions of high pressure and high temperature, we need to find more mild photochemical reactions for combining water splitting and CO2 reduction.

Professor Harriman said: One of the main difficulties associated with a molecular (i.e., bio-inspired) approach towards artificial photosynthesis—in contrast to the alternative photoelectrochemical approach—is that we have not produced a viable demonstration. Indeed, it remains unclear if the molecular approach will ever work. At the beginning, the main emphasis was to design and synthesize artificial molecular arrays that looked and operated a bit like the key components in real photosynthesis. This phase of the work has been a spectacular success and we have examples of wonderful molecular structures. Separately, simple systems were devised for light-induced formation of either hydrogen or oxygen at the expense of burning up some added sacrificial reagent. Again, this was successful but not practical. We seem not to have progressed from this state and reports are appearing in the literature that look remarkably similar to those published 30 years ago. I worry about this strategy.
What is needed, I think, is a clear demonstration of what might be achieved by a concerted cooperation between research groups. The ideal would be the photochemical reduction of nitrogen to ammonia. I'm thinking really of some way in which poor countries rich in sunlight and polluted waste could develop their own fertiliser for pouring onto the ground in place of sewage. Surely, we could combine to do something useful along these lines! Unlike in the 1980's, we have plentiful supplies of waste materials—glycerol from bio-diesel production for example—that might replace sacrificial reagents. Without a eye-catching demonstration I don't think we will attract as much funding as we need. It would be nice to think that we could put publications aside for the moment and combine resources to do a useful job for the community.

Professor Fukuzumi responded: I agree with Professor Harriman. A molecular approach is still far behind photocatalytic water splitting using visible light-absorbing semiconductors. Nevertheless, I believe that a molecular approach is more promising because of the high potential of molecular design. In addition we can obtain much deeper insight into the mechanisms in molecular systems. We need to use water as an electron source instead of sacrificial organic electron donors as Professor Harriman pointed out. However, the studies on the water oxidation or reduction using sacrificial acceptors or donors with semiconductors have helped to develop water splitting catalysts. The same may be true for molecular systems. The production of something useful using polluted waste may be one practical solution. From the practical point of view, however, a biological approach using microorganisms may be more promising for such a purpose. A promising chemical approach, I believe, is the photocatalytic oxidation of water by oxygen to produce hydrogen peroxide, which is certainly more valuable than hydrogen because hydrogen peroxide is currently produced by the reaction of hydrogen and oxygen.

Professor Gust added: While there are now a few examples of systems that use at least some molecular components to carry out water oxidation and production of a fuel such as hydrogen using sunlight, the "eye-catching demonstration" mentioned by Professor Harriman would indeed go a long way towards convincing the general community of the value of the molecular approach. In this regard, I believe that the best approach will likely not be using semiconductor materials exclusively, or molecular structures exclusively, but rather a combination that exploits the best features of both types of materials.

Professor Uner commented: Methanol synthesis is a quite well established industrial reaction system utilizing CO2 as a feedstock with a million ton/year capacity plants around the world. The reaction uses CO, CO2 and H2 (and H2O) as raw materials and produces CH3OH in a reversible reaction at high temperatures (around 500 K) and pressures (around 75 bar). The benchmarking of artificial photosynthesis should be performed, in my opinion, in comparison to the industrial dark high temperature, high pressure reactions. We have performed such an analysis1 based on the mechanisms published in the literature.2 A microkinetic analysis in a hypothetical reactor gave us the following predictions on the reaction rates given in Table 2 from our paper which we compared with the experimental data also reported in the literature. The results indicate that the model predicts fairly close to the experimental reported rates. Then we have done the extrapolations of decreasing temperature and decreasing pressure, also shown in the same table. The rates predicted from a microkinetic analysis and reported in the literature.1
Table 2 The rates predicted from a microkinetic analysis and reported in ref. 1




Reaction conditions
Rate from microkinetic modelling (mol gcat−1 s−1)
Experimentally determined rates reported in literature (mol gcat−1 s−1)


Without initial H2O
With initial H2O




523 K, 75 bar
4.53 × 10−5
3.58 × 10−5
6.1 × 10−5 (with Cu/ZnO/Al2O3)3


523 K, 75 bar
1.07 × 10−9
4.58 × 10−12
–


523 K, 75 bar
1.9 × 10−11
2.07 × 10−12
Photocatalytic: 6 × 10−9 (with Cu/TiO2)4




The photocatalytic rates should be carefully compared since they are obtained in the liquid phase while the data and model for the industrial methanol synthesis are in the gas phase. Even in such a coarse comparison, it is interesting to see that the photocatalytic rates are very close to the high pressure (75 bar) room temperature rates of the gas phase industrial catalysts without initial water addition conditions.
At low temperatures and in the liquid phase, the present day state of the art photocatalytic reactions further suffer from the well mixed reactor conditions which drives the fragile reaction intermediate downhill to the total oxidation product in the presence of an oxide catalyst (TiO2 in this case). Thus, the technology development should not only be limited to catalytic material development but also system design which separates CO2 absorption and reduction reactions from the water splitting reactions such that the evolved oxygen is kept apart from the CO2 reduction centers, as we see in the plant cells.
1 B. Ipek and D. Uner, Artificial Photosynthesis from a Chemical Engineering Perspective, in Photosynthesis: Book 3, ed. Mohammad Najafpour, Intech, 2011, ISBN 979-953-307-665-1.
2 C. V. Ovesen, B. S. Clausen, J. Schiotz, P. Stoltze, H. Topsoe and J. K. Norskov, Kinetic implications of dynamical changes in catalyst morphology during nethanol synthesis over Cu/ZnO catalysts, J. Catal., 1997, 168, 133–142.
3 M. Sahibzada, I. S. Metcalfe and D. Chadwick, Methanol synthesis from CO/CO2/H2 over Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 at differential and finite conversions, J. Catal., 1998, 174, 111–118.
4 I. H. Tseng, W. C. Chang, and J. C. S. Wu, Photoreduction of CO2 using sol–gel derived titania and titania-supported copper catalysts, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 37, 37–48.

Professor Hammarström questioned: What catalysts for methanol production by room-temperature artificial photosynthesis are you comparing with? Is the comparison relevant?

Professor Uner responded: As can be seen, the above analysis is crude, but informative. Furthermore, our analysis given in the table below indicates that there is an 8 orders of magnitude gap between the natural rates and artificial rates over TiO2 surfaces of CO2 reduction. The gap is 8 orders of magnitude below the present day technologies. But when we compare the dark kinetics of the industrial catalysts at room temperature and high pressure (as in my comments above) the difference is only three orders of magnitude with the crude analysis we perform. So the conclusion we arrive at is the same: not just material development, but also process development is needed!
Table 3 Time characteristics of major processes realized in photosynthesis and artificial photosynthesis1




Photosynthesis
Artificial photosynthesis (on TiO2)






a
 Oxygen evolution with cobalt ITO electrode (Kanan and Nocera, 2008). b Considering 200 μmol gcat−1 h−1 activity and 50 m2 gcat−1 and 1015 sites cm−2




Charge carrier generation
ps
Charge carrier generation
ps


Charge trapping
ps-ns
Charge trapping
10 ns


Electron transport
ns–μs
Interfacial charge transfer
100 ns


Water oxidation
1.59 ms
Water oxidation
670 msa


CO2 reduction
300 ms
CO2 reduction
14950 sb




1 B. Ipek and D. Uner, Artificial Photosynthesis from a Chemical Engineering Perspective, in Photosynthesis: Book 3, ed. Mohammad Najafpour, Intech, 2011, ISBN 979-953-307-665-1.

Professor Peter opened the discussion of the paper by Professor Mallouk: The driving force for back electron transfer from the TiO2 to the oxidized dye is very large in your water splitting system, even under short circuit conditions. In the dye-sensitized solar cell, for example, the electron Fermi level at short circuit can be 0.5 eV above the redox Fermi level on the electrolyte side of the film. If the dye/IrO2 system is to be part of a two terminal water splitting device, the problem is even more acute since the quasi Fermi level in the TiO2 need to be high in order to reduce the amount of external basis needed to drive the hydrogen evolution reaction at the counter electrode. Can you suggest strategies to overcome these problems?

Professor Mallouk responded: This is an important point. I think the solution to this problem is to use semiconductors that have more positive flat band potentials than TiO2, such as SnO2 and In2O3. There are several papers on SnO2 dye cells where core–shell structures with ZnO and MgO have lead to reasonably efficient conventional dye cells. A more positive Efb will increase the bias we need to apply for hydrogen evolution, but it will also allow us to use dyes that absorb further to the red and in principle it will lead to slower back electron transfer. We are currently pursuing this idea.

Professor Peter asked: The build up of electrons in TiO2 that occurs under short circuit conditions is a consequence of the low mobility of the electrons. It might be useful to look at substrates with higher electron mobilities, e.g. SnO2

Professor Mallouk replied: This is also a good point. As noted in my answer to your previous question, the two semiconductors we are considering as alternatives to TiO2 also have higher electron mobility.

Professor Styring remarked: Do you have any measurements that really show that the tyrosine part is involved in the electron transfer and the oxidation of the iridium catalyst?

Professor Mallouk answered: The data on the mediator are quite preliminary at this point. We hope to characterize this system more fully in the coming months.

Professor Hammarström asked: 1. Why is oxidation of the iridium oxide so slow?
2. In the new system with the phenol intermediate linked to IrO2, there is no longer a link between the TiO2-bound Ru-sensitizers and the phenol/IrO2 particles. Yet you seem to see faster regeneration of the Ru(II). What do you know about the system organization?

Professor Mallouk responded: In the water oxidation reaction, Ir cycles between the 3+, 4+, and 5+ oxidation states. It appears that at low overpotential outer sphere electron transfer is the rate-determining step. That is consistent with a large reorganization energy for the Ir(IV/V) couple.

Professor Peter enquired: In your scheme, you show a Fermi level for the IrO2 nanoparticle. This level is important when it comes to the driving force for electron transfer from the IrO2 to the oxidized dye. What do you think determines this Fermi level since you do not have a simple redox system? Will it be close to the reversible oxygen potential or is it some kind of mixed potential? If so, what influence does the oxygen concentration in the solution have? I might expect the kinetics of electron transfer to change if the solution is saturated with oxygen compared with the situation for the first time the system is illuminated.

Professor Mallouk replied: We have done our transient spectroscopy measurements under open circuit conditions, so the activity of oxygen is not as high as it is when the cell is operating. We are currently setting up a system to do these measurements under active potential control. The photocurrent measurements I showed are recorded after the cell has run for a while, and therefore there is some oxygen in the anode compartment, although again its activity may not be unity. Your point is well taken—we should saturate the anode with oxygen, or at least measure the rates under a fixed oxygen partial pressure so that all the potentials are well defined.

Professor Graetzel asked: In your system for solar water splitting it may be advantageous to separate spatially the oxygen evolution catalyst from the surface and use a redox shuttle such as the Co(II/III) redox system for regeneration of the sensitizer and couple it to the oxygen evolution reaction.

Professor Mallouk responded: That's an interesting suggestion. This strategy would address the problem of rapid back electron transfer to the dye. We would need a mediator that is positive enough to oxidize water, and it would need to be present in relatively high concentration to regenerate the dye rapidly. Some Co(II/III) couples along the lines of those studied by Mike Elliott and Carlo Bignozzi would be interesting to try.

Dr Fielden said: We have made a system inspired by yours with a polyoxometalate water oxidation catalyst and dye-sensitized titania. Although the first electron transfer we measure by transient absorption spectroscopy is a lot faster than yours (around 1 ns), the overall performance of the system so far does not appear to be better. One factor may be the efficiency of the catalyst. Another may be that the second, third and fourth electron transfers from our molecular catalyst are significantly slower than the first; whereas with a nanoparticle these still occur at a similar rate.

Professor Mallouk answered: We have not measured the rate of forward electron transfer in our system, but it appears (from the quantum yield of initial charge separation and the rate of non-radiative decay of the sensitizer–IrO2 diad) to also be in the range of nanoseconds.
It is certainly possible that catalysts with fewer metal atoms can have the kinds of kinetic problems you suggest for the four-electron oxidation of water. There are hundreds of Ir atoms in our clusters, and electrochemically we see oxygen evolution onset quite close to the potential of the Ir(IV/V) wave, so we do not think there is a significant kinetic bottleneck for electrons 2–4.

Dr Fielden said: Does the electron transfer speed from the IrO2 particle to the dye apply only to the first electron? Can you assume that subsequent electron transfers occur at a similar rate?

Professor Mallouk replied: Each IrO2 nanoparticle contains many Ir atoms, and so we assume that we do not have different rates for the four electrons it takes to produce one O2 molecule. We see no evidence of this in the electrochemistry of the nanoparticles. The catalytic oxidation of water occurs at the potential where Ir is oxidized from 4+ to 5+.

Professor Sacilotti addressed Professor Mallouk and Professor Peter: I do not see the driving force to separate e− from h+ and I can not see the spent energy to separate them, which is the excitonic energy. Note that this energy can be as high as 0.5 eV in organic systems. Exciton on (e−, TiO2)/(h+, Dye) is perhaps unknown. I’d talk about energy band bending at the interface TiO2/Dye that should be taken into account.

Professor Mallouk answered: The key thing to recognize here is that the dye cell involves charge separation at a nanoparticle–solution interface that is bathed in a salt solution of about 1 M concentration. The TiO2 is a nanoparticle network that is perfused with this electrolyte solution. Further, the TiO2 is intercalated by cations when electrons are injected. Thus, to a first approximation, we can say that electric fields are not important in the charge separation and recombination processes. That is what we mean when we say that the dye cell is an excitonic cell. It is not the same physics as in a p–n junction semiconductor cell, or in an organic photovoltaic cell.
I think the most appropriate model for charge injection and recombination is basically a Marcus picture in which there is a distribution of donor and acceptor states and an energy barrier that is determined by the total reorganization energy. The electronic coupling matrix element that determines the rate of electron transfer falls off exponentially with distance, so we can expect both the forward and back electron transfer processes to become slower when we insert a thin film of a wide-bandgap semiconductor between the dye and the TiO2 nanoparticles. The forward electron transfer step occurs in competition with quenching of the dye excited state by IrO2, which is a ~30 ns process. Thus, if the film of ZrO2 or Nb2O5 is too thick, the quantum yield for charge injection and the photocurrent both decrease. However with a very thin film, the forward electron transfer step is still faster than 30 ns, and the back electron transfer step slows down. Slowing the back electron transfer process increases the quantum yield, which is determined by the competition between back electron transfer (TiO2 to oxidized dye) and forward electron transfer from IrO2 to oxidized dye, which occurs on the millisecond timescale.

Professor Sacilotti replied: As Professor Mallouk inserts a ZrO2 barrier between TiO2/Dye, this barrier should decrease the electron probability to jump from TiO2 to the Dye. This should decrease the flow of electrons to the Dye system and decrease the charge separation proposed mechanism (diffusion), since electron flow across the ZrO2 barrier should decrease.
It would be interesting to know the exact band offset of the TiO2/ZrO2/Dye system, since that of the TiO2/Dye system is presented. This energetic interface is type II interface like (as presented by H. Kroemer and Leo Esaki,1 two Nobel Prize Laureates in physics. Note that one of the papers published by H. Kroemer talk about interface type II recombination and emission). This interface emission can be linked to the spent energy to separate e− from h+.
1 (a) http://www.ece.ucsb.edu/faculty_research.shtml; (b) H. Kroemer, Quasi-electric fields and band offsets: teaching electrons new tricks, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2001, 73, 783–793.

Professor Peter responded: The separation of electrons and holes depends on the gradient of electrochemical potential (partial Gibbs free energy). The electrochemical potential can be divided conceptually (but not experimentally) into a term that arises from the Galvani potential of the phase and a term that arises from the concentration of the species concerned. In general for a species i with a charge zq in a phase α 
        (1)
      The gradient of the electrochemical potential represents the thermodynamic driving force for the movement of charged species therefore has two components—one associated with the gradient of concentration and the other with the gradient of potential m (i.e. the electrical field). In some cases (e.g. the dye sensitized solar cell), the electric field is negligible, and charge separation occurs by diffusion to carrier selective electrodes. In conventional solid state devices, the physical processes are often separated into drift and diffusion. This is formally equivalent to the thermodynamic formulation, but it can lead leads to the incorrect picture of currents flowing in opposite directions. For example in the case of a p–n junction at equilibrium in the dark the current is zero. If this is explained by drift and diffusion currents cancelling out, the device would dissipate energy, violating the first Law. Unfortunately many elementary textbooks and teachers simply say that charges are separated by the field in a p–n junction. This is fundamentally incorrect. I recommend the excellent book by Peter Würfel1 for anyone who is confused about this.
1 P. Würfel, U. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells. From Basic Principles to Advanced Concepts, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2009.

Dr Hull asked: Water oxidation is facilitated by increasing the pH of the bulk solution. However, metal oxide–phosphonate or carboxylate systems are unstable above pH 7. Is this a design flaw for systems that use acid linkers, and if so how can it be addressed?

Professor Mallouk answered: This is a good suggestion. At the moment we are using a phosphonate linker, which means that the sensitizer desorbs above pH 6 in water. You are correct that we would probably get better results with the catalyst at higher pH using a covalent linking strategy, for example using siloxane coupling of the sensitizer to TiO2. We would also need to re-design the sensitizer, since the semiconductor conduction band edge potential will shift negative with increasing pH, but the excited state redox potential of the sensitizer is pH-independent.

Mr Bora commented: How does charge injection take place when a layer of insulating YrO2 put over TiO2?
What is the exact mechanism in this case?

Professor Mallouk replied: You can think of it the same way as you think of electron transfer through an (insulating) molecular bridge, as superexchange-mediated outer sphere electron transfer.

Dr Fujita opened the discussion of the paper by Erwin Reisner: Cobalt dimethylglyoximate complexes are unstable in water and loose a dimethylglyoximate ligand. Did you add an excess amount of the ligand to stabilize the complex? When the cobalt(II) complex is reduced, it normally loses axial ligands. Do you have any evidence to demonstrate if your cobalt dimethylglyoximate complex is really immobilized during the photochemical hydrogen production?

Dr Reisner answered: No excess of dmg ligand was present in the reported system, but we also performed experiments with an excess of ligand: we do see a substantially increased life-time of our photocatalytic system. This is in agreement with previous reports by Lehn and Eisenberg for related homogeneous systems. We know that about one third of the Co catalyst is adsorbed on the nanoparticle prior irradiation. However, Co(III) is inert and we have no information available yet as to what happens (and at what rate) upon reduction to more labile reduced states.

Professor Ghiggino said: Have you determined the quantum yield of hydrogen formation in the system described in your paper? Does your arrangement offer any specific advantages in terms of efficiency of hydrogen production over earlier non-metal oxide based systems? Your system also uses a sacrificial electron donor and the solar light absorption is not optimal—in what ways do you plan to improve the performance of your interesting system.

Dr Reisner answered: We have not yet determined the quantum yield of our system, because we were mainly interested in the catalytic rate of proton reduction. Thus, we used an excess of dye in most of our experiments so that they were limited by proton reduction. However, optimised conditions are now available and we will measure the quantum yield soon. The metal oxide nanoparticle does not only allow for simple linkage of the dye to the cobalt catalyst, but also for the photo-formation of a long lived charge separated state. Ruthenium dye–TiO2 is the key component in dye-sensitised solar cells and it prevents fast charge recombination kinetics, a feature we exploit in our colloidal system.
I agree that light absorption is not optimal, because our Ru photosensitizer absorbs only in the blue region of the visible spectrum. This was no problem for our basic studies, because we focused on catalytic rate of the catalyst rather than quantum yield. We could easily replace the ruthenium dye with a photosensitiser that covers a broader spectral window.

Professor Guldi opened the discussion of the paper by Professor Campagna: Have you established the equilibrium not only by means of an appreciable intercept, but also by changing the concentrations of both species?

Professor Campagna replied: We only changed the concentration of the catalyst. The suggestion of also changing the concentration of the photosensitizer is very useful. Thank you.

Professor Styring asked: Do I understand this correctly that your catalyst will not work if you have a one-electron acceptor instead of the acceptor system you have used?

Professor Campagna replied: No, the system would work as well. The first photon actually, following the "oxidation of the excited photosensitizer by the sacrificial acceptor" (1); "electron transfer from the catalyst to the oxidized sensitizer" (2); would prepare the mono-oxidized catalyst. This species is stable, but is not the catalytically-active form (see cyclic voltammogram of the Co-cubane catalyst, Fig. 3 of the paper). A second complete series of events (1 + 2), light-induced, will generate a bi-oxidized form of the Co-cubane catalyst, and so on, finally leading to the catalytically-active state. The fact that the sacrificial agent used here, persulfate, can generate two oxidation equivalents per photon has only the effect of accelerating the process, but it is not compulsory. It has an effect on the maximum photochemical quantum yield which can be reached.
Indeed, whereas the catalyst could work also with other sacrificial acceptors, the overall system here reported (sensitizer–sacrificial acceptor–catalyst) would not. In this sense you have correctly understood. But the problem is due to the Ru–bpy sensitizer, whose oxidation potential is too positive to carry on successive oxidation of the catalyst, and in the present case is most likely assisted by the specific electron acceptor. The problem could be overcome just simply changing the sensitizer, for example by replacing bpy ligands with more electron deficient polypyridine ligands.

Professor Faunce said: You have demonstrated a cubane structure for your cobalt catalyst. The recent paper by Kamiya et al.1 appears to confirm that the cubane structure has been preserved at the core of the natural photosynthetic process. Please speculate on the fundamental relationship that might exist between the cubane structure and the water oxidation process.
1 Kamiya et al., Nature, 2011, 473, 55–60

Professor Campagna replied: I have no answer to the question you mention. Just as a speculation, I could imagine that a cubane structure could be effective to confer stability to the system, for example by a sort of "templating effect". The catalyst, of course, undergoes to a series of reaction, including most likely bond breaking, during the photocatalytic process. The cubane structure could allow such bond breaking but could avoid effective separation of fragments, so helping to keep the integrity of the catalytic species. This, maybe also together with other reasons, could be a possible answer. But this is just speculation.

Dr Watson asked: Given the ubiquity of the Mn4O4 cubane cluster in natural systems and the highly favoured metal oxide species in synthetic systems, would it perhaps be a good direction for research to mimic the geometry and local environment of the manganese cluster with other cheap metals for the cluster analogs and supramolecular hydrophobic host molecules, polymeric supports, MOFs, zeolites etc. mimicking the a.a. residues of the active site. Also to include another metal ion maintained at a cyclically varying concentration to mimic the transient involvement of Ca2+ in the 4 electron process at the active site of Mn4O4?

Professor Gust responded: The natural PSII system illustrates that it is possible to design a practical water oxidation catalyst based on inexpensive, abundant elements. There a number of research groups currently investigating mimicry of the active site of this complex. These efforts will be aided by the recent high-resolution X-ray determination of the structure of the natural catalyst.

Professor Styring commented: In continuation of Professor Faunce’s question—why cubanes are successful in water oxidation. I suggest that is not the structure that is necessarily the most important factor but the number of metal ions. During water splitting we have to deal with four oxidizing holes and it might well be that it is good to have four metal ions to handle them.

Professor Faunce responded: The fact that the cubane structure seems to have been preserved uniformly as the symbolic heart of the natural process for converting solar photons to stored chemical energy suggests the geometric distances and angles may be relevant, perhaps to facilitating a quantum coherence aspect.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

CO2 + 2H2O ⇒ CH4 + 2O2	801.0	400.5
CO2 + 2H2O ⇒ CH3OH + 1½O2	689.2	459.5
2CO2 + 3H2O ⇒ C2H5OH + 3O2	1306.6	435.5
H2O + CO2 ⇒ ⅙C6H12O6 + O2	2880.0	480.0
H2O ⇒ H2 + ½O2	228.6	457.2


523 K, 75 bar	4.53 × 10−5	3.58 × 10−5	6.1 × 10−5 (with Cu/ZnO/Al2O3)3
523 K, 75 bar	1.07 × 10−9	4.58 × 10−12	–
523 K, 75 bar	1.9 × 10−11	2.07 × 10−12	Photocatalytic: 6 × 10−9 (with Cu/TiO2)4


Charge carrier generation	ps	Charge carrier generation	ps
Charge trapping	ps-ns	Charge trapping	10 ns
Electron transport	ns–μs	Interfacial charge transfer	100 ns
Water oxidation	1.59 ms	Water oxidation	670 msa
CO2 reduction	300 ms	CO2 reduction	14950 sb
	
        (1)
      

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
