Highly-flexible, low-cost, all stainless steel mesh-based dye-sensitized solar cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR03999H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR03999H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13203-13212Highly-flexible, low-cost, all stainless steel mesh-based dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Heng 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Zhao
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Dong
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Qianli 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dongsheng 
            Xu
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Dapeng 
            Yu
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: zhaoqing@pku.edu.cn; yudp@pku.edu.cn
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing, China
cState Key Laboratory for Structural Chemistry of Unstable and Stable Species, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China
Received 
      18th July 2014
    , Accepted 3rd September 2014First published on 5th September 2014AbstractHighly-flexible, ITO-free dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are fabricated in a simple, all-solution-based, facile, and controllable way. A double mesh structure is applied to DSSCs, and the design principles, especially scale parameters, are analyzed delicately to ensure the power conversion efficiency and mechanical flexibility of the device. The good flexibility of mesh-based DSSCs is verified by systematic bending tests compared to conventional flexible DSSCs based on PET/ITO or metal foil substrates. Commercial carbon ink is used as a counter electrode material, and it is proved to be low-cost and efficient. The double mesh structure design provides an attractive strategy toward the development of flexible and wearable electrochemical energy supplies.
1. Introduction
Along with the fast development of various bendable or wearable electronics, flexible power supplies, especially solar cells, have drawn extensive attention in recent years.1–3 Flexible solar cells can be widely used in self-powered systems in building integrated photovoltaics (BIPV), wearable electronic devices, etc.4–7 Flexible solar cells are usually fabricated based upon thin film cell technology, with active materials deposited on flexible substrates, such as plastic films, metal foil, or metal mesh. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been developed rapidly after the prototype published in 1991, due to their simple fabrication process, low cost and good weak light response.8 In most flexible DSSCs, fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass, which is commonly used as a transparent and conductive photoanode substrate, is replaced by poly(ethylene terephthalate)/indium tin oxide (PET/ITO) films [Fig. 1(a)]. Due to the loss of endurance at high temperatures, typically at 150 °C, the plastic substrates cannot be subjected to traditional TiO2 mesoporous film deposition, which require sintering at 450–500 °C. Instead, a solution process, for example a hydrothermal method or solution–gel method, is adopted for the TiO2 mesoporous film synthesis.9,10 Defects and poor electric connections between polycrystals are usually presented without high temperature sintering.11 Metal foils, such as stainless steel and titanium, are also candidates to replace FTO glass.12–14 However, metal foils are opaque so incident light can pass through the semitransparent cathode (Pt coated PET film) and electrolyte, and a portion of incident light gets lost before reaching the photoanode [Fig. 1(b)]. In addition, the TiO2 mesoporous film aboard the metal foil is easy to crack and fall off under bending.15
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of flexible DSSCs based on PET/ITO substrates (a), flexible DSSCs based on the metal foil (b), and flexible double mesh based DSSCs (c). (d) Photographs showing the real double mesh DSSC device. (e, f) Photographs showing that the device has very good flexibility. 
Recently, DSSCs using metal mesh as the photoanode substrate have been reported, which have different device structures from those based on plastic films or metal foils.16–23 TiO2 mesoporous layers are deposited around the interlaced wires of the mesh by electroless or electrochemical deposition.16,17 Generally, the light absorption material cannot cover the whole photoanode by common deposition techniques due to voids between neighboring wires in the mesh. Thus incident light that passes through the voids is not absorbed by the photoanode to generate photocurrent, and the loss ratio depends on the void ratio of the mesh.18,19 In order to fabricate efficient flexible mesh-based DSSCs, important parameters, such as the diameter of metal wires, the space between neighboring wires, and the thickness of the photoanode, need to be considered as a starting point on a basic design, which have been rarely focused in previous work.16–23 Moreover, most of the previous reports lack a detailed bending test to confirm the device flexibility.16–22
Counter electrodes of DSSCs are commonly fabricated with Pt or nanostructured carbon. Pt is a costly noble metal, and nanostructured carbon synthesis (chemical vapor deposition or carbonization) needs high temperature and energy consumption.22,23 Recently, commercial ink is proved to be a well-behaved counter electrode material to replace Pt in DSSCs.26 Here, a low-cost and highly flexible DSSC design is developed all based on the stainless steel mesh. The TiO2 deposited mesh acts as the photoanode and the commercial ink deposited mesh acts as the counter electrode. A unique two-step deposition method is developed to effectively increase the photoanode light absorption area. Commercial ink is proved to be a low-cost and effective counter electrode material compared to Pt. Structure parameters are carefully examined and designed to ensure device conversion efficiency and flexibility. The double mesh DSSCs demonstrate excellent flexibility compared to ITO/PET and metal foil structures. The design principle to realize bendable DSSCs is verified by both experiments and qualitative analysis. The developed simple and facile method to fabricate all mesh based flexible DSSCs can be easily applied to other electrochemical systems for future bendable energy conversion or storage devices.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Device design and parameter considerations
The double-mesh-electrode DSSC (DME-DSSC) consists of a photoanode covered with a dye sensitized TiO2 mesoporous layer and a counter electrode coated with commercial ink [Fig. 1(c)]. Both electrodes used the stainless steel mesh as the mechanical support and electric lines, which are embedded in the mesoporous materials (TiO2 for the photoanode, and ink for the counter electrode). The photoanode, separator, and cathode were sandwiched together to assemble the cell. The device is filled with an iodine electrolyte and encapsulated with two pieces of the PET film (transparency > 90%) [Fig. 1(c)]. The DME-DSSC can be bent at a very large angle, even rolled around a pen without fracture [Fig. 1(d)–(f)].
For conventional sandwich type DSSCs, the thickness of the TiO2 mesoporous layer greatly affects the power conversion efficiency (PCE). There is an optimal value of the thickness (Lanode), typically 10–20 μm approximately, as a result of a balance between light absorption and electron diffusion.24 For DME-DSSCs, the whole photoanode mesh is covered with TiO2 nanoparticle layers. The metal mesh wire collects electrons from all directions around, and the electron migration routes can be projected into two directions. The route parallel or vertical to incident light in the length of Lpara or Lvert is illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The electron migration is similar to that in conventional DSSCs, thus it is required that Lpara, Lvert ≤ Lanode. That is, the thickness of the TiO2 nanoparticle layer on the mesh should not be more than Lanode to ensure Lpara ≤ Lanode and the distance between neighboring metal wires should be less than double Lanode to ensure Lvert ≤ Lanode. On the other hand, the distance between the photoanode and the cathode (Lelectrolyte), often less than 200 μm, has an influence on the impedance according to ion diffusion in the electrolyte, and it should be considered when assembling the DME-DSSC.9
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the process for fabricating DME-DSSCs. (a) The cross-section view of the ideal photoanode for DME-DSSCs. (b–d) The scheme for the two-step deposition method to fabricate the photoanode. (e) The scheme for fabrication of the ink coated counter electrode. (f) The scheme for assembling the double mesh based DSSC device. 
In addition, the TiO2 nanoparticles beneath the mesh wires are shaded or not illuminated, and they can be considered as a useless DSSC in parallel to the DME-DSSC. The redundant TiO2 layers also increase the impedance of the device. So the portion of TiO2 nanoparticles shaded by the mesh should be as less as possible. The ideal morphology of TiO2 layers on the metal mesh is shown in Fig. 2(a), where the TiO2 layer facing light is much thicker than that shaded by the mesh.
Furthermore, to ensure the flexibility of DSSC and eliminate the risk of short circuit, it is necessary to insert a separator between the two electrodes to avoid contact. The separator is a porous polymer film, which is stable in the DSSC electrolyte with little impact on the impedance of the solar cell. The DSSCs using metal foil as the photoanode substrate cannot use the separator, because light can only be shone from the counter electrode side and the employment of the separator will shade the photoanode [Fig. 1(b)].
Note that the work function of Fe (∼4.5 eV) is similar to the electron affinity of FTO (∼4.4 eV). So the loss of open voltage is much less than other metals when using Fe mesh as the substrate of the photoanode.25,26
2.2. Photoanode fabrication
Based on the above considerations, a two-step deposition method is developed to fabricate a photoanode to fully use the area of mesh and the void space [Fig. 2(b)–(d)]. The metal mesh was first pretreated by forming an ultra-thin ferric oxide film by surface passivation and a dense TiO2 layer by electroless coating before the two-step deposition. These two ultra-thin oxide layers protect the metal core to avoid the galvanic reaction of iron and I−/I3− electrolyte, and prevent the recombination current at the solid–liquid interface. In addition, the pretreatment had little impact on the sheet resistance of the stainless steel mesh, which remained less than 1 Ω sq−1. The morphology of the pretreated stainless steel mesh is observed in scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images as shown in Fig. 3(a) and (e), very similar to its original surface.
 Fig. 3  (a, e) SEM images of the pre-treated stainless steel mesh. (b, f) SEM images of the stainless steel mesh after the first step TiO2 coating. (c, g) SEM images of the stainless steel mesh after the second step TiO2 coating. (d, h) SEM images of the stainless steel mesh after carbon ink dip-coating. 
A drawing press technique was developed for the first step to effectively fill up the void space by depositing a thin TiO2 nanoparticle layer (∼1 μm) on the pretreated stainless steel mesh [Fig. 2(b) and (c)]. Please see the Experimental section and Fig. S1† for more details. Note that a very small portion of the void space can be filled if the conventional doctor blade is used [Fig. S2†]. In practice, a highly viscous TiO2 nanoparticle paste was used, because it can fill up the mesh due to adhesive force and surface tensile, and can form a stable and nonflowing covering before drying [Fig. 3(b) and (f)]. The first step deposition is very important because it serves as a supporting membrane for second layer deposition using the doctor blade method.
For the second step, another mesoporous TiO2 layer about 10 μm thick was deposited on the upper side of the mesh, which will face the light source directly after assembling [Fig. 2(d)], using the conventional doctor blading technique, followed by high temperature sintering. SEM images [Fig. 3(c) and (g)] show that the upper side of the mesh is covered by thick TiO2 layers and the opposite side stays the same as that before the second step. Note that the second step deposition was applied to one side of the mesh only, because only the active layer on the side facing light is functional. The short current density (Jsc) of the solar cell increases significantly after the second step deposition (Fig. S3†). As a result, the photoanode is asymmetric on two sides of the mesh, according to the design that little photon-absorption material is shaded by the mesh wires [Fig. 2(a)] and the detailed analysis of such design is discussed in ESI.† It is worth mentioning that the TiO2 layer on either side of the mesh is uniform even on the milli-scale as shown in Fig. S4(a) and (b).†
Above device structure parameter considerations give an optimized thickness of an anatase mesoporous film of 10–20 μm. Here we specifically choose the stainless steel mesh with a mesh number of 635, which has both the diameter of mesh wires and the distance between neighboring wires of 20 μm. After two layer deposition, the thickness of the anatase mesoporous film is about 10–20 μm, which exactly satisfies the device parameter requirements. In addition, the light absorption area is significantly increased by this novel two-step deposition method. Furthermore, the developed two step method can be fully integrated into the existing photoanode fabrication process, which includes doctor blading, high temperature sintering, compared to other reports of mesh-based DSSC fabrication.9–11,15–20
2.3. Counter electrode fabrication
The fabrication of a cathode is an all-solution-based process. Commercial carbon ink has been verified to be well-behaved in electrical double-layer capacitors.3,27 It consists of 20 nm carbon nanoparticles and a binding agent such as gum arabic or animal glue. Carbon ink was deposited around the metal wires using the dip-coating method followed by sintering in inert gas to remove the binding agent [Fig. 2(e)]. SEM images [Fig. 3(d) and (h)] reveal that the mesh was coated with carbon nanoparticles uniformly. Introducing commercial ink as the counter electrode material for DSSC and the simple cheap dip-coating method greatly shrink the cost of device fabrication, which is a great step forward in the field. Finally, the photoanode and counter electrode are assembled together with the separator [Fig. 2(f)], and the DME-DSSC is completed after electrolyte injection.
2.4. Device bending tests
The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the resulting solar cell showed an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.60 V, a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 3.54 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 43% under standard illumination conditions (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) [Fig. 4(a)]. Note that the PCE of DME-DSSCs is relatively lower than traditional DSSCs based on FTO glass. Commercial FTO glass has a steady and smooth surface, and doctor blading works for it very well. But the metal mesh will not remain flat until it is tensed up. The two-step method needs a flat mesh during the whole process to obtain a uniform TiO2 colloid film. In real fabrication it is rather difficult to meet the requirements exactly by human hands, therefore there might be some defects embedded in the TiO2 layers. The area on the anode with defects can be treated as a poorly performed sub-cell in parallel to the rest of the anode. The performance of the solar cell is pulled down then. The DME-DSSC showed excellent flexibility and bending tolerance, as demonstrated by the J–V curves produced with different bending radii [Fig. 4(a)]. Bending test details are shown in Fig. S5.† The device performance did not change significantly at very high bending curvatures. The slight rise in Jsc, which may be caused by a decrease in the electrolyte transport space between the electrodes, can be fully recovered after the device returns to its flat strain-free form. No distinct degradation in performance was observed for the solar cell even after 500 cycles of high curvature bending [bending radius: 10 mm, Fig. 4(b)]. Fig. 4(c) summarizes the Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE values as functions of bending times, and they all remain stable according to various bending cycles, up to 500 bending times. The DME-DSSC has long-term and repeatable flexibility, which is much better than the work reported.12–20 The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were measured from 100 kHz to 100 mHz at open voltage and in the dark for the sample before bending and after 500 bending cycles. The radius of the semicircle in the Nyquist plot [Fig. 4(d)] increases only a little after 500 bending cycles, implying that electrochemical transmission and the reaction process remained stationary during bending.
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves of the DME-DSSC under non-bending and various bending conditions at bending radii of 10 mm and 20 mm. (b) J–V curves of DME-DSSCs up to 500 bending cycles at a bending radius of 10 mm. (c) Photovoltaic properties (Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE) of the DME-DSSC as a function of bending cycles up to 500 times at a bending radius of 10 mm. (d) Nyquist plot for the EIS analysis of DME-DSSCs under non-bending conditions and after 500 bending cycles at a bending radius of 10 mm. 
2.5. Anode comparison
The metal foil-based DSSCs were fabricated for comparison to further reveal the advantage of the use of a metal mesh as a substrate to fabricate flexible DSSCs. Because light has to illuminate from the counter electrode side due to an opaque photoanode substrate (metal foil), a semitransparent Pt coated PET/ITO is used as the counter electrode [Fig. 1(b)] instead of an ink coated mesh. For the same reason, the working area of the solar cell was surrounded by a sealing gasket instead of using an opaque separator. The J–V characteristics showed rather worse photovoltaic performance compared to DME-DSSCs [Fig. S6†]. The worse performance is comprehensive due to the intense light absorption of the semitransparent cathode and electrolyte. In addition, considering the space among the grid structure, the mesh carries more active materials than the foil with the same deposition thickness and working area. Short circuit during bending at a large bending curvature is found in metal foil-based DSSCs without a separator.
2.6. Flexibility explanation
In conventional flexible DSSCs, active material layers often adhere to flexible conductive film substrates. During bending, tensile strain arises on one electrode and compress strain on the other electrode, and the two electrodes are connected together by force. During bending, the substrate surface bears compress or tensile strain.1,3,7 The strain intensity is determined by the distance from the active layer to the mechanical neutral plane [green dashed lines in Fig. 5(a) and (b)], which may be estimated as half the thickness of the flexible substrate (more than 100 μm, typically). The mesoporous material layer is too vulnerable to crack and fall off, especially during repeated bending. If the stainless steel mesh is used as the substrate, the distance from the mechanical neutral plane to the deposition will become much shorter, because the diameter of the mesh wire is only 20 μm [Fig. 5(a) and (b)]. That is, the strain is decreased by an order of magnitude under the same bending. In addition, the stainless steel mesh can also be used as a mechanical support to bear bending strain and conductive lines for electron transport at the same time.
 Fig. 5  (a, b) A schematic comparison of the cross section of deposition on the metal mesh (a) and foil (b) under bending. The mechanical neutral plane is indicated by green dashed lines. (c) A schematic diagram of the metal mesh bent around the red dashed line, which crosses the x axis with angle θ. 
In addition, the morphology of the mesh has three-dimensional complexity, with the mesh wires ringed by TiO2 layers. This morphology has an unique advantage to benefit bending, as those metal wires with the surrounded TiO2 layers can be considered as coaxial cables, which are mechanically independent of each other [Fig. 5(a)]. Although some cracks which fit the shape of the mesh wires can be found in the thick TiO2 layer [Fig. 3(c)], these cracks can separate the TiO2 layer into independent mechanical domains and will not cause deposition loss or peeling because they are still stably fixed to the mesh wires during bending, as shown in the scheme in Fig. 5(a). In contrast, the deposits on metal foil are easy to fall off once they crack or break under bending [Fig. 5(b)].
In order to compare the adherence of TiO2 layers on different substrates (metal mesh and metal foil), the devices were bent in an extremely small radius less than 0.1 mm, namely folded. The folding tests showed that the deposition on the metal foil was more vulnerable than that on the metal mesh (Fig. 6). After folding, a large area of the TiO2 layer fell off along the folding line on the metal foil [with the boundaries marked by green dash lines in Fig. 6(a) and (b)]. In contrast, the TiO2 layers were bonded with the mesh wire firmly without peeling [Fig. 6(c) and (d)] although cracks were observed along the folding line on the metal mesh, as we interpreted above.
 Fig. 6  (a, b) SEM images of the TiO2 mesoporous layer on the stainless steel foil after folding along the folding line indicated by the red dashed line. Active layers were peeled off with the peeling off boundaries indicated by green dashed lines. (c, d) SEM images of the TiO2 mesoporous layer on the stainless steel mesh after folding. (e, f) SEM images of the ink layer on the stainless steel foil (e) and stainless steel mesh (f) after folding. The red dashed lines illustrate the folding line. 
Finally, in practice, the bending direction is not always along the steel wire, and more commonly, with an angle between the two directions (θ). That is, when the device is bent around a cylinder with the radius of R, the actual bending radius of the stainless steel wire is R/cos2θ or R/sin2θ (there are two vertical directions for all wires), which is not less than R [Fig. 5(c)]. Thus the strains are decreased to cos2θ and sin2θ times (half in average). All the above considerations contribute to the good flexibility of the DME-DSSC devices.
2.7. Cathode comparison
Four types of flexible counter electrodes of different materials and various substrates were prepared for comparison to further demonstrate the advantages of ink coated mesh as the counter electrode: Type A: our design of double-mesh based DSSCs; Type B (material comparison): 10 nm thick Pt coated stainless steel mesh (Pt vs. ink); Type C (structure comparison): ink coated stainless steel foil (foil vs. mesh); Type D: 10 nm thick Pt coated PET/ITO film (conventional flexible cathode vs. our work).
Then four types of DSSCs were assembled with the same stainless steel mesh based photoanode and four types of counter electrodes. Under 1.5 AM illumination, J–V curves of the four devices are shown in Fig. 7(a). The photovoltaic performance parameters are summarized in Table S1.† Type A and Type B give better photovoltaic performance than Type C and Type D. For the counter electrode, compared to the plate structure such as a foil or PET/ITO film (Type C or D), the mesh structure (Type A and B) has more surface catalytic area to contain more active materials, leading to a better photovoltaic performance. In addition, much better flexibility can be achieved in the mesh structure for the same reason mentioned above, which will be demonstrated later.
 Fig. 7  (a) J–V curves of four types of DSSCs with different counter electrodes: ink coated mesh (Type A), Pt coated mesh (Type B), ink coated foil (Type C) and Pt coated PET/ITO (Type D). (b, d, f) J–V curves of Type B (b), Type C (d) and Type D (f) DSSCs up to bending cycles of 500 times at a bending radius of 10 mm. (c, e) Photovoltaic properties (Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE) of Type B (c), Type C (e) DSSCs as a function of bending cycles up to 500 times at a bending radius of 10 mm. 
The photovoltaic performance of Type A is comparable to that of Type B. The maximum Jsc of the former (3.38 mA cm−2) is just a little lower than that of the latter (3.83 mA cm−2), and so does the maximum PCE (0.83% vs. 0.93%), indicating that commercial ink can act as an effective counter electrode material in DSSCs. The observed difference of the two DSSCs is on account of the catalytic activity of cathode materials. The comparability of ink and Pt as the counter electrode active material was further confirmed in conventional sandwich type DSSCs (Fig. S7†). From the cost point of view, each square meter of the 10 nm thick Pt cathode uses ∼0.2 g Pt, which costs ∼$10, and each square meter of the ink cathode uses 4 g carbon black, which costs less than $0.01. The use of commercial carbon ink as the counter electrode of DSSCs can significantly decrease the fabrication cost of DSSCs, and the dip-coating method for carbon deposition is much simpler and cheaper than platinum deposition.
Type C has lower Jsc (2.63 mA cm−2) and PCE (0.59%) than Type A. The carbon loading capacity of foil (0.20 mg cm−2) is rather smaller than that of mesh (0.44 mg cm−2), which have more complex morphology and a larger surface area. Higher carbon load (mesh structure) leads to a larger catalytic area and better device performance.
Flexibility tests of Types B, C, and D were performed after every 100 times bending (bending radius: 10 mm) up to 500 times. Fig. 7(b) and (d) show that Type B and Type C have good device flexibility and stability. Jsc, Voc, FF and PCE are summarized in Fig. 7(c) and (e) according to the above J–V curves. During 500 times bending cycles, the photovoltaic performance of these cells varied only slightly around the statistical average. After folding, the morphology of the ink coated mesh (Type A) was unchanged, and some creases were found in the stainless steel foil (Type C), as shown in Fig. 6(e) and (f).
The performance of Type D declines significantly after 100th bending according to Fig. 7(f), which can be attributed to the broken transparent conductive oxide (TCO) layer. Additionally, cyclic voltammograms (Fig. S8†) show relatively lower polarization in the PET/ITO/Pt electrode compared with the ink coated metal mesh. That is, the J–Ewe slope at the origin is higher from the data of the metal mesh, because of the large surface area and good adhesion of carbon nanoparticles on the metal mesh. This experiment sufficiently confirms the advantage of using a metal mesh as a substrate for flexible DSSCs compared to the conventionally used PET/ITO, for giving much better bending performance and much lower cost. Furthermore, ITO is totally unnecessary in mesh-based device fabrication.
3. Conclusions
In conclusion, ultra-flexible and low-cost DSSCs are developed in a double stainless steel mesh structure using a simple and facile method based upon delicate structure parameter design. A new two-step deposition method is developed to vastly increase the light absorption area of the photoanode. Commercial carbon ink is proved to be a low-cost and efficient cathode material for DSSCs. The all mesh-based DSSCs demonstrate much better flexibility than the DSSCs based on PET/ITO films or metal foils, which is affirmed on the basis of detailed analysis and systematic bending tests. We can further increase the PCE of the devices by improving the anode fabrication, for example, to use roll to roll handling to ensure a flat mesh on a large scale. In addition, using a thinner separator to make the two electrodes get closer may be helpful. The double metal mesh structure can be applied to other electrochemical devices, such as quantum dot sensitized solar cells, lithium ion batteries, and supercapacitors, to make them bendable. The DME-DSSCs may open up possibilities for textile and fabric production for flexible and wearable energy supplies.
4. Experimental section
4.1. Preparation of the photoanode
TiO2 nanoparticle coated stainless steel mesh: the stainless steel meshes (635 mesh, 316 L stainless steel, Hebei, China) were cut into 10 mm × 30 mm pieces. They were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone followed by deionized water for 15 min. They were heated at 500 °C under ambient conditions for 15 minutes to form an oxidized layer outside the Fe wire to protect the metal core and avoid the galvanic battery effect. The stainless steel meshes were dipped in an ethanol solution of titanium isopropoxide (J&K) (0.01 M) and acetyl acetone (0.02 M) for 30 seconds followed by sintering at 500 °C for 15 min, and this process was repeated three times to deposit a dense TiO2 layer for preventing the recombination current at the iron–electrolyte interface.16 The two step method was used for TiO2 coating. For the first step, commercial anatase nanoparticles (Wuhan Geao Co. Ltd) of 20 nm diameter were deposited onto the stainless steel mesh by the drawing press technique, to ensure uniform deposition on both sides. After drying in air at 100 °C, the void space of the mesh was full of anatase nanoparticles. And then, a homemade TiO2 nanoparticle paste was applied on one side of the mesh by doctor blading (the thickness of the film is controlled with a 60 μm tape). The homemade watery TiO2 nanoparticle paste was used for the second step deposition because it is easy to control the thickness of the light absorption layer. The meshes were sintered at 450 °C for 30 min. Finally, the meshes were immersed in cis-bis(isothiocyanato) bis(2,2-bipyridyl-4,4-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) bistetrabutyl ammonium (N719, Solaronix, 0.5 mM) in ethanol for 24 hours. A similar process was applied to the stainless steel foils when doing anode comparison.
Drawing press technique: put the mesh on the glass between two pieces of tape (thickness: 60 μm). Apply a portion of the paste near the middle of the mesh. Cover the mesh and tape with another glass. Press the upper glass to spread the paste in the gap between the two glass pieces. Draw the mesh out from the gap slowly.
4.2. Preparation of the counter electrode
Ink coated stainless steel mesh: after cleaning and pretreating according to the process of photoanode fabrication, the stainless steel meshes were dipped in commercial carbon ink (Hero, Shanghai Ink Factory in China) for 30 seconds and dried in air. The meshes were heated at 300 °C in argon for 30 min to remove organics. A similar process was applied to the stainless steel foils.
Platinum coated substrates: a 10 nm platinum film was deposited on one side of the substrates by electron beam evaporation. The substrates include PET/ITO films and pretreated stainless steel meshes (each side was coated).
4.3. Fabrication of solar cell devices
DSSC was assembled with the prepared photoanode and counter electrode. A piece of graft polypropylene separator (thickness: 60 μm, PPAS-06, Shanghai Shilong Co. Ltd) was inserted between the two electrodes to prevent short circuit. Then, the DSSC was packaged with two pieces of the PET film (thickness: 118 μm, Toray, Japan) using an adhesive tape (300LSE, 3M). The electrolyte consisting of lithium iodide (50 mM, >99.9%, Aldrich), iodine (30 mM, >99.99%, Aldrich), 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMII) (1 M, >99%, Aldrich), GuNCS (0.1 M, 97%, Aldrich) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (0.5 M, >99%, Aldrich) in acetonitrile (99.8%, Aldrich) was introduced into the gap between the two PET films by capillary action.
4.4. Characterization and electrical measurement
The surface morphology of the electrode was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (Navo nanoSEM 430, FEI). The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were obtained using the Keithley model 4200 source measure unit, and the cell was illuminated using a solar simulator (Newport 69911) under AM1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2). The electrochemical impedance spectrum (EIS) and cyclic voltammograms were measured using a potentiostat/galvanostat (SP-150, Bio-Logic, France).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National 973 projects (2011CB707601, 2012CB933401, 2013CB932602, MOST) from the Ministry of Science and Technology, China, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC51272007, 11023003, 11234001). Q. Z. acknowledges the Beijing Nova Program (XX2013003) and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University of China. This work was also supported by the National Fund for Fostering Talents of Basic Science (NFFTBS) with grant no. J1030310 and J1103205.
References
M. Koo, K. Park, S. H. Lee, M. Suh, D. Y. Jeon, J. W. Choi, K. Kang and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Kim, J. Noh, I. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Seo, S. Jeon, T. S. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Zhao, W. Wang, H. Dong, D. Xu, G. Zou, H. Duan and D. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhu, A. Kumar and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, H. Razavi, J. Do, A. Moriwaki, O. Ergen, Y. Chueh, P. W. Leu, J. C. Ho, T. Takahashi, L. A. Reichertz, S. Neale, K. Yu, M. Wu, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Adv. Mater., 2009, 8, 648 CAS .
J. Yoon, A. J. Baca, S. Park, P. Elvikis, J. B. Geddes, L. Li, R. H. Kim, J. Xiao, S. Wang, T. Kim, M. J. Motala, B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, J. A. Lewis, R. G. Nuzzo, P. M. Ferreira, Y. Huang, A. Rockett and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
H. Lindström, A. Holmberg, E. Magnusson, S. Lindquist, L. Malmqvist and A. Hagfeldt, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 97 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, T. Yoshida, T. Oekermann, K. Furuta and H. Minoura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1228 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Nogueira, C. Longo and M. D. Paoli, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kang, N. Park, K. S. Ryu, S. H. Chang and K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, N. C. Ha, G. Rothenberger, P. Liska, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeerudin, P. Péchy, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2006, 38, 4004 RSC .
J. Wu, Y. Xiao, Q. Tang, G. Yue, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan, Z. Lan, S. Yin and T. Sato, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Lee, J. Y. Kim, B. Kim, N. Park, K. Kim, J. Shin, I. Choi and M. J. Ko, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8950 CAS .
X. Fan, F. Wang, Z. Chu, L. Chen, C. Zhang and D. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 073501 CrossRef PubMed .
C. S. Rustomji, C. J. Frandsen, S. Jin and M. J. Tauber, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, J. Qiu, F. Zhuge, X. Li, J. Lee, Y. Kim, H. Kim and Y. Hwang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 225602 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Shen, J. Yan and H. Xu, Prog. Photovoltaics: Res. Appl., 2010, 18, 285 CAS .
Z. Liu, V. Subramania and M. Misra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14028 CAS .
S. I. Cha, Y. Kim, K. H. Hwang, Y. Shin, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6071 CAS .
Z. Yang, T. Chen, R. He, G. Guan, H. Li, L. Qiu and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Malara, M. Manca, M. Lanza, C. Hübner, E. Piperopoulos and G. Gigli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8377 CAS .
B. Lee, D. Hwang, P. Guo, S. Ho, D. B. Buchholtz, C. Wang and R. P. H. Chang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Q. Zhao, H. Li, H. Wu, D. Zou and D. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2775 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, S. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr03999hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of flexible DSSCs based on PET/ITO substrates (a), flexible DSSCs based on the metal foil (b), and flexible double mesh based DSSCs (c). (d) Photographs showing the real double mesh DSSC device. (e, f) Photographs showing that the device has very good flexibility.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the process for fabricating DME-DSSCs. (a) The cross-section view of the ideal photoanode for DME-DSSCs. (b–d) The scheme for the two-step deposition method to fabricate the photoanode. (e) The scheme for fabrication of the ink coated counter electrode. (f) The scheme for assembling the double mesh based DSSC device.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a, e) SEM images of the pre-treated stainless steel mesh. (b, f) SEM images of the stainless steel mesh after the first step TiO2 coating. (c, g) SEM images of the stainless steel mesh after the second step TiO2 coating. (d, h) SEM images of the stainless steel mesh after carbon ink dip-coating.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves of the DME-DSSC under non-bending and various bending conditions at bending radii of 10 mm and 20 mm. (b) J–V curves of DME-DSSCs up to 500 bending cycles at a bending radius of 10 mm. (c) Photovoltaic properties (Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE) of the DME-DSSC as a function of bending cycles up to 500 times at a bending radius of 10 mm. (d) Nyquist plot for the EIS analysis of DME-DSSCs under non-bending conditions and after 500 bending cycles at a bending radius of 10 mm.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a, b) A schematic comparison of the cross section of deposition on the metal mesh (a) and foil (b) under bending. The mechanical neutral plane is indicated by green dashed lines. (c) A schematic diagram of the metal mesh bent around the red dashed line, which crosses the x axis with angle θ.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a, b) SEM images of the TiO2 mesoporous layer on the stainless steel foil after folding along the folding line indicated by the red dashed line. Active layers were peeled off with the peeling off boundaries indicated by green dashed lines. (c, d) SEM images of the TiO2 mesoporous layer on the stainless steel mesh after folding. (e, f) SEM images of the ink layer on the stainless steel foil (e) and stainless steel mesh (f) after folding. The red dashed lines illustrate the folding line.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) J–V curves of four types of DSSCs with different counter electrodes: ink coated mesh (Type A), Pt coated mesh (Type B), ink coated foil (Type C) and Pt coated PET/ITO (Type D). (b, d, f) J–V curves of Type B (b), Type C (d) and Type D (f) DSSCs up to bending cycles of 500 times at a bending radius of 10 mm. (c, e) Photovoltaic properties (Voc, Jsc, FF and PCE) of Type B (c), Type C (e) DSSCs as a function of bending cycles up to 500 times at a bending radius of 10 mm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr03999h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
