Carbothermal synthesis of metal-functionalized nanostructures for energy and environmental applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA01228G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA01228G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13114-13188Carbothermal synthesis of metal-functionalized nanostructures for energy and environmental applications

        
          
            Yafei 
            Shen
          
          
        
      ab
aSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing 210044, P.R. China. E-mail: yafeisjtu@gmail.com; jsshenyafei@sina.com
bSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, P.R. China
Received 
      13th February 2015
    , Accepted 30th March 2015First published on 9th April 2015AbstractCarbothermal reduction could be employed as a facile technology for the synthesis of various novel materials, especially transition-metal-functionalized nanostructures. In particular, energy materials, such as ZnO, MnO2, and LiFePO4, combined with different carbon nanostructures have been widely synthesized via carbothermal reduction, which could be well established industrially due to its low-cost starting materials. In addition, a variety of carbon sources can be employed as comparatively low-cost carbon precursors for the synthesis of carbonaceous functional materials, such as porous carbon-coated magnetic nanoparticles (e.g., Co3O4@C, Fe3O4@C, and FeC3–C). These functional materials have great potential for use in energy and environmental applications. Carbothermal reduction methods possess some incomparable advantages, such as convenience, relatively low cost, and good repeatability, for commercial applications. However, they normally require a relatively high temperature for sustaining carbothermic reaction. Consequently, novel structures can also be derived from renewable, abundant carbon precursors. Examples include lignocellulosic biomass or other biological products derived from food or agricultural wastes (carbohydrates, cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, chitin, inorganics, and proteins). Thermochemical conversion of biomass, including pyrolysis in an inert environment, has been developed for the production of energy and carbon materials. Furthermore, it is still a potential challenge to simultaneously produce high-quality biofuel products and synthesize value-added functionalized materials via in situ carbothermal reduction. This review will be a powerful resource for stimulating the development of sustainable metal-functionalized nanostructured materials by carbothermal reduction integrated with other advanced technologies, particularly for strengthening efforts towards novel materials for clean energy and environmental applications in the future sustainable society.Yafei ShenYafei Shen received his MSc degree (2012) from Shanghai Jiaotong University (SJTU), PR China. In this period, his research interests include energy & chemical engineering. He was awarded the excellent master dissertation in Shanghai, PR China. He received his PhD (2015) at Tokyo Institute of Technology (TokyoTech), Japan, supported by China Scholarship Council (CSC). After that, he worked as a lecturer in SJTU. Currently, he is hired as a professor in Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology (NUIST), PR China. His research interests mainly include tar and fuel gas cleaning, thermochemical conversion of wastes, and carbonaceous materials for energy and environmental application. He has authored more than 30 academic publications in the fields of energy and environment.
1. Introduction
1.1. General introduction
Carbothermic reactions involve the reduction of substances (e.g., metal oxides) using carbon sources as reducing agents. These chemical reactions are commonly conducted at temperatures of several hundred degrees celsius. Such processes are often applied for production of the elemental forms of many elements. Carbothermic reactions are not useful for some metal oxides such as those of sodium and potassium. The ability of metals to participate in carbothermic reactions can be predicted from an Ellingham diagram as shown in Fig. 1,1 which plots standard free energy changes (ΔG) per mole O2 as a function of the absolute temperature. Carbothermal reactions produce carbon oxides (i.e., CO and CO2). The facility of these conversions is ascribed to the entropy of the reaction: two solids (a metal oxide and carbon) are converted into a new solid (i.e., a metal) and a gas (i.e., CO), which has a high entropy. Heat is required for carbothermic reactions because diffusion of the reacting solids is slow otherwise. Oxidation of C to CO results in an increase in the number of gas molecules; it is accompanied by a large increase in entropy and is favored at high temperature. Conversely, oxidation of CO leaves the number of gaseous molecules unchanged; there is a small change in entropy [ΔS0 = 2.93 J (K−1 mol−1)] and the free energy almost depends on temperature. The two dotted lines intersect at 983 K, indicating that ΔG for the disproportionation reaction is zero. In addition, this diagram includes plots of ΔG for the oxidation of several representative metals. Such a diagram indicates that below 710 °C (983 K) carbon is a stronger reducing agent when it is converted into CO2 rather than CO, whereas above 710 °C the reverse is true. As reduction of metal oxides with C will occur when ΔG is negative, such a reduction becomes progressively more feasible at higher temperatures. For instance, ZnO is reduced at a relatively low temperature, whereas MgO is reduced at temperatures approaching 2000 K. However, in predicting the outcome of such reactions, a number of otherwise reasonable reductions cannot be used, as the metal forms a carbide such as Cr and Ti.
 Fig. 1  Ellingham diagram for the free energy of the formation of metallic oxides (reproduced with permission from ref. 1). 
Carbothermal reduction of iron oxides is one of the oldest technologies; the history of humans in the last 4000–5000 years is defined as originating from the beginning of the Iron Age.2 Nowadays, interest in the direct reduction of solid iron oxides is supported by its increased application for sponge iron production. It is no wonder that this process has been widely studied, similarly to the carbothermal reduction of Co, Ni and Cu oxides. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the interaction of two solid reactants (i.e., oxide and carbon) at temperatures below 800–1000 °C, along with the formation of a solid metal. The most widespread is the oxide reduction mechanism via gaseous intermediates including CO and CO2 in accordance with the following reactions (R1) and (R2):3 MO (s) + CO (g) → M (s) + CO2 (g)(R1) CO2 (g) + C (s) → 2CO (g)(R2)
However, there are some obstacles impeding its application. The most significant is slow (thermodynamically limited) restoration of CO at low temperatures. The others are connected with the interpretation of an autocatalytic effect observed for all these oxides and the high rate of their reduction in vacuum conditions. In this case, some alternative mechanisms have been proposed. For example, metal oxides reduction via gaseous metal carbides can occur via the interaction of metal vapor with carbon (R3) and (R4). 2MO (s) + MC2 (g) → 3M (s) + 2CO (g)(R3) M (s) + 2C (s) → MC2 (g)(R4)
This mechanism has mainly been supported by the direct observation of metal and gaseous carbide vapors by mass spectrometry. It was used for the interpretation of temporal oscillations in the kinetics of the interactions of carbon with the oxides of different elements.4–6 However, this mechanism cannot normally be applied to the reduction of iron, cobalt, nickel and copper oxides due to their low saturated pressures at reduction temperatures and the impossibility of transportation of metal vapor to carbon in line with reaction (R4). Subsequently, thermal reduction via the gaseous intermediates H2 and H2O has been proposed as follows in (R5)–(R7). MO (s) + H2 (g) → M (s) + H2O (g)(R5) C (s) + H2O (g) → H2 (g) + CO (g)(R6) MO (s) + C (s) → M (s) + CO (g)(R7)
Hydrogen in the reaction mixture derived from water vapor could be adsorbed on the carbon surface. However, some doubts have been cast on the presence of H2 in quantities which are necessary for efficient reduction, especially in a vacuum. Actually, the process of carbothermal reduction of iron, cobalt, nickel and copper oxides is a decomposition process, especially for solid-state decomposition reactions. Moreover, thermal dissociation based on dissociative evaporation of the reactant with simultaneous condensation of the low-volatility product has been invoked to interpret the kinetics of FeO, CoO, NiO and Cu2O reduction by carbon. The characteristic property of the carbothermal reduction of Fe, Co, Ni and Cu oxides is an autocatalytic development, indicating the rate of isothermal reduction accelerates as the reduction progresses, and passes through a maximum. The function of carbon in this process is to react with the oxygen liberated from the oxide decomposition, thus maintaining a low partial pressure of oxygen in the system. In other words, carbon can play a key role as a buffer in this process. Significantly, this mechanism does not work if the metal remains in the gaseous phase at the temperature of oxide reduction. As for the oxides of metal elements like Al, Cr, Mg, Mn, Sn, Zn, etc., carbothermal reduction most likely occurs via the gaseous carbide mechanism.5,6
1.2. Carbothermal synthesis of materials
Carbothermal reduction can be used as a facile technology for the synthesis of various materials, especially transition-metal-functionalized nanostructures. In particular, energy materials such as ZnO, MnO2, and LiFePO4 combined with different carbon nanostructures have been widely synthesized via carbothermal reduction, which could be well established industrially due to its low-cost starting materials. In addition, a variety of carbon sources can be used as comparatively low-cost carbon precursors for the synthesis of carbonaceous functional materials, such as porous carbon magnetic nanoparticles (e.g., Co3O4@C, Fe3O4@C, and FeC3–C). These functional materials have great potential for use in energy and environmental applications. Carbothermal reduction approaches possess some incomparable advantages such as convenience, relatively low cost, and good repeatability for industrial applications. Moreover, the development of more flexible routes to new carbonaceous materials derived from renewable resources has only recently become a topic of significant interest. It is appropriate to note that materials researchers can draw inspiration from a variety of natural processes and structures to produce various complex nanostructured functional materials, which are required to address the energy and chemical challenges of a future sustainable society. Significantly, new structures could also be derived from renewable, abundant carbon precursors. Examples include lignocellulosic biomass or other products contained in food/agricultural wastes (i.e., carbohydrates, cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, chitin, inorganics, proteins, etc.). In recent years, thermochemical conversion of biomass (e.g., pyrolysis) has been developed rapidly for energy and carbon materials production. It has still been a major challenge to simultaneously produce high-quality energy and synthesize value-added functional materials. Considering the lack of a relevant comprehensive report, this review aims to survey recent progresses in the carbothermal synthesis of commonly used metal nanostructures (especially for the non-precious transition metals in black characters in Fig. 2). Besides, other metal nanostructures (e.g., Sn and Sb) are included for energy and environmental applications.
 Fig. 2  Transition metals in the periodic table of elements. 
2. Carbothermal reduction
2.1. Direct carbothermic reduction
The carbothermic reduction process is a mature technology using carbon to directly reduce metal oxides (ores) to produce metals such as iron in blast furnaces, as well as metallurgical grade silicon. The same process can be used to reduce minerals containing various metallic oxides in the lunar regolith to produce oxygen. Ostrovski et al. and Kononov et al.7,8 used carbothermic reduction to extract oxygen from the regolith by high-temperature reaction of oxides with a carbon source and recover oxygen in a multi-step process including three basic steps. The first step is carbothermic reduction of metal oxides in minerals (e.g., ferrous, silicon, titanium oxides, etc.) which are mostly reduced by a carbon source (e.g., methane) to form carbon monoxide and hydrogen. Subsequently, carbon monoxide is reduced by reacting with hydrogen to form water and methane, which is recycled. Finally, the generated water could be electrolyzed to form oxygen and hydrogen. Therefore, this closed cyclic process does not depend on the presence of water precursors in the lunar materials. It produces oxygen from ilmenite and silicate minerals in the lunar regolith regardless of their precise composition and fine structure. Fig. 3 shows integrated carbothermic reduction of the regolith, where carbothermal tests were conducted using a 440 W CO2 laser. The equivalent oxygen yields are up to 28%. Moreover, the carbon loss in the processed regolith with these oxygen yields is typically very low (<15%).
 Fig. 3  Integrated system for the carbothermic reduction of regolith for field tests (taken with permission from ref. 7). 
Sun et al.9 reported a simple carbothermal reduction route for the production of SnO2 nanobelts and nanowires. Fig. 4a–d show SEM images of the synthesized SnO2 nanostructures on substrates at different deposition temperatures. Fig. 4e shows the formation temperatures. SnO2 nanobelts grew mainly in the temperature range 1000–850 °C. The typical widths of the nanobelts formed in region I (1000–950 °C) are in the range 1–3 μm, with lengths ranging from tens to hundreds of micrometers, even up to millimeters (Fig. 4a). SnO2 nanowires grew mainly in the temperature range 850–600 °C. The diameters of the nanowires formed in region III (850–750 °C) normally range from 100 nm to 300 nm, with lengths of several tens of micrometers (Fig. 4c). The substrate temperature and the oxide vapor concentration are two significant parameters for forming different morphologies and sizes of SnO2 nanostructures via the reduction of SnO2 powders. The SnO2 nanostructures were synthesized by carbothermal evaporation. Based on the vapor–solid mechanism,10 the growth mechanism can be explained by (R8)–(R10). 2SnO2 (s) + C (s) → 2SnO (v) + CO2 (v)(R8) 2SnO (v) → SnO2 (s) + Sn (l)(R9) 2Sn (l) + O2 (v) → 2SnO (v)(R10)
 Fig. 4  SEM images of SnO2 nanostructures: (a) wide nanobelts; (b) narrow nanobelts, inset showing a closer view of one curved SnO2 nanobelt; (c) thick nanowires; (d) thin nanowires. (e) Schematic of the formation temperatures (reproduced with permission from ref. 9). 
This direct carbothermal reduction method requires neither complex apparatus nor metal catalysts11 or templates, whereas it does need a high reaction temperature or other relatively strict conditions. SnO2 nanowires could also be synthesized by a carbothermal reduction process at a lower temperature of 800–850 °C from a SnO precursor at normal atmospheric pressure employing CuO as a catalyst.11 Firstly, CuO powder was reduced by active carbon powder at 700 °C to yield Cu2O and CO2(R11). Commonly, the phase transformation from SnO to SnO2 in an ambient atmosphere may occur at temperatures as low as 370 °C,12 but in a powder form not a nanoform if heated alone. Thus, Cu2O acted as a catalyst for transforming SnO into SnO2 in a nanoform at 850 °C by the reaction between Cu2O and SnO (R12). The SnO2 nanoparticles acted as nucleation sites and initiated the growth of SnO2 nanowires by means of the vapor–solid mechanism.13,14 CuO could be regenerated via(R13) and (R14) by oxidation. 4CuO (S) + C (S) → 2Cu2O (s) + CO2 (g)(R11) SnO (S) + Cu2O (S) → SnO2 (s) + 2Cu (s)(R12) 2Cu (S) + O2 (g) → 2CuO (s)(R13) 2Cu2O (S) + O2 (g) → 4CuO (s)(R14)
2.2. Carbothermal hydrogen reduction
The temperature and energy required for the conversion of a metal oxide into the pure metal are defined by the reaction thermodynamics and kinetics. A major reductant for metal oxides is carbon in the form of coke or char. Carbothermal reduction of stable metal oxides such as MnO, Cr2O3, SiO2, TiO2 and Al2O3 requires relatively high temperatures. Nevertheless, the efficiency of carbothermal reduction processes could be improved by decreasing the reduction temperature and improving the reaction kinetics. This can be achieved by decreasing the CO partial pressure or increasing the mass transfer in the gas phase by running the process in an inert atmosphere or in hydrogen to aid the reduction reaction. At low temperatures, reduction of oxides takes place in the solid state. It is well known that carbothermal reduction of metal oxides in the solid state occurs via the gas phase. When carbothermal reduction takes place in the presence of hydrogen, methane is formed by means of carbon reacting with hydrogen (R15). This changes the mechanism of reduction, which then proceeds via(R16). In addition, the reduction of the metal oxide to the carbide (i.e., MC) can be represented by (R17). C (s) + 2H2 (g) → CH4 (g)(R15) MO (s) + 2CH4 (g) → MC (s) + CO (g) + 4H2 (g)(R16) MO (s) + 3CO (g) → MC (s) + 2CO2 (g)(R17)
In (R1) and (R2), or (R17) and (R2), carbon and oxygen are transferred between solid phases by CO and CO2, respectively. In the reduction of stable metal oxides similar to manganese or titanium oxides, the CO2 partial pressure is very low, below 10−4 atm (subject to the applicable temperature); therefore, mass transfer could be a limiting step for the reaction rate. In (R6) and (R7), carbon is transferred between a solid carbonaceous material and an oxide by CH4 with the formation of CO and H2, which are transferred to the gas phase. The partial pressure of CH4 is much higher than the partial pressure of CO2, allowing the carbothermal reduction of manganese and titanium oxides in a H2 atmosphere to occur at a much faster rate. The reduction temperature can be decreased by 300–400 °C in the carbothermal reduction of manganese, titanium (ilmenite), and aluminium oxides. Furthermore, control of the gas atmosphere in reactions is an important factor in the development of carbothermal reduction of metal oxides. Gas species are directly involved in carbothermal reactions, so the composition of the gas phase affects the reaction rate. Fig. 5 shows reduction curves for MnO2 obtained in hydrogen, helium and argon. Reduction is much faster in hydrogen than in helium, and faster in helium than in argon.8
 Fig. 5  Carbothermal reduction curves of MnO2 at 1275 °C in H2, He and Ar (taken with permission from ref. 8). 
In general, the carbothermal hydrogen reduction involves two successive steps: (1) reduction of a metal oxide precursor (i.e., MoO3, WO3) by hydrogen and (2) reaction between partially reduced metal oxides (i.e., MoO2, WO2) and surface carbon atoms of carbon materials under a hydrogen atmosphere.15–17 Nanostructured β-Mo2C was formed on carbon materials with an ultra-high surface area by carbothermal hydrogen reduction at 700 °C. The particle size of β-Mo2C increased with an increase in reaction temperature.16 Likewise, tungsten carbides (e.g., W2C) nanostructures were synthesized with a size range 5–12 nm on a carbon material with ultra-high surface area by carbothermal hydrogen reduction at 850 °C and promotion by metal Ni at 650 °C.17 Besides, activated carbon-supported bimetallic CoMo carbides were successfully synthesized by carbothermal hydrogen reduction at around 600 °C. The addition of a second metal such as Co and Ni decreases the formation temperature of a carbide because the second metal promotes the formation of CHx species from reactive carbon atoms or groups on the carbon material and hydrogen, which further carburizes the oxide precursors.18 Furthermore, Li et al.19 fabricated Mo2C catalysts on multi-walled carbon nanotubes by carbothermal hydrogen reduction. As a support and a carbon source, the temperature for Mo2C formation on multi-walled carbon nanotubes is 580 °C, which is much lower than with other conventional carbon supports. It is noteworthy that the metal carbides (i.e., Mo2C, W2C) synthesized by carbothermal hydrogen reduction have extensive characteristics for use as adsorbents, catalysts, electronic materials, etc.20–27
2.3. Carbothermal chemical vapor deposition (CTCVD)
One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures such as nanowires, nanotubes, and nanoribbons have become a subject of intensive research on their synthesis, properties, characterization and applications, due to their potential use as building blocks in making nanoscale electrical or other devices.28–32 Currently, vapor deposition technologies have been employed for fabrication of these nanostructures, such as physical vapor deposition (PVD) and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) with its two typical growth modes, vapor–solid (VS) and vapor–liquid–solid (VLS), respectively.33–35 For instance, ZnO nanowires can provide a direct band gap (3.37 eV) and a large exciton binding energy (60 meV), which make them suitable for a wide range of device applications, e.g., optoelectronic and sensor devices.36–39 ZnO nanowires can be fabricated by vapor deposition techniques. Fig. 6 shows a schematic of a typical experimental setup for CVD ZnO nanowires growth, consisting of a source boat and substrates in a two-zone growth system. A ZnO/C (e.g., graphite) powder mixture in a source crucible is evaporated at high temperatures (e.g., 950 °C). The Zn (g) atoms produced by carbothermal reduction are transported in a CVD chamber to the substrate for deposition.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of a typical experimental setup for CVD ZnO nanowires growth, consisting of a source boat and substrates in a 2-zone growth system. The heating zones can be independently well controlled, enabling a reliable and homogeneous growth to several centimeters (reproduced with permission from ref. 34). 
However, ZnO nanowires grown by thermal CVD typically require a metal catalyst (e.g., Au) on the substrate surface, as it initiates and guides the growth. Here, the main mechanisms of ZnO nanowires growth are the VS and catalyst-assisted growth (i.e., VLS) mechanisms. In the VS process, Zn atoms could condense on a solid catalyst (e.g., Au) at a lower temperature and preferential deposition occurs on energetically favored nucleation sites.40,41 The Zn atoms move due to surface diffusion and the ZnO nanowires grow with a preferential orientation (typically a c-orientation) by self-organization.42 In the case of VS growth, the nanowires have a buried Au dot or Au at their root. In the VLS process, a thermally evaporated growth species (i.e., Zn) is transported to the metal catalyst and is subsequently adsorbed and diffuses to form a liquid alloy. Accordingly, its concentration exceeds its solubility and ZnO nanowires are precipitated. Growth through supersaturation and precipitation occurs only in appropriate growth conditions and until the source of the growth species is exhausted.42–44 In the case of VLS growth, the nanowires typically exhibit an Au dot on their tip. Moreover, the diameter of VLS nanowires can be controlled by the size of the Au dot.45 Control of the diameter in the case of VS nanowires can be tuned via the substrate temperature. At higher substrate temperatures, the nanowires tend to grow with smaller diameters and larger lengths, whereas lower substrate temperatures yield increased diameters and shorter lengths. This effect can mainly be attributed to the growth kinetics.46,47
Menzel et al.48,49 employed one-zone and two-zone heating furnaces for the controlled growth of ZnO nanostructures to distinguish between the VS and VLS growth modes. The transport properties and species distribution in thermal CVD were previously investigated for one-zone and three-zone growth systems. It has been demonstrated that the controlled growth of VS and catalyst-assisted-grown (i.e., VLS) ZnO nanowires can occur in a CVD reactor by the carbothermal reduction method based on either upstream or downstream deposition techniques.49 In addition, proper tuning of the pressure and carrier gas flow has an impact on the nanowire growth position in a growth reactor. Controlling the diffusion and convection of growth species enables growth in either upstream or downstream positions.48,50 Moreover, control of the O2 flux is crucial because it determines how much O2 is available for the reaction of Zn to ZnO in upstream and/or downstream directions. In addition, O2 might be consumed at the source position, where the carbothermal reduction occurs. If the O2 flux is rather low, upstream nanowires growth might occur based on Zn gas diffused upstream, while the remaining O2 is consumed at the powder source, leaving insufficient O2 at the downstream position, where only a Zn-rich film is grown.50 On the other hand, if the O2 flux is too concentrated, the oxidation environment suppresses nanowires formation in the upstream position; nevertheless, after passing through the position of the source powder, the reduced O2 concentration at the downstream position is high enough for ZnO nanowires growth.50 A different approach to control switching between the VS and VLS growth modes was the addition of an extra carbon source consisting of ionic liquids (ILs) inside the growth reactor. The growth area was drastically increased to centimeter ranges, even in a one-zone oven for VLS-grown nanowires, by adding ILs. It is noted that a one-zone furnace typically offers a large temperature gradient and nanowires only grow at a certain position with appropriate conditions; therefore, the growth range is limited. A step involving cleaning the tube by HCl enables complete switching back to the VS growth mode.51

Fig. 7 provides a schematic diagram of the most significant parameters and how they can affect the growth mechanism in nanowires grown by VS and catalyst-assisted growth (i.e., VLS). For thermal CVD growth, the key parameters, e.g., chamber pressure, carrier gas transport, source temperature, substrate temperature, and concentration gradients of the reaction gas, can affect the morphology of the grown nanostructures. For controlled nanowire growth, gas leakage must be prevented since it represents an additional source of oxygen; therefore, initial pumping to a relatively low base pressure in a tightly sealed system is significantly required. Moreover, the pumping system and tube geometry (i.e., tube diameter) play crucial roles in setting suitable growth parameters.
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the key parameters controlling nanowire growth (reproduced with permission from ref. 49). 

Fig. 8 is a shape diagram for variations in the Ar flow and the substrate temperature and shows the morphologies for different parameters at the upstream position in a 1 in. one-zone furnace system. The O2 flow rate is constant at 0.01 sccm. Below a 10 sccm Ar flow, corresponding to a <0.1 vol% O2 concentration, nanostructure formation could be observed due to Zn species diffusion in the upstream direction, and a sufficiently high Zn species concentration forms nanostructures.48 Higher flow rates only cause a Zn/Au catalyst structure, which is ascribed to the low concentration of Zn vapor in the upstream position (gray area). Generally, if the carrier gas flow rate is too high in the upstream configuration (i.e., >10 sccm), the Zn concentration is not sufficient for the nucleation and growth of ZnO structures. By increasing the Ar flow further, a shift in nanostructure formation to the downstream position is caused, due to the high flow. The temperature is lower than 700 °C, and only a ZnO film forms on the substrate surface (Fig. 8b). Increasing the substrate temperature leads to the formation of VS-grown ZnO nanorods (Fig. 8a). A further increase in the substrate temperature leads to creation of an optimum growth area, which contains VS-grown nanowires (Fig. 8d). However, their average length and diameter can be controlled by the substrate temperature and deposition time. The temperature is high enough, so catalyst-assisted growth can be observed due to diffusion of Zn atoms on the Au catalyst and supersaturation (Fig. 8c). Furthermore, there is still an oxidizing environment that rather leads to intermixing of VS and VLS growth of nanowires. Temperatures beyond 880 °C at a 5 sccm carrier gas flow rate lead only to the formation of a thin ZnO film.
 Fig. 8  Shape diagram for a 1 inch one-zone reactor system in the upstream growth direction configuration: (a) ZnO nanorod formation, (b) ZnO film formation, (c) the growth region for VLS ZnO nanowires, and (d) the optimum growth region for VS ZnO nanowires (reproduced with permission from ref. 49). 
In contrast, Fig. 9 shows a shape diagram generated for the downstream position in a 2 in. two-zone system. At a low substrate temperature (up to 650 °C) and a high substrate temperature (900 °C) with a relatively low Ar flow rate (0–5 sccm), shown by A1 (lower substrate temperature) and A2 (higher substrate temperature), only a ZnO film was formed due to the very high Zn vapor concentration inside the reactor. Increasing the flow rate to 50 sccm at low substrate temperatures (<650 °C) can lead to the formation of a thick ZnO film with slight nucleation of ZnO nanorods (B area). Compared to the same temperature with higher flow rates (70 and 100 sccm), the growth of ZnO at lower flow rates is preferably on the surface rather than vertically from the surface, indicating that growth with preferential orientation cannot occur at lower flow rates. This could be the effect of higher wettability of Zn liquid during deposition before oxidation. A higher flow rate might encourage more complete oxidation during deposition. A higher Ar flow rate (>50 sccm) dilutes the O2 and Zn concentrations far enough to produce VS-grown ZnO nanowires (C area). This VS growth area extends over the entire range of Ar flow rates up to 825 °C, showing that the kinetics and Zn concentration are appropriate for forming VS-grown ZnO nanowires at these temperatures. By tuning the substrate temperature and the carrier gas flow, the geometry in terms of length and diameter is controllable over the entire range of the C area. In the range of temperatures 825–950 °C and Ar flow rates 5–35 sccm in the D area, the thin ZnO film contains nuclei with Au on the tip, which is attributed to catalyst-assisted nanostructures starting to form. At higher flow rates (>35 sccm), intermixing of catalyst-assisted (dominant morphology) and VS-grown nanowires (E area) is observed. At such high flow rates, the vapor concentration is low enough to facilitate catalyst-assisted growth.52Fig. 8 (upstream configuration) and Fig. 9 (downstream configuration) indicate that dilution of Zn at a respective substrate temperature forms similar nanostructures. In general, a decrease in the diameter and increase in the length of nanowires when decreasing the temperature in VS conditions is attributed to slow growth kinetics due to temperature-dependent diffusion conditions. In typical growth conditions, the Zn vapor is undersaturated, nucleating at energetically suitable accommodation sites such as Au-coated regions or ZnO buffer layers/seeds. Furthermore, Saunders et al.53 suggested that growth proceeds via condensation of Zn at such sites and subsequent oxidation, which is consistent with the evidence that metal catalysts or pre-deposited ZnO nucleation points were generally required for growing ZnO nanostructures via carbothermal vapour phase transport.
 Fig. 9  Shape diagram of a two-zone reactor system in downstream growth direction configuration: (A1) and (A2) ZnO film formation, (B) a mixture of ZnO film formation with nanowire nucleation points, (C) the optimum growth region for VS-grown ZnO nanowires, (D) intermixing growth of VS and VLS ZnO nanowires, and (E) the growth region for VLS ZnO nanowires (reproduced with permission from ref. 49). 
CVD methods have successfully been employed to fabricate ZnO nanowires, but there still exists some scope to develop methods for ZnO nanowires production in large quantities. Therefore, Zhou et al.54 developed a modified carbothermal reduction method for the rapid mass production of ZnO nanowires. In this study, the synthesis was carried out at atmospheric pressure without using any catalysts and air was employed as an oxygen source. Mixed ZnO and graphite powder were used as source materials and the reaction time was about 5 min. The flask and the prepared ZnO nanowires are shown in Fig. 10A. The yield of the prepared ZnO nanowires was about 85 wt% of the source ZnO powder. It was found that the product was composed of randomly aligned nanowires (Fig. 10B). Moreover, the edges of the nanowires were smooth and no catalyst particles were observed on the edges of the nanowires (Fig. 10C). The ZnO nanowires exhibited a hexagonal wurtzite crystal structure. The average length and diameter of the ZnO nanowires were about 1.8 μm and 35 nm, respectively. Furthermore, the ZnO nanowires displayed a polycrystalline nature with uniform structures (Fig. 10D and E).
 Fig. 10  (A) Digital image of the prepared ZnO nanowires and the flask for collecting the prepared product; typical low (B) and high (C) magnification SEM images of the prepared ZnO nanowires; (D) TEM image of ZnO nanowires; (E) high-resolution TEM image of a single ZnO nanowire (reproduced with permission from ref. 54). 
Cheng et al.55 synthesized hierarchical nanostructures with a SnO2 backbone and ZnO branches by combining carbothermal reduction with hydrothermal growth. The hybrid SnO2–ZnO nanostructures exhibited an enhanced near-band-gap emission compared to pure SnO2 or ZnO nanowires. Furthermore, Jin et al.56 synthesized ZnO-core/SnO2-shell nanorods via a combination of thermal evaporation and atomic layer deposition. These also exhibited a high near-band-edge emission intensity for a shell thickness of 15 nm, which was attributed to the formation of a sub-wavelength optical resonant cavity in the nanorods. Most hybrid ZnO/SnO2 nanostructures have been made by a two-step method at low pressure, where each oxide is synthesized by a carbothermal reduction method sequentially. For instance, Hwang et al.57 synthesized ZnO/SnO2 core–shell nanowires via a two-step carbothermal reduction method with a system pressure around 10−2 Torr, whereas Lan et al.58 produced hierarchical nanostructures at a pressure of 1 Pa. Tharsika et al.59 synthesized ZnO/SnO2 nanowires by a single-step carbothermal reduction based on the catalyst-assisted VLS mechanism. Here, activated carbon powder acted as a reducing agent. In this synthetic process, metal nanoparticles or nanoclusters were used as nucleation seeds, which determined the growth direction, interfacial energy and diameter of the one-dimensional metal oxide nanowires.60 In this facile method, the morphology and properties of nanowires are mainly controlled by growth parameters such as temperature, thickness of the catalyst layer, rate of carrier gas flow, and distance between the source and the substrate.61 Different types of nanostructures are obtained at different locations on an Au/alumina substrate. ZnO/SnO2 nanowires possess a comb-like branched structure in Fig. 11A. In this structure, the diameter of the backbone nanowire is 80 nm and the branched nanowires exhibit a uniform diameter of 30 nm. Fig. 11B shows the morphology of the ZnO/SnO2 hierarchical nanostructure. Importantly, the secondary branches from backbone nanowires are significant. The ends of these secondary branches have Au tips, indicating that the VLS mechanism is operative here. Au can play a significant role as a catalyst for growing branched and hierarchical nanowires.59 Hierarchical nanostructures consist of a trunk and branches, which are composed of mixed ZnO/SnO2 material. However, controlled synthesis of these kinds of nanostructures is still a challenge. It has been suggested that the backbone nanowire grew quickly with an Au catalyst particle at its tip, while smaller alloy droplets were formed on the backbone nanowire surface, leading to hierarchical nanowires in different locations.62 The growth of hierarchical nanowires is triggered as the critical values of temperature and vapor supersaturation ratio are reached. In general, catalyst-assisted growth of nanowires on an alumina substrate constitutes a promising method for growing nanowires over large areas.
 Fig. 11  FESEM images of ZnO/SnO2 nanowires: (A) comb-like and (B) hierarchical nanostructures; (C) FETEM image of SnO2/ZnO nanostructures after 2 h deposition; (D) FESEM and (E) TEM images of SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires fabricated for 0.5 h (reproduced with permission from ref. 59 and 60). 
Recently, Tharsika et al.63 employed carbon-assisted thermal evaporation as a vapor-phase growth method for SnO2/ZnO nanostructures on various substrates. In the vapor-phase growth, nanostructures could grow via two common VLS and VS mechanisms. SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires and hierarchical nanostructures were fabricated on top of a quartz boat loaded with the precursor by a catalyst-free one-step synthetic route based on the VS mechanism.63 The SnO2/ZnO nanostructures exhibited two types of structures depending on the deposition time. Only regular nanowires were observed at a shorter growth time (e.g., 0.5 h). When the growth time increased, e.g., to 2 h, the nanowires exhibited hierarchical nanostructures (Fig. 11C). The nanowires had a diameter of 50–100 nm and a length of several tens of micrometers. Evidently, no catalyst tips appear at the ends of the nanowires (Fig. 11D). Therefore, the growth of nanostructures is in accordance with the VS mechanism. The regular nanowires observed at a shorter growth time of 0.5 h exhibited a SnO2/ZnO core–shell structure. The diameter of the core was found to be about 50 nm and the thickness of the shell was about 17 nm (Fig. 11E). This special process allows different types of nanostructures to be prepared and collected by selecting the deposition time.
3. Carbon sources
In the widest sense, any object which is, at least in one dimension, less than 1 μm long can be considered a nanostructure.64 One-dimensional (1-D) nanostructures such as rods, wires, belts and tubes have attracted much attention due to their unique properties and the possibility that they may be used as building blocks for electronics and photonics, as well as life-science applications.65–69 As a special example, the synthesis of ZnO nanowires by carbothermal reduction with growth methods has been widely studied and discussed. However, particles <100 nm in at least two dimensions are commonly referred to as nanoparticles. It is noted that metal nanoparticles (e.g., metal carbides, metal oxides, metal borides, and zero-valent metals) could be synthesized by carbothermal reduction. In general, the carbon sources used for carbothermal synthesis include carbon black, activated carbon, graphite, biochar, charcoal, organic polymers (e.g., sol–gel), biopolymers (e.g., cellulose), sugars (e.g., glucose), and light hydrocarbons (e.g., CH4, C2H2, C3H6).70–72 The properties of carbon sources, for instance, their surface characteristics and impurities, might affect the synthesis of nanostructures by carbothermal reduction.
Carbothermal reduction is popular for production of ZnO nanostructures, as it allows control of the Zn vapor pressure via the reaction temperature.73 Carbothermal reduction-vapor phase transport growth of ZnO nanostructures is usually carried out at temperatures above 900 °C. It has been found that other carbon sources, such as graphite, carbon black, charcoal, single-walled carbon nanotubes, multi-walled carbon nanotubes, and activated carbon can be used to grow ZnO nanostructures at lower temperatures.74–79 Lower purity in the carbon source, as well as its surface area, have an effect on factors such as differences in the free energy of carbon sources and effects on the reaction energetics.79 In addition, the surface activity of non-graphite carbon sources (originating in edges and defects of the carbon layers and the presence of heteroatoms such as oxygen, hydrogen, sulfur, and nitrogen, which introduce active sites onto the carbon surface) is known to play a considerable role in the surface chemistry of these materials.80 The surface activity is expected to vary with the surface area for otherwise identical materials, but is not correlated solely with changes in the surface area. Moreover, the density of active sites is strongly dependent on material preparation methods. Here, different surface activities depend on differences in preparation.80 Finally, the purity levels available in non-graphite carbon sources are often, or even generally, inferior to the purity levels available in graphite, and impurities affect nanostructures growth. For instance, an indium impurity contaminating the growth system could alter the growth morphology and alignment of nanostructures in carbothermal reduction-vapor phase transport growth.81 The requirement to ensure reproducibility and control of morphology is an important consideration with respect to unexpected high-temperature effects. Therefore, appropriate selection of the carbon source is a key factor. Nanostructures can be grown at significantly lower temperatures using carbon black and activated carbon, even with different morphologies compared to graphite. The surface areas of carbon black and activated carbon are higher than that of graphite; this is used to explain the origin of such differences in growth and morphology.
Biswas et al.78 therefore used carbothermal reduction-vapor phase transport to grow ZnO nanostructures at different temperatures using carbon black, graphite, and activated carbon powders as carbon sources. Fig. 12 shows SEM images of the synthesized ZnO nanostructures in the Au-deposited region. Differences in growth and morphology are observed for the different carbon sources, which are especially visible for growth at 750 and 800 °C, although the morphology for growth at 850 °C is quite different, with substantially longer, generally narrower, higher-density, and less well-aligned nanostructures grown using carbon black compared to graphite. Generally, differences in ZnO nanostructures prepared with different carbon sources cannot only be explained by differences in the surface areas, thermodynamic effects, or purity of the source; in addition, differing surface activities of the carbon powders are responsible. Using different carbon powders, growth cannot occur at much lower temperatures and different morphologies, including smaller nanowire diameters, are obtained in certain temperature regions. However, the negative side of achieving this diversity is that reproducible deposit yields and morphologies are more difficult to achieve with carbon powders whose chemical properties vary, especially in terms of more variable surface activities. Obviously, there is a trade-off between the relative advantages of lower-temperature growth using non-graphite powders, which is able to provide a diversity of nanostructures and a range of available substrates, and driving to develop industrial applications of the ZnO nanostructures, for which reproducibility and scalability are key considerations. For the latter, the use of graphite powder may be preferred.
 Fig. 12  FESEM images of ZnO nanostructures grown using carbon black, graphite and activated carbon at 750 °C, 800 °C, and 850 °C, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 78). 
Relatively high-purity carbon sources such as carbon black, graphite, and activated carbon can be used for the synthesis of zinc electronic nanostructures (e.g., ZnO nanowires). Interestingly, at certain temperatures, no growth at all was found using graphite with a lower total surface area, whereas nanostructures were grown using the other carbon sources. The reason is that the higher total surface area of non-graphite carbon sources can lead to an increased release of Zn vapor which is responsible for nanostructure growth, but the lower purity of the carbon source affects the growth as well. It is noted that the involvement of heteroatoms in surface activity could be described as an impurity effect; however, the key point is that the presence of impurities alone is not the origin of the effects, but rather the specific binding to the carbon layers of such heteroatoms during synthesis of the carbon, creating active carbon sites (in addition to intrinsic effects such as edges and defects of the carbon layers), thereby enabling carbothermal reduction. The presence of heteroatoms in the condensing vapor stream could result in changes in the nanostructure morphology.
Hitherto, a variety of one- or two-dimensional ZnO nanostructures have been synthesized, in the various forms of nanodots, nanorods, nanowires, nanobelts, nanotubes, nanobridges, nanonails, nanowalls, nanohelices, seamless nanorings, mesoporous single-crystal nanowires, and polyhedral cages (Fig. 13).82 Also, intensive researches have focused on fabricating one-dimensional ZnO nanostructures and on correlating their morphologies with their size-related optical and electrical properties.78 However, transition-metal nanostructures are not limited to the aforementioned applications. For instance, some nanostructures, especially metal carbide or oxide nanoparticles with two-dimensional structures, have been extensively fabricated via carbothermal reduction for catalysts and environmental functionalized materials. These applications have relatively low requirements for the carbon sources in carbothermal synthesis. Consequently, sustainable carbon sources, such as biopolymers (e.g., cellulose), sugars (e.g., glucose and sucrose) and biomass have been extensively used.83–87
 Fig. 13  Typical ZnO nanostructures synthesized by the carbothermal evaporation of solid powders under controlled conditions (taken with permission from ref. 82). 
Wang et al.85,86 successfully synthesized pure Fe3O4 powder from Fe2O3 powder mixed with glucose as a carbon source using the carbothermal reduction method. Glucose was the reducing agent. Carbon, a by-product of glucose pyrolysis, could reduce Fe2O3 to Fe3O4 at 650 °C. Then, the generated CO could react with Fe2O3 to produce Fe3O4. Consequently, the carbon content and the concentration of CO determine the reaction rate of carbothermal reduction.85 Wu et al.87 recently synthesized magnetite (Fe3O4) dendrites/sugar carbon (MDs/SC) nanocomposites by a one-step carbothermal reduction method using α-Fe2O3 dendrites (HDs) as precursor and sucrose as carbon source. Fig. 14 schematically illustrates the synthesis process of MDs/SC nanocomposites with a TEM image shown below. In this work, the α-Fe2O3 phase of HDs was completely transformed into Fe3O4 during the complicated carbonization-reduction process. Carbon monoxide (i.e., CO) as one of the sucrose pyrolysis products can play a dominant role during the phase transformation process and the possible redox reaction could be roughly expressed as 3Fe2O3 + CO → 2Fe3O4 + CO2. Furthermore, the dendritic morphology of the embedded MDs could make them a promising candidate for lightweight electromagnetic absorption materials.87
 Fig. 14  Synthesis process of magnetic MDs/SC nanocomposites (reproduced with permission from ref. 87). 
4. Commonly used metal nanostructures
4.1. Iron (Fe) nanostructures

4.1.1. Iron carbides (Fe3C). 
Magnetic nanoparticles have been used for numerous applications, particularly as recoverable catalysts88 and in the biomedical sciences.89 By far the most widely used magnetic materials are iron oxides, especially in the form of magnetite (Fe3O4) and maghemite (γ-Fe2O3). However, iron oxide nanoparticles exhibit relatively low magnetic saturation, a crucial factor for many applications. Metallic iron (Fe0) has much higher saturation magnetization, but is unsuitable for medical applications due to its toxicity. Therefore, iron carbide (Fe3C) as an attractive alternative provides both high magnetic saturation and chemical stability. The synthesis of phase-pure Fe3C is very difficult, because the relatively high-temperature reducing conditions characteristic of carbide synthesis often lead to the formation of metallic iron or mixed Fe/Fe3C products.90,91 However, some routes, such as flame spray pyrolysis, have been employed to synthesize phase-pure Fe3C, involving multiple-step or high-energy procedures using hazardous or costly chemical precursors.92–95 Recently, organic gelators have been widely applied for the synthesis of carbide materials. In these cases, small molecules (e.g., urea) or polymers (e.g., chitosan) have also been employed to disperse soluble metal precursors within a homogeneous gel network.96–98 Once heated in an inert atmosphere, the gel decomposes and acts as a special carbon source for carbide formation. Biopolymers are particularly useful for this method due to their diverse functionality, meaning that they can be used to strongly bind and disperse metal precursors. Furthermore, many biopolymers (e.g., chitosan) display remarkable thermal stability.99 In the typically high-temperature synthesis of metal carbides, this means that the polymeric template is retained for a large portion of the calcination step. As a result, the complex tertiary structure of the biopolymer could control the nucleation and growth of crystalline intermediates and thus influence the size and morphology of the product. Similar methods are well established in the synthesis of metal oxide nanostructures.100
In addition, Fe3C can be synthesized by carbothermal reduction processes using biopolymers as carbon sources.83,84 Schnepp et al.83 used gelatin (a readily available biopolymer) for the synthesis of phase-pure Fe3C nanoparticles. Moreover, further insight into the mechanism of iron oxide/carbide formation was obtained using TGA coupled with mass spectrometry (TGA-MS). As shown in Fig. 15, the initial mass loss from 20 to 200 °C is attributed to vaporization of free and bound water, possibly coupled with loss of acetic acid released during binding of iron to carboxylate groups of the gelatin. The steeper section of the mass loss curve (190–350 °C) relates to gelatin decomposition in an inert atmosphere. TGA-MS in this decomposition region showed peaks for CO2 (293 °C), HCN (280 °C), H2O (205 °C, 235 °C), and NH3 (290 °C), which are consistent with partial decomposition of the gelatin. Porcine gelatin is mainly composed of multiple amino acids, so it is impossible to define an exact source for each of these emission products. Besides, iron acetate decomposition (190–200 °C) accounts for part of the mass loss. Crucially, this decomposition step occurs during the same temperature range as that of the nucleation of magnetite nanoparticles. In this way, dispersed oxide nanoparticles as well as carbon- and nitrogen-rich amorphous matrices are formed simultaneously.83
 Fig. 15  The key crystalline phases, elemental composition, mass loss, and evolved species during the synthesis of Fe3C from gelatin (reproduced with permission from ref. 83). 
The occurrence of iron oxide nanoparticles as an intermediate phase in this mechanism can be rationalized by considering the microstructure and composition of the biopolymer starting material. Indeed, there are multiple reports of the synthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles using biopolymer templates. The metal-binding capacity of biopolymers plays a crucial role. Gelatin is composed of a mixture of amino acids, which have multiple functionalities providing sites for metal ion binding. By dispersing the precursor iron cations within a functional aqueous gel, a stabilized homogeneous mixture of the metal precursor is formed. Consequently, the initial nucleation of the iron oxide phase is restricted to nanoparticles, whilst the polymer decomposes around the nanoparticles, forming a carbon- and nitrogen-rich template that prevents sintering of the oxide phase. Upon further heating, this template can react with the iron oxide, generating Fe3C nanoparticles.
Carbothermal reduction of metal oxides to carbides occurs at different temperatures depending on the stability of the oxides. Consequently, it is possible to employ sol–gel chemistry to prepare an oxide/carbide/carbon mixture, provided that the stabilities of the two intermediate oxides are sufficiently different. One or both of the phases could be etched to introduce pores with distinct sizes and chemical features. Schnepp et al.101 synthesized MgO/Fe3C/C nanocomposites from gelatin, an abundant polypeptide. Mild etching of MgO and Fe3C nanoparticles can result in a network of micropores and graphitic mesoporous “capsules”. Remarkably, this same simple system also introduces macropores. It has been demonstrated that mixed Mg and Fe nitrates interact synergistically with gelatin to produce foams with tunable “bubble” sizes. By combining these new advances, carbons with three types of pores have been prepared (Fig. 16A). Iron(III) can bind strongly to gelatin,22 forming a gel that expands into a sponge on drying, with bubbles 10–100 mm in diameter. Mg(NO3)2 can induce foaming, whereas mixed Mg(II) and Fe(III) nitrates exhibit a synergistic effect to form a foam with much smaller bubbles (Fig. 16B), having bubble sizes ranging from 100 to 1000 nm (Fig. 16C and D). Synchrotron X-ray diffraction (SXRD) reveals two crystalline phases (Fig. 16E), indexed to MgO and Fe3C. These two phases with highly contrasted Fe3C crystallites were embedded in a matrix alongside smaller MgO particles (Fig. 16F). Energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDXA) line scans and high-resolution TEM images showing discrete MgO and Fe3C particles (Fig. 16G and H) support these phase assignments. The average Fe3C particle diameter is clearly smaller in MF25 (5–10 nm) compared to MF50 (10–20 nm), indicating that the MgO suppresses sintering of the Fe3C phase during selective carbothermal reduction of iron oxide intermediates. Significantly, the particle size is considerably smaller than that of Fe3C/C synthesized from gelatin.83 The Fe3C particles are covered in multiple graphitic carbon layers (Fig. 16I).
 Fig. 16  (A) Schematic of the one-pot route to C/Fe3C/MgO foams and etching to generate carbon with three types of pores; (B) gelatin sponge; (C) SEM and (D) TEM images of the calcined foam; (E) SXRD of samples prepared using 25 and 50 mol% Fe in the starting material, denoted as MF25 and MF50, respectively; (F) dark-field STEM image of MF50; (G) STEM image and overlaid EDXA line scans of Mg and Fe for MF50; (H) high-resolution TEM image of MF25; (I) TEM of Fe3C/graphite (reproduced with permission from ref. 101). 
There are many synthetic polymers and indeed small molecules that can enable the sol–gel-type synthesis of carbides or nitrides. However, the interesting physical properties of many biopolymers can be exploited to introduce structural complexity into the product. For example, gelatin/metal nitrate hydrogels often foam on drying to produce expanded sponge-like structures, which are exploited to produce a metal carbide/nitride with high accessible porosity. Biopolymers have been applied to produce hybrid oxide/nitride or oxide/carbide nanocomposites (e.g., TiO2/Fe3C) in a one-step sol–gel-type process,102 which depends on different stability of the oxide intermediates to enable selective carbothermal reduction or nitridation. The homogeneous biopolymer precursor ensures that the two metal oxide intermediates are highly interdispersed, thus leading to a composite with very small particle size (<10 nm). In addition, biomass could be used both as a template and a carbon source for metal carbides production, typically achieved by first carbonizing the biomaterial (e.g., wood) and then infiltrating the char template with a liquid or gaseous metal reagent to form a metal carbide replica. Alternatively, the metal carbide can be produced in one step by soaking the biomaterial in an aqueous metal salt solution before pyrolysis. In this case, the metal precursor initially decomposes to give an oxide coating over a soft/hard template before carbothermal reduction to give a carbide replica with the biological features still intact. By heating to a lower temperature (avoiding carbothermal reduction), biomaterials could be used to template carbon/metal oxide composites as well.103
Glatzel et al.104,105 employed a biopolymer (i.e., cellulose) as a carbon source for the synthesis of iron-based carbides. As shown in Fig. 17, it can be seen that iron etches micrometer-long tubular carbons, running through the entire fiber (Fig. 17A) and lacing the whole structure with iron carbide nanoparticles. Furthermore, HRTEM micrographs of samples prepared at 800 °C confirm the high degree of crystallinity of the iron carbide, as well as the carbon in graphite (Fig. 17B). Comparing samples with and without iron shows that the presence of iron is required to graphitize cellulose at ≥800 °C, which was expected, as cellulose is considered a non-graphitizable carbon.106 Temperature-dependent XRD patterns revealed two interesting results. One of these is that the only crystalline phase this system passes through is magnetite, iron(II,III) oxide, which starts to crystallize at ∼500 °C. This is then directly converted into iron carbide, which forms at 800 °C. Furthermore, it can be seen that decomposition of iron carbide to elemental iron sets in between 800 and 900 °C and progresses further at 1000 °C (Fig. 17D). In this case, folded crane shapes were submerged in an iron precursor solution and calcined under an inert atmosphere (Fig. 17E–G). The resulting cranes were not only very well preserved in shape; they were also highly magnetic and stable enough to be picked up by the ‘wings’ or the ‘beak’ (Fig. 17G, inset).
 Fig. 17  (A) Cellulose calcined with added iron salt yields structures that are vastly different to that of the amorphous carbon obtained from cellulose alone. (B) HRTEM micrograph with labeled lattice fringes for iron carbide and graphite. (C) EDX line scan for iron (white curve, taken along orange line) and elemental mapping for iron (orange). (D) XRD patterns of samples. Green: Fe3O4, red: Fe3C, blue: Fe0 and the gray circle at 26° is attributed to graphitic carbon. Steps leading to the magnetic crane shapes: folding (E), soaking with the precursor solution (F) and after calcination (G) (reproduced with permission from ref. 104). 
The whole mechanism of the iron/carbon system can be summarized as follows. First, iron salts are converted into iron oxide, which, at elevated temperatures exceeding 600 °C, is then carbothermally reduced into metallic iron nanoparticles.107 Subsequently, these dissolve the amorphous carbon derived from cellulose and recrystallize it in the form of well-ordered graphene nanostructures, because the reaction proceeds via a liquid eutectic metal droplet (iron:carbon = 50:50) morphologically observed from some of the Fe3C nanostructures. During crystallization of the iron carbide, occurring along with cooling of the sample, several layers of ordered carbon are formed around the particles. These arise from sequestration of surplus carbon from the eutectic mixture, with the aim of moving from an iron-to-carbon atom ratio of approximately 1:1 in the eutectic mixture to a ratio of 3:1 in the cementite.
The precursors employed thus far have already been based on renewable resources, but both iron salts and cellulose still undergo some degree of processing before they are used in the syntheses. Consequently, there is certain room for further simplification. For instance, coffee filter paper is composed of unbleached and free cellulose. Using unprocessed dry wood worked just as well.104 In our recent work, rice husks in the presence of lignocellulose were utilized as a carbon source for metal nanoparticles (i.e., FeC3, Fe3O4, and Ni0) synthesis by one-step carbothermal pyrolysis at 750 °C. The XRD patterns are shown in Fig. 18. FeC3 and metallic nickel (Ni0) could initially be generated in situ in the carbon matrix of rice husk char by carbothermal pyrolysis at 750 °C in an inert atmosphere (e.g., N2). In addition, FeC3 can be converted into Fe3O4 after calcination at 600 °C, whereas the crystalline phase of Ni0 became stronger after further pyrolysis in an inert atmosphere. This indicates that nickel precursors in the carbon matrix were much more easily converted into the metallic state at a relatively low temperature compared to iron precursors.
 Fig. 18  XRD patterns of (A) iron carbide or oxides and (B) nickel (Ni0) nanoparticles embedded in a carbon matrix. 


4.1.2. Iron ternary carbides (MxFeyC). 
Iron carbide has been demonstrated to be a versatile catalyst, especially for the Fischer–Tropsch process.108–110 More interestingly, although single metal carbides are of high significance, iron-containing ternary carbides (i.e., MxFeyC) have received little attention outside the steel/metallurgy community. This is more so when one considers that their combination could potentially lead to synergistic effects between materials, resulting in unprecedented catalytic performance or even new catalytic properties. Glatzel et al.104 demonstrated a very easy synthetic route to defined iron-based ternary carbides, such as Fe3W3C, W2Fe21C6 and Fe2.25Mn0.75C in the form of nanoparticles, thereby broadening their prospective applicability.
Tungsten–iron system. 
For tungsten and cellulose alone, XRD analysis can be used to follow the gradual reduction of the initially formed tungsten oxides (WO3) via tungsten(IV) to elemental tungsten. With increasing temperature, each of the oxides is present in the different crystal structures (Fig. 19). It can be seen that the carbon matrix is able to stabilize and maintain these intermediate stages while cooling the samples down to room temperature. When calcining the tungsten precursor and cellulose alone, initially polyoxotungstates (W18O49) are still present, but they gradually decompose into WO3 and WO3−δ (present up to 900 °C). At lower temperatures, the various oxygen-deficient (1 > δ ≥ 0) tungsten oxides could not be distinguished via the XRD patterns due to their insufficient crystallinity.111–113 To maintain clarity and comprehensibility, only selected tungsten oxide patterns are depicted in the summary figure below. This means that tungsten(VI) oxides are subsequently reduced to different tungsten(IV) oxides between 800 and 900 °C. These are then further reduced to W0. In the last stage, elemental tungsten is present with tungsten carbides and tungsten oxycarbide. Tungsten does not catalyze graphitization in the investigated temperature region,114 which has no visible trace of ordered carbon structures.
 Fig. 19  XRD patterns of the temperature- and ratio-dependent phases of the tungsten–iron system. Green: W18O49; red: WO3, triclinic; gray: WO3, hexagonal; blue: WO2, orthorhombic; cyan: WO2, monoclinic; magenta: W0; yellow: WC; dark yellow: W2C; navy: W2 (C, O); purple: FeWO4; wine: Fe0; olive: Fe3W3C; dark cyan: Fe0.94W0.06; royal blue: W2Fe21C6 and the gray circle: graphitic carbon (reproduced with permission from ref. 104). 
The addition of iron has a substantial impact on the phase development, as the presence of iron causes phase coalescence at 700 °C. Here, only ferberite (FeWO4) is formed. When stoichiometric amounts of Fe and W are used, FeWO4 is formed phase-pure; in the case of samples with a 3:1 ratio, excess iron is present in the form of Fe0. Decomposing ferberite is transformed into several tungsten and iron–tungsten carbides above 700 °C, but, in contrast to tungsten alone, no traces of any tungsten oxides are visible. Furthermore, with 3:1 ratio samples, the excess iron can cause graphitization from this temperature on; for 1:1 ratio samples, graphitization does not set in until 1000 °C, where iron is released from the decomposing ternary carbides.104
Generally, the combination of iron and tungsten salts with cellulose and subsequent heat treatment under an inert atmosphere will, under the reaction conditions that were investigated, only yield FeWO4 as a pure phase. Various mixed-phase iron–tungsten carbides have been synthesized by this route. Nevertheless, utilizing alginate and gelatin as biopolymers and otherwise the same precursors has shown that this system is somewhat difficult to control. However, with the right temperature treatment, pure Fe3W3C and nitride phases can be obtained from biopolymer precursors115. This strongly indicates that it would only be a matter of finding the correct reaction conditions to yield pure phases with cellulose. In contrast to the aforementioned work, using cellulose, rather than dissolved biopolymer precursors, causes considerable porosity to be formed with overall surface areas exceeding 250 m2 g−1. Neither alginate nor gelatin yielded graphitized and hence porous products. The presumable reason is the interaction between cellulose and iron. This allows the formation of iron oxide nanoparticles on the surface of fibers, rather than the binding of individual ions to chelating moieties of the matrix. This seems to be essential for graphitization to occur and thus the formation of pores. This is supported by the consumption of the fibers derived from the outside in when comparing samples prepared at different temperatures in the presence of iron. Even though the phase purity leaves room for improvement, the present synthesis is a generally easy one-pot route to ternary oxides and carbides and it is only a matter of varying the reaction conditions to achieve the desired single-phase systems.
Manganese–iron system. 
Elemental manganese (Mn), which is structurally closer to iron (Fe), was chosen, as tungsten proved to be a somewhat difficult partner for iron in terms of the phase purity and size homogeneity of the resulting product. However, combination with Mn promises to yield equally interesting ternary compounds, as Mn is also known to be a versatile catalyst.116–118 The formation of phase-pure ternary carbides turned out to be a smaller challenge, and the synthesis of pure Mn0.75Fe2.25C could be achieved, which corresponds to the ratio of the Fe and Mn precursors. Manganese is hardly reduced by carbon alone (Fig. 20). The first reduction products were visible at 1000 °C, namely the two manganese carbides Mn5C2 and Mn7C3, along with substantial amounts of graphitic carbon. Manganese and cellulose alone form manganese(II) oxide with very small particle sizes (<4 nm). The first crystalline MnO nanoparticles emerge at 600 °C. Moreover, the manganese oxide nanoparticles formed at 600 °C do not grow significantly up to 900 °C. The first major change in the phase composition takes place at 1000 °C. A steep increase in the MnO particle size from 5 to 21 nm is followed by the emergence of a pronounced peak arising from graphitized carbon and crystalline Mn7C3 and Mn0 as minor phases. As opposed to tungsten, manganese could catalyze the graphitization of cellulose in the absence of iron. Graphitized carbon appears with the manganese carbides by a similar graphitization mechanism as observed with iron.104 The addition of iron can cause a significant drop in the graphitization temperature from 1000 to 800 °C and give rise to a multitude of Fe/Mn phases. At 600 °C, Fe3O4 and Fe0.5Mn0.5O could be formed. In this case, the formation of iron oxide and the mixed metal oxide Fe0.5Mn0.5O precedes the formation of crystalline MnO. At ≥800 °C, MnO becomes visible with an increase in Fe0 and Mn0.75Fe2.25C as additional phases. Furthermore, traces of a nitrogen-depleted iron nitride phase (FeN0.0589) were formed from 900 °C (Fig. 20). This is most likely due to the use of nitrate precursors. By replacing these with the acetates Fe(CH3CO2)2 and Mn(CH3CO2)2, formation of the nitride is suppressed without any other change in composition.104
 Fig. 20  XRD patterns of the phase developments in the manganese–iron system. Blue: Mn0.75Fe2.25C; red: MnO; magenta: Mn0.5Fe0.5O; gray: Mn7C3; wine: Mn5C2; green: Fe3O4; dark yellow: FeN0.0589; cyan: Fe0 and gray circle: graphitic carbon (reproduced with permission from ref. 104). 
Manganese and cellulose alone can yield homogeneous MnO nanoparticles dispersed in a carbon matrix at temperatures as low as 600 °C. Significantly, all other manganese oxides can be easily obtained by means of controlled further oxidation of MnO. Furthermore, the synthesis of Mn0.75Fe2.25C is demonstrated in nanoparticulate form, which is produced by simply combining aqueous solutions of manganese and iron acetates, in a ratio of 1:3, with cellulose and calcining the slurry under an inert atmosphere at 1000 °C. The possibility of producing this ternary carbide by an easy large-scale one-pot synthesis allows the material to be used for catalytic applications.


4.1.3. Fe3O4/C. 
Magnetite (Fe3O4), with its cubic inverse spinel structure, has unique electric and magnetic properties based on electron transfer between Fe2+ and Fe3+ in octahedral sites.119 Magnetite, as an important magnetic material, has been widely used in different applications, such as magnetic sensors, high-density magnetic recording media, printing ink, catalysts and especially in the biomedical field. Zhang et al.119,120 successfully synthesized Fe3O4 powders from a Fe2O3 and glucose mixture by a carbothermal reduction method. In this case, glucose was the reducing agent. Only mixed Fe3O4 and Fe2O3 phases were obtained with a glucose mass fraction less than 1/24. However, a pure Fe3O4 phase was obtained when the glucose mass fraction was above 1/24, up to 1/2.119 Besides, pure Fe3O4 can be synthesized at a higher heating temperature (650 °C) for a shorter holding time (even 0.5 h), or at a lower temperature (450 °C) for a longer holding time (>6 h), which is attributed to adequate decomposition of the carbon source (Fig. 21). Furthermore, Fe3O4 heated at 650 °C for 2 h possessed the highest saturation magnetization (Ms = 97.99 emu g−1) compared with using other methods, due to its better crystallinity and expanded crystalline cell.120 Carbon, as the by-product of glucose pyrolysis, can react with Fe2O3 at an appropriately high temperature.121 Possible reactions, along with the corresponding free energy, are listed in Table 1. Firstly, according to thermodynamics, carbon cannot react with water at 650 °C, because ΔG is positive for the corresponding reaction (18). This means that reaction (18) cannot occur and there is no hydrogen in the system. Therefore, neither of the reactions (19) and (20) will occur due to the absence of hydrogen, although their ΔG values are both negative. Secondly, ΔG is negative for reaction (21); therefore, carbon would reduce Fe2O3 to Fe3O4 at 650 °C (ΔG < 0). The CO produced in reaction (21) would react with Fe2O3 further via reaction (22). Because ΔG for reaction (21) is lower than that of reaction (23), reaction (21) is more likely to happen. Similarly, reaction (22) most likely occurs due to the ΔG for reaction (22) being lower than that of reaction (24). When the CO partial pressure reaches equilibrium with atmospheric pressure for reaction (21), reaction (23) cannot occur. The same applies to the relationship between reactions (22) and (24). When the CO and CO2 partial pressures reach equilibrium for reaction (22), reaction (24) cannot occur either. Therefore, no FeO phase would appear in the products.119
 Fig. 21  XRD patterns of samples with different mole fractions of glucose and Fe2O3 (reproduced with permission from ref. 119). 
Table 1 Possible thermodynamic equilibrium reactions in glucose and iron oxide system at 650 °C




Reaction
Reaction free energy ΔG (kJ mol−1)
Reaction number




C + H2O → CO + H2
3.94
(18)


H2 + 3Fe2O3 → 2Fe3O4 + H2O
−77.59
(19)


H2 + Fe3O4 → 3FeO + H2O
−15.46
(20)


C + 3Fe2O3 → 2Fe3O4 + CO
−73.65
(21)


CO + 3Fe2O3 → 2Fe3O4 + CO2
−86.34
(22)


C + Fe3O4 → 3FeO + CO
−11.52
(23)


CO + Fe3O4 → 3FeO + CO2
−24.22
(24)






4.1.4. Zero-valent iron (Fe0). 
Zero-valent metal nanoparticles have been widely studied due to the diverse applicability of these structures for some important applications, especially in catalysis,122 medicine, and spectroscopy and sensors.123 In addition to zero-valent metal nanoparticles, bimetallic alloy nanoparticles have received much attention due to their enhanced properties and additional tunability.124,125 The main concern with the preparation of metallic nanoparticles relates to the issue of stabilization. This typically represents a twofold issue: one is stabilization of the particles against aggregation or coalescence, the other is their stabilization against chemical changes, especially oxidation. A common solution is the use of stabilizing agents such as surfactants.126 MnO nanoparticles can disperse homogeneously in the carbon matrix. MnO nanoparticles are prone to further oxidation, which suggests that the carbon matrix is a potent stabilizing agent. Moreover, no coalescence of the particles was observed over a wide temperature range, suggesting that the carbon structure is a good anticaking agent as well. Non-noble zero-valent metal particles are especially prone to undergo chemical changes along with the usual ripening processes and consequently are harder to stabilize; however, they are important catalysts.126–128 In this respect, cellulose is valuable for dispersing and stabilizing them. Several transition metals of recent interest have been applied such as iron, cobalt, nickel, palladium and copper. Furthermore, Glatzel et al.104 synthesized zero-valent metal and metal alloy particles, including Cu, Ni, NiFe, Ni0.32Fe0.68, NiPd, CoFe and Co3Fe7, using celluloses (e.g., cellulose filter paper and microcrystalline cellulose) as carbon sources and bivalent metal nitrates as metal precursors.
Copper–iron system. 
The combination of iron and copper can produce well-dispersed stable Cu0 nanoparticles. It turns out that, despite their small size of around 9 nm, these particles are found to be aggregates of very small crystalline copper clusters of only a few atoms. Moreover, copper can direct the graphitizing power of iron. On the one hand, copper directs the formed tubular carbons to align themselves and to grow in straight lines. On the other hand, the fcc structure of copper promotes the formation of diamond-like carbons at very low temperatures. However, none of the ratios or temperatures yielded any combination of the metals, neither ternary oxides nor ternary carbides, nor is any form of alloy seen in Fig. 22. Copper alone can form crystalline copper nanoparticles at a temperature as low as 500 °C. At relatively low temperatures, those particles are accompanied by Cu2O particles, which disappear above 600 °C. The crystallinity of copper particles appears virtually invariant with temperature, exhibiting a crystallite size of ∼20 nm. The addition of iron initially does not produce any unexpected alterations. Upon heating, Fe3O4 is observed as an additional phase. Moderate amounts of iron will be transformed directly into Fe0 and larger amounts will additionally produce small amounts of Fe3C. No form of combination of the two metals is observed.104 Copper alone could yield well-controlled nanoparticles with an average diameter of 9 nm. In general, copper nanoparticles have been produced and stabilized in a carbon matrix. The particles were actually copper clusters of sizes below 1 nm with an approximate atom count of less than 200 atoms per copper cluster. The combination of copper and iron enabled the formation of a diamond-like carbon phase that was catalytically produced by the iron and stabilized by the fcc lattice of the copper.
 Fig. 22  XRD patterns of the phase developments in the copper–iron system. Gray: Cu2O; red: Cu0; green: Fe3O4; blue: Fe0; magenta: Fe3C; cyan: diamond-like carbon and the gray circle: graphitic carbon (reproduced with permission from ref. 104). 
Nickel–iron system. 
Nickel yielded, much like copper, well-dispersed and highly stable zero-valent metal nanoparticles. These were of well-controlled size with diameters of 5.5 ± 0.5 nm and crystallized at temperatures as low as 600 °C. An increase in the treatment temperature at and above 900 °C can cause catalytic graphitization to occur, similar to the processes with iron. Nevertheless, the graphitized structures were of somewhat different morphology. The use of nickel precursors furthermore gave rise to micrometer-sized pores in addition to the pores caused by graphitization. As opposed to copper, nickel will form various alloys in the presence of iron due to their similar size and chemical nature. In particular, the alloys NiFe and Ni0.32Fe0.68 were obtained. Iron and nickel formed at different locations within the cellulose framework and only upon graphitization. In addition, the iron present throughout the carbon matrix was in the form of pure alloys.
The XRD patterns of the crystalline phases at the various temperatures and atomic ratios are summarized in Fig. 23. From the point of crystallization at 700 °C and up to the onset of graphitization at 900 °C the size of the Ni0 nanoparticles is virtually invariant with temperature. For samples prepared at 800 °C, the Scherrer equation yields particle sizes of 4.7 ± 0.3 nm. Upon graphitization, the particle sizes increase dramatically; this mechanism is similar to that for iron. The addition of iron first causes the formation of a Fe3O4 phase at temperatures of 500 and 600 °C; in addition, above 600 °C the alloy NiFe is formed alongside Ni0 (4.4 nm). With graphitization at 900 °C, the Ni0 phase disappears completely and only graphitic carbon and the alloy remain. Adding a threefold excess of iron causes a similar reaction path, only now Fe0 is the excess phase and the alloy is the 3:1 alloy Ni0.32Fe0.68.
 Fig. 23  Summary of the temperature- and ratio-dependent XRD patterns for the nickel–iron system. Gray: Ni0, red: Ni0.5Fe0.5, green: Fe3O4, blue: Fe0, cyan: Ni0.32Fe0.68 and the gray circle: graphitic carbon (reproduced with permission from ref. 104). 
Interestingly, nickel could cause the formation of micrometer-sized pores akin to those seen with manganese. However, the addition of iron immediately suppresses those larger pores, as observed with manganese. The large pores are attributed to nickel over the entire temperature range. With the onset of graphitization, the walls of large pores become porous, effectively creating well-defined hierarchical pore structures ideal for applications in catalysis.129 Samples prepared with iron and nickel do not exhibit porosity until graphitization sets in. However, the presence of iron causes the formation of a layer of nanoparticles on the surface of the fibers. Also, at 1000 °C, it becomes apparent that the graphitized carbon structures derived from nickel are of a more layered nature, meaning that they form flat aligned bundles as opposed to the rather tubular structures derived from iron. The transition from one structure to the other can be followed by increasing the iron-to-nickel ratio.
The sample prepared at 800 °C with an iron-to-nickel ratio of 3:1 showed that iron still forms on the surface of the fibers and only upon etching into the fibers does it come into contact with nickel. This explains why the alloy does not become phase-pure until graphitization completely sets in. Iron behaves differently from all other metals, in the respect that it forms oxides solely on the surface of the fibers and does not enter into the carbon matrix, until it forms an iron–carbon eutectic mixture. The most probable reason is a coordination effect where iron does not bind strongly enough to the cellulose matrix. Recently, Thompson et al.130 reported the direct transformation of lignocellulosic biomass into nanostructured graphitic carbon by means of a single step. Iron carbide nanoparticles are generated in situ by thermal decomposition of absorbed iron nitrate followed by carbothermal reduction. The Fe3C particles subsequently etch through the biomass to generate intertwined graphitic tubules by means of catalytic graphitization. These materials are mesoporous structures with the pore size dependent on the iron content. Conversion of biomass into stable graphitic carbon at relatively low temperatures (e.g., 800 °C) offers a promising route to the sustainable synthesis of carbons for electrode or filtration applications. Moreover, this facile method was applied to produce nanocomposites of Fe3C/graphite combined with nanoparticles of metal oxides such as CaO or MgO, providing the potential for a wide range of applications.130


4.1.5. LiFePO4/C. 
Lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4) has been intensively used because of its low cost, low toxicity, abundant raw materials, good cycling stability, high theoretical capacity, and good structural stability.131–135 Olivine-type LiFePO4 has a hexagonally close-packed oxygen array, in which the octahedra share both edges and faces (Fig. 24). The cation arrangement in LiFePO4 is significantly different from that in layered and spinel structures. There is no continuous network of FeO6 edge-shared octahedra that might contribute to electronic conductivity; instead, divalent Fe2+ ions occupy corner-shared octahedra. The phosphorus ions are located in tetrahedral sites, and the lithium ions reside in chains of edge-shared octahedra. LiFePO4 initially includes one Li+ ion per formula unit that could be extracted and transferred to the anode in the first charging process, compensating for the oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+. The theoretical capacity based on this one-electron reaction is 170 mA h g−1, but the first attempts to de-insert Li from this material were limited to about 0.6 e−, owing to transport limitations of electrons and ions.131 The main obstacle to reaching the theoretical capacity is low intrinsic electronic conductivity. Furthermore, motion of lithium in the olivine crystal structure takes place through one-dimensional channels, with little possibility of crossing between channels.136 These 1-D paths are particularly susceptible to blockage by defects and impurities.136,137 Several approaches were developed to solve the conductivity problem.138 These approaches include reduction of particle size and homogeneous particle size distribution;139 coating the particles with carbon140,141 or co-synthesizing the compounds with carbon to surround each particle with a good electronic conductor;142 tailoring the morphology and texture of the particles via low-temperature synthetic routes;143 and selective doping with supervalent cations in order to increase the intrinsic conductivity.144
 Fig. 24  The olivine structure of LiFePO4 (taken with permission from ref. 135). 
The technology used to synthesize LiFePO4 is important for reducing particle size, which directly affects its performance, cost, and potential applications. Various methods, such as solid-state reaction,145,146 carbothermal reduction,147–149 hydrothermal processing,146,150,151 sol–gel processing,146,152 and precipitation153 have been employed to synthesize LiFePO4 for cathode materials. Carbothermal reduction possesses some distinct advantages over other methods, such as cheap precursors, a simple synthetic process, and easy scale-up.148 Besides, residual carbon introduced by reducing agents in the carbothermal reduction process not only offers better electron transport in a composite electrode, but also impedes the growth of LiFePO4 particles, which can enhance the electrochemical performance of an electrode.147
Carbothermal reduction is essentially a solid-state reaction process that uses higher temperatures and longer reaction times to enhance the diffusion process and generate a well-ordered structure.154 Owing to the high temperatures and long reaction times used, products synthesized by this method have some disadvantages, such as broader particle size distributions, undesirable impurities, and larger particles.154,155 Mechanical milling, including dry milling156,157 and wet milling,158,159 has been used to improve the uniformity and decrease the average particle size of the synthesized materials. Wet-milled samples have higher charge–discharge capacities and longer stable life cycles than dry-milled samples.155 This improved performance originates from the finer particles generated (nano/sub-micron size) and their homogeneous surface morphologies. Therefore, wet-milling-assisted carbothermal reduction is an appropriate route to produce nano/sub-micron LiFePO4.155 The electrochemical performance of LiFePO4/C is closely associated with a variety of properties, including its surface area, particle size and distribution, particle morphology, carbon content, carbon morphology, and phase purity.160 These properties depend on the wet-milling parameters, including ball-to-powder ratio, stirrer speed, ball milling time, ball diameter, solids concentration, and the amounts and types of organic additives. Lv et al.161 synthesized LiFePO4/C using wet-milling-assisted carbothermal reduction, and studied how the ball-to-powder ratio affected its structure, morphology, and electrochemical performance. The particle sizes of LiFePO4/C could be adjusted by changing the ball-to-powder weight ratio. An SEM micrograph shows that the particles have become slightly agglomerated from nanosized primary particles (Fig. 25A), and a TEM micrograph shows that the LiFePO4 particles are surrounded by a carbon network, which prevents the LiFePO4 particles from growing during carbothermal reduction (Fig. 25B). When the ball-to-powder weight ratio reached 25:1, the sample exhibited the highest discharge capacity (155 mA h g−1 at 0.5 C and 125 mA h g−1 at 10 C) and excellent capacity retention after 100 cycles at room temperature, which is attributed to a reduction of particle size to nanometer scale, narrower particle size distribution, the network of carbon coating the active material, and reduced electrochemical polarization resistance.161 Then, they successfully synthesized bowl-like mesoporous LiFePO4/C composites by a wet-milling/spray-drying carbothermal reduction method that used FePO4·2H2O as the iron source and starch as the carbon source and reducing agent with a bowl-like mesoporous structure.162 Moreover, the resulting bowl-like LiFePO4/C composites consist of carbon-coated nanoparticles along with an interconnected open mesoporous microstructure, which provides more channels for the rapid diffusion of lithium (Li) ions and prevents aggregation of LiFePO4 particles during charging and discharging processes. Therefore, these LiFePO4/C composites exhibit excellent high rate performance.162 In addition, the solvent is an important parameter in spray-drying to prepare LiFePO4 particles. As shown in Fig. 25(C) and (D), particles prepared with alcohol have nearly spherical structures, but particles prepared with water exhibit a bowl-like morphology. This can be attributed to hydrodynamic effects (internal and external with respect to the droplet), which also have an important effect on particle morphology.162
 Fig. 25  (A) SEM and (B) TEM micrographs of LiFePO4/C with ball-to-powder ratio of 25:1; SEM micrographs of precursor using different solvents: (C) alcohol and (D) water (reproduced with permission from ref. 161 and 162). 
Coating with carbon derived from pyrolysis of organics has been a very efficient strategy for enhancing electrical conductivity and improving rate capacity. Besides, due to the assistance of in situ carbon coatings in restricting the crystal growth and suppressing the agglomeration of LiFePO4, its primary particle size is decreased on the nanoscale, leading to a shorter distance for lithium ion diffusion in crystals and thereby an enhancement of the rate capability. Nevertheless, Delacourt et al.163 reported carbon-free LiFePO4 particles in the range 100–200 nm which still exhibit excellent electrochemical performance in terms of specific capacity and capacity retention upon cycling. Moreover, to achieve high rate capability of LiFePO4 electrodes, more emphasis should be focused on minimization of particle size, because the ionic conductivity is much lower than the electronic conductivity.164 Their results imply that decreasing the particle size can have a beneficial effect on power performance. Recently, carbon-coated LiFePO4 composites were modified with carbon nanotubes (CNT) or graphene, which exhibit enhanced electrochemical performance.165–170 Most reported studies have confirmed that the addition of superior conductive materials is effective in enhancing the dispersion of LiFePO4 and reducing its primary particle size. Although it is difficult to determine whether the major role in power performance is played by enhanced electronic conductivity or reduced particle size, this trend of combining the two merits of conductive coatings and particle size minimization is certainly the future direction for improving the rate capacity of LiFePO4. Nevertheless, expensive carbon materials (e.g., CNT and graphene) can cause an increase in the cost of LiFePO4-based composites, which does not promote their widespread application. In addition to the cost, the excessive carbon content can lower the tapped density of LiFePO4-based composites.171 Therefore, it remains a major challenge to establish a balance among these aspects for preparing economical carbon-coated LiFePO4-based composites (C-LFP). Therefore, Liu et al.172 developed a high-energy ball mill (HEBM) technique to treat bulk precursors and achieve particle size minimization. The precursor was prepared by means of a rheological phase method to ensure uniform mixing of materials. Carbon-coated single-crystalline LiFePO4 nanocomposites (nano-CS-LFP) can be synthesized by a rheological phase method, combined with the HEBM process and carbothermal reduction (Fig. 26). A large amount of the nanosized precursor is obtained within a narrow particle size distribution of ca. 95 nm. Recently, Rong et al.173 synthesized a LiFePO4/C nanocomposite by a simple carbothermal process within a short sintering time using nano-Fe2O3, LiH2PO4 and sucrose. Nanosized Fe2O3 was adopted to reduce the diffusion distances of ions in the solid-state reaction and reduce the sintering time. In addition, nano-Fe2O3 can effectively reduce the LiFePO4 grain size (<100 nm) and make it uniform, as well as accelerating the solid-state reaction kinetics, which is a convenient procedure for industrialization.
 Fig. 26  Schematic procedures used to prepare nano-CS-LFP composites; embedded SEM images of the bulk precursor of C-LFP (a) and the nanosized precursor of nano-CS-LFP (b) (reproduced with permission from ref. 163). 
Mesoporous LiFePO4 electrode materials could exhibit good electrochemical performance, but they are always prepared using surfactants or templates. Therefore, it is still a major challenge to discover a facile, cost-effective, repeatable and high-yield way to synthesize mesoporous LiFePO4 nanoparticles that exhibit excellent electrochemical performance without using a template or surfactant. Du et al.174 reported the synthesis of mesoporous LiFePO4/C nanocomposites by a carbothermal reduction method. The starting materials were FeCl3·6H2O, NH4H2PO4, and Li2CO3. Fig. 27A shows the XRD patterns of the LiFePO4/C (LFP/C) and porous LFP/C nanocomposites. All the major diffraction lines of the two samples could be indexed to the orthorhombic olivine-type structure without any detectable impurity phases. Fig. 27B shows that most of the particles are well-dispersed spherical particles, with an average particle size of 80 nm, indicating that polyaniline can effectively prevent agglomeration of the particles and restrict the growth of LFP. However, the morphology of LFP/C is distorted and agglomerated and the size of the particles is about 110 nm (Fig. 27E). In addition, a mesoporous structure can be observed for each nanoparticle in Fig. 27C, whereas hardly any pores can be seen in LFP/C (Fig. 27F). Furthermore, the LiFePO4 crystallites in contact with a carbon layer (Fig. 27D) can ensure electrical continuity around the crystallites. The carbon layer was proven to be effective in achieving optimized rate capabilities.
 Fig. 27  (A) XRD patterns of (a) porous-LFP/C and (b) LFP/C nanocomposites; (B) SEM, (C) and (D) TEM images of porous-LFP/C; (E) SEM, (F) and (G) TEM images of LFP/C nanocomposites (reproduced with permission from ref. 174). 
In addition, carbothermal reduction can be used for the synthesis of porous LiFePO4/C in combination with other technologies. Chen et al.175 used a microwave-assisted hydrothermal process combined with carbothermal reduction to synthesize monodisperse porous LiFePO4/C microspheres. Ferric citrate and lithium dihydrogen phosphate were used as starting materials. After the precursor was initially prepared via a microwave-assisted hydrothermal approach, it was reground, together with sucrose as an additional carbon source, for carbothermal reduction. The carbothermal reduction was conducted at 700 °C under an Ar/2 vol% H2 atmosphere for 2 h at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. Fig. 28A(a) shows a typical XRD pattern of the as-synthesized precursor, which is highly consistent with the standard Fe3(PO4)2(OH)2. Fig. 28A(b) is indexed to the standard orthorhombic LiFePO4. The diffraction peaks are strong and narrow with no detectable impurity phases, indicating the high crystallinity of the LiFePO4/C sample. SEM images of LiFePO4/C microspheres are shown in Fig. 28B and C. It can be observed that the meatball-like morphology was retained after carbothermal reduction and LiFePO4/C microspheres are mainly composed of carbon-coated nanoparticles (50–150 nm). Furthermore, the microspheres exhibit a porous morphology aggregated by nanoparticles, indicating the nanoparticles in LiFePO4/C microspheres are single crystals (Fig. 28D).
 Fig. 28  (A) XRD patterns of (a) Fe3(PO4)2(OH)2 microspheres and (b) LiFePO4/C microspheres (reproduced with permission from ref. 175). 
The proper amount of carbon coating can effectively enhance the electronic and ionic conductivities of LiFePO4/C microspheres, thereby improving its rate capability and cycling stability as a cathode material. Due to their high tapped density, LiFePO4/C microspheres can provide high volumetric energy density as well as excellent electrochemical performance as cathode materials, which is promising for high-power lithium-ion batteries.175 Although surface coating and particle size reduction have been shown to increase the power density, these are usually associated with a lower tapped density of the cathode material as the particle size decreases.176 As an alternative method, metal ions have been used as doping species to improve the electrochemical properties of pure LiFePO4.177 In this respect, much attention has been paid to structural modification by substitution of Fe, P, or Li, which leads to enhancement of Li+ ion or electron mobility.178 The electronic conductivity of LiFePO4 can be increased by cation doping, which generates defects in the interior of the crystallite. Thus, Örnek et al.179 reported different combinations of Ni-doped LiFePO4/C nanocomposite synthesized via sol–gel-assisted carbothermal reduction. Tannic acid was added to form a conductive carbon network between the LiFePO4 particles and restrict the growth of grains. Lin et al.180 enhanced the electrochemical performance of LiFePO4/C by surface modification with Sn nanoparticles. More recently, Fan et al.181 synthesized LiFe0.98Mg0.02PO4/C, LiFe0.97Cr0.02PO4/C and LiFe0.96Ti0.02PO4/C by a carbothermal reduction method using FePO4·2H2O as the iron source and phenol–formaldehyde resin as the reducing agent and carbon source. Mg2+, Cr3+ and Ti4+ with various valences in the ratio of 0.02 were used as dopants in order to improve the electrochemical performance of LiFePO4/C.

4.2. Nickel (Ni) nanostructures
Porous carbon materials are of great interest due to their high surface area, thermal stability, chemical inertness, and biocompatibility, which contribute to their high performance in various applications, such as adsorption of dye molecules.182–186 However, their widespread application is restricted due to the size of micropores, which limits the transfer of bulky dye molecules from the surface of carbon materials into the pores.187,188 Moreover, porous carbon-based metal or metal oxide materials have been widely used for catalytic applications. These are fabricated by incorporating metals (oxides) within pores by impregnation or by modifying metal (oxide) nanoparticles within carbon mesopore walls.189–199 The latter case is superior to the incorporation of particles in pores, in that open pores are retained and pore blockages are avoided, especially at high loadings.193 On the other hand, nanoparticle size has a significant effect on catalytic performance. Small-sized particles (normally 3–15 nm) are active and stable in catalytic reactions.193,200–203 The technique of confined growth of nanoparticles within the pores of a matrix is normally adopted to control particle sizes.193,200–204
Ordered mesoporous carbons with uniform, large, accessible mesopores and designed pore structures at least partially overcome the disadvantages associated with traditional porous carbons and are outstanding candidates for supporting metal nanoparticles.205–217 Highly ordered mesoporous polymer–silica and carbon–silica nanocomposites with interpenetrating networks could be synthesized by the evaporation-induced triconstituent co-assembly method. Thus, soluble resol polymer was used as an organic precursor, prehydrolyzed TEOS was used as an inorganic precursor, and the triblock copolymer F127 was employed as a template. Ordered mesoporous nanocomposites have “reinforced concrete”-structured frameworks. By adjusting the initial mass ratios of TEOS to resol, the obtained nanocomposites possess continuous composition gradients, with the ratios ranging from zero to infinity for the two constituents that are “homogeneously” dispersed in the pore walls. The presence of silicates in nanocomposites dramatically inhibits framework shrinkage during calcination, resulting in ordered mesoporous carbon–silica nanocomposites. Combustion in air or etching in HF solution can remove carbon or silica from carbon–silica nanocomposites and generate ordered mesoporous pure silica or carbon frameworks.216 Wang et al.218 reported self-assembling metal or metal oxide nanoparticles, which were embedded in ordered mesoporous polymers or carbon frameworks. The synthetic scheme is illustrated in Fig. 29. TEM images show oriented and hexagonally arranged pores with an estimated domain size of 11.8 nm for the NiO catalyst, confirming the highly ordered 2D hexagonal mesostructure (Fig. 30). Interestingly, well-dispersed nanoparticles with sizes of about 3.0 nm are clearly observed in the pore walls. Metal or metal oxide nanoparticles with sizes below 12 nm controlled by the metal content and pyrolysis temperature are well dispersed throughout the entire polymer or carbon matrix. These features facilitate their application as adsorbents or catalysts with an easy separation process. This method is also applicable to other mesoporous transition metal oxide-containing polymer or carbon catalysts, such as those containing Co and Fe. Moreover, Zhai et al.219 developed a soft-template route to synthesize highly ordered mesoporous carbon/nickel nanoparticle composites, which possess high surface areas, large mesopores and magnetic frameworks. Resol, nickel nitrate and TEOS were used as precursors, and Pluronic F127 as a template. Ordered mesoporous silica/carbon/nickel nanoparticle composites were obtained by co-assembling the precursors with F127. The presence of rigid silicates in nanocomposites can reduce structural shrinkage during carbonization. The ordered mesoporous carbon/nickel nanoparticle composites were fabricated by etching the silicate component with NaOH solution.
 Fig. 29  Schematic diagram for the synthesis of ordered mesoporous Ni–C catalyst with metal embedded in carbon pore walls (taken with permission from ref. 218). 
 Fig. 30  TEM images of mesoporous Ni- (a and b) or NiO-containing (c and d) polymer catalysts (taken with permission from ref. 218). 
Integrating large magnetic transition metal nanocrystals onto mesoporous carbons has attracted more attention because of its low cost, easy separation and great potential in various applications. Subsequently, Yang et al.220 reported large nickel nanocrystals (30–75 nm) in situ integrated onto mesoporous carbons (MC), synthesized via block copolymer-directed self-assembly of nickel acetate and 8-quinolinol-modified chitosan under neutral conditions assisted by tetraethyl orthosilicate before pyrolysis and removal of silica (Fig. 31). This silica-assisted strategy strengthens the interaction between chitosan and P123 via the polymerization of chitosan with silica, yielding “homogeneous” interpenetrating silica–chitosan frameworks with inserted evenly dispersed nickel complexes, leading to homogeneously distributed Ni nanocrystals on the silica–carbon frameworks in the pyrolyzed samples. Nickel ions are reduced in situ to metallic nickel (Ni0) via carbothermal reduction using reducing carbon species, like CO and C, in a single step. The presence of silicates in nanocomposites could dramatically inhibit framework shrinkage during pyrolysis and removing the silica yields a replicated intertwined carbonaceous mesostructure, during which the Ni nanocrystals are exposed. Significantly, the removal of silica can create more exposed and magnetically recoverable Ni nanocrystals. Furthermore, their size, microstructure and morphology of the carbonaceous support can be easily tuned by varying the pyrolysis temperature.
 Fig. 31  Schematic diagram of Ni–MC-t synthesis (taken with permission from ref. 220). 
In addition, Kido et al.221 applied a facile sol–gel reaction accompanied by phase separation for the fabrication of rigid monolithic nickel hydroxide xerogels and nickel/carbon composites with hierarchical porosity. In the synthetic route, nickel chloride (i.e., NiCl2) acts as a nickel precursor and trimethylene oxide acts as a gelation initiator to increase the pH in the reaction solution. Moreover, polyacrylic acid plays a double role as a phase separation inducer and as a co-constituent with nickel hydroxide to form continuous gel skeletons on the micrometer scale. As a result, the obtained xerogels possess well-defined macropores. Subsequent heat-treatment in air can result in the crystallization of NiO at 300 °C, whereas carbothermal reduction under an Ar flow leads to the formation of nickel/carbon (Ni/C) composites with hierarchical pores and large specific surface areas at temperatures higher than 300 °C (as shown in Fig. 32). This facile and versatile synthetic route has the potential to be extended to various monolithic inorganic materials, which include oxides, carbides, and nitrides as well as metallic materials, along with well-controlled pores based on divalent metal hydroxides.
 Fig. 32  Schematic of a facile sol–gel reaction for the fabrication of rigid monolithic nickel hydroxide-based xerogels and nickel/carbon composites (taken with permission from ref. 221). 
In recent years, graphene-based nanocomposites have undergone rapid development based on their promising applications and the steady accumulation of technology in the carbon nanotube (CNT) field. Compared with one-dimensional CNT, graphene is more suitable for immobilizing guest nanoparticles due to the large contact area provided by its planar structure. Moreover, when graphene oxide (GO) is used as a precursor, its oxygen-containing functional groups would facilitate immobilization of nanoparticles.222 It is easy to anchor metal nanoparticles onto graphene sheets by simultaneously reducing GO and metal ions via a suitable reduction method. Significantly, when decorated with metal nanoparticles, reduced GO could efficiently prevent aggregation arising from stacking and interaction among the sheets after drying.223 The two-dimensional morphology of graphene-like materials can offer opportunities as scaffolds in composites, combining the properties of graphene with those of an inorganic support.224,225 One type of material that is attracting more attention is metal and metal oxide nanoparticles deposited on graphene-like sheets.226 Metal nanoparticle/graphene hybrid composites have been widely applied in catalysis,227–229 supercapacitors,230,231 sensors232,233 and hydrogen storage,234 due to the synergistic effect between the inherent properties of metal nanoparticles and the merits of graphene, e.g., large surface area and high electrical conductivity. Zhang et al.235 synthesized Ni nanoparticles supported on graphene (Ni/G) using GO and Ni2+ ions as starting materials. GO was mixed with NiCl2 solution and treated with hydrazine. Hydrazine both reduced GO and formed a complex with nickel(II). At 500 °C, highly dispersed Ni nanoparticles with diameters of about 10 nm and surface oxygen species comprising Ni2+/Ni3+ could be formed on the graphene sheets after decomposition of the Ni complex. Moreover, further “reduction’’ of the graphene sheets by removing the oxygen functionalities remaining after reduction with hydrazine could be achieved via carbothermal reduction. By increasing the annealing temperature to 700 °C, the Ni nanoparticles migrated and aggregated into large particles and their surface oxygen species were mainly reduced by the graphene support. Taking into account the fact that transition metal ions such as Fe2+, Co2+ and Mn2+ can react with hydrazine to form a complex, the synthetic route to Ni/G is applicable to other metal nanoparticle/graphene composites.
In addition, Abellán et al.236 proved that thermal treatment of the hybrid material formed by the spontaneous precipitation of GO and Ni,Mn layered double hydroxide (NiMn-LDH) can possibly lead to the segregation of nickel nanoparticles and the decomposition of graphene into CO2. The GO material would provide carbon atoms to convert Ni2+ ions into Ni metal via carbothermal reduction. Mixing solutions of LDH and GO leads to the instantaneous precipitation of a solid in which, due to the relative dimensions, nanometer-scale LDH flakes are supported on larger micrometer-scale GO sheets (Fig. 33A). Fig. 33B–G show images obtained from NiMn-LDH–GO after calcination for 24 h at 450 °C and 800 °C, respectively. Fig. 33E shows the morphology of the material obtained at 450 °C, in which nanoparticles of <20 nm can be observed to be deposited on graphene layers. Moreover, the lamellar morphology of the hybrid material displays a series of curved graphene layers thinner than 3 nm covered with nanoparticles of 17 nm (Fig. 33B and C). Importantly, for the material calcined at 450 °C, the presence of carbonaceous materials arising from the transformation of GO and, in particular, CNTs is observed. Fig. 33G shows an interlayer spacing of 0.34 nm, which is in agreement with the value for a (002) plane in graphite. In contrast, the key feature after calcination at 800 °C is the complete disappearance of any residual carbon material. The changes in GO are accompanied by the appearance of small Ni nanoparticles (Fig. 33B and C) for calcination at 450 °C or large Ni spheres for calcination at 800 °C. The key feature is that thermal treatment at 800 °C can lead to complete segregation of Ni from the original NiMn-LDH in the form of large micrometer-scale Ni spheres, accompanied by the disappearance of any carbonaceous material (carbon content 0.1%), as well as the residual presence of manganese oxides.
 Fig. 33  (A) Structure of the NiMn-LDH–GO hybrid. (B) FESEM-EDS elemental mapping performed over the area indicated in the inset, showing phase segregation of Ni and Mn. The scale bar represents 20 μm. (C) Larger magnification of a well-defined Ni sphere present in (B) of ca. 20 μm in size. (D) FESEM, (E) TEM, (F) HRTEM, and (G) larger-magnification images of NiMn-LDH–GO calcined at 450 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 236). 
Most processes concentrate on native biomass, including food or agricultural wastes, since potential applications often require cheap and sustainable materials.237 The simplest approach is pyrolysis of these biomaterials under closed conditions or an inert atmosphere.238 Alternatively, a two-step heating process can be employed to initially strengthen the biopolymer network by crosslinking; for example, the synthesis of microporous N-doped carbon materials from chicken feather fibers (composed of keratin, a fibrous structural protein also found in wool, hair, and some animal shells).239 Another two-step strategy is to activate the carbon materials after pyrolysis, either chemically (e.g., with KOH) or by heating in air to increase their porosity.240,241 Metals can be used to crosslink and stabilize the polymer precursor,242 to increase porosity, or as catalysts (e.g., Fe or Ni) for graphitization of the carbon materials at relatively low temperatures.243 The metal precursor can be introduced by infiltration, but many native biomaterials also contain metals (e.g., potassium in seaweeds) that have been exploited for in situ chemical activation.244 It has been widely reported that the natural variability of biopolymers (e.g., seaweed species) can be used to tune the exact properties of the carbon product. However, for some special applications, such as supercapacitors, this lack of uniformity in the biomass can cause some problems with consistency of performance compared to carbon materials originating from synthetic polymers.245 Some researchers synthesized nickel (Ni0) nanoparticles via carbothermal reduction.246–248 Biomass can be employed as a carbon source with a natural biotemplate and the nickel precursor (Ni2+) is inserted into the lignocellulosic matrix by impregnation (e.g., atmospheric pressure or vacuum). Vacuum impregnation contributes to the formation of inner-sphere surface complexes, whereas atmospheric pressure impregnation promotes electrostatic interactions with the outer hydration sphere of the Ni2+ cations (i.e., outer-sphere complex) or the formation of hydrogen bonds (as illustrated in Fig. 34). After one-step pyrolysis at a higher temperature (e.g., 700 °C), nickel (Ni0) nanoparticles were successfully embedded in situ in the carbon matrix. However, the initial dispersion of the preformed Ni0 nanoparticles is very poor, due to the difficulty of inserting them into the lignocellulosic matrix,248 which can be solved by optimizing the surface properties, such as surface area and pore structure. For example, it can be converted into activated carbon. Yu et al.249–251 synthesized Ni-loaded activated carbon (Ni/AC) by carbothermal reduction, which exhibited remarkable hydrogenolysis activity compared with reduced Ni/AC, KBH4, or H2.249
 Fig. 34  Schematic of the mechanism of nickel ion (Ni2+) adsorption in a lignocellulosic matrix (i.e., rice husk fiber) via impregnation under atmospheric pressure or vacuum (reproduced with permission from ref. 246 and 247). 
Nature has evolved structures that are optimized for specific functions, for example, the porous tubular arrays in wood that confer strength and flexibility while simultaneously providing a route for water and nutrient transport through the tree. Many of these natural structures contain complex ordered biopolymers, such as the microfibrillar composite of cellulose and lignin in the cell walls of biomass. By templating the biomaterial, we can harness this structural complexity, either to mimic a natural function or for an entirely new purpose (e.g., catalysis). In this case, the templating focuses on hard templating of native biomass to produce negative (inverse) and positive (hollow) copies or direct replicas (Fig. 35A). A wide range of biomaterials, including wood, paper, cotton, and fungi, have been used to template ceramic materials.252–254 Commonly, this templating can be achieved by infiltrating the biomaterial with inorganic precursors and then precipitating an amorphous, polycrystalline, or, more rarely, single-crystal ceramic product. The template could essentially be considered as a cast, which provides a confined space for mineralization. However, the choice of conditions and the inorganic precursor can have a dramatic effect on the resulting material. For example, templating wood with sol–gel silica precursors by slow hydrolysis and condensation produced a fine-structured replica, since the precursors were able to leach into the cell walls (Fig. 35B).255 Fast hydrolysis, on the other hand, formed a simple inverse structure (Fig. 35C). An advantage of many organic biomaterials for templating is that they often exhibit functional surfaces owing to the biopolymer content. These can be exploited to achieve accurate templating via surface-specific chemisorption of, for example, metal alkoxides onto the hydroxyl-rich surface of cellulose fibers (Fig. 35D).256–259 Careful sequential adsorption and hydrolysis enables deposition of a thin metal oxide layer and maintains nanoscale structural features. If the biotemplate does not readily adsorb metals, it can also be modified by chemical functionalization, enzyme treatment, or mild hydrolysis.260–262 Another route is decorating the biomass surface with noble-metal nanoparticles for the surface-specific electroless deposition of metals.263
 Fig. 35  (A) Schematic of the different methods of templating to produce (1) negative and (2) positive copies and (3) direct replicas. Examples of (B) a replica and (C) an inverse copy of poplar wood via the slow and fast hydrolysis of silica precursors; (D) schematic of sequential chemisorption and hydrolysis to build atomic-sized layers of metal oxides on a template surface (reproduced with permission from ref. 255 and 257). 
Biomass itself can be used both as a template and as a carbon source for metal carbides production. This is typically achieved by initially carbonizing the biomaterial and then infiltrating the resulting charcoal template with a liquid or gaseous metal reagent to form a metal carbide replica such as TiC or ZrC.264,265 Alternatively, the metal carbide can be produced in one step by soaking the biomaterial in an aqueous metal salt before pyrolysis.266,267 In this case, the metal precursor first decomposes to give an oxide coating over the template before carbothermal reduction to give a carbide replica with the biological features still intact. By heating to a lower temperature (avoiding carbothermal reduction), biomaterials can also be widely used to template carbon/metal oxide composites.268,269 Another example that exploits carbon-rich biomaterial as both template and reducing agent is the formation of metal sulfides from cellulose fibers.270
The synthesis of bimetallic alloys often requires sophisticated chemical and physical methods, including non-aqueous organometallic routes,271 ultrasonic spray pyrolysis272 or reducing agents such as borohydrides that yield FeNi nanoparticles with boron inclusions.273 Furthermore, incipient wetness and co-impregnation methods were employed.274 Recently, Chieffi et al.275 used a low-cost rapid approach for the synthesis of carbon-supported catalysts, consisting in the impregnation of cellulose filter paper (CFP) with the metal precursors Ni(NO3)2 and Fe(NO3)3 in optimal mixing ratios. Afterwards, carbothermal reduction of iron and nickel salts was performed leading to isolated nanoparticles on the CFP that substantially retain the morphology of the paper on the microscale after thermal treatment. On the other hand, the metals trigger the reorganization of the carbon matrix on the nanoscale, resulting in the formation of a graphene shell which encapsulates and stabilizes the nanoparticles (as illustrated in Fig. 36). Consequently, reducing agents and multi-step and time-consuming syntheses have been completely avoided, thus affording a catalyst based entirely on sustainable precursors.
 Fig. 36  (A) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CFP FeNi catalyst used for hydrogenation; (B) high-magnification SEM image of the CFP FeNi catalyst; (C) low-magnification TEM image and (D) high-resolution TEM image with labeled lattice fringes of CFP-supported FeNi alloy nanoparticles. The SAED pattern shown in the inset of (C) is indexed to the fcc lattice of FeNi alloy nanoparticles (reproduced with permission from ref. 275). 
In addition, carbon nanofibers (CNFs) are excellent support materials that can act as scaffolds to direct the growth of metallic nanoparticles with uniform shape and tunable size.276,277 Mahata et al.278 reported that Ni0 nanoparticles stabilized with CNFs exhibited good catalytic performance in the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene, producing clean aniline in 99% yield. The main challenge is cost-effective and environmentally friendly synthesis of the Ni–CNF catalyst. The conventional method, i.e. carbon vapor deposition and subsequent reduction of nickel salts to synthesize the Ni–CNFs,279,280 usually involves complex synthetic procedures, complicated equipment,280 and extra reducing agents (e.g., NaBH4, NH2–NH2, and H2).281 Fast pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass can not only produce bio-oil, but also produces low-boiling-point reducing species (e.g., CxHy, H2, and CO).282,283 Abundant reductants and anoxic conditions could offer an ideal environment for the reduction of nickel salts. Recently, Liu et al.284,285 found that CNFs can be formed via the pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass along with FeCl3 catalysis. Then, they developed a facile process to obtain Ni nanoparticles embedded in CNFs by pyrolyzing Ni,Fe-containing lignocellulosic biomass.286 The Ni2+/Fe3+-preloaded lignocellulosic biomass was rapidly pyrolyzed at 873 K,287,288 during which a Ni–NiFe2O4/CNF catalyst, as well as renewable bio-oil, were harvested.289,290 During the fast-pyrolysis process, the lignin, celluloses, and hemicelluloses in biomass quickly decomposed into volatiles and char. NiCl2 and FeCl3 are converted into Ni0 nanoparticles and magnetic NiFe2O4, respectively, by reducing agents (e.g., CO, H2, and C) formed during biomass decomposition. A similar feature was demonstrated for the formation of Cu–CuFe2O4/graphene composites under hydrothermal conditions.291 Moreover, FeCl3 catalyzed the decomposition of volatiles into small-molecule hydrocarbons, such as CH4, C2H4, and C2H2,292 which can be deposited on the surface of char to form CNFs under the catalysis of newly formed Ni and Fe compounds (e.g., NiFe2O4 and Ni) in a way similar to that in the CVD process.282,293 In the XRD pattern, only peaks of NiFe2O4 (2θ = 29.8°, 35.3°, 37.2°, 43.5°, 53.5°, 56.7°, 62.4°, and 74.1°) and metallic Ni (2θ = 44.7°, 51.9°, and 76.4°) are found, and no other crystalline Fe and Ni species are observed (Fig. 37A). It is confirmed that the catalytic activity and selectivity of the catalyst should be ascribed to Ni0 species, whereas its separability is ascribed to NiFe2O4. Fig. 37B shows SEM and TEM images of Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs, which possess a rough morphology, comprising a nanofiber structure with lots of particles embedded in it. The TEM image indicates that the particles are evenly distributed in the CNFs with an average size below 50 nm. As a support, the CNFs provide a relatively high surface area, which promotes dispersion of the Ni nanoparticles, increasing the catalytic activity of materials.294 It is noteworthy that Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs can be quickly separated by an external magnetic field from the reaction mixture. NiFe2O4 endows the Ni–NiFe2O4/CNF composite with high separability due to its magnetic properties (Fig. 37C). In addition, a mechanism for the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene by Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs has been proposed. As illustrated in Fig. 37D, H2 was initially activated by the evenly distributed Ni nanoparticles to form active H atoms295,296 and then it transferred electrons to another acceptor (the nitro group of nitrobenzene) due to the high graphitization degree of CNFs.297,298 Finally, protonated H combined with the acceptor to form the hydrogenation product.299 On the other hand, due to the relatively low hydrogen activation ability, the H atoms activated by the Ni nanoparticles cannot react further with other reducible functional groups (e.g., CO, C–OH, C–Cl or C–Br) at low H2 pressure, endowing the catalyst with high selectivity.
 Fig. 37  (A) XRD pattern of Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs, (B) SEM and TEM images of Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs, (C) magnetic hysteresis loop of Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs recorded at 300 K. The photographs (inset) show that Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs in methanol solution can be quickly separated by a magnet, and (D) catalytic mechanism of Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs for the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene (reproduced with permission from ref. 286). 
4.3. Copper (Cu) nanostructures

4.3.1. Copper oxide (Cu2O). 
The interaction of carbon monoxide (i.e., CO) with CuO has been investigated with the primary aim of using CuO to catalyze the water gas shift reaction: CO + H2O → CO2 + H2. CO is able to reduce bulk CuO powders between 236 and 500 °C.300,301 Under high concentrations of CO, CuO can be directly converted into Cu. However, when the CO concentration is low, the reduction process occurs as CuO to Cu2O to Cu. The removal of oxygen and the formation of a non-stoichiometric and disordered Cu2O1+δ were also reported.300 Wu et al.302 synthesized vertically aligned dense Cu2O nanowire arrays by carbothermal reduction of CuO nanowires. Periodic nodule formation is observed in the Cu2O nanowires, which is found to be driven by Rayleigh instability during the phase transformation process. This approach can lead to the formation of a diversity of hierarchical one-dimensional Cu2O nanostructures (as shown in Fig. 38A). Besides, an “antenna effect” was found in mass transport where CuO nanowire arrays with a large specific surface area lead to faster phase transformation compared to planar films. Continuous oxygen out-diffusion could prevent the Cu2O nanowire from fragmenting and collapsing; therefore, it results in dense arrays of vertically aligned nodular Cu2O nanowires. Furthermore, a possible mechanism of the transformation of CuO nanowires into Cu2O nanowires under carbothermal reduction conditions is proposed (as illustrated in Fig. 38B). Carbothermal reduction can occur at temperatures as low as 350 °C and is described by the reaction 2CuO + CO → Cu2O + CO2. It can be found that: (1) the reduction front initiates at the nanowire surface and proceeds through the wire and into the underlying film; (2) oxygen out-diffusion is the primary process by which reduction of CuO to Cu2O takes place, thus creating an intermediate non-stoichiometric phase given as Cu2O1+δ; and (3) the presence of nanowires, i.e., extra surface area, enhances the rate of reduction. This reduction scheme leads to Rayleigh instability and the growth of periodic nodules on the nanowire surfaces. Fragmentation is avoided and vertically aligned viable Cu2O nanowires are formed. Alternatively, under a Cu chemical potential gradient and Ar atmosphere, Cu can be made to diffuse into CuO nanowires with the formation of a Cu2O phase and nodules, represented as CuO + Cu → Cu2O.
 Fig. 38  (A) Schematic of Cu2O nanowires synthesis via the carbothermal reduction of CuO nanowires; (B) mechanism of the transformation of CuO nanowires into Cu2O nanowires under carbothermal reduction conditions: (a) starting foil, (b) incipient stage of the transformation process, (c) full conversion of the nanowires and partial conversion of the underlying oxide film, and (d) complete conversion of the CuO nanowires and underlying oxide film (reproduced with permission from ref. 302). 


4.3.2. Cu–C nanocomposites. 
A number of methods have been developed to synthesize porous metal–carbon nanocomposites. Many are based on conventional sol–gel synthesis of carbon aerogels by pyrolysis of polymeric gels, with metal nanoparticles incorporated into the aerogel matrix.303–315 Nevertheless, such metal–carbon nanocomposites have been limited to a relatively low metal loading of <20 wt% and large monolith densities of ≥100 mg cm−3, as scaling of sol–gel methods to a regime of ultra-low densities and high metal loadings has proven to be non-trivial. Charnvanichborikarn et al.316 have found that trapping Cu nanoparticles highly dispersed in a solvent while carbon aerogel precursors undergo gelation causes gel shrinkage and results in porous monoliths with relatively high densities of ≥65 mg cm−3 for Cu loadings of ≥10 wt%. To realize lower-density Cu–C composites, they also developed an approach that involves filling the pores of robust carbon nanotube (CNT)-based aerogels317 with a CuSO4 solution, followed by freeze-drying to remove water and thermal decomposition of CuSO4, which has yielded nanoporous Cu–C composites with a minimum C scaffold density of 25 mg cm−3 and Cu loadings up to 70 wt%.316 Then, they proposed a novel route to obtain Cu–C nanocomposites with an unprecedented minimum C scaffold density of 5 mg cm−3 and controllable Cu loading up to 65 wt%.318 They described the fabrication of porous Cu–C nanocomposites by water-ice templating in aqueous CuSO4 using a suspension of graphene oxide (GO) and CNTs (as illustrated in Fig. 39). Upon crystallization of water, the salt and carbon constituents segregate at grain boundaries of water crystallites. Freeze-drying (vacuum desiccation) is used to remove water for the creation of pores. The final Cu–C composites are obtained by thermally induced reduction of GO and decomposition of CuSO4. In such nanocomposites, mechanical integrity was ensured by a random network of interconnected reduced GO (rGO) sheets and CNTs, while the Cu constituent was in the form of Cu nanoparticles decorating the rGO sheets and CNTs. They explored the flexibility of this method for controlling pore and nanoparticle sizes, Cu loading, and the final monolith density. Furthermore, they demonstrated its applicability to the synthesis of other porous metal–carbon nanocomposites, e.g., Ag–C.318
 Fig. 39  Schematic showing the fabrication process of Cu–C composites (reproduced with permission from ref. 318). 
Flame spray synthesis or ultrasonic spray pyrolysis is known to be a promising process that can be used to produce functional metal particles. In flame spray synthesis, particles are formed via a gas-to-particle conversion mechanism.319–323 Conventional flame spray synthesis has been applied to synthesize oxide nanoparticles in an ambient air environment. To synthesize metal particles, the gas mixture from flame reactions could be altered from CO2/H2O (oxidizing conditions, traditional set-up) to CO/H2/H2O (reducing conditions).319 Combustion of metal–organic precursors in the flame process at a high ratio of fuel to oxygen makes it possible to obtain metallic nanoparticles, since H2 and CO gases formed by decomposition of metal precursors are involved in the complete consumption of the available oxygen and the reduction of oxides to metals. Athanassiou et al.320 synthesized metallic copper nanoparticles covered with thin carbon layers via reducing flame spray synthesis, in which copper(II) 2-ethylhexanoate was completely decomposed in highly reducing conditions. However, for the reducing flame, a special system of metal–organic precursor and solvent is required. Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis, as an aerosol process, can be used to prepare functional particles from cost-effective metal salt precursors. In conventional spray pyrolysis, formation of CuO or Cu2O is inevitable, although N2 gas is used as a carrier gas, as most Cu precursors containing oxygen (e.g., nitrate or acetate) are used as aqueous solutions. Therefore, addition of H2 to the carrier gas (e.g., N2) is needed for the reduction of CuO to Cu.324 Kim et al.325 developed an approach to produce pure Cu particles via spray pyrolysis without the use of hydrogen or other reducing gases. A low-carbon-number alcohol such as ethanol and methanol was used as a reducing agent. In ethanol-assisted spray pyrolysis, reduction of CuO or Cu2O to metallic Cu is basically achieved by H2 or CO generated from decomposition of ethanol. Zhong et al.326 studied the effect of ethanol and ethylene glycol (EG) as co-solvents on generation of micrometer-sized copper particles from a copper nitrate precursor, which made it possible to obtain oxide-free copper particles at temperatures higher than 400 °C; however, hollow particles were obtained. The mechanism of particle generation was proposed as follows: (1) Cu(NO3)2 is initially hydrolyzed to Cu2(OH)3NO3 after the evaporation of solvents; (2) Cu2(OH)3NO3 decomposes to CuO and Cu2O; and (3) reduction of these oxides is achieved under a reducing atmosphere, which is created by decomposition of ethanol or EG. Firmansyah et al.327 studied the effect of ethanol concentration on the phase transformation of copper oxides in ethanol-assisted spray pyrolysis. Two pathways for the generation of metallic Cu particles were proposed. On the one hand, the Cu2O phase formed initially was further oxidized to CuO, followed by reduction to Cu at low temperatures (450 ≤ T ≤ 525 °C); on the other hand, Cu2O was directly reduced to Cu at a high temperature (T ≥ 525 °C). Subsequently, Cho et al.328 developed a new approach to produce core–shell structured carbon-coated Cu particles via hydrogen-free ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (as illustrated in Fig. 40). In order to obtain pure metallic Cu particles having a thin carbon layer, citric acid and sucrose were used as the reducing agent and carbon source, respectively. Initially, Cu(NO3)2/CA/sucrose precipitates were formed after the complete drying of droplets. Thereafter, C/CuO composites were formed by decomposition of copper nitrate and carbonization of organic additives, producing reducing gases (CO and H2) under a nitrogen atmosphere. In the core region of the particles, reduction of CuO to Cu can be achieved by carbothermal reduction. As a result, the carbon inside the particles seems to be removed. On the contrary, in the surface region of the particles, reducing gases such as CO and H2 could be involved in the reduction of CuO to Cu, generating the C/Cu composite region.
 Fig. 40  Formation mechanism of core–shell structured carbon-coated copper by spray pyrolysis (reproduced with permission from ref. 328). 
Recently, Liu et al.329 synthesized a magnetic carbon material anchored to Cu nanoparticles (Cu&Fe3O4-mC) by fast pyrolysis of biomass polluted by heavy metals. The synthesis of Cu&Fe3O4-mC includes two main stages, i.e., metal loading and fast pyrolysis. In the metal-loading stage, Cu and Fe were adsorbed onto the biomass in the form of Cu2+ and Fe3+, respectively. In this stage, heavy metals in water can be removed by adsorption; therefore, the wastewater was decontaminated. Since interaction between metal ions and biomass occurs on the surface of biomass, and adsorption of metal ions by biomass is a single-layer adsorption process,330 Cu2+ and Fe3+ hydrolyzed forms were dispersed on the surface of the biomass after drying. In the fast-pyrolysis stage, biomass was thermally decomposed and the volatile components produced were swept out by a carrier gas to form bio-oil and pyrolysis gas at 773 K. Meanwhile, the adsorbed Cu2+ and Fe3+ species were reduced by the reducing components (e.g., H2, CO, and biochar) derived from the pyrolysis process (eqn 25–28).331–333Fig. 41A shows typical XRD patterns of the metal-preloaded biomass and Cu&Fe3O4-mC. It can be seen that before pyrolysis, both Fe and Cu in the biomass are amorphous, and the diffraction peak at a 2θ value of 22.9° is attributed to the cellulose crystal plane.334 After pyrolysis, the Fe and Cu form crystals, while the cellulose crystal plane disappears, confirming the decomposition of the cellulose structure during pyrolysis. The diffraction peaks at 2θ = 43.5°, 50.7°, and 74.3° are assigned to Cu crystal planes, respectively, indicating that Cu in the char is in a metallic form with face-centered cubic crystals (27.3 nm). The diffraction peaks at 2θ = 36.4°, 42.2°, and 61.2° indicate the formation of Fe3O4 crystallites, which is the main reason for the magnetic properties of the produced materials. As shown in Fig. 41B, the hysteresis loop of Cu&Fe3O4-mC is symmetrical in the magnetic field intensity (H) range of −20 to 20 kOe, and its saturation magnetization (M) reaches 20.6 emu g−1 at 10 kOe, indicating favorable ferromagnetic properties of the material. Such properties are mainly significant for convenient recycling of the catalyst in liquid-phase reactions. There are two types of particles on the carbon support: the particles of micron size are attributed to Fe3O4 particles, whereas the nanosized particles are attributed to Cu particles (Fig. 41C and D). More than 90% of the total Cu nanoparticles possess a particle size of 15–25 nm, confirming that the Cu nanoparticles are highly monodisperse on the carbon support.335 In addition, a possible reaction mechanism for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol by NaBH4 under the catalysis of Cu&Fe3O4-mC is schematically proposed in Fig. 41E. BH4− ions were initially adsorbed on the surface of Cu nanoparticles to form a Cu hydride complex. Meanwhile, 4-nitrophenol was reversibly adsorbed on Cu nanoparticles (i.e., adsorption accompanied by desorption). Consequently, hydrogen and electrons are transferred from the Cu hydride complex to the nitro group of 4-nitrophenol, which goes through hydrodeoxygenation reactions to form the final product, 4-aminophenol (eqn (29)).336 2Fe(NO3)3 + 6H2O → 2Fe(OH)3 + 6HNO3↑ → 2FeO(OH) → Fe2O3(25) Cu(NO3)2 + 2H2O → Cu(OH)2 + 2HNO3↑ → CuO(26) 3Fe2O3 + 3(H2, CO, C) → 2Fe3O4 + 3(H2O, CO2, CO)↑(27) CuO + 3(H2, CO, C) → Cu + (H2O, CO2, CO)↑(28) (29)
 Fig. 41  (A) XRD patterns of metal-preloaded biomass and magnetic carbon anchored to Fe and Cu nanoparticles (Cu&Fe3O4-mC); (B) magnetic hysteresis curves of Cu&Fe3O4-mC and (inset) the photographs show Cu&Fe3O4-mC in the reaction solution attracted and arranged vertically using a magnet; (C) SEM image of Cu&Fe3O4-mC; (D) TEM image of Cu nanoparticles in Cu&Fe3O4-mC, (inset) high-resolution TEM image of Cu nanoparticles; (E) reaction mechanism for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol by NaBH4 with the catalysis of Cu&Fe3O4-mC (reproduced with permission from ref. 329). 

4.4. Cobalt (co) nanostructures

4.4.1. Cobalt carbide. 
Cobalt carbide (e.g., Co2C) has been widely studied as a permanent magnet337 and heterogeneous catalyst,338 because of its high coercivity337 and high surface area339 combined with high activity,340 respectively. Combination of metals or metal oxides with a carbon source is a common method for the synthesis of metal carbides (i.e., carbothermal reduction).341 Graphite or synthetic pitch is usually employed as a carbon source.342,343 For this solid-state reaction, mass transport to the reaction interface is the rate-limiting step. A high reaction temperature (typically >1000 °C) is therefore necessary to facilitate the diffusion of ions/atoms through the solid phases. Therefore, Hasin344 reported the utilization of graphene oxide (GO) as a carbon source for the synthesis of Co2C. In comparison with other carbon sources, GO contains only a few layers of carbon345 and it could facilitate the diffusion of carbon atoms.346 Another merit is that the oxygen-containing functional groups (–COOH, –OH, and –CO groups)347–349 in GO can facilitate direct nucleation of metal oxide nanocrystals on its surface, thus resulting in intimate contact between the two phases.350–352 Coupled with its high monodispersity,353 these properties make GO an attractive carbon source for the synthesis of Co2C. A simple ammonia-evaporation-induced method is proposed for the synthesis of a GO/Co3O4 nanocomposite, which is then converted to Co2C by thermal reduction in a H2/N2 atmosphere. Compared to conventional high-temperature synthesis of metal carbides, utilization of GO as a carbon source enables metal carbide synthesis at the lowest reported temperature. The end product is mesoporous Co2C with a large surface area. Moreover, the product exhibits superparamagnetic behavior. Fig. 42 illustrates the formation of mesoporous Co2C. Firstly, positively charged cobalt ions are attracted to the surface of a GO sheet due to electrostatic attraction from the negatively charged functional groups (e.g., epoxide, hydroxyl, and carboxylic groups) present on the surface of the GO sheet.348,354,355 This intimate contact facilitates nucleation of metal oxide during ammonia evaporation at 80 °C, and the resulting Co3O4 nanoparticles are more thoroughly wrapped in GO sheets. At a low annealing temperature (200 °C) under a reducing atmosphere, graphene is formed and simultaneously reacts with Co3O4 to form Co2C. The single carbon atomic layer is believed to facilitate the diffusion of carbon atoms, resulting in such a low synthesis temperature. It is suggested that the synthesis of Co2C using GO as a carbon source can be extended to other metal carbides (e.g., WC).354
 Fig. 42  Scheme showing a proposed formation route to prepare Co2C (taken with permission from ref. 344). 


4.4.2. Cobalt (Co0). 
The rational design of non-noble metal catalysts with an electrocatalytic activity comparable or even superior to that of Pt is extremely important for future fuel cell-based renewable energy devices. Xia et al.356 demonstrated a new concept: that a metal–organic framework (MOF) can be used as a precursor to encapsulate Co@Co3O4@C core@bishell nanoparticles in situ into a highly ordered porous carbon matrix (CM) (denoted as Co@Co3O4@C–CM), as illustrated in Fig. 43. Firstly, CM with hexagonally ordered mesopores was synthesized357 and functionalized with carboxyl groups,358 which were allowed to coordinate with metal ions and initiate the growth of MOF crystals after adding MOF precursors.359,360 The highly ordered CM is robust and cannot be destroyed even after a high-temperature carbonization process. Subsequently, an MOF constructed from a cobalt center and a benzimidazole ligand361 was introduced into the confined space of the highly ordered CM. The as-prepared MOF–CM composite was pyrolyzed in an inert atmosphere to obtain Co@C–CM. Notably, the Co complex could be easily decomposed and Co2+ ions segregated from the MOF during the initial pyrolyzing stage and then agglomerated to form ultra-fine cobalt nanoparticles362 on carbon rods in the highly ordered porous CM. As the heat treatment proceeded, these nanoparticles could aggregate to form larger Co@C nanoparticles to decrease their surface energy. These Co nanoparticles supported on the CM were highly active and their surface layers were then oxidized to Co3O4 by controlled heating in air, thus forming core@bishell Co@Co3O4@C nanoparticles on the porous CM. The as-formed oxidized outer layers could protect the Co core from further oxidation.363 From the Co–O phase diagram, the stable phase is Co3O4 at elevated temperatures.364,365 From this point of view, the Co@Co3O4 nanoparticles were also completely oxidized to Co3O4 by heating the composite at 150 °C in air for 96 h, resulting in Co3O4@C–CM. Moreover, Co@Co3O4@C could be synthesized by heating a pure MOF crystal under an Ar flow and further oxidizing the obtained Co@C in air.
 Fig. 43  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Co@Co3O4@C–CM: (a) functionalization of CM with carboxylate groups, (b) growth of MOF on CM, (c) heat treatment under Ar flow and (d) oxidation in air at 90 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 356). 
In summary, there is a series of reactions for the carbothermal reduction of Co3O4. Co3O4 can be reduced by carbon directly to metallic Co (30) and (31), or to CoO first and then to Co (32)–(35).366 For each route, the gas product could be CO or CO2. The standard Gibbs free energies (ΔG0) of reactions (30)–(35) as a function of temperature are plotted in Fig. 44. From the thermodynamics, reactions (31) and (33) are more feasible compared to reactions (30) and (32) below 707.9 °C, i.e., CO2 will be produced as the gas product. With respect to reactions (31) and (33), the latter occurs more easily even at low temperature. According to Fig. 44B, CoO can be reduced by carbon to metallic Co via reactions (34) and (35) at temperatures below or above 707.9 °C, respectively. Co3O4 + 4C → 3Co + 4CO (g)(30) Co3O4 + 2C → 3Co + 2CO2 (g)(31) Co3O4 + C → 3CoO + CO (g)(32) Co3O4 + 1/2C → 3CoO + 1/2CO2 (g)(33) CoO + C → Co + CO (g)(34) CoO + 1/2C → Co + 1/2CO2 (g)(35)
 Fig. 44  Gibbs free energies (ΔG0) of reactions (A: Co3O4 to Co, CoO) and (B: CoO to Co) via carbothermal reduction (reproduced with permission from ref. 366). 

4.5. Titanium (Ti) nanostructures
Titanium carbide (TiC) has received much attention for catalytic and electrochemical applications, apart from its application in sintered composite materials such as Al2O3–TiC composites. Carbothermal reduction of TiO2 by solid carbon materials in an inert atmosphere or vacuum is the most effective method to produce TiC for applications in composite materials.367,368 According to Weimer,369 synthesis of TiC by this method requires high temperature (1700–2100 °C) and a long reaction time (10–24 h)370 in an argon environment. Therefore, it presents the problems of grain growth, particle agglomeration, non-uniform particle shape and large amounts of unreacted TiO2 and carbon in the product.367 Woo et al.371 produced homogeneous ultra-fine TiC powders via carbothermal reduction. Carbothermal reduction of a mixture of TiO2 and carbon resin at 1500 °C proceeded as follows. Firstly, partially reduced TiO2 particles were agglomerated in the initial stage of carbothermal reduction with sizes from 500 to 1000 nm. In the intermediate stage, the particles were broken down into fine particles and the many holes in the middle of the particles were attributed to the release of gaseous reduction products such as CO. Finally, homogeneous fine TiC particles with a size of 80 nm were formed at 1500 °C for 15 min. In addition, TiC powders can be synthesized by ball milling with carbothermal reduction of titania/charcoal in vacuum conditions. Xu et al.372,373 investigated the preparation of TiC by carbothermal reduction of TiO2 in vacuum conditions. Fine TiC powders (2.05 μm) with low impurity were obtained by ball milling and heating a titania/charcoal mixture (molar ratio 1:4) to 1450 °C for 8 h at 1–60 Pa.
In the development of convenient syntheses of solid-solution carbides, microwave-assisted carbothermal reduction (MWCR) has received attention. There have been some studies on the successful sintering of metal powders via microwave heat, such as copper, iron, tungsten and magnesium powders.374–378 The use of microwaves can increase the heating rate and substantially reduce the sintering time in comparison with conventional sintering. Zhang et al.379 prepared ultra-fine (Ti,W,Nb)C solid-solution powders via MWCR after high-energy ball milling oxide–graphite mixtures. Compared with carbothermal powder techniques, the hybrid polymer route is promising for synthesizing TiC by in situ carbothermal reduction, due to convenient control of composition, homogeneity, and morphology.380,381 Yu et al.382 synthesized highly ordered mesoporous nanocrystalline TiC/carbon composites by a solvent-evaporation-induced self-assembly approach combined with in situ carbothermal reduction. As illustrated in Fig. 45, chelated titanium citrate clusters can themselves interact independently with triblock copolymer F127 templates, forming ordered mesostructures, similar to the behavior of metal aqua complexes383 and titanium trifluoroacetate.384 Furthermore, metal citrate complexes can crosslink with polyols (resols) upon curing to form polymer composites, whereas titanium citrate clusters and resols interact with triblock copolymer templates, thereby resulting in the cooperative assembly and subsequent curing of ordered mesostructures with a high titanium content and dispersion. The situation is different with tri-component assembly of mesostructured hybrid silicate–polymer nanocomposites,216 which leads to silicate–polymer phase separation in the latter case. Therefore, phase separation may not occur in hybrid polymers derived from resols, titanium chelate complexes, and triblock copolymers. By thermal curing and pyrolysis, resols will undergo thermopolymerization to form phenolic polymer frameworks and ordered mesopores are opened up with a high dispersion of amorphous titanium oxide species in the carbon matrix. In situ carbothermal reduction is carried out to obtain TiC nanocrystals in carbon matrices.
 Fig. 45  Schematic of the synthesis of ordered mesoporous titanium carbide/carbon composites by a solvent-evaporation-induced self-assembly approach and subsequent in situ carbothermal reduction (reproduced with permission from ref. 382). 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), like carbon-supported metals, are a class of organic/inorganic hybrid materials that have attracted more attention due to their various practical applications.385–392 MOFs have been used as catalysts, in particular due to their high dispersion of active sites, well-defined structures, microporosity, and tunable physicochemical properties (alteration of metal atoms/ligands).393–397 Furthermore, post-synthetic modification of MOFs bearing certain functional groups (e.g., –OH,398,399 –NH2,400 and pyridine401) with organic or inorganic compounds has led to an increased promise of practical applications.402 This is partially caused by the high dispersion of organic/inorganic compounds attainable via coordination chemistry.398 In catalysis, however, the chemical and thermal stability of post-synthetically modified MOFs limits their recyclability, frequently resulting in structural degradation and significant leaching from their active metal sites.396,398,399,403,404 To overcome this obstacle and provide high stability, MOFs can be used as templates for the formation of various carbon-supported materials.405–408 Using their ability to provide strong coordination between active metal precursors and the unique and diverse chemical functionalities incorporated in MOFs, a method was envisioned to include carbonization and carbothermal reduction (CCR) in one step. This resulted in a material that retained the high surface area and high dispersion of active metal sites inherent in a post-synthetically modified MOF, while imparting the high chemical and thermal stability of carbon-supported materials. Kim et al.409 reported a novel method for the preparation of titanium oxide nanoparticles supported on nanoporous amorphous carbon (Ti/NC) via post-synthetic modification of a Zn-based MOF bearing an amine functionality (i.e., IRMOF-3) with titanium isopropoxide followed by carbothermal pyrolysis. This material exhibited high purity, high surface area (>1000 m2 g−1), and high dispersion of metal oxide nanoparticles, while retaining a small particle size (around 4 nm). As illustrated in Fig. 46, carbonization of IRMOF-3 is initiated by cleavage of the bond between the zinc oxide octahedral cluster and the organic linker. This carbonization step was immediately followed by the formation of ZnO in the temperature range between 200 and 550 °C. When the IRMOF-3/Ti material was subjected to CCR at 550 °C, the resulting material contained crystalline ZnO. As the temperature was increased above 800 °C, ZnO was reduced to Zn via carbothermal reduction, leading to continuous consumption of the carbon source until evaporation of Zn occurred at >910 °C.406 Concurrently, titanium oxide nanoparticles were produced via thermal decomposition initiated by cleavage of the coordinate bond between the titanium precursor [Ti(O–iPr)3] and the amine functionality (–NH2) of the organic linker in IRMOF-3 above 300 °C.410–412 The cleaved fragments of the titanium precursor were subsequently decomposed via pyrolysis and carbothermal reduction413,414 to form titanium oxide nanoparticles, which then underwent further carbothermal reduction, resulting in carbon consumption. This type of carbon consumption could presumably give rise to the formation of concave holes for stronger immobilization of titanium oxide nanoparticles to prevent their aggregation at high temperature (i.e. 1000 °C).415 As a result of this synthetic process, the CCR method can produce unique materials that are highly stable and active for oxidation reactions.
 Fig. 46  Proposed mechanism for the formation of Ti/NC (taken with permission from ref. 409). 
It has been proved that carbides and nitrides of transition metals have excellent properties such as a high melting temperature, high hardness and high abrasion resistance. They have also been widely applied in the mechanical, electronics, and chemical industries.416 Titanium carbonitride (Ti(C,N)), with its good mechanical properties, is a major material for Ti(C,N)-based cermets when mixed with nickel/cobalt, molybdenum carbide, and other materials.417 Cermets using a solid-solution powder of (Ti,Mo)(C,N) as a hard phase have been studied to improve the properties of cermets.418,419 Several methods are available to synthesize titanium nanostructures such as titanium carbide, titanium nitride and titanium carbonitride. The first method is direct carbonization/nitridation of titanium metal or titanium hydride, which is well established as an industrial production method for carbides and nitrides. However, the produced powders require extensive milling in order to yield fine particles. The second method is carbothermal reduction of titanium dioxide with carbon sources in a controlled atmosphere at a relatively high temperature. Consequently, Ti(C,N) powder can be synthesized by a solid-solution reaction between TiC and TiN at high temperatures. The produced powders usually have a wide particle size distribution and tight agglomeration; therefore, they need subsequent milling. Carbothermal reduction offers the possibility of an economically attractive synthetic route for Ti(C,N) powders, which possess a particle size larger than 0.5 μm due to grain growth. Moreover, they exhibit tight agglomeration between individual particulates. Although ultra-fine TiO2 powder has been used as a starting material to synthesize a fine carbide powder,367,420–422 the particle size of the resulting powder is larger than that of the original TiO2 particles. Recently, Matsuda et al.423 investigated particle size control during carbothermal reduction of TiO2 for the industrial production of Ti(C,N) powder. The effects of oxide additives including MoO3, WO3, ZrO2, Nb2O5 and Ta2O5 on the carbothermal reduction of fine TiO2 were studied for obtaining nanopowders. A mixed powder of TiO2, C and additives was thermally treated in flowing Ar up to 1500 °C. It was confirmed that MoO3 and WO3 were effective in yielding fine particles with sizes of 0.1–0.2 μm. The addition of MoO3 can result in restriction of grain growth in the TinO2n−1 phase. Furthermore, the vapor pressure of MoO3 was highest among the oxides investigated under an inert atmosphere, showing that Mo compounds were easily diffused via the gas phase and were homogeneously distributed in the powder.423
4.6. Zinc (Zn) nanostructures

4.6.1. Zinc oxide (ZnO). 
Previously, it has been discussed that one-dimensional ZnO nanostructures including nanowires, nanorods, and nanosheets could be synthesized via carbothermal reduction. For instance, as the synthesis of nanowires or nanorods is basically a process of growing a single crystal from vapor, the source vapors for constructing ZnO nanowires should be derived from the source materials. As shown in Fig. 47a, the source vapors could be Zn (g) + O2 and/or ZnO (g), depending on the process. In the case of a carbothermal reduction process, it has been reported that ZnO nanowires and various nanostructures can be fabricated via a vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) crystallization process on an Au-coated silicon substrate by heating a mixture of ZnO and graphite in an argon flow, as shown in Fig. 47(b).424–426 Hitherto, most ZnO/SnO2 mixed nanostructures have been produced by a two-step route at low pressure, where each oxide is synthesized by a carbothermal reduction method sequentially. For example, Hwang et al.427 synthesized ZnO/SnO2 core–shell nanowires via a two-step carbothermal reduction method with the system pressure around 10−2 Torr, whereas Lan et al.428 produced hierarchical nanostructures at a pressure of 1 Pa. Tharsika et al.429 synthesized ZnO/SnO2 nanowires via a single-step carbothermal reduction according to the catalyst-assisted VLS mechanism. Metal nanoparticles or nanoclusters are used as nucleation seeds, which determine the growth direction, interfacial energy and diameter of one-dimensional metal oxide nanowires.430 In this method, the morphology and properties of ZnO/SnO2 nanowires are generally controlled by growth parameters such as temperature, thickness of the catalyst layer, rate of carrier gas flow, and distance between the source and the substrate.431Fig. 48A indicates the presence of a crystalline wurtzite structure for ZnO and a tetragonal cassiterite structure for SnO2. In addition, some peaks from a ternary compound, i.e. the face-centered cubic spinel Zn2SnO4, are detected, indicating that part of the SnO2 and ZnO react to form Zn2SnO4. Different types of nanostructures are formed at different locations on the Au/alumina substrate. Fig. 48B illustrates a comb-like branched structure of ZnO/SnO2 nanowires. The diameter of the backbone nanowire is about 80 nm and the branched nanowires exhibit a highly uniform diameter of 30 nm. Furthermore, Fig. 48C shows the morphology of a ZnO/SnO2 hierarchical nanostructure. Importantly, the secondary branches from the backbone nanowires are significant. Hierarchical nanostructures consist of a trunk and branches, which are composed of hybrid ZnO/SnO2, but controlled synthesis of these nanostructures is still a challenge. It has been suggested that the backbone nanowire grew quickly with the Au catalyst at its tip, whereas smaller alloy droplets can be formed on the surface of the backbone nanowire, leading to hierarchical nanowires in different locations. The growth of hierarchical nanowires can be triggered when the critical temperature and vapor supersaturation ratio are achieved.
 Fig. 47  (a) Types of source vapor for the fabrication of ZnO nanowires; (b) schematic illustration of a typical carbothermal reduction process (taken with permission from ref. 426). 
 Fig. 48  ZnO/SnO2 mixed nanowires: (A) XRD patterns, FESEM micrographs of (B) comb-like and (C) hierarchical nanostructures (reproduced with permission from ref. 429). 
In recent years, a variety of MOFs have acted as semiconductors in metal oxide quantum dot (QD) configurations.432 Such MOFs exhibit photocatalytic activities and photoluminescence that result from their hybrid structures comprising periodically dispersed metal oxide clusters, which are separated by organic spacers. The properties of these hybrid structures have greatly motivated the development of facile syntheses of well-dispersed metal oxide QDs embedded in porous carbon matrices comprising MOFs (Fig. 49). Yang et al.433 developed a novel and facile approach to the synthesis of ZnO QDs (3.5 nm) without intrinsic defects or agglomeration and embedded in a hierarchically porous carbon matrix derived from isoreticular MOF-1 (IRMOF-1). The tailored microstructures enabled the attainment of exceptionally high Li storage performances. Therefore, the proposed method provides new effective routes to synthesize high-performance anode materials based on a metal oxide@porous carbon matrix. The selected-area electron diffraction pattern displayed a hexagonal wurtzite crystal structure of ZnO, indicating that the amorphous carbon lacked long-range order. Furthermore, the highly crystalline ZnO QDs were well dispersed, not agglomerated, and monodisperse, with a mean particle size of 3 ± 1 nm in the amorphous carbon matrix.
 Fig. 49  Schematic diagrams of IRMOF-1 before and after controlled pyrolysis to synthesize carbon-coated ZnO QDs without agglomeration (reproduced with permission from ref. 433). 


4.6.2. Metal zinc (Zn0). 
Cellulose is an important component of lignocellulosic biomass and is a structural component of plant cell walls. Its primary structure is a homopolysaccharide polymer that is composed of β-D-glucopyranose units that are linked together by (1–4) glycosidic bonds. Earlier, it has been proved that cellulose can be used as a carbon source. During pyrolysis of cellulose, tar, char and gases that contain H2, CO2, CO, light hydrocarbons and water vapor are generated.434 In addition, tar and char gasification can occur with the release of gases such as CO and H2. Maciel et al.435 reported that hydrogen generated in situ during thermal degradation of cellulose led to the reduction of ZnO to Zn, that solidified on a quartz tube in a low-temperature zone. Zn nanowires and Zn nanoflowers were obtained at heating rates of 3 °C min−1 and 10 °C min−1, respectively. These results confirmed that Zn morphologies are markedly dependent on the heating rate, which determines the release of Zn vapor and its partial pressure in the furnace. When graphite was used, no ZnO reduction occurred. This process is different from the carbothermal reduction route using carbon sources (e.g., graphite or CNTs), high temperatures, vacuum, catalysts and templates. A mixture of cellulose and ZnO was pyrolyzed combined with catalytic steam reforming, resulting in the generation of H2, which reduced ZnO to Zn. H2 was the main reducing agent to promote ZnO reduction, unlike CO in classical carbothermal reduction. Moreover, a process was presented for the conversion of black liquor into gases to reduce ZnO and promote the synthesis of Zn nanosheets.436 During pyrolysis and gasification of black liquor, gases evolve, especially CO, and promote ZnO reduction with the release of Zn via carbothermal reduction. The metal is condensed yielding Zn nanosheets, with partial surface reoxidation in the presence of carbon dioxide.

4.7. Tin (Sn) nanostructures
The carbothermal reduction method has been adapted to synthesize tin-based oxide compounds and alloys. Hassoun et al.437 synthesized a SnSb/C nanocomposite using triphenylantimony and triphenylbutyltin as metal precursors. Zhao et al.438 synthesized SnxSb alloy powders via carbothermal reduction from SnO2 and Sb2O3 in an argon atmosphere above 850 °C. Wang et al.439 also synthesized Cu6Sn5-encapsulated carbon microsphere anodes by means of a carbothermal reduction method. However, the alloy materials reported merely dispersed the metal in a carbon matrix or obtained materials on the micron scale, rather than creating a core–shell nanostructure. It is noteworthy for the process of carbothermal reduction that the Sn melting point is much lower than the SnO2 reduction temperature (650 °C), suggesting that once Sn is reduced from tin oxide it exists as a liquid, which makes the alloying process easier. On the other hand, owing to its low melting point (232 °C), liquid Sn is poured off in the outflow in high-temperature treatment. Therefore, preparation of core–shell-structured carbon-coated Sn-based alloy nanoparticles by carbothermal reduction with the aim of improving the cycling stability of the alloy is important but very challenging. Furthermore, Cui et al.440 proposed a modified carbothermal route for the synthesis of core–shell carbon-coated nanosized tin-based materials using a mixture of the oxides CuO and SnO2 as precursors. Upon thermal treatment, the mixed oxides were converted into Cu6Sn5 alloy by carbothermal reduction. Simultaneously, the remnant carbon was coated on the surface of the Cu6Sn5 particles to form a core–shell structure. Fig. 50 shows Gibbs free energy diagrams of the thermodynamic relationship between the free energy of the oxide reduction reaction and temperature. Theoretically, carbothermal reduction will take place at the temperature where ΔG equals zero.441,442 The reduction temperatures of CuO, SnO2, Co3O4, Bi2O3 and Sb2O5 can be found in the diagram. For example, 190 °C, 320 °C and 650 °C are the reduction temperatures for Sb2O5, Co3O4 and SnO2, respectively. However, in most situations, the practical reduction temperature is affected by both kinetics and carbon resources.
 Fig. 50  Relationship between the Gibbs free energy of the carbothermal reaction and temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 440). 
Sn has a very large theoretical capacity (990 mA h g−1, corresponding to the formation of the lithium-rich alloy Li22Sn5 (ref. 443)). Sn-based materials could be considered a promising alternative to graphite-based electrode materials.444 However, their large volume expansion during lithiation and delithiation causes structural instability, resulting in poor cycling performances.445 This can be solved by dispersing small tin metal particles onto an electrochemically inactive matrix able to limit the volume expansion, maintaining the electrical conductivity of the material while cycling.446 Dispersion of tin on a BPO4 matrix can noticeably improve its reversible cycling behavior compared to that of pure tin.447,448 Further improvements can be obtained by optimizing the method of dispersing Sn in the matrix. Also, Mouyane et al.449 prepared a Sn–BPO4/xC composite by carbothermal synthesis, leading to highly dispersed metallic tin particles on a BPO4 buffer matrix. The carbothermal reaction can be expressed by eqn (36): SnO2 + (2 − x) C → Sn + (2 − 2x) CO + xCO2,(36)where x varies between 0 and 1, depending on the reaction conditions (i.e., reaction atmosphere). Unreacted carbon, corresponding to a molar fraction of x per mole of tin, is an important constituent of the composite, improving its electrical conductivity and cohesion. The optimal synthesis conditions were obtained under an argon flow. These conditions were therefore used for the synthesis in the presence of BPO4 to give the final Sn–BPO4/xC composite, allowing intimate mixing of the metal and the matrix.
In general, the introduction of nanoparticulate tin in terms of safety, ease of handling and processing, as well as relatively high tapped densities, provides increased volumetric energy densities for the final lithium-ion cells using tin anodes. In addition, tin–carbon composites have exhibited promising electrochemical performance when applied as sodium-ion anode materials, providing specific capacities in the range of 130 to 180 mA h g−1 and a substantially higher tapped density compared to hard carbons,450,451 which have so far been the anode material of choice for lab-scale sodium-ion batteries.452,453 Bresser et al.454 proposed a simple, cost-efficient, and environmentally friendly one-pot synthesis approach, using only tin(IV) acetate and sucrose as precursors, for embedding tin nanoparticles in micron-sized carbon particles, thus combining the great advantages of nanoparticulate tin with the high tapped density of micron-sized active particles. Such morphology can not only increase volumetric energy densities on the electrode level but also allows safer handling during sample processing and electrode preparation. In addition, electrodes prepared with this Sn–C nanocomposite can provide stable cycling performance and high rate capability for lithium- and sodium-ion anode applications. In this study, the utilization of an organic tin salt provides the great advantage that no washing steps are required in order to remove inorganic residues. In Fig. 51A, a comparison of the XRD patterns of the two samples prior to any thermal treatment (i.e., SnOx/C) and after 3 h at 450 °C under air (i.e., SnO2) is presented. SnOx/C displays very poor crystallinity, whereas the reflections for the latter are significantly sharper, indicating increased crystallinity of the phase-pure SnO2 with a particle size of 15–30 nm (Fig. 51C). Accordingly, subsequent carbothermal reduction resulted in air-stable metallic tin with a highly crystalline structure (Fig. 51B). Moreover, homogeneously distributed metallic nanoparticles which possess an average diameter of 50–200 nm are present within relatively large carbon particles (Fig. 51D).
 Fig. 51  (A) XRD patterns of SnOx/C composite and SnO2 nanopowder; (B) XRD pattern of Sn–C nanocomposite; SEM images of (C) SnO2 nanopowder and (D) Sn–C nanocomposite (reproduced with permission from ref. 454). 
Although metallic tin (Sn0) is one of the alternative materials to silicon that have been identified as taking the place of graphite anodes to achieve higher energy densities,455 this system undergoes large volume changes upon lithium alloying and de-alloying.456 This phenomenon causes pulverization of the active material and loss of contact with the current collector, eventually resulting in rapid capacity fade upon cycling. To address this challenge, some approaches involving the generation of porous nanostructured Sn, carbon coatings, Sn/graphite and Sn/graphene composites have been explored.457–472 Consequently, graphene (G), due to its superior in-plane electronic conducting properties, has attracted wide interest in applications for energy storage, photovoltaics and supercapacitors.473–477 Beck et al.478 synthesized tin nanoparticles embedded in graphene sheets by microwave reduction of SnCl2 and graphite oxide (GO) followed by annealing in Ar. The microwave reaction can result in the formation of SnO2, which was completely embedded in G sheets (Fig. 52A). Annealing in Ar at elevated temperatures initiated carbothermal reduction, culminating in the formation of a tin-decorated graphene sheet composite (Fig. 52B). In addition, a large-sized tin droplet may have formed due to solidification and there are many small particles in the size range of ≤20 nm. The size distribution of these particles is more uniform and the particles appear to adhere well onto the G sheets (Fig. 52C).
 Fig. 52  SEM images of (A) Sn prior to annealing, (B) Sn after annealing at 900 °C in Ar. Both show graphene layers; however, droplets and beads of tin are visible only after annealing. (C) HRTEM image of Sn after annealing at 900 °C in Ar (reproduced with permission from ref. 478). 
Significantly, uniform insertion of Sn metal between graphene layers can reduce aggregation of Sn, limit the overlap of graphene layers during the synthesis process and reduce the change in volume of Sn during charging/discharging cycling. Furthermore, Zhou et al.479 reported a facile synthesis route to Sn/G composites via a hydrothermal technique and subsequent calcination in argon (i.e., carbothermal reduction), as illustrated in Fig. 53A. Typically, a GO dispersion can be obtained from graphite using strong oxidizing agents and ultrasonication. Tin oxide (SnO2) and colloidal silica (SiO2) nanoparticles are sandwiched between GO layers by a hydrothermal process, during which the interval between GO sheets increases. SiO2 acts as a dispersant to separate the SnO2 nanoparticles, increases the distance between two neighboring GO layers and prevents the overlap of GO nanosheets. Then, colloidal silica is removed from the G/SnO2/SiO2 hybrid by 20% HF. Finally, G/SnO2 is heated under an Ar flow at 1000 °C for carbothermal reduction. The diffraction peak of GO around 2θ = 11.4° cannot be found, but a very broad peak at 2θ = 24° is observed for the G sample, indicating that most oxygen functional groups have been removed from the carbon framework (Fig. 53B). The peak at 2θ = 24° for graphene is rather broad and conspicuously distinct from that for graphite.480 The greatly broadened diffraction peaks for GO/SnO2 are indicative of the formation of SnO2 nanocrystals with very small size. After heat treatment, as shown for the G/Sn sample, all intense peaks are well indexed to Sn metal and the sharpness of the diffraction peaks indicates complete crystallinity of the tin phase. The crystallite size of G/Sn is estimated to be 5.9 nm according to the Debye–Scherrer formula. The absence of a SnO2 crystalline phase implies that nearly all the SnO2 nanoparticles have been reduced. No obvious peaks relative to graphene are observed in G/Sn samples, which might be attributed to an effect of disordered stacking of graphene sheets in the composites. A Raman spectrum of the G sample displays a strong G band at 1590 cm−1 and a weak D band at 1359.28 cm−1. The value of I(D)/I(G) for G is 0.81 (less than 1), indicating that the G sample still retained a graphite structure, except for a limited amount of disordered structure. When Sn was added and then GO was hydrothermally reduced, the D peak intensity became greater and the intensity ratio I(D)/I(G) for G/SnO2 exceeded 1 (1.01). This can be attributed to defects introduced into the G/SnO2 sample during preparation. After thermal treatment, the value of I(D)/I(G) for the G/Sn sample is 0.94, suggesting that the quality of the G/Sn sample is higher than that of the G/SnO2 sample.481,482 The preparation of G/Sn periodic structures is meaningful for fundamental study of Sn-based composites and for industrial applications.
 Fig. 53  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of G/Sn; (1) SnO2 and SiO2 nanoparticles were decorated on GO nanosheets via a hydrolysis process; (2) SiO2 was removed from G/SnO2/SiO2; (3) G/SnO2 was transformed into G/Sn nanosheets through carbothermal reduction. (B) XRD patterns of G (a); GO/SnO2 (b); G/Sn (c). (C) Raman spectra of G; GO/SnO2; G/Sn (reproduced with permission from ref. 479). 
As mentioned above, tin-based alloys could be synthesized via carbothermal reduction using tin oxides and carbon sources. Also, the hydrothermal technique improves the metal distribution in the carbon matrix. Hydrothermal treatment can also be used after carbothermal reduction. Wu et al.483 synthesized hierarchical worm-like SnO2@C aggregates via glucose-assisted hydrothermal treatment of Co–Sn alloy nanoparticles, which were initially formed by carbothermal reduction of mixed SnO2 and Co3O4 nanoparticles, as illustrated in Fig. 54A. The Co–Sn alloy nanoparticles are spheroidal particles with smooth surfaces and a diameter range of 200–500 nm (Fig. 54B). SnO2 nanoparticles have a diameter of 60 nm (Fig. 54C). Furthermore, hierarchical worm-like SnO2@C aggregates (Fig. 54D) were obtained, with the diameters of the aggregates similar to those of their precursor, Co–Sn alloy nanoparticles. The worm-like SnO2@C compound has a length of about 130 nm with a diameter about 40 nm.
 Fig. 54  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategy of hierarchical worm-like SnO2@C aggregates; SEM images of Co–Sn alloy nanoparticles (B), SnO2 nanoparticles (C) and hierarchical worm-like SnO2@C aggregates (D) (reproduced with permission from ref. 483). 
4.8. Manganese (Mn) nanostructures
Transition metal oxides have been considered as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), due to their high capacities.484 However, the large volume change of metal oxides during the Li insertion/extraction process causes mechanical degradation, resulting in rapid loss of capacity. Moreover, the low conductivity of metal oxides hastens the degradation process. To solve these problems, carbonaceous materials with high electrical conductivity and good stability could be employed as matrices for metal oxides.485–488 Among various metal oxides, manganese monoxide (MnO) is extremely attractive because of its relatively low electromotive force (1.032 V vs. Li/Li+), low overpotential, low cost, and environmental friendliness.489–492 MnO/carbon composite materials, such as coaxial MnO/carbon nanotubes,493 MnO/carbon core–shell nanorods,494 and MnO cubic particles/carbon composites,495 have been applied as anode materials for LIBs. Thus, the combination of MnO and carbon could improve electrochemical performance. Qiu et al.496 synthesized a MnO nanoparticle/graphene composite via in situ carbothermal reduction of Mn3O4 on the surface of graphene nanosheets. MnO nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 20 to 250 nm were integrated tightly with the graphene nanosheets. It has been proved that thermal reduction of graphene oxide can release CO and CO2 and the CO/CO2 ratios were dependent on the thermal conditions.497,498 Zhao et al.499 used the reducing agent CO released from GO for in situ carbothermal reduction of MnO2 in MnO2/GO composites to obtain MnO/rGO composites without using any external reducing gases, such as H2 and CO, which provided a synthesis process with less cost and more safety. As illustrated in Fig. 55, the preparation first included synthesis of the precursors, i.e. P-MNP, P-MGC1 and P-MGC2, via a controllable redox reaction between GO and KMnO4. After that, the final materials were obtained by calcination of the precursors under Ar at 500 °C for 90 min.
 Fig. 55  Schematic of the formation of manganese dioxide nanoparticles (MNP) and manganese monoxide/rGO composites (MGC1 and MGC2) (reproduced with permission from ref. 499). 
With respect to carbon-coated MnOx powders, Yang et al.500 synthesized a nano-MnO/C composite based on an alcoholysis step to convert manganese acetate into Mn3O4 followed by carbothermal reduction to reduce Mn3O4 to MnO, while a carbon layer was simultaneously coated on the surface of MnO nanospheres. As illustrated in Fig. 56, natural wood has a 3D porous structure with multiple layers. The xylem of China fir (CF) is composed of small fibres. CF xylem fibres were initially blended with KMnO4 in a neutral Na2SO4 solution to form a MnO2/CF precursor.501 The prepared precursor in DMF solution was calcined in N2 to obtain the MnO/C composite material.502 In the SEM image (Fig. 56B), it is clearly shown that a natural wood fibre without any chemical treatment possesses a curving multi-layered sheet structure. After being soaked with KMnO4 in the Na2SO4 solution, the CF fibre surface with an undamaged appearance (Fig. 56C) was inlaid with MnO2. After further carbonization (Fig. 56D), it is clearly shown that the carbonized CF perfectly retained the original fibres' morphology with multi-layered walls and a 3D twisted structure. It has been proved that this unique structure and the strong synergistic effect between the nanosized MnO particles and the porous carbon matrix result in high discharge capacity, high cycling stability and excellent rate performance. Therefore, this nanocomposite structure can provide a considerable range of structural variability, considering the extensive options of transition metal oxides and carbon-based materials, which can be extended to other promising high-performance anode materials for the future development of novel energy storage materials.
 Fig. 56  (A) Fabrication of MnO/C sample. SEM images of CF xylem fibres (B), MnO2/CF (C) and MnO/C (D), and HRTEM image of MnO/C (E). Well-crystallized MnO nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 3 to 7 nm are evenly dispersed on the carbon matrix (reproduced with permission from ref. 500). 
Nature has already provided us with elaborate one-, two-, and three-dimensional architectures with multiple sizes ranging from nanoscale to macroscale.503 Importantly, these biological resources are inexpensive, abundant, and renewable, so researchers have been inspired to develop biotemplating techniques. So far, many classical examples have been well established in oxides,504–510 carbides,511–517 metals,518–522 chalcogenides,523–525 and even ternary metal oxides526–528 and phosphates529–532 with various biotemplates. Furthermore, Xia et al.533 synthesized a MnO/C composite with hollow porous microstructures by means of a facile biotemplating technique and carbothermal reduction. Compared to other artificial/biological templates, a natural biological material from Nannochloropsis oculata (i.e., N. oculata) microalgae used in this study has three distinguishing features: (i) easy availability. N. oculata cells have a fast growth rate. They can double their biomass in less than 1 day. In addition, they are easy to cultivate and harvest; (ii) biological activity. The cell wall of N. oculata is mainly composed of polysaccharides. Therefore, N. oculata cells could adsorb and take up metal ions via electrostatic interactions, which are different from those with artificial templates;504,534 and (iii) carbon source. N. oculata cells are able to accumulate a large quantity of lipids inside them, and they contain lots of carbohydrates.535 As a result, they could act as a natural carbon source for fabricating a hollow porous carbon matrix. The main process of preparing hollow porous MnO/C microspheres is illustrated in Fig. 57. Firstly, N. oculata cells were concentrated and purged of unwanted materials before use. Then, an N. oculata cell solution was added to the KMnO4/Na2SO4 precursor solution. After the immersion process, N. oculata/MnO2 composites could be easily synthesized via biosorption and spontaneous redox deposition of metal ions on the N. oculata surface. To ensure that MnO nanoparticles could be strongly anchored onto composite microspheres, a polystyrene (PS) film was coated on the precursor. During thermal treatment, carbonaceous organic compounds arising from N. oculata and PS could decompose to carbon, as well as forming a reducing atmosphere to transform MnO2 into MnO via carbothermal reduction. Finally, the MnO nanocrystals can be successfully embedded in porous carbonaceous matrices to constitute hollow MnO/C microspheres.
 Fig. 57  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of hollow porous MnO/C microspheres (reproduced with permission from ref. 533). 
4.9. Other metal nanostructures

4.9.1. Molybdenum (Mo). 
Molybdenum dioxide (MoO2) is an attractive host material for lithium storage because of its rich chemistry associated with multiple valence states, low electrical resistivity, high electrochemical activity toward lithium, and affordable cost.536–538 MoO2, with a disordered rutile structure, has metallic conductivity and high theoretical capacity (838 mA h g−1). However, bulk MoO2 often delivers a low charge–discharge capacity at room temperature because of sluggish kinetics.539 The incorporation of carbon in electrode materials can improve lithium ion intercalation or extraction kinetics.540–543 So far, various carbon/MoO2 composite materials have been prepared via reaction between Mo-based precursors and carbon in a reducing atmosphere.544–547 However, the amount of carbon in the composite is hard to control. Due to their high carbon content, the lithium ion intercalation/extraction behavior of carbon/MoO2 composite materials is usually similar to that of hard carbon materials. Moreover, no distinct charge/discharge plateaus of MoO2 are observed. The introduction of a hierarchical porous structure is an efficient way to improve the performance of electrode materials, as it can decrease the diffusion length of lithium ions and provide a sufficient contact surface between the electrode and electrolyte.548–551 Therefore, it is feasible to improve the lithium ion intercalation/extraction kinetics of MoO2 by the introduction of a hierarchical porous structure instead of the incorporation of carbon. Zhang et al.552 developed a one-step carbothermal reduction method for the preparation of hierarchical porous materials. In this study, the mesoporous carbon CMK-3 acts both as a template for casting the hierarchical porous structure and as a reducing agent for carbothermal reaction. Hierarchical porous MoO2 was fabricated using MoO3 as molybdenum source and mesoporous carbon (i.e., CMK-3) as template and reactant via a route illustrated in Fig. 58. After grinding for 20 min, a mixture of MoO3 and CMK-3 was heated at 820 °C, a temperature above the melting point of MoO3 (i.e., 795 °C). Molten MoO3 was dispersed onto the surface of CMK-3 followed by gradual reduction by carbon to form MoO2 nanoparticles with a higher melting point. The consumption of CMK-3 led to nanosized tubules composed of as-formed MoO2 nanoparticles. These tubules, in combination with the voids among the MoO2 nanoparticles, feature a hierarchical structure with a three-dimensional (3D) porous channel system.
 Fig. 58  Schematic illustration of the preparation of MoO2 nanotubes (reproduced with permission from ref. 552). 
More recently, supported tungsten and molybdenum carbides have exhibited high activities for deoxygenation of triglycerides and fatty acids to linear alkanes, while their product selectivity could be further tuned to alkenes and branched alkanes, if desired.553–557 Although these transition metal carbides appear to be versatile deoxygenation catalysts, there are still unresolved issues regarding the activity and stability of such catalysts. Supported molybdenum carbide catalysts could produce alkanes from fatty acids in high yields, but the deoxygenation reaction needed either high reaction temperatures and long reaction times,554 or the use of a supercritical solvent as reaction medium.555,556 Tungsten carbides exhibit high selectivity for the production of alkenes from fatty acid.553,557 However, their catalytic activity was slightly lower than that of supported molybdenum carbides, whereas tungsten carbides additionally suffered from deactivation due to oxidation of the active carbide phase.554 In Stellwagen et al.'s work,558 CNF-supported tungsten and molybdenum carbides of different crystallite sizes could be synthesized to improve their performance in deoxygenation reactions for hydrodeoxygenation of stearic acid to hydrocarbons. To vary the size of carbide particles while maintaining equal metal loadings, the distribution of the metal precursor over the CNF support after impregnation was altered by changing the surface properties of the CNF. Surface oxygen groups were inserted onto the CNF by treatment with nitric acid (i.e., CNF-ox), while non-oxidizing treatment with hydrochloric acid resulted in a largely oxygen-free surface (i.e., CNF-hcl).559 The surface oxygen groups of the CNF-ox material are known to interact with the polymolybdate or polytungstate complexes that are present in the impregnation solutions. Consequently, impregnation of CNF-ox leads to higher metal dispersion than impregnation of the CNF-hcl support.560,561 Conversion of tungsten and molybdenum ammonium salts to carbides can be achieved by a carbothermal reduction process.562,563
With respect to molybdenum carbide (Mo2C), this also exhibits interesting activity in a number of catalytic reactions, including isomerization,564 hydrogenation and hydrogenolysis,565 methanol reforming,566 and hydrotreating reactions.567 It can be formed under relatively mild conditions, making it an ideal carbide material in catalysis. Besides, Mo participates in extensive reactions with oxygen, providing various potential routes to mono- and polymetallic carbides via multi-metal oxide precursors. Carburization of MoO3 in a mixed feed of hydrogen and hydrocarbon is affected by the surface area of the oxide and the chain length of the alkane. Longer-chain hydrocarbons are able to reduce the oxide at lower temperatures than pure H2. Each successive increase in chain length decreases the temperature required to decompose the hydrocarbon and incorporate carbon into the oxide matrix.568–571 In addition, MoOx can be carburized using carbon alone as the reducing–carburizing agent.572–575 Depending on the reaction conditions, reduction–carburization can be directed to form either fcc α-Mo2C or hcp β-Mo2C. Oyama et al.576 concluded that the formation of the metal carbide occurs in two consecutive steps, due to similarities in the reaction profiles and effluent gas analysis in temperature-programmed reduction of MoO3 in hydrogen alone and temperature-programmed reduction–carburization (TPRC) of MoO3 to β-Mo2C under H2/CH4. The first step comprises reduction of MoO3 to MoO2, which is carried out by the action of H2 alone. The second step is reduction–carburization of MoO2 to Mo2C, which is performed by H2 and CH4 acting in concert. The synthesis of binary MoNb carbides occurs similarly in two stages.577 Cotter et al.578 synthesized a series of bimetallic carbides of the form β-(Mo1−xVx)2C (0 < x < 0.12) by the carbothermal reduction of corresponding h-Mo1−xVxO3 precursors. The oxides were synthesized by precipitation and the subsequent development of a carbide phase was monitored. As illustrated in Fig. 59, the reduction proceeded via a complex mechanism involving the initial formation of defective MoO2. Increasing the V content retards the onset of reduction and strongly impacts the kinetics of carburization. The carbides exhibit a trend in growth morphology with V concentration, from a particulate-agglomerate material to packed nanofibrous morphology. The high-aspect-ratio crystallites exhibit pseudomorphism and, in the case of V-containing materials, some preferential crystal orientation of grains is observed. Moreover, an increase in mesoporosity is associated with fibrous morphology, as well as an exceptionally high surface area (i.e., 80–110 m2 g−1). By adapting the heating rate, gas flow, and pretreatment conditions, it was possible to produce carbide materials with comparable physical properties to those obtained on a small scale. As a result, it was possible to synthesize Mo2C materials in multi-gram quantities (5–15 g) with BET surface areas ranging from 50 to 100 m2 g−1.
 Fig. 59  Suggested cascade of reaction steps during carburization of MoO3 (reproduced with permission from ref. 578). 


4.9.2. Antimony (Sb). 
There are various methods for the synthesis of Sb-based alloy materials, including mechanical alloying of metal powders,579,580 hydrothermal methods,581 chemical precipitation,582 and electrochemical deposition,583,584 as well as carbothermal reduction of metal oxides.585–588 Compared to other preparation methods, the carbothermal reduction method is low-cost and much more easily adapted to mass-production. In carbothermal reduction processes, the amount of carbon is a critical parameter, as it directly determines the product purity. If carbon is in excess, there will be a certain amount of carbon remaining; on the other hand, less carbon than required will lead to the incomplete reduction of metal oxides. In this case, many studies have been carried out based on the hypothesis that all carbon is oxidized to CO during the carbothermal process.586,589–593 However, the generation of CO2 cannot be excluded in some particular systems. CO or CO2 is generated mainly depending on the chemical features of different metal oxides. As a matter of fact, in a carbothermal reduction process involving multiple metal oxides, the gas products might be a mixture of CO and CO2 due to various factors. It is of great importance to obtain a further understanding of details of the carbothermal reduction process such as the reduction order and the CO and CO2 composition in the gas product, which can contribute to determining the precise amount of carbon actually required, leading to high-purity products. Furthermore, Yang et al.366 synthesized a high-purity CoSb alloy and clarified the kinetics of the reaction by carbothermal reduction of the Co3O4–Sb2O3–C system. It is noted that Co3O4 was preferentially reduced to CoO at a relatively low temperature, followed by the simultaneous carbothermal reduction of Sb2O3 and CoO. The former is reduced by carbon via the generation of CO2, while the latter is reduced via the formation of CO. The overall reaction for the synthesis of CoSb alloy could be expressed as: 3Sb2O3 + 2Co3O4 + 23/2C → 6CoSb + 6CO + 11/2CO2.
More recently, Wu et al.594 successfully synthesized Sb–C nanofibers via a single-nozzle electrospinning technique and subsequent calcination (as illustrated in Fig. 60A). The morphology of the as-electrospun fibers after carbothermal treatment displayed individual uniform nanofibers with a diameter around 200 nm (Fig. 60B). Moreover, Sb nanoparticles with 15–20 nm diameters are uniformly embedded in the carbon nanofibers (Fig. 60C), appearing as a number of “Sb islands” surrounded by a carbon “ocean”. The high-resolution TEM image in Fig. 60D clearly shows some nanocrystals with diameters around 20 nm. Sb–C nanofibers can be considered a promising anode candidate to construct a viable and low-cost Na-ion battery for energy storage. Furthermore, these types of metal–carbon nanofibers could be widely applied for developing high-performance electrode materials.
 Fig. 60  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation process and (B–D) SEM & TEM images of the Sb–C nanofibers (reproduced with permission from ref. 594). 
Nanoporous carbon (NC) as a support is highly relevant to these conversions because of its wide commercial availability595 and excellent thermochemical stability.596 Traditional catalysts are synthesized by supporting metal nanoparticles on as-prepared NC via a variety of approaches including electrochemical deposition,597 incipient wetness impregnation,598 sonochemical-assisted deposition,599 precipitation–deposition,600 and chemical vapor deposition.601 With the aim of asserting greater control over synthesis of the material and providing the ability to tailor the physical and catalytic properties of the material, metal–organic frameworks (MOF) were employed as carbon sources/templates where supported nanoparticle catalysts were formed.602–604 It has been indicated that Zn-based MOFs, such as IRMOF-1 (ref. 605) and MOF-2,606 can be converted into highly purified NC materials via carbonization above the boiling point of Zn metal (907 °C) with the formation of mesopores. In addition to acting as a carbon source for NC formation, the pore characteristics as well as macroscopic morphologies of these NC materials can be easily tuned based on the initial structure of the MOF, thus illustrating the role of MOFs as both template and carbon source for the resulting NC material.606,607 It is envisioned that, in addition to serving as a carbon source, MOFs can act as a reactive source to site-isolate transition metal precursors through post-synthetic modification (PSM) prior to thermal treatment. Therefore, MOFs could provide a carbon source for the resulting material support, as well as reducing site-isolated transition metal precursors, potentially leading to the formation of various types of reduced metal phases (elemental metal phases, oxycarbide phases, and carbide phases). Initial results proved the successful preparation of highly dispersed 4 nm titanium nanoparticles on NC with a high specific surface area via carbonization and carbothermal reduction (CCR) of a post-synthetically modified MOF.608 For comparison, using conventional impregnation followed by pyrolysis to synthesize carbon-supported metal nanoparticles from MOFs609–611 can result in significantly reduced surface areas (150 m2 g−1) and extensive metal impurities derived from the metal centers of the MOFs.610,611 However, using IRMOF-3, metal precursors (e.g., Ti(O–iPr)4) can be coordinated with the amine functionalities of IRMOF-3 to form Ti/IRMOF-3 (Fig. 61i).608 When subsequently subjected to CCR conditions, Ti/IRMOF-3 is carbonized to form Ti/NC3, resulting in reduction of the titanium precursor and the formation of dispersed titanium nanoparticles on NC (Fig. 61ii).608 The initial coordination between the MOF amine functionality and the metal precursor served to minimize aggregation of the metal precursor during carbothermal reduction, leading to the isolation of active sites in metal nanoparticles.608 Moreover, metal nanoparticles could be embedded in situ into the NC by consumption of the carbon source resulting from the carbothermal reduction of the metal precursors. This carbothermal reduction can achieve the formation of concave holes in NC where reduced metal nanoparticles could be rigidly immobilized, thereby minimizing aggregation of active metal nanoparticles in catalytic reactions.612 Accordingly, this method could be widely applied to many transition metal precursors to generate catalysts for biomass conversion with enhanced controllable properties: (1) high surface areas, (2) enhanced mesoporosity, and (3) dispersed accessible metal nanoparticles. In addition, this method can tune the resulting phase of the metal, depending on the carbonization temperature during synthesis. For instance, in a previous report on Ti/NC materials, a transition from Ti4+ species to reduced oxidation states of Ti (Ti2+ and Ti3+) was observed during CCR. This demonstrated that this method can be used to control not only the physical and catalytic properties of the materials but also the resulting metal phase in the generation of reduced metals, oxides, carbides, and oxycarbides supported on NC, based on the synthesis conditions and initial MOF structure.
 Fig. 61  Schematic of preparation of M/NC3 and M/NC1 materials (M 1/4 Ru, W, V, and Ti) via the carbonization and carbothermal reduction (CCR) of corresponding M/IRMOF-3 and M/IRMOF-1 materials (taken with permission from ref. 621). 
Using the CCR method as illustrated in Fig. 61, post-synthetically modified IRMOF-3 was used to generate a class of carbon-based catalysts supporting highly dispersed and active transition metal nanoparticles (Fig. 61i and ii). Ruthenium (Ru), tungsten (W), vanadium (V), and titanium (Ti) were studied because all these metals are relevant to biomass conversion via reduction and oxidation (redox) reactions.613–616 The thermal and chemical transitions of these precursors to reduced metals (Ru) and carbide phases (W, V, and Ti)616–618 have also been reported. As controls, IRMOF-1 materials (M/IRMOF-1) without amine coordination sites were simply modified via impregnation (IMP) of metal precursors prior to CCR (Fig. 61iii and iv). Furthermore, the catalytic performance of M/NC3 and M/NC1 materials was studied in various reactions involving biomass model compounds: hydrogenation of levulinic acid (Ru as active metal),613 esterification of levulinic acid (W as active metal),619 and oxidation of benzyl alcohol (V and Ti as active metals).620 Consequently, M/NC3 materials prepared by the CCR method have the potential to be highly active catalysts for the efficient conversion of lignocellulosic biomass.621
Among the different carbon materials, a novel type of mesoporous biocarbon material has displayed unique structures and surface chemistry properties and is especially attractive as a cathode material for lithium-ion batteries from economic and environmentally friendly points of view.622–624 Many functional materials including amorphous and crystal structures are synthesized via biomineralization in biological systems.625–627 Compared with other synthetic routes, the advantage of biomineralization processes is that they not only yield advanced materials in an environmentally benign system, but also enable control of the structure, size, morphology and crystallographic orientation of inorganic crystals. Beer waste brewing yeasts (BWBYs) are a main by-product in the beer industry and most of them are discarded, leaving a small part to add to the next batch of beer fermentation. BWBY cells generally possess spherical or elliptical morphology, a large surface area and abundant surface charge within a broad range of pH and ionic strength.628 Significantly, they accumulate metal ions from aqueous solutions by means of different physicochemical interactions, adsorption and absorption, or a metabolism-dependent mechanism. The most notable feature of BWBY cells is that they have hierarchical structures on different length scales, but use self-assembly to control the mineralization that forms hierarchical nanomaterials.629 He et al.630 synthesized a mesoporous biocarbon-coated Li3V2(PO4)3 (MBC-LVP) cathode material by a biotemplate-assisted sol–gel reaction process using low-cost BWBYs as both structural template and biocarbon source. Moreover, hydrophilic anionic groups in biomacromolecules on a cell wall surface could improve the mineralization ability of yeast cells and regulate crystal nucleation and growth.631Fig. 62a outlines the adsorption, desorption and self-assembly mechanism of Li3V2(PO4)3 nanoparticles in a yeast cell. Afterwards, the proteins and polysaccharides in the yeast cell have hydrophilic anionic groups and negative charges.632 When V3+, Li+ and PO43− are added to a purified BWBY solution, the cations combine with the hydrophilic anionic groups on the biomolecules in the yeast cells by electrostatic interaction. Like most natural cells, yeast cells can induce spontaneous mineralization on their surface, due to their relatively low charge density.633 The sol–gel process with Li3V2(PO4)3 occurs on the yeast cell wall; inside the cell, the yeast cells regulate and control the mineralization of Li3V2(PO4)3 nanoparticles on the molecular level. Therefore, MBC-LVP materials could be synthesized by means of in situ composite carbonization and crystallization via carbothermal reduction (Fig. 62b). MBC-LVP possesses a biocarbon network structure for achieving good electrochemical performances (as illustrated in Fig. 62b–d). In this structure, the Li3V2(PO4)3 nanoparticles can effectively reduce the length of Li+ solid-state transport paths to provide a high diffusion rate. The active mesoporous biocarbon network possesses good electronic conductivity by in situ preparation of a carbon coating during heat treatment of the precursor. This convenient and environmentally friendly synthetic route can be easily scaled up for the industrial production of electroactive materials.
 Fig. 62  (a & b) Schematic illustration of mesoporous biocarbon-coated Li3V2(PO4)3 (MBC-LVP) synthesized via a biotemplate-assisted sol–gel process and a carbothermal reduction method using BWBY cells as both structural template and carbon source. (c) Representative crystal structure of monoclinic Li3V2(PO4)3; the VO6 octahedra are shown in green and PO4 tetrahedra in tan. (d) The distorted crystal structure of Li3V2(PO4)3 nuclei completely coated by biocarbon, lithium and electron pathways; biocarbon-coated atoms are shown in yellow-green and electrons in orange (taken with permission from ref. 630). 

5. Application of sustainable carbon–metal nanostructures
In current society, energy and the environment have become the two most prevalent topics in the fields of science and technology. To address and meet the challenges presented by the global energy demand of an ever-increasing population and the associated environmental consequences of a society still generally based on fossil fuels, very innovative, efficient and increasingly sustainable solutions must be developed.634 In this regard, there are several options by which to generate and store renewable energy from sun, wind, water, geothermal or biomass – all of which are heavily reliant on materials technologies to allow their efficient implementation. Consequently, the development of sustainable materials is extremely important.635 This is not a trivial task as these new materials should ideally be low-cost, scalable, industrially and economically attractive, and based on abundant renewable resources, whilst of course achieving application performances in renewable energy conversion or environmental applications that exceed those of existing technologies. Thus, it is the duty of researchers to develop novel high-performance sustainable materials to solve the challenge of providing renewable energy for all whilst limiting environmental impacts. In the context of sustainable materials development, after oxygen, carbon is the most abundant element existing in the biosphere. Moreover, nature utilizes these elements coupled with hydrogen to provide the basis for renewable energy storage (e.g., carbohydrates). Analogously, carbon-based systems perform a major role in emerging renewable energy conversion technologies in terms of electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, electrodes in energy storage devices, heterogeneous catalysis, biofuels, etc.636
Carbon-based materials have also been extensively used in water purification, gas separation (e.g., CO2 capture), and as a soil additive. Furthermore, the importance and potential of carbon-based materials has been recognized in recent decades by some of the highest scientific awards including the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry (fullerenes), the 2008 Kavli Prize in Nanoscience (carbon nanotubes), and the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics (graphene). As a consequence, interest in carbon-based materials and their applications is undergoing its most rapid development and represents a very significant topic in modern materials science. With the creation of fossil fuel-based industry since the start of the 20th century, the majority of carbon-based materials are conventionally synthesized using fossil fuel-derived precursors and often require harsh or energy-intensive synthetic conditions. It is vital to emphasize the great importance of optimizing the surface area and porosity of materials for catalytic, separation and energy applications.637
The nanocasting approach is one prevalent route for synthesizing high-surface-area porous carbon materials, but it has its limitations (e.g., multi-step synthesis involving a sacrificial inorganic template).638–640 The synthesis of such ‘‘hard-templated’’ mesoporous carbons can potentially use sustainable precursors (e.g., sucrose in CMK-1 synthesis), but generally carbon-based materials and the aforementioned carbon allotropes (e.g., nanotubes) are not derived from sustainable resources and require complex synthetic approaches that are difficult to scale and usually lead to condensed hydrophobic carbon structures.638–642 Most of these structures are not appropriate for future chemical/energy provision schemes (e.g., aqueous phase-based biorefineries).643–645 So far, renewable resource-derived carbons have only comprised activated carbons (ACs).646–649 This class of predominantly microporous materials is commercially available and has proven applications in water treatment,650,651 CO2 capture,652 energy storage (e.g., supercapacitors653), and, perhaps most typically, heterogeneous catalysis.654,655 However, a top-down approach to the synthesis of ACs derived from natural precursors does not provide the necessary control over material features including porosity, morphology and surface chemistry, whilst limited batch-to-batch reproducibility and final carbonization yield, as well as the use of harsh reagents during synthesis (i.e., strong acids or bases) to generate porosity, are other drawbacks of this process. Conversely, the development of more flexible routes to carbonaceous materials derived from renewable resources has become a significant topic. It is perhaps appropriate to note that researchers could draw inspiration from a variety of natural processes (e.g., coalification, photosynthesis) and structures (e.g., crustacean shells, plant tissues, etc.) to produce the various complex nanostructured materials required to address the energy and chemical challenges of a sustainable society. More importantly, new structures may also be derived from abundant renewable carbon-based precursors that do not compete with food supplies. Examples include lignocellulosic biomass or other bioproducts derived from food/agricultural wastes (i.e., carbohydrates, cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, chitin, inorganics, proteins, etc.). As biomaterials can act as both template and carbon source, this section will only focus on the production of metal nanostructures during the pyrolysis process, which provides both a high temperature and an inert atmosphere for carbothermal reduction. The simplest approach is one-step pyrolysis of native biomaterials under closed conditions or in an inert atmosphere.656 Alternatively, a two-step heating process could be used to initially strengthen a biopolymer network by crosslinking; for instance, the synthesis of microporous N-doped carbon materials from chicken feather fibers.657 Another two-step strategy is to activate a carbon material after pyrolysis, either chemically or by heating in air to increase its porosity.658,659 Metals can also be used to crosslink and stabilize polymer precursors,660 to increase porosity, or as catalysts (e.g., Fe and Ni) for graphitization of carbon materials at relatively low temperatures.661 Metal precursors can be introduced by infiltration, but many native biomaterials also contain metal species (e.g., potassium in seaweeds) that have been exploited for in situ chemical activation.662 In this area, metal nanostructures synthesized by carbothermal pyrolysis can be widely applied and discussed in the fields of energy and the environment.
5.1. Energy applications
Seaweeds are outstanding precursors of nanotextured carbons, which are promising candidates for carbon-based electrode materials for energy storage applications. Alginate, a high-modulus natural polysaccharide extracted from brown algae, is mainly composed of β-D-mannuronate (M) and α-L-guluronate (G) monomers.663 The negatively charged framework (–COO−) in G-rich blocks of alginate polymers makes it simple to form cobalt alginates (Co-alginates) by absorbing Co2+via an ion-exchange process, and their structures have been described by the egg-box model.664,665 After carbonization of Co-alginates in an inert gas atmosphere, Co3O4 nanoparticles can be encapsulated in the carbonized alginate in the form of Co3O4/C nanocomposites. Furthermore, pyrolysis of abundant sustainable natural alginate resources provides a new opportunity to synthesize Co3O4/C nanocomposites on a large scale via an environmentally friendly pathway. As shown in Fig. 63A, carbonaceous microfibres with a diameter of 5–8 μm embedded with Co3O4 nanoparticles (30–50 nm) were synthesized by pyrolysis of wet-spun Co–alginate fibres (Co–AF). When evaluated as an anode material for LIBs, the synthesized Co3O4–CF exhibits high specific capacity and excellent cycling stability and rate performance. In particular, a Co3O4–CF electrode composite displays a reversible capacity as high as 780 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 89 mA g−1 (Fig. 63D). Its charge capacities are 500 and 220 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles at high current rates of 890 and 4450 mA g−1, respectively. The high performance of the Co3O4–CF electrode resulted from its unique hierarchical nano/microstructure, where the synergistic effect of Co3O4 nanoparticles and the micron-sized amorphous carbon matrix greatly improves the reversible capacity, cycling stability and rate performance.666
 Fig. 63  (A) Synthesis process of Co3O4–CF by the pyrolysis of wet-spun cobalt alginate fibres; (B) SEM image of Co3O4–CF; (C) TEM image of Co3O4–CF; and (D) comparison of the cycling performances of Co3O4–CF and CF (reproduced with permission from ref. 666). 
With regard to battery materials in energy applications, e.g., LIBs, advanced materials for cathodes, anodes, and electrolytes have been developed to achieve higher energy and power densities, longer life, and lower cost. For cathode materials, many studies focus on layered LiMO2, olivine-type LiMPO4, and spinel-type LiM2O4, where M is one or more transition metal elements. Moreover, Si, Sn, alloys, and MnXm-type compounds (where M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Sn, etc., and X = O, S, N, etc.) are also used as anode materials. Although all these active materials demonstrate considerable capability and promising prospects, many obstacles restrict their commercialization, including poor electronic conductivity, low Li+ transfer efficiency, volume expansion/contraction during repeated cycling processes, and loss of active materials due to corrosion by electrolytes and/or collapse of the stable structure. To overcome these obstacles, various feasible strategies have been proposed, such as optimizing the crystalline lattice of active materials by doping cations or anions, reducing particles to a suitable scale to provide enhanced electron/Li+ conductivity and reactivity, and combining active materials with other active/inactive materials for complementary strengthening, especially core–shell structures.667 Su et al.668–671 have studied many methods for fabricating LIBs materials with core–shell structures, such as mesoporous Fe3O4@C microcapsules, Fe@Fe3C/C nanocomposites, hierarchical Fe@C microspheres, and MnO@C nanorods. Among these, replacing mature carbon materials with a solution of polysaccharides and subsequent carbonization at high temperatures can improve the quality of coatings. Also, sol–gel chemistry can provide effective coating layers and uniformly distributed particles at the same time. Hydrothermal or solvothermal treatments involve particular conditions of high temperature and pressure and are extensively used to prepare regular particles on the nanometer to micrometer scale. In addition, this route displays advantages for realizing advanced core–shell structures, given that polysaccharides can decompose into carbonaceous materials in a high-temperature solution and simultaneously surround the active cores.667
The biotemplating technique has been an impressive strategy for achieving materials with controllable morphology and structural specialization, complexity, and relevant fascinating functions derived from biomaterials.672 Many state-of-the-art microstructures have been well established by a wide range of biotemplates with multi-scale structures and novel morphologies, enhancing the performance of the prospective materials. It has also been proved that rational utilization of a biotemplating strategy can realize advanced functional materials, including phosphates, oxides, and carbides, via various biotemplates such as bamboo,673–675 pollen grains,676 cotton fibers,677 and microalgae,678,679etc. Nevertheless, conventional biotemplating methods focus only on replication of the morphology and using the biogenic elements of biomaterials (e.g., C, Si, N, Fe, P, S), and the biofunctionality of biological systems was neglected. For example, microalgae, consisting of a large amount of proteins, polysaccharides (alginate, etc.), and lipids, possess various functional groups that can absorb and take up heavy metal ions. Recently, Tao et al.680 took advantage of the unique biosorption behavior of microalgae and synthesized a Sn@C composite with tin nanoparticles embedded in a porous carbon matrix via a facile biosorption and subsequent calcination procedure. Spirulina platensis was employed as a biotemplate, biosorbent, and carbon source. Initially, SnCl4·5H2O was dissolved in absolute ethanol to form a hybrid precursor. Meanwhile, S. platensis was washed several times by formaldehyde and deionized water to remove unwanted materials. Then, S. platensis was added to the precursor. After 1 h at room temperature, the mixture was filtered, dried at 80 °C, and then immersed in 10 wt% polystyrene (PS) dissolved in dimethylformamide. Finally, the sample was calcined at 600 °C for 3 h under a N2 atmosphere to obtain black materials (i.e., sample A3), as illustrated in Fig. 64a. For comparison, pristine S. platensis (A1) and S. platensis with adsorbed tin ions but without a PS coating film (A2) were calcined in the same conditions to obtain control samples. In order to ensure that tin particles could be strongly anchored to the carbon matrix, a PS film was coated onto the surface of S. platensis after biosorption. During subsequent heat treatment, the carbonaceous compounds in S. platensis and PS decomposed to carbon, as well as forming a series of gaseous products (such as CO, H2, CH4, and C2H4)681 to act as a reducing atmosphere, which can transform SnO2 into tin. Combined with carbothermal reduction, tin nanocrystals were dispersed in situ into carbonaceous matrices and constituted the Sn@C composite. A Sn@C electrode exhibits remarkable cycling stability and excellent cycling performance, which demonstrates high potential as an anode material for LIBs (Fig. 64b–c). Furthermore, this green sustainable strategy can not only extend the scope of biotemplating synthesis of advanced functional materials, but also provide an important reference for environmental protection and water purification.
 Fig. 64  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the Sn@C composite; (b) charge/discharge profiles of sample A3 at different cycles with a current density of 50 mA g−1; (c) cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of samples A1–A3 at a 50 mA g−1 current density; (d) rate performance of samples A2 and A3 (reproduced with permission from ref. 680). 
Fast pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass under anoxic conditions at an ultra-high heat-up rate has been heavily studied and commercially used in recent years.682,683 In a pyrolysis process, not only renewable liquid fuel, but also tons of biochar have been produced, which have not found value-added utilization. Besides, various carbonaceous materials, such as nanotubes and graphene, have been mass-produced and found applications in separation, energy storage, drug delivery, and bioimaging.684,685 For instance, carbonaceous materials are the most widely used electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLC).686–688 The more favorable cycle durability and electrical conductivity of different carbonaceous materials have led to their application in almost 100% of commercial supercapacitors since the 1960s.689 Conventional synthetic approaches to carbon nanomaterials, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and arc discharge synthesis, etc., usually require tedious and expensive synthetic routes as well as organic solvents and electrochemical treatment, which limit large-scale production and commercialization.690–692 Although some materials researchers have developed facile methods to prepare carbon nanomaterials by pyrolyzing silk and feathers,684,693 using complex lignocellulosic biomass, which contains lignin, cellulose, hemicellulose, and ash, to prepare carbon nanomaterials has not been carried out to date. Recently, functionalized carbonaceous materials could be formed via pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass by adjusting the pyrolysis temperature.329,694 It is envisioned that we can develop a conceptually new method for in situ growth of carbon fibers by catalytically reducing and depositing certain volatile low-molecular-weight organic compounds on carbonaceous skeletons. Moreover, the morphology and properties of as-synthesized carbon composites could be tunable via deliberate adjustment of temperature and selection of catalysts. Furthermore, Liu et al.695 synthesized magnetic nanofiber/mesoporous carbon composites via a one-pot method by catalytic pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass with FeCl3 and evaluated their energy storage performance. As illustrated in Fig. 65, the precursor was biomass preloaded with Fe(III), which was prepared by a biosorption process using sawdust as adsorbent at ambient temperature. Subsequently, fast pyrolysis was conducted under N2 flow to obtain magnetic carbon nanofibers. In addition, the coupled catalytic action of both Fe and Cl species can effectively catalyze the growth of carbon nanofibers on mesoporous carbon and form magnetic nanofibers/mesoporous carbon composites, which can be directly used as electrode materials for electrochemical energy storage without further separation, and exhibit favorable energy storage performance with high EDLC capacitance, good retention capability, and excellent stability and durability (>98% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles). Considering that biomass is a naturally abundant and renewable resource, magnetic carbon nanofibers can be easily fabricated via one-step pyrolysis on a large scale and become a sustainable and reliable resource for clean energy storage.
 Fig. 65  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of magnetic carbon nanofibers from lignocellulosic biomass for energy storage applications (reproduced with permission from ref. 695). 
With the depletion of fossil fuels, development of renewable energy has attracted an increasing amount of interest. Acidic materials have been widely used in catalytic production of a variety of renewable fuels (e.g., biodiesels) and fine chemicals (e.g., furfurals and sugars).696–698 Previously, liquid mineral acids (e.g., HCl, H2SO4, and H3PO4) were widely used to catalyze these reactions.696,699 However, their many disadvantages, such as high corrosiveness, costly and inefficient separation from homogeneous reaction mixtures, and creation of a large amount of waste by-products, have limited the applications of liquid mineral acids.700 Alternatively, solid acids, including solid Brønsted acids (e.g., SO3H-functionalized carbon and polymers)701–704 in addition to solid Lewis acids (e.g., transition metal (W, Zr, Nb) oxides),705,706 are easily separated from reaction mixtures and can be reused. Therefore, solid acids have been used to replace liquid mineral acids in catalytic reactions such as esterification, dehydration, and hydrolysis during biofuel production to minimize adverse effects on the environment and to reduce expenses.700,707–711 Porous carbonaceous solid acids are widely used catalysts in acid-catalyzed reactions. Nakajima et al.701 reported that these acids could be synthesized by sulfonation of partially carbonized organic matter including sugars, cellulosic materials, and synthetic polymers and can be selectively used in many acid-catalyzed reactions such as hydrolysis of β-1,4-glucan and biodiesel production. Arancon et al.712 synthesized a porous carbonaceous solid acid derived from corncob residues with good catalytic performance in esterification or transesterification of waste oils. Wu et al.713 prepared sulfonated biochar as a solid acid for hydrolysis of crystalline cellulose.
Compared with conventional solid acids, magnetic solid acids can be separated more easily in the presence of external magnetic fields, particularly in viscous or solid reaction mixtures.714,715 The most common method applied for the synthesis of magnetic solid acid catalysts is sulfonation of a mesoporous structure with a magnetic core, generally Fe3O4. It has been confirmed that a magnetic solid acid with a high acid strength of 2.2–2.5H+ mol−1 was prepared via sulfonation of polystyrene-encapsulated Fe3O4 spheres.716 More recently, a series of magnetic nanosized solid acid catalysts were synthesized by sulfonation of a series of particles containing Fe3O4 cores with various shell materials (e.g., polystyrene, poly(glycidyl methacrylate), and silica).717 All these catalysts exhibit high activity and excellent separability in acid-catalyzed reactions. However, it has been reported that many magnetic solid acid catalysts have been deemed unsatisfactory for acid-catalyzed reactions. For example, SO3H-functionalized polymers often exhibit low thermal stability and are costly.718 In addition, preparation of these magnetic solid acid catalysts involves complex synthetic procedures and usually requires expensive reagents, which impedes large-scale production and commercialization. In the continuing effort toward biomass waste disposal and resource recovery,719–722 Liu et al.723 developed a rapid, low-cost, and readily scalable approach for synthesizing a magnetic porous carbonaceous solid acid catalyst (MPC–SO3H) using biomass waste as a precursor. This method involves fast pyrolysis of biomass preloaded with Fe to produce MPC material; subsequent sulfonation of the obtained material is carried out to prepare a solid acid catalyst (as illustrated in Fig. 66). The primary step is the synthesis of MPC precursor materials including the following steps. Fe preloaded on biomass in the form of FeCl3 is hydrolyzed to Fe hydroxides (FeO(OH)) via a drying process (eqn (37) and (38)). The biomass preloaded with Fe is then subjected to a pyrolysis process in order to be transformed into MPC material. In this process, the biomass preloaded with Fe is thermally decomposed and the volatile components produced are swept out by the carrier gas (N2) and condensed to produce bio-oil. FeO(OH) is reduced to Fe3O4 under mesothermal conditions at 673–873 K by reducing agents, including H2, CO, and amorphous carbon, derived from pyrolysis of biomass (eqn (39) and (41)).724,725 Magnetic solid acids exhibit high acid strength and are readily separable. Therefore, they provide promising replacements for liquid acids in some acid-catalyzed reactions, which can minimize adverse effects on the environment and human health. Therefore, as solid acid catalysts are easily separated and exhibit high catalytic activity, they offer promising applications as low-cost, environmentally friendly, and recyclable acid catalysts in the production of fine chemicals. FeCl3 + 3H2O → Fe(OH)3 + 3HCl↑(37) Fe(OH)3 → FeO(OH) + H2O(38) 6FeO(OH) + 4H2 → 2Fe3O4 + 4H2O↑(39) 6FeO(OH) + 4C → 2Fe3O4 + 4CO↑(40) 6FeO(OH) + 4CO → 2Fe3O4 + 4CO2↑(41)
 Fig. 66  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a magnetic porous carbonaceous (MPC) solid acid catalyst derived from naturally abundant biomass waste, which was used for three typical acid-catalyzed reactions: esterification of benzyl alcohol and acetic acid (reaction A), dehydration of xylose to produce furfural (reaction B), and hydrolysis of sucrose (reaction C) (reproduced with permission from ref. 723). 
Pyrolysis of biomass or its derivatives is recognized as an efficient and feasible process to selectively transform lignocellulose into a liquid biofuel. However, bio-oil derived from fast pyrolysis of biomass normally contains a large amount of oxygenated compounds. These oxygenated compounds could possess many negative properties such as low heating value, high corrosiveness, high viscosity, and instability; they also greatly limit the application of bio-oil, particularly as a transportation fuel. Hydrocarbons derived from biomass are most attractive because of their high energy density and compatibility with existing infrastructure. Converting lignocellulose into transportation fuels via catalytic fast pyrolysis has attracted much attention.726 The main challenge of this process is the development of active and stable catalysts that can deal with a large variety of decomposition intermediates from lignocellulose.
Close contact between a catalyst and biomass can be achieved by physically mixing a solid catalyst with biomass reduced to fine particles or by impregnating biomass particles with an aqueous solution of metallic salts. In the first case, nanostructured catalysts and nanoparticles prove to be efficient for close contact between the active sites of catalysts and organic macromolecules in biomass, as well as primary molecules generated in the early stages of pyrolysis. High catalytic efficiency is typically expected with metal or metal oxides nanoparticles.727 A great deal of fundamental work has been carried out on the addition of metal species to biomass by impregnation with metal salts solutions, which can explain the role of minerals during pyrolysis of biomass,728–732 modify primary pyrolysis and increase selectivity towards one or more specific products,729–737 or study the effect of fire retardants.737 It is well known that the presence of inorganic species dispersed in biomass can influence the behavior of pyrolysis and thereby the distribution of pyrolysis products. Recent research revealed the merits of the impregnation of wood with Fe or Ni salt solutions in reducing production of tar and increasing production of H2 during pyrolysis at 700 °C.738 With a nickel precursor, an increase of 260% in H2 production was observed compared to a pyrolysis test without a catalyst. This is attributed to in situ generation of crystalline metallic Ni nanoparticles dispersed in the solid fuel during pyrolysis of wood.739 During the wood impregnation step, numerous oxygenated groups in biomacromolecules act as adsorption sites for metal cations in an aqueous medium, providing very high dispersion of metal precursors into the carbon matrix of wood. The surface of the lignocellulosic matrix behaves as a solid polyelectrolyte in the same way as a metal oxide surface, but involving more complex interfacial chemistry in association with the acidity of various types of hydroxyl groups in the biomacromolecules. During the stage of pyrolysis of wood, an amorphous NixOyHz phase is formed, which is easily reduced to metallic nickel (Ni0) via reducing reactions, such as carbothermal reduction, leading to the formation of quasi-monocrystalline Ni0 nanoparticles with a size of 2–4 nm, which mainly depends on the nickel load and the pyrolysis temperature. The formed Ni0 nanocrystallites can also act as catalytic active sites, which enhance production of H2 and conversion of tar during the biomass pyrolysis process.246 Furthermore, an integrated concept of thermochemical conversion of biomass comprises different key reaction steps as shown in Fig. 67, including: (step 1) insertion of a catalytic precursor into solid biomass; (step 2) catalytic pyrolysis of biomass and its main macromolecular constituents; (step 3) catalytically active nanoparticles are generated in situ and well dispersed inside the solid fuel; (step 4) catalytic conversion of nascent tar over the freshly formed nanoparticles; (step 5) catalytic gasification of the nanocomposite char residue; and (step 6) recycling and reuse of the metal catalyst species in the ashes. Each step requires a fundamental understanding of thermochemical conversion of biomass on the nanoscale.740
 Fig. 67  Concept of integrated catalytic biomass gasification via a catalyst/biomass integration strategy (reproduced with permission from ref. 740). 
5.2. Environmental applications
Porous carbon is a commonly used adsorbent material in environmental protection, such as water treatment, owing to its highly developed porosity, excellent adsorption capacity, and high degree of surface reactivity.741 It can effectively adsorb contaminants due to van der Waals forces, electrostatic attraction, or chemical bonds between its surface functional groups and the adsorbate.742,743 However, the adsorption process primarily achieves phase transfer and not transformation of toxic pollutants into non-toxic or low-toxicity substances.744 Therefore, many efforts have been made to synthesize functionalized porous carbons which combine adsorption with detoxification for use in environmental remediation.744,745 In addition, nanotechnology for environmental remediation has been a highly anticipated breakthrough, as growing demand for the limited supply of clean water creates an urgent requirement for technologies that can deliver faster, cleaner, and more affordable water treatment measures.
The application of engineered nanomaterials for environmental remediation came about when iron nanoparticles were observed to rapidly transform a group of persistent groundwater contaminants including trichloroethylene (TCE) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).746 In recent years, nanoscale zero-valent iron technology has evolved into the most active sub-field of environmental nanotechnology, with remarkable advances seen in the fundamental understanding of the reactivity of nanoscale zero-valent iron with environmental contaminants, surface engineering to enhance transport, and pilot and full-scale field implementation.747 In addition to chlorinated solvents, the contaminants suitable for treatment with nanoscale zero-valent iron include a variety of deleterious organic pollutants such as pesticides, azo dyes, flame retardants, and antibiotics. Moreover, inorganic contaminants are significant, such as nitrates, arsenic, hexavalent chromium, heavy metals, and radionuclides. With an increase in field applications conducted with nanoscale zero-valent iron for in situ groundwater and soil treatment, engineering aspects in association with the stability, mobility, and long-term ecotoxicological impacts of nanoscale zero-valent iron have received increasing attention as well.748 Zhan et al.749 developed a high-throughput method for producing carbonaceous materials embedded with zero-valent iron nanoparticles for environmental remediation of chlorinated hydrocarbons (e.g., TEC) by reductive dechlorination following a simplified redox mechanism (eqn. (42)). While this showed the feasibility of an aerosol process, the reactivity of zero-valent iron is achieved by reduction with NaBH4. In addition, hydrolysis of NaBH4 generates large amounts of hydrogen, impeding the scale-up of this process.750 To retain the merits of using aerosol-based technology to produce iron–carbon composites, an attempt was made to distribute nanoscale zero-valent iron particles throughout a carbon matrix via a facile carbothermal method (as illustrated in Fig. 68A). The iron oxide particles generated by the aerosol process are essentially reduced by the carbon matrix via pyrolysis in an inert atmosphere. The potential distinct advantages of this process include the following: (1) nanoscale zero-valent iron nanoparticles that are highly distributed in the carbon support; (2) reduction of the iron precursor to zero-valent iron via a carbothermal step, instead of adding NaBH4; and (3) the fact that carbothermal treatment introduces high porosity into iron–carbon composites, as part of the carbon is converted into CO and CO2 during reduction of the iron oxide, thus allowing the entry of contaminants to reactive sites. Additional factors include the fact that the starting materials are environmentally benign and economical. The whole process is operated in a semi-continuous method, facilitating large-scale synthesis for eventual in situ application. For instance, Fig. 68C compares the adsorptive capacity of aerosol-based Fe–C composites with those of humic acid (the major natural organic matter in soil) and commercial activated carbon. The adsorption of TCE on Fe–C (∼94.5%) is much higher than that of humic acid (∼30%) and comparable to that of activated carbons (∼95%). The conceptual basis of this technology involves injecting these carbon materials into contaminated sediments saturated with groundwater containing chlorinated hydrocarbons traveling as a plume in the groundwater. As the Fe–C nanoparticles enter the contaminated site, the carbon component acts as an adsorbent for dissolved TCE and concentrates TCE on the particles. Consequently, reaction with TCE can proceed via catalysis by zero-valent iron and Pd, resulting in destruction of the chlorinated compound (Fig. 68B). It is noteworthy that the hydrophobic nature of carbon allows colloidally stabilized particles to be partitioned into interfacial regions when TCE as a bulk phase (in pools within bedrock) is in contact with water.751,752 Anchoring of the particles at such interfaces allows the reaction to continue. The carbothermal process could become an efficient way to modify the internal porosities of particles in carbon-supported catalysts. The aerosol method for generating metal-supported carbons in a facile process therefore has significant applicability for the design of new catalysts. C2HCl3 + 4Fe0 + 5H+ → C2H6 + 4Fe2+ + 3Cl−(42)
 Fig. 68  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of nanoscale zero-valent iron–carbon composites; (B) schematic illustration of Fe–C composites for the adsorption and simultaneous dechlorination of chlorinated hydrocarbon contaminants (TCE); (C) comparison of adsorption capacities of humic acid, Fe–C, and commercially activated carbon (in all experiments, 20 mL of a 20 ppm TCE solution and 0.2 g particles were used) (reproduced with permission from ref. 749). 
It has been mentioned before that iron–carbon composites can be employed for the treatment of inorganic contaminants, especially heavy metal wastewaters. For example, Zhuang et al.753 successfully prepared a porous carbon-encapsulated iron (Fe@PC) composite by carbothermal reduction of Fe(NO3)3 and starch (as illustrated in Fig. 69A). It should be noted that, after being cooled in flowing N2, the sample was washed with dilute HCl to thoroughly remove external Fe and iron oxide. In addition, NaCl served as a solid spacer to prevent the particles from agglomerating. After carbothermal reduction, iron oxide was reduced to metallic iron and covered with a carbonaceous layer. Fe@PC prepared at 750 °C (denoted as Fe@PC-750) had an irregular porous surface (Fig. 69B) with a specific surface area up to 378.71 m2 g−1 and a pore volume up to 0.17 cm3 g−1. As external Fe species had been completely removed by the HCl solution, the residual Fe was mainly distributed in the interior of the bulk particles, instead of being attached to the extra carbon shell, and was not accessible from the outside (EDS mapping in Fig. 69B). It was also confirmed that the carbon layer could protect the Fe particles in harsh conditions. The maximum removal capacity for Cr(VI) of Fe@PC-750 and PC-750 at 25 °C can reach 10.07 mg g−1 and 2.50 mg g−1, respectively (Fig. 69C). This is attributed to the fact that Fe(NO3)3 serves not as a Fe precursor, but as an activating agent at higher temperatures and produces pores on carbon. Compared with PC-750, Fe@PC-750 possessed a much higher specific surface area, and the surface reducing groups on its carbon shell had more opportunity to contact Cr(VI). Moreover, the removal rate first increased sharply with time and reached 70% in 3 min. The removal rate of Cr(VI) also increased with the adsorption temperature (Fig. 69D). Significantly, almost no hysteresis loop was observed in the magnetization curve (Fig. 69E), which indicates that the composite is a superparamagnetic material. Furthermore, its saturation magnetization reached 72.5 emu g−1, which was high enough for magnetic separation. Therefore, the prepared material can be used as an easily recoverable adsorbent to remove heavy metals from wastewater.
 Fig. 69  (A) Schematic of the preparation of Fe@PC composite; (B) SEM image and EDS mapping of Fe@PC; (C) adsorption isotherm of Fe@PC-750 and PC-750 (T = 25 °C, pH = 7.0, m = 0.1 g); (D) effect of adsorption temperature on the removal of Cr(VI) by Fe@PC (pH = 7.0, m = 0.1 g); (E): (a): magnetization curve of Fe@PC-750, (b): I. Attraction of the particles to a permanent magnet; II. Particles dispersed in water (reproduced with permission from ref. 753). 
As one of the two stable forms of chromium (Cr) in the natural environment, Cr(VI) is commonly present as soluble, mobile, and oxidizing oxyanions (CrO42−, HCrO4−, and Cr2O72−) that exhibit high toxicity, causing carcinogenic and mutagenic effects and liver damage.754–757 In contrast, trivalent chromium, (Cr(III)), usually found in the form of Cr(OH)3 or Cr(III) complexes with organic ligands, is less soluble, less mobile, and less toxic.758,759 It is even considered to be a non-toxic essential trace metal in human nutrition (especially in glucose metabolism).760,761 Therefore, it is of great importance to transform Cr(VI) into Cr(III) and fundamentally reduce its toxicity when porous carbons are used to adsorb Cr(VI) from contaminated water.762 Actually, porous carbon can itself weakly reduce Cr(VI) to Cr(III) by redox reactions of its surface functional groups.763,764 In order to promote reduction, some reducing agents such as zero-valent iron, ferrous iron, and iron sulfide765–767 could be introduced onto porous carbon. More recently, several elegant studies associated with an activated carbon/nZVI composite, ordered mesoporous carbon doped with iron, and nanosized magnetite-coated activated carbon have been reported,768–770 whereas limited research has been carried out to integrate ferrous sulfide with porous carbon. Due to the high reducibility provided by both Fe(II) and S(−II), it is far more efficient to reduce Cr(VI) than iron-bearing oxide minerals, and the products generated during redox reactions could greatly decrease the chance of reoxidation of chromium.766 A type of carbon/pyrite composite showing potential for environmental remediation via the removal of TCE has been synthesized by sequential processes, including incipient wetness impregnation of iron, transformation into iron oxides by calcination, and sulfurization by further heat treatment, in addition to the preparation of bituminous-coal-based carbon.771 However, the multi-step synthesis and high-cost raw materials involved still compel us to explore more facile and more economical preparation routes.
Yang et al.772 proposed an in situ carbothermal reduction method for synthesizing a new C/FeS/Fe composite by co-pyrolysis of hemp stems and iron(II) sulfate in flowing N2. Iron(II) sulfate could be directly decomposed and reduced to FeS/Fe nanoparticles embedded in a carbon matrix under a reducing atmosphere, which is generated via carbonization of hemp stems. Furthermore, it acts as an activating agent to develop pores in the carbon matrix. This synthetic process saves time and, more importantly, the porous C/FeS/Fe composite displays good simultaneous adsorption and reduction performance in the removal of Cr(VI) (as illustrated in Fig. 70), which makes it a potential material for the fields of chemical industry and environmental protection. Furthermore, using functionalized carbon composites produced from biomass wastes for wastewater treatment should become a promising sustainable way to achieve environmental treatment using waste.
 Fig. 70  Schematic of C/FeS/Fe composite synthesized by in situ carbothermal reduction method from hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) stems for removal of Cr(VI) (reproduced with permission from ref. 772). 
Magnetic porous carbons with different structures have been widely synthesized. Magnetic carbon nanoparticles with metallic cores (Fe, Co, Ni, or alloys) and graphitic shells (carbon onions, etc.) have been developed by arc discharge, laser ablation, electron irradiation, and pyrolysis processes.773–781 However, their non-porous graphitic shells result in extremely low specific surface areas, which thereby limits the amount of chemically active sites. To overcome this disadvantage, magnetic carbons with high specific surface areas and porosity were generated by impregnation of iron, cobalt, or nickel salts in activated carbon slurry with subsequent calcination.782–784 In spite of the highly enhanced porous features, condensation of metal salts leads to substantial blocking of pore space and reduces the pore dimensions, which usually increases mass transfer resistance. To eliminate pore blocking and improve mass transfer performance, Lu et al.785 reported the synthesis of mesoporous magnetic carbon by a combination of nanocasting and spatially selective deposition of magnetic cobalt nanoparticles. Later, Lee et al.786 and Park et al.787 independently developed a new route for carbonizing carbon sources and metal salts in a mesoporous silica template to produce mesoporous magnetic carbons. In these cases, pore spaces were utilized as nanoreactors for the formation of magnetic carbon composites and pore walls to guarantee the formation of open mesopores. In addition, Sun et al.788 prepared magnetic carbon spheres by direct pyrolysis of an anion exchange resin. The magnetic carbon spheres are sub-millimetre-sized with rough exterior surfaces and microporous bulk regions. The exterior roughness of these large spheres contributes to the formation of macropores, which are beneficial for transportation of guest species to the core of the sphere. Therefore, intensive studies have been conducted in the development of magnetic porous carbon materials with mesopores or macropores. Wang et al.789 synthesized a ferromagnetic hierarchical porous carbon (FHPC) for separation of dyes. This FHPC material exhibits a macroporous skeleton consisting of smaller macropores, mesopores, micropores and nickel particles. Moreover, the hierarchical porous texture was formed using Na2CO3 as a salt template and the nickel particles were carbothermally reduced from nickel oxide.
Except for zero-valent iron (Fe0) nanoparticles, Fe3O4 is also non-toxic and can be easily separated by external magnetic forces. When Fe3O4 is encapsulated in carbon, the magnetic Fe3O4 core is protected from attack by dissolved aqueous species. Fe3O4 exhibits good electrochemical performance in reversible ion storage, whereas it displays poor cyclability due to pulverization of the electrode and poor conductivity.790–794 In general, carbon-coated Fe3O4 nanoparticles have become accepted in the field of lithium-ion batteries to overcome these issues. It is an interesting but challenging task to design a facile and scalable procedure for the manufacture of multifunctionalized materials used in energy and environmental applications. More recently, Suma and Deng795 developed a facile one-step hydrothermal preparation of Fe2O3@a-C nanorods (disordered-carbon-coated Fe2O3 nanorods). By heating Fe2O3@a-C nanorods in argon, they could be easily converted into graphitic carbon (g-C)-coated magnetic Fe3O4 (Fe3O4@g-C) nanorods (as illustrated in Fig. 71A). Magnetic Fe3O4@g-C nanorods can reversibly store molecules, using a dye as a model. Consequently, one application of them is as a recyclable and reusable adsorbent for remediation of water (e.g., adsorption of methylene blue in Fig. 71D). Moreover, magnetic Fe3O4@g-C nanorods can be applied as vehicles for controlled drug release in an aqueous environment; in particular, for targeted treatment of infected regions via guided external magnetic forces. The thin graphitic carbon sheaths which encapsulate the high-capacity Fe3O4 cores could actually prevent the cores from having full access to sodium ions. Therefore, a carbon coating commonly used in electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries may not be generally appropriate for electrode materials for future sodium-ion batteries. Further study would be helpful on the utilization and selection of carbon coatings, which is a common strategy to overcome pulverization of electrodes in lithium-ion batteries, for electrodes in future sodium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 71  (A) Schematic of one-step synthesis of Fe2O3@a-C nanorods and their subsequent conversion to Fe3O4@g-C nanorods by calcination in Ar. (B) SEM and TEM images of Fe2O3@a-C nanorods and Fe3O4@g-C nanorods, respectively. (C) XRD patterns of Fe2O3@a-C nanorods and Fe3O4@g-C nanorods after calcination. (D) Magnetic Fe3O4@g-C nanorods as adsorbents: (a) UV-vis spectra of methylene blue solution with increasing adsorption times; inset of (a) shows a magnet used to recover the nanorods in a beaker; (b) normalized methylene blue concentration for increasing adsorption times; inset of (b) shows optical images of the decay in color of the solution over time (reproduced with permission from ref. 795). 
Magnetic transition metal nanocrystals have been highly favored as they are low-cost and make the separation process by means of an external magnetic field easy, thus avoiding conventional filtration or centrifugation procedures, which is a key obstacle preventing industrial-scale application. In spite of their significant virtues, magnetic nanocrystals, especially when small in size, are prone to agglomeration during usage owing to their high surface energy, which significantly lowers their catalytic activity and reduces their lifetime. Therefore, creating large nanocrystals and dispersing them on porous supports or adsorbents is vital for the construction of economical and durable nanocatalysts for wastewater treatment. Furthermore, porous carbonaceous supports have been proved to be superior to oxide carriers, due to their chemical inertness and excellent stability in both acidic and basic conditions. Activated carbons with large surface areas and high pore volumes have been employed as supports/adsorbents. However, the size of micropores restricts their further application owing to the difficulty in transportation of large molecules.796 Therefore, mesoporous carbons with uniform large pores and high surface areas are principally required. Recent advances in the synthesis of nanocrystals on mesoporous carbons mainly focus on the hard-templating approach to infiltrate an appropriate carbon precursor (e.g., furfuryl alcohol or sucrose) and a metal source (e.g., Fe, Co and Ni) into the mesopores of a silica template, accompanied by thermal polymerization and carbonization with dissolution of silica.797–800 Mesoporous carbons with dispersed Ni nanocrystals can be synthesized using SBA-15 coated with 2,3-dihydroxynaphthalene and impregnated with a nickel salt in combination with a heating process.801 However, this multi-step synthetic route involves repeated impregnation with carbon and/or a metal precursor, which greatly restricts widespread application of these composite materials. With respect to soft-templated carbons, incorporation of inorganic species into the carbon framework can be carried out directly via an extra self-assembly process. The addition of metal salts to a reaction mixture containing polymerizable precursors and block copolymer templates can facilitate its transformation into metal nanocrystals embedded in the carbon matrix during thermal treatment.
Nitrophenols are among the most common organic pollutants in industrial and agricultural wastewaters. In particular, 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) is a notorious industrial pollutant exhibiting high solubility and stability in water.802,803 Catalytic reduction of 4-NP to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) using sodium borohydride, which is widely used in sewage treatment, is considered to be the most efficient, green and economical approach804–807 and the reduction product (i.e., 4-AP) has great industrial relevance for the production of aniline and paracetamol.808 Recently, Yang et al.220 synthesized large Ni nanocrystals (30–75 nm, ca. 20 wt%) integrated in situ onto mesoporous carbons via self-assembly of nickel acetate and 8-quinolinol-modified chitosan directed by Pluronic P123 under neutral conditions assisted by tetraethyl orthosilicate before pyrolysis and removal of silica (as illustrated in Fig. 31), which were subsequently used for catalytic reduction of 4-NP. The mechanism of the reduction of 4-NP is illustrated in Fig. 72. (i) The external nickel (tri)oxide layer was rapidly reduced by NaBH4 to give Ni0 species upon mixing. (ii) Because of chemical interaction between the particle surface and the substrate, phenolate ions are adsorbed onto the Ni NC surface when present in the aqueous medium, forming a surface complex, and the strong nucleophile NaBH4, due to its diffusive nature and high electron injection ability, transfers electrons to the substrate with metal particles or a carbonaceous support. This contributes to overcoming the kinetic barrier of the reaction. (iii) Reduction of 4-NP by H2 generated in situ to form the adsorbed product 4-AP, and finally (iv) desorption of the product. The surface of the Ni0 species was reoxidized by air to nickel (tri)oxide when NaBH4 was fully consumed. The rate-determining step is governed by the reaction of the adsorbed species. Adsorption/desorption equilibrium is reached much faster, modeled in terms of a Langmuir isotherm. Furthermore, nickel catalysts can easily be magnetically separated and the size and microstructure of Ni nanocrystals and the morphology of the carbonaceous support are well adjusted via the pyrolysis temperature, which influences the catalytic performances of Ni nanocrystals in reduction of 4-nitrophenol. Ni nanocrystals embedded in mesoporous carbon and pyrolyzed at 750 °C, possessing both twinned microstructure and carbon nanotube morphology, exhibit the highest catalytic efficiency.
 Fig. 72  Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanistic model for reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) by NaBH4 using Ni nanocrystals (taken with permission from ref. 680). 
5.3. Solar carbothermal reduction applications in energy
The significant obstacle in carbothermal reduction is energy consumption caused by reduction of oxides to a pure metal/metalloid. Aluminum (Al) and magnesium (Mg) are light metallic elements with stronger metal–oxygen bonds compared with some transition metals such as iron (Fe) and nickel (Ni). Therefore, high electrical energy consumption and potential for global warming are still present in industrial processes. Solar carbothermic reduction can be considered an alternative route, where a significant part of the energy input is provided by concentrated solar radiation, thereby decreasing the CO2 emissions associated with traditional industrial electrolytic and thermal processes.809–815 The main sources of CO2 emissions are twofold: one is associated with electric power generation based on combustion of fossil fuel, the other stems from oxidation of graphite electrodes in electrolytic processes or, alternatively, during generation of the heat supplied in thermal processes. Consequently, renewable electricity can reduce the CO2 footprint only partially in the production of these metals. In addition, solar carbothermic reduction can be considered the endothermic step in redox cycles for solar energy storage combined with gasification of a carbon source. CO released in these processes can be used as a valuable gaseous fuel and reducing agent and its combustion provides additional thermal energy. CO2 finally released during CO combustion does not have an impact on the potential for global warming when biomass charcoal is used as a desirable source of reducing carbon.816–818 Carbothermic reduction of oxides of these metals under vacuum not only reduces the reaction temperatures, but also minimizes the formation of carbides and oxycarbides intermediate compounds.819,820Fig. 73 shows one of the WIS's solar facilities capable of concentrating solar radiation. Its principal optical set-up is shown in Fig. 73a: a heliostat reflects solar energy onto a stationary parabolic dish through an intermediate flat deflecting mirror. Concentrated solar light enters the reactor (Fig. 73b) from above through a spherically shaped quartz window that can withstand the internal vacuum conditions and temperature (Fig. 73d) and then passes through a zirconia aperture placed in the focal plane of the dish.820
 Fig. 73  Solar facility capable of concentrating solar radiation: (a) concentrating optics; (b) photo of the batch solar reactor during cooling after testing; (c) theoretical estimation of the temperature distribution inside the reactor; (d) IR image of the reactor window during testing (taken with permission from ref. 819 and 820). 
With respect to thermal reduction of metal oxides to their elements without the application of electrical energy, a chemical reducing agent is necessary to lower the dissociation temperature. Coal (i.e., coke) and natural gas (i.e., methane) are normally preferred as reducing agents in blast furnace processes, because of their availability and relatively low price. In the presence of carbon, uptake of O2 with the formation of CO brings about reduction of oxides at much lower temperatures; for example, zinc production by solar carbothermic reduction of zinc oxide via the conventional fossil-fuel-based electrolytic or Imperial Smelting processes. Furthermore, the use of solar energy for supplying the enthalpy of the reaction increases the calorific value of the initial reactants by 39%. Solar thermochemical cycles based on metal oxide redox reactions can split H2O and CO2 to produce H2 and CO for catalytic synthesis of liquid fuels for transportation.821 When coupled to direct capture of CO2 from atmospheric air, the solar cycle becomes a carbon-neutral source of hydrocarbon fuels. Among a variety of redox materials investigated for use in thermochemical cycles, the Zn–ZnO redox cycle (Fig. 74A) has been identified as a promising route due to its potential to reach a high solar-to-fuel energy conversion efficiency.822 In the endothermic reduction step, ZnO is thermally dissociated into Zn and O2 at above 2000 K by concentrated solar energy. After being separated from O2, the produced Zn is exothermally reacted with H2O and CO2 in a lower-temperature oxidation step to form syngas (H2 and CO) and metal oxide; the latter is recycled to the solar reactor. As the two steps are decoupled, the production of syngas can be carried out on demand at convenient sites. Thermodynamic analysis can indicate that the solar-to-fuel energy conversion efficiency, defined as the heating value of the produced syngas divided by the total energy input into the cycle, can attain values exceeding 30%. As shown in Fig. 74B, the Solzinc project uses concentrated solar radiation for carbothermal production of zinc.823 Solar-produced zinc (or other metals) can be used as a commodity. Alternatively, zinc is used for flexible (chemical) storage of a large fraction of the solar energy used in its production. Options for solar-produced zinc include: (1) production of hydrogen by reaction with steam in a hydrolysis reactor; (2) production of syngas (H2 and CO) by reaction with steam and CO2. Syngas could be further applied for the synthesis of liquid fuels; (3) generation of electricity in mechanically rechargeable Zn–air batteries or fuel cells with Zn anodes produced from solar-produced Zn. The produced ZnO can again be reduced to Zn in the zinc solar reactor. In summary, zinc serves as a flexible chemical storage material in a cyclic process.
 Fig. 74  (A) Schematic of two-step solar thermochemical cycle based on Zn/ZnO redox reactions to produce H2 and/or CO from H2O and/or CO2; (B) sketch of concepts for use of solar-produced zinc for flexible storage, shown for carbothermic reduction of ZnO (taken with permission from ref. 822 and 823). 
Currently, biomass offers an economically feasible means of replacing fossil-based liquid and gaseous fuels, which are necessary for transportation and industry. Solar energy, on the other hand, is practically limitless but has applications only in the electricity and heating markets. Solar and biomass energy can be combined to produce a much greater amount of fuel from a given quantity of biomass using a reduced metal oxide produced in a solar thermal process to deoxygenate the biomass. Hargus et al.824 proposed a novel route for augmented biofuel production, which indirectly harnesses solar thermal energy to drive deoxygenation of bio-oil. This process, which is termed “looped-oxide catalysis” (LOC), is envisioned as a two-step thermochemical cycle, illustrated in Fig. 75. In one step of the cycle, bio-oil is catalytically upgraded by reaction with a reduced metal oxide, forming a higher-valence oxide and yielding a deoxygenated fuel product. During this upgrading step, the reduced metal oxide offers a bulk source of reducing potential to drive the deoxygenation reaction and a catalytic surface, thereby promoting both the thermodynamics and the kinetics of the reaction. In the opposite step of the cycle, the metal oxide is heated in a solar furnace to the point at which it dissociates into its metal or into a lower-valence metal oxide and oxygen gas, thereby completing the cycle. By the input of solar thermal energy, LOC has the potential to achieve significantly increased fuel yields compared to stand-alone biomass-to-fuels pathways. Notably, other processes can be envisioned for regenerating reduced metal oxides, e.g., carbothermal reduction. Fig. 75B illustrates six exergonic reaction cycles with metal–oxygen bond strengths intermediate between those of the Cd/CdO and SnO/SnO2 pairs in order to increase the metal–oxygen bond strength: Fe/FeO, Fe/Fe3O4, Sn/SnO, Ge/GeO2, Sn/SnO2 and Mo/MoO2. Whereas zero-valent metals allow exergonic deoxygenation, reducing metal oxides may be limited kinetically, due to diffusion of oxygen through a solid metallic phase (Fe and Mo), or complicated due to mixing of liquid metal with the electrolyte (Sn and Ge). Regarding LOC upgrading of acetic acid (as shown in Fig. 75C and D), the formation of acetaldehyde with comparable selectivity via LOC with zinc metal to that via HDO with zinc oxide suggests that surface oxygen vacancies are the catalytically relevant sites in both processes. Although LOC would face various challenges in development to an industrial-scale process, especially in materials handling and thermal management, it has inherent advantages over catalytic HDO of bio-oils that makes LOC a strong candidate as a complementary or alternative process. After decades of research, solar thermal processing is mature to the extent that use of solar thermochemical cycles integrated with carbothermal reduction for upgrading bio-oil is technologically feasible and merits exploration.
 Fig. 75  (A) Overview of the looped-oxide catalysis (LOC) thermochemical cycle for deoxygenation of bio-oil feedstocks (MO: a metal oxide, M: the corresponding zero-valent metal or a lower-valence metal oxide). (B) Volcano-type plot of LOC cycles, with five candidate cycles annotated. The inset figure shows the volcano-type plot over its entire range of 80 cycles included in this analysis. (C) LOC experiment. (D) HDO control experiment (reproduced with permission from ref. 824). 
6. Summary and outlook
This review aims to present recent progress in carbothermal synthesis of commonly used transition-metal-functionalized nanostructures ranging from one-dimensional nanostructures to three-dimensional nanoparticles, then highlight their applications in the fields of energy and the environment. A significant challenge in materials science at the moment is to quantify sustainability. In the future, researchers will need to be creative and realistic and consider all contributions when it comes to designing a truly sustainable material, from precursors to processing (catalysts, number of steps, energy requirements, solvents), CO2 emissions, harmful releases as well as end of life. Using renewable resources that do not compete with the food chain is clearly important, but it is not the only condition for making a sustainable material. Carbothermal reduction can be used as a facile route for the synthesis of various novel materials, especially in terms of transition-metal-functionalized materials. In particular, energy and electronics materials such as ZnO, MnO2, and LiFePO4 with different carbon–metal nanostructures have been extensively synthesized by means of various carbothermal reduction methods integrated with other auxiliary technologies (e.g., sol–gel, hydrothermal process), which can be well established industrially because of their low-cost starting materials. In addition, a variety of carbon sources could be considered comparatively low-cost carbon precursors for the synthesis of carbonaceous functional materials, such as carbon-coated magnetic nanoparticles (e.g., Co3O4@C, Fe3O4@C, FeC3–C). These materials have great potential for use in energy and environmental applications. Carbothermal reduction methods possess some incomparable advantages such as convenience, relatively low cost, and good repeatability for commercial applications. However, they often require a relatively high temperature for sustaining the carbothermic reaction. Consequently, novel structures can also be derived from abundant renewable carbon precursors. Examples include lignocellulosic biomass or other components in food or agricultural wastes (i.e., carbohydrates, cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, chitin, inorganics, proteins, etc.). Thermochemical conversion of biomass including pyrolysis in an inert environment has been developed for production of energy and carbon materials. Furthermore, it is still a potential challenge to simultaneously produce high-quality biofuel products and synthesize value-added functionalized materials via in situ carbothermal reduction. This review will be a powerful resource to stimulate the rapid development of sustainable transition-metal-functionalized nanostructures via carbothermal reduction, particularly for strengthening efforts towards novel nanostructured materials for clean energy and environmental applications in the future sustainable society.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the China Scholarship Council (CSC) for the financial support under the Grant no. 201206230168.
References

          N. N. Greenwood and A. Earnshaw, Chemistry of the Elements, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2nd edn,  1997, ISBN 0080379419 Search PubMed .
B. V. L'vov, Thermochim. Acta, 2000, 360, 109–120 CrossRef .
B. V. L'vov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1983, 271, 119–121 Search PubMed .
B. V. L'vov, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 1989, 44, 1257–1271 CrossRef .
B. V. L'vov, L. K. Polzik, N. P. Romanova and A. I. Yuzefovskii, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1990, 5, 163–169 RSC .
B. V. L'vov, A. A. Vasilevich, A. O. Dyakov, W. H. Lam and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1019–1024 RSC .
O. Ostrovski and G. Zhang, AIChE J., 2006, 52, 300–310 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kononov, O. Ostrovski and S. Ganguly, Metall. Mater. Trans. B, 2008, 39, 662–668 CrossRef .
S. H. Sun, G. W. Meng, M. G. Zhang, X. H. An, G. S. Wu and L. D. Zhang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2004, 37, 409–412 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Yang and C. M. Lieber, J. Mater. Res., 1997, 12, 2891–2996 Search PubMed .
S. Thansanvorakun, P. Mangkorntong, S. Choopun and N. Mangkorntong, Ceram. Int., 2008, 34, 1127–1130 CrossRef .
D. Calestani, M. Zha, G. Salviati, L. Lazzarini, L. Zanotti, E. Comini and G. Sberveglieri, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 275, 2083–2087 CrossRef .
Z. R. Dai, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 9–24 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choopun, H. Tabata and T. Hawai, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 274, 167–172 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, Z. Wei, Q. Xin and C. Li, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2000, 143, 975–982 CrossRef .
C. Liang, P. Ying and C. Li, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3148–3151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, F. Tian, Z. Wei, Q. Xin and C. Li, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 955–958 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, W. Ma, Z. Feng and C. Li, Carbon, 2003, 41, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Ma, L. Chen and X. Bao, Catal. Lett., 2007, 116, 63–69 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, F. Tian, Z. Li, Z. Feng, Z. Wei and C. Li, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4846–4853 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, J. Duan, P. Chen, H. Lou, X. Zheng and H. Hong, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2561–2568 RSC .
W. Liu, Y. Soneda, M. Kodama, J. Yamashita and H. Hatori, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2759–2767 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, L. Ding, C. Li, M. Pang, D. Su, W. Li and Y. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1121–1127 CAS .
N. Ji, T. Zhang, M. Zheng, A. Wang, H. Wang, X. Wang and J. G. Chen, Angew.
Chem., 2008, 120, 8638–8641 CrossRef .
H. Wang and P. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4408–4410 Search PubMed .
N. Ji, T. Zhang, M. Zheng, A. Wang, H. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Shu, A. L. Stottlemyer and J. G. Chen, Catal. Today, 2009, 147, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, H. Yang, Y. Li and X. Guo, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1274–1281 RSC .
Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 291, 851–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Xia, P. D. Yang, Y. G. Sun, Y. Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin, F. Kim and H. Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
S. Frank, P. Poncharal, Z. L. Wang and W. A. De Heer, Science, 1998, 280, 1744–1746 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Li, J. Shi and Y. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9346–9384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, D. Pan, Z. Li, Z. Jiao, M. Wu, C.-H. Shek, C. M. L. Wu and J. K. L. Lai, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7442–7486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahlén, M. Johnsson and M. Nygren, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 79, 2803–2808 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, M. Zuo, S. Tan, G. Li, S. Zhang and J. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10653–10657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, S. Zhang, M. Zuo, G. Li and J. Hou, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2005, 47–50 CrossRef .
Ü. Özgür, Y. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Dogğan, V. Avrutin, S.-J. Cho and H. Morcoç, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 041301 CrossRef .
N. S. Ramgir, Y. Yang and M. Zacharias, Small, 2010, 6, 1705–1722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Subannajui, K. S. Kim and M. Zacharias, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 014308 CrossRef .
A. Menzel, K. Subannajui, F. Güder, D. Moser, O. Paul and M. Zacharias, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4342–4348 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Dai, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 9–24 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947–1949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Fan, P. Werner and M. Zacharias, Small, 2006, 6, 700–717 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yang, H. Yan, S. Mao, R. Russo, J. Johnson, R. Saykally, N. Morris, J. Pham, R. He and H.-J. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 2, 323–331 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, S. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 3165–3166 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wongchoosuk, K. Subannajui, A. Menzel, I. Burshtein, S. Tamir, Y. Lifshitz and M. Zacharias, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 757–761 CAS .
J. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Peng, H. O. Everitt, L. Qin and J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3950–3954 CAS .
A. Menzel, R. Goldberg, G. Burshtein, V. Lumelsky, K. Subannajui, M. Zacharias and Y. Lifshitz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5524 CAS .
A. Menzel, K. Subannajui, R. Bakhda, Y. Wang, R. Thomann and M. Zacharias, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2815 CrossRef CAS .
K. Subannajui, N. S. Ramgir, R. Grimm, R. Michiels, Y. Yang, S. Mueller and M. Zacharias, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 1585–1589 CAS .
N. S. Ramgir, K. Subannajui, Y. Yang, R. Grimm, R. Michiels and M. Zacharias, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10323–10329 CAS .
I. Amarillio-Burshtein, S. Tamir and Y. Lifshitz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 103104 CrossRef .
R. B. Saunders, E. McGlynn, M. Biswas and M. O. Henry, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 4578–4581 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, C. Zhan, Y. Wang, Y. Su, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 832–835 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, B. Liu, H. Yang, W. Zhou, L. Sun, R. Chen, S. F. Yu, J. Zhang, H. Gong and H. Sun, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3069–3076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jin, H. Kim, H. Y. Ryu, H. W. Kim and C. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8513–8518 CAS .
I.-S. Hwang, S.-J. Kim, J.-K. Choi, J. Choi, H. Ji, G.-T. Kim, G. Cao and J.-H. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 148, 595–600 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lan, J. Gong, Y. Su, K. Li and S. Yang, Phys. E, 2012, 44, 791–796 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tharsika, A. S. M. A. Haseeb, S. A. Akbar and M. F. M. Sabri, Ceram. Int., 2014, 3, 5039–5042 CrossRef .
G. Shen, Recent Pat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 2, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
A. Johari, V. Rana and M. C. Bhatnagar, Nanomater. Nanotechnol., 2011, 1, 49–54 CAS .
Y. Zhang, R. Li, X. Zhou, M. Cai and X. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4230–4234 CAS .
T. Tharsika, A. S. M. A. Haseeb, S. A. Akbar and M. F. M. Sabri, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 7601–7605 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Yokoyama, in Nanoparticle Technology Handbook, ed. M. Hosokawa, K. Nogi, M. Naito, et al., Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2008, p. 3 Search PubMed .
D. Appell, Nature, 2002, 419, 553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Samuelson, Mater. Today, 2003, 6, 22 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Duan, Y. Huang, Y. Cui, J. F. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2001, 409, 66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, Q. Wei, H. Park and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 293, 1289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Yi, C. Wang and W. I. Park, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20, S22–S34 CrossRef CAS .
R. Koc and J. S. Folmer, J. Mater. Sci., 1997, 32, 3101–3111 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Swift and R. Koc, J. Mater. Sci., 2001, 36, 803–806 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, H. L. Hao, M. H. Zhang, W. Li and K. Y. Tao, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 538–543 CrossRef CAS .

          P. W. Atkins, Physical Chemistry, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 5th edn,  1994 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Lim, J. W. Park, M. S. Kim and J. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 253, 1601–1605 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Leung, A. B. Djurisic, J. Gao, M. H. Xie, Z. F. Wei, S. J. Xu and W. K. Chan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 394, 452–457 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gundiah, F. L. Deepak, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, Top. Catal., 2003, 24, 137–146 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Leung, A. B. Djurisic, J. Gao, M. H. Xie and W. K. Chan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 385, 155–159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Biswas, E. McGlynn, M. O. Hennry, M. McCann and A. Rafferty, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 094306 CrossRef .
M. Biswas, E. McGlynn and M. O. Henry, Microelectron. J., 2009, 40, 259–261 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rodríguez-Reinoso, Carbon, 1998, 36, 159–175 CrossRef .
H. J. Fan, A. S. Barnard and M. Zacharias, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 143116 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Schnepp, S. C. Wimbush, M. Antonietti and C. Giordano, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5340–5344 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Schnepp, W. Yang, M. Antonietti and C. Giordano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6564–6566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, P. Hu, D. Pan, J. Tian, S. Zhang and A. A. Volinsky, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 502, 338–340 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu, S. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Pan, J. Tian, Z. Tang and A. A. Volinsky, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 2316–2319 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, L. Wang and H. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 290, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Yi, S. S. Lee and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2459–2461 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Lu, E. L. Salabas and F. Schuth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Wang, L. Zhang, F. Yu and Z. M. Sheng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 2119–2124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Nikitenko, Y. Koltypin, I. Felner, I. Yeshurun, A. I. Shames, J. Z. Jiang, V. Markovich, G. Gorodetsky and A. Gedanken, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 7620–7626 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Herrmann, R. N. Grass, D. Mazunin and W. J. Stark, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3275–3281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huo, H. Song, X. Chen and W. Lian, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2849 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Sajitha, V. Prasad, S. V. Subramanyan, A. K. Mishra, S. Sarkar and C. Bansal, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 046214 CrossRef .
D. W. Lee, J. H. Yu, B. K. Kim and T. S. Jang, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 449, 60–64 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano, C. Erpen, W. T. Yao, B. Milke and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5136–5144 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano, C. Erpen, W. T. Yao and M. Antonietti, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4659–4662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. R. Holgate, T. Schoberl and S. R. Hall, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2009, 49, 145–149 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Hong, S. D. Li, C. Y. Ou, C. P. Li, L. Yang and C. H. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2007, 105, 547 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Schnepp, S. C. Wimbush, S. Mann and S. R. Hall, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1782 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Schnepp, Y. Zhang, M. J. Hollamby, B. R. Pauw, M. Tanaka, Y. Matsushita and Y. Sakka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13576–13581 CAS .
Z. Schnepp, M. J. Hollamby, M. Tanaka, Y. Matsushita, Y. Katsuya and Y. Sakka, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2012, 13, 035001 CrossRef .
Z. Schnepp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1096–1108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Glatzel, Cellulose Based Transition Metal Nano-Composites, PhD thesis, Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces,  2012 .
S. Glatzel, Z. Schnepp and C. Giordano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2355–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Franklin, Crystallite Growth in Graphitizing and Non-Graphitizing Carbons, Proc. R. Soc. A, 1951, 209, 196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, S. W. Chee, R. Sharma, K. Liu, X. Xie, Q. Li, S. Fan and K. Jiang, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 767 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 884 CAS .
A. Y. Khodakov, W. Chu and P. Fongarland, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. G. Fait, H. J. Lunk, M. Feist, M. Schneider, J. N. Dann and T. A. Frisk, Thermochim. Acta, 2008, 469, 12 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. French and F. R. Sale, J. Mater. Sci., 1981, 16, 3427 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Locherer, I. P. Swainson and E. K. H. Salje, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1999, 11, 6737 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ōya and S. Ōtani, Carbon, 1979, 17, 131 CrossRef .
Z. Schnepp, M. J. Hollamby, M. Tanaka, Y. Matsushita, Y. Xu and Y. Sakka, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5364–5366 RSC .
C. Giordano and T. Corbiere, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2013, 291, 1297–1311 CAS .
Z. Chen, Z. Jiao, D. Pan, Z. Li, M. Wu, C. H. Shek, C. M. Wu and J. K. Lai, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cao, W. Lai and P. Du, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8134 CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018 CAS .
H. Wang, P. Hu, D. Pan, J. Tian, S. Zhang and A. A. Volinsky, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 502, 338–340 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu, S. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Pan, J. Tian, Z. Tang and A. A. Volinsky, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 2316–2319 CrossRef CAS .
B. Das, M. V. Reddy and B. V. R. Chowdari, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 565, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Jia and F. Schüth, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2457 RSC .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, P. Li, Y. T. Pan, S. Warren, X. Yin and H. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8066–8074 RSC .
F. F. Tao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7977–7979 RSC .
H. You, S. Yang, B. Ding and H. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2880–2904 RSC .
D. M. Alonso, S. G. Wettstein and J. A. Dumesic, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8075–8098 RSC .
M. Besson, P. Gallezot and C. Pinel, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1827–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Perego and R. Millini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3956–3976 RSC .
E. Thompson, A. E. Danks, L. Bourgeois and Z. Schnepp, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 551–556 RSC .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Zhong, L. Wu, J. C. Zheng and J. Q. Liu, Powder Technol., 2012, 219, 45 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, J. D. Wilcox, R. Kostecki and G. Lau, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 180 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Wong, J. R. Carey and J. S. Chen, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2010, 5, 1090 CAS .
D. Jugovic and D. Uskokovic, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 538–544 CrossRef CAS .
D. Morgan, A. Van der Ven and G. Ceder, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A30–A32 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Islam, D. J. Driscoll, C. A. J. Fisher and P. R. Slater, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5085–5092 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon, C. Delacourt, A. S. Prakash, M. Morcrette, M. S. Hegde, C. Wurm and C. Masquelier, Dalton Trans., 2004, 2988–2994 RSC .
M. Gaberscek, R. Dominko and J. Jamnik, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2778–2783 CrossRef CAS .
S. Franger, C. Benoit, C. Bourbon and F. Le Cras, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 1338–1342 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Song, Y.-M. Kang, J.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, D.-Y. Kim, H.-S. Kwon and J.-Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2007, 166, 260–265 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Kim, J. S. Park and K. S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 144–150 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gaberscek, R. Dominko, M. Bele, M. Remskar and J. Jamnik, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 3015–3022 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chung, J. T. Bloking and Y.-M. Chiang, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 123–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. D. Cho, G. T. K. Fey and H. M. Kao, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 256 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koltypin, D. Aurbach, L. Nazar and B. Ellis, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1241 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Liu, Z. X. Wang, X. H. Li, H. J. Guo, W. J. Peng, Y. H. Zhang and Q. Y. Hu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 469 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, G. C. Liang, X. Q. Ou, X. K. Zhi, J. P. Zhang and J. Y. Cui, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 423 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Rahman, J. Z. Wang, R. Zeng, D. Wexler and H. K. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 259 CrossRef CAS .
G. Meligrana, C. Gerbaldi, A. Tuel, S. Bodoardo and N. Penazzi, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 516 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, D. Cai, H. Wang and M.-M. Titirici, Nanomaterials, 2013, 3, 443–452 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Lee, S. H. Cho, S. J. Cho, G. J. Park, S. H. Park and Y. S. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1219 CrossRef CAS .
G. Arnold, J. Garche, R. Hemmer, S. Ströbele, C. Vogler and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 247 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Y. Huo, P. P. Du, L. Z. Wang, A. Q. Zhang, Y. H. Song, Y. Lv and G. Y. Li, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 1315 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Tang, F. Gao and J. J. Xue, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 23, 1415 CAS .
G. T. K. Fey, Y. G. Chen and H. M. Kao, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Konarova and I. Taniguchi, Powder Technol., 2009, 191, 111 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. L. Doan, Z. Bakenov and I. Taniguchi, Adv. Powder Technol., 2010, 21, 187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Konarova and I. Taniguchi, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3661 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, R. Cai, Y. K. Zhou, Z. P. Shao, X. Z. Liao and Z. F. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, J. Su, Y. Long, X. Cui, X. Lv and Y. Wen, Powder Technol., 2014, 253, 467–473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, Y. Long, J. Su, X. Lv and Y. Wen, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 119, 155–163 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P. Poizot, S. Levasseur and C. Masquelier, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A352 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gaberscek, R. Dominko and J. Jamnik, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2778–2783 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, D. Wexler, H.-J. Li, H.-K. Liu and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16465 RSC .
J. Yang, J. Wang, D. Wang, X. Li, D. Geng, G. Liang, M. Gauthier, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 340 CrossRef CAS .
L.-H. Hu, F.-Y. Wu, C.-T. Lin, A. N. Khlobystov and L.-J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1687 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, Z. Wen, H. Feng and J. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Tang, D. Wang, X. Li, Y. Hu, R. Li, G. Liang, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1521 CAS .
B. Wang, D. Wang, Q. Wang, T. Liu, C. Guo and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 135 CAS .
Z. Chen and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1184 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, L. Zhao, D. Wang, J. Zhu, B. Wang and C. Guo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 10067–10075 RSC .
B. Rong, Y. Lu, X. Liu, Q. Chen, K. Tang and H. Yang, 
            et al.
          , Nano Energy, 2014, 6, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, L. Kong, H. Liu, J. Liu, M. Liu and P. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 123, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, Y. Wu and X. Kong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 246–252 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, Y. Wen, C. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, B. Shan and R. Chen, Solid State Commun., 2012, 152, 999–1003 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Yuan, Z. H. Wang, W. X. Zhang, X. L. Hu, J. T. Chen, Y. H. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 269–284 CAS .
S. H. Wu, M. S. Chen, C. J. Chien and Y. P. Fu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 440–444 CrossRef CAS .
A. Örnek, E. Bulut, M. Can and M. Özacar, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 3101–3107 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Y. Lin, T. Zhou, G. Zhao, Y. Huang and Z. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 20–26 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fan, C. Lin, S. Han, J. Chen, L. Li, Y. Bai, K. Zhang and X. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 795–801 RSC .
G. M. Walker and L. R. Weatherley, Water Res., 1997, 31, 2093–2101 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Walker and L. R. Weatherley, Environ. Pollut., 1998, 99, 133–136 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamai, T. Yoshida, M. Sasaki and H. Yasuda, Carbon, 1999, 37, 983–989 CrossRef CAS .
V. Meshko, L. Markovska, M. Mincheva and A. E. Rodrigues, Water Res., 2001, 35, 3357–3366 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tanthapanichakoon, P. Ariyadejwanich, P. Japthong, K. Nakagawa, S. R. Mukai and H. Tamon, Water Res., 2005, 39, 1347–1353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Walker and L. R. Weatherley, Chem. Eng. J., 2001, 83, 201–206 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhuang, Y. Wan, C. M. Feng, Y. Shen and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 706–716 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, S. J. Choi, I. Oh, J. Kwak, Z. Liu, O. Terasaki and R. Ryoo, Nature, 2001, 412, 169–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corma, H. Garcia and A. Leyva, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 230, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Holmes, P. Foran, E. P. L. Roberts and J. M. Newton, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1912–1913 RSC .
R. Chakravarti, A. Mano, H. Iwai, S. S. Aldeyab, R. P. Kumar, M. L. Kantam and A. Vinu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6673–6682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-H. Lu, W.-C. Li, Z. Hou and F. Schuth, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1038–1040 RSC .
A. H. Lu, J. J. Nitz, M. Comotti, C. Weidenthaler, K. Schlichte, C. W. Lehmann, O. Terasaki and F. Schuth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14152–14162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, A. Wang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1881–1888 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, H. Wang, Q. Zhao, M. Klingstedt, O. Terasaki and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4541–4550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Anderson, A. Athawale, F. E. Imrie, F. M. McKenna, A. McCue, D. Molyneux, K. Power, M. Shand and R. P. K. Wells, J. Catal., 2010, 270, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Yin and J. Liebscher, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 133–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stein, Z. Y. Wang and M. A. Fierke, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 265–293 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fang, N. K. Chaudhari, M.-S. Kim, J. H. Kim and J.-S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15330–15338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. A. Sietsma, J. D. Meeldijk, J. P. den Breejen, M. Versluijs-Helder, A. J. van Dillen, P. E. de Jongh and K. P. de Jong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4547–4549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ghedini, F. Menegazzo, M. Signoretto, M. Manzoli, F. Pinna and G. Strukul, J. Catal., 2010, 273, 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. H. Zhu, Z. F. Yan, G. Q. Lu and L. Rintoul, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 320, 166–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alam, C. Anand, S. M. J. Zaidi, T. S. Naidu, S. S. Al-Deyab and A. Vinu, Chem.–Asian J., 2011, 6, 834–841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vinu, K. Ariga, T. Mori, T. Nakanishi, S. Hishita, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1648–1652 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vinu, K. Z. Hossian, P. Srinivasu, M. Miyahara, S. Anandan, N. Gokulakrishnan, T. Mori, K. Ariga and V. V. Balasubramanian, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1819–1825 RSC .
S. B. Yoon, J. Y. Kim, J. S. Yu, K. P. Gierszal and M. Jaroniec, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 4316–4322 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, H. Yang and D. Zhao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 423–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ryoo, S. H. Joo, M. Kruk and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 677–681 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Lu and F. Schuth, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1793–1805 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Lu, W. C. Li, W. Schmidt and F. Schuth, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 80, 117–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2073–2094 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kruk, M. Jaroniec, T. W. Kim and R. Ryoo, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2815–2823 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jun, S. H. Joo, R. Ryoo, M. Kruk, M. Jaroniec, Z. Liu, T. Ohsuna and O. Terasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10712–10713 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Gierszal and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10026–10027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Wan, Y. Meng, F. Zhang and D. Gu, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11652–11662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li and D. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 943–946 RSC .
W. Wang, H. Wang, W. Wei, Z. Xiao and Y. Wan, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13461–13472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, X. Liu, S.-S. Park, C.-S. Ha and D. Zhao, Carbon, 2011, 49, 545–555 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Li, F. Yang, W. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Ren, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kido, K. Nakanishi, N. Okumura and K. Kanamori, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 176, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 520 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Si and E. T. Samulski, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6792 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666 RSC .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. G. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mülhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7990 CAS .
E. J. Yoo, T. Okata, T. Akita, M. Kohyama, J. Nakamura and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lv, F. Sun, D. M. Tang, H. T. Fang, C. Liu, Q. H. Yang and H. M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9014 RSC .
H. L. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Y. Liang and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Johnson, A. Behnam, S. J. Pearton and A. Ural, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Dey and C. R. Raj, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21427 CAS .
A. K. Singh, M. A. Ribas and B. Yakobson, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Zhao, M. Li, H. Ni, J. Zhang and X. Feng, 
            et al.
          , New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1108–1113 RSC .
G. Abellán, M. Latorre-Sánchez, V. Fornés, A. Ribera and H. García, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11416–11418 RSC .
R. A. Arancon, H. R. Barros Jr, A. M. Balu, C. Vargas and R. Luque, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3162–3167 RSC .
S. Chen, G. He, X. Hu, M. Xie, S. Wang, D. Zeng, H. Hou and U. Schrçder, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1059–1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Senoz and R. P. Wool, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 118, 1752–1765 CAS .
F. Kurosaki, H. Koyanaka, M. Tsujimoto and Y. Imamura, Carbon, 2008, 46, 850–857 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Zhang, B. S. Amirkhiz, X. Tan, Z. Xu, H. Wang, B. C. Olsen, C. M. B. Holt and D. Mitlin, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2012, 2, 431–437 CAS .
D. Deng, X. Liao and B. Shi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 298–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Ma and X. Bao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17596–17602 CAS .
E. Raymundo-PiÇero, M. Cadek and F. Béguin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1032–1039 CrossRef .
L. Wei, M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes, R. Mokaya and G. Yushin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 827–834 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Richardson, J. Motuzas, A. Julbe, G. Volle and J. Blin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23812–23831 CAS .
Y. Shen, C. Areeprasert, B. Prabowo, F. Takahashi and K. Yoshikawa, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40651–40664 RSC .
Y. Shen and K. Yoshikawa, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 10929–10942 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, J. Xu, H. Ma, C. Chen, J. Zhao, H. Miao and Q. Song, Catal. Commun., 2010, 11, 493–497 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, J. Zhao, H. Ma, H. Miao, Q. Song and J. Xu, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 383, 73–78 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Song, F. Wang, J. Cai, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, W. Yu and J. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 994–1007 CAS .
H. Zhou, T. Fan and D. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 100, 322–327 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Deshpande, I. Burgert and O. Paris, Small, 2006, 2, 994–998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Kostova, C. Zollfrank, M. Batentschuk, F. Goetz-Neunhoeffer, A. Winnacker and P. Greil, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 599–603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shin and G. J. Exarhos, Cellulose, 2007, 14, 269–279 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11834–11835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang and Y. Gu, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 16, 470–481 CrossRef .
J. He, Z. W. Liu, W. B. Fan, Z. T. Liu, J. Lu and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10107–10109 RSC .
F. Wang, S. L. Nimmo, B. Cao and C. Mao, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2639–2645 RSC .
S. R. Hall, V. M. Swinerd, F. N. Newby, A. M. Collins and S. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 598–600 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, J. D. Berrigan, Y. Cai, S. R. Marder and K. H. Sandhage, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1305–1312 RSC .
I. Perelshtein, Y. Ruderman, N. Perkas, K. Traeger, T. Tzanov, J. Beddow, E. Joyce, T. J. Mason, M. Blanes, K. Mollá and A. Gedanken, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10736–10742 RSC .
Y. Tan, J. Gu, X. Zang, W. Xu, K. Shi, L. Xu and D. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8307–8311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Greil, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 21, 105–118 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sieber, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2005, 412, 43–47 CrossRef .
Z. Schnepp, W. Yang, C. Giordano and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6564–6566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shin, X. S. Li, C. Wang, J. R. Coleman and G. J. Exarhos, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1212–1215 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, W. Zhang, Z. Xiao, H. Huang, H. Zeng, X. Chen, F. Chen, Y. Gan and X. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9209–9215 RSC .
Y. Xia, W. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Gan, Z. Xiao, L. Qian and X. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6498–6501 RSC .
P. Afanasiev, C. Geantet, I. Llorens and O. Proux, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9731–9737 RSC .
Y. Chen, X. Luo, G. H. Yue, X. Luo and D. L. Peng, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 113, 412–416 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gurmen, B. Ebin, S. Stopić and B. Friedrich, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 480, 529–533 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schrick, J. L. Blough, A. D. Jones and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 5140–5147 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sitthisa, W. An and D. E. Resasco, J. Catal., 2011, 284, 90–101 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chieffi, C. Giordano, M. Antonietti and D. Esposito, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11591–11596 CAS .
Y. K. Park, S. B. Choi, H. J. Nam, D. Y. Jung, H. C. Ahn, K. Choi, H. Furukawa and J. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3086–3088 RSC .
N. Hammer, I. Kvande, X. Xu, V. Gunnarsson, B. Tøtdal, D. Chen and M. Rønning, Catal. Today, 2007, 123, 245–256 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mahata, A. F. Cunha, J. J. M. Órfão and J. L. Figueiredo, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 351, 204–209 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Tao, X. B. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. P. Cheng, F. Liu, J. H. Luo, Z. Q. Luo and H. J. Geise, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1425–1428 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zhou, Z. J. Sui, P. Li, D. Chen, Y. C. Dai and W. K. Yuan, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3255–3262 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jung, A. Jess, T. Schubert and W. Schütz, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 362, 95–105 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Patwardhan, R. C. Brow and B. H. Shanks, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 636–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Patwardhan, R. C. Brown and B. H. Shanks, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1629–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Liu, K. Tian, H. Jiang, X. S. Zhang, H. S. Ding and H. Q. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 7849–7856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Liu, K. Tian, H. Jiang and H. Q. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2419 Search PubMed .
W. J. Liu, K. Tian and H. Jiang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 821–826 RSC .
A. V. Bridgwater, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 38, 68–94 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu, W. Song and W. Lin, Biotechnol. Adv., 2009, 27, 583–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Alonso, S. G. Wettstein and J. A. Dumesic, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8075–8098 RSC .
Y. Dong, Y. S. Chui, R. Ma, C. Cao, H. Cheng, Y. Y. Li and J. A. Zapien, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13892–13897 CAS .

          L. A. Edye, G. N. Richards and G. Zheng, in Transition Metals as Catalysts for Pyrolysis and Gasification of Biomass, Am. Chem. Soc.,  1992, vol. 515, pp. 90–101 Search PubMed .
F. Gong, T. Ye, L. Yuan, T. Kan, Y. Torimoto, M. Yamamoto and Q. Li, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 2001 RSC .
P. Serp, M. Corrias and P. Kalck, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 253, 337–358 CrossRef CAS .
A. Onda, T. Komatsu and T. Yashima, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 2999–3005 RSC .
L. Yang, Z. Jiang, G. Fan and F. Li, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1123–1131 CAS .
M. L. Toebes, Y. Zhang, J. Hájek, T. Alexander Nijhuis, J. H. Bitter, A. Jos van Dillen, D. Y. Murzin, D. C. Koningsberger and K. P. de Jong, J. Catal., 2004, 226, 215–225 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Planeix, N. Coustel, B. Coq, V. Brotons, P. S. Kumbhar, R. Dutartre, P. Geneste, P. Bernier and P. M. Ajayan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 7935–7936 CrossRef CAS .

          M. B. Smith and J. March, March's Advanced Organic Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, 5th edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
X. Q. Wang, J. C. Hanson, A. I. Frenkel, J. Y. Kim and J. A. Rodriguez, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 13667–13673 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Goldstein and R. E. Mitchell, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2011, 33, 2803–2810 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, Y. Myung and P. Banerjee, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 1588–1595 CAS .
T. F. Baumann, G. A. Fox, J. H. Satcher Jr, N. Yoshizawa, R. Fu and M. S. Dresselhaus, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7073–7076 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Pérez-Cadenas, C. H. Ros, S. Morales-Torres, M. Pérez-Cadenas, P. J. Kooyman, C. Moreno-Castilla and F. Kapteijn, Carbon, 2013, 56, 324–331 CrossRef .
Z. Zapata-Benabithe, J. de Vicente and F. Carrasco-Marín, Carbon, 2013, 55, 260–268 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Cotet, M. Gich, A. Roig, I. C. Popescu, V. Cosoveanu, E. Molins and V. Danciu, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2006, 352, 2772–2777 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fu, T. F. Baumann, S. Cronin, G. Dresselhaus, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. H. Satcher Jr, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2647–2651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Tian, C. E. Buckley, D. A. Sheppard, M. Paskevicius and N. Hanna, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 13242–13246 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sānchez-Polo, J. Rivera-Utrilla and U. von Gunten, Water Res., 2006, 40, 3375–3384 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Wang, J. Ren, B. Shi, G. Lu and Y. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 151, 287–292 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Steiner III, T. F. Baumann, J. Kong, J. H. Satcher Jr and M. S. Dresselhaus, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5161–5166 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, A. Wang, X. Xang and T. Zhang, Catal. Today, 2008, 137, 162–166 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Pérez-Cadenas, F. J. Maldonado-Hódar and C. Moreno-Castilla, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10850–10855 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Dawidziuk, F. Carrasco-Marín and C. Moreno-Castilla, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2679–2687 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bekyarova and K. Kaneko, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1625–1628 CrossRef CAS .
S. Charnvanichborikarn, S. J. Shin, M. A. Worsley, I. C. Tran, T. M. Willey, T. van Buuren, T. E. Felter, J. D. Colvin and S. O. Kucheyev, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 962 CAS .
M. A. Worsley, S. O. Kucheyev, J. H. Satcher Jr, A. V. Hamza and T. F. Baumann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 073115 CrossRef .
S. Charnvanichborikarn, M. A. Worsley, M. Bagge-Hansen, J. D. Colvin, T. E. Felter and S. O. Kucheyev, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18600–18605 CAS .
E. K. Athanassiou, R. N. Grass and W. J. Stark, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1668–1673 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Athanassiou, R. N. Grass and W. J. Stark, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 161–172 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Grass and W. J. Stark, J. Nanopart. Res., 2006, 8, 729–736 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Jung, H. M. Lee, Y. C. Kang and S. B. Park, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 364, 574–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Majumdar, H. D. Glicksman and T. T. Kodas, Powder Technol., 2000, 110, 76–81 CrossRef CAS .
D. Majumdar, T. A. Shefelbine and T. T. Kodas, J. Mater. Res., 1996, 11, 2861–2868 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, T. A. Germer, G. W. Mulholland and S. H. Ehrman, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 518–521 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhong, G. Peabody, H. Glicksman and S. Ehrman, J. Mater. Res., 2012, 27, 2540–2550 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Firmansyah, T. Kim, S. Kim, K. Sullivan, M. R. Zachariah and D. Lee, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7063–7071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Cho, K. Y. Jung, H. Lee and S. Heo, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 3424–3430 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, K. Tian, H. Jiang and H. Yu, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4198–4205 RSC .
B. Volesky, Water Res., 2007, 41, 4017–4029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gong, T. Ye, L. Yuan, T. Kan, Y. Torimoto, M. Yamamoto and Q. Li, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 2001–2012 RSC .
P. R. Patwardhan, R. C. Brow and B. H. Shanks, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 636–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Patwardhan, R. C. Brow and B. H. Shanks, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1629–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, J. Li, Z. Zheng and Z. Meng, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 2009, 63, 569–575 CrossRef CAS .
L. Johnson, W. Thielemans and D. A. Walsh, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1686–1693 RSC .
A. Corma, P. Concepción and P. Serna, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 119, 7404–7407 CrossRef .
V. G. Harris, Y. Chen, A. Yang, S. Yoon, Z. Chen, A. L. Geiler, J. Gao, C. N. Chinnasamy, L. H. Lewis, C. Vittoria, E. E. Carpenter, K. J. Carroll, R. Goswami, M. A. Willard, L. Kurihara, M. Gjoka and O. Kalogirou, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 16 CrossRef .

          T. Xiao and Y. Qian, Promoted carbide-based Fischer–Tropsch catalyst, method for its preparation and uses thereof, 2008-GB703 2008104793, 20080229,  2008.
R. B. Anderson, W. K. Hall, A. Krieg and B. Seligman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1949, 71, 183–188 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Ding, Y. Pei, H. Zhu, X. Song, J. Zang, W. Dong and Y. Lu, Role of cobalt carbide in high alcohols (C1-C18) synthesis from syngas over activated carbon supported cobalt catalysts, AIChE Spring Meet, 6th Global Congr. Process Saf., Conf. Proc., ding1/1-ding1/2.
B. M. Eick and J. P. Youngblood, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 1159–1171 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Berger, W. Gruner, E. Langholf and S. Stolle, Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mater., 1999, 17, 235–243 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2073–2094 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hasin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4726–4732 CAS .
M. J. McAllister, J. L. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Car, R. K. Prud'homme and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films, Los Alamos Natl. Lab., Prepr. Arch., Condens. Matter, 2004, 1–5 Search PubMed  , arXiv:cond-mat/0410550.
W. S. Hummers Jr and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .
A. Lerf, H. Y. He, M. Forster and J. Klinowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4477–4482 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Paci, T. Belytschko and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18099–18111 CAS .
L. L. Zhang, S. Zhao, X. N. Tian and X. S. Zhao, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 17624–17628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, B. H. Fan and J. Y. Ouyang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4237–4244 CAS .
Z. H. Tang, S. L. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. J. Park, Y. W. Zhu, J.
H. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, X. Wang, J. W. Zhu, X. J. Yang and L. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5625–5629 RSC .
W. Xia, R. Zou, L. An, D. Xia and S. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 994–1007 Search PubMed .
S. Jun, S. H. Joo, R. Ryoo, M. Kruk, M. Jaroniec, Z. Liu, T. Ohsuna and O. Terasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10712 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vinu, K. Z. Hossian, P. Srinivasu, M. Miyahara, S. Anandan, N. Gokulakrishnan, T. Mori, K. Ariga and V. V. Balasubramanian, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1819 RSC .
H. J. Lee, W. Cho and M. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 221 RSC .
S. Sorribas, B. Zornoza, C. Téllez and J. Coronas, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9388 RSC .
K. S. Park, Z. Ni, A. P. Côté, J. Y. Choi, R. D. Huang, F. J. Uribe-Romo, H. K. Chae, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 10186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Ma, G. A. Goenaga, A. V. Call and D. J. Liu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Guo, S. Zhang, L. H. Wu and S. H. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Navrotsky, C. C. Ma, K. Lilova and N. Birkner, Science, 2010, 330, 199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Ha, L. M. Moreau, S. Honrao, R. G. Hennig and R. D. Robinson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14303 CAS .
J. Yang, M. Wang, Y. Zhu, H. Zhao, R. Wang and J. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 7657–7661 CrossRef CAS .
R. Koc, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 17, 1309–1315 CrossRef CAS .
H. Preiss, L.-M. Berger and D. Schultze, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1999, 19, 195–206 CrossRef CAS .

          A. W. Weimer, Carbide, nitride and boride materials-synthesis and processing, Chapman & Hall, London,  1997 Search PubMed .
Y. Gotoh, K. Fujimura and M. Koike, Mater. Res. Bull., 2001, 36, 2263–2275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Woo, H. Kang and D. J. Kim, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 27, 719–722 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Q. Xu, B. Yang, J. P. He, W. Sen, Y. N. Dai and D. C. Liu, Study on carbothermic reduction of titanium dioxide in vacuum, Proceeding of 9th Vacuum Metallurgy and Surface Engineering Conference,  2009, pp. 499–505 Search PubMed .
W. Sen, H. Sun, B. Yang, B. Xu, W. Ma, D. Liu and Y. Dai, Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mater., 2010, 28, 628–632 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, J. F. Diehl, E. J. Johnson, K. R. Martin, N. M. Miskovsky, C. T. Smith, G. J. Weisel, B. L. Weiss and D. T. Zimmerman, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 074906 CrossRef .
J. Cheng, R. Roy and D. Agrawal, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2002, 5, 170–177 CrossRef CAS .
R. Roy, R. Peelamedu, L. Hurtt, J. P. Cheng and D. Agrawal, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2002, 6, 128–140 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takayama, Y. Saito, M. Sato, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga and Y. Ninomiya, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, 1816–1822 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ignatenko, M. Tanaka and M. Sato, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 067001 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, W. Xiong, Z. Yao, S. Chen, X. Chen and Q. Yang, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 7621–7625 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang and W. E. Rhine, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 1132 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutremez, P. Gerbier, C. Guerin, B. Henner and P. Merle, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 465 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yu, Y. Deng, L. Wang, R. Liu, L. Zhang, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2301–2306 CrossRef CAS .
Ö. Celik and Ö. Dag, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 3800 CrossRef .
S. W. Boettcher, M. H. Bartl, J. G. Hu and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 856–867 CAS .
O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1166–1175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Bae, C. Y. Lee, K. C. Kim, O. K. Farha, P. Nickias, J. T. Hupp, S. T. Nguyen and R. Q. Snurr, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dubbeldam, C. J. Galvin, K. S. Walton, D. E. Ellis and R. Q. Snurr, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10884–10885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Han, W. Q. Deng and W. A. Goddard III, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6289–6292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Herm, B. M. Wiers, J. A. Mason, J. M. van Baten, M. R. Hudson, P. Zajdel, C. M. Brown, N. Masciocchi, R. Krishna and J. R. Long, Science, 2013, 24, 960–964 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Sun, Z. Yin, Q. Q. Wang, D. Sun, M. H. Zeng and M. Kurmoo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4538–4543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Thompson, N. A. Brunelli, R. P. Lively, J. R. Johnson, C. W. Jones and S. Nair, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8198–8207 CAS .
J. Gascon, U. Aktay, M. Hernandezalonso, G. Vanklink and F. Kapteijn, J. Catal., 2009, 261, 75–87 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma, H. Garcia and F. X. Llabres i Xamena, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4606–4655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Farrusseng, S. Aguado and C. Pinel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7502–7513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. McNamara, G. T. Neumann, E. T. Masko, J. A. Urban and J. C. Hicks, J. Catal., 2013, 305, 217–226 CrossRef CAS .
N. Stock and S. Biswas, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 933–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, D. O. Kim, D. W. Kim, J. Park and M. S. Jung, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2012, 390, 22–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, D. O. Kim, D. W. Kim and K. Sagong, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 197, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pintado-Sierra, A. M. Rasero-Almansa, A. Corma, M. Iglesias and F. Sánchez, J. Catal., 2013, 299, 137–145 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Bloch, D. Britt, C. Lee, C. J. Doonan, F. J. Uribe-Romo, H. Furukawa, J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14382–14384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Song and L. Cronin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4635–4637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Nelson, O. K. Farha, K. L. Mulfort and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 458–460 CrossRef PubMed .
O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1166–1175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y. Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390–5391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, H. Jiang, X. Zhang and Q. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 456–463 CrossRef CAS .
P. Su, H. Xiao, J. Zhao, Y. Yao, Z. Shao, C. Li and Q. Yang, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2941–2946 RSC .
J. Kim, N. D. McNamara, T. H. Her and J. C. Hicks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11479–11487 CAS .
R. L. Brutchey, D. A. Ruddy, L. K. Andersen and T. D. Tilley, Langmuir, 2005, 2005, 9567–9583 Search PubMed .
J. Jarupatrakorn and T. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8380–8388 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Brutchey, B. V. Mork, D. J. Sirbuly, P. Yang and T. D. Tilley, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 238, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, F. Li, Q. Jia and G. Ye, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2008, 46, 217–222 CrossRef CAS .
R. Koc, J. Mater. Sci., 1998, 33, 1049–1055 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Song, J. Cai, J. Zhang, W. Yu, F. Wang and J. Xu, Chin. J. Catal., 2013, 34, 651–658 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano and M. Antonietti, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 366–380 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matsubara, J. Hard Mater., 1992, 3(3–4), 339–350 CAS .
H. Matsubara, Ceramics, 2009, 44, 382–386 CAS .
H. Hosokawa, K. Shimojima, A. Matsumoto, K. Kato, T. Matsuda and H. Matsubara, Mater. Trans., 2013, 54, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
R. Koc and J. S. Folmer, J. Mater. Sci., 1997, 32, 3101–3111 CrossRef CAS .
F. Monteverde, V. Medri and A. Bellosi, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 15, 421–429 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiang, Y. Liu, Z. Zhao, H. Cao, S. Gao and M. Tu, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 429, 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuda and H. Matsubara, Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mater., 2014, 42, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, Y. Wu, H. Feick, N. Tran, E. Weber and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 113 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, Y. Choi and J. Park, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 280, 161–167 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Hwang, S. J. Kim, J. K. Choi, J. Choi, H. Ji, G. T. Kim, G. Cao and J. H. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 148, 595–600 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lan, J. Gong, Y. Su, K. Li and S. Yang, Phys. E, 2012, 44, 791–796 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tharsika, A. S. M. A. Haseeb, S. A. Akbar and M. F. M. Sabri, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 5039–5042 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shen, Recent Pat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 2, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
A. Johari, V. Rana and M. Chander Bhatnagar, Nanomater. Nanotechnol., 2011, 1, 49–54 CAS .
S. Bordiga, C. Lamberti, G. Ricchiardi, L. Regli, F. Bonino, A. Damin, K. P. Lillerud, M. Bjorgen and A. Zecchina, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2300 RSC .
S. J. Yang, S. Nam, T. Kim, J. H. Im, H. Jung, J. H. Kang, S. Wi, B. Park and C. R. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7394–7397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, R. Yan, H. Chen, D. L. Lee and C. Zheng, Fuel, 2007, 86, 1781–1788 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Maciel, A. E. Job, W. N. Mussel, W. Brito and V. M. D. Pasa, Biomass Bioenergy, 2011, 35, 1121–1129 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Maciel, A. E. Job, W. N. Mussel and V. M. D. Pasa, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 46, 538–545 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, G. Derrien, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4441 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, D. H. L. Ng, Z. Lu and N. Ma, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 395, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. M. He, J. G. Ren, L. Wang, C. Y. Jiang and C. R. Wan, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1221 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cui, F. Wang, J. Wang, H. Liu, C. Wang and Y. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3633–3639 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barker, M. Y. Saidi and J. L. Swoyer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A684 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Xiong, D. P. Liu, H. Zhang and J. S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2775 RSC .
W. H. Pu, X. M. He, J. G. Ren, C. R. Wan and C. Y. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 4140–4145 CrossRef CAS .
F. Robert, P. E. Lippens, J. Olivier-Foureade, J. C. Jumas, F. Gillot, M. Morcrette and J. M. Tarascon, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Beaulieu, K. W. Eberman, R. L. Turner, L. J. Krause and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A137–A140 CrossRef CAS .

          J. C. Jumas, F. Robert, P. E. Lippens, J. Olivier-Fourcade and P. Willmann, Patent NFR287385, EP1794828 2007,  2004 .
D. E. Conte, A. Aboulaich, F. Robert, J. Olivier-Fourcade, J. C. Jumas, C. Jordy and P. Willmann, J. Solid State Chem., 2010, 183, 65–75 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aboulaich, M. Mouyane, F. Robert, P. E. Lippens, J. Olivier-Fourcade, P. Willmann and J. C. Jumas, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1224–1228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mouyane, J.-M. Ruiz, M. Artus, S. Cassaignon, J.-P. Jolivet, G. Caillon, C. Jordy, K. Driesen, J. Scoyer, L. Stievano, J. Olivier-Fourcade and J.-C. Jumas, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6863–6869 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Oh, S.-T. Myung, M.-W. Jang, B. Scrosati, J. Hanssoun and Y.-K. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3827–3833 RSC .
D.-J. Lee, J.-W. Park, I. Hasa, Y.-K. Sun, B. Scrosati and J. Hassoun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5256–5261 CAS .
S. Komaba, W. Murata, T. Ishikawa, N. Yabuuchi, T. Ozeki and T. Nakayama, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3859–3867 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, T. Ishikawa, N. Yabuuchi, W. Murata, A. Ito and T. Ohsawa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4165–4168 CAS .
D. Bresser, F. Mueller, D. Buchholz, E. Paillard and S. Passerini, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 128, 163–171 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 31–50 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Courtney and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2045–2052 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Ji, Z. K. Tan, T. Kuykendall, E. J. An, Y. B. Fu, V. Battaglia and Y. G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3611–3616 CAS .
S. Z. Liang, X. F. Zhu, P. C. Lian, W. S. Yang and H. H. Wang, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 1400–1404 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Q. Li, Y. X. Chen and F. J. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 478, 694–698 CrossRef CAS .
M. Noh, Y. Kwon, H. Lee, J. Cho, Y. Kim and M. G. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1926–1929 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. H. Tian, X. H. Liu, R. Yang and X. G. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 3360–3365 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Xue, Z. H. Fu, Y. Yao, T. Huang and A. S. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7310–7314 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Li, X. C. Sun, X. R. Zhou, M. Cai and X. L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9130–9135 CAS .
Y. H. Yu, Q. Yang, D. H. Teng, X. P. Yang and S. Ryu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1187–1190 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1160 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Lee, Y. S. Jung and S. M. Oh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5652–5653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nadeau, X. Y. Song, M. Massé, A. Guerfi, G. Brisard, K. Kinoshita and K. Zaghib, J. Power Sources, 2002, 108, 86–96 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Wang, B. Wang, X. L. Wang, J. Park, S. X. Dou, H. Ahn and K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8378–8384 RSC .
J. Hassoun, K. S. Lee, Y. K. Sun and B. Scrosati, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3139–3143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Kim, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A44–A48 CrossRef CAS .
P. Patel, I. S. Kim, J. Maranchi and P. Kumta, J. Power Sources, 2004, 135, 273–280 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, K. Balakrishnan, J. S. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter, A. Srivastava, M. Conway, A. L. M. Reddy, J. Yu, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, D. S. Geng, Y. Zhang, X. B. Meng, R. Y. Li and X. L. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 822–825 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, X. P. Shen, B. Wang, H. K. Liu and G. X. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1849–1852 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Beck, R. Epur, D. Hong, A. Manivannan and P. N. Kumta, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 299–306 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Zou and J. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 253, 287–293 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Ahn and G. X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 22–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, Y. Yu, Y. Z. Li, T. Xu and J. F. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18306–18313 RSC .
Z. J. Fan, W. Kai, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. J. Zhi, J. Feng, Y. M. Ren, L. P. Song and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 191–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, J. Li, Y. Zhong, J. Liu, X. Guo, L. Huang, B. Zhong and S. Sun, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 620, 407–412 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kang, Y. S. Jung, A. S. Cavanagh, G. H. Kim, S. M. George and A. C. Dillon, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2430–2438 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Li, H. Fan, Z. Zhu, J. Jiang and R. Ding, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 212–217 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu and S. W. Tay, Mater. Lett., 2012, 72, 74–77 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. J. Bai, F. D. Han, Y. X. Qi, N. Lun and B. Yao, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 3157–3159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Yu, Y. He, J. P. Sun, K. Tang, H. Li and L. Q. Chen, 
            et al.
          , Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 791–794 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhong, X. Xia, B. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Wang and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3300–3308 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kokubu, Y. Oaki, E. Hosono, H. Zhou and H. Imai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3673–3680 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, L. Wan, Y. Xie, X. Qin and G. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23914–23935 RSC .
Y. L. Ding, C. Y. Wu, H. M. Yu, J. Xie, G. S. Cao and T. J. Zhu, 
            et al.
          , Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5844–5848 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, Z. Chen, H. S. Kim, H. Ahn and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3346–3349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Zhao, F. Li and D. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6448–6452 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qiu, L. Ma, M. Zheng, Z. Lin, B. Zhao and Z. Wen, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Lett., 2012, 84, 9–12 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jung, D. Dikin, S. Park, W. Cai, S. L. Mielke and R. S. Ruoff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 20264–20268 CAS .
R. Larciprete, S. Fabris, T. Sun, P. Lacovig, A. Baraldi and S. Lizzit, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17315–17321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, X. Huang, X. Wang, P. Connor, J. Li, S. Zhang and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 297–303 CAS .
C. Yang, Q. Gao, W. Tian, Y. Tan, T. Zhang, K. Yang and L. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19975–19982 CAS .
C. K. Remucal and M. Ginder-Vogel, Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2014, 16, 1247–1266 CAS .
G. Xu, Y. Xu, J. Fang, F. Fu, H. Sun, L. Huang, S. Yang and S. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6316–6323 CAS .
H. Zhou, T. X. Fan and D. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1344–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Shim, Y. H. Jin, S. D. Seo, S. H. Lee and D. W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 443–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, X. F. Li, T. X. Fan, F. E. Osterloh, J. Ding, E. M. Sabio, D. Zhang and Q. X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 951–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Hall, V. M. Swinerd, F. N. Newby, A. M. Collins and S. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 598–600 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Shim, A. H. Lim, K. M. Min and D. W. Kim, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 6747–6752 RSC .
Y. Xia, W. K. Zhang, Z. Xiao, H. Huang, H. J. Zeng, X. R. Chen, F. Chen, Y. P. Gan and X. Y. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9209–9215 RSC .
E. Pomerantseva, K. Gerasopoulos, X. Y. Chen, G. Rubloff and R. Ghodssi, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 282–287 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. X. Fan and D. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 100, 322–327 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Tao, J. Du, Y. P. Li, Y. C. Yang, Z. Fan, Y. P. Gan, H. Huang, W. K. Zhang, L. X. Dong and X. D. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 534–539 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Shin, C. M. Wang and G. L. Exarhos, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 73–77 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Tao, L. X. Dong, X. N. Wang, W. K. Zhang, B. J. Nelson and X. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2055–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Schnepp, W. Yang, M. Antonietti and C. Giordano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6564–6566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Tao, J. Du, Y. C. Yang, Y. P. Li, Y. Xia, Y. P. Gan, H. Huang, W. K. Zhang and X. D. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 4422–4426 CAS .
X. Y. Tao, Y. P. Li, J. Du, Y. Xia, Y. C. Yang, H. Huang, Y. P. Gan, W. K. Zhang and X. D. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9095–9102 RSC .
X. L. Wu, T. Wen, H. L. Guo, S. B. Yang, X. K. Wang and A. W. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3589–3597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Zhao, M. Wei, J. Lu, Z. L. Wang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4009–4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamata, S. Suzuki, M. Ohtsuka, M. Nakagawa, T. Iyoda and A. Yamada, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5509–5513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Bigall, M. Reitzig, W. Naumann, P. Simon, K. H. van Pee and A. Eychmuller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7876–7879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Guo, X. L. Wang, X. P. Liao, W. H. Zhanga and B. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8188–8195 CAS .
O. K. Zahr and A. S. Blum, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 629–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Y. Chen, W. L. Hu, S. K. Shi, W. Shen, X. Zhang and H. P. Wang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2009, 76, 509–512 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. Fan, D. Zhang, Q. Guo and H. Ogawa, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2144–2146 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. X. Fan, T. Han, X. F. Li, J. Ding, D. Zhang, Q. X. Guo and H. Ogawa, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 085603 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Nuraje, X. N. Dang, J. F. Qi, M. A. Allen, Y. Lei and A. M. Belcher, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2885–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Bansal, P. Poddar, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11958–11963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Song, Q. Wang, Z. Zhang and Z. X. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 147, 248–254 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao and D. X. Li, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2010, 5, 16005 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Huang and Y. J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 626–630 RSC .
Y. Xia, W. K. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. P. Gan, Z. Xiao, L. C. Qian and X. Y. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6498–6501 RSC .
Y. J. Lee, H. Yi, W. J. Kim, K. Kang, D. S. Yun, M. S. Strano, G. Ceder and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2009, 324, 1051–1055 CAS .
Y. Xia, Z. Xiao, X. Dou, H. Huang, X. Lu and R. Yan, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7083–7092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Govindaraju, S. K. Basha, V. G. Kumar and G. Singaravelu, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 5115–5122 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Lam and K. T. Lee, Biotechnol. Adv., 2012, 30, 673–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, Y. H. Kim, R. Deshpande, P. A. Parilla, E. Whitney, D. T. Gillaspie, K. M. Jones, A. H. Mahan, S. Zhang and A. C. Dillon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3627–3632 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Mai, B. Hu, W. Chen, Y. Y. Qi, C. S. Lao, R. S. Yang, Y. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3712–3716 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, H. B. Wu, Z. Wang and X. W. Lou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4853–4857 CAS .
J. H. Ku, Y. S. Jung, K. T. Lee, C. H. Kim and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 15, A688–A693 CrossRef .
J. Hassoun, G. Derrien, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3169–3175 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Cui, Y. Yang, C. M. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3370–3374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kang, Y. S. Jung, G. H. Kim, J. Chun, U. Wiesner, A. C. Dillon, J. K. Kim and J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4349–4357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7100–7107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, J. C. Yu, Q. Li, W. Luo, L. Yuan, W. Zhang and Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2870–2877 CAS .
Z. Wang, J. S. Chen, T. Zhu, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6906–6908 RSC .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 425–431 RSC .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Tan, C. M. Li, Y. L. Cheah, D. Luan, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6124–6130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, S. Rajasekhara, J. B. Goodenough and F. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2132–2135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Shu, K. Wang, X. Chen, K. Jiang, X. Wei and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 80–86 CAS .
R. W. Gosselink, D. R. Stellwagen and J. H. Bitter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. W. Hollak, R. W. Gosselink, D. S. van Es and J. H. Bitter, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2837 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, P. Chen, J. Duan, J. Han, H. Lou, X. Zheng and H. Hong, RSC. Adv., 2013, 3, 17485 RSC .
J. Han, J. Duan, P. Chen, H. Lou, X. Zheng and H. Hong, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2561 RSC .
H. Ren, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, W. Deng, D. Vlachos and J. G. Chen, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 761 RSC .
D. R. Stellwagen and J. H. Bitter, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 582–593 RSC .
M. L. Toebes, M. K. Van der Lee, L. M. Tang, M. H. Huis in't Veld, J. H. Bitter, J. van Dillen and K. P. de Jong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11611 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Ma, L. Chen and X. Bao, Catal. Lett., 2007, 116, 63 CrossRef CAS .
G. de la Puente, A. Centeno, A. Gil and P. Grange, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1998, 202, 155 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gruner, S. Stolle and K. Wetzig, Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mater., 2000, 18, 137 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Venables and M. E. Brown, Thermochim. Acta, 1996, 282–283, 251 CrossRef .
L. Leclercq, M. Provost, H. Pastor and G. Leclercq, J. Catal., 1989, 117, 384 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Ranhotra, A. T. Bell and J. A. Reimer, J. Catal., 1987, 108, 40 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. E. York, J. B. Claridge, A. J. Brungs, S. C. Tsang and M. L. H. Green, Chem. Commun., 1997, 39 RSC .
G. M. Dolce, P. E. Savage and L. Thompson, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 668 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Xiao, A. P. E. York, V. C. Williams, H. Al-Megren, A. Hanif, X. Y. Zhou and M. J. H. Green, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3896 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Xiao, A. P. E. York, K. S. Coleman, J. B. Claridge, J. Sloan, J. Charnock and M. L. H. Green, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 3094 RSC .
T. C. Xiao, H. T. Wang, J. W. Da, K. S. Coleman and M. L. H. Green, J. Catal., 2002, 211, 183 CAS .
A. Hanif, T. C. Xiao, A. P. E. York, J. Sloan and M. L. H. Green, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1009 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Wang, X. H. Wang, M. H. Zhang, X. Y. Du, W. Li and K. Y. Tao, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1801 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Ma, L. Chen and X. Bao, Catal. Lett., 2007, 116, 63 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Yao, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 475, L38 CrossRef CAS .
B. Frank, K. Friedel, F. Girgsdies, X. Huang, R. Schlögl and A. Trunschke, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 2296–2305 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, S. T. Oyama and M. Boudart, J. Catal., 1987, 106, 125 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Yu, S. Ramanathan, B. Dhandapani, J. G. Chen and S. T. Oyama, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 512 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cotter, B. Frank, W. Zhang, R. Schlögl and A. Trunschke, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3124–3136 CrossRef CAS .
H. Honda, H. Sakaguchi, Y. Fukuda and T. Esaka, Mater. Res. Bull., 2003, 38, 647 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ronnedro, J. Yin, A. Kitano, M. Wada and T. Sakai, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 2749 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, W. Tian and X. Liu, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 3360 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. Tian and X. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 439, 350 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bryngelsson, J. Eskhult, L. Nyholm and K. Edstrom, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7226 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, X. Zheng, Y. Wu, L. Xue, F. Ke, G. Wei and S. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 585 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, D. H. L. Ng, Z. Lu and N. Ma, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 395, 192 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, H. Zhao, J. He, R. Wang and J. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 484, 864 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, C. Yin, H. Guo, J. He, W. Qiu and Y. Li, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 916 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, Z. Zhu, C. Yin, H. Guo and D. H. L. Ng, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 110, 201 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. He, J. Ren, L. Wang, C. Jiang and C. Wan, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1221 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, H. Zhao, M. Wang and X. Jia, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 171, 35 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, H. Zhao, C. Yin and W. Qiu, J. Alloys Compd., 2006, 426, 277 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, H. Zhao, X. Jia, W. Qiu and F. Cui, Mater. Res. Bull., 2007, 42, 836 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, H. Zhao, X. Jia, J. He, W. Qiu and X. Li, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 921 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, X. Hu, J. Qian, F. Pei, F. Wu and R. Mao, 
            et al.
          , Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 323–328 CAS .
A. Jain, S. Jayaraman, R. Balasubramanian and M. P. Srinivasan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 520–528 CAS .
S. Han, Y. Yun, K. W. Park, Y. E. Sun and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1922–1925 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Quinn, C. Dekker and S. G. Lemay, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6146–6147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Delannoy, N. El Hassan, A. Musi, N. N. Le To, J.-M. Krafft and C. Louis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22471–22478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, H. Zhou, M. Hibino, I. Honma and M. Ichihara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 381–386 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, K. Chiang and N. Burke, Catal. Today, 2011, 178, 197–205 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, W. Xia, M. van den Berg, Y. Wang, H. Soltani-Ahmadi, O. Schlüter, R. A. Fischer and M. Muhler, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2360–2366 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, Y. Yun, K. W. Park, Y. E. Sung and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1922–1925 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Ania, V. Khomenko, E. Raymundo-Piñero, J. B. Parra and F. Béguin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1828–1836 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y.-Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, H. Jiang, X. Zhang and Q. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 456–463 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Aiyappa, P. Pachfule, R. Banerjee and S. Kurungot, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 4195–4199 CAS .
G. Srinivas, V. Krungleviciute, Z.-X. Guo and T. Yildirim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 335–342 CAS .
J. Kim, N. D. McNamara, T. H. Her and J. C. Hicks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11479–11487 CAS .
J.-K. Sun and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2071–2100 CAS .
F. Afsahi, H. Vinh-Thang, S. Mikhailenko and S. Kaliaguine, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 415–423 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, M. Jin, K. Lee, J. Cheon, S. Joo, J. Kim and H. Moon, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 461 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Song, J. Cai, J. Zhang, W. Yu, F. Wang and J. Xu, Chin. J. Catal., 2013, 34, 651–658 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Serrano-Ruiz, D. Wang and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 574–577 RSC .
P. A. Russo, S. Lima, V. Rebuttini, M. Pillinger, M.-G. Willinger, N. Pinna and A. A. Valente, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2595–2603 RSC .
S. Son and F. D. Toste, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3791–3794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ooms, M. Dusselier, J. A. Geboers, B. Op de Beeck, R. Verhaeven, E. Gobechiya, J. A. Martens, A. Redl and B. F. Sels, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 695–707 RSC .
R. B. Levy and M. Boudart, Science, 1973, 181, 547–549 CAS .
F. Meunier, P. Delporte, B. Heinrich, C. Bouchy, C. Crouzet, C. Pham-Huu, P. Panissod, J. J. Lerou, P. L. Mills and M. J. Ledoux, J. Catal., 1997, 169, 33–44 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Nandiwale, S. K. Sonar, P. S. Niphadkar, P. N. Joshi, S. S. Deshpande, V. S. Patil and V. V. Bokade, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 460–461, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Behera and K. M. Parida, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 413–414, 245–253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, G. T. Neumann, N. D. McNamara and J. C. Hicks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14014–14027 CAS .
E. J. Shin, A. Lauve, M. Carey, E. Bukovsky, J. F. Ranville, R. J. Evans and A. M. Herring, Biomass Bioenergy, 2008, 32, 267 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Chu, X. Zhou, K. L. Ren, B. Neese, M. R. Lin, Q. Wang, F. Bauer and Q. M. Zhang, Science, 2006, 313, 334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Neese, B. J. Chu, S. G. Lu, Y. Wang, E. Furman and Q. M. Zhang, Science, 2008, 321, 821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nassif and J. C. Livage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 849 RSC .
C. S. Chan, G. D. Stasio, S. A. Welch, M. Girasole, B. H. Frazer, M. V. Nesterova, S. Fakra and J. F. Banfield, Science, 2004, 303, 1656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jensen, R. Keding, T. Hoche and Y. Z. Yue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Petranovic and G. N. Vemuri, J. Biotechnol., 2009, 144, 204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Han, Y. B. Dou, D. P. Yan, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5274 RSC .
W. He, X. Zhang, X. Du, Y. Zhang, Y. Yue, J. Shen and M. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 112, 295–303 CrossRef CAS .
D. Brady and J. R. Duncan, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1994, 41, 149 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. T. Barriga, D. G. Copper, E. S. Idziak and D. R. Cameron, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1999, 25, 96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Wang, G. J. Du, H. Liu, D. Liu, S. B. Qin, N. Wang, C. G. Hu, X. T. Tao and J. Jiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1131 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abbasi and S. A. Abbasi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1828 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127 RSC .
N. Linares, A. M. Silvestre-Albero, E. Serrano, J. Silvestre-Albero and J. García-Martínez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7681–7717 RSC .
M.-M. Titirici, R. J. White, N. Brun, V. L. Budarin, D. S. Su, F. del Monte, J. H. Clark and M. J. Maclachlan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 250–290 RSC .
R. Ryoo, S. H. Joo, M. Kruk and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 677 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1217 CAS .
A. H. Lu and F. Schüth, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1793 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ryoo, S. H. Joo and S. Jun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7743–7746 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rondeau-Gagné and J.-F. Morin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 85 RSC .
J. H. Clark, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2007, 82, 603 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Clark, V. Budarin, F. E. I. Deswarte, J. J. E. Hardy, F. M. Kerton, A. J. Hunt, R. Luque, D. J. Macquarrie, K. Milkowski, A. Rodriguez, O. Samuel, S. J. Tavener, R. J. White and A. J. Wilson, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 853 RSC .
R. Rinaldi and F. Schueth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 610 CAS .
O. Ioannidou and A. Zabaniotou, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 1966 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. White, V. Budarin, R. Luque, J. H. Clark and D. J. Macquarrie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 3401–3418 RSC .
B. Hu, K. Wang, L. Wu, S.-H. Yu, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 813–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 103 RSC .
D. Mohan and C. U. Pittman Jr, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 137, 762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mohan and C. U. Pittman Jr, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 142, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, J. H. Dresse and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 796–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rodriguez-Reinoso, Carbon, 1998, 36, 159 CrossRef CAS .
E. Auer, A. Freund, J. Pietsch and T. Tacke, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 173, 259 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, G. He, X. Hu, M. Xie, S. Wang, D. Zeng, H. Hou and U. Schröder, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1059–1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Senoz and R. P. Wool, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 118, 1752–1765 CAS .
F. Kurosaki, H. Koyanaka, M. Tsujimoto and Y. Imamura, Carbon, 2008, 46, 850–857 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Zhang, B. S. Amirkhiz, X. Tan, Z. Xu, H. Wang, B. C. Olsen, C. M. B. Holt and D. Mitlin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 431–437 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, X. Liao and B. Shi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 298–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Ma and X. Bao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17596–17602 CAS .
E. Raymundo-Piñero, M. Cadek and F. Béguin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1032–1039 CrossRef .
E. Fourest and B. Volesky, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 1997, 67, 215–226 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Davis, B. Volesky and A. Mucci, Water Res., 2003, 37, 4311–4330 CrossRef CAS .
I. Braccini and S. Pérez, Biomacromolecules, 2001, 2, 1089–1096 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, D. Yang, X. Zhu, D. Jing, Y. Xia, Q. Ji, R. Cai, H. Li and Y. Che, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18761–18766 CAS .
L. Su, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3967–3983 RSC .
S. M. Yuan, J. X. Li, T. Yang, L. W. Su, L. Liu and Z. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 705–709 CAS .
L. Su, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, Y. Zhong and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15158–15166 CAS .
L. Su, Y. Zhong, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9035–9041 RSC .
D. Ramimoghadam, M. Z. Bin Hussein and Y. H. Taufiq-Yap, Chem. Cent. J., 2013, 7, 136–146 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Tao, J. Du, Y. P. Li, Y. C. Yang, Z. Fan, Y. P. Gan, H. Huang, W. K. Zhang, L. X. Dong and X. D. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 534–539 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiu, H. Huang, J. Du, T. Fen, W. K. Zhang, Y. P. Gan and X. Y. Tao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13770–13775 CAS .
X. Y. Tao, Y. P. Li, J. Du, Y. Xia, Y. C. Yang, H. Huang, Y. P. Gan, W. K. Zhang and X. D. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9095–9102 RSC .
Y. Xia, W. K. Zhang, Z. Xiao, H. Huang, H. J. Zeng, X. R. Chen, F. Chen, Y. P. Gan and X. Y. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9209–9215 RSC .
X. Y. Tao, L. X. Dong, X. N. Wang, W. K. Zhang, B. J. Nelson and X. D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2055–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, W. K. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. P. Gan, Z. Xiao, L. C. Qian and X. Y. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6498–6501 RSC .
Y. Xia, Z. Xiao, X. Dou, H. Huang, X. H. Lu, R. J. Yan, Y. P. Gan, W. J. Zhu, J. P. Tu, W. K. Zhang and X. Y. Tao, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7083–7092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Tao, R. Wu, Y. Xia, H. Huang, W. Chai, T. Feng, Y. P. Gan and W. K. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3696–3702 CAS .
X. Y. Tao, J. Du, Y. C. Yang, Y. P. Li, Y. Xia, Y. P. Gan, H. Huang, W. K. Zhang and X. D. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 4422–4426 CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater and G. V. C. Peacocke, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2000, 4, 1–73 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Zhang, B. Kong, S. Feng, J. Wang, L. Wang, J. Yang, F. Zhang, P. Wu and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8151–8155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Noked, S. Okashy, T. Zimrin and D. Aurbach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1568–1571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, G. Mu, C. Tian, L. Sun, W. Zhou, P. Yu, J. Yin and H. Fu, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 880–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, X. Wang, S. Mao, Z. Bo, H. Kim, S. Cui, G. Lu, X. Feng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5610–5616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xie, X. Qin, X. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Tao, Q. Wu, L. Yang and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 347–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Volotskova, I. Levchenko, A. Shashurin, Y. Raitses, K. Ostrikov and M. Keidar, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2281–2285 RSC .
L. Wei, M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes, R. Mokaya and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 356–361 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, H. Hu, X. Sui, C. Chen and Q. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 6500–6507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Liu, H. Jiang, K. Tian, Y.-W. Ding and H.-Q. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 9397–9403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Liu, K. Tian, Y.-R. He, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 13951–13959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Zhou, X. Xia, C. X. Lin, D. S. Tong and J. Beltramini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5588 RSC .
M. Hara, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 601 CAS .
E. Taarning, C. M. Osmundsen, X. Yang, B. Voss, S. I. Andersen and C. H. Christensen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 793 CAS .
K. Tanabe and W. F. Hölderich, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 181, 399 CrossRef CAS .
A. Takagaki, C. Tagusagawa, S. Hayashi, M. Hara and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 82 CAS .
K. Nakajima and M. Hara, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1296 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xing, N. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Jiang, L. Chen, M. He and P. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2455 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, W. Kong, C. Qi, L. Zhu and F.-S. Xiao, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 565 CrossRef CAS .
G. Akiyama, R. Matsuda, H. Sato, M. Takata and S. Kitagawa, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tagusagawa, A. Takagaki, A. Iguchi, K. Takanabe, J. N. Kondo, K. Ebitani, S. Hayashi, T. Tatsumi and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Jiang, F. Ma, F. Su, L. Chen, S. Zhang and Y. Guo, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 2135 RSC .
E. I. Gürbüz, J. M. Gallo, D. M. Alonso, S. G. Wettstein, W. Y. Lim and J. A. Dumesic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 52, 1270–1274 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, C. Lievens and C.-Z. Li, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Lange, W. D. van de Graaf and R. J. Haan, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Ren, X. Liu, J. Xi, Q. Xia, Y. Zu, G. Lu and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2506 RSC .
L. Shuai and X. Pan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6889 CAS .
R. A. Arancon, H. R. Barros Jr, A. M. Balu, C. Vargas and R. Luque, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3162 RSC .
Y. Wu, Z. Fu, D. Yin, Q. Xu, F. Liu, C. Lu and L. Mao, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 696 RSC .
C. S. Gill, B. A. Price and C. W. Jones, J. Catal., 2007, 251, 145 CrossRef CAS .
D.-M. Lai, L. Deng, Q.-X. Guo and Y. Fu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3552 CAS .
M. Feyen, C. Weidenthaler, F. Schüth and A.-H. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2955 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zillillah, G. Tan and Z. Li, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 3077–3086 RSC .
N. A. Zafiropoulos, H. L. Ngo, T. A. Foglia, E. T. Samulski and W. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3670–3672 RSC .
W.-J. Liu, K. Tian, H. Jiang, X. S. Zhang, H. S. Ding and H.-Q. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 7849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Liu, F.-X. Zeng, H. Jiang, X.-S. Zhang and H.-Q. Yu, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 6260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Liu, F.-X. Zeng, H. Jiang and X.-S. Zhang, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 8247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Liu, F.-X. Zeng, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 3471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Liu, K. Tian, H. Jiang and H. Q. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2419 Search PubMed .
P. R. Patwardhan, R. C. Brown and B. H. Shanks, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gong, T. Ye, L. Yuan, T. Kan, Y. Torimoto, M. Yamamoto and Q. Li, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 2001 RSC .
C. Liu, H. Wang, A. M. Harim, J. Sun and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7594–7623 RSC .
L. Guczi, G. Petö, A. Beck and Z. Paszti, Top. Catal., 2004, 29, 129–138 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Nowakowski and J. M. Jones, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2008, 83, 12–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Lee, E. J. Shin, R. A. Pavelka, M. S. Kirchner, D. Dounas-Frazer and B. D. McCloskey, 
            et al.
          , Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 2816–2825 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khelfa, G. Finqueneisel, M. Auber and J. V. Weber, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2008, 92, 795–799 CrossRef CAS .
C. Couhert, J. M. Commandre and S. Salvador, Fuel, 2009, 88, 408–417 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Patwardhan, J. A. Satrio, R. C. Brown and B. H. Shanks, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 4646–4655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Zaror, I. S. Hutchings, D. L. Pyle, H. N. Stiles and R. Kandiyoti, Fuel, 1985, 64, 990–994 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demirbas, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2004, 30, 219–230 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dobele, G. Rossinskaja, T. Dizhbite, G. Telysheva, D. Meier and O. Faix, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2005, 74, 401–405 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suzuki, T. Suzuki, Y. Takahashi, M. Okimoto, T. Yamada and N. Okazaki, 
            et al.
          , J. Wood Sci., 2009, 55, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Blasi, C. Branca and A. Galgano, Energy Fuels, 2007, 22, 663–670 CrossRef .
K. Bru, J. Blin, A. Julbe and G. Volle, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2007, 78, 291–300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Richardson, J. Blin, G. Volle, J. Motuzas and A. Julbe, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 382, 220–230 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 281–295 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Dias, M. C. M. Alvim-Ferraz, M. F. Almeida, J. Rivera-Utrilla and M. Sánchez-Polo, J. Environ. Manage., 2007, 85, 833–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. De Ridder, L. Villacorte, A. R. D. Verliefde, J. Q. J. C. Verberk, S. G. J. Heijman, G. L. Amy and J. C. Van Dijk, Water Res., 2010, 44, 3077–3086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Ramesha, A. Vijaya Kumara, H. B. Muralidhara and S. Sampath, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 361, 270–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liang and P. H. Lee, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 231–232, 120–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gollavelli, C. C. Chang and Y. C. Ling, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 462–472 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Wang and W. X. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 2154–2156 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Crane and T. B. Scott, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211–212, 112–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, H.-L. Lien, B. E. Koel and W. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2013, 15, 63–77 CAS .
J. Zhan, B. Sunkara, J. Tang, Y. Wang, J. He, G. L. McPherson and V. T. John, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 13021–13029 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Hoch, E. J. Mack, B. W. Hydutsky, J. M. Hershman, J. M. Skluzacek and T. E. Mallouk, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 2600–2605 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhan, B. Sunkara, L. Le, V. T. John, J. He, G. L. McPherson, G. Piringer and Y. Lu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 8616–8621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mackenzie, A. Schierz, A. Georgi and F. D. Kopinke, Global NEST J., 2008, 10, 54–61 Search PubMed .
L. Zhuang, Q. Li, J. Chen, B. Ma and S. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 253, 24–33 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cieslak-Golonka, Polyhedron, 1995, 15, 3667–3689 CrossRef .
J. Kotas and Z. Stasicka, Environ. Pollut., 2000, 107, 263–283 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, Z. Gu, D. Gang, C. Liu, E. S. Ilton and B. Deng, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 4748–4753 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Ghosh, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 171, 116–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Shevchenko, V. Zaitsev and A. Walcarius, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 6922–6928 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Li, R. Dai and Y. Lan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 243, 265–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Zhang, J. Li, M. Zhang and D. D. Dionysiou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 9324–9331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Kassem, Desalination, 2010, 258, 206–218 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, Q. Cai, M. Wu, Y. Shi, H. Fang, L. Li, J. Chen, J. Chen and S. Song, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 9556–9565 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saha and C. B. Orvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2959–2972 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, S. Wang, Y. Tzou, Y. Yan and W. Kuan, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 104, 165–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gheju and A. Iovi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 135, 66–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Patterson and S. R. Fendorf, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 2039–2044 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mullet, S. Boursiquot and J. J. Ehrhardt, Colloids Surf., A, 2004, 244, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, L. Liao, G. Lv, F. Qin, Y. He and X. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 254–255, 277–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nethaji, A. Sivasamy and A. B. Mandal, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 134, 94–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tang, G. D. Yang, G. M. Zeng, Y. Cai, S. S. Li, Y. Y. Zhou, Y. Pang, Y. Y. Liu, Y. Zhang and B. Luna, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 239, 114–122 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang and P. H. Lee, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 231–232, 120–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yang, Y. Wang, M. Li and Y. Hong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 1270–1279 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. J. Scott and S. A. Majetich, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, 12564–12571 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Ang, I. Alexandrou, N. D. Mathur, G. A. J. Amaratunga and S. Haq, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 520–524 CrossRef CAS .
W. Teunissen, F. M. F. de Groot, J. Geus, O. Stephan, M. Tence and C. Colliex, J. Catal., 2001, 204, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hayashi, S. Hirono, M. Tomita and S. Umemura, Nature, 1996, 381, 772–774 CrossRef .
R. Nesper, A. Ivantchenko and F. Krumeich, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 296–305 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. S. Chan, B. L. Ellis, H. L. Sharma, W. Frost, V. Caps and R. A. Shields, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 144–149 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Nikitenko, Y. Koltypin, O. Palchik, I. Felner, X. N. Xu and A. Gedanken, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4447–4449 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Geng, D. A. Jefferson and B. F. G. Johnson, Chem. Commun., 2004, 21, 2442–2443 RSC .
V. V. Baranauskas, M. A. Zalich, M. Saunders, T. G. St Pierre and J. S. Riffle, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5246–5254 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gorria, M. Sevilla, J. A. Blanco and A. B. Fuertes, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1954–1957 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Fuertes and P. Tartaj, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1675–1679 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schwickardi, S. Olejnik, E. L. Salabas, W. Schmidt and F. Schuth, Chem. Commun., 2006, 38, 3987–3989 RSC .
A. H. Lu, W. Schmidt, N. Matoussevitch, H. Bonnemann, B. Spliethoff and B. Tesche, 
            et al.
          , Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4303–4306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. M. Jin, Y. Hwang, J. G. Park, H. M. Park and T. Hyeon, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2536–2543 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Park, M. Choi, T. W. Kim and R. Ryoo, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3409–3416 RSC .
Z. H. Sun, L. F. Wang, P. P. Liu, S. C. Wang, B. Sun and D. Z. Jiang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1968–1971 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1593–1599 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Oh, S.-T. Myung, C. S. Yoon, J. Lu, J. Hassoun, B. Scrosati, K. Amine and Y.-K. Sun, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1620–1626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Komaba, T. Mikumo, N. Yabuuchi, A. Ogata, H. Yoshida and Y. Yamada, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A60–A65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Gao, L. Mao, Y. Hu and X. W. Lou, Small, 2014, 10, 2815–2819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, Y. Zhang and X. W. Lou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3276–3279 CAS .
T. Zhu, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9814–9820 CAS .
D. Suma and D. Deng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2073–2094 CrossRef CAS .
A.-H. Lu, W.-C. Li, A. Kiefer, W. Schmidt, E. Bill, G. Fink and F. Schüth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8616–8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-H. Lu, W. Schmidt, N. Matoussevitch, H. Bönnemann, B. Spliethoff, B. Tesche, E. Bill, W. Kiefer and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4303–4306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Holmes, P. Foran, E. P. L. Roberts and J. M. Newton, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1912–1913 RSC .
I. S. Park, M. Choi, T. W. Kim and R. Ryoo, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3409–3416 RSC .
P. F. Fulvio, C. Liang, S. Dai and M. Jaroniec, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 605–612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chang and D. H. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 165, 664–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-R. Chiou, B.-H. Lai, K.-C. Hsu and D.-H. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 248, 394–400 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Shen, X. Y. Liu, T. H. Sun and J. P. Jia, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 8867–8882 RSC .
M. Muniz-Miranda, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 146, 147–150 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Mohamed and M. S. Al-Sharif, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 432–441 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Guo, F. Liu, X. Yuan, Y. Guo, S. Zhang, W. Guo and M. Huo, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 828–837 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gazi and R. Ananthakrishnan, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 317–325 CrossRef CAS .
A. Steinfeld and E. A. Fletcher, Energy, 1991, 16, 1011–1019 CrossRef CAS .
A. Steinfeld and G. Thompson, Energy, 1994, 19, 1077–1081 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Murray, A. Steinfeld and E. A. Fletcher, Energy, 1995, 20, 695–704 CrossRef CAS .
A. Steinfeld, M. Brack, A. Meier, A. Weidenkaff and D. Wuillemin, Energy, 1998, 23, 803–814 CrossRef CAS .
T. Osinga, G. Olalde and A. Steinfeld, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 7981–7988 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wieckert, R. Palumbo and U. Frommherz, Energy, 2004, 29, 771–787 CrossRef CAS .
R. Müller, P. Haeberling and R. D. Palumbo, Sol. Energy, 2006, 80, 500–511 CrossRef .
T. Osinga, U. Frommhertz, A. Steinfeld and C. Wieckert, Proc. ISEC, 2003, 15–18 Search PubMed .
I. Vishnevetsky, M. Epstein and R. Rubin, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2005, 127, 401–412 CrossRef CAS .

          A. W. Weimer, C. Perkins, D. Mejic and P. Lichty, Patent US8287610 B2,  2012 .
R. Ben-Zvi, Sol. Energy, 2013, 98, 181–189 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vishnevetsky and M. Epstein, Sol. Energy, 2015, 111, 236–251 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Meier and A. Steinfeld, Encyclopedia of Sustainability Science and Technology,  2012, pp. 9588–9619 Search PubMed .
W. Vilasmil, M. Brkic, D. Wuillemin, A. Meier and A. Steinfield, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2014, 136, 011017 CrossRef .

          C. Wieckert, M. Epstein, G. Olalde, S. Santé and A. Steinfeld, Encyclopedia of Electrochemical Power Sources,  2009, vol. 5, pp. 469–486 Search PubMed .
C. Hargus, R. Michalsky and A. A. Peterson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3122–3134 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Yafei Shen	Yafei Shen received his MSc degree (2012) from Shanghai Jiaotong University (SJTU), PR China. In this period, his research interests include energy & chemical engineering. He was awarded the excellent master dissertation in Shanghai, PR China. He received his PhD (2015) at Tokyo Institute of Technology (TokyoTech), Japan, supported by China Scholarship Council (CSC). After that, he worked as a lecturer in SJTU. Currently, he is hired as a professor in Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology (NUIST), PR China. His research interests mainly include tar and fuel gas cleaning, thermochemical conversion of wastes, and carbonaceous materials for energy and environmental application. He has authored more than 30 academic publications in the fields of energy and environment.

 	Fig. 1  Ellingham diagram for the free energy of the formation of metallic oxides (reproduced with permission from ref. 1).	 
MO (s) + CO (g) → M (s) + CO2 (g)	(R1)
CO2 (g) + C (s) → 2CO (g)	(R2)
2MO (s) + MC2 (g) → 3M (s) + 2CO (g)	(R3)
M (s) + 2C (s) → MC2 (g)	(R4)
MO (s) + H2 (g) → M (s) + H2O (g)	(R5)
C (s) + H2O (g) → H2 (g) + CO (g)	(R6)
MO (s) + C (s) → M (s) + CO (g)	(R7)

 	Fig. 2  Transition metals in the periodic table of elements.	 

 	Fig. 3  Integrated system for the carbothermic reduction of regolith for field tests (taken with permission from ref. 7).	 
2SnO2 (s) + C (s) → 2SnO (v) + CO2 (v)	(R8)
2SnO (v) → SnO2 (s) + Sn (l)	(R9)
2Sn (l) + O2 (v) → 2SnO (v)	(R10)

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of SnO2 nanostructures: (a) wide nanobelts; (b) narrow nanobelts, inset showing a closer view of one curved SnO2 nanobelt; (c) thick nanowires; (d) thin nanowires. (e) Schematic of the formation temperatures (reproduced with permission from ref. 9).	 
4CuO (S) + C (S) → 2Cu2O (s) + CO2 (g)	(R11)
SnO (S) + Cu2O (S) → SnO2 (s) + 2Cu (s)	(R12)
2Cu (S) + O2 (g) → 2CuO (s)	(R13)
2Cu2O (S) + O2 (g) → 4CuO (s)	(R14)
C (s) + 2H2 (g) → CH4 (g)	(R15)
MO (s) + 2CH4 (g) → MC (s) + CO (g) + 4H2 (g)	(R16)
MO (s) + 3CO (g) → MC (s) + 2CO2 (g)	(R17)

 	Fig. 5  Carbothermal reduction curves of MnO2 at 1275 °C in H2, He and Ar (taken with permission from ref. 8).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of a typical experimental setup for CVD ZnO nanowires growth, consisting of a source boat and substrates in a 2-zone growth system. The heating zones can be independently well controlled, enabling a reliable and homogeneous growth to several centimeters (reproduced with permission from ref. 34).	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the key parameters controlling nanowire growth (reproduced with permission from ref. 49).	 

 	Fig. 8  Shape diagram for a 1 inch one-zone reactor system in the upstream growth direction configuration: (a) ZnO nanorod formation, (b) ZnO film formation, (c) the growth region for VLS ZnO nanowires, and (d) the optimum growth region for VS ZnO nanowires (reproduced with permission from ref. 49).	 

 	Fig. 9  Shape diagram of a two-zone reactor system in downstream growth direction configuration: (A1) and (A2) ZnO film formation, (B) a mixture of ZnO film formation with nanowire nucleation points, (C) the optimum growth region for VS-grown ZnO nanowires, (D) intermixing growth of VS and VLS ZnO nanowires, and (E) the growth region for VLS ZnO nanowires (reproduced with permission from ref. 49).	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Digital image of the prepared ZnO nanowires and the flask for collecting the prepared product; typical low (B) and high (C) magnification SEM images of the prepared ZnO nanowires; (D) TEM image of ZnO nanowires; (E) high-resolution TEM image of a single ZnO nanowire (reproduced with permission from ref. 54).	 

 	Fig. 11  FESEM images of ZnO/SnO2 nanowires: (A) comb-like and (B) hierarchical nanostructures; (C) FETEM image of SnO2/ZnO nanostructures after 2 h deposition; (D) FESEM and (E) TEM images of SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires fabricated for 0.5 h (reproduced with permission from ref. 59 and 60).	 

 	Fig. 12  FESEM images of ZnO nanostructures grown using carbon black, graphite and activated carbon at 750 °C, 800 °C, and 850 °C, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 78).	 

 	Fig. 13  Typical ZnO nanostructures synthesized by the carbothermal evaporation of solid powders under controlled conditions (taken with permission from ref. 82).	 

 	Fig. 14  Synthesis process of magnetic MDs/SC nanocomposites (reproduced with permission from ref. 87).	 

 	Fig. 15  The key crystalline phases, elemental composition, mass loss, and evolved species during the synthesis of Fe3C from gelatin (reproduced with permission from ref. 83).	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Schematic of the one-pot route to C/Fe3C/MgO foams and etching to generate carbon with three types of pores; (B) gelatin sponge; (C) SEM and (D) TEM images of the calcined foam; (E) SXRD of samples prepared using 25 and 50 mol% Fe in the starting material, denoted as MF25 and MF50, respectively; (F) dark-field STEM image of MF50; (G) STEM image and overlaid EDXA line scans of Mg and Fe for MF50; (H) high-resolution TEM image of MF25; (I) TEM of Fe3C/graphite (reproduced with permission from ref. 101).	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Cellulose calcined with added iron salt yields structures that are vastly different to that of the amorphous carbon obtained from cellulose alone. (B) HRTEM micrograph with labeled lattice fringes for iron carbide and graphite. (C) EDX line scan for iron (white curve, taken along orange line) and elemental mapping for iron (orange). (D) XRD patterns of samples. Green: Fe3O4, red: Fe3C, blue: Fe0 and the gray circle at 26° is attributed to graphitic carbon. Steps leading to the magnetic crane shapes: folding (E), soaking with the precursor solution (F) and after calcination (G) (reproduced with permission from ref. 104).	 

 	Fig. 18  XRD patterns of (A) iron carbide or oxides and (B) nickel (Ni0) nanoparticles embedded in a carbon matrix.	 

 	Fig. 19  XRD patterns of the temperature- and ratio-dependent phases of the tungsten–iron system. Green: W18O49; red: WO3, triclinic; gray: WO3, hexagonal; blue: WO2, orthorhombic; cyan: WO2, monoclinic; magenta: W0; yellow: WC; dark yellow: W2C; navy: W2 (C, O); purple: FeWO4; wine: Fe0; olive: Fe3W3C; dark cyan: Fe0.94W0.06; royal blue: W2Fe21C6 and the gray circle: graphitic carbon (reproduced with permission from ref. 104).	 

 	Fig. 20  XRD patterns of the phase developments in the manganese–iron system. Blue: Mn0.75Fe2.25C; red: MnO; magenta: Mn0.5Fe0.5O; gray: Mn7C3; wine: Mn5C2; green: Fe3O4; dark yellow: FeN0.0589; cyan: Fe0 and gray circle: graphitic carbon (reproduced with permission from ref. 104).	 

 	Fig. 21  XRD patterns of samples with different mole fractions of glucose and Fe2O3 (reproduced with permission from ref. 119).	 

C + H2O → CO + H2	3.94	(18)
H2 + 3Fe2O3 → 2Fe3O4 + H2O	−77.59	(19)
H2 + Fe3O4 → 3FeO + H2O	−15.46	(20)
C + 3Fe2O3 → 2Fe3O4 + CO	−73.65	(21)
CO + 3Fe2O3 → 2Fe3O4 + CO2	−86.34	(22)
C + Fe3O4 → 3FeO + CO	−11.52	(23)
CO + Fe3O4 → 3FeO + CO2	−24.22	(24)

 	Fig. 22  XRD patterns of the phase developments in the copper–iron system. Gray: Cu2O; red: Cu0; green: Fe3O4; blue: Fe0; magenta: Fe3C; cyan: diamond-like carbon and the gray circle: graphitic carbon (reproduced with permission from ref. 104).	 

 	Fig. 23  Summary of the temperature- and ratio-dependent XRD patterns for the nickel–iron system. Gray: Ni0, red: Ni0.5Fe0.5, green: Fe3O4, blue: Fe0, cyan: Ni0.32Fe0.68 and the gray circle: graphitic carbon (reproduced with permission from ref. 104).	 

 	Fig. 24  The olivine structure of LiFePO4 (taken with permission from ref. 135).	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) SEM and (B) TEM micrographs of LiFePO4/C with ball-to-powder ratio of 25:1; SEM micrographs of precursor using different solvents: (C) alcohol and (D) water (reproduced with permission from ref. 161 and 162).	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic procedures used to prepare nano-CS-LFP composites; embedded SEM images of the bulk precursor of C-LFP (a) and the nanosized precursor of nano-CS-LFP (b) (reproduced with permission from ref. 163).	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) XRD patterns of (a) porous-LFP/C and (b) LFP/C nanocomposites; (B) SEM, (C) and (D) TEM images of porous-LFP/C; (E) SEM, (F) and (G) TEM images of LFP/C nanocomposites (reproduced with permission from ref. 174).	 

 	Fig. 28  (A) XRD patterns of (a) Fe3(PO4)2(OH)2 microspheres and (b) LiFePO4/C microspheres (reproduced with permission from ref. 175).	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic diagram for the synthesis of ordered mesoporous Ni–C catalyst with metal embedded in carbon pore walls (taken with permission from ref. 218).	 

 	Fig. 30  TEM images of mesoporous Ni- (a and b) or NiO-containing (c and d) polymer catalysts (taken with permission from ref. 218).	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic diagram of Ni–MC-t synthesis (taken with permission from ref. 220).	 

 	Fig. 32  Schematic of a facile sol–gel reaction for the fabrication of rigid monolithic nickel hydroxide-based xerogels and nickel/carbon composites (taken with permission from ref. 221).	 

 	Fig. 33  (A) Structure of the NiMn-LDH–GO hybrid. (B) FESEM-EDS elemental mapping performed over the area indicated in the inset, showing phase segregation of Ni and Mn. The scale bar represents 20 μm. (C) Larger magnification of a well-defined Ni sphere present in (B) of ca. 20 μm in size. (D) FESEM, (E) TEM, (F) HRTEM, and (G) larger-magnification images of NiMn-LDH–GO calcined at 450 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 236).	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic of the mechanism of nickel ion (Ni2+) adsorption in a lignocellulosic matrix (i.e., rice husk fiber) via impregnation under atmospheric pressure or vacuum (reproduced with permission from ref. 246 and 247).	 

 	Fig. 35  (A) Schematic of the different methods of templating to produce (1) negative and (2) positive copies and (3) direct replicas. Examples of (B) a replica and (C) an inverse copy of poplar wood via the slow and fast hydrolysis of silica precursors; (D) schematic of sequential chemisorption and hydrolysis to build atomic-sized layers of metal oxides on a template surface (reproduced with permission from ref. 255 and 257).	 

 	Fig. 36  (A) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CFP FeNi catalyst used for hydrogenation; (B) high-magnification SEM image of the CFP FeNi catalyst; (C) low-magnification TEM image and (D) high-resolution TEM image with labeled lattice fringes of CFP-supported FeNi alloy nanoparticles. The SAED pattern shown in the inset of (C) is indexed to the fcc lattice of FeNi alloy nanoparticles (reproduced with permission from ref. 275).	 

 	Fig. 37  (A) XRD pattern of Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs, (B) SEM and TEM images of Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs, (C) magnetic hysteresis loop of Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs recorded at 300 K. The photographs (inset) show that Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs in methanol solution can be quickly separated by a magnet, and (D) catalytic mechanism of Ni–NiFe2O4/CNFs for the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene (reproduced with permission from ref. 286).	 

 	Fig. 38  (A) Schematic of Cu2O nanowires synthesis via the carbothermal reduction of CuO nanowires; (B) mechanism of the transformation of CuO nanowires into Cu2O nanowires under carbothermal reduction conditions: (a) starting foil, (b) incipient stage of the transformation process, (c) full conversion of the nanowires and partial conversion of the underlying oxide film, and (d) complete conversion of the CuO nanowires and underlying oxide film (reproduced with permission from ref. 302).	 

 	Fig. 39  Schematic showing the fabrication process of Cu–C composites (reproduced with permission from ref. 318).	 

 	Fig. 40  Formation mechanism of core–shell structured carbon-coated copper by spray pyrolysis (reproduced with permission from ref. 328).	 
2Fe(NO3)3 + 6H2O → 2Fe(OH)3 + 6HNO3↑ → 2FeO(OH) → Fe2O3	(25)
Cu(NO3)2 + 2H2O → Cu(OH)2 + 2HNO3↑ → CuO	(26)
3Fe2O3 + 3(H2, CO, C) → 2Fe3O4 + 3(H2O, CO2, CO)↑	(27)
CuO + 3(H2, CO, C) → Cu + (H2O, CO2, CO)↑	(28)
	(29)

 	Fig. 41  (A) XRD patterns of metal-preloaded biomass and magnetic carbon anchored to Fe and Cu nanoparticles (Cu&Fe3O4-mC); (B) magnetic hysteresis curves of Cu&Fe3O4-mC and (inset) the photographs show Cu&Fe3O4-mC in the reaction solution attracted and arranged vertically using a magnet; (C) SEM image of Cu&Fe3O4-mC; (D) TEM image of Cu nanoparticles in Cu&Fe3O4-mC, (inset) high-resolution TEM image of Cu nanoparticles; (E) reaction mechanism for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol by NaBH4 with the catalysis of Cu&Fe3O4-mC (reproduced with permission from ref. 329).	 

 	Fig. 42  Scheme showing a proposed formation route to prepare Co2C (taken with permission from ref. 344).	 

 	Fig. 43  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Co@Co3O4@C–CM: (a) functionalization of CM with carboxylate groups, (b) growth of MOF on CM, (c) heat treatment under Ar flow and (d) oxidation in air at 90 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 356).	 
Co3O4 + 4C → 3Co + 4CO (g)	(30)
Co3O4 + 2C → 3Co + 2CO2 (g)	(31)
Co3O4 + C → 3CoO + CO (g)	(32)
Co3O4 + 1/2C → 3CoO + 1/2CO2 (g)	(33)
CoO + C → Co + CO (g)	(34)
CoO + 1/2C → Co + 1/2CO2 (g)	(35)

 	Fig. 44  Gibbs free energies (ΔG0) of reactions (A: Co3O4 to Co, CoO) and (B: CoO to Co) via carbothermal reduction (reproduced with permission from ref. 366).	 

 	Fig. 45  Schematic of the synthesis of ordered mesoporous titanium carbide/carbon composites by a solvent-evaporation-induced self-assembly approach and subsequent in situ carbothermal reduction (reproduced with permission from ref. 382).	 

 	Fig. 46  Proposed mechanism for the formation of Ti/NC (taken with permission from ref. 409).	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) Types of source vapor for the fabrication of ZnO nanowires; (b) schematic illustration of a typical carbothermal reduction process (taken with permission from ref. 426).	 

 	Fig. 48  ZnO/SnO2 mixed nanowires: (A) XRD patterns, FESEM micrographs of (B) comb-like and (C) hierarchical nanostructures (reproduced with permission from ref. 429).	 

 	Fig. 49  Schematic diagrams of IRMOF-1 before and after controlled pyrolysis to synthesize carbon-coated ZnO QDs without agglomeration (reproduced with permission from ref. 433).	 

 	Fig. 50  Relationship between the Gibbs free energy of the carbothermal reaction and temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 440).	 
SnO2 + (2 − x) C → Sn + (2 − 2x) CO + xCO2,	(36)

 	Fig. 51  (A) XRD patterns of SnOx/C composite and SnO2 nanopowder; (B) XRD pattern of Sn–C nanocomposite; SEM images of (C) SnO2 nanopowder and (D) Sn–C nanocomposite (reproduced with permission from ref. 454).	 

 	Fig. 52  SEM images of (A) Sn prior to annealing, (B) Sn after annealing at 900 °C in Ar. Both show graphene layers; however, droplets and beads of tin are visible only after annealing. (C) HRTEM image of Sn after annealing at 900 °C in Ar (reproduced with permission from ref. 478).	 

 	Fig. 53  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of G/Sn; (1) SnO2 and SiO2 nanoparticles were decorated on GO nanosheets via a hydrolysis process; (2) SiO2 was removed from G/SnO2/SiO2; (3) G/SnO2 was transformed into G/Sn nanosheets through carbothermal reduction. (B) XRD patterns of G (a); GO/SnO2 (b); G/Sn (c). (C) Raman spectra of G; GO/SnO2; G/Sn (reproduced with permission from ref. 479).	 

 	Fig. 54  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategy of hierarchical worm-like SnO2@C aggregates; SEM images of Co–Sn alloy nanoparticles (B), SnO2 nanoparticles (C) and hierarchical worm-like SnO2@C aggregates (D) (reproduced with permission from ref. 483).	 

 	Fig. 55  Schematic of the formation of manganese dioxide nanoparticles (MNP) and manganese monoxide/rGO composites (MGC1 and MGC2) (reproduced with permission from ref. 499).	 

 	Fig. 56  (A) Fabrication of MnO/C sample. SEM images of CF xylem fibres (B), MnO2/CF (C) and MnO/C (D), and HRTEM image of MnO/C (E). Well-crystallized MnO nanoparticles with diameters ranging from 3 to 7 nm are evenly dispersed on the carbon matrix (reproduced with permission from ref. 500).	 

 	Fig. 57  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of hollow porous MnO/C microspheres (reproduced with permission from ref. 533).	 

 	Fig. 58  Schematic illustration of the preparation of MoO2 nanotubes (reproduced with permission from ref. 552).	 

 	Fig. 59  Suggested cascade of reaction steps during carburization of MoO3 (reproduced with permission from ref. 578).	 

 	Fig. 60  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation process and (B–D) SEM & TEM images of the Sb–C nanofibers (reproduced with permission from ref. 594).	 

 	Fig. 61  Schematic of preparation of M/NC3 and M/NC1 materials (M 1/4 Ru, W, V, and Ti) via the carbonization and carbothermal reduction (CCR) of corresponding M/IRMOF-3 and M/IRMOF-1 materials (taken with permission from ref. 621).	 

 	Fig. 62  (a & b) Schematic illustration of mesoporous biocarbon-coated Li3V2(PO4)3 (MBC-LVP) synthesized via a biotemplate-assisted sol–gel process and a carbothermal reduction method using BWBY cells as both structural template and carbon source. (c) Representative crystal structure of monoclinic Li3V2(PO4)3; the VO6 octahedra are shown in green and PO4 tetrahedra in tan. (d) The distorted crystal structure of Li3V2(PO4)3 nuclei completely coated by biocarbon, lithium and electron pathways; biocarbon-coated atoms are shown in yellow-green and electrons in orange (taken with permission from ref. 630).	 

 	Fig. 63  (A) Synthesis process of Co3O4–CF by the pyrolysis of wet-spun cobalt alginate fibres; (B) SEM image of Co3O4–CF; (C) TEM image of Co3O4–CF; and (D) comparison of the cycling performances of Co3O4–CF and CF (reproduced with permission from ref. 666).	 

 	Fig. 64  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the Sn@C composite; (b) charge/discharge profiles of sample A3 at different cycles with a current density of 50 mA g−1; (c) cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of samples A1–A3 at a 50 mA g−1 current density; (d) rate performance of samples A2 and A3 (reproduced with permission from ref. 680).	 

 	Fig. 65  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of magnetic carbon nanofibers from lignocellulosic biomass for energy storage applications (reproduced with permission from ref. 695).	 
FeCl3 + 3H2O → Fe(OH)3 + 3HCl↑	(37)
Fe(OH)3 → FeO(OH) + H2O	(38)
6FeO(OH) + 4H2 → 2Fe3O4 + 4H2O↑	(39)
6FeO(OH) + 4C → 2Fe3O4 + 4CO↑	(40)
6FeO(OH) + 4CO → 2Fe3O4 + 4CO2↑	(41)

 	Fig. 66  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a magnetic porous carbonaceous (MPC) solid acid catalyst derived from naturally abundant biomass waste, which was used for three typical acid-catalyzed reactions: esterification of benzyl alcohol and acetic acid (reaction A), dehydration of xylose to produce furfural (reaction B), and hydrolysis of sucrose (reaction C) (reproduced with permission from ref. 723).	 

 	Fig. 67  Concept of integrated catalytic biomass gasification via a catalyst/biomass integration strategy (reproduced with permission from ref. 740).	 
C2HCl3 + 4Fe0 + 5H+ → C2H6 + 4Fe2+ + 3Cl−	(42)

 	Fig. 68  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of nanoscale zero-valent iron–carbon composites; (B) schematic illustration of Fe–C composites for the adsorption and simultaneous dechlorination of chlorinated hydrocarbon contaminants (TCE); (C) comparison of adsorption capacities of humic acid, Fe–C, and commercially activated carbon (in all experiments, 20 mL of a 20 ppm TCE solution and 0.2 g particles were used) (reproduced with permission from ref. 749).	 

 	Fig. 69  (A) Schematic of the preparation of Fe@PC composite; (B) SEM image and EDS mapping of Fe@PC; (C) adsorption isotherm of Fe@PC-750 and PC-750 (T = 25 °C, pH = 7.0, m = 0.1 g); (D) effect of adsorption temperature on the removal of Cr(VI) by Fe@PC (pH = 7.0, m = 0.1 g); (E): (a): magnetization curve of Fe@PC-750, (b): I. Attraction of the particles to a permanent magnet; II. Particles dispersed in water (reproduced with permission from ref. 753).	 

 	Fig. 70  Schematic of C/FeS/Fe composite synthesized by in situ carbothermal reduction method from hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) stems for removal of Cr(VI) (reproduced with permission from ref. 772).	 

 	Fig. 71  (A) Schematic of one-step synthesis of Fe2O3@a-C nanorods and their subsequent conversion to Fe3O4@g-C nanorods by calcination in Ar. (B) SEM and TEM images of Fe2O3@a-C nanorods and Fe3O4@g-C nanorods, respectively. (C) XRD patterns of Fe2O3@a-C nanorods and Fe3O4@g-C nanorods after calcination. (D) Magnetic Fe3O4@g-C nanorods as adsorbents: (a) UV-vis spectra of methylene blue solution with increasing adsorption times; inset of (a) shows a magnet used to recover the nanorods in a beaker; (b) normalized methylene blue concentration for increasing adsorption times; inset of (b) shows optical images of the decay in color of the solution over time (reproduced with permission from ref. 795).	 

 	Fig. 72  Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanistic model for reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) by NaBH4 using Ni nanocrystals (taken with permission from ref. 680).	 

 	Fig. 73  Solar facility capable of concentrating solar radiation: (a) concentrating optics; (b) photo of the batch solar reactor during cooling after testing; (c) theoretical estimation of the temperature distribution inside the reactor; (d) IR image of the reactor window during testing (taken with permission from ref. 819 and 820).	 

 	Fig. 74  (A) Schematic of two-step solar thermochemical cycle based on Zn/ZnO redox reactions to produce H2 and/or CO from H2O and/or CO2; (B) sketch of concepts for use of solar-produced zinc for flexible storage, shown for carbothermic reduction of ZnO (taken with permission from ref. 822 and 823).	 

 	Fig. 75  (A) Overview of the looped-oxide catalysis (LOC) thermochemical cycle for deoxygenation of bio-oil feedstocks (MO: a metal oxide, M: the corresponding zero-valent metal or a lower-valence metal oxide). (B) Volcano-type plot of LOC cycles, with five candidate cycles annotated. The inset figure shows the volcano-type plot over its entire range of 80 cycles included in this analysis. (C) LOC experiment. (D) HDO control experiment (reproduced with permission from ref. 824).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
