Interface engineering via an insulating polymer for highly efficient and environmentally stable perovskite solar cells   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CC06290C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CC06290C
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11355-11358Interface engineering via an insulating polymer for highly efficient and environmentally stable perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Xiaoru 
            Wen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiamin 
            Wu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Meidan 
            Ye
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Gao
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Changjian 
            Lin
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces and Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: cjlin@xmu.edu.cn
bThe Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. E-mail: gaod@pitt.edu
cResearch Institute for Soft Matter and Biomimetics, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory for Soft Functional Materials Research, Department of Physics, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: mdye@xmu.edu.cn
Received 
      29th July 2016
    , Accepted 24th August 2016First published on 25th August 2016AbstractA tunnelling contact of polystyrene nanofilm was introduced for the first time at the interface of perovskite/hole transfer layer, leading to a significantly reduced charge recombination. Moreover, such a polymeric contact worked as a hydrophobic encapsulation layer for effectively protecting the perovskite against humidity. The resultant PSCs displayed a peak efficiency of 17.80% (vs. 15.90% of the control cell) and an enhanced stability.
Solar cells are a promising renewable energy technology that convert sunlight directly into electricity, possess cost-effective, reliable and safe attributes, and thus show great potential for solving the global energy problem. Recently, solution-processed organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have gained worldwide attention for their amazing photovoltaic performance as well as their low cost.1–5 The pioneering work by Miyasaka and his co-workers in 2009 employed the organometal halide perovskites as sensitizers for photovoltaic cells with a liquid electrolyte, and demonstrated a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.81%, which makes the material particularly attractive for photovoltaic applications.6 Within a short period of time, the advancement in PCE of PSCs has progressed very rapidly, and a certified PCE over 20% was reported recently, which largely exceeds the development speed of all other thin-film solar cells such as amorphous silicon, dye-sensitized, quantum dot-sensitized as well as organic solar cells.4,7 The explosive efficiency of PSCs is mostly attributed to the superior photovoltaic properties of lead halide perovskites such as excellent absorption coefficient, tunable band gap by managing chemical compositions, ambipolar charge transport, and long electron–hole diffusion length, which make PSCs become the most promising candidates for the third-generation photovoltaic technologies.3,8–11
For efficient PSCs, the perovskite films are always sandwiched between the electron transport layers (ETLs) and hole transport layers (HTLs). In pursuit of high performance, enormous efforts have been made on each isolated layer, with a major emphasis on perovskite film processing and relevant material design. Besides the optimization of each layer, it has been demonstrated that the precise photo-carrier control along the relevant interfaces (ETL/perovskite as well as perovskite/HTL) becomes the main challenge for high efficiency.5,12 To date, various interfacial strategies have been developed by doping additional interlayers including metal-based semiconductors, metals, polymers, graphene derivatives and silane to facilitate the carrier extraction and transport from the perovskite to the ETL or HTL layer for an enhanced photovoltaic performance.13–19
The tunnelling junction, a very thin insulating layer at the interface, can act as the contact layer for suppressing the photo-carrier recombination, which has been successfully developed in the field of silicon solar cells.20,21 The inserted insulating layer is capable of selectively conducting one type of charge while blocking the other one simultaneously. Thus it benefits the spatial separation of the photo-generated electrons and holes, resulting in the reduced charge recombination at the corresponding interface. However, the most widely used oxide or amorphous silicon layers are generally deposited via a relatively high-temperature vacuum process for silicon solar cells, which is not compatible for PSC application. Quite recently, inspired by the success of applying tunnelling contacts in silicon solar cells, Huang’s group proposed an insulating polymer tunnelling layer at the perovskite and ETL interface for inverted PSCs.22 The polymer tunnelling contact was demonstrated to selectively tunnel electrons while blocking holes, which suppressed the charge recombination at the perovskite/ETL interface. The amazing achievements make the tunnelling junction a promising interface strategy for high-performance PSCs. However, the relative research studies on developing tunnelling contacts for PSCs are quite rare, and there is no report on the exploration of tunnelling junctions for the perovskite/HTL interface to date. Herein, we firstly proposed the insulating polymer as the tunnelling junction at the perovskite/HTL interface (Fig. 1A), and achieved a significantly improved the efficiency of the PSCs. The polystyrene (PS) suspension was deposited onto the perovskite layer using a spin-coating method without any further annealing treatment. The energy level matching between the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD allows the photo-generated holes tunnel through the ultra-thin insulating PS contact from the valence band of perovskite to that of spiro-OMeTAD, while blocking the tunnelling of photo-generated electrons. Thus, the electrons and holes are spatially separated at this contact, and thus suppress the charge recombination of the perovskite/HTL interface. In addition to the efficiency, the inferior long-term stability of perovskite affected by the humidity always becomes a big challenge for PSC applications. Recently, many interfacial layers have been inserted at the relevant junction, and an evidently enhanced stability was achieved.19,23 Here, the super-hydrophobic PS ultrathin film may also behave as an encapsulation layer to protect the perovskite from the humidity-caused decomposition.
 Fig. 1  (A) A schematic structure of PSCs with the PS interlayer; (B) cross-sectional SEM image of the resultant device; (C) the J–V characteristics of the best cells; and (D) a comparison of PCE distributions of 10 individual devices. 
The commercially available PS dissolved in chlorobenzene with a concentration of 10 mg mL−1 was used as the tunnelling contact at the perovskite/HTL junction. The fabricated PSCs had a regular p–i–n configuration of FTO/TiO2 blocking layer (BL)/mesoporous (Mp)-TiO2 scaffold/CH3NH3PbI3/PS/spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 1A and B). The entire preparation was conducted in the open air at a relative humidity of 45%. In a typical fabrication procedure, the compact TiO2 BL and scaffold layer were deposited onto the FTO conducting glass substrate in sequence. Then, a uniform and pinhole-free perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) layer was deposited onto the above substrate using the Lewis base adduct of PbI2 following a previous report.24 For the interface modification, the PS suspension was drop-coated onto the perovskite sublayer without any further annealing post-treatment. The whole fabrication process was accomplished via the subsequent deposition of the spiro-OMeTAD-based HTL and the Au film. More details on the experimental procedure, morphology and crystalline characterization as well as optical and electric measurements are provided in the ESI.†
To evaluate the effect of the PS interlayer on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, a thin PS film with a thickness of 2–3 nm (Fig. S1, ESI†) was sandwiched between the perovskite sublayer and the HTL uplayer. Firstly, the FTIR spectra were recorded to demonstrate the successful deposition of PS as depicted in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Notably, besides the evident appearance of an adsorption peak at ca. 3040 cm−1 assigned to C–H stretching of PS, no other corresponding peak change was detected. The result indicated that the PS nanofilm was successfully coated onto the perovskite surface, and only physical contact existed between the bilayers, in accordance with the previous results.22 The surface morphology of the PS-modified perovskite sublayer was investigated through SEM measurements. Clearly, a continuous PS interlayer was fully covered on the highly dense perovskite substrate (Fig. S3, ESI†), without the negative effect on the crystalline and optimal properties of the perovskite film as revealed by the XRD patterns and UV-Vis spectra (Fig. S4 and S5, ESI†).
To identify whether the incorporated PS nanofilm is capable of improving the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best performing cells (Fig. 1B) were measured under the illumination of AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 as illustrated in Fig. 1C. Notably, with the insulating PS interlayer at the perovskite/HTL interface, the resultant device exhibited the best PCE of 17.80% with an average efficiency of 16.89% from 10 separated devices. In comparison, the control device without the PS interlayer offered the best efficiency of 15.90% with an average PCE of 15.28% (Fig. 1D). Clearly, the introduction of the insulating PS interlayer at the perovskite/HTL interface remarkable improved the PCE of the PSC devices, which mainly resulted from the increase of JSC and FF, while the VOC underwent a slight increase (Fig. 2A–C).
 Fig. 2  Statistical data of 10 individual devices: (A) short circuit current density, (B) fill factor and (C) open circuit voltage. 
The tunnelling role of the PS interlayer at the perovskite/HTL interface was investigated through electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements, which is a powerful technique for monitoring the interfacial change for photovoltaic devices.25,26 The Nyquist plots were recorded under dark conditions, by applying a 5 mV AC signal over the constant applied bias of 0.9 V in the frequency range from 0.01 Hz to 100 kHz as depicted in Fig. 3A. Generally, the main arc at the low frequency region can be ascribed to the recombination resistance (Rrec) as well as the chemical capacitance of cells,27,28 and the increased diameter of the semicircle is always related to an improved recombination resistance at the corresponding interface. Considering the identical cell assembly process besides the interface engineering of the perovskite/HTL junction, the difference in Rrec values was proposed to be caused by the thin PS incorporation. It is noteworthy that an evidently enhanced Rrec value has been obtained for PSCs with the insulating PS interlayer, suggesting the sufficiently suppressed electron–hole recombination at the interface. Moreover, the transient Voc as a function of time upon turning off the illumination was applied to monitor the electron recombination kinetics of the solar cells.29 It was found that once the illumination was turned off, the Voc decayed sharply due to the photo-carrier recombination, and the Voc decay rate directly indicated the charge recombination rate. As clearly seen in Fig. 3B, the PSCs with the PS tunnelling contact exhibited an evidently slower Voc decay rate compared to the control device, suggesting that the suppressed photo-charge recombination can be achieved via PS incorporation. Moreover, the electron lifetime (τn), the average time of photo-generated electrons, can be extracted via τn = −(kBT/e)(dVoc/dt)−1,29,30 and the calculated τn plotted as a function of Voc is depicted as the inset of Fig. 3B. As expected, using the insulating PS contact at the perovskite/HTL interface, the device achieved an improved τn, which was closely associated with the reduced photo-carrier recombination, in accordance with the EIS results. So the insulating PS behaved as a spatial separation layer at the interface, which selectively tunnelled the holes while blocking the electrons for the well-aligned energy band between the perovskite and HTL (Fig. 3C), which directly benefited the improvement of Jsc.
 Fig. 3  (A) Nyquist plots of resultant devices in the dark; (B) the Voc-decay curve of devices (inset: the extracted τn-decay curve); (C) the energy level diagram of materials used in PSCs and the schematic of the interface between the perovskite and HTL layers. 
Besides the high performance of PSCs, the long-term stability against humidity becomes the main concern towards commercial applications of PSCs. In this work, we have demonstrated that the hydrophobic PS nanofilm at the interface of perovskite/HTL can really act as the water-resistant layer for perovskite, and a significantly enhanced water contact angle (98.1°) has been achieved compared to that of the control device (86.4°, Fig. 4A and B). The improved water-resistant ability was proposed to be beneficial to inhibit the entrance of water molecules into the perovskite film, yielding enhanced stability. So, the long-term durability of the resultant devices was investigated by storing them in the dark under air with a relative humidity of ca. 45% without any encapsulation layer. As illustrated in Fig. 4C, the devices with the PS layer retained over 70% of the original efficiency after 10 days, while the control cell only maintained 23%. As expected, an evident improvement of stability against humidity has been achieved after the insertion of a thin PS layer at the perovskite/HTL interface. So, the hydrophobic PS film is capable of behaving as an efficient water protector for the perovskite layer. It is believed that the facile processing as well as the low cost make such an interface engineering strategy possess an attractive potential for further commercialization of PSCs.
 Fig. 4  (A and B) Water contact angles of different substrates and (C) the efficiency variation of devices with a relative humidity of 45%. 
A facile, low-cost and efficient interfacial engineering strategy with a PS interlayer at the perovskite/HTL junction has been proposed for the first time. Here, the incorporated insulating PS acted as a tunnelling contact for selectively conducting holes while blocking the electrons at the perovskite/hole transfer layer interface with an appropriate band alignment, resulting in reduced carrier recombination. Moreover, the super-hydrophobic PS layer behaved as an encapsulation layer to protect the perovskite film against the humidity. The dual-functional role of such PS interlayers at the perovskite/HTL interface enabled a significantly enhanced efficiency and long-term stability of the resultant PSCs, which showed a direction towards further development of high-performance and high-stability PSCs.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (2012CB932900) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21321062). Xiaoru Wen acknowledges the financial support from the China Scholarship Council.
Notes and references
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, M. Endo, S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi, Y. Ohno, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and K. Matsuda, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11882–11888 RSC .
H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. Song, H. Duan, Z. R. Hong, J. B. You, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. C. Ryu, J. W. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Y. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. F. Liu, Z. L. Ku, T. F. Liu, Y. G. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Z. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. W. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pydzin'ska, J. Karolczak, I. Kosta, R. Tena-Zaera, A. Todinova, J. Id'goras, J. A. Juan A. Anta and M. ZiO'Łek, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1–14 CrossRef .
Q. Luo, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, J. Li, N. Wang and H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15996–16004 CAS .
J. M. Marin-Beloqui, L. Lanzetta and E. Palomares, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28, 207–213 CrossRef .
Z. L. Zhu, J. N. Ma, Z. L. Wang, C. Mu, Z. T. Fan, L. L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Z. Fan, H. Yan, D. L. Phillips and S. H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ihly, A. Dowgiallo, M. J. Yang, P. Schulz, N. J. Stanton, O. G. Reid, A. J. Ferguson, K. Zhu, J. J. Berry and J. L. Blackburn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1439–1449 CAS .
J. Cao, S. G. Mo, X. J. Jing, J. Yin, J. Li and N. F. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3274–3277 RSC .
J. Zhang, P. Wang, X. K. Huang, J. Xu, L. M. Wang, G. Q. Yue, X. W. Lu, J. W. Liu, Z. Y. Hu and Y. J. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2015, 6, 9090–9095 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. L. Hu, L. Huang, G. Q. Yue, J. W. Liu, X. W. Lu, Z. Y. Hu, M. H. Shang, L. Y. Han and Y. J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7047–7050 RSC .
B. Nemeth, D. L. Young, M. R. Page, V. LaSalvia, S. Johnston, R. Reedy and P. Stradins, J. Mater. Res., 2016, 31, 671–681 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vasudevan, Z. Thanawala, L. H. Han, T. Buijs, H. Tan, D. Deligiannis, P. Perez-Rodriguez, I. A. Digdaya, W. A. Smith, M. Zeman and A. H. M. Smets, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 150, 82–87 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Q. F. Dong, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. S. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6734–6739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, J. Yin, S. F. Yuan, Y. Zhao, J. Li and N. F. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9443–9447 RSC .
N. Y. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gonzalez-Pedro, E. J. Juarez-Perez, W. S. Arsyad, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 888–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9083–9118 RSC .
Y. G. Kim, K. C. Kwon, Q. V. Le, K. Hong, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2016, 319, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Yang, R. Rui Guo, K. Kadel, Y. Y. Liu, K. O’Shea, R. Bone, X. W. Wang, J. He and W. Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19616–19622 CAS .
J. Juan Bisquert, A. Arie Zaban, M. Miri Greenshtein and I. Mora-Sero, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13550–13559 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and J. Bisquert, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 859–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of experimental procedure, XRD, FTIR and UV-vis spectra for different substrates. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc06290cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) A schematic structure of PSCs with the PS interlayer; (B) cross-sectional SEM image of the resultant device; (C) the J–V characteristics of the best cells; and (D) a comparison of PCE distributions of 10 individual devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  Statistical data of 10 individual devices: (A) short circuit current density, (B) fill factor and (C) open circuit voltage.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Nyquist plots of resultant devices in the dark; (B) the Voc-decay curve of devices (inset: the extracted τn-decay curve); (C) the energy level diagram of materials used in PSCs and the schematic of the interface between the perovskite and HTL layers.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A and B) Water contact angles of different substrates and (C) the efficiency variation of devices with a relative humidity of 45%.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details of experimental procedure, XRD, FTIR and UV-vis spectra for different substrates. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc06290c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
