Efficient solar energy conversion via bionic sunlight-driven ion transport boosted by synergistic photo-electric/thermal effects   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE00720K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00720K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 3146-3157Efficient solar energy conversion via bionic sunlight-driven ion transport boosted by synergistic photo-electric/thermal effects†

        
          
            Jin 
            Wang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zeyuan 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Na 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shangzhen 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yufei 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Huang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Huijiao 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zheng 
            Cui
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Lei 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aResearch Institute of Membrane Separation Technology of Shaanxi Province, Key Laboratory of Membrane Separation of Shaanxi Province, School of Environmental & Municipal Engineering, Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, No. 13 Yan Ta Road, Xi'an 710000, China. E-mail: wangjin@xauat.edu.cn; zhangyufei@xauat.edu.cn; wl0178@126.com
bSchool of Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology, No. 13 Yan Ta Road, Xi’an 710000, China
cInstitute of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, No. 28, West Xianning Road, Xi'an, 710049, China
Received 
      6th March 2023
    , Accepted 28th April 2023First published on 28th April 2023AbstractMimicking smart light-controlled ion transport in biological channels exhibits exceptional application potential. However, to achieve efficiency comparable to those of biological counterparts, both constructing delicate nanoarchitectures and developing novel light-responsive mechanisms are urgently required. Herein, unique light-regulated ion transport driven by a photo-electric/thermal synergistic effect was realized in a two-dimensional Ti3C2Tx/g-C3N4 heterogenous nanochannel. Under illumination, the separation of photoexcited charge carriers in nanofluidic channels directly prompted spontaneous ion migration. Furthermore, benefiting from the light-to-heat conversion of Ti3C2Tx channels, the temperature field further reinforced the transport motivation. On this basis, effective modulation of ionic diffusion was achieved even under natural sunlight. In this regime, not only osmotic power in traditional salinity-gradient systems could be efficiently harvested with the help of light irradiation, but also the ionic energy could be successfully converted into electricity in a symmetric solution system. Our work opens up an avenue for the design of intelligent light-triggered nanochannels for solar energy conversion and storage.

Broader context
Significant efforts have been dedicated to developing bionic solid-state artificial nanochannels to achieve technological breakthroughs in diverse energy-, environmental-, and resource-related applications. However, the efficiencies of these channels, when compared to those of their biological counterparts that are functionalized under natural sunlight, still fall short of expectations. Here, we present a 2D heterogeneous channel fabricated with Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/chitosan nanosheets that leverages a photoelectric/thermal synergistic effect, and as a result, the modulation of ion transport under natural sunlight was realized. Through high-performance photo-driven ion pumps, we successfully extracted electrical energy from a common electrolyte solution with the aid of light irradiation.

Introduction
Smart and controllable ionic transport across a biological cellular membrane is directly related to many life-based activities.1 The channels contained in the transmembrane proteins with nanometric dimensions possess the ability to complete the conflicting task of being highly permeable to the target ions, simultaneously being extremely selective for the co-existing ions.2,3
The exceptional ion-sieving abilities of biological channels serve as a source of inspiration for diverse promising applications in the field of energy, environment and resources, and artificial nanochannels with biological mimicking architecture were developed.4,5 One-dimensional (1D) nanochannels were initially proposed as platforms for ion transport-based studies.6 However, the fabrication of 1D nanofluidic devices required the involvement of complex processes and expensive instruments.7 Recently, nanochannels constructed with parallel stacking of two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets, such as graphene derivatives, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes), have provided a novel opportunity for nanofluidic studies.8–10 Compared with 1D nanochannels, except for the advantages in the scalability of fabrication, it is also possible to accurately adjust both the chemical and the physical characteristics of 2D lamellar nanofluidic systems because efficient chemical modification of the nanosheets could be achieved before building up the nano-architectures.3,11–14 For instance, modifying the surface charge properties, wetting behavior, and channel sizes of 2D nanochannels have been reported to improve ion selectivity.15–17 Although the 2D lamellar membrane is drawing wide attention and is considered the next-generation membrane, in most previous works in the literature, the nanosheet has not merely been treated as a “solid brick” in the spatial structure. Further utilization of the diverse intrinsic properties of the 2D nanosheet, such as electronic or optical properties to realize highly efficient ion transport regulation, still lacks adequate exploration.18
On the other hand, ultrafast responsive ion transport to the different external environmental stimuli including pH, temperature, and light is another critical feature of biological channels.3,19 However, the current research on ion diffusion behavior in nanochannels is mainly restricted to the response to an external electric field, mechanical pressure, and the transmembrane concentration gradient.20–22 Recently, given the natural existence and unique flexibility in illumination location, intensity, and direction, light has been attempted as a novel impetus for intelligent ion transport modulation in artificial nanochannels.23–26 To achieve light-controlled ionic migration, surface modification of nanochannels was achieved by using polymers with light-responsive properties.27,28 Moreover, in nanochannels constructed with semiconductor materials, the light-induced separation of electrons and holes resulted in directional ionic diffusion, which could be utilized for producing artificial photo-driven ion pumps or improving the ionic energy harvesting efficiency.23,29,30 Furthermore, by taking advantage of the light-to-heat conversion performance of photothermal-based nanomaterials, directional ion migration under illumination could also be realized due to the temperature field across the nanochannel.24,31,32 In a study by Xu et al., taking advantage of the photothermal induced ion migration, both the generation of freshwater out of seawater and the production of electricity could be realized simultaneously in a solar–thermal evaporation system.33 On this basis, several pioneering works have now preliminarily proved the possibility of regulating ionic transport using light energy and confirmed the promising application potential. However, achieving ionic transport regulation comparable to biological channels, which are functionalized under natural sunlight, remains an extremely challenging task.19 Therefore, both the construction of a nanoarchitecture with delicate design and the development of a novel light stimuli-responsive transport mechanism are urgently needed for practical applications, such as solar–ionic energy conversion systems.
Under this direction, in this work, high-efficiency light-responsive ion transport function is presented by developing a heterogenous 2D Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/chitosan (termed as TCC) nanochannel (Fig. 1). Due to the interfacial correlation in the TCC heterogenous junction, the photoexcited charge carriers were efficiently separated in the TCC heterostructure, boosting the ion transport in the nanochannel, while simultaneously, benefiting from the prominent light-to-heat conversion efficiency of the Ti3C2Tx structure, a temperature field was also built, leading to light-driven ion migration due to the photo-electric/thermal synergic effect. Numerical simulations based on coupled Poisson–Nernst–Planck (PNP) and Einstein–Stokes theory and density functional theory (DFT) calculations were also conducted to theoretically explain the mechanisms of light-stimuli-responsive ion transport. As far as the ionic energy harvesting applications are concerned, impressive output densities were obtained even in a symmetric ionic solution system. Additionally, biomimetic “uphill” ion transport against the concentration gradient was also realized.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the preparation of a light-responsive heterogenous 2D TCC membrane. First, the monolayer Ti3C2Tx nanosheets were prepared by selectively etching the Ti3AlC2 phase. Simultaneously, melamine was thermally polymerized and ultrasonicated to obtain g-C3N4 nanosheets. The g-C3N4 nanosheets were further functionalized by chitosan molecules to improve their poor structural integrity. Finally, a two-step vacuum filtration method was used to obtain a TCC membrane with coupled photoelectric and photothermal properties. 
Results and discussion
Characterization of nanosheets and heterogeneous membranes
The bulk Ti3AlC2 phase was selectively etched by applying a mild etching method to obtain few-layered Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, as was reported in our previously reported works.15 The disappearance of the (008) diffractive peak at 39° and the left shift of the (002) peak in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum of the Ti3C2Tx indicated that the Al layers were successfully etched (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI†). According to the extracted scanning electron microscopy (SEM) results, the lateral size of the prepared single-layer Ti3C2Tx nanosheets was about 2 μm (Fig. S3, ESI†). Insights from the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 2A) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 2D) images revealed that the ultrathin Ti3C2Tx nanosheets were almost transparent with a thickness of about 1.5 nm, and the high aspect ratio was in favor of the construction of a uniform and ordered layer nanochannel. The g-C3N4 nanosheets were prepared by enforcing the thermal polymerization method of melamine combined with ultrasonic-assisted exfoliation.34 According to the extracted XRD results (Fig. S4, ESI†), compared with bulk g-C3N4, the intensity of this (002) peak was significantly decreased and the (100) weak peak disappeared, clearly demonstrating that layered g-C3N4 had been successfully exfoliated.35 Based on the morphology observation of the as-prepared g-C3N4 nanosheets via SEM and TEM imaging (Fig. 2B and Fig. S5, S6, ESI†), it can be confirmed that the g-C3N4 nanosheets exhibited an intact structure. It was demonstrated that the C and N atoms were uniformly dispersed in the g-C3N4 nanosheets based on the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) results (Fig. 2C). The AFM image and thickness analysis (Fig. 2D) revealed the same morphology as was observed from SEM and TEM imaging and showed a uniform thickness of approximately 1.2 nm. Both the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 colloidal suspension showed an obvious Tyndall scattering effect (Fig. 2E and Fig. S7, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  Characterization of nanosheets and heterogeneous membranes. (A) TEM image of the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. (B) TEM image of the g-C3N4 nanosheets. (C) Elemental mapping images corresponding to B for carbon and nitrogen. (D) AFM and height profile image of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 nanosheets. (E) Tyndall effect of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 nanosheet dispersion. (F) Zeta potentials of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 nanosheet solution. (G) SEM image of a cross-section of the TCC membrane. (H) Photograph of the Ti3C2Tx side (left) and g-C3N4/CTS side (right) of the TCC membrane and the optical image of a free-standing TCC membrane after peeling off from the PVDF substrate. (I) C 1s XPS spectra of the Ti3C2Tx membrane. (J) C 1s XPS spectra of the g-C3N4 membrane. (K) FTIR spectra of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 membranes. 
The chemical characterization of Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 was testified by conducting X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analysis (Fig. 2I–K). For the Ti3C2Tx membrane, three C 1s peaks located at 286.10, 282.0 and 284.8 eV could be observed, which could be assigned to the C–O, C–Ti, and C–C bonds.17 The characteristic peaks of –OH stretching at ∼3400 cm−1 and the CO bond stretching at ∼1630 cm−1 could be observed in the acquired FTIR spectra.36 In the XPS spectrum of the g-C3N4 membrane (Fig. S8, ESI†), the C 1s XPS spectrum was divided into three peaks, located at 288.25, 286.15, and 284.8 eV. The peak at 284.80 eV was attributed to the surface adventitious carbon in the formation of the CC bond, whereas the other peaks at 286.15 and 288.25 eV corresponded to the existence of sp2 hybridized carbon in the triazine ring bonded to the –NH2 group and the sp3-bonded carbon in the NC–N bond, respectively.37,38 Consistent with the XPS results, the absorption bands located at 3180–3300 cm−1 in the FTIR spectrum were attributed to the amino and surface hydroxyl groups, and the main bands at 1240–1650 cm−1 indicated the existence of the C–N bonds in the heptazine units of g-C3N4.39 Combined with the above-mentioned chemical property analysis, the existence of abundant functional groups that existed on the surface of Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 nanosheets could be confirmed, leading to the charged nanosheet surface. The zeta potentials of the different nanosheets were also measured to confirm the hypothesis, and the zeta potentials (Fig. 2F) of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 nanosheets were −35 mV and −21 mV (0.1 mg mL−1, pH = 7), respectively.
Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 membranes were fabricated on polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes by the implementation of the vacuum filtration method, respectively. The Ti3C2Tx membrane exhibited excellent structural stability with a highly ordered lamellar structure (Fig. S9, ESI†), and Ti, F, and C were evenly distributed across the entire cross-section according to the SEM and EDS elemental mapping (Fig. S10 and S11, ESI†). To prepare the g-C3N4-based membrane, g-C3N4 nanosheets were functionalized by chitosan molecules. Due to the electrostatic and hydrogen bonding forces, the chitosan molecules could be firmly grafted on the surface of the g-C3N4 nanosheets after thoroughly mixing the chitosan molecules with the g-C3N4 nanosheets. From the SEM surface and cross-section image (Fig. S12, ESI†), the g-C3N4/chitosan (termed as g-C3N4/CTS) membrane showed excellent structural integrity with no defects. The EDS elemental mapping (Fig. S13 and S14, ESI†) of the g-C3N4/CTS membrane showed that C and N were distributed homogeneously throughout the cross-section. The surface morphologies of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS membrane exhibited wrinkled and corrugated surface structures (Fig. S15 and S16, ESI†). The water contact angle of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS membrane surface indicated good wetting behavior (Fig. S17, ESI†). From the zeta potential (Fig. 2F), it can be argued that after fully reacting with chitosan (zeta +72 mV), the surface polarity of the g-C3N4 nanosheets changed from negative to positive, and was finally stabilized at a value of +13 mV. As a result, the assembled g-C3N4/CTS and Ti3C2Tx membrane showed improved mechanical properties and flexibility (Fig. S18, ESI†). It should be pointed out that the g-C3N4 membrane did not show a clear lamellar structure as that of the Ti3C2Tx membrane, which is consistent with most of the previous reports.34,35 It was speculated that this effect could be related to the poor rigidity of the monolayer g-C3N4 nanosheets.
A heterogeneous TCC membrane was fabricated to improve the efficiency of photo-induced ion transport. As detailedly described in the Methods section, the heterogeneous membrane was prepared by sequential filtration of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS nanosheets' colloidal solutions (Fig. S19, ESI†). It was observed that with the continuous loading of the g-C3N4/CTS nanosheets onto the Ti3C2Tx membrane, the original metallic luster became foggy and still presented impressive flexibility (Fig. 2G). The prepared membrane exhibited excellent structural stability (Fig. S20, ESI†) in water and in a wide range of pH values without enforcing any additional pretreatment (pH: 2, 5, and 12, immersion time: 0, 3, and 10 days). According to the SEM images (Fig. S21, ESI†) of the heterogeneous membrane cross-section, it could be seen that the g-C3N4/CTS and Ti3C2Tx parts were stacked tightly, and a clear interface was formed in the middle, indicating the successful construction of the TCC heterojunction. No seams or voids were found at the interface of the two membranes, which could be due to the electrostatic interaction between Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS with opposite charge polarity. Furthermore, based on the EDS results (Fig. S22 and S23, ESI†), it could be observed that the Ti and N elements clearly appeared in both the lower and upper halves of the membrane cross-section, respectively.
Photo-responsive ion transport behavior
To investigate the ionic transportation properties through the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS nanoconfined channels, current–voltage (I–V) curves were measured in a series of KCl solutions with concentrations changed from the value of 0.001 to 0.1 M (Fig. S24, ESI†) and the ionic conductance of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS membranes as a function of the KCl concentration can be observed in Fig. 3A and Fig. S25 (ESI†). The ionic conductance of both membranes exhibited a linear relationship when the bulk solution was in the high concentration region. However, when the concentration decreased, the linear decrease tendency of ion conductivity with reduced concentration has become less pronounced. Therefore, the population and distribution of ions in the nanochannels were significantly influenced by the surface charges of nanochannels, and ionic conductance showed a different changing tendency with electrolyte concentrations compared with that of bulk solutions. This relationship between the ionic conductance and electrolyte concentrations was mainly due to the impact of the surface charges of nanochannels on the ionic transportation behavior.40 By considering the Ti3C2Tx nanochannels as an instance, the protonation of the surface functional groups in the aqueous solution led to the progressive creation of a negatively charged surface, as was indicated in the zeta potential analysis. As a result, an electrical double layer (EDL) was formed on the charged Ti3C2Tx nanosheets’ surface due to the electrostatic attraction to the counter ions. On top of that, the thickness of the EDLs, which could be simply characterized by the Debye length, is inversely proportional to the electrolyte concentration.37,41 Therefore, the EDLs on the channel walls would be severely overlapped in the confined space at low concentrations. Therefore, the population and distribution of ions in the nanochannels were mainly dominated by the induced surface charge, while the ionic conductance became independent of the ionic concentrations of the bulk solutions.
 Fig. 3  Light-responsive ion transport in Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS membranes. (A) Ionic conductance of bulk solutions and the freestanding Ti3C2Tx membrane versus salt concentration (thickness: 2 μm). (B) Photocurrent through the Ti3C2Tx membrane under irradiation. (C) IR thermal images of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS membranes before and after light illumination. (D) Net variation of concentration (Δc; K+, red curve; Cl−, blue curve). (E) Photocurrent through the g-C3N4/CTS membrane under irradiation. (F) UV-Vis DRS of Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS samples. 
To evaluate the ionic transport under light illumination, a xenon lamp was introduced into the measurement system as the light source, while more details could be found in the Methods section. As shown in Fig. 3B, when the electrolyte solution in the two reservoirs was within the range of 10−2 M KCl, the recorded ionic current exhibited an increase from zero to about −130 nA within 60 s after illuminating one side of the Ti3C2Tx membrane, indicating a light-induced net cation transport. In the cycling experiment, after a slight decrease in the first cycle, the photocurrent remained relatively stable in the subsequent cycles with only minor fluctuations. The average fluctuation value of photocurrent in the following cycles was approximately 9 nA, which is relatively small compared to the value of the photocurrent, indicating the generation of light-induced ionic current. Furthermore, with the prolongation of the irradiation time, the ionic photocurrent finally reached a plateau (Fig. S26, ESI†). According to the previously reported works in the literature, Ti3C2Tx materials exhibit extremely high photothermal conversion efficiency.35 Here, the real-time temperature changes of the Ti3C2Tx membrane before and after the illumination were recorded with an IR thermal camera (Fig. 3C and Fig. S27, ESI†). Before the irradiation, the central temperature of the Ti3C2Tx membrane was the same as the room temperature. After the light was turned on, an obvious temperature increase from 24.7 °C to 90 °C was observed in the Ti3C2Tx membrane within 240 s. Such a high-efficiency light-to-heat conversion process would lead to an increase in the temperature of the solution near the Ti3C2Tx membrane surface under irradiation.
To further understand the proposed photothermal mechanism, a theoretical investigation of ion transport behavior in the Ti3C2Tx nanochannels was conducted based on the continuum Poisson–Nernst–Planck (PNP) theory and Einstein–Stokes theory (Fig. S28, ESI†). Owing to the negative charges of the nanochannel, a remarkable concentration gradient existed between the channel and reservoirs due to the electrostatic attraction and repulsion to the cations and anions. Moreover, the concentration of both cation and anion before and after the temperature field application showed clear changes. Taking the net changes of ion concentration, Δc, near the nanochannel orifice for instance (Fig. 3D), the noticeable depletion of K+ and slight accumulation of Cl− appeared was observed. The relationship between Gibbs free energy and temperature is as follows: (1)where G, S, T, V, and p are the Gibbs free energy, entropy, temperature, volume, and pressure of the solutions, and the μi and ni are the chemical potential and the molar number of species i.
The Gibbs free energy of the solution near the illuminated area was decreased with the increase of the temperature, as a result, the spontaneous diffusion tended to proceed in the direction of the decreasing Gibbs free energy. Due to the opposite direction of selective ion transportation and the temperature gradient, when the temperature of the solution in the reservoir on the right side increased, both K+ and Cl− tended to transport from the nanochannel towards reservoir B. For K+, the temperature and concentration gradient directions coincided, resulting in the outflow of K+ from the nanochannel and ion depletion phenomena at the nanochannel orifice. However, for Cl−, the ionic outflow driven by the temperature gradient-driven outflow was partially offset by the inflow due to the concentration gradient, leading to a slight accumulation of orifices. In addition, based on the simulation results, as the temperature continuously increased, such dissipation and aggregation phenomena of cations and anions at the channel orifices became more prominent (Fig. S29 and S30, ESI†), suggesting that high-intensity light can enhance the light-responsive ionic current.
To testify that the light-induced ionic current was motived by the temperature difference, parallel experiments were also performed. Specifically, a heated KCl solution with a temperature value of approximately 70 °C and a room-temperature solution was filled in the two reservoirs, respectively, to simulate the photothermal experimental conditions. As could be observed in Fig. S31 (ESI†), it was found that when no temperature difference existed between the two sides of the Ti3C2Tx membrane, no obvious ionic current could be hardly detected. However, when the temperature difference between the solutions was established, a distinct current value with the opposite direction to the temperature difference appeared, clearly suggesting that the ionic current flowed from the low-temperature region to the high-temperature region. This effect was consistent with the direction of the current generated by asymmetric illumination. When the temperature difference between the solutions in the different reservoirs continuously decreased, the corresponding photocurrent also gradually decreased. According to the reports in the literature, the difference in the diffusion rates of the photo-excited electrons and holes in the nanosheets was also a key critical mechanism for light-controlled ion transport.25 Nevertheless, due to the superior electrical conductivity, the separation of the light-induced electrons and holes hardly barely occurred in the Ti3C2Tx membrane.42
For the g-C3N4/CTS membranes, an instantaneous ion photocurrent could also be detected (Fig. 3E and Fig. S32, ESI†), which quickly reached the approximate value of −110 nA within 2 min when the concentrations of the KCl solutions on both sides were set at the value of 10−2 M. Based on the IR thermal camera observation (Fig. S27, ESI†), different from the Ti3C2Tx membrane, it was found that no obvious photothermal phenomenon for the g-C3N4/CTS membranes took place, indicating that the photothermal effect was not the main mechanism for the photocurrent detected in the g-C3N4/CTS membrane. Fig. 3F depicts the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS configurations. Different from absorption in the full range light spectrum for Ti3C2Tx, the g-C3N4/CTS showed a well-defined absorption edge at about 500 nm, which was consistent with the previous reports in the literature.43 Furthermore, as can be observed from the obtained Mott–Schottky plots (Fig. S33, ESI†), the g-C3N4/CTS exhibited a positive slope, indicating its n-type semiconductor behavior. Based on the above-mentioned analysis, it could be argued that different from Ti3C2Tx which cannot be activated due to its metallic properties, g-C3N4/CTS could be excited by photons and the electrons are the primary carriers, which was attributed to its n-type semiconductor property.44,45 As a result, the electrons tended to be separated from holes under irradiation and diffused from the illuminated part to the unilluminated part, leading thus to the asymmetric charge distribution across the g-C3N4/CTS membrane and resulting in the light-driven ion migration phenomenon.30
To gain the maximum photo-responsive ion transport efficiency, the heterogeneous TCC membrane was designed to explore if the inherent photothermal conversion properties of the Ti3C2Tx structure could be synergized with the special photo-excited carrier diffusion properties of the photo-excited carriers of the g-C3N4/CTS configuration. As shown in Fig. 4A, under light irradiation on the g-C3N4/CTS side, a noticeable photocurrent of −370 nA appeared, which was much higher than the sum of the respective current generated in the homogeneous Ti3C2Tx membrane and g-C3N4/CTS membrane (approximately −240 nA). Based on this result, it could be induced that when the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS were combined to form the heterostructure, not only their respective optical properties could be exerted, but also the heterogeneous membrane could further promote the light-responsive property. The TCC membrane immersed in the electrolyte solution was used for the cyclic experiment to evaluate the long-term stability of the photocurrent response. Our results demonstrate that the photocurrent remained stable and did not exhibit significant decay over a period of five days, indicating excellent long-term stability (Fig. S34, ESI†). To shed light on the underlying mechanism for the excellent light-responsive ion transport performance of the TCC membrane, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed by calculating the electron density difference (EDD) in the TCC membrane. Both the crystal models of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4 and Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS were built after geometry optimization as shown in Fig. S36 (ESI†). We could observe that Ti–N and Ti–C1 bonds (N and C1 are the carbon atoms from g-C3N4) formed at the interface of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4 with lengths of 2.325 Å and 2.390 Å, respectively, in the binary Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4 model. After introducing the chitosan molecules into the system, the Ti–N–C1–C2 bond (C2 is the number of carbon atoms from chitosan) emerged at the interface, and the lengths of Ti–N and C1–C2 bonds are 2.128 Å and 1.556 Å, respectively. On this basis, it could be induced that strong interfacial correlation in the Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS heterogenous junction would benefit from a steady structure and therefore fast electron migration. The point and plane defects could also be found at the interface of Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 due to the large deformation of the original lattice plane under such firm interactions. Mulliken Population Analysis (MPA) based on the EDD results of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4 and Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS (Fig. 4B and Fig. S37, ESI†) demonstrated that only about 5.42 electrons are transferred from g-C3N4 to Ti3C2Tx at the interface of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4. However, after introducing chitosan molecules into the system, approximately 13.13 electrons are transferred from g-C3N4 to Ti3C2Tx which could be due to the possibility that the formation of Ti–N–C1–C2 bond could be functionalized as a channel for fast electronic transmission among Ti3C2Tx, g-C3N4 and chitosan. To further verify the acceleration of electron migration at the interfaces of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS due to the introduction of CTS molecules, we calculated the electron density of states (DOS) of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4 and Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS, as shown in Fig. S38 (ESI†). The results of the electron total density of states (TDOS) demonstrate that the Eg value of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS is reduced, indicating an increased light response range due to the presence of CTS molecules. Additionally, compared to the DOS of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4, the maximum energy level of the C 2p orbital and Ti 3d orbital of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS move towards higher and lower energy levels, respectively. This suggests that electrons can be excited and migrated more easily from the C 2p orbital with higher energy levels in g-C3N4 and CTS to the Ti 3d orbital with lower energy levels in Ti3C2Tx. In addition, based on the PL measurements of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4 and Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS samples, it is clear that the PL peak became weak after CTS was introduced into the system, indicating that the doped CTS suppressed the electron–hole pair recombination Fig. S39 (ESI†).
 Fig. 4  Light-responsive ion transport behavior of the TCC membrane. (A) Photocurrent through the TCC membrane under irradiation. (B) Schematic illustration of the Mulliken Population Analysis (MPA) based on the EDD results of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS. (C) Steady-state photoluminescence emission spectra and mechanism schematic diagram of g-C3N4/CTS and TCC. The 3:1 and 4:1 were the mass ratios of g-C3N4/CTS and Ti3C2Tx. The inset graph showed the electrochemical impedance spectra. (D) Concentrations of Na+ ions measured by ICP before and after the light-triggered ion diffusion process and schematic diagram. (E) Photocurrent of the TCC membrane with an increase in the g-C3N4/CTS loading amount. 
Besides the theoretical calculations, the optical band gaps of the g-C3N4/CTS were analyzed by Tauc plots (Fig. S31, ESI†), which were derived from the corresponding DRS results based on eqn (2):46 (αhν)1/n = A(hν − Eg)(2)where α is the absorption coefficient, h represents Planck's constant, Eg refers to the energy band gap, ν stands for the optical frequency, A is a constant, and n corresponds to the transition properties of the semiconductor. Here, the value of n was set as 1/2 for the g-C3N4 structure due to the direct transition semiconductor properties. The g-C3N4/CTS showed a band gap value of about 2.84 eV, and the flat-band potential of the g-C3N4/CTS derived from the Mott-Schottky plots was around −0.82 eV (vs. NHE). Because the conduction band (ECB) position is close to the flat band potential, the position of the ECB and valence band (EVB) for the g-C3N4/CTS were calculated to be −0.82 eV and 2.01 eV (vs. NHE), respectively.47,48 Because the Femi level of Ti3C2Tx (−0.52 eV vs. NHE) is more positive than the ECB of g-C3N4/CTS (Fig. S40, ESI†), when light was illuminated at the g-C3N4/CTS side, the photo-excited electrons in the g-C3N4/CTS membrane began to separate from the holes and further transferred across the interface to the Ti3C2Tx membrane. This promoted the separation of charge carriers resulting in the final formation of a heterostructure composed of the positively charged g-C3N4/CTS and the negatively charged Ti3C2Tx structures. Furthermore, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra measurement was conducted to confirm the recombination rates of the charge carriers (Fig. 4C). Here, the mass ratios of Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS in TCC1 and TCC2 samples were 3:1 and 4:1, respectively. Evidently, the PL intensity of the TCC was significantly weakened compared with g-C3N4/CTS structures implying that the TCC heterojunction significantly facilitated the charge transfer and effectively suppressed the recombination of the photogenerated electrons and holes. In addition, it was observed that the higher the content of Ti3C2Tx, the lower the PL intensity. As was also revealed by the acquired electrochemical impedance spectra of the as-deposited photoelectrodes (Fig. 4C), the TCC possessed a smaller arc radius in the electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS), while its heterostructure exhibited greatly reduced charge transfer resistance. This outcome is in contrast to the single-component materials, indicating faster interfacial charge transfer in the TCC configuration, which was in direct accordance with the above-mentioned PL results.
Based on the above analysis, we could infer that when Ti3C2Tx was coupled with g-C3N4/CTS-based heterojunctions, it acted as a ‘‘bridge” or solid-state-electron mediator to complete the charged carrier transfer,49 and the introduction of chitosan molecules further accelerated the migration of electrons at the interface (Fig. 4C). The resulting asymmetric charge polarity initiated the directional ionic current from the g-C3N4/CTS side to the Ti3C2Tx side. Simultaneously, benefitting from the good light transmittance of the thin g-C3N4/CTS membrane, the illumination of light on the g-C3N4/CTS side also caused an increase in the temperature of the Ti3C2Tx membrane due to the excellent photothermal conversion properties. The imposed thermal field built from the g-C3N4/CTS side to the Ti3C2Tx side reinforced the driving force, and therefore the distinct photo-induced ionic current was observed, leading to the manifestation of the photothermal and photoelectric synergy effects. To further verify the photo-induced ion directional transport mechanisms in the heterogeneous membrane, the NaCl and KCl solutions with the same concentrations were filled into reservoirs on the g-C3N4/CTS part and Ti3C2Tx part sides, respectively, and the changes in the ionic concentration in the two reservoirs before and after the irradiation were monitored by conducting inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) measurements. As shown in Fig. 4D, the Na+ concentration in the g-C3N4/CTS membrane side reservoir was decreased after illuminating for 180 s, while in the other reservoirs a corresponding increase of the Na+ concentration was observed. Moreover, the K+ concentrations of the two solutions in the different reservoirs remained almost constant before and after the light illumination (Fig. S41, ESI†), indicating that cations tended to transport from the g-C3N4/CTS side to the Ti3C2Tx membrane side under light illumination. To optimize the coupled light-controlled ion transport effect of the TCC heterogeneous membrane, the impact of the thickness of the g-C3N4/CTS membrane that is loaded on the Ti3C2Tx membrane on photoresponse current was investigated. As shown in Fig. 4E, when the Ti3C2Tx membrane thickness was stabilized at a value of 2 μm and the g-C3N4/CTS membrane thickness increased from 1 to 1.5 μm, the ionic current exhibited a clear increase from −180 to −313 nA because the increase of the g-C3N4/CTS loading promoted the synergy of the Ti3C2Tx photothermal effect with the g-C3N4/CTS photoelectric effect. However, the continuously increased g-C3N4/CTS loading amount not only resulted in a higher ion transport resistance but also reduced the light transmitted across the g-C3N4/CTS membrane, leading to a significant decrease in the photocurrent. Long-term light illumination experiments were also conducted, as shown in Fig. S42 (ESI†). The measured photocurrent did not show a clear sign of severe deterioration and almost remained stable under continuous illumination. Moreover, by adjusting the distance between the light source and the experimental set-up, the significant impact of light intensity on the magnitude of the photocurrent was confirmed (Fig. S43, ESI†). On this basis, it could be argued that the magnitude of the photocurrent could be further enhanced by optimizing the experimental setup because the fact that the light intensity experienced an inevitable loss because the light needs to pass through both the glass window and the electrolyte solution before reaching the membrane surface.
Photoelectric energy conversion and active transport
Salinity gradient power, also known as osmotic energy, has attracted wide attention owing to its unique features including abundant reservation and renewability.50 Recently, with the considerable development of high-performance membranes, which could efficiently discriminate ions with different charge polarities, reverse electrodialysis (RED) has been identified as the most promising technique for osmotic energy harvesting.51 In this method, in this work, light was introduced directly into the traditional RED system to explore if the light-driven directional ion transport could be utilized to further improve the osmotic energy conversion efficiency. In the proposed model, the electrolyte solution with a relatively high concentration was placed on the g-C3N4/CTS side to ensure that the direction of the ionic current driven by the concentration gradient was identical to that induced by light illumination. Under non-illumination conditions, both anions and cations tended to diffuse through the membrane to the low concentration side due to the concentration gradient. However, due to the influence of the surface charge of the channel wall, only the cations could complete the transmembrane transport, resulting in a net ion current. After light illumination, the driving force for the cation transport was reinforced due to the above-mentioned photothermal/electric coupled effect. As shown in Fig. S44 (ESI†), under a 10-fold concentration difference (CL = 10CR = 10−4 M), the initially generated diffusion current driven only by the salinity gradient was approximately +80 nA, while the ionic current rapidly increased by about two times and reached a value of +180 nA after the illumination.
To further explore whether the harvested osmotic energy could be the output to the external circuit to supply an external load (RL), an osmotic energy conversion system was built with the artificial river water (0.01 M NaCl) and seawater (0.5 M NaCl). It was observed that the current density on the external circuit decreased with the increase of the resistance under 50-fold salinity gradients, and the output power density, calculated by the following expression P = I2 × RL, reached a maximum value of 0.47 W m−2 (Fig. 5B). When illumination was applied at the g-C3N4/CTS side of the heterogeneous membrane connected to the solution with high concentration, the output power density showed a distinct increase to a value of 0.95 W m−2, which is more than twice that without illumination. From these results, substantial pieces of evidence are provided regarding the fact that the above-mentioned photo-synergistic effect is a considered reliable strategy to improve the osmotic energy conversion efficiency. Furthermore, it was also explored whether ionic energy harvesting could be achieved in a symmetric-based electrolyte system with the help of the photothermal/electric coupling effect. In this work, both the reservoirs were filled with 0.01 M KCl electrolyte solutions and light illumination was also provided on the g-C3N4/CTS membrane side. As shown in Fig. 5C, the generated osmotic energy could be the output to the external circuit to supply an external load (RL) with an output power density of up to 21.93 mW m−2. Recently, the possibility of conversion of ionic energy from equilibrium ionic solutions was also confirmed in a Janus TMD membrane composed of MoS2 and WS2 based on the photoelectrical effect, while our power density based on synergistic photo-electric/thermal effects was approximately 73 times higher than the reported value in the literature in the same 0.01 M KCl solution.52 This result indicated that the salinity gradient is not necessary for ionic energy harvesting, which greatly expanded the application range. Similar light-to-ionic energy conversion could be observed in a variety of electrolyte solutions containing monovalent or divalent salt ions (Fig. 5D and Fig. S45, ESI†). It should be noted that the power density obtained from the monovalent ion system is much higher than that of the divalent ion system. During ion transport in nano-confined channels in the 2D lamellar membrane, the transport rate will be greatly impacted by the size confinement effect. Specifically, ions need to undergo surface hydration layer deformation to enter nanochannels.53 As listed in the Table, the difference in hydration free energy between monovalent ions is only around 100 kJ mol−1, while divalent ions generally exhibit hydration free energies that are 1000–1600 kJ mol−1 higher than those of monovalent ions (Table S1, ESI†). Thus, divalent ions with larger hydration energies possess a more robust hydration layer and encounter a relatively higher energy barrier for transport in nanoscale channels in the TCC membrane. Therefore, the permeation rate of divalent cations is much lower than the monovalent cations, leading to different power densities.
 Fig. 5  Ionic energy harvesting and uphill transport. (A) Scheme of the ionic energy conversion device. (B) Output power density without and with illumination under a 50-fold salinity difference. (C) Output power density from the equilibrium electrolyte solution system (0.01 M KCl). (D) Ionic energy conversion performance for various salt solutions. (E) Anti-gradient ion transport behavior under different concentration gradients. (F) Photocurrent under the natural sunlight; the inset graph shows the photograph of the outdoor environment. 
More intriguingly, the active ion transport against a presented concentration gradient, which is considered common in biological cell membranes and provides the foundation for many life processes could also be achieved in the proposed heterogeneous membrane under light illumination.54 When the KCl solutions with concentration values of 10−5 M and 2 × 10−4 M were placed on the Ti3C2Tx side and the g-C3N4/CTS side, respectively, the initial gradient-driven diffusion current was approximately 86 nA (Fig. 5E). After light illumination, the direction of the ionic current induced by the concentration gradient aligned with that of the photocurrent, and the total current value is the sum of the two currents. When a high ion concentration was present on the Ti3C2Tx side, the directions of the salinity-gradient-induced current and the photocurrent were opposite. Although the initial gradient-driven diffusion current was approximately −36 nA, the ionic current quickly went across the zero line after light illumination, and the final current with the reverse direction was observed, indicating the anti-gradient cation transport procedure. When the ion concentration of the solution on the high-concentration side was further increased, for example, when the inverse concentration gradient reached 1/50, the recorded photocurrent could not be reversed because the ionic current induced by light-driven ion diffusion was not high enough to offset the generated current due to ion diffusion under such a high concentration gradient. Nevertheless, the salt gradient for the uphill ionic transport in the TCC configuration was also higher than that of the other 2D membranes reported in previous studies (Table S2, ESI†).
To testify if the natural sunlight could be utilized to drive the ion transport, the proposed structure was directly placed under the natural environment. Here, a mirror was used to reflect sunlight onto the TCC membrane and the generated photocurrent was recorded in real-time (Fig. 5F). Based on monitoring data collected by the Shaanxi Provincial Meteorological Bureau in China, the total irradiance of sunlight was measured at 337 W m−2. It was observed that under sunlight irradiation, the recorded ionic photocurrent exhibited a clear increase from the initial value of −11 nA with non-illumination to −53 nA within 1 min. The current fluctuated slightly due to the interference of external environmental factors during the outdoor test. However, the photocurrent was maintained at an approximate value of −55 nA under continuous illumination for 4 min, showing its potential for photoelectricity conversion-related applications. In recent years, the conversion of solar energy into electricity has been the subject of extensive research, with perovskite-based devices demonstrating remarkable photovoltaic conversion efficiency due to their exceptional photovoltaic effects. Our research provides initial evidence that the photothermal/electric coupling effect is a promising approach to achieving high-efficiency light-responsive ion transport, resulting in the efficient conversion of light and ionic energy into electricity. Here, we not only improve the efficiency of recovering osmotic energy in traditional salt-gradient systems but also achieve the conversion of ionic energy into electricity in equilibrium concentration solutions. These features offer new opportunities for the sustainable utilization of abundant resources such as seawater, salt lake brine, and industrial high-salt wastewater, exhibiting promising application potential from both economic and environmental perspectives. In addition, 2D nanochannel membranes as a novel nanofluidic research platform have garnered many research interests due to various advantages. For instance, the different physical and chemical properties of nanosheets offer opportunities for constructing diverse nanochannels. Furthermore, the size and surface properties of nanochannels can be precisely adjusted through nanosheet surface functionalization. Based on our results, further research such as constructing nanoarchitecture with appropriate band alignment and optimizing the nanosheet surface properties could be conducted to enhance the ion/solar/electricity energy conversion performance.
Conclusions
In summary, a strategy to realize high-performance light-regulated ion transport was demonstrated by the photo-electric/thermal synergic effect. To achieve this goal, two kinds of 2D nanomaterials, Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS nanosheets, were selected as the building blocks to construct a heterogenous light-responsive nanochannel. Under light irradiation, a transmembrane potential was formed because the photoexcited charge electrons and holes were efficiently separated, and simultaneously, the high light-to-heat conversion efficiency of the Ti3C2Tx structure also led to a temperature field across the nanochannels. As a result, a difference in transport was even observed in an outdoor experiment under natural sunlight. The application potential of the TCC hetero-nanochannel was also investigated, and the output power density could be enhanced by two times after the light source was introduced into the osmotic energy harvesting system. Moreover, the maximum output power density approached the value of 21.93 mW m−2, which was obtained in an equilibrium ionic solution system. The produced heterogeneous nanochannels could also drive the ions uphill against a 20-fold concentration gradient with light illumination. Our findings provide a possible route for the development of advanced light-trigged nanochannels for diverse environment-, resource-, and energy-related applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for financial support from the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2022YFC2904302), the Key R&D Program of Shaanxi Province (No. 2022SF-134), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51804240) and the Education Department of Shaanxi Research Plan (No. 21JK0709).
Notes and references
K. Thor, S. Jiang, E. Michard, J. George, S. Scherzer, S. Huang, J. Dindas, P. Derbyshire, N. Leitao, T. A. DeFalco, P. Koster, K. Hunter, S. Kimura, J. Gronnier, L. Stransfeld, Y. Kadota, C. A. Bucherl, M. Charpentier, M. Wrzaczek, D. MacLean, G. E. D. Oldroyd, F. L. H. Menke, M. R. G. Roelfsema, R. Hedrich, J. Feijo and C. Zipfel, Nature, 2020, 585, 569–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Zhang, X. Li, J. Hou, L. Jiang and H. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 2224–2254 RSC.
Z. Zhang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 622–639 CrossRef CAS.
J. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Han and W. Jin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 294–312 CrossRef CAS.
P. Liu, T. Zhou, L. Yang, C. Zhu, Y. Teng, X.-Y. Kong and L. Wen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4400–4409 RSC.
X. Hou, Y. Liu, H. Dong, F. Yang, L. Li and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2440–2443 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Dekker, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 209–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Abraham, K. S. Vasu, C. D. Williams, K. Gopinadhan, Y. Su, C. T. Cherian, J. Dix, E. Prestat, S. J. Haigh, I. V. Grigorieva, P. Carbone, A. K. Geim and R. R. Nair, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Ries, E. Petit, T. Michel, C. C. Diogo, C. Gervais, C. Salameh, M. Bechelany, S. Balme, P. Miele, N. Onofrio and D. Voiry, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1112–1117 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
L. Ding, L. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Wu, Z. Lu, J. Deng, Y. Wei, J. Caro and H. Wang, Nat. Sustainability, 2020, 3, 296–302 CrossRef.
S. Wang, L. Yang, G. He, B. Shi, Y. Li, H. Wu, R. Zhang, S. Nunes and Z. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1071–1089 RSC.
W. Xin, C. Lin, L. Fu, X.-Y. Kong, L. Yang, Y. Qian, C. Zhu, Q. Zhang, L. Jiang and L. Wen, Matter, 2021, 4, 737–754 CrossRef CAS.
Z. Lu, Y. Wu, L. Ding, Y. Wei and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 22439–22443 CrossRef.
D. Ji, Q. Wen, L. Cao, Q. Kang, S. Lin, X. Zhang, L. Jiang and W. Guo, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800742 CrossRef CAS.
J. Wang, Z. Zhang, J. Zhu, M. Tian, S. Zheng, F. Wang, X. Wang and L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3540 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
X. Wu, X. Cui, W. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Li and Z. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18524–18529 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Zhu, L. Wang, J. Wang, F. Wang, M. Tian, S. Zheng, N. Shao, L. Wang and M. He, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 15306–15316 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han and G.-H. Nam, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Jin, T. Honig, I. Ron, N. Friedman, M. Sheves and D. Cahen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2422–2432 RSC.
D. Ji, Q. Wen, L. Cao, Q. Kang, S. Lin, X. Zhang, L. Jiang and W. Guo, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800742 CrossRef CAS.
W. Guo, C. Cheng, Y. Wu, Y. Jiang, J. Gao, D. Li and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6064–6068 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Zhou and L. Jiang, Joule, 2020, 4, 2244–2248 CrossRef.
P. Jia, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Jin, M. Zhou, D. Quan, M. Jia, L. Cao, R. Long, L. Jiang and W. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2007529 CrossRef PubMed.
X. Li, J. Lao, G. Li, J. Song and J. Luo, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 3361–3367 RSC.
M. Graf, M. Lihter, D. Unuchek, A. Sarathy, J.-P. Leburton, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Joule, 2019, 3, 1549–1564 CrossRef CAS.
J. Ran, T. Pan, Y. Wu, C. Chu, P. Cui, P. Zhang, X. Ai, C. F. Fu, Z. Yang and T. Xu, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 16615–16620 CrossRef.
L. Wang, Q. Wen, P. Jia, M. Jia, D. Lu, X. Sun, L. Jiang and W. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903029 CrossRef PubMed.
L. Wen, X. Hou, Y. Tian, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2636–2642 CrossRef CAS.
Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Hou, X. Fan, J. Zha and L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5901–5903 RSC.
K. Xiao, L. Chen, R. Chen, T. Heil, S. D. C. Lemus, F. Fan, L. Wen, L. Jiang and M. Antonietti, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 74 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Chen, L. Yao and B. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8608–8615 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
S. Hong, G. Zou, H. Kim, D. Huang, P. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 9042–9049 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Y. Xu, J. Xu, J. Zhang, X. Li, B. Fu, C. Song, W. Shang, P. Tao and T. Deng, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106882 CrossRef CAS.
X. Zou, M. Li, H. Xiao, S. Zhou, C. Chen and Y. Zhao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 278, 119598 CrossRef.
R. Li, Y. Ren, P. Zhao, J. Wang, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 365, 606–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
W. Zhi, S. Xiang, R. Bian, R. Lin, K. Wu, T. Wang and D. Cai, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 168, 404–411 CrossRef CAS.
G.-F. Li, M. Divinagracia, M. F. Labata, J. D. Ocon and P.-Y. Abel Chuang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33748–33758 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
D. Zhao, J. Chen, C.-L. Dong, W. Zhou, Y.-C. Huang, S. S. Mao, L. Guo and S. Shen, J. Catal., 2017, 352, 491–497 CrossRef CAS.
S. Yang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, Z. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
K. Raidongia and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16528–16531 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
R. Hatsuki, F. Yujiro and T. Yamamoto, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2012, 14, 983–988 CrossRef.
J. Ran, G. Gao, F. T. Li, T. Y. Ma, A. Du and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13907 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Xu, R. Xiao, J. Huang, Y. Jiang, C. Zhao and X. Yang, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 107–114 CrossRef CAS.
K. Xiao and O. G. Schmidt, CCS Chem., 2022, 4, 54–65 CrossRef CAS.
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, C.-Y. Chung, N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Estili, Y. Sakka and Y. Kawazoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185–2192 CrossRef CAS.

          J. I. Pankove, Optical processes in semiconductors, Optical processes in semiconductors,  1971 Search PubMed.
J. Xiao, Y. Xie, F. Nawaz, S. Jin, F. Duan, M. Li and H. Cao, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 420–428 CrossRef CAS.
Y. Yang and Z. Bian, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 753, 141908 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
H. Hou, G. Shao and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13722–13745 RSC.
Q. Zhu, Y. Li, Q. Qian, P. Zuo, M. D. Guiver, Z. Yang and T. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4148–4156 RSC.
K. Xiao, L. Jiang and M. Antonietti, Joule, 2019, 3, 2364–2380 CrossRef CAS.
P. Jia, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Jin, M. Zhou, D. Quan, M. Jia, L. Cao and R. Long, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007529 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
J. Abraham, K. S. Vasu, C. D. Williams, K. Gopinadhan, Y. Su, C. T. Cherian, J. Dix, E. Prestat, S. J. Haigh and I. V. Grigorieva, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed.
Z. Zhang, X. Y. Kong, G. Xie, P. Li, K. Xiao, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600689 CrossRef PubMed.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section and supplementary figures. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00720kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
Significant efforts have been dedicated to developing bionic solid-state artificial nanochannels to achieve technological breakthroughs in diverse energy-, environmental-, and resource-related applications. However, the efficiencies of these channels, when compared to those of their biological counterparts that are functionalized under natural sunlight, still fall short of expectations. Here, we present a 2D heterogeneous channel fabricated with Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/chitosan nanosheets that leverages a photoelectric/thermal synergistic effect, and as a result, the modulation of ion transport under natural sunlight was realized. Through high-performance photo-driven ion pumps, we successfully extracted electrical energy from a common electrolyte solution with the aid of light irradiation.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the preparation of a light-responsive heterogenous 2D TCC membrane. First, the monolayer Ti3C2Tx nanosheets were prepared by selectively etching the Ti3AlC2 phase. Simultaneously, melamine was thermally polymerized and ultrasonicated to obtain g-C3N4 nanosheets. The g-C3N4 nanosheets were further functionalized by chitosan molecules to improve their poor structural integrity. Finally, a two-step vacuum filtration method was used to obtain a TCC membrane with coupled photoelectric and photothermal properties.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of nanosheets and heterogeneous membranes. (A) TEM image of the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. (B) TEM image of the g-C3N4 nanosheets. (C) Elemental mapping images corresponding to B for carbon and nitrogen. (D) AFM and height profile image of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 nanosheets. (E) Tyndall effect of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 nanosheet dispersion. (F) Zeta potentials of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 nanosheet solution. (G) SEM image of a cross-section of the TCC membrane. (H) Photograph of the Ti3C2Tx side (left) and g-C3N4/CTS side (right) of the TCC membrane and the optical image of a free-standing TCC membrane after peeling off from the PVDF substrate. (I) C 1s XPS spectra of the Ti3C2Tx membrane. (J) C 1s XPS spectra of the g-C3N4 membrane. (K) FTIR spectra of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4 membranes.	 

 	Fig. 3  Light-responsive ion transport in Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS membranes. (A) Ionic conductance of bulk solutions and the freestanding Ti3C2Tx membrane versus salt concentration (thickness: 2 μm). (B) Photocurrent through the Ti3C2Tx membrane under irradiation. (C) IR thermal images of the Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS membranes before and after light illumination. (D) Net variation of concentration (Δc; K+, red curve; Cl−, blue curve). (E) Photocurrent through the g-C3N4/CTS membrane under irradiation. (F) UV-Vis DRS of Ti3C2Tx and g-C3N4/CTS samples.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Light-responsive ion transport behavior of the TCC membrane. (A) Photocurrent through the TCC membrane under irradiation. (B) Schematic illustration of the Mulliken Population Analysis (MPA) based on the EDD results of Ti3C2Tx-g-C3N4/CTS. (C) Steady-state photoluminescence emission spectra and mechanism schematic diagram of g-C3N4/CTS and TCC. The 3:1 and 4:1 were the mass ratios of g-C3N4/CTS and Ti3C2Tx. The inset graph showed the electrochemical impedance spectra. (D) Concentrations of Na+ ions measured by ICP before and after the light-triggered ion diffusion process and schematic diagram. (E) Photocurrent of the TCC membrane with an increase in the g-C3N4/CTS loading amount.	 
(αhν)1/n = A(hν − Eg)	(2)

 	Fig. 5  Ionic energy harvesting and uphill transport. (A) Scheme of the ionic energy conversion device. (B) Output power density without and with illumination under a 50-fold salinity difference. (C) Output power density from the equilibrium electrolyte solution system (0.01 M KCl). (D) Ionic energy conversion performance for various salt solutions. (E) Anti-gradient ion transport behavior under different concentration gradients. (F) Photocurrent under the natural sunlight; the inset graph shows the photograph of the outdoor environment.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section and supplementary figures. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00720k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
