General Discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B507789N View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B507789N
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2005, 130, 241-264General DiscussionDr Monks opened the discussion of Professor Platt’s paper: The theme of this session is detection and understanding of small scale structure in controlling atmospheric composition. Prof. Platt has clearly demonstrated the power and application of MAX-DOAS. I would like to show some recent data that further illustrates the points made in Prof. Platt’s paper. Using a CMAX-DOAS,1 where all the viewing angles are imaged concomitantly it is possible to follow plume evolution owing to the ability to collect high time resolution data. Fig. 1 shows NO2 slant column data taken from the roof of the space research centre (52.62 °N, 1.12 °W) at the University of Leicester, UK on the 17th January 2004. The data shows a clear progression of a tropospheric NO2 signal through the different viewing geometries. Fig. 1  Slant column NO2 as retrieved from a CMAX-DOAS instrument on January 17th 2004. The wind speed on the 17th January 2004 was approximately 2 m s−1 coming from a northerly direction. As the instrument is placed to the south of the city centre, plumes with an origin in the city centre are transported slowly through each viewing direction of the CMAX-DOAS instrument under these conditions. Analysis of structure of the peaks and their timings in a given viewing geometry provides information on the transport of the two plumes (09.30–35 and 09.40–45), their spatial extent and the concentration of NO2.A relatively straightforward geometric analysis can be performed to essentially “triangulate” the origin of the plume.These data demonstrate the power of MAX-DOAS for being able to measure, essentially, plume dynamics and evolution, the small-scale structure of the atmosphere.1 R. J. Leigh, G. K. Corlett, U. Friess and P. S. Monks, J. Appl. Opt., paper in preparation.Professor Plane asked: With a ground-based MAX-DOAS, the azimuthal angle can be fixed. But in a mobile system on a ship or plane, the azimuthal viewing angle will vary. Is the resulting complication of taking multi-axis spectra as a function of solar zenith angle at varying azimuthal angle a major challenge?Professor Platt replied: There is an effect of the relative azimuth angle (i.e. the angle between observation azimuth and solar azimuth) on the result of the measurement because Mie and Rayleigh scattering are angle dependent. However, the effect of different azimuth angles can be modelled and—we think—its effect on the measurements can be corrected for. In fact such a correction would also be necessary to use MAX-DOAS with different observation azimuth angles to derive the spatial distribution of aerosol and trace gases around the instrument or to perform tomographic measurements using several instruments.Professor Stutz asked: Is it going to be possible to derive unique vertical profiles of trace gases if no a priori information on the aerosol and the gas is available?Professor Platt replied: We showed in our manuscript that a MAX-DOAS instrument can measure some elements of the vertical trace gas and aerosol distribution, for instance the concentration in the boundary layer, the vertical extend of the boundary layer, as well as trace gas mixing ratios and aerosol optical density above the boundary layer. The retrieval of these elements should be independent of a priori information. In the future retrieval of more elements could be possible, for instance the concentration in several layers.Dr Kolb said: Your paper demonstrates clearly that MAX-DOAS measurements can provide important data on the boundary layer concentrations of absorbing pollutants, provided information on the aerosol particle properties in the interrogated air mass are well enough known to describe the radiation transport. It has long been recognized that the polarization properties of detected solar radiation contain valuable information about the aerosol particles it has encountered.1 Would you comment on the potential for polarization data to improve the aerosol extinction data obtained by MAX-DOAS observations? I note that colleagues in my laboratory have recently demonstrated a novel and agile method for measuring full Stokes vector polarization information for passively sensed near infrared and visible radiation.21 M. Mishchenko and L.Travis, J. Geophys. Res. 1997, 103, 16989–17013.2 S. H. Jones, F. J. Iannarilli and P. L. Kebabian, Opt. Express 2004, 12(26), 6559.Professor Platt responded: As I described in the manuscript, the essence of our new technique is to obtain the required information on the aerosol properties from DOAS measurements of the absorption due to species with known distribution in the atmosphere (e.g. O4 or O2). However, as you correctly point out, additional information may be gained from the polarisation properties of the analysed radiation. This information mostly comes from the fact that Mie-scattered radiation is unpolarised (on average), while Rayleigh scattered light is (in most viewing geometries). I think that your new method to determine full Stokes vector information of scattered radiation is likely to be of great value in this context and should be evaluated for that purpose.Professor Burrows commented: The vertical resolution of the MAX DOAS retrieved depends on the radiation transfer conditions and the number of azimuthal and off-axis angles. This needs to be taken into account in the retrieval algorithm and I believe is taken into account. In addition the resolution depends on the multiple scattering in the atmosphere for cloud-free conditions. This depends on the aerosol, which can be determined from the O4 absorption.Professor Platt replied: I agree with your comment. In fact our radiative transfer modelling does take multiple scattering into account. The number of different azimuthal and off-axis angles used for the measurement does influence the retrieval, but we think that taking more than 5–10 off-axis angles does not much improve the retrieval of trace gas concentrations and aerosol data. You are correct in pointing out that up to now we largely limited ourselves to cloud-free conditions, however I see no fundamental limitations for retrieving trace gas and aerosol distributions in the presence of clouds.Dr Remedios† commented: We have been working in Leicester on the derivation of vertical information on aerosols from MAX-DOAS instruments. The results clearly depend on the number of wavelengths observed and the choice of angles with the combination of both being an important factor. However, for four wavelengths (360 nm, 477 nm, 577 nm and 640 nm), and utilising both O4 optical depth and relative intensity, we find that up to four independent pieces of information can be obtained for retrieved aerosol; typical averaging kernels are illustrated in Fig. 2. We have tried to optimise, in simulations, the angles which should be used and find this depends on the type of aerosol situation that one wants to observe but the dependence is also relatively weak on instrument set-up. There might be some variation in instrument set-up, therefore, from location to location such as marine to polluted urban environments but clearly, there is potential for much well-characterised information on aerosols. Fig. 2  Averaging kernels for the aerosol extinction vertical profile from MAX-DOAS measurements of the O4 optical depth and relative intensity measured at four wavelengths (360, 477, 577 and 640 nm) and elevations of 20°, 10°, 5° and 2° for a visibility of 25 km. Averaging kernels represent the sensitivity of the retrieved profile to changes in the true profile with the altitudes of the retrieval levels indicated on the diagram. Dr Jones asked: Would the use of spectrally resolved pressure broadened vibrational–rotational lines of O2—a species of known distribution; be useful in order to determine optical depth (often enhanced due to multiple scattering) as a function of pressure—i.e. direct information on AMFs in aerosol and cloud?Professor Platt replied: Many thanks for your suggestion. In principle, of course O2 could be used as a species of known distribution just like O4. The disadvantage of the former gas would be that the O2 spectrum (e.g. the A-band) consists of many very narrow, mostly highly saturated rotational lines. To make full use of the information a high resolution spectrometer would be required, but then the shape of the individual rotational lines could yield further information on the aerosol profile. In fact we made use of high resolution measurements of O2 spectra to study radiation transport in clouds, these results are published.1 K. Pfeilsticker, F. Erle, O. Funk, H. Veitel and U. Platt, J. Geophys. Res. 1998, 103, 11483–11504.2 K. Pfeilsticker, J. Geophys. Res. 1999, 104, 4101–4116.Dr Sarkar asked: How does your MAX-DOAS compare with a combination of (MICROTOP sun photometer + micropulse lidar) with respect to profile retrievals for aerosols for both day and night? Please mention economic viability also.Professor Platt said: A MAX-DOAS instrument can measure some elements of the vertical aerosol distribution e.g. aerosol optical density in the boundary layer, the vertical extend of the BL and aerosol optical density above the BL. In the future retrieval of more elements could be possible, for instance trace gas concentrations in several layers. MAX-DOAS measurements are only possible during daylight hours (including the twilight period). A micropulse LIDAR would probably give somewhat better vertical resolution in the lower atmosphere, also it would work during periods of darkness. However I would estimate the combination of MICROTOP plus micropulse LIDAR to be more expensive and more bulky, moreover it would not measure trace gas distributions.Dr Monks opened the discussion of Dr Jones’s paper: One aspect missing from your discussion is the effect of ozone–alkene chemistry of night-time chemistry. It has been shown that ozone–alkene chemistry can be as important as NO3 chemistry in controlling night-time oxidation chemistry.1 Under the conditions encountered at Mace Head in Ireland, night-time NMHC chemistry oxidation was dominated by ozone reactions up to a factor of four over NO3. Interestingly, the nitrate radical remains critical to the RO2 to HO2 propagation. In the context of overall oxidation chemistry the night-time reaction fluxes, particularly for alkenes, contributed up to 20% of their overall loss. How similar would your findings be for the ozone–alkene chemistry?1 G. Salisbury, A. R. Rickard, P. S. Monks, B. J. Allan, S. Bauguitte, S. A. Penkett, N. Carslaw, A. C. Lewis, D. J. Creasey, D. E. Heard, P. J. Jacobs and J. D. Lee., J. Geophys. Res. [Atmos.] 2001, 106, 12669–12688.Dr Jones replied: We are well aware of the importance of ozone–alkene (OA) chemistry at night-time and integrations using a more detailed chemistry model show that one moves from a regime where OA chemistry dominates to one where NO3 chemistry dominates as the level of NOx in the ‘plume’ is varied. The issue of the importance of mixing for OA chemistry would be bound up with the level of NOx in the plume, and might be expected to be very different in clean marine boundary layer conditions as compared with more polluted (higher NOx) urban conditions. However, even in the absence of NOx, there would still be a mixing issue, where O3 levels would be expected to increase away from the surface, while biogenic VOC concentrations are maximum at the surface, and would decrease with altitude. This is another example of the mutual exclusivity of two species that can react with each other (cf. NO3 and biogenic HC). In this respect, while the idealised model, as described, represents horizontal structure, it could equally well be applied to represent vertical structure and other chemical systems.Dr Shallcross communicated: Indeed both ozonolysis of alkenes etc. and NO3 chemistry are important in night time chemistry. We have observed, in a model containing more detailed chemistry, conditions where ozone chemistry dominates right through to where NO3 dominates. The transition from one to another depending on the level of NOx emission introduced into the model. However, the major point of this paper is that inspection of any one emission scenario for NOx will generate very different levels of NOx and its partitioning, ozone deposition etc. depending on mixing timescales.Professor Stutz commented: The contribution by Dr Jones et al. addresses nocturnal chemistry, and in particular the reactions of NO3 and the impact of transport and mixing. My comment addresses a fundamental problem when modeling the turbulent transport of reactive trace gases, which are currently treated as scalars in most chemical transport models of the atmosphere. While this topic has been addressed in a number of publications,1–10 it is often described in a rigorous mathematical form that does not provide a good understanding of the nature of this phenomenon. Here I want to present a simplified derivation of the turbulent transport of reactive gases, which serves as a more intuitive explanation of this effect. It will become clear below that the modeling of some nocturnal trace gases does indeed require the consideration of chemical reactions during turbulent mixing and transport (see also ref. 11).The derivation starts from the mixing length approach first introduced by Prandtl,12 and expands it by including a loss of a reactive species (Fig. 3). We will concentrate on vertical mixing, although the derivation will apply in the same way for all other directions. Turbulent mixing will be simplified by considering two adjacent volumes with trace gas concentrations c(z1) and c(z2) at height z1 and z2
				(Fig. 3). We will distinguish upward and downward trace gas flux, Jup and Jdown, which, in the case of a scalar quantity or unreactive gas, are determined by Jup
						=
						ωc(z1) and Jdown
						=
						−ωc(z2)(1)where ω is a vertical velocity describing the turbulent mixing (Fig. 3) and is the same in upward and downward direction. By calculating the net trace gas flux, i.e. the sum of Jup and Jdown, we can then derive the gradient law, also often referred to as K-theory,12 for vertical turbulent transport between z1 and z2. (2)Here d is the distance between the center of our two boxes, d
				=
				z2
				–
				z1. The product of ω and d is the turbulent diffusion coefficient, K.12Eqn. (2) is the basis of the description of vertical mixing and transport in most chemical transport models. Fig. 3  Sketch of the expansion of Prandtl’s mixing length theory to include the chemical loss L1 and L2. We can now expand this derivation by introducing chemistry. As an example we will consider that only a chemical loss of the trace gas, with loss frequencies L(z1) and L(z2), occurs during upward and downward transport, respectively. Please note that L(z1) and L(z2) can depend on the concentrations of other trace gases in the upper and lower box, and do not have to be equal. The concentrations c(z1,2) are reduced by a factor L(z1,2)τ/c(z1,2), where τ is the timescale for turbulent mixing. Including this loss for both the upward and downward fluxes in eqns. (1) and (2) leads to the following mathematical equation: (3)The final result of this calculation (last line in eqn. (3)) shows that the flux not only depends on the gradient of the concentration ∂c/∂z, but also on the gradient of the loss rate ∂L/∂z scaled with the turbulent time scale τ. In the general case, where both formation, P*, and loss, L*, of a trace gas occur, L can be replaced by the net loss frequency L
				=
				L*
				−
				P*. In cases where significant net loss can be observed the classical gradient approach (eqn. (2)) does not describe turbulent transport correctly and an approach based on eqn. (3) must be used instead.11 The effect of chemistry is typically largest when the turbulent timescale is similar to the chemical timescale L(z1,2)/c(z1,2). If the chemical timescale is much smaller than τ, the trace gas will not be efficiently transported between z1 and z2. In contrast, when the chemical timescale is much larger than τ the gradient approach (eqn. (2)) can be used.Based on the above concept Hamba et al.13,14 have described an approach that provides a relatively simple method to treat the transport of reactive gases in the atmosphere. We have applied and expanded this method in our modeling studies of the vertical dependence of nocturnal chemistry.11 We found that at night the O3
				+ NO reaction, which leads to a loss of both species, can lead to a reduction of the vertical transport of NO of up to a factor of five compared to the classical gradient approach (eqn. (2)).The derivation of eqn. (3) and the results from our modeling study show that chemistry has to be considered when describing turbulent transport of reactive trace gases in chemical transport models, in particular at night.1 D. R. Fitzjarrald and D. Lenschow, Atmos. Environ., 1983, 17(12), 2505–2512.2 W. Gao and M. L. Wesely, J. Appl. Meteorol., 1994, 33(7), 835–847.3 W. Gao, M. L. Wesely and I. Y. Lee, J. Geophys. Res., 1991, 96, 18,761–18,770.4 S. Galmarini, P. G. Duynkerke and J. Vilà-Guerau de Arellano, J. Appl. Meteorol., 1997, 36(7), 943–957.5 O. Hov, Atmos. Environ., 1983, 17, 535–550.6 G. Kramm, H. Mueller, D. Fowler, K. D. Hoefken, F. X. Meixner and E. Schaller, J. Atmos. Chem., 1991, 13, 265–288.7 D. H. Lenschow, J. Meteorol. Soc. Japan, 1982, 1, 60.8 D. H. Lenschow and A. C. Delany, J. Atmos. Chem., 1987, 5, 301–309.9 A. M. Thompson and D. Lenschow, J. Geophys. Res., 1984, 89(D3), 4788–4796.10 J. Vila-Guerau de Arellano, Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 2003, 84(1), 51–56.11 A. Geyer and J. Stutz, J. Geophys. Res., 2004, 109, DOI: 10.1029/2003JD004211.12 R. B. Stull, An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorology, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1988, p. 666.13 F. Hamba, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1987, 56, 79–96.14 F. Hamba, J. Geophys. Res., 1993, 98(D3), 5173–5182.Professor Plane asked: Vertical deposition velocities are a crude parameterisation of vertical transport to the surface, which assume the species are well mixed (usually within the planetary boundary layer). This will not be the case for the plume model. Will this affect the deposition of O3 as treated in the model?Dr Jones responded: The model makes no attempt to reproduce the range of scales likely to be present in the real planetary boundary layer (PBL). Nor does it include realistic surface chemical processes. In this sense it cannot be expected to reproduce certain aspects of the interaction between composition and transport. This was made clear in the paper where it is stated that the model results cannot as they stand be used to produce parameterisations for use in lower resolution models.In the case of O3 deposition, the major night time influence is likely to be titration by NO, which, as observations show, in the urban situation is to be emitted in highly variable localised structures. While of course the detail would be different in, for example, an LES representation of the PBL, small scale structure in O3 would still be expected to be present in the more sophisticated model, leading to the non-linear effects described in the paper.Professor Heard commented: The paper has demonstrated the potential importance of structure, chemical variability and mixing processes in the evolution of the composition of the nighttime boundary layer. We have observed behaviour which suggests similar conclusions also hold during the daytime when oxidation is driven primarily by the hydroxyl radical, OH, and ozone is generated in situ through the reaction of peroxy radicals with NO. In recent field measurements undertaken in Leeds by Dr J. D. Lee and Ms S. C. Smith, we have recorded signals from atmospheric OH and HO2 with a 1 s integration period. The atmospheric lifetimes of these species under urban conditions of elevated NOx are very short (∼0.1 s for OH and a few seconds for HO2), and as mentioned by both Professor Ravishankara in his introductory lecture, and by Dr Jones in this paper, the atmospheric variability of such short lived species is expected to be high when observed on short timescales. Indeed, the atmospheric variability of both OH and HO2 during measurements in Leeds is larger than the variability due to the precision of the instrument alone (obtained from inspection of the variation of background signal) for a 1 s integration period.The data indicate that on a 1 s timescale, both OH and HO2 concentrations are highly variable, suggesting that their rates of production and/or loss (controlled by J(O1D), other J values, [H2O], [O3], [NOx], [CO] and [VOCs]) are also varying on very short timescales. Such behaviour is expected due to mixing of spatial concentration gradients in sources and sinks by turbulent eddies. The key questions are: Can we understand the origin of these rapid fluctuations, and if so, are the results important? For example, are the variations significant compared with the integrated average, and if so, are there implications for the predictions of numerical models? Does the model output depend upon the integration period of the inputs with which it is constrained? It is clear from this paper that 20 s fluctuations in NOx are significant compared with the average value taken over a longer period. The instantaneous rates of many processes, for example, the rate of ozone formation, or the rate of secondary organic aerosol formation, will depend upon concentrations of free-radicals and NOx, which are highly variable. Hence the quantity of ozone generated by the model in a given period, for example 15 min, may be different depending on whether the model is constrained by 1 s input data, and the 1 s ozone production is computed, and then averaged up to 15 min, or whether the model is constrained by a single set of 15 min averaged input data, and one value of the ozone production is calculated. The relevant chemistry is highly non-linear and a different result may be expected for the two quantities  and  as computed by the model.Dr Sarkar communicated: I have some doubts on your ‘Representation of mixing in the model’. In one hand you neglected multi-scale turbulent mixing processes, in the other hand you used a range of eddy diffusion coefficients (104 cm2 s−1–3 × 107 cm2 s−1) which is true for a realistic range of PBL conditions.1 Do you mean that the realistic range of PBL conditions does not include turbulent mixing processes?1 R. B. Stull, An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorology, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1988.Dr Jones replied: The representation of mixing in the model is clearly not adequate to represent the detail of the processes known to be important in influencing PBL structure and mixing. The use of eddy diffusion coefficients, as per Stull’s book, provides a mechanism to reproduce, in a numerically tractable manner, realistic average PBL conditions for a given set of conditions (e.g. stability). In this sense the use of eddy diffusion coefficients includes the effects of turbulent mixing processes. The use of a range of eddy diffusion coefficients used in the simplified model was chosen to encompass different rates of mixing, from incomplete (low mixing) to rapid.Dr Stevenson asked: Global models have resolutions of ∼1° to 5°, and only coarsely resolve the boundary layer (∼100 m). They contain nighttime chemistry (NO3, N2O5). These models can reproduce column NO2
				(satellite observations) to maybe ∼30%. Is this result fortuitous, or does it indicate that small-scale structure (i.e. structure not resolved by models) is relatively unimportant?Dr Jones responded: Given that the range of plume and mixing conditions in the real atmosphere is expected to be large, the relevant comparison is between some average of the model cases and the unstructured model case. Simple inspection of the model results shows that there would be biases in virtually all aspects of the model results, O3 deposition, NOx lifetime, VOC oxidation etc. Thus, agreement to 30% for NO2 does not necessarily provide a useful constraint for other aspects of the chemistry. There are also well documented situations (e.g. ship plumes referenced in the paper) where instantaneous mixing leads, for example, to unrealistic ozone production. The conclusion is that the agreement for NO2 may be to a degree fortuitous, and does not imply that large scale models are reproducing many of the subtleties of the chemistry.It would be interesting to know whether much higher resolution integrations have a significant impact on the NO2 columns produced by global models. Global and indeed many regional models effectively assume instantaneous mixing and are therefore represented by one extreme of the model integrations performed in this study. The impact of the rate of mixing on nitric acid formation can be very important under certain NOx emissions and therefore NO2 levels are intrinsically linked.Dr Kolb commented: Your paper demonstrates that steep pollutant concentration gradients can be expected to occur in evolving emission plumes and, due to strong photochemical kinetics nonlinearities, that significant effects on the resulting secondary pollutant concentrations and deposition rates can be expected. You show that steep variations in urban ozone concentrations down to 20 s measurement integration times are consistent with this supposition. We routinely deploy tunable infrared laser instruments during urban measurements with measurement integration times of 1 s.1,2 We often observe significant fluctuations of both primary (NO, NH3, CO2) and largely secondary (NO2, O3, HCHO) pollutant concentrations down to time scales of a few seconds, confirming your hypothesis. It is probable that not only atmospheric pollutant concentrations and deposition rates are strongly impacted by the concentrations gradients you discuss. The damage to human health and ecosystem viability may also be strongly non-linear in pollutant exposure and uptake.1 C. E. Kolb, S. C. Herndon, J. B. McManus, J. H. Shorter, M. S. Zahniser, D. D. Nelson, J. T. Jayne, M. R. Canagaratne and D. R. Worsnop, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 5694–573.2 S. C. Herndon, J. T. Jayne, M. S. Zahniser, D. R. Worsnop, B. Knighton, E. Allwine, B. K. Lamb, M. Zavala, D. D. Nelson, J. B. McManus, J. H. Shorter, M. R. Canagaratna, T. B. Onasch and C. E. Kolb, Faraday Discuss., 2005, 130, DOI: 10.1039/b500411j.Professor Duxbury opened the discussion of Dr Tuck’s paper:(1) The absorption lines in the IR spectrum of water have a small subset where collisions don’t change the vibration-rotation state. By comparing the behaviour of the special (Dicke-narrowed) lines with the normally pressure broadened lines it may be possible to unpick the collision effects of high speed atoms produced by for O3 photodissociation.(2) Recent measurements in the centre of Glasgow by Wright and Duxbury using a rapid sweep quantum cascade (QC) laser spectrometer have demonstrated rapid fluctuations in methane concentration on a time of seconds, where the other traces measured at the same time, water and nitrous oxide, show little or no fluctuation. This shows the experimental measurement of rapid fluctuations of one component of a multicomponent mixture are possible using the wide tuning range an intra-pulse QC laser spectrometer.Dr Tuck responded:(1) The ability to examine molecular behaviour quickly is very important in the present context, and I therefore await publication of Prof. Duxbury’s spectroscopic results with interest. A direct experiment using molecular beam methods to measure the velocity PDFs of molecules in the real atmosphere would be a powerful complement to fast high resolution optical spectroscopy, but it looked to me to be a very difficult experiment, even with modern rotating, slotted disc velocity selectors and high vacuum techniques.(2) Variations in line shape taken very fast and at very high resolution might be registering other processes as well as concentration fluctuations, for example a different ‘local’ velocity PDF arising from variation in one or more ‘local’ anisotropies.Professor Platt asked:(1) How do your findings relate to the phenomenon of non-local thermal equilibrium (non-LTE) in the upper atmosphere?(2) What is the role of excited oxygen atoms (O21Δ)?and commented: (3) Generally it is assumed that the dominant source of O2 atoms in the singlet delta state is the UV-photolysis of ozone. However it was found by Schurath1 that the photolysis of O4
				(oxygen dimers) by visible light typically produces about one order of magnitude more O2 singlet delta molecules.1 U. Schurath, Free Radical Res. Commun., 1987, 3(1–5), 173–184.Dr Tuck replied: The phrase ‘local thermodynamic equilibrium’ conceals many difficulties hidden in the word ‘local’. How local is local? Alder’s calculations suggest that it could be limited to very brief time scales and to very short space scales. It should also be noted that, to the best of my knowledge, even the fastest atmospheric measurements show non-instrumental variability characterized by fat-tailed PDFs in temperature, wind speed and chemical mixing ratios, on scales from an earth radius down to lengths of order 10 m. I recommend ref. 1, which argues statistically mechanically for the operation of a fluctuation–dissipation theorem in association with the need to maximize entropy production; temperature remains well-defined in a system far from equilibrium.The role of O2(1Δg) could be very interesting, as you suggest, depending on how the large production rate you cite from the O4 photodissociation studies by Schurath has its energy flux redistributed in air, presumably mainly at rather low altitudes. It is a good example of the need for laboratory experiments and possibly molecular dynamical simulation studies to understand the quantitative relevance for the atmosphere.1 R. Dewar, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 2003, 36, 631.Professor Heard and Professor Ashfold commented: A number of laboratory studies have highlighted ways in which the exoergicity of the various O3 photodissociation pathways will map through into local excitation within the stratosphere. Dr Tuck’s paper references the work of Takahashi et al.,1 who have investigated the Doppler lineshapes (and thus the translational energies) of O(1D) atoms resulting from O3 photolysis at 248 nm, in the presence of various pressures of N2. Analysis allowed determination of the relative efficiencies of translational and electronic (to O(3P)) relaxation pathways, and led to the conclusion that the average translational energy of O(1D) atoms in the stratosphere at an altitude of 50 km, for example, will be about twice as large as the thermal energy of the ambient air. Standard models treat photolytically produced stratospheric O(1D) atoms as being fully thermalised before reacting with trace gas molecules like H2O, CH4 or N2O. Clearly, inclusion of a more realistic, non-thermal, distribution of collision energies (and, particularly, the high energy tail to the distribution) could have implications both for relative and absolute reaction rates, and product channel branching ratios. Kharchenko and Dalgarno have investigated such effects, for the specific case of the O(1D)
				+ N2O reaction.2 Photodissociation can also lead to non-thermal product internal state population distributions. O3 constitutes a text-book case in this regard also. Ground state (O(3P)
				+ O2(X3Σ−g)) products account for ∼10% of the total dissociation yield following O3 photolysis at wavelengths λ < 310 nm; the resulting O2(X) products are formed in a broad spread of vibrational energy levels.3 The O2(X) vibrational state population distribution measured at λ
				∼ 233 nm is bimodal, with a component attributable to formation of very highly vibrationally excited fragments carrying almost all of the available excess energy. The relative yield of these very highly vibrationally excited fragments grows substantially as the photolysis wavelength is decreased further, and accounts for some 15% of the total O2(X) yield at λ
				∼ 226 nm. Such findings have attracted previous interest within the stratospheric modelling community, given the realisation that reaction of ambient O2 molecules with the fraction of photolytically produced O2(X) fragments formed with v
				≥ 26 could constitute an exoergic route for reforming O3 molecules (the reverse of the fourth reaction in the Chapman mechanism O + O3
				→ O2
				+ O2). The stratospheric importance, or otherwise, of this pathway will depend on the relative probabilities of reaction and vibrational relaxation; in practice, neither experiment4 nor theory5 has yet found compelling evidence for the reactive pathway.1 K. Takahashi, N. Taniguchi, Y. Sato and Y. Matsumi, J. Geophys. Res., 2002, 107(D20), ACH-11, DOI: 10.1029/2001JD002048.2 V. Kharchenko and A. Dalgarno, J. Geophys. Res., 2004, 109(D18311), DOI: 10.1029/2004JD004597.3 J. D. Geiser, S. M. Dylewski, J. A. Mueller, R. J. Wilson, R. Toumi and P. L. Houston, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 1279 and references therein.4 C. A. Rogaski, J. A. Mack and A. M. Wodtke, Faraday Discussions, 1995, 100, 229.5 A. J. C. Varandas, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 758, and references therein.Dr Tuck responded: The comments of Profs. Heard and Ashfold are germane. One of the predictions of the mechanism we suggest is that the ‘steady state’ ratio of ground state oxygen atoms O(3P) to ozone will be higher than that observed in well-thermalised laboratory experiments, or in numerical model calculations using thermal rate coefficients. An over-population of O(3P) could conceivably have chemical consequences, particularly if there is a fat tail in its atomic speed PDF. It may further be necessary to re-examine the ‘odd oxygen’ concept in a quantitative context.Professor Plane asked: Self-sustaining vortices through the creation of ring currents are understandable in the case of a molecular-beam gas experiment. However, in the atmosphere O3 photolysis creates translationally hot fragments at very low concentrations and moving isotropically. How will this generate self-sustaining vortices?Dr Tuck replied: There is a big difference between a molecular beam of gas propagating into a vacuum and an atmospheric photodissociation event, as Professor Plane says. The former has its own anisotropy, a direction arising from the large, generating pressure gradient. It is, however, depending on experimental design, a largely collision-free environment off-axis. Rarefied gas dynamics is involved rather than the fluid mechanics appropriate to the atmosphere below the turbopause. It is important to remember that the translationally hot photofragments from ozone photodissociation recoil into a pre-existing set of anisotropies, in particular into a set of generating, distorting and dissipating vortex tubes and filaments appropriate to a fluid with a Reynolds number of order 1012 and which of course involves all air molecules. The translationally hot photofragment energy can feed into, be sustained by and in turn help to sustain these pre-existing vorticity structures. In traditional radiative transfer calculations, the absorption of solar and terrestrial radiation is significant in the atmospheric heating rate—for example as witness the extension of the life of the Antarctic vortex induced by the loss of such heating consequent upon the almost complete destruction of ozone by the halogen-based chemistry in the ‘ozone hole’. The behaviour described in Figs. 4–6 in our paper is direct evidence of the tangible role of ozone heating. I emphasise again that the heavy tails of the molecular speed distribution are sustained by and sustain the ‘ring currents’ in the molecular dynamics simulations.I would also like to make a final point about non-linear correlations, the occurrence of fluctuations and the generation and maintenance of the heavy-tailed PDFs we see in atmospheric observations for which the atmospheric variability is greater than the instrumental noise. Suppose we have two chemical species A and B, and that we have a reaction rate coefficient k between them1,2, and that we also have wind speed v and temperature T. Then if we calculate the rate of reaction k[A][B] we are convoluting two heavy-tailed PDFs; the result will be an even more skewed distribution in the rate than in either reactant, with a large contribution to the mean from rare but intense events. The same will apply to the advection of temperature, v∇T. The atmosphere, far from acting like a giant, smoothing integrator generates fluctuations and sharp gradients by virtue of its non-linearity. The variability is in some ways more important than the mean; it is what we and our instruments actually experience.1 A. F. Tuck, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1979, 290, 477–494.2 A. F. Tuck, S. J. Hovde, R.-S. Gao and E. C. Richard, J. Geophys. Res., 2003, 108(D15), DOI: 10.1029/2002JD002832, Art. no. 4451Professor Herrmann asked: Could heterogeneous reactions of O(3P) be important and represent an indirect ozone loss process?Dr Tuck responded: Yes; it is a prediction of the mechanism that there will be an increase in the ratio [O(3P)]/[O3]. Moreover, it has been demonstrated in the laboratory that ground state oxygen atoms react with films of surfactants with almost no activation energy,1 a finding which could be relevant to the atmospheric oxidation of hydrocarbon chains, given the presence of long-chain carboxylic acid films on the surfaces of both marine and continental aerosols.21 Y. Paz, S. Trakhtenberg and R. Naaman, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 13517–13523.2 H. Tervahattu, J. Juhanoja, V. Vaida, A. F. Tuck, J. V. Niemi, K. Kupiainen, M. Kulmala and H. Vehkamaki, J. Geophys. Res., 2005, 110(D6), DOI: 10.1029/2004JD005400, Art. no. D06207.Dr Jones said: You say in the paper that the relation between intermittency in T does not correlate with [O3]. Given the importance of O3 photolysis in establishing the T intermittency implicit in your argument, can you explain why this correlation does not appear?Dr Tuck answered: We do not have an explanation based upon direct experiment or molecular dynamical simulation. However, an argument may be made as follows. In an environment with O2 and O(3P) having heavy-tailed PDFs in their speeds, the reaction O + O2
				+ M → O3
				+ M, virtually the sole atmospheric means of producing ozone, will select for the slower-moving atoms in the O(3P) population and the slower-moving molecules in the O2 and M populations. It will do so because the recombination reaction has an inverse temperature dependence, and one might not therefore expect a correlation between the product [O3] itself and the intermittency of temperature. Recall that the great majority of ozone photodissociations are followed by such a recombination, at a rate sufficient to put every oxygen atom in the lower stratosphere in an oxygen molecule, in an ozone molecule and in its free state within a few months. The correlation is not with J and not with [O3] but with their product. My earlier remarks in response to Prof. Plane about the photofragments recoiling into pre-existing vorticity structures also seem apposite.Professor Plane asked: There is a clear correlation between the winter and summer flight data, rather than among each group of data points in Fig. 2 of the paper. Is the overall correlation therefore really clear-cut?Dr Tuck replied: Both the summer POLARIS flights and the winter SOLVE flights were designed primarily to test ozone photochemistry in the Arctic lower stratosphere, and often the flight paths were not ideal for our statistical multifractal analysis, which requires great circle flight legs for as long as possible under entirely autopilot control, with no vertical profiling. We have selected all such flight legs possessing an adequate number of decades of scale, see references 10 and 14 in our paper. In viewing Figs. 2 and 3, it should be remembered that each point on those graphs cost of order ∼105 dollars at least and are unlikely to be repeated any time soon. The error bars on the points should be noted. Finally, the chemistry in the vortex during the 48 day period 20000123–20000312 was changing significantly, as evidenced by the large change in the ClO scaling (ref. 11 of our paper) and this could affect the ‘within SOLVE’ correlation. The ‘within POLARIS’ correlation involves a much longer period, 136 days from April to September and is certainly spread out over substantial air mass changes. Note that SOLVE does yield in Fig. 3 of the paper two or three points intermediate between the main POLARIS and SOLVE clusters. Perhaps future flights with high altitude, long endurance drone aircraft will provide better data—we are unlikely to examine this problem better through either satellites or numerical models.Dr I. W. M. Smith said: Your paper states (on the basis of calculations reported in ref. 1) that ‘memory of initial velocity can persist for ∼100 collisions’. I wonder about the nature of the interaction between the collision partners that is assumed in those calculations. I ask because, at least for collisions between O(3P) atoms and O2, the multiple intermolecular potentials will be anything but ‘hard-sphere’, reflecting the ability of these species to interact chemically.1 S. Chapman and T. G. Cowling, The Mathematical Theory of Non-Uniform Gases, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 3rd edn., 1970, pp. 93–96, 327.Dr Tuck replied: Chapman and Cowling briefly consider the persistence of molecular velocity for ‘real’, i.e. quantum mechanical, intermolecular potentials on p. 327. On the one hand, as you say, an attractive potential might enhance energy exchange possibilities between collidants. On the other hand, compared to ‘billiard ball’ collisions, ‘real’ collisions will be fuzzier and involve structure in both the distance and angular parts of the potential, so weakening the validity of the strong collision assumption, the lack of correlation in position and momentum between collision partners before and after collision. This assumption of course underlies such common formulations as Maxwellian distributions and pressure-broadened Lorentzian line shapes, for example. I believe some molecular dynamical simulations have been done with square well potentials rather than an infinitely steep repulsion. It is possible that MD approaches could help here, given that the current state of the art is 107 atoms, a number which would permit simulation of the absorption of a solar photon by a single ozone molecule in a realistically-sized bath of air molecules.Dr Taatjes communicated: In reference to the question, raised both in the paper and in the discussion, of whether experimental gas kineticists know or appreciate the importance of velocity relaxation I would like to point out that many measurements and calculations have in fact been made on the relaxation of nonequilibrium velocity distributions of atoms. “Hot atom” chemistry in the presence of velocity moderation was described for products of nuclear reactions by Libby in the 1940s.1 Non-Maxwellian distributions of velocity in Earth’s atmosphere have been calculated by application of the Boltzmann equation.2–4 Laboratory measurements of, for example, translational relaxation of I atoms in C3F7I and in He,5 or of hot O(1D) atoms in rare gases, N2, and O2,6 have addressed the persistence of the direction of velocity as well as the relaxation of the speed distribution towards equilibrium. These experiments tend to confirm simple gas kinetic calculations and the experience of laboratory kineticists; hundreds of collisions may be necessary to relax hot atoms in the case of a large mass mismatch, but thermalization of velocity in both magnitude and direction is nearly complete within a few tens of collisions for similar-mass particles. Prudent kineticists allow many more average collisions for effective thermalization. The fact that the decay of velocity correlations is described by a power-law rather than an exponential7 probably has no effect on the results of careful laboratory kinetics measurements.1 W. F. Libby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1947, 69, 2523–2534.2 B. D. Shizgal, Planet. Space. Sci., 2004, 52, 915–922.3 B. Shizgal and M. J. Lindenfeld, Planet. Space. Sci., 1979, 27, 1321–1332.4 E. C. Whipple Jr., T. E. VanZandt and C. H. Love, J. Chem. Phys., 1975, 62, 3024–3030.5 J. I. Cline, C. A. Taatjes and S. R. Leone, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 93, 6543.6 Y. Matsumi, S. M. Shamsuddin, Y. Sato and M. Kawasaki, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 9610–9618.7 B. J. Alder and T. E. Wainwright, Phys. Rev. A, 1970, 1, 18–21.Dr Tuck communicated in reply: Matsumi et al. contains work which was cited in our paper as refs. 29 and 38. Their conclusion was that there are likely to be very substantial overpopulations of hot O(1D) atoms, ranging from 20% to a factor of two, throughout the stratosphere. In my opinion, these are likely to be lower limits, because of the mutually self-sustaining interaction between ‘ring currents’ and translationally hot atoms and molecules; the anisotropies which have existed in the atmosphere for geological time scales will feed and be fed by the production of translationally hot atoms, as I have remarked in response to earlier questions. In the context of laboratory experiment, I am happy to acknowledge Dr Taatjes’s remarks about prudent kineticists, but I observe that measuring velocity distributions in a flow tube with pressures high enough to exhibit fluid mechanical behaviour is a far from trivial exercise, as is also true for the atmosphere.Professor Herrmann opened the discussion of Professor George’s paper: P. Warneck has suggested a heterogeneous HONO source involving PNA (peroxynitric acid) which has been included in CAPRAM 2.4.1  Could this be also important in the troposphere?1 B. Ervens, C. George, J. E. Williams, G. V. Buxton, G. A. Salmon, M. Bydder, F. Wilkinson, F. Dentener, P. Mirabel and H. Herrmann, J. Geophys. Res., 2003, 108(D14), 4426.Professor George replied: The formation of nitrous acid through the chemistry of peroxynitric acid is indeed important. It has be to be underlined that peroxynitric acid can be formed in the gas phase as well in the liquid phase through the reaction of NO2 and O2− as shown by the paper by Ervens, George et al.1 However, this chemistry is secondary in nature i.e., as it requires formation of different intermediates (as peroxynitric acid) from NO2. In this context, Lahoutifard et al.,2 showed for aerosol dark chemistry that the peroxynitric acid HONO source is at a comparable level when compared to the dark chemistry between phenolates and NO2. Peroxynitric acid decomposition into nitrite is mainly important at higher pH, while at low pH (where HONO could be evaporating from the liquid) the decomposition into NO2 and HO2 might be at least as important.Also, this chemistry is occurring in aqueous droplets while we considered here chemistry of organic surfaces as proxies for ubiquitous organic surfaces.We demonstrated that under such conditions the NO2 conversion to HONO is drastically enhanced by photochemical processes, which exceeds the rates observed on pure phenolic substrates by at least an order of magnitude. Therefore the source suggested here may be of major importance.1 B. Ervens, C. George, J. Williams, G. V. Buxton, G. A. Salmon, M. Bydder, F. Wilkinson, F. Dentener, P. Mirabel, R. Wolke and H. Herrmann, J. Geophys. Res., 2002, 108, 4426.2 N. Lahoutifard, M. Ammann, L. Gutzwiller, B. Ervens and C. George, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2002, 2, 215.Professor Platt commented: Regarding the NO2
				+ HO2 mechanism for HONO formation: peroxy radicals (HO2) can also form at night by NO3
				+ olefin reactions.Professor George replied: This comment refers to Professor Herrmann’s question. As we have already argued, the photochemical source identified during this study is much more important than a hypothetical source by pernitric acid formed from NO2 and HO2 during the day; it is unlikely that HO2 could contribute to HONO forming via this pathway during the night.Professor Ravishankara said: I have a very simple minded comment. It appears to me that one of the needs is to get NO2−, which then would make HONO. So, is there some way of making NO2− in your system?Professor George responded: Indeed, nitrite ions might play a very important role as precursor of nitrous acid (as it is the conjugated base associated to this acid). However, in our experiments we cannot distinguish if nitrites anions are first produced or if HONO is directly produced.The mechanism we are suggesting is based on different redox reactions where electrons will be transferred, therefore nitrite anions can be formed from the reduction of NO2 subsequent to a photoinduced electron transfer (see proposed mechanism).Dr Baltensperger asked:(1) You mentioned in your paper that HONO was only formed in the presence of water. Does this mean that also the NO2 uptake is enhanced in the presence of water? One could imagine that removing a product might result in an enhancement of the uptake.(2) I like your paper because it nicely explains the additional HONO source observed in smog chambers, which makes calculations of reaction kinetics complicated.Professor George replied:(1) We observed that the photochemical enhancement of the NO2 uptake was independent of the relative humidity but that the product distribution was affected. Traces of water vapour were indeed necessary to see some traces of gas phase HONO, even if no dependence on humidity was established. This is in line with the mechanism we are suggesting where a photoinduced electron transfer produces nitrite anions, followed by HONO production. The latter step would require some amounts of water (see our response to Professor Ravishankara’s comment). In such a two-step process, and as long as the surface is not saturated, the removal of a product would not lead to an additional uptake enhancement.(2) We appreciated your second comment. Indeed we also believe that a similar mechanism (while not identical) may occur in smog chambers. However, in a recent study in a simulation chamber a contribution by NO2 to the photoenhanced HONO formation could be excluded.1 Thus there might be different mechanisms explaining the “background reactivity” of smog chambers.1 F. Rohrer, B. Bohn, T. Brauers, D. Brüning, J.-F. Johnen, A. Wahner and J. Kleffmann, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 2004, 4, 7881.Dr Brauers commented: Our recent chamber experiments (see ref. 1 or the poster by Brauers et al.) show a photo-enhanced HONO source dependent on humidity, temperature, and light, but not on the gas phase NO2 concentration. This finding is not covered by the NO2 uptake and HONO formation introduced in the presented paper.1 F. Rohrer, B. Bohn, T. Brauers, D. Brüning, J.-F. Johnen, A. Wahner and J. Kleffmann, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 2004, 4, 7881.Professor George replied: We agree, that our mechanism cannot explain the observations in the SAPHIR chamber. The organic substrates used in the present study are most probably not present on the surface of the SAPHIR chamber, caused by the kind of chemistry and the low concentration levels used in this chamber. Thus, there might be different mechanism explaining the photoenhanced HONO formation in this simulation chamber and in the atmosphere, respectively.Dr Ammann said: This comment addresses the comparison made by Dr Brauers between the photochemical HONO source observed in atmospheric simulation chambers also in absence of NO2 and the results presented in the paper by George et al. The chemistry we are proposing is generating nitrite ion on the surface. Depending on the water and proton availability (related to the acidity of the surface), HONO may be formed and released to the gas phase. Porous media will additionally complicate the situation allowing diffusion of NO2 or HONO in the bulk underneath the surface. In the end, under given specific conditions, emission of HONO must not necessarily be coinciding with the presence of NO2, but could be related to previous processing of a surface. With respect to the HONO emission observed in absence of NO2 in smog chambers, nitrite or adsorbed HONO could have been formed in absence of NO2 under dry conditions. After the admission of humidity later on under otherwise clean conditions, HONO could be emitted from the surfaces.Professor George added: This might play a role in other chambers, however, it cannot explain the HONO formation in the SAPHIR chamber. In the SAPHIR chamber, the addition of water in the dark did not result in release of HONO from the walls in contrast to other chambers.Professor Burrows asked: Can you include the role of N2O4 in your system as an intermediate, which may also produce a lead to the production of HONO? The presence of N2O4 may complicate the interpretation of your interesting observations.Professor George replied: The first experiments we made were with high concentrations of NO2
				(i.e., 50–100 ppm) where the influences of N2O4 could have been important. Therefore, the gas phase concentration was lowered by three orders of magnitude (i.e., up to 20 ppb) without any change in our results.As the N2O4 fraction depends on the square of the NO2 gas phase concentration and since the surface is not saturated, we are quite confident that N2O4 is an unimportant intermediate at atmospherically relevant concentration. In addition, even if a theoretical uptake coefficient for N2O4 of unity is used as an upper limit, the observed uptake coefficients of NO2 of ca. 10−5 from the present study cannot be explained by uptake of N2O4 at the low NO2 concentrations applied (i.e. 20 ppb corresponding to <10−3 ppt N2O4).Professor Donahue asked: Is this redox mechanism a significant sink of aromatics in the organic aerosol fraction?Professor George replied: The redox chemistry involving NO2 might not be such an important sink. However photochemistry of organics in the aerosol might an important sink with a mechanism similar to the one proposed here, see, e.g. ref. 1.1 A. Feilberg and T. Nielsen, Environ. Sci. Technol. 2000, 34, 789–797.Dr Cox said: The discovery of a photochemically induced heterogeneous conversion of NO2 into HONO on organic material is an important contribution to the longstanding puzzle of the formation process for atmospheric HONO. Have the authors seen any evidence for a photochemical reaction of this type on inorganic surfaces such as mineral dust or on Pyrex glass surfaces?Professor George answered: The photochemical conversion of NO2 to HONO was not observed on Pyrex or glass once these materials were extremely well cleaned. Note that only really thorough cleaning of the glass (either mechanically or using HF) completely removed any photoenhancement of the dark HONO formation on glass. We assume that this is due to the formation of products, which were not soluble in any of the solvents we used.However, such a conversion might occur, and have been observed, when redox cycles might be photoinduced, as on some specific minerals.Dr King commented: The work described in this paper is exciting and it will be very interesting to apply to snowpack photochemistry.The question relates to the following chemistry NO3−
						+
						hν
						→
						[NO3−*](1) [NO3−*]
						→ NO2−
						+ O(3P)(2) [NO3−*]
						→ NO2
						+ O−(3a) O−
						+ H2O → OH + OH−(3b)In their paper George et al. state that “In the laboratory, the effective yield of nitrite formation was found to be two orders of magnitude smaller compared to the NO2 formation.” When discussing the emission of HONO and NO2 from Arctic snowpacks they reference Mark et al.1 However, a later review by Mack and Bolton2 suggests that values for the quantum yields for channels (2) and (3) are of the order 0.6–2% and ∼6%, respectively. The work of Dubowski et al.3 on the photochannels in ice demonstrates a quantum yield for channel 2 of ∼0.5% and an apparent quantum yield of channel (3) of 0.1%. Also the work of Chu and Anastasio4 reports a quantum yield for channel (3b) of about 0.3% in ice. These works suggest that there are not two orders of magnitude difference in the yield between these channels. Thus, these values are not inconsistent with the 1 : 2 yield of HONO : NO2 from snowpack at Alert5 as detailed in their paper. It is worth noting that a yield of 1 : 3 was noted at Summit Greenland6 and that unpublished data from other polar snowpacks suggest that emissions of HONO from snowpacks can be zero.1 G. Mark, H.-G. Korth, H.-P Schuchmann and C. Von Sonntag J. Photochem. Photobiol. A, 1996, 101, 89.2 J. Mack and J. R. Bolton, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A, 1999, 128, 1.3 Y. Dubowski, A. J. Colussi, C. Boxe and M. R. Hoffman, J. Phys. Chem. 2001, 105, 4928–4932.4 L. Chu and C. Anastasio, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 9594.5 H. J. Beine, I. Allegrini, R. Sparapani, A. Ianniello and F. Valentini, Atmos. Environ., 2001, 35, 36456 J. E. Dibb, M. Arsenault, M. C. Peterson and R. E. Honrath, Atmos. Environ., 2002, 26, 2501Professor George replied: We agree, as very different numbers of the quantum yields are reported for both processes (i.e.reactions (2) and (3)). For example, referring to Table 3 of the paper of Mack and Bolton, values for ϕ(OH)
				(reaction (3)) between 0.8–9% are reported, whereas a number of ∼0.1% is given for ϕ(O)
				(reaction (2)). Thus, there is a large range published for the relative contribution of both channels. In addition, the situation might become even more complex in snow depending on the pH, amount of water in a quasiliquid layer of the ice, etc.In our paper we only would like to propose, that one reason for the variable HONO/NO2 ratio observed on ice surfaces in the field may be the conversion of NO2
				(formed by the nitrate photolysis) into HONO by the proposed photolytic mechanism and a variable content of organics, similar to those used in our study. Since there is a tendency from the literature data that reaction (3) is of higher importance and since additionally, HONO is much more soluble in water and shows a much higher adsorption enthalpy on ice compared to NO2, a conversion of NO2 into HONO would help for the explanation of field data, at least for which a high HONO/NO2 ratio was observed. This was already discussed in the paper of Zhou et al. However, the dark reaction of NO2
				+ H2O, as discussed in their study, is too slow to explain a fast conversion, in contrast to the mechanism proposed in the present study.From many snowpack photochemical studies it is known that not only nitrogen oxides are emitted but also many low weight organic compounds which indicate that organic photochemical processes are occurring in snow. When we take the data from Grannas, Shepson and Filley2 who found organic contents of around 0.5 mg l−1 of molten snow and showed a high content of lignin phenols and of high molecular weight organic compounds, we conclude that organic chromophores could be the most important light absorbers in snow over a wide range of the solar spectrum. If such organic compounds and nitrate are collocated in quasiliquid layers of snow a reaction of the photo-produced NO2 with photo-activated organic mixtures is likely.1 X. L. Zhou, Y. He, G. Huang, T. D. Thornberry, M. A. Carroll, S. B. Bertman, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2002, 29, 4087–4090, DOI: 10.1029/2002GL015080.2 A. M. Grannas, P. B. Shepson and T. R. Filley, Global Biochem. Cycles 2004, 18.Mr Glowacki said: In your “Proposed reaction mechanism” section you mention that you take 2π spectral irradiance measurements and use them to calculate J(NO2) by multiplying by a factor 4, giving a calculated J(NO2) of 0.046 s−1. The 1987 Madronich paper which you cite1 as informing this factor of 4 pertains to treating the sun as both an isotropic and collimated source which is isotropically scattered. However, in this case of a photoreactor with cylindrical symmetry, the light source is not collimated. Simply multiplying the 2π spec irradiance measurements by a factor of 2 would give a J(NO2) of 0.046/2 = 0.023 s−1, which would match much better your experimentally measured J(NO2) of 0.024 s−1 and still be theoretically justified because of the chamber symmetry (i.e. 2 × 2π
				= 4π, which represents spherical surface area). Can you explain why your radiation field/J(NO2) calculations have been performed this way?1 S. Madronich, J. Geophys. Res. [Atmos.], 1987, 92, 9740.Professor George replied: In our article we intended to calculate the actinic flux in our reactor from the 2π-irradiance measurements taken at the reactor surface. We assumed an isotropic radiation and neglected any influence of the glass reactor. By integration of the radiance L(λ) over a hemisphere with unit radius, we obtained, as shown in the cited paper by Madronich (1987), an actinic flux of F(λ)
				= 2πL(λ). For the 2π-irradiance at the reactor surface we obtained E(l)
				=
				πL(λ) by integration of the radiance L(λ) weighted by the cosine of the zenith angle over the hemisphere. We concluded that the hemispheric actinic flux is therefore twice the measured irradiance. As described by Madronich (1987), we introduced a second factor of two to account for the actinic flux originating from both hemispheres with identical magnitude, and hence used in total a factor of four to convert the measured 2π-irradiance into the total spherically integrated actinic flux in the reactor. Due to your question we reconsidered our approach and conclude that our model is likely inadequate for the given conditions, because we assumed an isotropic radiance over all angles. But actually we confirmed experimentally only that the irradiance in the reactor was axial symmetric and the assumption of a spherical isotropic radiance is not supported by the reactor geometry. Hence we should calculate the flux of an axial symmetric radiance trough a sphere, which we are presently not capable to do. Therefore, we can not judge your proposal of a factor two for the conversion. In conclusion we recommend to rely rather on the measured J(NO2) and accordingly scale the photolysis frequencies J(HONO), J(HNO3), J(NO3−) predicted by the model down by a factor of two.Professor Donaldson opened the discussion of Professor Abbatt’s paper; Professor Abbatt indicated that nitric acid adsorbed on cirrus particles could perhaps undergo photochemical reaction. We have measured photochemistry involving nitric acid adsorbed on cold ice surfaces as well as from frozen nitric acid solutions at several acid concentrations.1 Our experiments utilize a quartz-windowed Pyrex ice chamber coupled to the CIMS apparatus described in your paper. This chamber could be cooled to approx. 220 K using a circulating chiller bath. The output of a 1000 W Hg–Xe lamp was passed through a 10 cm long water filter to remove infrared light, then mildly focussed through the top quartz window to the ice surface. Various long-pass optical filters could be inserted following the IR filter to measure an approximate wavelength dependence to the photochemistry. Gas phase products which evolved from the ice chamber were entrained in a flow of N2 and introduced to the CIMS flowtube. NO2 and HONO were detected as NO2− and F−HONO, respectively.Fig. 4 shows the results of a representative experiment using a frozen 10 wt.% nitric acid solution, performed at 228 K at a relative humidity of 0%
				(relative to the ice sample). Upon exposure to the full (except for IR) output of the lamp, a rapid rise is observed in both NO2 and HONO signals. These both become much less intense when light of λ < 295 nm is removed; the relative changes are quite different for the two species, however. There is a monotonic decrease in product flux as the wavelength cutoff is moved further to the red; again, the NO2 signal is relatively more sensitive to these changes than that from HONO. Fig. 4  Plots of NO2−
					(upper trace, dark line) and F−HONO (lower trace, lighter line) mass spectrometer signals vs. time from illumination of a frozen sample of 10 wt.% nitric acid at 228 K and 0% RH. The various bars indicate the different long-pass wavelength cutoff filters used, with the cutoff wavelength (in nm) indicated. Qualitatively similar results were observed for different concentrations of frozen nitric acid solution and different relative humidities (up to 100%) and temperatures (between 220 K and 250 K). No product evolution was seen (at these low temperatures) using frozen solutions of KNO3. Both NO2 and HONO products were observed upon illumination at λ > 295 nm when gas phase nitric acid was deposited onto pure water ice in the monolayer coverage regime.A few recent studies have reported NO2 production from illuminated ice and snow samples doped with nitrate.2–4 To our knowledge the present report represents the first direct laboratory observation of HONO production from illuminated frozen nitric acid solutions. The low temperature regime probed here suggests that NOx could be photolytically released from nitric acid adsorbed to cirrus cloud particles or from NAT- and NAD-containing PSCs.1 T. Bartels-Rausch and D. J. Donaldson, to be published.2 Y. Dubowski, A. J. Colussi and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105 4928.3 L. Chu and C. Anastasio, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 9594.4 E. S. N. Cotter, A. E. Jones, E. W. Wolff and S. J.-B. Bauguitte, J. Geophys. Res., 2003, 108(D4) 4147; DOI: 10.1029/2002JD002602.Professor Abbatt replied: These are very interesting results. They highlight the need to understand the chemical state in which nitric acid exists when present on an ice (or other) surface. If nitrate is formed, then its absorption coefficient is shifted into the red compared to that of nitric acid. Together with the ability of ice particles to scavenge nitric acid from the upper troposphere, and via gravitational settling to then give rise to vertical redistribution of NOy species, this photochemical degradation mechanism may also have a role to play in establishing the NOx to HNO3 ratio.Professor Cohen commented: Working at the atmospherically appropriate concentration matters for NO2 release from NO3− photolysis mentioned in Professor Donaldson’s comment as well as the uptake described by Professor Abbatt. We observe NO2 release proportional to [NO3−]01/2Dr Kärcher asked:(1) Most laboratory experiments have been performed under ice-saturated conditions, while atmospheric ice crystals frequently experience substantial super-saturations. Would you agree that uptake mechanisms in cirrus clouds involve growing ice surfaces?(2) Trace gas uptake in growing ice crystals imply a volume uptake, but in situ data are often plotted as surface coverages. Shouldn’t this way of interpretation be abandoned, as it is not reflecting the true physical mechanism of uptake? At most the Θ’s are inferred upper limit values, but adsorption enthalpies etc. must not be inferred.(3) How should lab. measurements be designed (ideally) to capture the salient features of uptake on growing surfaces?Professor Abbatt replied: In work that is soon to be submitted for publication, we have extended the work presented here at the Faraday Discussion by studying the HNO3 uptake profiles under conditions where ice is growing. We do this by increasing the relative humidity of the carrier gas entering the flow tube. Average growth rates are a few microns per minute, not unlike those experienced in some portions in the atmosphere. We see significant steady state uptake of nitric acid in these experiments indicative of burial. And so, in response to the first question, I would say that uptake by a burial/trapping mechanism under conditions where the ice is growing is a highly viable mechanism in cirrus clouds. I don’t believe we can yet say whether it dominates over the uptake due to surface adsorption for ice growth rates, residence times etc. in the upper troposphere. However, it is an important uptake mode that has been overlooked until recently, as nicely highlighted by Dr Kärcher’s recent model on this subject.1 In this context I fully agree that the community should be cautious in interpreting nitric acid contents of cirrus cloud particles in terms of only a surficial uptake model. And I also agree that it would be extremely difficult, if not impossible at this stage, to try to extract adsorption enthalpies from field measurements, given how strongly affected they are by varying temperature, partial pressure, total ice surface areas, and particle history.The new work on uptake under growing ice conditions that I just described is a first cut but a weakness is that the ice growth rate is not uniform down the flow tube. An experiment where the ice growth rate is uniform across the ice sample area, as could be attained in a Knudsen cell, would be preferable. However, the Knudsen cell would be constrained to relatively low temperatures. An experiment where ice particles exposed to nitric acid, where the nitric acid content is measured as the particles grow, is feasible but would not be an easy experiment to make work quantitatively.1 B. Kärcher and M. M. Basko, J. Geophys. Res., 2004, 109, Article No. D22204.Dr Coe said: In the atmosphere, homogeneous freezing at temperatures greater than −70 °C may occur from the surface inwards as the latent heat generated in the centre of the drop may heat it and prevent freezing whereas convective cooling at the surface will lead to freezing. This may trap significant HNO3, already dissolved in the drop, before freezing takes place.Professor Abbatt responded: The topic of whether homogeneous freezing occurs at the surface or in the bulk is a current, controversial topic. Assuming for the time being that freezing does indeed occur at the surface, then the mechanism you describe for trapping nitric acid seems viable. The retention efficiency will be driven by the relative rates of ice growth after nucleation and diffusion of nitric acid from the solution droplet. From recent field studies, it has been reported that gases such as HNO3 are efficiently retained in the ice crystal upon rapid freezing of supercooled cloud droplets, whereas gases such as H2O2 and SO2 are not.1,2 In an earlier publication, where we show that both SO2 and H2O2 have a much lower affinity for adsorption to ice than does HNO3, we suggested that all the gases are excluded from the droplet as it freezes but that the HNO3 retention efficiency is much higher than the others because it is retained on the surface of the ice crystal.3 In that publication we noted the consistency of this model with observations of convective enhancement factors, i.e. ratio of trace gases in convective outflow compared to levels in the absence of convection, observed during the TRACE-A field campaign.4 In particular, it was observed in those field measurements that the convective enhancement factor for HNO3 was less than one whereas it was larger than one for H2O2. Although both gases are very soluble in supercooled water, nitric acid remains in the ice upon freezing and so is removed from convective outflow by ice gravitational settling whereas H2O2 is released from the ice particle upon freezing, and so the gas can be transported from the boundary layer to the upper troposphere.4 Given the importance of trace gas retention upon droplet freezing, this phenomenon is clearly worthy of more study.1 D. Voisin, M. Legrand and N. Chaumerliac, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 6817.2 J. R. Snider and J. Huang, J. Geophys. Res., 1998, 103, 1405.3 S. M. Clegg and J. P. D. Abbatt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 6630.4 C. Mari, D. J. Jacob and P. Bechtold, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 22255.Dr Cox commented: I would like to report results obtained with a numerical simulation model which helps to interpret observations of uptake on surfaces in a flow system such as reported by Prof. Abbatt. This is illustrated in the accompanying figure which demonstrates the need to include diffusion into the ice film as well as Langmuir type surface adsorption to reproduce the adsorption curves for HNO3 exposed to ice at 229 K. The surface coverage is overestimated if transfer into the bulk is not taken into account. The model is also able to reproduce the patterns observed for repeated exposure to the same film and also competitive adsorption of HNO3 and HCl on an ice film. Fig. 5  Comparison of experimental data (points) and simulated HNO3 concentration changes following exposure to an ice film. Conditions as Fig. 1A of Ullerstam et al. Thin continuous line using Langmuir constant, Keq, reported in the paper; other lines using Keq reduced by 30% and with different rates of diffusion into bulk ice film. Professor Abbatt responded: The results of Prof. Cox’s model, which accounts for both surface adsorption and diffusion into the ice film, nicely highlight a number of issues associated with nitric acid interacting with ice surfaces. First, as Prof. Cox’s model results illustrate, a significant component (30%, in this case) of what may be interpreted as surface uptake may in fact be arising from diffusive processes that occur subsequent to surface adsorption. Second, it is not clear whether the diffusive component arises from diffusion into the bulk of the ice or along grain boundaries. Third, is the chemical state of the nitric acid different for that component diffusing into the ice versus that residing on the surface. For example, is dissociated nitric acid diffusing whereas undissociated nitric acid resides on the surface?Professor Zellner said: We have recently published1 a simple kinetic model to describe reversible gas adsorption in CWFT experiments which helps to quantify observed adsorption and desorption profiles as well as to extract the associated kinetic quantities.In parallel to this modelling work we have extended our experimental investigations of the adsorption of acetone on ice surfaces. In particular we have concentrated on the ageing effect of the adsorption capacity. Our most recent explanation is that there exist two different types of adsorption sites which both have their own adsorption thermodynamics and kinetics. Ageing of the ice surface is interpreted as a change from one type of surface adsorption into the other which probably is associated with structural change of the ice surface.Unlike most other surfaces the ice surface is extremely dynamic implying that even at temperatures around 200 K there will be continuous flux of water from and to the surface. What do you think does a monolayer adsorption mean in the light of this dynamics? Will it hamper dynamic exchange or will adsorption always reflect heteromolecular condensation including water?1 P. Behr, A. Terziyski and R. Zellner, Z. Phys. Chem. 2004, 218, 1307–1327Professor Abbatt responded: This is an interesting observation commensurate with a number of studies that show that snow samples collected in the field also exhibit aging phenomena where the specific surface area decreases as a function of time. One might suspect that the nature of the binding interaction may also change as the surface structure changes. In addition to time, I can expand upon this comment by noting that interpretation of the mechanism of uptake by ice surfaces is complicated by the changing structure of the ice surface as a function of temperature. At low temperatures, the surficial water molecules have low mobility whereas at higher temperatures the “quasi-liquid” layer grows in. How does this affect the nature of adsorbate-surface interactions? In studies of the adsorption of small alcohols to ice we found typical van’t Hoff behaviour, i.e. the logarithm of the gas-surface equilibrium constant varied linearly with inverse temperature, with the larger uptake at lower temperatures, as is normally the case.1 For the uptake of SO2 to ice we found the opposite behavior with uptake increasing with increasing temperature, an observation which we interpreted to imply that water mobility was essential for SO2 uptake to proceed via HSO3− formation.2 Lastly, in the nitric acid study presented today, the van’t Hoff plot was not linear. It does not seem unreasonable to suggest that the changing nature of the surface might be to blame.With regards to your question concerning the dynamic nature of the ice surface, I point out that the average residence time on the surface for a nitric acid molecule will be orders of magnitude longer than for water molecules. In this sense, any one adsorbed nitric acid molecule will experience a mean “field” of water molecules over its lifetime on the surface as the waters evaporate and condense. Does the interaction between the nitric acid and the water molecules affect the volatility of the water molecules? Studies from the research group of Tolbert have shown that the evaporation rate of ice surfaces are not affected when exposed to roughly 10−6 torr of nitric acid, i.e. in the monolayer regime.31 O. Sokolov and J. P. D. Abbatt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 775.2 S. M. Clegg and J. P. D. Abbatt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 6630.3 M. S. Warshawsky, M. A. Zondlo and M. A. Tolbert, Geophys. Res. Lett., 1999, 26, 823.Dr Kolb said: Your paper nicely demonstrates the complexity of heterogeneous chemical processes on real atmospheric aerosol particles and environmental surfaces, which are often mixtures of deliquesced inorganic and organic species. The role of both organic films on water and water condensed on organic surfaces needs to be understood. You measurements of anthracene uptake to and reaction on both water and organic surfaces demonstrate how complicated understanding real-world surface chemistry will be.We have recently published droplet train flow reactor uptake studies of hydrogen halides, HCl, HBr, and HI,1 and the organic species, acetic acid,1 as well as α-pinene, γ-terpinene, p-cymene, and 2-methyl-2-hexanol2 on 1-octanol surfaces. Mass accommodation coefficients for the organic compounds, including acetic acid, were fairly large, with ∼265 K values of 0.4 for acetic acid, 0.25 for 2-methyl-2-hexanol, 0.20 for p-cymene, 0.12 for γ-terpinene, falling off gradually with increasing temperature.1,2 The uptake of α-pinene was solubility limited, but exhibited an uptake coefficient >0.1 at the shortest gas/droplet contact times, setting a lower limit for its α. The uptake of benzene was too small for us to detect, setting an upper limit for an uptake coefficient on 1-octanol of 0.001 for a 1.5 ms interaction time, consistent with your previous measurement of small anthacene and pyrene uptake coefficients on 1-octanol coated water surfaces,3 but much smaller than the uptake coefficient on neat 1-octanol surfaces you report here. Interestingly, none of our measured mass accommodation coefficients for organic species showed any significant change as the relative humidity was varied between 0 and 100+%.The influence of water on the uptake behavior of the hydrogen halides on water vapor was much more dramatic (1). The measured mass accommodation coefficients for showed no significant temperature dependence. However, that for HCl, was 0.008 ± 0.001 and exhibited a negative temperature dependence. The effect of water vapor was dramatic, at 100% relative humidity (which corresponds to less than a 10% liquid water surface coverage), the 273 K mass accommodation coefficients for HBr and HCl, had fallen to 0.21 ± 0.03 and 0.18 ± 0.05, respectively, while that for HCl had risen to 0.17 ± 0.03(i). All of the 100% relative humidity values are equal, within measurement error, to their values on pure water.1These measurements along with yours help demonstrate just how rich and complex the heterogeneous chemistry of mixed organic/water surfaces can be.1 H. Z. Zhang, Y. Q. Li, P. Davidovits, L. R. Williams, J. T. Jayne, C. E. Kolb and D. R. Worsnop, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 6398–6407.2 H. Z. Zhang, Y. Q. Li, J. R. Xia, P. Davidovits, L. R. Williams, J. T. Jayne, C. E. Kolb and D. R. Worsnop, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 6398–6407.3 B. T. Mmereki, S. R. Chaudhuri and D. J. Donaldson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 2264–2269.Professor Donaldson replied: When comparing the uptake coefficient of benzene on octanol (<10−3 as reported here by Dr Kolb) with our higher uptake of anthracene by octanol, it might be helpful to consider the vapour pressures and octanol–air partition coefficients (KOA) of these compounds as well. We note in our report that the uptake of anthracene by oleic acid seems larger than the uptake of naphthalene by the same substrate (although one should be aware that these are measured using different methods). The room temperature vapour pressures of these compounds differ by four orders of magnitude in Pa; their KOA values by two orders of magnitude. The differences between the values of these parameters for benzene and anthracene are larger still. One might therefore expect a higher propensity for anthracene to partition to the condensed phase than for benzene to do so, as we observe.Professor Herrmann commented: I would like to stress the importance of Professor Donaldson’s studies. Current field work suggests that cloud droplets might be much enriched with regards to less water-soluble organics. Hence, it might be necessary to introduce a third compartment, i.e. the droplet surface, into advanced tropospheric multiphase models for aerosol and cloud chemistry.Professor Donaldson responded: Professor Herrmann raises an important point. Field studies have identified higher concentrations of organics, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), in fog-water and aqueous aerosol particles than could be explained by Henry’s law and the surrounding gas phase concentrations.1–4 Gill and Graedel5 suggested that such an organic film exists on atmospheric aerosol particles, fog droplets, cloud droplets, rain droplets, and snowflakes. This suggestion has been confirmed by recent field measurements.6,7 Lo and Lee8 suggested that such a coating could enhance adsorption of more hydrophobic compounds such as PAHs, perhaps explaining the observed non-Henry’s law behaviour. We have recently reported both an increased solublization9 and an increased mass accomodation coefficient10 for PAH compounds at organic-coated aqueous interfaces. Interestingly, the effect seems to depend on the chemical nature of the organic coating, with octanol proving a better surface “solvent” for PAHs than hexanoic acid.1 (a) D. E. Glotfelty, J. N. Seiber and L. A. Lilje, Nature, 1986, 325, 602; (b) D. E. Glotfelty, M. S. Majewski and J. N. Seiber, Env. Sci. Tech., 1990, 24, 353.2 P. D. Capel, C. Leuenberger and W. Giger, Atmos. Environ., Part A, 1991, 25, 1335.3 C. J. Schomburg, D. E. Glotfelty and J. N. Seiber, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1990, 25, 155.4 J. C. Sagebiel and J. N. Seiber, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 1993, 12, 813.5 P. S. Gill and T. E. Graedel, Rev. Geophys., 1983, 21(4), 903.6 H. Tervahattu, J. Juhanoja and K. Kupiainen, J. Geophys. Res., 2002 107, Art. no. 4319.7 H. Tervahattu, J. Juhanoja, V. Vaida, A. F. Tuck, J. V. Niemi, K. Kupiainen, M. Kulmala and H. Vehkamaki, J. Geophys. Res., 2005 110, Art. no. D06207.8 J. H. A. Lo and W. M. G. Lee, Chemosphere 1996, 33(7), 1391.9 B. T. Mmereki and D. J. Donaldson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 4186.10 B. T. Mmereki, S. R. Chaudhuri and D. J. Donaldson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 2264.Dr Ammann commented:(1) This paper nicely highlights the importance of surface processes. Several aspects associated with these include the competition for two-dimensional space, enhancement of surface reactions compared to bulk reactions, effects of surfactant layers, etc. We have developed a framework model for aerosol and cloud surface chemistry and gas particle interactions with consistent terminology for transport and physico-chemical processes, which are established in a simple and straightforward flux formalism.1 Exemplary simulations of time-dependent uptake processes and steady-state situations show the general applicability and convenience of the proposed framework, which are also relevant for the issues addressed in the present contribution.2(2) A specific comment concerns the slow recovery of the ms signal in Fig. 1a of the paper. From the fast drop at the moment, when the surface is exposed to the gas-phase naphthalene, I presume that memory effects are not significant in the experimental setup, and I would then expect an as fast recovery, when the lid is closed. If this slow recovery should be related to partitioning of the oleic acid substrate to the chamber walls and associated adsorption of naphthalene to this after the lid is closed, I wonder whether this does not affect the apparent uptake kinetics.1 U. Pöschl, Y. Rudich and M. Ammann, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 2005, 5, 2111–2191.2 M. Ammann and U. Pöschl, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 2005, 5, 2193–2246.Professor Donaldson responded: Dr Ammann points out that the recovery times observed for the mass spectrometer signal in the Knudsen cell when the substrate is isolated following exposure to the gas phase are longer using liquid substrates than solid (cf. Fig. 1 of our paper). This might be due to “creep” of the liquid substrate out of the substrate holder into the Knudsen cell proper. In this case, signal recovery would depend on the gas phase probe species (i.e., naphthalene) reaching equilibrium with this small amount of exposed liquid. As Dr Ammann correctly points out, this would introduce an error in the inferred uptake coefficient, since the substrate surface area exposed to the gas phase is no longer just that in the sample container. We believe that this effect may well be responsible for the low precision of the uptake coefficients we measure. The error estimates on the results given in Table 1 of the paper are on the order of 20–50%, which should account for this possible artefact.Professor Plane asked: In Fig. 6 in the paper, a linear regression through the experimental points at [O3] > O has a clear intercept on the ordinate. What does this indicate? One clue might emerge from comparing to the plot in Fig. 5 for oxidation of anthracene on a 1-octanol coated water surface. This shows a rapid increase to kobs
				∼ 0.0015 s−1 when [O3] reaches 1 × 1015 cm−3. If there was a similar increase in Fig. 6, this might imply that at low [O3] there is a surface-only reaction.Professor Donaldson replied: Professor Plane suggests that there could be a surface component to the reaction of gas phase ozone with anthracene dissolved in octanol, which is only important at low ozone concentrations. This is a very exciting possibility which we shall certainly be testing. With the experimental setup we used to obtain the results illustrated in Fig. 6, the S/N ratio becomes poor for ozone concentrations less than about 1015 molecule cm−3. We are improving the experimental system and hope to have kinetic results for lower ozone concentrations shortly.Dr McFiggans commented: Results are presented for uptake and ozone reaction on expanded and compressed films. Would the authors like to comment on the atmospheric likelihood of each and the relevance? What would be the effect in mixed organic systems where a uniform compressed film will not form at the molecular area corresponding to the stearic acid concentration shown?Professor Donaldson responded: Dr McFiggans asks an excellent question about whether organic-coated surfaces in the “real world”
				(as opposed to the laboratory) may be considered to be compressed, and also what the effect of mixed organic films might be on the results presented here. Fatty acid-coated particles have been observed in the field;1,2 it is not at all clear whether the coatings comprised compressed or expanded films, however. We have recently proposed various mechanisms by which film compression might take place in atmospheric aqueous particles.3 A report by Pogorzelski4 on the surface thermodynamics of real sea-surface microlayers suggests that, at least on the ocean surface, the film is clearly a multicomponent mixture, and that it is in an expanded state.1 H. Tervahattu, J. Juhanoja and K. Kupiainen, J. Geophys. Res., 2002, 107, Art. no. 4319.2 H. Tervahattu, J. Juhanoja, V. Vaida, A. F. Tuck, J. V. Niemi, K. Kupiainen, M. Kulmala and H. Vehkamaki, J. Geophys. Res., 2005, 110, Art. no. D06207.3 D. J. Donaldson, A. F. Tuck and V. Vaida, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 5270.4 S. J. Pogorzelski, Colloids Surf., A, 2001, 189, 163.Dr Eisfeld addressed Professor Abbatt:(1) It is discussed that real atmospheric ice particles are quite different from the ones produced in the laboratory. They seem to consist of an ice core surrounded by a shell of liquid water containing up to 40% of electrolytes. How can the presented laboratory results be compared to the situation in the real atmosphere?(2) The repeated exposure results (Fig. 3) indicate some aging of the surface. Could this be related to the effect of a liquid water/nitric acid layer forming, making the particles more similar to the ones proposed in the real atmosphere?Professor Abbatt replied: It is possible that the surfaces of the cirrus cloud particles contain electrolytes, perhaps from sulfate aerosol scavenging or if the ice particle formed via homogeneous freezing of an aqueous aerosol. If electrolytes exist on the surface of the ice then the uptake of nitric acid may be affected. The question is how much of the surface is “contaminated” in this manner. Given the relatively high surface areas that can exist in cirrus compared to the total sulfate aerosol loading, and the rapid growth conditions that cirrus frequently experience, the total surface coverages may not be high. I am not aware of any measurements that support a liquid water shell with up to 40% electrolytes but if such a shell is present it will have a huge effect on the uptake of trace gases such as nitric acid.With respect to your second point, yes, we believe the uptake of nitric acid is suppressed in the repeated exposure experiments because some nitric acid remains on/in the ice after the initial exposure. In this regard, the subsequent exposure may well be more representative of uptake of nitric acid to surfaces that have been previously exposed.Footnote† Also Dr U. Frieß, EOS, Departments of Chemistry and Physics/Astronomy, University of Leicester, UK.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Slant column NO2 as retrieved from a CMAX-DOAS instrument on January 17th 2004.	 

 	Fig. 2  Averaging kernels for the aerosol extinction vertical profile from MAX-DOAS measurements of the O4 optical depth and relative intensity measured at four wavelengths (360, 477, 577 and 640 nm) and elevations of 20°, 10°, 5° and 2° for a visibility of 25 km. Averaging kernels represent the sensitivity of the retrieved profile to changes in the true profile with the altitudes of the retrieval levels indicated on the diagram.	 
Jup
						=
						ωc(z1) and Jdown
						=
						−ωc(z2)	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Sketch of the expansion of Prandtl’s mixing length theory to include the chemical loss L1 and L2.	 
	(3)

 		 
NO3−
						+
						hν
						→
						[NO3−*]	(1)
[NO3−*]
						→ NO2−
						+ O(3P)	(2)
[NO3−*]
						→ NO2
						+ O−	(3a)
O−
						+ H2O → OH + OH−	(3b)

 	Fig. 4  Plots of NO2−
					(upper trace, dark line) and F−HONO (lower trace, lighter line) mass spectrometer signals vs. time from illumination of a frozen sample of 10 wt.% nitric acid at 228 K and 0% RH. The various bars indicate the different long-pass wavelength cutoff filters used, with the cutoff wavelength (in nm) indicated.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of experimental data (points) and simulated HNO3 concentration changes following exposure to an ice film. Conditions as Fig. 1A of Ullerstam et al. Thin continuous line using Langmuir constant, Keq, reported in the paper; other lines using Keq reduced by 30% and with different rates of diffusion into bulk ice film.	 
Footnote
† Also Dr U. Frieß, EOS, Departments of Chemistry and Physics/Astronomy, University of Leicester, UK.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
