Doping graphene with boron: a review of synthesis methods, physicochemical characterization, and emerging applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA10599D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA10599D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5002-5025Doping graphene with boron: a review of synthesis methods, physicochemical characterization, and emerging applications

        
          
            Stefano 
            Agnoli
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Marco 
            Favaro
          
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Chemical Sciences, University of Padova, Via F. Marzolo 1, 35131 Padova, Italy. E-mail: stefano.agnoli@unipd.it
bAdvanced Light Source (ALS), Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (JCAP), Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Rd., Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
Received 
      24th December 2015
    , Accepted 10th February 2016First published on 2nd March 2016AbstractGraphene based materials can be effectively modified by doping in order to specifically tailor their properties toward specific applications. So far the most used and widely investigated dopant heteroatom is probably nitrogen. However, boron is also an equally important element that can induce novel and complementary properties leading to specific implementation in alternative devices and technologies. In this paper, we survey the most recent preparation methods of boron doped graphene, including materials with specific morphology such as nanoribbons, quantum dots and 3D interconnected systems. We illustrate the results of theoretical and experimental studies dealing with the description and understanding of the main structural, electronic and chemical properties of this material. The emerging applications of boron doped graphene in several technological fields such as electrochemistry, sensors, photovoltaics, catalysis and biology are extensively reviewed.Stefano AgnoliStefano Agnoli studied Materials Science at the University of Padua, obtaining his PhD degree in 2006. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the same institution in the surface science group of Prof. G. Granozzi, focusing on the investigation of ultrathin oxide films using electron spectroscopies and local probes. From 2009 to 2010, he was associated with the group directed by Dr J. A. Rodriguez at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in New York, where he studied the catalytic properties of ceria-based materials. In 2015, Stefano was awarded the Raffaello Nasini Medal by the Inorganic Division of Italia Chemical Society, a national award recognising the most meritorious young Italian scientist in the field of Inorganic Chemistry. He is currently an associate professor at the University of Padua, and his present research activity is focused on the study of structural and chemical properties of graphene and other two dimensional materials.Marco FavaroMarco Favaro received his BS in 2009 and completed his MS degree in 2011 in Materials Science at the University of Padua under the supervision of Prof. Gaetano Granozzi. From 2011 to 2015, he worked at the same institution pursuing a PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering under the supervision of Prof. Stefano Agnoli. After completing his PhD degree in 2015, he moved to the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (USA), where he currently holds a joint post-doctoral fellowship at the Advanced Light Source and the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis. His current research interest focuses on the investigation of the processes occurring at the solid/liquid interfaces by means of operando ambient pressure X ray absorption and photoelectron spectroscopy.
Introduction
After a few years of extremely intense research, graphene is still a brightly shining star in the materials science horizon. Soon after its discovery, graphene had been extensively studied because of the relativistic physics of massless Dirac fermions1 and its fascinating physical properties such as superb electrical, mechanical and thermal properties.2 Nowadays however, the main focus of scientists has clearly shifted toward the investigation of graphene based materials with specific morphology and chemical functionalization.3 The easy manipulation of the physicochemical properties of graphene has allowed the development of a wide gamut of materials that are tailored for specific applications that encompass extremely diversified technological fields such as energetics,4 sensors,5 biomedicine,6 and photovoltaics.7
The chemical functionalization of graphene involves the modification of the carbon sp2 lattice, by introducing heteroatoms, usually known as doping, or covalent bonds with specific functional groups or even other molecules. The possibility of tuning the chemistry of graphene soon emerged as a powerful tool to endow this material with relevant new properties or to modify on demand its intrinsic capabilities.8 Actually, chemically modified graphene exhibits quite interesting properties such as superconductivity, ferromagnetism, and enhanced chemical and electrochemical activity, which promote a widespread application of graphene-based materials in different technologies.
Chemical doping is maybe the most basic modification of graphene, and in its simplest form consists of substituting one carbon atom with another element. Several types of dopants have been introduced in graphene such as S, P, Se, O, Si, I, and many different metals. On the other hand, boron and nitrogen have definitely attracted most of the scientists' attention, since their atomic radii are similar to that of carbon. Nitrogen, the first dopant introduced in graphene, has been widely exploited for inducing n-type conductivity, representing therefore a key element for the development of microelectronic devices. In addition, it has been discovered that its introduction in the graphene lattice can efficiently boost the catalytic performances in several electrochemical processes, and especially for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).9 A number of studies and detailed investigations have focused on nitrogen-doped graphene (N-G), attaining a quite detailed understanding of its properties. The wide knowledge gained in the last few years about the synthesis of these novel materials has led to many remarkable applications in different fields.9
From the electronic point of view, boron represents the other side of the coin with respect to nitrogen, since it is less electronegative (even less than carbon), and induces p-type conductivity in graphene. Although the introduction of boron (similarly to nitrogen) can trigger a quite interesting chemical and electrochemical activity in the graphene basal plane, the research on boron-doped graphene (B-G) has been less impetuous than on nitrogen N-G, and only recently has reached the same maturity in terms of synthesis procedures, study of physicochemical properties, and technological implementation in practical applications. In this paper we will survey all these aspects of B-G and we will also provide indications about the further directions of future research concerning this promising material.
Synthesis
The doping of graphene by heteroatoms is a very large field that exploits the solid experience accumulated in previous studies on the doping of other carbon based materials such as nanotubes, fullerenes, diamonds and mesoporous carbons. Moreover, most of the methods developed for the doping of graphene with N, S, or P can be applied also in the case of boron, granted a suitable choice of the dopant source.
The most commonly used techniques vary from solid state reactions at high temperature, hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis, gas–solid reactions, electrochemical methods, chemical vapour deposition, and on-surface catalysed reactions. These methods can also be divided into bottom-up or direct methods, where the boron doped material is synthesized starting from molecular carbon and boron precursors, and post-synthesis methods based on the chemical functionalization of preformed graphene. In this latter case, the most common graphene precursors are usually graphene oxide (GO) or its reduced form (RGO).
It is noteworthy considering that the introduction of heteroatoms into the honeycomb lattice of graphene in a substitutional manner is rather arduous due to the strong stability of the C–C bonds. Nonetheless, DFT calculations have demonstrated that boron is one of the atoms that can displace C atoms from the lattice more efficiently, even if this process is associated with a large activation energy barrier (1.3 eV).10
Solid state synthesis
In one of the first papers dealing with B-G,11 the material was obtained by a top-down method employing arc discharge of graphene electrodes in the presence of diborane as the heteroatom source and hydrogen in order to prevent the rolling of the graphene sheets into nanotubes. By this method, boron atoms could replace the carbon atoms in the sp2 lattice of graphene leading to a substitutionally doped material with a doping level comprised between 1 and 3%. The same authors also proposed an alternative synthesis employing the simple arc discharge of graphite electrodes packed with 3% boron atoms.11 Transmission electron microscopy investigation indicated that by both these methods, few layer (2–5 layers) graphene was formed and that the introduction of boron led to an enhanced morphological defectivity.
The most widely exploited synthesis of B-G is based on the solid state reaction between graphite powder or GO, and a boron precursor, mainly H3BO3, B2O3 or B4C. Subsequently, boron doped graphite can be mechanically exfoliated in order to obtain single sheets of B-G that are very useful for basic studies.12,13
If the starting material is pure graphite and the temperature is very high (>2000 °C), mainly substitutional doping is carried out. If instead GO and lower temperature (900–1200 °C) are used, a more complex material is formed, usually bearing several different functional groups ranging from substitutional boron, to boronic and borinic esters, and boronic acids (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Ball model of B-G showing some of the most common boron induced defects. 
GO can be doped by gas–solid reactions: for example Pumera et al.14 have used thermal exfoliation of GO in the presence of boron trifluoride diethyl etherate (BF3Et2O) as a boron precursor. By tuning the temperature and composition of the gaseous atmosphere (i.e. H2/N2 ratio), different amounts of boron could be introduced in the carbon lattice; however, the overall amount of doping was very small, being only up to 590 ppm.
RGO can be doped by the direct reaction with vapors of BCl3 in Ar (1/4 v/v) at 800 °C for 2 hours. Also in this case the amount of doping was very little (<1%) and mainly of substitutional type.15
The most used synthetic route for preparing B-G is however based on the direct solid state reaction between GO obtained by the Hummers' method and boric acid or B2O3 (see Fig. 2).16,17 The two materials are grinded together and annealed at high temperature (900–1200 °C) in an Ar atmosphere. During thermal annealing, the reduction of GO and the introduction of boron into the lattice take place at the same time. This leads to a relatively defective material with a significant variety of functional groups as determined by photoemission spectroscopy. Also the amount of boron that can be introduced in the structure varies according to different studies, but in general is comprised between 0.5 and 10%.
 Fig. 2  Illustration of the typical reaction scheme for the synthesis of B-G via solid state reactions (reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Several variations of this method have been developed; in order to obtain a material with special morphology, Yeom et al.18 started from a solution of GO and B2O3 that was ultrasonicated and freeze dried. After thermal annealing, graphene nanoplatelets with very homogeneous boron doping (up to 6%) could be collected. To obtain materials with higher surface area, in place of simple GO sheets Xu et al. used a graphene aerogel prepared by hydrothermal synthesis followed by freeze drying.19 Other authors20 mixed GO with a B2O3 solution and collected the resulting sediment. This was quickly cooled down to −78 °C, obtaining a solid composite formed by ice, GO and B2O3. In the final step the frozen composite was quickly moved to a hot furnace (800 °C). The resulting material showed moderate level of doping (up to 3%) accompanied by an appreciably high surface area (above 600 m2 g−1).
More recently, high quality B doped graphene layers have been obtained using a SiC(0001) single crystal heavily doped by boron, by exploiting the expertise on the well-known controlled sublimation method to produce epitaxial graphene from SiC. To further enrich the substrate of dopant atoms, boron and silicon were directly evaporated on the surface; subsequently, the system was annealed at high temperature to promote the removal of Si from the surface, leaving an epitaxial graphene layer doped by boron (0.1%).21
Another interesting method for the preparation of B-G is based on the thermal decomposition of B4C at very high temperature.22 Such an approach has been recently optimized for the high yield production of graphene: rhombohedral B4C was annealed at very high temperature (1200–1600 °C) in an inert atmosphere (N2), so that by surface precipitation it was possible to obtain a few layer graphene phase (4–5 layer thick with grains of a few microns) trapping boron atoms. Then, the graphene sheets could be easily removed from the parent B4C crystals by using a simple water based separation technique.23
B-G can be obtained by the reaction of activated graphene sheets and a borylation agent. B. R. Sathe et al. started from GO previously thermally reduced at 600 °C in order to form reactive sites; the so-obtained RGO was then treated with the borane tetrahydrofuran complex at reflux, inducing boron substitution (2%) into the graphene lattice.24 Interestingly, in this work the authors verified that the borane tetrahydrofuran (BH3–THF) adduct was the best borylation agent among B2O3, H3BO3, NaBH4, carborane, and NH3BH3.
Another simple synthesis route is based on the high temperature pyrolysis of a tetraphenylborate salt at 900 °C under autogenic pressure in the presence of graphene.25 This method leads to the introduction of several types of boron defects with a B/C ratio of about 1%.
In a very recent paper, B-G was obtained by starting from a solution of polyamidic acid and boric acid, which was dried, thermally and mechanically treated to obtain a composite film of polyimide and BOx. Subsequently, by irradiation with a CO2 cutting laser system, the material was converted to B-G (Fig. 3).26 One very interesting feature of this synthesis is the wide versatility and the possibility to deposit B-G on patterned areas on flexible substrates.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the laser induced formation of B-G starting from a boron oxide polyimide composite. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Liquid phase synthesis
Hydrothermal and solvothermal methods have been widely used for the preparation of graphene materials with special morphology and surface functionalization. This expertise has also been applied to the production of boron doped materials. GO solutions can be treated under supercritical conditions in the presence of a suitable boron source (NaBH4), in order to obtain B-G with different morphologies.27,28
A fully bottom-up synthesis at low temperature (150–210 °C) has been employed in ref. 29: by reacting potassium and carbon tetrachloride, a Wurtz type reductive coupling can take place forming –CC– units that eventually assembled into small hexagonal patches and then larger sheets. Doping up to 2.5% could be obtained in a very short time, paving the way for a scalable way to produce B-G in high yield.
Similarly, boron doped nanoplatelets have been produced by the solvothermal Wurtz reaction of carbon tetrachloride and potassium in the presence of boron tribromide at 270 °C for 30 minutes. However, the obtained boron doping was very limited and in order to introduce a significant amount of heteroatoms codoping with nitrogen was necessary.30
Boron doped nanoplatelets have been produced from standard GO sheets obtained by the Hummer method, which have been mechanically cut to smaller dimensions. The obtained solution was then treated at reflux for 4 days in the presence of BH3–THF adduct.31 The resulting materials exhibited a relevant surface area (466 m2 g−1).
Quite recently, a rapid method for a quick and economical synthesis of B-G has been developed. A GO suspension has been mixed with a B2O3 solution and stirred for 8 h at 60 °C in order to promote the reaction between the two. After purification and drying, the solid was exfoliated in a microwave oven (700 W) for 45 s, leading to the final product.32
CVD synthesis
CVD is one of the leading techniques for the production of graphene based materials of high quality on large areas. Such as in the case of pure graphene, several metal substrates have been identified for the efficient growth of doped materials. Among these, the most widely used are Ni and Cu foils, but also Ru(0001), Co(0001), Ni(111) and Cu(111) single crystals were used. Generally, boron doped graphenes are produced by exploiting the same procedures optimized for the preparation of standard graphene with the addition of a source of boron, mostly in gaseous form such as diborane (B2H6),33 carborane (C2B10H12),34 and 4-methoxyphenylboronic acid.35
One of the first papers dealing with the CVD growth B-G of was the work of Cattelan et al.,36 which exploited a combination of CH4 and B2H6 and polycrystalline copper as a substrate. The high growth temperature (950 °C) and the low pressure regime allowed us to obtain monolayer films with significant doping levels (up to 2.5%). Nonetheless boron was present as a combination of several types of defects (i.e. substitutional and oxidized terminal species), as determined by photoemission spectroscopy. Interestingly, the authors demonstrated the possibility of growing 2D core/shell undoped/B-doped nanostructures by a sequential procedure. Besides gases, solid precursors can be exploited for the preparation of B-G. T. Wu et al.,37 used polystyrene and boric acid powders in an Ar carrier to grow doped single layer graphene films on copper at about 1000 °C. Under these conditions, the resulting material presented an amount of dopant up to 5% and showed very good charge carrier mobility between 450 and 650 cm2 V−1 s−1, which demonstrated the good quality of the films. Other authors developed a very simple procedure where only one solid precursor is used (phenylboronic acid) to grow a large monolayer wafer size polycrystalline graphene film in an H2 stream at 950 °C on copper foils (see Fig. 4).38
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the CVD deposition of B-G on Cu foils by using phenylboronic acid. Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2013 Wiley VCH. 
B-G with a 50 meV band gap was also synthesized by CVD using a mixture of solid and liquid precursors, namely boron powder and ethanol.39 In this case the resulting materials are multilayer (3–5 layers) films, with high optical transparences (95.7% at 550 nm) and good conductivity (1500–2000 Ω sq−1).
Very large grains (up to 7 μm) have been recently obtained by a CVD method at ambient pressure, which were safe and easy to handle liquid precursors: hexane for carbon and triethylborane for boron. Relatively large copper foils (5 × 5 cm2) could be homogeneously covered by a single layer of doped graphene with a doping level of about 1.7%.40 A similar route was previously used under ultra high vacuum (UHV) conditions to grow B-G on a Ni(111) single crystal, using triethylborane as a combined carbon and boron source.41
Taking the cue from these early results, other groups have tackled the study of graphene films in more controlled conditions, often using single crystals and UHV environments.34 On Ni(111) a combination of propylene and carborane allowed the growth of monolayer films with substitutional doping. The growth rate of graphene had to be optimized in order to suppress the formation of a NiBx phase. Doping as high as 15% could be obtained, but in this case there was a severe modification of the graphene structure with the formation of several point defects and a progressive loss of the preferential orientation with respect to the Ni(111) substrate. Moreover, for low doping levels, the B atoms show a strong preference to enter the graphene lattice in only one type of graphene sublattice (i.e. A or B sites). Better results in terms of structural order were obtained by the same authors using Co(0001) as the substrate. In this case, the presence of Dirac cones, which is the signature of a highly perfect graphenic structure, could be observed up to a doping level of 15% (at/at). In this case the Dirac energy was found at about 2.2 eV below the Fermi level, because of the strong interaction with the metal substrate. Recently,42 it has been shown that by exposing graphene grown on Ru(0001) to diborane even at room temperature, a doped material can be easily obtained. In this case a pivotal role is played by the substrate: calculations based on climbing-image nudged elastic band indicated that the C atom, which is displaced by B, is strongly stabilized by bonding to the metal substrate, reducing to 0.1 eV the activation energy barrier of the doping process.
One recurring aspect of most CVD syntheses is the difficulty to obtain large crystalline grains. In particular, one notable complication with respect to pure graphene growth is the concomitant formation of metal boride species on the catalytic substrate, which complicates the growth procedures.34,36 Moreover, a relatively large pressure of boron precursors is generally needed (i.e. the B/C ratio in the feeding stream is much higher than in the resulting materials), indicating that the introduction of boron into the lattice of graphene is kinetically hindered.10,36 Nonetheless, CVD grown materials usually present a higher fraction or even exclusively substitutional doping,34,43 with an overall lower defectivity compared to the materials obtained by solid–solid or gas–solid reactions from GO.
Post functionalization
Mechanically exfoliated graphene sheets were doped by using microwave plasma using an atmosphere of H2 and trimethyl boron (9:1) at 300 °C, followed by thermal annealing at 400 °C in vacuum.44 By using this method it was possible to obtain high quality layers with a homogeneous boron doping up to 13.8%. According to the photoemission data of B 1s and C 1s core levels, only substitutional doping takes place.
Graphene grown by high temperature surface segregation on the SiC(0001) substrate has been postfunctionalized by implantation of boron atoms with a kinetic energy of 25 eV and a fluence of 3 × 1014 cm−2. In this case the amount of doping is very low (0.8%), associated also with the formation of other defects (accounting for 0.05%), such as carbon vacancies and sp2–sp3 re-hybridization.45
Recently, GO sheets have been functionalized with boronic acid-derived molecules. A direct reaction of GO solution with 3-aminophenylboronic acid was performed at 70 °C for 3 hours, by exploiting the coupling between amine and epoxide groups.46
Synthesis of boron nanographenes
The need for exploiting material properties that depend on the confinement to nanometer dimension has pushed scientists to the search of different approaches for the synthesis of nanographenes. Both bottom-up and top-down methods were employed for preparing different types of morphologies such as quantum dots (i.e. small patches of single or few layer graphene with a diameter below 5–10 nm), and nanoribbons (single layer nanosheets with a high aspect ratio and where one dimension is in general below 5 nm). Whereas the methods based on organic chemistry reactions either in solution or by surface catalysed reactions allow the obtainment of nanographenes with highly controlled structures, other methods based on electrochemistry or solvothermal synthesis are more suitable for large yield production, but at the expense of a poorer control on the structural properties.
Nanodots
The first paper47 reporting the preparation of B-G quantum dots was based on an organic chemistry synthesis conducted in solution. The reaction involved the oxidative cyclodehydrogenation (Scholl reaction) of a 6,13-dihydro-6,13-diborapentacene precursor bearing an orthogonal anthryl group on each boron atom (see the simplified reaction scheme in Fig. 5). Bulky mesityloxy substituents were introduced at the 4,5-positions of the anthracene moieties, therefore cyclization could take place selectively at the 1,8-positions and the so-formed aromatic molecules were prevented from stacking. The result is the formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon molecules with boron atoms in substitutional positions.
 Fig. 5  Reaction scheme for the preparation of boron doped quantum dots by cyclodehydrogenation of substituted diborapentacene precursors. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2012 Wiley VCH. 
More recently, similar nanographenes were obtained by the oxidative cyclodehydrogenation of dianthryl-substituted dihydrodiboropentacene using FeCl3 as the catalyst.48 Also in this case, different types of alkoxy (mesityloxy, butoxyl, dodecyloxy) peripheral groups were introduced in the anthracene moiety in order to control the stacking and crystallinity of the resulting material. Notably, all these organic methods maintain the initial configuration of the boron atom bond to three carbon atoms.
Another route toward the formation of boron-doped nanographene is based on electrochemical methods. In particular, the electrochemical etching of graphene based electrodes allows the obtainment of boron doped graphene quantum dots (B-GQDs).49–51 Several studies provide different procedures, although a general method can be identified by using an electrode made by graphite or GO, which is used as the working electrode in a solution containing a boron precursor (borax,51 1,4-phenylenbis(boronic acid)50). For example in ref. 49 and 50 B-GQDs have been obtained by the extended electrochemical cycling (at ±3 V with respect to Ag/AgCl) of a GO electrode. The doping obtained in this way is not selective since several different radical processes can be active on the electrode surface, which lead to multiple reactions between the GO sheets and the boron precursor.49,50 The B-GQDs obtained in this way are in general single or few layer thick, with a diameter of about 2–8 nm and because of their molecular-like nature they exhibit interesting photoluminescence properties.49,51
Another route for the preparation of quantum dots is based on the hydrothermal method. In this case B-G was used as a starting material, which after extended treatment with acids and sonication was introduced in an autoclave for 11.5 hours at 200 °C under basic conditions (pH 8).52 B-GQDs with sizes ranging from 2 to 5 nm and a boron doping level of about 4% (substitutional and CBOx groups) could be obtained. The same method was also used in ref. 53; in this case, the starting boron doped graphene sheets were obtained by the arc discharge of graphite electrodes in the presence of diborane, He and H2.
The usually time-expensive process characteristic of the hydrothermal methods can be conveniently reduced by the support of microwave heating. After treating an aqueous solution of GO and borax (Na2B4O7) for 30 minutes in a Teflon digestion jar at 230 °C under microwave irradiation, highly luminescent boron doped GO quantum dots with about 1.4% B doping were produced.54
Nanoribbons
Quite recently, spatially controlled nanoribbons have been obtained by surface polymerization of halogen substituted polyaromatic cyclic hydrocarbons through an Ullmann type on-surface polymerization.55 A specifically designed halide substituted precursor bearing B atoms inside aromatic carbon rings, that is 5,10-bis(10-bromoanthracene-9-yl)-5,10-dihydroboranthrene, has been deposited on the Au(111) surface under UHV conditions. Annealing at moderate temperature (220 °C) induced the cleavage of the C–Br bonds and the formation of linear polymers made up by alternating units of boranthrene and anthracene. Annealing at higher temperature (300 °C) led to a cyclodehydrogenation that converts the polymer to linear nanoribbons with armchair edges that are 7 carbon atom wide (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the Ullmann coupling reaction that leads to the formation of boron doped nanoribbons. STM image before (b) and after (c) annealing at 180 °C. (d) Large area STM topography of the condensed nanoribbons formed after annealing at 400 °C. Adapted from ref. 56 under CC BY license. 
The same route was further pursued by S. Kawai et al.56 who demonstrated also that by heating at higher temperature (510 °C) the single nanoribbons can be fused together to form wider condensed structures, i.e. 14 and 21 carbon atom wide nanoribbons.
A more scalable way for preparing doped graphene nanoribbons has been developed by M. Xing et al.,57 who were able to prepare boron doped nanoribbons of 150–200 nm length and 20–40 nm width. The synthesis protocol was based on the vacuum activation of GO, which was previously treated at 70 °C with H3BO3 to form B–O–C bonds. During the thermal treatment, these bonds induce a significant strain in the carbon lattice with the consequent opening of the C–C bonds along straight lines on the graphene basal plane. The so-produced line defects characterized by oxidized edges are formed following a mechanism similar to the classic oxidative unzipping of carbon nanotubes under hydrothermal conditions. These oxidized edges preferentially react with boron oxide and induce the rupture of further C–C bonds. The anoxic conditions of the synthesis favor the loss of oxygen and the reaction of boron with unsaturated carbon sites of the graphene lattice leading to an efficient doping.
Physicochemical properties: theory and experiments
The introduction of boron in the graphene lattice has significant effects on the physicochemical properties of the material. The most notable feature is represented by the change in the electronic properties, and in particular by the possibility to induce a small energy band gap and p-type conductivity. This aspect has been widely investigated both theoretically and experimentally. Most of these studies, especially the ones supported by theoretical computations, usually assume that a boron atom substitutes a carbon atom in the graphitic lattice, but this is a very simplified assumption with respect to real materials that in general are more complicated and characterized by the presence of a large variety of boron based defects. Only recently theoretical investigations have shed new light on the presence of more complex organoborane functionalities and studied their reactivity.58
The electric properties of B-G have been thoroughly investigated in ref. 44. Materials with different B contents (substitutional to carbon) were prepared by post functionalization of micromechanically exfoliated graphene sheets by exposure to a microwave plasma containing trimethylborane. Measurements obtained by field effect transistors indicate that B-G has a lower conductivity (hole mobility μh was estimated to be ∼550 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 7.5% B doping) with respect to pristine graphene, probably because of the presence of defects induced by the doping procedure. The material exhibits p-type conductivity and a small band gap as determined by the plot of on/off ratio versus source/drain voltage. All the electrical properties are very sensitive to the amount of boron, for example the mobility was decreased from ∼894 to ∼197 cm2 V−1 s−1 with an increasing B content from ∼3.6 to ∼13.8 atom%. Similarly, the energy band gap resulted to be 0.19, 0.32, 0.42, and 0.54 eV for B concentrations of ∼3.6, 7.3, 11.3, and 13.8 atom%, respectively (Fig. 7). DFT calculations qualitatively support the experimental data confirming the presence of p-type doping and the induction of a band gap as a consequence of the presence of boron. For example, an energy gap of about 0.15 eV is calculated for the ∼2.8 atom% B-G, nevertheless the actual values are very dependent on the structural model used for the calculations.44 In particular, the theoretical energy band gaps are found to be 0, 0.15, 0.20, 0.25, 0.39, and 0.61 eV for a boron concentration of 0, 1.4, 2.8, 4.2, 5.6, 9.7, and 16.7 atom%, respectively (Fig. 7).44
 Fig. 7  (a) On/off and mobility measurements for B-doped graphene with different amounts of doping. (b) Comparison of the calculated vs. experimental band gap (c) calculated density of states of the B-G as a function of B content. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
DFT calculations on 3.125% boron doped self-standing graphene bilayers11 suggest that there is an interaction between the layers operated by B, which leads to a reduction of 2.7% in the interlayer spacing. The formation energy of B-G starting from graphene and gaseous dopant atoms is 5.6 eV per atom. Calculations of the band structure indicate that the linear dispersion of the Dirac cones is maintained even in the presence of the dopant. In case of 2% boron substitution, the Fermi level shifts to about −0.65 eV with respect to the Dirac energy, indicating a p-type conductivity. This effect is partially due to an electronic effect (96%) and partially to a strain effect (4%), as a matter of fact C–B bonds are 0.5% longer than C–C bonds.11
Not only the concentration, but also the spatial arrangement of the dopants plays a crucial role: DFT and tight binding calculations indicate the opening of an energy band gap when the boron dopants are arranged according to a D3h symmetry, whereas honey comb superlattices (D6h) preserve the Dirac cones.59 Similarly, P. Rani et al. have found that the energy band gap in B-G is wider when the dopants are introduced in the same sublattice, whereas there is an opposite effect when they are placed on adjacent positions.60
A very detailed theoretical investigation of B-G has been recently undertaken by the group of C. Di Valentin.61,62 By using different DFT methods based on vdWDF2C09x and PBE-D2 approaches, the authors investigated B-doped graphene supported on Cu(111), trying to disentangle the effect of the lattice strain from the electronic interaction with the substrate usually occurring on supported systems. Free standing B-G shows a huge p doping (1 eV) and even the presence of a small energy band gap (0.2 eV), due to the depletion of one electron with respect to pure graphene. On the other hand, B-G interacts very strongly with the Cu(111) surface. The dopant atom prefers to sit in a hollow site with respect to the substrate, and an increase of −0.76 eV per atom in the adsorption energy of the graphene film takes place (Fig. 8a). The presence of empty pz states on B allows a chemical interaction with the substrate, so that the graphene–substrate spacing locally reduces from 2.98 Å to 2.18 Å; moreover, a relevant (0.47–0.45 eV) charge transfer occurs from the substrate to graphene. The band structure of B-G in contact with Cu is then strongly perturbed, whereas the effect of the lattice spacing (2.47 Å for unstrained graphene and 2.52 Å for graphene epitaxially matched to Cu(111)) is less important (Fig. 8). Furthermore, it is possible to observe a strong metal component in the band structure especially at 2 eV below the Fermi level, due to the interaction between B and Cu. The strong metal donation from the metal can compensate for the holes induced by the presence of B and fill the valence band so that overall the B-G is slightly n-doped. This theoretical prediction is well in agreement with the angle resolved photoemission measurements of Cattelan et al.36
 Fig. 8  (a) Ball model of B-G; (b) density of states of pristine (top panel) and B-G (bottom panel) supported on Cu(111) with unstrained unit cell, (c) same as (b) but with the lattice constant of graphene strained to match the Cu(111) surface unit cell. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
A very comprehensive investigation of charge transport based on an extensive numerical study has been carried out on B-G using the Kubo–Greenwood transport formalism.63
In this work it was found that for low (0.1%) boron doping, semiballistic conduction is still possible over hundreds of nanometers, whereas for a higher amount (>0.5%) a diffusive regime takes place, and eventually weak localization can be observed at >2% doping. Calculations indicate that the introduction of boron induces p-doping and a broadening of the Van Hove singularities.
Also B-G nanoribbons have been widely studied because of their potential to exhibit a tuneable band gap, which could be used for more versatile applications in microelectronics.
Model (3,0) nanoribbons with zig-zag edges have been studied in ref. 64. Boron atoms preferentially occupy edge sites, probably because the strain induced by the heteroatom can be efficiently minimized. The presence of boron atoms (overall 1.6% with respect to C atoms) at the nanoribbon edge determines the opening of an energy gap between the π and π* bands, which affects more strongly the spin up levels. When the amount of dopants is increased, repulsive interactions between boron atoms take place. Calculations of transport properties of B doped nanoribbons indicate that the transmittance is strongly depended on the spin state, whereas on pure materials is spin degeneration.
Boron atoms in the graphene lattice determine the presence of holes that are filled by spin-up electrons coming from the nearby carbon atoms. On the other hand, spin-down electrons are only weakly affected by the doping since it implies a lower density of states for spin-down electrons close to the Fermi level. The efficiency of boron as a scattering center for spin-up electrons decreases as the nanoribbon width is increased; for a critical length of 6.6 nm, both channels reach an almost equal transmittance.64
Other investigations confirm the nature of boron atoms as electron acceptors whose impurity potential extends for a few Å.65 In the investigated armchair nanoribbons, boron atoms result to be strong hole scatterers, whereas interact much more weakly with electrons. This leads to an asymmetry in the transport properties and to the formation of a “mobility gap” in the valence band, i.e. the presence of an energy interval where the scattering hinders conduction, but at the same time, good transport properties are maintained in the conduction band. This behavior is predicted for both semiconductive and quasi-metallic nanoribbons and increases with the boron content.65
Other calculations on armchair semiconducting graphene nanoribbons indicate that the introduction of the dopant at the edges determines new states on the dopant site at 0.8 eV above the Fermi level, but this has a very limited effect on the energy band gap (small decrease of −32 meV).66
Several techniques are commonly used to characterize both the morphology and the chemical and electronic properties of B-G. In this work we will focus only on Raman spectroscopy, photoemission spectroscopy and scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM), since they are the most informative about the real nature of the defects, as well as about the physicochemical changes induced by boron into the material.
Raman spectroscopy is the most standard technique used to characterize carbon-based materials due to its sensitivity towards the material structure, defectivity, electronic properties and morphology.67
The Raman spectrum of micromechanically exfoliated B-G (obtained by a high temperature reaction between graphite and boric acid) has been thoroughly investigated in ref. 12. The most intense signal comes from the G-band at 1580 cm−1, which corresponds to the breathing of the carbon rings. A further band centered at about 2735 cm−1 (G′) is connected to the second order two photon process triggered by double resonance. The introduction of boron in the carbon lattice leads to the appearance of a new set of bands (labelled as D and D′) at 1345 cm−1 and 1622 cm−1, which are due to defect-induced double resonance. Finally, a third band is observable at 2950 cm−1, which arises from the combination of the D + G bands. Actually, the presence of a boron atom induces a breaking of the translational symmetry of the carbon honeycomb lattice. The D-band is 7 times more intense than the G-band, whereas the D′ and G bands show almost the same intensity. The comparison of the intensity ratio of D vs. G band in B-G vs. B doped graphite suggests a strong interaction between boron defects and the carbon atoms on the adjacent planes, therefore the scattering amplitude of the D band strongly reduces in multilayers. These findings suggest that the boron atom can change the coupling interaction between different layers. On the other hand, the intensity variation of the D band as a function of boron content follows the same trend of defective graphene prepared by ion implantation.68 Interestingly, no correlation between the boron doping level and the spectral position of the G band has been detected. This unusual observation was ascribed to two counteracting phenomena: stiffening caused by the p-doping and softening induced by the boron induced tensile strain.67
Other authors however, reported a shift of the G band position as a function of doping boron content11 for both monolayer and bilayer B-G. In order to explain this behaviour it was necessary to include not only the effect of the change in the B–C bond lengths but also complex dynamic effects (such as phonon scattering and reflections localized at the boron site).69
X-ray photoemission spectroscopy is probably one of the most used techniques to study the chemical nature of boron based defects. A careful examination of several papers reporting photoemission data provide quite diverging views about the attribution of the different boron related defects, with differences as large as a few eV in the binding energy (BE) position of the B 1s photoemission peak. These differences can be possibly ascribed to the very different structural properties among the investigated materials. Actually, materials obtained by GO are rather defective and are characterized by several different boron based defects, whereas in the monolayer materials obtained by CVD an important role in the photoemission process (doping, final state screening and direct chemical interaction) is played by the chemical identity of the metal substrate. Substitutional boron atoms are mainly observed in CVD prepared systems and are generally identified by the BE position of the B 1s peak lower than 189.0 eV,12,23,34,40 whereas in the case of materials prepared by the reaction of GO with a boron precursor, mostly borinic (C2BO) and boronic (CBO2) groups are found at BE positions ranging between 189.5 and 192 eV.36,52
Notably, the introduction of substitutional boron atoms into the graphene lattice should also induce a change in the C 1s spectrum, which is the formation of an additional peak shifted by about 1.5 eV to lower BE with respect to the main component related to sp2 atoms.34,36 However, this is usually neglected or sometimes B–C bonds are associated with peaks with BE positions higher than 285 eV.
One powerful tool to characterize the electronic properties of graphene is angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), which is based on the acquisition of photoemission spectra from the valence band with high angular resolution, in order to obtain a precise mapping of the energy vs. momentum (k) dispersion of the electronic bands. In the case of B-G, this technique has been applied to materials obtained by CVD on Cu foils, Ni(111), and Cu(111) single crystals.
On B-G grown by CVD on polycrystalline copper, Cattelan et al. have measured the dispersion of the π band around the K point, verifying the presence of Dirac cones (i.e. a linear dispersion of the band energy vs. k vector). By the identification of the Dirac energy, a neutral doping was determined, as suggested also by DFT calculations.58,61 Actually, the introduction of B should determine p-type conductivity, but this effect is counterbalanced by the n-doping due to the interaction with the metal substrate.
B-G grown on Ni(111) single crystal was studied in ref. 43. The authors demonstrated that the peculiar band structure of graphene on Ni(111)70 is maintained also after the introduction of a low concentration of boron atoms into the graphene lattice (Fig. 9). Nonetheless, the authors observed a clear shift of the graphene energy bands toward lower BE, suggesting a p-doping of the layer, in particular for a doping of about 0.3 ML, the minimum of the π band in Γ shifted to about 1.2 eV. By comparing the experimental data with DFT calculations, it was possible to determine that the shift of the bands is due to a potential step at the graphene/metal interface due to the charge transfer from the nickel substrate to graphene. Moreover, the calculations pointed out the presence of a small energy band gap at the K point in boron doped free standing graphene. A qualitatively similar behaviour was observed on Co(0001). On this strongly interacting metal, graphene undergoes a strong hybridization with the metal d orbitals, which leads to the loss of the upper Dirac cone.34 Experimental ARPES measurements confirm that this phenomenon takes place also on B-G, but in addition the presence of the dopant (15% at) induces an almost rigid shift of about 0.5 eV of the energy bands towards lower BE with respect to pure graphene.34 Notably, both studies on Ni(111) and Co(0001) indicate that the most notable electronic feature of graphene, that is the presence of Dirac cones, is very limitedly affected by the presence of dopants (i.e. only a rigid shift of the bands) even at very high concentrations (28% and 15%).
 Fig. 9  Angle resolved photoemission spectra showing the dispersion of graphene π bands at different boron doping levels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2013 American Physical Society. 
The defects induced by boron into the lattice of graphene have been extendedly studied by STM. Using different substrates (Ni(111), Cu(111), Ru(0001)) and different growth methods, highly controlled B-G layers can be prepared under UHV conditions. This ability in the materials synthesis allowed a systematic study by means of local probe techniques of the atomic and electronic structures of several different boron defects.33,40
In an early work dealing only with theoretical simulations, it has been foreseen that substitutional boron atoms should appear as large, bright triangular features centered on the B atom for both positive and negative tunneling bias. However these defects should be more evident with positive bias (occupied states) due to the presence of localized B states in the valence band.71 A rather complete characterization of substitutional boron defects was recently carried out in the work of M. Telychko et al.21 On B-G grown on SiC(0001), they characterized by STM the boron defects providing constant current maps at different heights, and backing up the results with DFT calculations. For all the tip sample-distances, it was observed an enhanced intensity over the B atoms and on the nearest neighbor carbon atoms, forming a triangular shaped feature (Fig. 10). Moreover, atomic force microscopy measurements indicated the presence of a small charge transfer from boron to carbon (Fig. 10f).
 Fig. 10  (a) 3D map of the tunnelling current on a B defect (V = −0.15 V I = nA) (b) simulation of the STM images at different tip surface distances, (c) I(z) and (d) F(z) spectroscopies over a B dopant; (e) plot of the electronic states near the Fermi level for B dopant. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Boron defects on graphene/Ru(0001) show a peculiar bright contrast, whereas the three surrounding carbon atoms appear dark (for positive sample-to-tip bias, at which the empty states are probed). This effect is due to a special interaction with the substrate. STS measurements indicate that the density of unoccupied states on boron atoms is much larger than on carbon atoms.42
In another work,33 single substitutional boron defects were observed on monolayer B-G grown by CVD on Cu. STM topographies evidenced the presence of point defects characterized by a triangular shaped core with three symmetrical tails moving out from the center. DFT calculations indicate that the pz states of B localized in the region around the dopant site can interact with the copper states. This leads to a deformation of the graphene sheets: locally the Cu–B bond distance is actually only 2.39 Å. Moreover, differential conductance spectra dI/dV indicate that the boron doping induces p-type conductivity in the graphene layer and the Dirac energy was estimated to be around 100 ± 30 meV. Quite interestingly, by combining STM and STS it was possible to determine that one boron atom on average contributes 0.5 hole to the valence band, a value also confirmed by DFT calculations.33
In a recent paper on B-G on copper, STM topographies evidenced the presence of “croissant” like features that by the comparison of STS spectra with DFT calculations were identified as complex defects comprising three quasi adjacent boron atoms, a carbon vacancy and a pentagonal carbon ring. The presence of a sharp peak at −0.4 eV in the STS spectra40 represents a distinctive fingerprint of these complex defects.
Atomically resolved STM images of substitutional boron atoms were reported also for the B-G/Ni(111) system. In this case, boron defects undergo contrast reversal by changing the bias: while imagining filled states (negative bias), boron atoms appear dark whereas are brighter when empty states are observed (positive bias).34
Applications
Electrochemistry
B-G and related nanostructures are widely used in electrochemistry, thanks to their unique electronic properties that make them very suitable for applications in electrocatalysis, electrochemical energy storage and sensing. In the following we report on the main results obtained so far in the literature.
Electrocatalysis
With the increase of the world energy utilization, new solutions are required to balance the energy demand and the impact on the environment and natural energy sources. In this context, fuel cells constitute a promising route toward the sustainable production of energy; however, their current use is still partially limited by several factors, the most important of which is represented by the high costs of Pt-based cathodes for the electrocatalysis of the ORR. Significant efforts within the scientific community are therefore oriented toward the replacement of Pt with other less noble materials. The challenge resides on the fact that these new systems must achieve, if not surpass, the same performances offered by the traditional Pt-based electrocatalysts, in terms of faradaic efficiency, overpotential and durability. Chemically modified and, in particular, B-doped graphene related materials have been deeply studied as metal-free electrocatalysts for the ORR. Interestingly, this new class of materials exhibits high catalytic efficiency accompanied by enhanced stability and better CO and methanol tolerance compared to the state of the art Pt-based cathodes. As recent DFT calculations show,50,72–74 B doping induces a high local spin densities on the graphene basal plane that leads to an enhancement of the adsorption kinetics of oxygen and OOH molecules, improving the ORR efficiency compared to pristine graphene. The cause of this phenomenon stems from the significant difference of the electronegativity values of B and C (2.04 vs. 2.55, respectively). Thus, the paired covalent electrons of the C–B bonds undergo a slight polarization towards the C atoms, forming a local positive charge density on the B sites that turns into a strongly acid defect serving as preferential adsorption sites for oxygen species such as O2, HOO− and OH−.73,74 Once O2 is adsorbed, it is necessary that the active site enables the weakening of the stable O2 double bond and promotes the formation of highly reactive reaction intermediates. Recently,75 it has been suggested that the oxygen molecule can adsorb in an end-on configuration on the charged boron atom, at variance with the usual side-on configuration observed for N-G. By studying in detail both the associative and dissociative reaction path, G. Fazio et al. demonstrated that the ORR proceeds more likely through an associative mechanism, since its reaction intermediates are more energetically convenient (Fig. 11). Moreover, by comparing a Langmuir–Hinshelwood vs. Eley–Rideal mechanism it was found that the former seems to be favoured thanks to the possibility of strongly adsorbed H+ ions on the surface. However, the high energy activation barriers involved in this reaction path may not exclude the competitive mechanism (i.e. direct reaction of H+ coming directly from the electrolyte) (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  DFT calculated reaction path of the ORR on B-G. Both the Eley–Rideal (ER red dotted line) and Langmuir–Hinshelwood (LH, black line) mechanism are reported. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Ltd. 
The same authors also used the formalism developed by Nørskov,76 to determine the free energy diagrams at specific electrochemical potential, obtaining a very good agreement between the calculated overpotential (0.29 V at pH = 0, 0.28 V at pH = 14) and the experimentally observed one. Another crucial aspect affecting the catalytic properties of B-G regards the electron transfer efficiency (faradaic efficiency) from the adsorption site to the intermediate oxygen species. Yang et al. have demonstrated77 that boron sites can act as electron donors in the ORR charge transfer process, as the electron density of the graphene π-electron system can be “tethered” to the unpaired pz orbital of boron (thanks to its three-fold valence, the unpaired pz orbital lies at an energy overlapping with the π band in graphene).77
Since the aforementioned mechanisms (adsorption and electron transfer) constitute the ORR rate-determining step, the decrease of energy barriers for adsorption and charge transfer goes together with an improvement of the overall catalytic performances of the material.50,73,74,77
The theoretical predictions are fully confirmed by the experimental results. Boron was initially introduced as a heteroatom in carbon nanotubes77 achieving high catalytic performances toward the electroreduction of oxygen and improved stability against the methanol crossover, which is the primary cause of deactivation of Pt-based catalysts (due to the consequent CO poisoning).77
In one of the first seminal paper on the electrochemical activity of B-G, GO was combined with B2O3 and annealed at 1200 °C to obtain a B doping of about 3%.17 Photoemission spectra indicated the presence of several types of B doped defects, with a clear predominance of borinic species with respect to substitutional graphitic boron and borates. The electrochemical performance in the ORR under alkaline conditions of the material was quite good, with an onset potential of −0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl and average number of electrons transferred during the catalytic oxygen reduction of about 3.5 in the potential range from −0.4 to −0.9 V.17
Very similar performances have been reported for several other materials obtained by many preparation methods and exhibiting different types of defects and morphologies. All of them showed a promising oxygen reduction overpotential,20,23,25,49,50,74,78 high selectivity toward the direct reduction of O2 to H2O,20,23,25,49,50,74,78 remarkable time stability, and a significant tolerance to methanol crossover.17,23,25,49,78 The pursuit of always better catalysts has pushed scientists to combine special 3D architectures with specific chemical functionalization. In particular, it has been clearly demonstrated that highly 3D interconnected electrodes, with a huge surface area and a large number of edges79 and pores,80 represent the most promising candidates to achieve the best performances. For instance, in a recent work Zhou et al. have obtained 3D B-G structures whose porosity can be tuned by using different reducing agents. The obtained materials are characterized by significantly high catalytic performances and, in particular, superior durability compared to that of standard Pt/C catalysts (only about 12 mV of overpotential degradation could be observed after 2500 cycles, with respect to the 40 mV detected for Pt/C).78
Doped 3D structures can also be obtained by electrochemical ablation of GO papers in the presence of suitable molecular precursors of the desired dopant.81 This method gives the considerable advantage of obtaining doped graphene nanodots and 3D foams (characterized by high surface areas, between 500 and 800 m2 g−1) through a single one-pot synthesis.49,81 Moreover, this method allows the obtainment of a high percentage of substitutional B in the graphenic lattice (up to 27% of the whole B doping), boosting the catalytic performances toward the ORR of both nanodots and 3D foams.49,50
An interesting comparison can be performed between the different doped graphenes so far obtained in the literature. Jiao et al. have recently shown by DFT calculations that the B-doped single layer graphene is characterized by the highest catalytic activity toward the ORR among the other doped-systems, such as O-, P- or S-doped graphenes (Fig. 12a).25,49,74 Theoretical calculations suggest that B- and N-G basically exhibit similar properties, although the B-doping allows obtaining slightly higher faradaic conversions.49,74 In a comparative experimental study on doped graphene quantum dots, Favaro et al.49 confirmed this trend, however the observed differences were very small among N-, S- and B-doping49 probably because of the additional effect of nanodimension and the close proximity of dopants to the edges (Fig. 12b). Actually, the spatial confinement may introduce additional interactions that lead to a distortion of the electronic structure of such systems. This may account for the differences in the catalytic activities compared to those characterizing the doped single layer graphenes. In the same study it was also demonstrated that the B-GQDs exhibit the highest selectivity toward the four electron reduction of O2 to H2O, and minimize the undesired side production of hydrogen peroxide. Under limiting current conditions, the number of exchanged electrons was equal to 3.42, 3.78, and 3.82, for S-, N- and B-doped materials.49
 Fig. 12  Tafel analysis taken at 5–10 mV s−1 and at 1600–1500 rpm (a and b respectively) under limiting current conditions of different doped single layer graphene and graphene quantum dots. Adapted with permission from ref. 74 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society) and adapted from ref. 49 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another important aspect that dramatically influences the properties of doped graphenes is the oxidation state of the heteroatoms. The role of oxygenated species on the catalytic activity and on the oxygen reduction pathway has been deeply investigated by Favaro et al., in the case of doped GO quantum with the support of DFT calculations. The ORR activity of the studied materials can be selectively driven towards a four electron reduction pathway (i.e. direct reduction of O2 to water) by a simple chemical reduction process with NaBH4. This treatment has the twofold effect of increasing the catalytic activity and eliminating the oxygen species that are responsible for the competitive bi-electronic reaction path.49,50
The introduction of a second heteroatom supporting the B-doping in graphene has recently drawn significant interest within the scientific community, since it has demonstrated to be a simple way to further decrease the oxygen reduction overpotential.49,50,79,80 Several studies have reported the successful preparation of different B,N-codoped graphene (B,N-G) materials, adopting different chemical routes, in particular via thermal annealing82–88 electrochemical ablation of a GO electrode in the presence of B and N sources,49,50 hydrothermal synthesis,89 or CVD.90 Despite the particular synthetic approach adopted for the material preparation, the catalytic activities of the dual doped systems are higher than those reached by the corresponding singly B- and N-G. Also the durability of such electrocatalysts seems to be positively influenced by the B,N co-doping. The origin of this synergic effect remains still difficult to trace probably because of the high complexity of these materials, which in general bear several types of structurally different B,N based defects that make very hard a detailed mechanistic understanding of the ORR.
A careful DFT investigation of different B,N codoped materials suggests that also in this case the chemical activity is due to the presence of large spin or charge density on carbon atoms as a consequence of the introduction of heteroatoms.87 However, an excessive amount of heteroatoms and the formation of h-BN patches have a negative effect on the catalytic activity since it increases the band gap of the material reducing the electron conductivity.87
Other DFT calculations, which assume as a good descriptor of the ORR the adsorption energy of water, have suggested that in a B–C–N heteroring with a pyridinic nitrogen, the carbon atom is polarized by the N atom and able to donate extra charge to the adjacent B atoms that can better bind a water molecule.86 Moreover, in the same work it has been demonstrated that the relative distance between B and N causes large fluctuations of the water adsorption energy on B, implying how critical can be the reactivity on structurally different materials.
Another theoretical work suggests that in B,N codoped systems the formation of small patches of h-BN inside a graphene sheet is energetically favored and the adsorption of O2 on this type of structures is more convenient with respect to isolated N and B defects.91
On the contrary, experimental studies seem to suggest that highly dispersed B and N atoms that do not form direct B–N bonds are the most active species for the ORR, and that graphitic N facilitates dopant separation whereas B–N units are favoured by pyridinic N.85
The existence of an electronic withdrawing effect of N that activates B sites can be deduced from X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements. As a matter of fact, the B 1s–B 2p transition (B K edge) of substitutional B dopants undergoes a positive shift of about 0.25 eV passing from the singly B-G to the B,N doped system.49 This may indicate an increase of the B 2p valence orbital energy of the boron defects, leading to a stronger adsorption of the OOH* and OH* intermediates and thus resulting in a better ORR activity.74
Nonetheless, both experimental and computational investigations are not conclusive yet, and more work on better controlled materials and more accurate theoretical models are necessary to obtain a definitive answer about the improved performance of co-doped materials.
Another important electrochemical process is constituted by the CO2 electroreduction reaction (CO2RR). In this process, CO2 (derived from traditional combustion processes) is fixed and converted at the cathode into carbon neutral fuels (such as methane, ethylene, methanol, ethanol, etc.). Different strategies have been followed so far to develop catalysts that enable the generation of desirable products at high current densities and low overpotentials. Despite the wide use of Cu or Ag to achieve such goals,92–94 B-G is starting to draw attention because of its unique catalytic properties. In a recent work, Sreekanth et al. reported that B-G possesses a catalytic activity towards CO2RR, which is similar to that of Cu,95 with a promising potential onset centered at around −1.0 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 13). However, the CO2RR catalysed by B-G solely leads to the formation of formic acid, HCOOHZ, which is a low value reaction product.96 From a microscopic point of view, the formic acid formation from CO2 reduction follows the well-known (2H+ + 2e−) pathway.97,98 The first step is constituted by the CO2 physisorption on the catalyst surface, followed by the chemisorption of the protonated CO2 (*COOH). The final step is the concerted attack of (H+ + e−) on *COOH, yielding formic acid. On B-G, as demonstrated by Sreekanth et al. via DFT calculations, *COOH can adsorb either on B or on the first-neighbour C atoms (Fig. 13), being the adsorption energy for the two sites basically the same (34.35 kcal mol−1 and 37.55 kcal mol−1, respectively). Interestingly, these theoretical calculations could account for the observed high selectivity of B-G towards the production of formate. This aspect should be investigated in detail, since its better understanding can lead to a careful engineering of future materials with improved selectivity toward higher value commodities.
 Fig. 13  (a) HOMO of C41BH16, (b) spin density mapping, (c) chemisorption of *COOH on C41BH16via B atoms, (d) chemisorption of *COOH on C41BH16via C atoms. (e) Linear sweep voltammetry of BG (dotted lines (b and c)) in 0.1 M KHCO3 in the presence (blue) and absence (red) of CO2. Dark solid trace (a) is the LSV of CO2 reduction on graphene. Adapted from ref. 95 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, B-G was evaluated as a catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction.24 By using linear sweep voltammetry in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution, a clear increase in the cathodic current could be observed at an overpotential of −0.2 V vs. RHE, whereas pure graphene started to be active only around −0.5 V. Tafel slopes of about 100 mV per decade and current density of 1.4 × 10−3 mA cm−2 were obtained, demonstrating that B-G can be competitive with respect to other non noble metal catalysts. The catalytic activity was connected to electron rich centers due to the presence of boron that can provide a lower energy reaction path for the reduction of H+ ions.24
From the comparison of the electrocatalytic activity of materials obtained by different borylation agents it may be inferred that the most active catalytic sites for the HER are indeed substitutional boron atoms whereas B–O species are not effective. However, more detailed investigations are needed in order to identify precisely the nature of the true active site. Interestingly, boron doped materials obtained starting from B4C powder have been tested as bifunctional catalysts for both ORR and for the reverse reaction that is the oxygen evolution reaction (OER).23 The obtained results are quite promising: under alkaline conditions. B-G electrodes can oxidize water at 0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl with a current of 5 mA cm−2, values that are very close to benchmark IrO2 catalysts.23 No detailed electrochemical characterization or indications about durability were provided, but in any case this report clearly paves the way for further investigations and to a more widespread exploitation of B-G.
In conclusion, from the survey of the present literature we can safely affirm that B-G has demonstrated to be an excellent catalyst for the ORR and that it can be even bettered by the interaction with other dopants or by a careful design of its morphology. Nonetheless, a precise understanding of the microscopic mechanism of the reaction and a precise identification of the active sites have still to be achieved. Some reports of good chemical activity for some pivotal reactions such as CO2RR, HER, and OER, are emerging only now, but the information is still fragmentary, so no clear views can be delineated, but the expectations are great.
Electrochemical energy storage: batteries and supercapacitors
Graphene-related materials have been used for energy storage purposes since the discovery of their unique electronic properties.99 In this context, it was found that the introduction of boron as a doping heteroatom further boosts the performances of such materials, although the literature reports quite sparse results.
The potential of B doped as a material for Li ion battery (LIB) anodes have been investigated both theoretically and experimentally. DFT calculations (DFT + GGA methods) indicate that the presence of boron is useful to stabilize Li ions, since the Li 2s electrons can be easily transferred to the empty states associated with the dopant.100 The binding energy of Li atoms is highly increased (−0.88 eV with respect to pristine graphene), preventing therefore clustering of Li species, which is also an important requirement for practical applications. Theoretical calculations indicate that 3D stacked BC3 sheets could provide a capacity of 857 mA h g−1, which is 2.3 times greater than that of graphite (372 mA h g−1). Interestingly, upon lithiation semiconducting C3B becomes metallic and Li ions, even if interacting strongly with B atoms, can diffuse rather efficiently.
On the experimental side, highly performing anodes for LIB were obtained using RGO sheets doped with boron through the exposure to BBr3 at high temperature. Interestingly, the obtained material shows a huge capacitance (1549 mA h at 50 mA g−1 charge/discharge rate), even better than similar nitrogen doped materials (1043 mA h g−1), which is maintained even at superfast rates (235 mA h g−1 at 25 A g−1, see Fig. 14).15 The reason four such good performances is partially due to the intrinsic 2D nature of the material that allows easy intercalation, but a pivotal role is played also by the boron defects that increase the interlayer distance, the electrical conductivity and the electrode/electrolyte wettability.15 Boron doped materials prepared by the solid state reaction between GO and H3BO3 were tested as anode materials for LIBs showing rather good performances such as a discharge capacity of 548 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 30 cycles. The comparison with pristine graphene indicates almost a two times improvement.101 Quite recently also boron doped quantum dots have been used for the preparation of LIB anodes.48 An electrode made up by 10 wt% boron-doped nanographene, 70 wt% carbon black and 20 wt% polyvinylidene difluoride, showed excellent cyclability and a good capacity (between 110 mA h g−1 and 160 mA h g−1 to be compared to a capacity without active material of only 13 mA h g−1). The positive charge polarization of B in graphene77 has been recently exploited to chemically adsorb S on the graphene surface and this new hybrid material was used as the cathode in Li–S batteries.102,103 Yang et al. and Xie et al. demonstrated that porous interconnected 3D boron-doped graphene aerogels (B-GA) can be efficiently loaded with elemental S through a simple liquid infiltration method (achieving a S load up to 59% weight).102,103 Compared with S-loaded pure and N-doped GA (S/GA and S/N-GA), S-loaded B-GA cathodes (S/B-GA) possess improved cyclability and higher discharge capacities, being the trend 300 mA h g−1 < 310 mA h g−1 < 600 mA h g−1 (after cycling the material at a rate of 2C for 200 cycles), respectively.102,103 Theoretical calculations are still undergoing to better understand the B–S interaction in such systems, although it is generally well-established that the chemical adsorption of electronegative polysulfide anions on the boron sites may lead to a “shuttle effect” under discharge conditions,104 consequently improving the lithiation performance of the material compared to the B-free systems.
 Fig. 14  (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profile and (b) cycle performance and coulombic efficiency of the B-doped graphene electrode at a low current rate of 50 mA g−1 between 3.0 and 0.01 V versus Li/Li. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Besides batteries, energy can be conveniently stored also in supercapacitors, and in this case B-G is emerging as an innovative material capable of great performances.
For example, Yeom et al.18 have demonstrated that B-doped reduced-GO (B-rGO, synthesized by thermal annealing of freeze-dried GO in the presence of B2O3) can be efficiently used as an electrochemical double layer capacitor (EDLC). The authors have shown that B-rGO is characterized by a satisfying electrical conductivity (about 44 S cm−1) and a remarkable specific capacitance (448 F g−1) in 6.0 M KOH (Fig. 15);18 however, the observed energy storage performance does not fully match with the poor surface area of such material (about 120 m2 g−1).103 As suggested by Conway,105 a carbon-based supercapacitor with high electrical conductivity and a surface area of about 1000 m2 g−1 should possess a specific capacitance of few hundreds of F g−1. This therefore indicates that, B doping could introduce other side redox reactions not yet elucidated, responsible for the observed high capacitance. On the same cue, Hao et al. have reported that the cyclability of B-G supercapacitors can be improved by introducing polyaniline in the structure.106 The so-obtained hybrid material is also characterized by a high specific capacitance (318 F g−1 in 6.0 M KOH and in a three-electrode system), although the missing surface area value makes difficult a direct comparison with other systems.
 Fig. 15  (a) CV curves at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, (b) specific capacitances as a function of scan rate, (c) CV curves for 3000 cycles at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, and (d) capacitance retentions as a function of cycle number of T-rGO and BT-rGO electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18 under CC BY license. 
Other reports from several groups help to substantiate a scenario where boron doped materials can play a significant role in the development of supercapacitor technology: L. Niu et al.107 prepared by a simple pyrolysis process (GO and H3BO3 at 900 °C) B doped materials that exhibit a specific capacitance of 172.5 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, which was maintained almost constant (96.5%) after 5000 cycles. Interestingly the materials with more B content showed the best performances: overall with respect to pristine graphene 4% B doped materials show a capacitance improvement of 86%.107
Excellent capacitance was obtained in the work of Z. Zuo et al.20 Their special synthesis route exploiting freeze drying and fast pyrolysis allowed the obtainment of materials with a high surface area (622 m2 g−1) and good boron content (3%). At 1 A g−1, the specific capacitance was 281 F g−1 that was maintained very stable even after 4000 cycles. The good performance was associated with a huge pseudocapacitance component (about 40%) and to the special hierarchical morphology that allowed an easy ion mobility.
B-G in the form of nanoplatelets has been used by J. Han et al.31 Their prepared material starting from graphene nanoplatelets reacted with the BH3–THF adduct showed a capacitance of 200 F g−1 in 6 M KOH, thanks to the combination of special nanomorphology, high surface area (466 m2 g−1) and chemical functionalization.
Very recently, flexible microsupercapacitors based on B-G were produced using a direct laser writing technique.26 The specific capacitance of the device was quite remarkable: 16.5 mF cm−2, which is 3 times higher than that of non-doped devices. This excellent performance was accompanied by 5 to 10 times larger volumetric energy density compared to the non-doped system. Moreover, such values are maintained even after extended cycling and mechanical deformation of the device.
Finally, Wu et al. have developed an EDLC based on the co-doping of a high surface area graphene aerogel with B and N (BN-GA).108 However, the presence of B does not lead to significant improvements of the energy storage performances compared to those achieved using a graphene/polyaniline composite (with a specific capacitance that passes from 233 F g−1 for the last mentioned109 to 239 F g−1 for the BN-GA material).108
In conclusion, the body of experimental and theoretical investigations indicates that B-G materials are extremely promising for the development of several applications in electrochemistry. The common origin of such behaviour can be traced back to the fact that boron introduces a high number of active sites, boosting the electrochemical performances of the otherwise inactive basal plane and improving the electronic conduction properties of the material. Moreover, since the electronic density of the boron defects is distorted by the polarization of the C–B covalent bonds, the adsorption energy of electronegative element-bearing molecules undergoes a significant increase compared to the adsorption on undoped graphene surfaces. All these effects therefore are responsible for the observed superior electrochemical performances of B-G.
Sensing
One of the most interesting applications for B-G is represented by sensing. Actually, the combination of the intrinsic electric and electrochemical properties of graphene can be efficiently combined with the chemical activity provided by the dopant in order to provide a quite efficient multifunctional system able to detect different analytes in a selective manner even in the ppb range.
Gas sensing
Extensive theoretical work has been carried out to gauge the possibility of gas sensing in B-G. In a first work, it has been shown by DFT calculations using PBE GGA methods that B-G can bind NO and NO2 (−0.3 eV), whereas other small molecules (H2, N2, H2O, CO, CO2, and O2) are only weakly interacting (<0.02 eV). Moreover, after the adsorption of NO2 there is a huge charge transfer from B-G to the molecule NO2.110 Qualitatively similar results were obtained in ref. 111. The B doping greatly improves the interaction with small molecules: whereas CO interacts very little, NO, NH3, and NO2 engage a strong interaction with the B centres and such interactions are associated with a relevant charge transfer in the case of NH3 and NO2. The simulations of the I/V response of a B-G junction indicate that such a device could be two orders of magnitude more performing than pure graphene.
In a very systematic paper, I. Choudhuri, et al.112 used DFT calculations to evaluate the changes of the electrical properties of graphene-based materials as a consequence of the adsorption of small molecules (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  (a–d) Ball model of the optimized structure of different molecules (CO, CO2, NO, NO2, respectively) adsorbed on B-G brown, red grey and green balls represent carbon oxygen nitrogen and boron atoms, respectively. (e–h) Charge density plot at an isosurface value of 0.232 e Å−3, (i–l) charge density difference for the difference as a consequence of gas molecule adsorption. A positive charge (higher charge density) is indicated by a blue colour whereas yellow indicates a negative charge (lower charge density). Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The introduction of boron induces p-doping and increases the bond length of B–C to 1.48 Å. Around the B dopant charge is depleted so that B is positively charged (+1.97 e Bader charge) whereas the neighbouring C atoms are negatively charged (−0.57 e) indicating the presence of partially ionic bonds.
The presence of modified states near the Fermi level induces a shift of the Fermi level below (0.76 eV) the Dirac energy. Moreover, an energy band gap, whose width is dependent on the amount of B content, is formed just above the Fermi level. The adsorption of several molecules was tested: CO and CO2 interacts with the boron dopant via the C atoms producing adsorption energy of 0.66 eV and 0.12 eV, respectively. NO and NO2 interact more favourably through the N atom, and exhibit adsorption energies of 0.58 and 1.23 eV, respectively.112 Interestingly, the adsorption of NO and CO also triggers a modification in the DOS of B-G, producing additional impurity states close to the Fermi level, whereas in the case of NO2 there is even the formation of a real energy gap (Fig. 16).
Improved sensing performances with respect to pristine graphene have been recently reported for a resistive gas sensor built starting from B-G obtained by ambient pressure CVD.40 Large changes in the electrical conductance were observed after the exposure to two target molecules such as NH3 and NO2, which are prototypical donor and acceptor species. Comparing to pure graphene, the sensitivity of the B-G based device is 27 and 105 times higher for NO2 and NH3, respectively. DFT calculations indicate a relatively strong interaction between the molecules and the B center, which is associated with a relevant charge transfer.40
The proof of concept application of boron nanoribbons as efficient sensors has appeared recently in the literature.56 Boron doped nanoribbons have been prepared by on surface Ullmann reaction and their interaction with a probe molecule has been studied by STM and DFT. STM images demonstrate that NO molecules preferentially adsorb on substitutional boron atoms at the centre of the nanoribbons suggesting that these nanostructures behave as Lewis acids. Furthermore, DFT calculations indicate that the adsorption energy of NO is 1.5 eV, which is an optimal value for the realisation of practical devices operating even at room temperature.56
Optical sensing
Phenylboronic functionalized GO has been used as an efficient glucose sensor.46 At variance with similar devices that exploit molecular recognition by glucose oxidase, in this case the device selectivity relies on the strong affinity of borates for diol groups. A fluorescent probe bearing a diol reacts with the GO surface forming a cyclic boronate ester and by doing so its fluorescence is quenched because of the interaction with the GO moiety. However, in the presence of glucose, which has a higher affinity for boronic acids, the probe is displaced and the fluorescence was recovered. By this way a concentration of glucose from 25 to 75 mg mL−1 can be detected.46
The intrinsic luminescent properties combined with chemical selectivity of boron doped quantum dots are the key of the glucose sensors developed by L. Zhang et al.52
Actually, the boronic groups that characterize the edges of the quantum dots obtained by hydrothermal cutting can selectively react with the two cis-diol unit of glucose, which then act as a cross-linker between different quantum dots, whose luminescence is boosted by aggregation (Fig. 17). The sensor is rather robust with a good detection limit (0.03 mM) and high selectivity, which stems from the presence of cis-diol groups that exclude the detection of similar saccharides such as fructose, galactose, and mannose.52
 Fig. 17  (a) Ball model of the B-GQDs (b) schematic illustration of the detection mechanism due to the glucose induced cross-link between B-GQDs, whose aggregation boosts the luminescence emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The boronic group can also coordinate metal ions with good selectivity. Z. Fan et al.51 have exploited B-GQDs as sensing agents for Al3+, thanks to the increase in the photoluminescence produced by B-GQDs that is observed in the presence of these ions. The sensor mechanism showed a good linearity between the optical response and the Al3+ concentration with a very good detection limit of 3.64 μM.
Electrochemical sensing
The aforementioned positive polarization of dopant sites74,77,83 in B-G can be also exploited to selectively bind chemical species other than O2 or CO2. Promising candidates are constituted by organic molecules bearing electron-withdrawing groups based on O, N, halogenides and their combinations. In such way, B-doped graphene can be used for the sensing of harmful species such as NOx and polychlorinated dibenzodioxins in wastewater, as well as other relevant molecules (e.g. amino acids and nucleobases) in biochemistry applications.113,114
Zhang et al. successfully obtained B-doped graphene-based structures (with a doping atomic percentage of about 1.4%) pyrolysing at high temperature CCl4 in the presence of BBr3 traces.115 The so-prepared sensing platform was used for the simultaneous determination of hydroquinone (HQ) and catechol (CC). These B doped materials showed superior electrocatalytic activity compared to that of pristine graphene toward the redox reaction of HQ and CC, leading to detection limits (S/N = 3) of 0.3 mM and 0.2 mM, respectively.115
A B-G electrode was used to detect H2O2 (ref. 116) by monitoring the electrocatalytic reduction current at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The sensitivity of the electrode was very good 367 μA mM−1 cm−2 (vs. 258 μA mM−1 cm−2 for non doped graphene) with an excellent detection limit of 3.8 μM. Such performance was connected both to the hierarchical architecture and to the high chemical activity of boron centers that can efficiently reduce H2O2.116
Guanine could be detected electrochemically using a B-G nanosheets supported on a glassy carbon electrode, thanks to the excellent electro-oxidation properties of B sites. In this work a lowest detection limit of 0.4 μM and a linear response between the anodic current and the concentration of guanine in the range from 1 to 75 μM could be achieved.27
Photovoltaics
Since B-G shows highly tunable optical and electrical properties, it has found a natural application in the photovoltaics field. As an example X. Li et al. used these materials in order to realize p-type electrodes in silicon-based p–n junction solar cells.39
These authors used few layer B-G with p-type conductivity and small energy band gap (0.05 eV) that, combined with n-type silicon, can form a p–n junction. On such systems, the holes generated by light absorption in the silicon moiety are then driven in B-G by the built-in potential formed as a consequence of the band line up across the two materials (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Photovoltaic characterizations. (a) Energy-band diagrams of BG, n-Si, and Ti/Pd/Ag. (b) Equilibrium energy-band diagram of a BG/Si junction. (c) Dark J–V curves of G/Si, BG/Si solar cells. (d) Light J–V curves of G/Si, BG/Si solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
This B-G/Si based solar cell exhibits very good properties: a short-circuit current density of 18.8 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 22.8%, under air mass 1.5 (AM 1.5) illumination.39
The combination of chemical activity, optical transparency and electrical conductivity is very appealing for the application of electrochemically active transparent electrodes. This intuition has been made practical by T. Lin et al.117
Few layer graphene with 1% boron doping was used as a back electrode in a CdTe based solar cell. The increased conductivity and hole collecting ability of B-G allowed the obtainment of much better performances with respect to both pristine graphene and RGO. The efficiency increased from 6.5% for rGO to 7.41% in pristine graphene to 7.8% for B-G and the short circuit current for B-G reached a value of 21.96 mA cm−2. The better power conversion efficiency was imputed to the higher work function with respect to other materials (actually 2% B-G has a 0.65 eV higher WF with respect to pristine graphene11), which allows the formation of an ohmic contact with the p-CdTe layer.
The good performance of B-G as a counter electrode for dye sensitized solar cells is clearly validated in the work of H. Fang et al.,16 where an excellent bond strength between B-G and the conductive glass substrate and a high catalytic activity for the reduction of I3− ions to I− are demonstrated. Overall the cell assembled with B-G shows very good numbers: a short circuit current of 13.93 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage of 0.73 V, and a fill factor of 0.63. Overall the conversion efficiency of the cell is 6.73%, which has to be compared with a value of 6.34% and 3.29% for a Pt and a graphene based electrode, respectively.16
The usage of B-G as an efficient transparent conductor has also been suggested in a recent work28 where a borate cross-linked graphene membrane was obtained combining hydrothermal synthesis and vacuum filtration. The resulting self standing film presented much better conduction properties and transparency than analogous materials based on CVD graphene.
Photo- and heterogeneous-catalysis
Doped carbons represent probably the most abundant and environmental friendly catalysts that could possibly represent a treasure trove for sustainable chemistry.118,119 So far, only limited results can be found in the literature, nonetheless these initial studies are quite promising.120 Up to now, the most investigated systems have been GO, RGO, and N-G,121,122 whereas B-G is still an almost unexplored territory.
In a recent work Lin et al. have shown that B-doped onion-like carbon and carbon nanotubes exhibit remarkable catalytic activity toward the reduction by N2H4 of nitroarenes to aminoarenes, with a selectivity of about 88% (ref. 123) and conversion > 99%. The authors investigated several types of nitro compounds bearing CN, CC, CC, ether, halogen, ester groups, observing a strong chemoselectivity of the catalyst. From a mechanistic point of view, the catalytic activity has been traced back to substitutional boron species (C3B) that are able to interact with hydrazine so that its hydrogen atoms are activated for the reaction with the nitro groups.123
A first example of photocatalytic reaction carried out entirely by B-G can be found in the work of M. Xing et al.57 Here, B-doped nanoribbons have been used for the photodegradation of Rhodamine B (5 mg L−1) under UV light irradiation. B-doped nanoribbons outperformed both GO and pristine graphene. A tentative explanation for the higher catalytic activity was envisaged in the formation of a heterojunction between B doped nanoribbons and nanosheets. The photo-generated electrons in the nanoribbon push the Fermi level above the conduction band of the nanosheets. Therefore, the photoproduced electrons are transferred into the conduction band of the B doped nanosheets where they react with O2 forming oxidising species. On the other hand, the excess holes in the valence band of the nanosheets (which have p-type conductivity because of boron) are directly injected into the HOMO of Rhodamine B.
Such a view has been recently questioned by another work,124 where B-G nanosheets were obtained by a reflux method31 and used for the photodegradation of rhodamine B under visible light. The performance of B-G was 5 times better with respect to the material without dopant. In this case, by combining several different control experiments, the authors suggested that the dye is photoexcited and then transfers its electrons to the B-G. This is possible because the LUMO of the dye (−3.08 vs. vacuum level) is higher in energy with respect to the Fermi level of graphene (−4.42 eV vs. vacuum level). The improved efficiency of the dopant materials was ascribed to the better electron transfer properties due to the overall enhanced conductivity and the higher density of states close to the Fermi level.
Recently the group of J. Zhang has also studied the combination of B-G with TiO2.125,126 These two materials can efficiently match their energy bands in order to form a p–n heterojunction that is very effective at separating charges: holes are accumulated on the TiO2 moiety forming oxidizing species, whereas electron are stored on B-G where they can be used for reduction reactions. The composite formed by TiO2 nanoparticles and B-doped nanoribbons resulted to be a promising catalyst for the reduction of CO2 to methane and for the oxidation of organic pollutants (methyl orange).125
Reduced TiO2 nanoparticles/B-G composites obtained by a one pot hydrothermal method were tested as a solar photocatalyst for the degradation of methylene blue and phenol. The synergy between the Ti3+ reduced species, which narrow the band gap of TiO2 and the B-G, which is an excellent electron acceptor, explains the good performance of the devices based on such materials.
Biological and biomedical applications
Recently, B-G just as several other carbon based materials has been progressively gaining more and more interest for applications in different sectors of biological sciences. Actually, this material can be designed to be alike to other boronic acid containing hydrogels that are currently widely used for the detection of biomolecules, as support for cell culture and controlled drug release.127 Moreover, the aforementioned reports on chemical sensing,46,52 suggest that by proper tuning of the surface chemistry of B-G one can expect to design quite efficient boronate affinity materials128 that could be used for molecular recognition, separation technology and biotechnology applications. Practical implementations are still to come, but the premises are very encouraging. Actually the possibility of tuning the surface chemistry of carbon based materials at the molecular level allows a great versatility. For example, boron/nitrogen co-doped carbon dots can be used as efficient biological nanoprobes since they exhibit quite good photoluminescence properties that can be manipulated by the interaction with different macromolecules.129 When the nanodots are passivated by polyethyleneimine, their luminescence properties are greatly enhanced, on the contrary the interaction with a protoporphyrin has a quenching effect. Interestingly, the presence of a carcinogenic dye such as Sudan Red III triggers the oxidation of the protoporphyrin and the luminescence can be switched back, providing a quite efficient nanosensor (concentrations as low as 9.9 pM were detected).
B-GQDs obtained by electrolytic exfoliation have been used also for the detection of oncogene micro-RNA-20a.130 The sensor was assembled by tagging the B-GQDs on thiolated hairpin DNA, which were grafted on gold nanoparticles supported on a Pt electrode. This complex system exhibited intense electrochemiluminescence, which could be strongly suppressed by the introduction of miRNA-20a. Actually, the hairpin DNA after hybridisation with the target molecule was adopting a double helix conformation with the overall effect of moving away the B-GQDs for the electrode surface and therefore reducing the electrophotoluminescence signal. A quantification limit of 0.1 pM of miRNA-20a could be achieved.130
Moreover, B-G quantum dots such as other differently doped graphene or carbon quantum dots, thanks to their good biocompatibility and strong photoluminescence properties, have demonstrated to be quite interesting materials for bioimaging. Z. Fan et al.51 demonstrated that HeLa cells can be incubated with B-G quantum dots for 24 h without significant loss of viability. Moreover, the yellow luminescence of B-G under 405 nm radiation could be exploited for confocal fluorescence imaging. Very similar results were also reported by other authors using B-G quantum dots obtained by microwave synthesis,54 in this case a standard MTT assay confirmed the low cytotoxicity of B-G quantum dots (87% cell viability after 12 h incubation with 4.0 mg mL−1 of B-G quantum dots).
Conclusion and future perspectives
The materials science of B-G represents a rapidly growing discipline that is progressively getting a foothold in several different technological fields. Several methods are available for the preparation of materials with selected morphology and chemical composition, however a real control of the type of B derived defects that are introduced in the materials is still far from being obtained, especially in the case of high yield methods.
Advanced experimental characterization techniques such as Raman and photoemission spectroscopies, and STM, with the assistance of DFT calculations have allowed us to obtain a quite clear understanding of the effect of boron into the graphene lattice. Nevertheless, in the case of more complex defects such as boronic and borinic groups still little is known, but such species are indeed quite important in order to comprehend some fundamental functional properties. For example, surface oxygenated boron species were identified as important intermediates in the ORR.73,75
B-G has already started to show its great potentiality in several technological fields. In particular, its use as an electrocatalyst for the ORR is quite well established and it is also a key material for the realisation of LIB anodes and supercapacitors. The ORR has been investigated both theoretically and experimentally by many groups, obtaining a very detailed level of understanding. Nonetheless, the combination of boron with other dopants (in particular nitrogen) and of B-G with other catalytic materials is expected to lead to even better performances, thanks to synergistic effects.131,132 However, on this topic there are only scattered and sometimes contradicting studies. Recently, new studies reporting interesting chemical activity in other critical reactions such as HER, OER and CO2RR are eventually emerging in the literature, providing novel and quite interesting results. We can expect that in the near future the study of these reactions will gather a great deal of attention from the scientific community.
Outside electrocatalysis, the study of the reactivity of B-G is still fragmentary and only a few reports can be found. For example, from a chemical stand point, graphene doped by substitutional boron can be considered a relatively strong Lewis acid,48 however no specific reaction catalysed by this type of species has been tested. B-G is easy to produce in large yield, cheap, sustainable, and with high surface area, and therefore would represent a perfect support and/or active material for catalysis. Moreover, its excellent electron transport properties and easy tuneable electronic structure make it an interesting and versatile material for photocatalysis. In this sense basic research is expected to provide an important contribution both to the development of synthesis protocols able to combine efficiently B-G with other materials, and to the comprehension of the photophysics of such heterostructures.
B-G is quickly making inroads into sensing: the combination of the chemical and electronic properties of B-G is actually very suitable for the implementation of advanced sensors. Thanks to several theoretical and experimental studies, a consistent picture is delineating about the reason for the excellent performances: the vacant states induced by B in the electronic structure of graphene can easily interact with molecules with “donor” properties with a consequent large change in the electric conductivity. Moreover, the chemical selectivity of some functional groups based on boron has paved the way to other forms of sensing (i.e. optical or electrochemical), offering a very versatile platform for the realization of practical devices.
In conclusion, B-G represents only one among the large family of heteroatoms doped graphenes, with whom it shares many interesting properties. Nonetheless, it has clearly demonstrated to possess some very distinctive features and chemical reactivity, whose potential is still to be fully uncovered.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the Italian MIUR through the national grant Futuro in Ricerca 2012 RBFR128BEC “Beyond graphene: tailored C-layers for novel catalytic materials and green chemistry” and by the University of Padova funded project CPDA128318/12, “Study of the catalytic activity of complex graphene nanoarchitectures from ideal to real conditions”. MF thanks the support from the Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Science (BES) of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under award no. DE-SC0004993 to the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (JCAP).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, Surf. Sci., 2013, 609, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liua, Y. Xue, M. Zhang and L. Dai, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 1265–1272 CrossRef .
S. S. Varghese, S. Lonkar, K. K. Singh, S. Swaminathan and A. Abdala, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 218, 160–183 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bitounis, H. Ali-Boucetta, B. H. Hong, D.-H. Min and K. Kostarelos, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2258–2268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 1061–1105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tsetseris and S. T. Pantelides, Carbon, 2014, 67, 58–63 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Panchakarla, K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. K. Saha, A. Govindaraj, H. R. Krishnamurthy, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .
Y. A. Kim, K. Fujisawa, H. Muramatsu, T. Hayashi, M. Endo, T. Fujimori, K. Kaneko, M. Terrones, J. Behrends, A. Eckmann, C. Casiraghi, K. S. Novoselov, R. Saito and M. S. Dresselhaus, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6293–6300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Endo, T. Hayashi, S.-H. Hong, T. Enoki and M. S. Dresselhaus, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5670 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Sofer, P. Šimek, I. Tomandl and M. Pumera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23251–23257 CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, C. Yu, T. Ma and J. Qiu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3328–3330 RSC .
Z.-H. Sheng, H.-L. Gao, W.-J. Bao, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 390–395 RSC .
D.-Y. Yeom, W. Jeon, N. D. Tu, S. Y. Yeo, S.-S. S. Lee, B. J. Sung, H. Chang, J. A. Lim and H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, Y. Su, D. Liu and X. He, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 25440–25448 RSC .
Z. Zuo, Z. Jianga and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13476–13483 CAS .
M. Telychko, P. Mutombo, P. Merino, P. Hapala, M. Ondráček, F. C. Bocquet, J. Sforzini, O. Stetsovych, M. Vondráček, P. Jelínek and M. Švec, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9180–9187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Norimatsu, K. Hirata, Y. Yamamoto, S. Arai and M. Kusunoki, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24, 314207 CrossRef PubMed .
T. V. Vineesh, M. P. Kumar, C. Takahashi, G. Kalita, S. Alwarappan, D. K. Pattanayak and T. N. Narayanan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500658 Search PubMed .
B. R. Sathe, X. Zou and T. Asef, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 2023–2030 Search PubMed .
G. Jo, J. Sanetuntikul and S. Shanmugam, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 53637–53643 RSC .
Z. Peng, R. Ye, J. A. Mann, D. Zakhidov, Y. Li, P. R. Smalley, J. Lin and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5868–5875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Borowiec and J. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, B332–B336 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tian, C. Xu, J. Li, G. Zhu, J. Wu, Z. Shia and Y. Wanga, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 6907–6913 RSC .
X. Lü, J. Wu, T. Lin, D. Wan, F. Huang, X. Xie and M. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10685 RSC .
S.-M. Jung, E. K. Lee, M. Choi, D. Shin, I.-Y. Jeon, J.-M. Seo, H. Y. Jeong, N. Park, J. H. Oh and J.-B. B. Baek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, X. Zhao, L. Zhang, S. Lee, J. Oh, K. S. Lee, J. R. Potts, J. Ji, X. Zhao, R. S. Ruoff and S. Park, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 19–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Umrao, T. K. Gupta, S. Kumar, V. K. Singh, M. K. Sultania, J. H. Jung, I.-K. K. Oh and A. Srivastava, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19831–19842 CAS .
L. Zhao, M. Levendorf, S. Goncher, T. Schiros, L. Pálová, A. Zabet-Khosousi, K. T. Rim, C. Gutiérrez, D. Nordlund, C. Jaye, M. Hybertsen, D. Reichman, G. W. Flynn, J. Park and A. N. Pasupathy, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Usachov, A. V. Fedorov, A. E. Petukhov, O. Y. Vilkov, A. G. Rybkin, M. M. Otrokov, A. Arnau, E. V. Chulkov, L. V. Yashina, M. Farjam, V. K. Adamchuk, B. V. Senkovskiy, C. Laubschat and D. V. Vyalikh, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7314–7322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ovezmyradov, I. V. Magedov, L. V. Frolova, G. Chandler, J. Garcia, D. Bethke, E. A. Shaner and N. G. Kalugin, J. Nanosci.
Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 4883 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cattelan, S. Agnoli, M. Favaro, D. Garoli, F. Romanato, M. Meneghetti, A. Barinov, P. Dudin and G. Granozzi, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1490 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, H. Shen, L. Sun, B. Cheng, B. Liu and J. Shen, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1385 RSC .
H. Wang, Y. Zhou, D. Wu, L. Liao, S. Zhao, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Small, 2013, 9, 1316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. Fan, Z. Li, K. Wang, M. Zhong, J. Wei, D. Wu and H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 425 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lv, G. Chen, Q. Li, A. McCreary, A. Botello-Méndez, S. V. Morozov, L. Liang, X. Declerck, N. Perea-López, D. A. Cullen, S. Feng, A. L. Elías, R. Cruz-Silva, K. Fujisawa, M. Endo, F. Kang, J.-C. Charlier, V. Meunier, M. Pan, A. R. Harutyunyan, K. S. Novoselov and M. Terrones, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 14527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, J. Gebhardt, K. Gotterbarm, O. Höfert, C. Gleichweit, C. Papp, A. Görling and H.-P. Steinrück, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2013, 25, 445002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, Y. Que, H. Chen, D. Wang, J. Li, C. Shen, W. Xiao, S. Du, H. Gao and S. T. Pantelides, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gebhardt, R. J. Koch, W. Zhao, O. Höfert, K. Gotterbarm, S. Mammadov, C. Papp, A. Görling, H.-P. Steinrück and T. Seyller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 155437 CrossRef .
Y.-B. Tang, L.-C. Yin, Y. Yang, X.-H. Bo, Y.-L. Cao, H.-E. Wang, W.-J. Zhang, I. Bello, S.-T. Lee, H.-M. Cheng and C.-S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 2, 1970 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Willke, J. A. Amani, A. Sinterhauf, S. Thakur, T. Kotzott, T. Druga, S. Weikert, K. Maiti, H. Hofsäss and M. Wenderoth, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Basiruddin and S. K. Swain, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 58, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dou, S. Saito, K. Matsuo, I. Hisaki and S. Yamaguchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Osumi, S. Saito, C. Dou, K. Matsuo, K. Kume, H. Yoshikawa, K. Awaga and S. Yamaguchi, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 219–227 RSC .
M. Favaro, F. Carraro, M. Cattelan, L. Colazzo, C. Durante, M. Sambi, A. Gennaro, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14334–14347 CAS .
M. Favaro, L. Ferrighi, G. Fazio, L. Colazzo, C. Di Valentin, C. Durante, F. Sedona, A. Gennaro, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, ACS Catal., 2014, 5, 129–144 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan, S. Zhou, D. Fang and S. Yang, Carbon, 2014, 70, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z.-Y. Zhang, R.-P. Liang, Y.-H. Li and J.-D. Qiu, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4423–4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dey, A. Govindaraj, K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 595, 203–208 CrossRef .
X. Hai, Q.-X. Mao, W.-J. Wang, X.-F. Wang, X.-W. Chen and J.-H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 9109–9114 RSC .
R. R. Cloke, T. Marangoni, G. D. Nguyen, T. Joshi, D. J. Rizzo, C. Bronner, T. Cao, S. G. Louie, M. F. Crommie and F. R. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8872–8875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kawai, S. Saito, S. Osumi, S. Yamaguchi, A. S. Foster, P. Spijker and E. Meyer, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(2015), 8098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xing, W. Fang, X. Yang, B. Tian and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6637 RSC .
L. Ferrighi and C. Di Valentin, Surf. Sci., 2015, 634, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .
S. Casolo, R. Martinazzo and G. F. Tantardini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3250–3256 CAS .
P. Rani and V. K. Jindal, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 802–812 RSC .
C. Di Valentin, L. Ferrighi and G. Fazio, ChemSusChem, 2016 DOI:10.1002/cssc.201501439r1 .
L. Ferrighi, M. I. Trioni and C. Di Valentin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6056–6064 CAS .
A. Lherbier, X. Blase, Y.-M. Niquet, F. Triozon and S. Roche, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 036808 CrossRef PubMed .
T. B. Martins, R. H. Miwa, A. J. R. da Silva and A. Fazzio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 196803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Marconcini, A. Cresti, F. Triozon, G. Fiori, B. Biel, Y.-M. Niquet, M. Macucci and S. Roche, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7942–7947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cervantes-Sodi, G. Csányi, S. Piscanec and A. C. Ferrari, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 165427 CrossRef .
A. C. Ferrari and D. M. Basko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lucchese, F. Stavale, E. H. Martins Ferreira, C. Vilani, M. V. O. Moutinho, R. B. Capaz, C. A. Achete and A. Jorio, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1592–1597 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ando, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 76, 104711 CrossRef .
A. Nagashima, N. Tejima and C. Oshima, Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17487 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zheng, P. Hermet and L. Henrard, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4165–4173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kong, Q. Chen and Z. Sun, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 514–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ferrighi, M. Datteo and C. Di Valentin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 223–230 CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4394–4403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fazio, L. Ferrighi and C. Di Valentin, J. Catal., 2014, 318, 203–210 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Blgaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132–7135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. Hsu Yen, S. Fu, G. Yang, C. Zhu, D. Du, P. C. Wo, X. Cheng, J. Yang, C. M. Waic and Y. Lin, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3552–3560 RSC .
Y. Gong, H. Fei, X. Zou, W. Zhou, S. Yang, G. Ye, Z. Liu, Z. Peng, J. Lou, R. T. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, J. M. Tour and P. M. Ajayan, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1181–1186 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei, R. Ye, G. Ye, Y. Gong, Z. Peng, X. Fan, E. L. G. Samuel, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10837–10843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Favaro, S. Agnoli, M. Cattelan, A. Moretto, C. Durante, S. Leonardi, J. Kunze-Liebhäuser, O. Schneider, A. Gennaro and G. Granozzi, Carbon, 2014, 77, 405–415 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7084–7091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. Ge, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1–7 CrossRef .
C. H. Choi, M. W. C. Han, C. Kwon, S. H. Parka and S. I. Woo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3694–3699 CAS .
J. Jin, F. Pan, L. Jiang, X. Fu, A. Liang, Z. Wei, J. Zhang and G. Sun, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3313–3321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. Ge, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3110–3116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, C. He, Y. Li, S. Kang and P. K. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14700 CAS .
Z. Jiang, X. Zhao, X. Tian, L. Luo, J. Fang, H. Gao and Z.-J. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19398–19407 CAS .
Y. Xue, D. Yu, L. Dai, R. Wang, D. Li, A. Roy, F. Lu, H. Chen, Y. Liu and J. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12220 RSC .
D. Sen, R. Thapa and K. K. Chattopadhyay, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 2542–2549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abramc and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 CAS .
T. Hatsukade, K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13814–13819 RSC .
K. P. Kuhl, T. Hatsukade, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram, J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14107–14113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sreekanth, M. A. Nazrulla, T. V. Vineesh, K. Sailaja and K. L. Phani, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16061–16064 RSC .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
Y. Hori, I. Takahashi, O. Koga and N. Hoshi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 15–17 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 CAS .
J. Hou, Y. Shao, M. W. Ellis, R. B. Moored and B. Yi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15384–15402 RSC .
Y. Liu, V. I. Artyukhov, M. Liu, A. R. Harutyunyan and B. I. Yakobson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1737–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sahoo, K. P. Sreena, B. P. Vinayan and S. Ramaprabhu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 61, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Yang, Y.-X. Yin, H. Ye, K.-C. Jiang, J. Zhang and Y.-G. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8789–8795 CAS .
Y. Xie, Z. Meng, T. Cai and W.-Q. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25202–25210 CAS .
X. Ji and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9821–9826 RSC .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Press, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
Q. Hao, X. Xia, W. Lei, W. Wang and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2015, 81, 552–563 CrossRef CAS .
L. Niu, Z. Li, W. Hong, J. Sun, Z. Wang, L. Ma, J. Wang and S. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 108, 666–673 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Wang, F. Li, J. P. Zhao, W. C. Ren, Z. G. Chen, J. Tan, Z. S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dai, J. Yuan and P. Giannozzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 232105 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Zhang, Y.-B. Chen, K.-G. Zhou, C.-H. Liu, J. Zeng, H.-L. Zhang and Y. Peng, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 185504 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Choudhuri, N. Patra, A. Mahata, R. Ahuja and B. Pathak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24827–24836 CAS .
S. M. Tan, H. L. Poh, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Analyst, 2013, 138, 4885–4891 RSC .
K. H. Hui, A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer, M. Pumera and A. Bonanni, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9040–9045 RSC .
Y. Zhang, R. Sun, B. Luo and L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 156, 228–234 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Yeh, Y.-S. Li, G.-L. Chen, L.-Y. Lin, T.-J. Li, H.-M. Chuang, C.-Y. Hsieh, S.-C. Lo, W.-H. Chiang and K.-C. Ho, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 172, 52–60 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lin, F. Huang, J. Lianga and Y. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 862–865 Search PubMed .
D. S. Su, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-M. Titirici, R. J. White, N. Brun, V. L. Budarin, D. S. Su, F. del Monte, J. H. Clarkd and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 250–290 RSC .
X.-K. Kong, C.-L. Chen and Q.-W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2841–2857 RSC .
Y. Lin, X. Pan, W. Qi, B. Zhang and D. S. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12475–12483 CAS .
C. Su and K. P. Loh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2275–2285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, S. Wu, W. Shi, B. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. A. Kim, M. Endo and D. S. Su, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13086–13089 RSC .
Z.-R. Tang, Y. Zhang, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7030–7034 RSC .
M. Xing, F. Shen, B. Qiu and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xing, X. Li and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5493 CAS .
Y. Guan and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8106 RSC .
D. Li, Y. Chen and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8097 RSC .
S. Jahan, F. Mansoor, S. Naz, J. Lei and S. Kanwal, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 10232–10239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, H. Zhao, G. Fan, Y. Li, L. Li and X. Quan, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 1150–1158 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Groves, C. Malardier-Jugroot and M. Jugroot, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10548–10556 CAS .
A. Pullamsetty, M. Subbiah and R. Sundara, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 10251–11026 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Stefano Agnoli	Stefano Agnoli studied Materials Science at the University of Padua, obtaining his PhD degree in 2006. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the same institution in the surface science group of Prof. G. Granozzi, focusing on the investigation of ultrathin oxide films using electron spectroscopies and local probes. From 2009 to 2010, he was associated with the group directed by Dr J. A. Rodriguez at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in New York, where he studied the catalytic properties of ceria-based materials. In 2015, Stefano was awarded the Raffaello Nasini Medal by the Inorganic Division of Italia Chemical Society, a national award recognising the most meritorious young Italian scientist in the field of Inorganic Chemistry. He is currently an associate professor at the University of Padua, and his present research activity is focused on the study of structural and chemical properties of graphene and other two dimensional materials.
Marco Favaro	Marco Favaro received his BS in 2009 and completed his MS degree in 2011 in Materials Science at the University of Padua under the supervision of Prof. Gaetano Granozzi. From 2011 to 2015, he worked at the same institution pursuing a PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering under the supervision of Prof. Stefano Agnoli. After completing his PhD degree in 2015, he moved to the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (USA), where he currently holds a joint post-doctoral fellowship at the Advanced Light Source and the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis. His current research interest focuses on the investigation of the processes occurring at the solid/liquid interfaces by means of operando ambient pressure X ray absorption and photoelectron spectroscopy.

 	Fig. 1  Ball model of B-G showing some of the most common boron induced defects.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of the typical reaction scheme for the synthesis of B-G via solid state reactions (reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the laser induced formation of B-G starting from a boron oxide polyimide composite. Adapted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the CVD deposition of B-G on Cu foils by using phenylboronic acid. Adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2013 Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Reaction scheme for the preparation of boron doped quantum dots by cyclodehydrogenation of substituted diborapentacene precursors. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2012 Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the Ullmann coupling reaction that leads to the formation of boron doped nanoribbons. STM image before (b) and after (c) annealing at 180 °C. (d) Large area STM topography of the condensed nanoribbons formed after annealing at 400 °C. Adapted from ref. 56 under CC BY license.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) On/off and mobility measurements for B-doped graphene with different amounts of doping. (b) Comparison of the calculated vs. experimental band gap (c) calculated density of states of the B-G as a function of B content. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Ball model of B-G; (b) density of states of pristine (top panel) and B-G (bottom panel) supported on Cu(111) with unstrained unit cell, (c) same as (b) but with the lattice constant of graphene strained to match the Cu(111) surface unit cell. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Angle resolved photoemission spectra showing the dispersion of graphene π bands at different boron doping levels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2013 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) 3D map of the tunnelling current on a B defect (V = −0.15 V I = nA) (b) simulation of the STM images at different tip surface distances, (c) I(z) and (d) F(z) spectroscopies over a B dopant; (e) plot of the electronic states near the Fermi level for B dopant. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  DFT calculated reaction path of the ORR on B-G. Both the Eley–Rideal (ER red dotted line) and Langmuir–Hinshelwood (LH, black line) mechanism are reported. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 12  Tafel analysis taken at 5–10 mV s−1 and at 1600–1500 rpm (a and b respectively) under limiting current conditions of different doped single layer graphene and graphene quantum dots. Adapted with permission from ref. 74 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society) and adapted from ref. 49 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) HOMO of C41BH16, (b) spin density mapping, (c) chemisorption of *COOH on C41BH16via B atoms, (d) chemisorption of *COOH on C41BH16via C atoms. (e) Linear sweep voltammetry of BG (dotted lines (b and c)) in 0.1 M KHCO3 in the presence (blue) and absence (red) of CO2. Dark solid trace (a) is the LSV of CO2 reduction on graphene. Adapted from ref. 95 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profile and (b) cycle performance and coulombic efficiency of the B-doped graphene electrode at a low current rate of 50 mA g−1 between 3.0 and 0.01 V versus Li/Li. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) CV curves at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, (b) specific capacitances as a function of scan rate, (c) CV curves for 3000 cycles at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, and (d) capacitance retentions as a function of cycle number of T-rGO and BT-rGO electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18 under CC BY license.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a–d) Ball model of the optimized structure of different molecules (CO, CO2, NO, NO2, respectively) adsorbed on B-G brown, red grey and green balls represent carbon oxygen nitrogen and boron atoms, respectively. (e–h) Charge density plot at an isosurface value of 0.232 e Å−3, (i–l) charge density difference for the difference as a consequence of gas molecule adsorption. A positive charge (higher charge density) is indicated by a blue colour whereas yellow indicates a negative charge (lower charge density). Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Ball model of the B-GQDs (b) schematic illustration of the detection mechanism due to the glucose induced cross-link between B-GQDs, whose aggregation boosts the luminescence emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Photovoltaic characterizations. (a) Energy-band diagrams of BG, n-Si, and Ti/Pd/Ag. (b) Equilibrium energy-band diagram of a BG/Si junction. (c) Dark J–V curves of G/Si, BG/Si solar cells. (d) Light J–V curves of G/Si, BG/Si solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
