Recent progress on single-atom catalysts for lithium–air battery applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE02949A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02949A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 1431-1465Recent progress on single-atom catalysts for lithium–air battery applications

        
          
            Tiansheng 
            Bai†
a, 
      
        
          
            Deping 
            Li†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Shenyi 
            Xiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fengjun 
            Ji
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuai 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chu 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingyu 
            Lu
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Quan 
            Gao
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Lijie 
            Ci
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Advanced Welding and Joining, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, 518055, China. E-mail: lideping@hit.edu.cn; cilijie@hit.edu.cn
bSchool of Science, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, 518055, China. E-mail: lujingyu@hit.edu.cn
cState Key Laboratory of High-efficiency Utilization of Coal and Green Chemical Engineering, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, 750021, China
Received 
      12th September 2022
    , Accepted 20th February 2023First published on 21st February 2023AbstractLithium–air batteries (LABs) have attracted extensive attention due to their high theoretical energy density based on the “Holy Grail”, the lithium metal anode and the inexhaustible air as the cathode. However, their intrinsic low catalytic activity, including the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) processes, undesirable high overpotential, low reversibility and poor cyclability hinder their development. Recently, single-atom catalysts (SACs) with high atom utilization and cost-effective prospects have shown excellent ORR/OER kinetics in various catalytic systems. Consequently, they have attracted increasing attention, especially in the past three years and achieved improvement in their electrochemical performances. With these in mind, this review first introduces the structure, characteristics, and synthesis methods of SACs and then summarizes the reported SACs for LABs based on both oxygen and carbon dioxide chemistry. The research progress of SACs in regulating the lithium metal anode is also discussed. Finally, challenges and opportunities for the synthesis, characterization, and application of SACs, as well as the structure–performance correlations are comprehensively summarized and corresponding perspectives are addressed.
Tiansheng Bai
Tiansheng Bai is currently a postgraduate at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT, Shenzhen). He received his undergraduate degree in materials science and engineering from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2021. His current research focuses on the structural design of carbon-based single-atom catalysts and their applications in lithium–air batteries.
Deping Li
Deping Li is currently an assistant professor at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT, Shenzhen). He received his PhD in materials science and engineering from Shandong University under the supervision of Prof. Lijie Ci in 2019. His current research focuses on next-generation energy storage applications including lithium–air batteries, solid-state batteries, and Na/K-ion batteries.
Jingyu Lu
Jingyu Lu is an assistant professor at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT, Shenzhen), Shenzhen. He obtained his bachelor, master, and PhD degrees from Northwestern Polytechnical University, HIT, and Nanyang Technological University, respectively. Then, he did his postdoc research at the National University of Singapore, Harvard University, and the University of Cambridge, before joining HIT (Shenzhen) in 2020. His research interests mainly include rechargeable batteries, in situ characterization techniques, and sensors.
Quan Gao
Quan Gao is currently a university lecturer at Ningxia University. He received his PhD in materials science and engineering from Shandong University under the supervision of Prof. Chengguo Wang in 2021. His current research focuses on high-performance carbon fibers.
Lijie Ci
Lijie Ci is currently a full professor at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT, Shenzhen). He received his PhD in mechanical engineering from Tsinghua University. He was a researcher at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ecole Central Paris in France, Max Planck Institute for Metals in Germany, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Rice University and Samsung Cheil Industry (San Jose Lab) in the USA. Before he joined HIT (Shenzhen), he was a full professor at Shandong University. His current scientific interest is focused on carbon-based materials and energy storage devices.

Broader context
Under the direction of the global carbon neutrality target, the development of highly efficient energy storage systems is critical. In this context, lithium metal is gradually being revived as the most promising anode with an ultra-high theoretical capacity of 3860 mA h g−1 and the lowest electrochemical potential of −3.04 V (vs. the standard hydrogen electrode). To match the lithium metal anode, batteries based on the redox chemistries of light elements are being explored, namely, lithium–sulfur batteries and lithium–air batteries, delivering theoretical energy densities of 2600 W h kg−1 and 3500 W h kg−1, respectively. However, these batteries face severe problems such as high overpotentials, sluggish kinetics and unsatisfactory cycling stability, exposing the inherent associations between redox chemistries and catalysts. Recently, single-atom catalysts (SACs) with fully exposed atom surfaces and extremely high catalytic activity have been attracting increasing attention as promising solutions for LABs and LSBs in both catalytic cathodes and lithium metal anodes. To this end, we offer this timely tutorial review for readers to quickly grasp the critical role of SACs in LABs and provide guidance on the development directions for the future.

1 Introduction
Global energy consumption is explosively increasing, and it is estimated that by 2090, the three traditional fossil energy sources will be exhausted. Therefore, urgent development of renewable energy sources, such as solar energy, wind energy, and tidal energy, is needed. We also need a more effective energy storage system with higher energy density, wider application, and longer cycle life to maximize its use. In the past three decades, lithium–ion batteries, the mainstream electrochemical energy storage system, have played a huge and indispensable role in our daily life. However, due to their limited energy density, restricted earth reserves and cost, more efficient battery systems are required.1–6
Lithium metal batteries (LMBs) are known as the “holy grail” of secondary lithium batteries due to their ultra-high theoretical capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and low electrochemical potential (−3.04 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode).7–14 Currently, lithium–sulfur batteries (LSBs) and lithium–air batteries (LABs) are two typical representatives of LMBs. The former employs sulfur as the cathode material and delivers a theoretical energy density of 2600 W h kg−1, while the latter, LABs, can directly use air as the cathode with an ultrahigh energy density of 3500 W h kg−1 (based on oxygen). LSBs have achieved rapid development with prototype pouch cells being widely reported,15–19 while the development of LABs is focused more on fundamental research. In particular, for the emerging SACs in LABs, there is still the need for a comprehensive understanding. Therefore, in this review, we mainly focus on the past, present, and prospects of SACs in constructing better LABs based on O2 and CO2 chemistry.
As the most widely reported system of LABs, rechargeable lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) batteries (LOBs) with Li2O2 as the discharge product provide a high theoretical specific energy density (3500 W h kg−1), which is ∼10 times higher than that of conventional Li–ion batteries (LIBs, 200–300 W h kg−1), thus showing appreciable potential for large-scale energy storage systems, such as vehicle applications.20–26 LOBs have the advantages of low cost, good stability and low overpotential, and are considered the most promising candidates for next-generation energy storage devices. At the same time, lithium carbon dioxide (Li–CO2) batteries (LCBs) based on Li2CO3 discharge products also deliver a relatively high theoretical energy density of 1876 W h kg−1. In the context of the global carbon neutrality target, strikingly, Li–CO2 batteries will provide a promising solution to reuse greenhouse gases.27–30 Therefore, from an economic and environmental view, LABs systems can be considered as encouraging electrochemical energy storage devices and promising alternatives to Li-ion batteries. However, before they are put to use on a large scale, there are still some issues to be solved, such as poor cycling efficiency, low rate capability, low round trip energy efficiency, and limited cycle life span, which are mainly caused by the sluggish ORR/OER process or CO2RR/CO2ER process. In other words, the failure of LABs is mainly due to the insufficient catalytic activity of the cathode materials. At the same time, there are also lots of hidden dangers in the lithium metal anode, which shows high electrochemical activity and is prone to the undesirable formation and growth of lithium dendrites during the charging and discharging processes, resulting in low coulombic efficiency (CE), short cycle life, and safety problems. All the above problems have become a bottleneck restricting the further development of LABs.31–34 Therefore, various “treatments” towards these “symptoms” have been developed, such as the introduction of nanosized catalysts and lithium growth regulation sites.35–40 To date, various kinds of cathode catalysts, such as particle-stacked catalysts, hollow-structured catalysts, MOF (metal–organic framework)-derived catalysts, fiber-assembled catalysts, and 3D-supported catalysts, are gradually emerging, which have their own disadvantages.41 For example, hollow-structured catalysts have a large specific surface area and a high proportion of active sites, while MOF-derived catalysts have the characteristics of heterogeneous and homogeneous electrocatalysis. On using these catalysts in LABs, some striking improvements have been achieved, which have promoted the development of LOBs. However, we still need a practical solution to further improve battery performance.
Recently, single-atom catalysts (SACs) with fully exposed atom surfaces and extremely high catalytic activity were introduced into LABs, serving as a powerful strategy in boosting the formation/decomposition process of discharge products and taming the bothersome lithium dendrite with significant enhancement in the battery performance, such as reduced overpotential, improved security, increased capacity and enhanced cyclability22,42–54 (Fig. 1). In this review, we will start with the development history of SACs. We will then introduce the structure, synthesis, and characterization of SACs. Subsequently, we summarize the progress of SACs in LABs based on oxygen chemistry, including noble metal SACs, non-precious metal SACs, and non-metallic SACs with the introduction of the working mechanisms of LOBs. As an analogous system, the development of SACs in Li–CO2 is also summarized. We also shed light on how SACs tame lithium dendrite issues. Finally, we present a comprehensive summary and indicate the potential development directions based on the current research, providing guidance for the design of better SACs for LABs and other catalytic or energy storage systems.
 Fig. 1  Advantages and application of SACs in LABs and other LMBs. Images have been reproduced with permission. Atomically dispersed cobalt catalyst. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. Covalent Organic Frameworks. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Co–N-Doped Carbon. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. SA-Co3O4 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. Adjacent Co Atoms on GO. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Li plating process on different electrodes. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Dendrite-tamed deposition kinetics (low and high dimensional deposition). Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. The image of SACs. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. Synergistic effect. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. Homogenizing Li2CO3 formation/decomposition. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
2 An overview of single-atom catalysts (SACs)
Single-atom catalysts (SACs) with a unique structure different from the previous catalytic units, namely isolated metal atoms mono-dispersed on supports, exhibit the merits of maximized metal utilization, exceptional tunability of the catalytic site, and cost-effective feature, which have attracted a great deal of research interest since its appearance.51 Besides, SACs bridge the gap between heterogeneous catalysts and homogeneous catalysts, which is regarded as a milestone in the catalytic field.55,56 After being evolved in the past decade, significant breakthroughs in SACs have already been achieved (Fig. 2). Therefore, this chapter depicts the development and application of single-atom catalysts, providing readers with a clear historical vein on the SACs research.
 Fig. 2  Development and application of SACs. Reproduced with permission.25,45,49,57–66,75–89 Copyright 2011, 2013, 2020 and 2022 Springer Nature, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2017, 2018 and 2020 American Chemical Society, 2012, 2016, 2018, 2019 and 2021 Wiley-VCH, 2014 and 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015, 2017, 2020 and 2022 Elsevier. 
2.1 Development and application fields
As shown in Fig. 2, the research on SACs started relatively late; in 2011, Zhang Tao et al. first outlined the theory of SACs and reported their good plasticity.57 They reported single Pt atoms successfully anchored to the surfaces of iron oxide nanocrystallites, which showed extremely high atom efficiency, excellent stability and high activity for both CO oxidation and the preferential oxidation of CO in H2. Subsequently, in 2012, the first report of SACs in LOBs was made, using Fe/N/C as catalytically active sites.58 Only one year later, Zhang Tao et al.59 further prepared Ir1/FeOx SACs for the water gas shift (WGS) reaction, in which the performance is comparable to or even higher than the most popular Au- or Pt-based catalysts. Since then, various precious metal single-atoms such as gold (Au), silver (Ag), and platinum (Pt), as well as the changes in supports have been reported with high catalytic activities, and have been applied in different fields.59–65 Since 2018, researchers have started to set their sights on non-precious SACs, such as iron (Fe), cobalt (Co), and nickel (Ni), to enrich the SACs family with greater cost-effectiveness.66 After nearly ten years of effort in mechanism, synthesis, and applications, SACs have attracted great attention as a rising star in the catalytic frontier field with broad prospects.67–72 To date, they have been widely applied in various fields such as CO oxidation, water–gas shift reaction, organic conversion, biomedicine, energy, and the environment.51,53,73,74 With widespread attention since 2019, SACs have begun to step into the field of LABs as the catalytic cathode and lithium growth regulators.22,25,75,76 Overall, SACs open a new window in the catalytic field with enhanced catalytic activity, selectivity, and cost-effectiveness.
In essence, SACs refer to mono-dispersed metal atoms loaded on the surface of the support via intimate interactions, which are isolated but not alone. Therefore, the unique structure including the metal-support interactions is the main origin of the high catalytic activity, and different synthetic routes determine the structures, thus affecting the final catalytic performance. Correspondingly, accurate and advanced characterizations of the electronic structure will help to track the origin of the improved catalytic performance. Therefore, the next section will mainly discuss the structure, synthesis, and characterization of SACs to illuminate the structure–performance correlations.
2.2 Structure, synthesis and characterization
As shown in Fig. 3a, before the advent of SACs, most catalytic units in the catalytic field were nanoparticles and nanoclusters with diameters of ∼5 nm and 1–5 nm, respectively. The former has a continuous energy band, while the electronic structure of the latter involves molecular orbitals. Both have been widely applied in biomedicine, the petrochemical industry, photocatalysis, and rechargeable batteries.90–95 When the catalytic unit approaches 0.1 nm and below, the electronic structure turns into atomic orbitals.96–99 Based on this, SACs have emerged with isolated metal atoms anchored by the coordination sites of the surrounding substrate, resulting in strong interactions or significant charge transfer between the single-atom metal and the carrier. Besides, fully exposed atom surfaces contribute to sharply increased catalytic active sites, promoting the theoretical atom efficiency of SACs to nearly 100%, which is the typical characteristic of SACs. It is worth noting that although the loading of SACs is quite small, generally below 5 wt%, far lower than nanoparticles and nanoclusters, the specific activity is greater, which provides a solution to remarkably reduce the cost of noble metal catalysts while maintaining superior catalytic activity.100 SACs also display a high specific activity and reaction pathway selectivity in the specific reaction.101–107 Furthermore, the strong covalent bonds between the metal atoms and substrate firmly immobilize the single metal atom and achieve high stability, which can prevent metal atoms from aggregating even under the conditions of high temperature or high oxidation potential.108 Meanwhile, there is a very important concept called regional catalytic activity, that is, the single atom and the support atoms will work together to improve the catalytic effect, which contributes to a synergistic effect in realizing excellent catalytic activity. More importantly, in the traditional supported catalysts, it is difficult to identify the reaction active centers due to the size effect, carrier effect, surface interface effect and many other influencing factors, and the active center of the redox mediators is also hard to capture, leading to research difficulties in the catalytic mechanism. Taking LOBs as the example, in the past 20 years, a large number of studies have proposed the possible ORR mechanism of the supported catalysts and redox mediators.25,49 However, no agreements have been made about many scientific issues: the identification of active centers, the dynamic evolution of catalytic active sites and related key reaction intermediates, etc. These issues greatly hinder the understanding of the discharge/recharge mechanism at the atomic level and the further rational design of efficient electrocatalysts for Li–O2 batteries. Therefore, it is an important basis for solving scientific problems to construct a catalyst system that can lead to a deep understanding of the catalytic mechanism at the atomic level.109 Herein, SACs with a uniform structure and the same chemical environment on the active center simplify the structure model of the catalyst, providing an ideal model system for the atomic level insight of the active sites and the corresponding catalytic reaction mechanism, which will greatly aid the follow-up in-depth studies.
 Fig. 3  Structure, synthetic strategies, and characterization techniques of single-atom catalysts. SACs images. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
In the past decade, various synthesis methods for high-quality SACs have emerged,110–112 including two general routes: bottom–up strategies and top–down strategies (Fig. 3b). The bottom–up strategy is the earliest reported and most widely used method to synthesize metal SACs. In this method, the metal precursors are adsorbed, reduced and confined by the vacancies or defects of the supports.113,114 Due to the selection of mononuclear metal complexes as the initiation precursor, the postprocessing method to remove mononuclear complex ligands is critical to realize the atomic dispersion of these mononuclear metal complexes and prevent migration and aggregation issues. Common bottom–up synthesis methods include impregnation, co-precipitation, atomic layer deposition, and chemical vapor deposition methods. The impregnation method involves soaking a solid powder or a formed solid (a carrier or a catalyst containing a main body) in a solution containing the metal complex for a certain time to adsorb the active metal ions.115–119 With the impregnation strategy, Melanie et al.64 prepared monodisperse single Pt atoms supported on an inert substrate, θ-alumina (Al2O3), for exploring CO oxidation activity. The above as-synthesized Pt SACs, compared with the catalyst without single atoms, exhibited significantly promoted CO oxidation activity. Wang et al.120 and Chaitanya et al.121 further extended this method to Rh1–Co3O4 SACs and NO oxidation. The co-precipitation method refers to two or more cations existing in a homogeneous solution. After adding the precipitant, the corresponding cations will be captured by dispersive sites, which is also a frequently used strategy to prepare SACs.60,122,123 Based on this strategy, Qiao et al.124 prepared a ferric hydroxide-supported Pd atom catalyst with high activity for CO oxidations. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a gas-phase catalyst synthesis technology for thin-film growth and has become an alternative to heterogeneous catalysts synthesis.125–127 Like chemical vapor deposition (CVD), the principle is based on the alternating intake of two precursor vapors, and then a molecular “self-limiting” reaction will occur on the carrier surface to achieve the accurate deposition of the target material on the carrier surface. Sun et al.63 reported a practical synthesis for isolated single Pt atoms anchored onto a graphene nanosheet using the ALD technique, which exhibited significantly improved catalytic activity (up to 10 times) over that of the state-of-the-art commercial Pt/C catalyst. Other bottom–up synthesis methods, such as electrochemical deposition, chemical reduction, photochemical reduction, and ball milling, all have their own advantages and applicable conditions,62 which need to be selected by researchers according to the actual situation. However, it should be noted that SACs synthesized from these bottom–up methods usually exhibit low metal loadings, which may limit their practical applications in some cases. Therefore, researchers also proposed top–down synthesis strategies, which employ metal nanoparticles or bulk metals as starting precursors and transform them into monodispersed SACs. The key to the top–down route is to break the metal–metal bonds in metal nanoparticles or bulk metal body phases and release atomically dispersed metal species for establishing new solid bond migration and aggregation between the formed single metal atoms and the supported anchor points. Typical top–down synthesis strategies include pyrolysis and high-temperature migration methods.74 High-temperature pyrolysis is a common method for preparing SACs by using the thermal decomposition of some precursors (complexes, polymers, metal–organic frameworks, etc.) under an inert or corrosive atmosphere (Ar, N2, NH3, or PH3) and an appropriate temperature (usually >700 °C).51,128,129 By far, pyrolysis is the most widely used method for the synthesis of carbon-based electrocatalysts. Chen et al.130 reported a highly reactive and stable isolated single-atom Fe/N-doped porous carbon (ISA Fe/CN) catalyst with Fe loading up to 2.16 wt% via a cage-encapsulated-precursor pyrolysis strategy. The catalyst showed excellent ORR performance with a half-wave potential (E1/2) of 0.900 V, which outperformed commercial Pt/C and most non-precious metal catalysts reported to date. The high-temperature atomic–migration strategy (high-temperature solid-state reactions) is another mainstream top–down method. Li et al.131 first mixed the bulk Cu powder and ZIF-8, and then heated them in a tube furnace under an NH3 atmosphere to synthesize a Cu-based SAC supported on N-doped porous carbon. They found that this strategy is readily scalable and has been confirmed as feasible for producing functional SACs at industrial levels. Despite the above-mentioned top–down methods, there are also other solutions, like electrochemical activation and the MOF-confining method, which all exhibit their unique characteristics. Although various synthesis methods of SACs have been developed, greater challenges are also presented to researchers, for example, the inapplicability of largescale productions and instability of SACs, which need further research to improve. The existing methods for the synthesis of SACs cannot meet the practical demands and still face great challenges; thus further exploration by researchers is necessary.
After selecting the appropriate synthesis method for preparing the required SACs, characterization methods to precisely determine the existing state of metal atoms and support the interpretation of the structure–performance correlations are equally important. As shown in Fig. 3c, the current characterization methods include HAADF imaging and XAFS technologies, NMR and IR spectroscopies, and theoretical support with DFT calculations.55 These techniques provide complementary data to confirm the mutual interactions between isolated metals and supports and offer local structural information at the atomic scale. HAADF-STEM (high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy) is a powerful technique for obtaining atomic resolution contrast images, which can vividly visualize isolated metal atoms anchored on supports.132 Despite the visual observation of the atomic site, obtaining a precise view of the microstructure is also essential. The XAFS technology, that is, X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy, is one of the most powerful tools for describing local structures. In contrast to electron microscopy, which only offers information on the specific local area, XAFS investigation can offer more detailed information concerning the overall and average structure, including the distance between the absorbing atom and the adjacent atom, the number, type, as well as the oxidation state of the absorbing element. Specifically, XAFS technology can be divided into two categories, namely, X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS).133 Solid-state magic-angle spinning NMR and infrared spectroscopy (IR) are also powerful tools for providing information related to the nature of the metal components as well as the coordination between the isolated centers and supports.134 The former involves nuclear magnetic resonance, while the latter is based on the theory that molecules can selectively absorb infrared rays of certain wavelengths, which causes the transitions of vibrational and rotational energy levels in molecules. Despite experimental determinations, DFT calculation is a theoretical method for describing materials through mathematical programming simulation operations. It provides an intuitive means for tackling schemes or problems that cannot be implemented experimentally due to the limitations of existing conditions and has been widely employed in reported studies on SACs.56 However, current data interpretations over these characterization results mainly focus on one typical case rather than a whole map. Therefore, how to dig into the nature of these results is critical and the effective combination of these techniques may provide us with more solid and convincing information.
3 Typical SACs applied in LOBs
In 2012, Liu et al.58 first proposed Fe–N–C SACs as the catalytic cathode material for LOBs, which exhibited better electrochemical performance than the benchmark α-MnO2 catalyst. However, the structure of atomic sites was not comprehensively characterized, and the role of atomic sites was not discussed in depth. It was not until 2019 that Wang et al.86 first reported platinum (Pt) single atoms on g-C3N4 nanosheets for LOBs. The experimental parameters were well investigated, and a series of improvements including overpotential, cycle stability and discharge capacity were realized. At the beginning of 2020, two consecutive articles on Co single-atoms were reported,22,25 thus opening the upsurge of research on SACs for LOBs. Therefore, this chapter will introduce the current research progress of SACs catalytic cathodes for LOBs. We will first introduce the working principle of LOBs. Afterwards, we will summarize the reported SACs in LOBs from three categories: (i) noble metal SACs, (ii) non-precious metal SACs, and (iii) non-metallic SACs.
3.1 Working principle of LOBs
To understand the relationship between SACs and LOBs, an in-depth understanding of how LOBs work and how SACs function is essential. Overall, there are currently four categories of Li–O2 systems, referred to as aprotic, aqueous, hybrid, and solid-state batteries, which differ from each other in terms of the electrolyte species involved.135 Among them, aprotic Li–O2 batteries have drawn enormous attention over the past few decades due to their high energy density and reversibility, gradually becoming the research mainstream of LOBs.136 As shown in Fig. 4a, an aprotic LOB system is generally composed of the lithium metal anode, porous catalytic cathode, and electrolyte. One of the functions of the porous catalytic cathode is to adsorb reactant molecular oxygen; at the same time, lithium ions are generated from the anode and transmitted to the catalytic cathode. Consequently, lithium ions and adsorbed oxygen react and the discharge product Li2O2 is generated, which is commonly referred to as the ORR process, as shown in Fig. 4b; the chemical equation is as follows (eqn (1)): O2 + 2e− + 2Li+ ↔ Li2O2 (Eθ = 2.96 VLi)(1)However, for a catalytic reaction, the whole process is commonly composed of multiple steps rather than a simple equation. As shown in eqn (2), the intermediate LiO2 is first formed, and then transformed into the final discharge product Li2O2. The step-by-step reaction equations are given in eqn (2) and (3). O2 + e− + Li+ → LiO2(2) LiO2 + e− + Li+ → Li2O2 (surface pathway)(3)Moreover, there are two disproportionation routes for LiO2, one is the surface pathway as shown in above eqn (3), while the other (solution pathway) is described in eqn (4) below. LiO2(sol) + LiO2(sol) → Li2O2 + O2 (solution pathway)(4)In the charging process, which is commonly referred to as the OER process, the discharge product Li2O2 will decompose into O2 and Li+. In an ideal case, the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 should be 100% reversible. However, owing to the limited catalytic activity and side reactions, some Li2O2 will remain on the cathode surface, resulting in a cathode passivation effect and a voltage hysteresis, which leads to battery failure over time.137 The overall and step-by-step reaction equations are shown as follows (eqn (5)–(9)): Li2O2 → O2 + 2Li+ + 2e−(5) Li2O2 → Li2−xO2 + xLi+ + xe−(6) Li2−xO2 → O2 + (2 − x)Li+ + (2 − x)e−(7) Li2−xO2 → LiO2 + (1 − x)Li+ + (1 − x)e−(8) LiO2 → O2 + Li+ + e−(9)Overall, during the discharge process, O2 is preferentially reduced and then combines with Li+ to form Li2O2 (the oxygen reduction reaction, ORR), and the Li2O2 is subsequently converted back into Li+ and O2 during charging (the oxygen evolution reaction, OER) in aprotic Li–O2 batteries (Fig. 4b). Although the high theoretical energy density of aprotic LOBs shows broad prospects, they also face difficulties, such as high overpotential and low power density. These issues may be tackled by introducing a cathode material with ultra-high catalytic activity such as SACs, as shown in Fig. 4c. We have summarized and analyzed the reported SACs for LOBs in the past few years to gain a deep understanding of the correlations between SACs and LOBs.
 Fig. 4  Mechanism and advantage of LOBs with SACs. (a) Working mechanism diagram of Li–O2 batteries. (b) The reaction pathways in non-aqueous LOBs. (c) Comparison before and after loading SACs. 
3.2 Noble metal SACs
Noble metal SACs are the most reported SACs, which are favored by researchers due to their high catalytic nature, good selectivity, and high stability. Currently, the reported noble metal SACs are mainly Pt-based, Ir-based, Ru-based, Rh-based, Au-based, Pd-based and Ag-based, which have been applied in the ORR, OER, CO2RR as well as other catalytic fields.52 Nevertheless, few noble metal catalysts are used in LOBs, namely, Pt-based, Ru-based and Pd-based SACs, while the electrochemical performance in LOBs is quite encouraging.

3.2.1 Pt. 
As a noble metal element, platinum (Pt) is a frequently used catalytic material with good conductivity, thermal conductivity, and extremely stable chemical properties.138,139 To date, there have been many investigations on this.118,140–142 For instance, Lee et al.118 successfully prepared Pt SACs supported on titanium nitride nanoparticles with the aid of chlorine ligands, which showed excellent performance in oxygen reduction, formic acid oxidation as well as methanol oxidation. Zhang et al.140 developed Pt SACs supported on mesoporous Al2O3, which exhibited astounding catalytic activity and stability under both oxidative and reductive atmospheres at high temperatures.
Herein, in LOBs, a Pt SAC supported on holey ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets (Pt–CNHS) was synthesized via a facile liquid-phase (the impregnation method mentioned previously) reaction of g-C3N4 and H2PtCl6 by Zhao et al.86 (Fig. 5a). They found that the distribution and configuration of Pt species on CNHS can be well distinguished via the HAADF-STEM technique, in which the uniformly dispersed bright spots are distinguished as isolated Pt single atoms. In particular, researchers prepared different contrast groups by changing the stirring times (marked as Pt–CNHS-6, Pt–CNHS-8 and Pt–CNHS-10, respectively) or replacing CNHS with CNB (bulk g-C3N4) and Ketjen Black (marked as Pt–CNB and Pt-KB). Among them, Pt–CNHS exhibited the highest initial discharge capacity of 17059.5 mA h g−1, far exceeding that of the pure CNHS cathode (5890.1 mA h g−1), highlighting the advantages of the nanosheet structure of CNHS and the introduction of Pt SACs. On the other hand, the discharge voltage plateau of the Pt–CNHS-8 catalyst (2.8 V) is higher than those of Pt–CNHS-6 (∼2.75 V), Pt–CNHS-10 (∼2.75 V) and pure CNHS (∼2.65 V), and exhibited better ORR catalytic activity. Meanwhile, the Pt–CNHS cathode showed good rate capabilities. When the current density varied from 200, 400, 600 to 800 mA g−1, the Pt–CNHS cathode exhibited the discharge capacities of about 13843.9, 10283.7, 9562.7 and 5964.7 mA h g−1, respectively (Fig. 5b). Besides, Pt–CNHS also exhibits better cycling stability (Fig. 5c), maintaining discharge/charge terminal voltages within 2.4/4.6 V after 100 cycles, while the pure CNHS cathode deteriorates rapidly just after 70 cycles (2.0/4.6 V). Besides, during the initial discharge/charge cycle, the charge voltage plateau of the Pt–CNHS cathode (3.84 V) is about 100 mV lower than that of the pure CNHS cathode. The author conducted theoretical simulations, trying to understand the origin of the enhanced electrochemical performance. As shown in Fig. 5d and e, DOS peaks located at around −1.0 eV for Pt–CNHS are associated with Pt 5d electrons and the absolute DOS value is related to the percentage of Pt atoms in the system. Compared to CNHS, the Pt–CNHS has a narrower band gap, which could be attributed to the existence of Pt 5d electrons, and is less dependent on the Pt percentage. Besides, the narrower band gap of the Pt–CNHS also demonstrates that the delocalization occurs with the decoration of Pt atoms on CNHS. This unique structure could lead to the increase of the electronic conductivity of Pt–CNHS, favoring fast ORR/OER kinetics. In summary, the superior electrocatalytic activity of Pt–CNHS can be ascribed to the large surface area, enhanced electronic conductivity and efficient interfacial mass transfer through Pt atoms.
 Fig. 5  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Pt SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the process for preparing CNHS and Pt–CNHS. (b) The initial discharge profiles of Pt–CNHS at different current densities. (c) Discharge/charge terminal voltages of CNHS and Pt–CNHS. DOS of (d) CNHS and (e) Pt–CNHS. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


3.2.2 Ru. 
As a member of the platinum group metals, ruthenium (Ru) is also a representative noble metal with high catalytic activity and stable physical/chemical properties.143–145 Recently, Xu et al.87 designed and constructed Ru single atoms distributed in nitrogen-doped porous carbon on carbon cloth (CC) through an ionic substitution reaction (replacing Zn2+ as Ru3+ nodes) with subsequent high-temperature pyrolysis (Fig. 6a). As the catalytic cathode in LOBs, the Ru SACs deliver a low overpotential of only 0.55 V at 0.02 mA cm−2. Moreover, in situ DEMS quantified that the e−/O2 ratio in a full cycle is 2.14, which is extremely close to 2.0 (the theoretical value for the desired O2 reduction to Li2O2), indicating superior electrocatalytic performance. Su et al.146 fabricated Ru–N/rGO (single-atom Ru-anchored N-doped reduced graphene oxide nanosheets) via a simple impregnation method (a bottom–up synthesis method) (Fig. 6g), which delivered a higher discharge capacity, a lower overpotential, a better rate performance in comparison with pure N-rGO, and the e−/O2 ratio was merely 2.08. Both studies proved that Ru SACs can be regarded as an ideal catalytic cathode for LOBs regarding their high stability and catalytic activity.
 Fig. 6  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Ru SACs in LOBs. (a) Scheme of the formation of Ru SAs-NC on the flexible CC. (b) Normalized K-edge XANES and (c) K-edge FT-EXAFS in R space for Ru-foil, Ru(acac)3, Ru0.3SAs-NC, and Ru NPs-NC. (d) Initial deep discharge–charge curves of LOBs with the four kinds of electrodes at a current density of 0.02 mA cm−2. (e), Discharge–charge curves of Ru0.3SAs-NC electrodes with a fixed capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.02 mA cm−2 in the voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. (f) Gibbs free energy diagrams at 2.97 V for the discharge–charge reactions on the active surface of pyrolyzed ZIF-8, Ru0.1SAs-NC and Ru0.3SAs-NC. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of the Ru–N/rGO. (h) The initial galvanostatic discharge/charge curves of Ru–N/rGO and N/rGO at 100 mA g−1. (i) The initial galvanostatic discharge/charge curves of Ru–N/rGO and N/rGO electrodes at 100 mA g−1 with a capacity limit of 500 mA h g−1. (j) Cyclability and terminal voltages of Ru–N/rGO and N/rGO; the capacity limit is 500 mA h g−1. (k) The adsorption energies (ΔEads) of LiO2/Li2O2 adsorbed on N/rGO and Ru–N/rGO electrodes. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
The loading content of Ru SACs is an essential parameter that should be well-evaluated. Xu et al.87 developed SACs with different mass loadings, such as Ru0.1SAs-NC and Ru0.3SAs-NC, by strictly controlling the adsorption amount of the Ru precursor, which were determined to be 0.75 wt% and 2.48 wt%, respectively, while the mass ratio of Ru nanoparticles was 16.89 wt% (Ru NPs-NC). It was observed that the edge of Ru0.3SAs-NC lies between Ru foil and Ru(acac)3, indicating that the average oxidation state of the Ru in Ru0.3SAs-NC is between 0 and +3, and only one dominating peak is found at ca. 1.5 Å (without phase correction), which can be attributed to a Ru–N single scattering path. Meanwhile, the peak representing the Ru–Ru bond at ca. 2.3 Å (without phase correction) as shown in the spectrum of Ru foil was not observed (Fig. 6b and c). To gain deep insight into the catalytic capability of Ru SAs-NC, LOBs with several materials were subjected to deep discharge–charge and limited capacity cycles. The battery based on Ru0.3SAs-NC exhibited a much higher capacity of 13424 mA h g−1 in comparison with the Ru0.1SAs-NC (12724 mA h g−1), Ru NPs-NC (8511 mA h g−1), and pyrolyzed ZIF-8 (5822 mA h g−1), and it had a lower overpotential and a significantly improved cycle life (60 cycles), far exceeding that of Ru0.1SAs-NC (35 cycles) and Ru NPs-NC (27 cycles) (Fig. 6d and e). Furthermore, the discharge overpotential of Ru0.3SAs-NC was the lowest with a value of only 0.17 V, while the pyrolyzed ZIF-8 was 0.27 V. All the above results demonstrate the superiority of Ru SACs in the improvement of the electrochemical performance of LOBs. The authors further conducted a DFT simulation to elucidate the discharge–charge mechanism and uncover the relationships between enhanced battery performance and Ru single-atom sites. As shown in Fig. 6f, the Gibbs free energies that needed to be overcome for pyrolyzed ZIF-8, Ru0.1SAs-NC, and Ru0.3SAs-NC were 2.96, 2.93, and 2.38 eV, respectively, demonstrating the promotional effect of the active site Ru–N4 and its role in tailoring the production of Li2O2 and oxidation overpotentials as well as improving the catalytic activity. In summary, compared with pyrolyzed ZIF-8, Ru NPs-NC and Ru0.1SAs-NC, Ru0.3SAs-NC catalysts showed the best electrochemical properties, which indicates that SAs perform better than NPs; the presence of more single-atom active sites within a certain range leads to stronger activity, resulting in better battery performance.
More efforts have been devoted to exploring the above relationship. By adjusting the contents of RuCl3·xH2O, Su et al.146 also obtained different Ru SACs (1.21, 2.42 and 4.84 wt%, respectively). An ultra-thin sheet-like structure was successfully preserved after Ru loading, which was similar to graphene. In terms of performance (Fig. 6h–j), the initial discharge capacity of Ru–N/rGO (13500 mA h g−1) is much higher than that of N/rGO cathode (4380 mA h g−1), the overpotential of Ru–N/rGO (0.95 V) is better than that of N/rGO (1.75 V), and the charge plateau of Ru–N/rGO (3.72 V) is lower than that of 0.5Ru–N/rGO (4.08 V) and 2Ru–N/rGO (4.10 V), which means the better OER activity of the former, and demonstrates the critical role of Ru atom amount in affecting the catalytic performance. A small Ru loading can boost the catalytic process in LOBs but is not enough, while excess Ru is likely to aggregate into nanoparticles and result in a decreased number of active sites. Therefore, it is particularly important to develop SACs with appropriate loading as well as precise control. Furthermore, the LOBs with Ru–N/rGO can cycle at 2.0/4.5 V for more than 100 times with almost no capacity loss and voltage drop, which is much better than the reported Ru-based materials in Li–O2 batteries.147–151 Su et al. also calculated the absorption of LiO2/Li2O2 intermediates, a key factor in evaluating the ORR process. As shown in Fig. 6k, N/rGO depicts intrinsic ΔEads for LiO2 and Li2O2 of −15.966 and −25.496 eV, while the Ru–N/rGO delivers −14.140 and −24.858 eV, which could be ascribed to the capturing of O atoms by Ru atoms, enabling easier decomposition of Li2O2. Both studies87,146 report similar loading rates (2.48 wt%/2.42 wt%) and discharge capacities (13424 mA h g−1/13500 mA h g−1), but significantly better cycling life (60 cycles/100 cycles). The improved electrochemical performance may be ascribed to the synergistic effect of the Ru single atoms and N-doped rGO, which provides sufficient and highly efficient catalytic active sites for the growth and decomposition of Li2O2.


3.2.3 Pd. 
The critical challenge for Li–O2 batteries lies in the large charge overpotential, leading to undesirable side reactions and inferior cycle stability. Based on this, Liu et al.152 reported a template-assisted strategy to synthesize atomically dispersed Pd anchored on porous N-doped carbon spheres (Pd SAs/NC) as a cathode catalyst for LOBs. As shown in Fig. 7a, the researchers selected silica spheres and 1,10-phenanthroline (Phen) as raw materials, and the Pd-SACs were obtained after a series of mixing, dissolution, pyrolysis, etc. It is noteworthy that during the pyrolysis, the metal precursor could preliminarily secure metal atoms via the decomposed residues, while nitrogen-doped porous carbon species decomposed from Phen at higher temperatures could subsequently anchor metal atoms to form metal–Nx moieties, further providing protection and restraining metal atoms from aggregation. Furthermore, to investigate the electrocatalytic performance of the as-prepared Pd SAs/NC, a series of electrochemical tests were performed, with a Super P carbon electrode and NC electrode as the control. The results show that despite the similar discharge voltages of three different cathodes, the Pd SAs/NC cathode showed a low charge overpotential of 0.24 V at 50% of the charge capacity, much lower than that of the NC (1.05 V) and Super P (1.22 V), indicating the excellent performance in the decomposition of the discharge products (Fig. 7b). Meanwhile, in EIS, the Rct value of the Pd SAs/NC after the charging process increased slightly in comparison to that of the pristine cathode, indicating that the discharged products can be almost thoroughly decomposed on the surface of the Pd SAs/NC cathode with outstanding reversibility (Fig. 7c). Moreover, as shown in Fig. 7d, the terminal charge voltage only increased to 3.62 V (vs. Li/Li+) for the Pd SAs/NC cathode after 250 h, while for SP and NC, it quickly increased to 4.5 V, indicating that the low charge potential is quite stable during the cycling process. Liu et al. also conducted in situ DEMS to monitor the discharge/charge process of the Pd SAs/NC and NC cathode. The e−/O2 molar ratio was determined to be 2.07 (Fig. 7e) and 2.16 (Fig. 7f) for Pd SAs/NC-based LOB during the discharge and charge, respectively. Besides, only O2 was detected with no obvious CO2 evolution signal during the charging process, displaying superior reversibility. In contrast, the e−/O2 molar ratios were quantified to be 2.19 and 2.44 for NC, meanwhile, a noticeable CO2 evolution signal was detected during the charging process, indicating that side reactions occurred due to the decomposition of electrolytes at a high charging potential. As the latest research on this topic, it provides some new insights into the design of highly active single-atom catalysts for stable low-overpotential Li–O2 batteries, which can be also extended to other catalysis-related fields.
 Fig. 7  Synthesis and electrochemical performance of Pd SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the Pd SAs/NC catalyst. (b) Initial discharge/charge profiles of different cathodes at the current density of 500 mA g−1 and cut-off specific capacity of 500 mA h g−1. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of Pd SAs/NC at different stages. Inset is the corresponding equivalent circuit. (d) Voltage versus time curves of Li–O2 batteries based on different cathodes at a current density of 500 mA g−1 and cut-off specific capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. In situ differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) curves of the discharge process (e) and recharge process (f) of the Pd SAs/NC-based Li–O2 battery. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 

3.3 Non-precious metal SACs
Overall, when noble metal SACs serve as the catalytic cathode of LOBs, the main battery performances such as the overpotential and cycle life are significantly improved. However, the high cost and fewer large-scale applications restrict their further development. Consequently, non-precious metal SACs are emerging with balanced catalytic activities and costs. The reported non-precious metal SACs are a big family, including Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cu, Zn, Cr, Sc, W, Bi, Sn, and Mo.52 As for LOBs, Fe, Cu and Co-based SACs have been systematically investigated.

3.3.1 Fe. 
As the second most abundant metal element in the earth's crust, iron (Fe) has good ductility, electrical and thermal conductivity, as well as high chemical activity. Besides, with the unsaturated 3d orbital, Fe has also been used as a catalyst.153,154
Liu et al.58 demonstrated the superiority of Fe SACs in LOBs, synthesized via a three-step process including the ball-milling method (a top–down strategy), to obtain Fe/N/C-AP (catalyst precursor), Fe/N/C-HT (the sample after the heat-treatment), and Fe/N/C-AT (the final catalyst, 0.39 wt%). Fig. 8a shows the normalized XANES at the Fe K-edge of the three samples, together with several related reference compounds. The Fe environment in Fe/N/C-AP is different from FeAc2, which is not in an ionic state. In the Fe/N/C-HT and -AT XANES spectra, the steeply rising feature before the main edge as seen for metallic iron and iron carbide is missing, suggesting the absence of elemental Fe and/or iron carbide. About 30 at% iron in the Fe/N/C-HT sample is in the form of iron oxides containing predominantly Fe3+ species. Fig. 8b shows the Fourier-transform magnitudes (phase-uncorrected) of k3-weighted Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra of the three materials, together with those of the reference compounds. During discharge, the cell containing the Fe/N/C catalyst demonstrated a slight reduction in the overpotential over that with α-MnO2/XC-72, indicating the improvement in the catalytic activity with promoted Li2O2 formation feasibility. In the following charge step, the superiority became more apparent with a much lower overpotential throughout nearly the entire charging span (0.6 V decreased, Fig. 8c). Periodically, GC (gas chromatography) analyses were conducted to measure the composition of the gas released at the end of the third charging step, which indicated that O2 was released from the cell with the Fe/N/C catalyst, whereas both O2 and CO2 were found in the gas from α-MnO2/XC-72. In theory, CO2 is an indicator of electrolyte decomposition, which often happens at the end of batteries, indicating the good reversibility of LOBs with the Fe/N/C catalyst. The bare carbon (BP), which is the support of Fe/N/C, was also assembled into the LOBs cells as a comparison. As shown in Fig. 8d and e, significant differences in overpotentials as well as cyclability were observed, further illuminating the superior catalytic activity of the introduced Fe atom sites. Although many aspects were not well investigated or insightfully discussed, such as the relationships among the loading rate, matrix, and performance, the significance of this work cannot be neglected as it is the beginning of employing SACs in LOBs.
 Fig. 8  Characterization and electrochemical performance of Fe SACs in LOBs. (a) Normalized XANES of Fe/N/C-AP, -HT, and -AT with reference compounds at the Fe K-edge. (b) Magnitudes of k3-weighted Fourier-transform (phase-uncorrected) EXAFS data for Fe/N/C-AP, -HT, and -AT with some reference compounds. (c) Discharge/charge voltage profiles of Li–O2 cells using α-MnO2/XC-72 and Fe/N/C as cathode catalysts. (d) Load profiles of cells at first cycles. Fe/N/C and BP were used as cathode materials. The current was 0.05 mA with a duration of 5 h, corresponding to a capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1. (e) Cycling performance of cells with catalysts Fe/N/C and carbon black (BP) as cathode catalysts. The current was 0.05 mA with a duration of 5 h. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 


3.3.2 Cu. 
As a representative carbon nanomaterial, carbon nanotubes (CNT) with the merits of light weight and good electronic conductivity are emerging as an ideal substrate for loading catalytic metals.155,156 Li et al.157 ingeniously combined CNTs and Cu SACs for LOBs applications. As illustrated in Fig. 9a and b, a confined self-initiated dispersing protocol was tailored to obtain the CuN2C2 SACs active site by high-temperature pyrolysis. Numerous white bright dots at the atomic scale were detected in the HAADF images (Fig. 9c), corresponding to well-dispersed atomic Cu and the mass loading was confirmed to be 2.6 wt% by ICP-AES. The overpotentials of LOBs were significantly ameliorated under the catalysis of CuN2C2 SACs, especially in the initial charging stage, suggesting the favorable transformation of Li2O2 into intermediate LiO2 (Fig. 9d). As depicted in Fig. 9e, the impedance of the Cu–NCNT also exhibited a low charge transfer resistance (Rct) after discharging fully, while there was a significant increase in Rct for CNT and NCNT catalysts, which can be ascribed to the passivation effect of the insoluble/insulating Li2O2 products originating from the limited catalytic activity. The impedance of Cu–NCNT almost recovered to its initial state after recharging, in strong contrast to others, further revealing its superior reversibility. Consequently, the Cu–NCNT-based LOBs presented increased stability for 104 cycles, which is 4.5 and 3.6 times higher than the lifespan of the others, respectively (Fig. 9f). To decrypt the intrinsic mechanism of these excellent properties, the authors further carried out DFT simulations (Fig. 9g–j). Based on the charge density difference diagram of Cu–NCNT, it is clear that the electrons were widely redistributed across the carbon framework after the introduction of Cu into the vacancy, which endowed the carbonous material with superior ORR/OER catalytic behavior. More abundant electron transfers occur on Cu–NCNT than on NCNT, identifying the CuN2C2 configurations as predominant active sites for the ORR process. Fig. 9k and l present the calculated free energy pathways based on the formation of (Li2O2)2 clusters at different overpotentials, in which the values of ORR/OER overpotential for Cu–NCNT (−1.7/1.62 V) are much lower than that of NCNT (−2.35/4.63 V), revealing the modulating effect of the exposed CuN2C2 active sites on enhancing ORR/OER kinetics, and strongly corroborating the obtained experimental observations. The above findings provide an in-depth understanding for the construction of electrocatalysts with high activity and satisfying selectivity. Dramatically different from the conventional nanoparticle (NP) catalysts with complex surface properties and indeterminate active sites, the definite active centers in SACs make it more straightforward to discern the underlying reaction mechanisms, which provides an ideal model to investigate the structure–function relationships.
 Fig. 9  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Cu SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Cu–NCNT. (b) TEM image. (c) Spherical aberration corrected HAAFD-STEM image of Cu–NCNT. (d) Galvanostatic discharge/charge curves at a current density of 200 mA g−1 under an upper-limit capacity of 500 mA h g−1. (e) EIS spectra of Li–O2 cells with Cu–NCNT at different discharge/charge stages under a current density of 200 mA g−1. (f) Cyclic performance of the Li–O2 cell with CNT, NCNT and Cu–NCNT at a current density of 200 mA g−1 with a capacity limitation of 500 mA h g−1. (g) Optimized structures of NCNT. (h) Top views of the deformation charge density diagrams for Cu–NCNT. (i and j) Top and side views of the deformation charge density diagrams for LiO2 on NCNT (i) and Cu–NCNT (j). (k and l) Calculated free energy diagrams for the discharge reactions on the active surface of NCNT (k) and Cu–NCNT (l). Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 


3.3.3 Co. 
Cobalt (Co) is currently the most reported non-precious metal SAC in LOBs. In general, from a rational design point of view, an ideal cathode catalyst in the Li–O2 battery should have highly active catalytic centers densely populated over the support surface, with minimum separation between individual sites, to achieve maximum interaction with the solid precipitate, such as Li2O2. The active sites should also be easily accessible to the electrons necessary to complete the electrochemical reactions. Therefore, the M–N–C catalysts are usually regarded as promising catalysts. Based on this, Yin et al.22 embedded isolated Co atoms into ultrathin nitrogen-rich carbon, and then obtained the Co-SAs/N–C catalyst through a green gas–migration–trapping strategy (a top–down method) (Fig. 10a). It is worth noting that the mass percent content of single cobalt sites in Co-SAs/N–C is about 2.01 wt%, while the nanoparticle counterpart, Co-NPs/N–C, is 8.07 wt%. As revealed in the initial discharge/charge process (Fig. 10b), the Co-SAs/N–C electrode delivers a much-decreased discharge (0.12 V) and charge (0.28 V)-voltage polarizations (corresponding to an overall potential gap of 0.4 V and ORR/OER efficiency of 87.7%), while the values for Co-NPs/N–C and N–C cathodes were calculated as 1.02 V and 1.03 V, respectively. The Co-SAs/N–C-based Li–O2 cell delivered an optimized ORR/OER overpotential of 0.97 V, which was much smaller relative to Co-NPs/N–C (1.35 V) and N–C (1.28 V) electrodes. The discharge/charge profiles of the Co-SAs/N–C-coupled cell for various cycles exhibited a striking overlap ratio, indicating improved cycle stability. Even after 200 cycles, the terminal ORR and OER potentials were maintained at 2.7 V and 3.9 V, yielding an overall overpotential at a lower level, which is of vital importance in suppressing the intractable parasitic reactions stemming from the electrolyte instability. Moreover, Co-SAs/N–C can operate stably for up to 260 cycles, while Co-NPs/N–C and N–C both suffer severe overpotential loss and can only cycle for 80 and 60 cycles, respectively (Fig. 10c and d). In summary, the Co-SAs/N–C electrode can afford ultra-low charge/discharge polarization (0.40 V), superior-high discharge capacity (11098 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1), and excellent cyclability (260 cycles at 400 mA g−1).
 Fig. 10  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of several Co SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Co-Sas/N–C, Co-NPs/N–C and N–C catalysts. (b) The discharge–charge curves of Co-SAs/N–C, Co-NPs/N–C, and N–C electrodes at a current density of 200 mA g−1 under a capacity limitation of 1000 mA h g−1. (c) Discharge–charge profiles of the Co-SAs/N–C-based electrode with different cycles at 400 mA g−1. (d) Cycling stability and terminal discharge–charge voltages of the Co-SAs/N–C electrode at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (e) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of N–HP–Co SACs. The composition in the cell (left) and the synthesis procedures for the N–HP–Co SACs (right). (f) PXRD graphs of N–HP–Co NPs and Co-SACs. (g) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of N–HP–Co NPs and Co SACs at 77 K. BET: 80.5 cm3 g−1 with N–HP–Co NPs; 312.3 cm3 g−1 with N–HP–Co SACs. (h) CV curves. (i) Full-range rate performances of Li–O2 batteries at different current densities. (j) Voltage versus cycle number on the discharge terminal of the Li–O2 cells with commercial Pt/C and N–HP–Co SACs. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of the Co–N–C catalyst. (l) HAADF-STEM image (scale bar 2 nm). (m) N2 isothermal adsorption–desorption curves of Co–N–C. (n) pore distribution of Co–N–C. (o) Discharge load curves of Pt–C and Co–N–C. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Xu et al.25 reported their relevant achievements (N–HP–Co SACs) in Co SACs, adopting a polymer encapsulation strategy, while the matrix was still a similar hollow N-doped porous carbon sphere structure (Fig. 10e). This work specified the importance of highly developed pores with a large BET-specific surface area of 312.3 cm3 g−1 and a pore volume of 1.3 cm3 g−1 (Fig. 10f and g), which provided channels for fast mass transport of oxygen, electrolytes, and exposure of the abundant active sites. With the commercial Pt/C electrode of the same metal loading (0.6 wt%), the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves show that a higher onset potential and larger peak current density were obtained with N–HP–Co SACs for the ORR (Fig. 10h), indicating the fast and adequate formation of Li2O2, which also signals a good rate capability. As expected, the discharge voltage plateau of N–HP–Co SACs is higher as compared to Pt/C catalysts at all selected current densities (Fig. 10i). Moreover, N–HP–Co SACs exhibited an extended lifespan of more than 250 cycles (218 days), whereas the Pt/C catalysts degrade after only 100 cycles with the terminal voltage rapidly reaching 2 V (Fig. 10j). More importantly, N–HP–Co SACs exhibited a relatively stable terminal discharge voltage above 2 V after 50 cycles at a large current density. All the results revealed that the synergy between the single-atom and the support endowed the catalyst with excellent stability and durability.
Liu et al.43 prepared Co SACs with lower content (0.14 wt%), and also compared it with the commercial Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 10k an l). Similar results highlighted the excellent catalytic performance of Co SACs. For example, the cathode with Pt–C showed a flat discharge plateau at 2.65 V and a specific discharge capacity of ca. 1.5 mA h cm−2, which are in good agreement with previous results,158 while Co–N–C delivered a higher discharge capacity surpassing 3.0 mA h cm−2 as well as 50 mV higher discharge voltage (Fig. 10o), corresponding to a higher ORR activity. BET results of Co–N–C showed a high specific surface area of 136 m2 g−1 and rich mesopores in the range of 10–50 nm (Fig. 10m and n). It is worth noting that a mesoporous structure of the cathode is ideal for LOBs by assisting the sustainable mass transport of O2 and providing sufficient sites for Li2O2 storage. Even though the performances of SACs are better than those of general catalysts, some problems have been highlighted with the progress of research. For example, the loading rate of Co–N–C prepared in this article is very low, only 0.14 wt%. Therefore, several key issues, such as how to improve the loading rate and the relationship between the microstructure and catalytic performance, demand continuous and in-depth investigations.
In the same year, Dang et al.159 prepared Co SACs with different contents, using SiO2 nanoparticles and Co(NO3)2·6H2O as raw materials (Fig. 11a). After the annealing and curing treatments, they obtained NC, ACo–NC-1, ACo–NC-2, and ACoNC-3 with Co ratios of 0, 0.53, 1.50 and 3.19 wt%, respectively. The CV curve of ACoNC-2 in Fig. 11b shows obvious cathodic ORR (2.6 V) and anodic OER (3.6 V) current peaks, while those of bare KB and nano Co–NC are quite weak, indicating inferior electrochemical catalytic performance. Galvanostatic discharge/charge testing was then conducted to evaluate the reversibility. As shown in Fig. 11c, the ACoNC-2 electrode displayed the largest discharge capacity of 14075 mA h g−1, while ACoNC-1 with a low Co content showed a decreased capacity of 13544 mA h g−1. Similarly, ACoNC-3 with the largest Co content also delivered a sharply decreased capacity of 4573.25 mA h g−1, even less than the NC electrode (9485.75 mA h g−1). The charging platform of ACoNC-2 was the lowest among all the samples (∼4 V), corresponding to the best OER performance. Furthermore, the ACoNC-2 electrode could run 340 cycles with a capacity limitation of 500 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, while the ACoNC-1, ACoNC-3, and nano Co–NC survived only 98, 31 and 23 cycles, respectively (Fig. 11d). The interactions between the intermediate product, final product and the catalytically active sites determine the overpotential and discharge capacity of the overall catalytic reactions. Therefore, to further analyze the adsorption trend between Co–N4 and the product, the projected density of states (DOS) under different adsorbates was calculated (Fig. 11e). As the ORR reaction progresses, the electronic state gradually changes, and the DOS of the Fermi level decreases significantly after the adsorption of insulated Li2O2, indicating the gradually weakened conductivity. Simultaneously, new bonds appear between adsorbates and substrate, as shown in Fig. 11f. All the above results support the conclusion that the appropriate content of single-atom metals and appropriate pore structure are critical for realizing satisfactory battery performance. Too much will accelerate the aggregation process and formation of nanoclusters or nanoparticles, while too little will not give full play to its high catalytic activity.
 Fig. 11  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of other Co SACs in LOBs. (a) A schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the ACoNC catalyst. (b) CV curves. (c) Initial discharge/charge profiles of the ACoNC electrode. (d) The cycling performance and the corresponding charge/discharge profiles of ACoNC and nano Co–NC catalyst. (e) The density of states (DOS) of different adsorbates on Co–N4 and the corresponding projected density of states (PDOS) of Co-3d. (f) Charge density differences of the different adsorbates LiO2 and Li2O2 on Co–N4. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2020, Engineered Science Publisher. (g) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process for single-atom cobalt anchored in porous N-doped hollow carbon spheres (CoSAs-NHCS). (h) Schematic illustration showing the synergistic effect of single-Co atom cathode materials and LiBr in Li–O2 batteries. (i) SEM image of the CoSAs-NHCS cathode at the state of charge (SoC) = 20%. (j) UV-vis spectrum of the TiO2SO4 complex prepared with different concentrations of H2O2 and the corresponding standard curve. (k) Terminal voltages and Coulombic efficiencies of the CoSAs-NHCS electrode with LiBr. (l) Galvanostatic discharge–charge voltage profiles of CoSAs-NHCS at 500 mA g−1, with and without LiBr. (m) The initial full discharge–charge curves of the CoSAs-NHCS electrode with and without LiBr. (n) Li2O2 yields of discharged/recharged cathodes obtained from the standard curve. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
With the deepening of the studies, researchers found that the catalysis of immobile SACs was limited to Li2O2 particles directly deposited on the surface without oxidizing the electronically isolated Li-peroxide layers on the electrolyte side, which leads to low round-trip efficiency and poor cycle stability.23,24,160 Based on this, Zhu et al.49 focused on the observation of the electrode surface during the battery cycling. This showed that as the Li2O2 decomposes, the large area of the film-like morphology is destroyed and holes appear, which will affect the performance of the battery (Fig. 11i). To tackle this issue, Zhu et al.49 added LiBr, a redox mediator, to the electrolyte as the liquid catalyst (Fig. 11g and h). Excitingly, after introducing 50 mM LiBr, the LOBs with the Co SACs catalyst (CoSAs-NHCS) achieved a 4.2 times prolonged cycle life (∼250 cycles) under the same conditions. The synergistic liquid and solid phase catalysts together reduced the overpotential to 0.69 V (Fig. 11k and l). Besides, the decomposition of Li2O2 was promoted with the charging capacity significantly improved (Fig. 11m). Furthermore, based on the standard curve (Fig. 11j), the liquid–solid composite catalyst exhibited a higher Li2O2 formation efficiency and lower Li2O2 residual rate as compared with the bare solid catalyst system, which implies that the synergistic effect of CoSAs-NHCS and LiBr exerts the full potential of both and improves the reversibility of the Li–O2 batteries (Fig. 11n). This achievement provides a promising strategy to boost the decomposition kinetics of Li2O2 from various directions.
Liao et al.161 reported an interesting study combining Co SACs and Ru nanoclusters. Specifically, single Co atoms were coordinated with nitrogen in the three-dimensional rGO substrate and Ru clusters were anchored to the surface. The optimized RuNC/CoSA-3DNG electrode exhibited a discharge capacity of 25632 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and superior cycling stability for 300 cycles. It is worth noting that the bare Co-3DNG electrode (without Ru nanoclusters loaded) merely cycled 150 times and the charge overpotential (122 mV) was 37 mV higher than RuNC/CoSA-3DNG (85 mV). The greatly enhanced performance is attributed to the highly active Co–N–C sites and the electron-deficient Ru nanoclusters, which facilitated increased ORR/OER activity and higher Ru atomic utilization efficiency. This work may provide novel inspiration for designing highly efficient catalysts in LOBs, which is the recombination of two kinds of single atoms. There have been relevant studies on bimetallic nanoparticle catalysts for LOBs,162 while bimetallic single atoms have not been reported, which may be a future direction.
After the above research on the Co-SACs catalytic cathode in LABs, Xu et al.109 conducted further studies exploring the structural dynamic evolution of near-free active centers and the internal reaction pathways of lithium–oxygen electrochemistry. Notably, this was the first time that the relevant mechanism was identified at the atomic level by structural and component measurements at multiscale levels. The results indicated that near-free Co (Co1–N3) exhibited higher 3d density and weaker Co-support interaction as compared with the saturated Co–N4 structure, which caused the generation of freer O*–Co1–N2 sites during the ORR process, benefiting the surface adsorption and activation of the key *O intermediate for efficient ORR. Co1–N3 has a better lattice match with the (100) crystal plane of Li2O2, forming a single-oriented sheet-like Li2O2 with higher electron transport capacity and weaker *LiO2 combination, which can be easily decomposed, thus improving the recharging performance of LOBs. This in-depth study is of groundbreaking value and guiding significance for other important dynamic evolution steps, including the study of metal–air batteries and the reduction of CO2, N2, etc.
In 2022, Liu et al.44 studied several non-precious metal SACs, including Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, Cu, and Zn, using Co3O4 and carbon cloth as the matrix according to the MOF-confinement method. Under the same conditions, atomic Ni catalysts exhibited the best catalytic effect and the highest catalytic activity, which indicate a promising direction in the selection and study of atomic metals with different electronic structures.

3.4 Nonmetallic SACs
In recent years, nonmetallic SACs have also emerged, especially for the intriguing transformation from semiconductors to good electronic conductors at the atomic scale. Inspired by this, Yin et al.88 introduced typical nonmetallic selenium (Se) SACs into LOBs for the first time in 2021. As shown in Fig. 12a, the SASe–Ti3C2 was prepared by a CO2-assisted strategy, a gas–migration–trapping strategy (the same as their previous work in Co SACs22). The matrix Ti3C2 reacts with CO2 to generate a certain number of vacancies, and subsequently, the vaporized selenium species at high temperatures will adhere to these vacancies with the inflow of CO2 to form single-atom sites (SASe–Ti3C2). The obtained SASe–Ti3C2 catalyst possesses greatly optimized discharge/charge plateaus (1.10 V vs. Li/Li+), specific capacity (17260 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1), round-trip efficiency (92.6%), rate capability, and cyclic stability (160 cycles), far exceeding the bare Ti3C2-based cells (Fig. 12b–e). Theoretical calculations further shed light on the mechanisms (Fig. 12f–h). The strong binding between single Se-involved moieties and the initial LiO2 significantly influences the nucleation and growth mechanism of the final Li2O2 products, which promotes the interface growth behavior. In contrast, the ORR process only occurs on the surface of Ti3C2, displaying a typical solution growth mechanism and leading to oversized Li2O2 nanodisks, which is adverse to the formation/decomposition behavior of Li2O2. The free energy pathways of the ORR/OER processes based on the formation/decomposition of Li2O2 at different overpotentials of SASe–Ti3C2 and Ti3C2 electrodes were calculated. For SASe–Ti3C2, the equilibrium potential reached 3.24 V, displaying the ΔORR/ΔOER of 0.29/0.59 V, which is much closer to U0 and supports the fact that the Se-involved active moieties play a crucial role in reducing both the Li2O2 formation and decomposition overpotentials. The promising results successfully combine non-metallic Se SAs with the high-conductivity MXene matrix and will provide insights into the development and understanding of a family of highly efficient MXene-based catalysts for LOBs.
 Fig. 12  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Se SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the SASe–Ti3C2 catalyst. Electrochemical performance of SASe–Ti3C2 and Ti3C2 electrodes. (b) CV curves of SASe–Ti3C2 and Ti3C2 electrodes at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 at a voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. (c) The initial deep discharge–charge curves of SASe–Ti3C2 and Ti3C2 electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) The discharge–charge profiles of the SASe–Ti3C2 electrode at various current densities ranging from 0.2 to 1.0 A g−1 at a capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. (e) Cycling stability and terminal discharge–charge voltages of the SASe–Ti3C2 electrode at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. DFT calculations and proposed mechanisms. (g) Optimized structure and the corresponding binding energy of LiO2 on SASe–Ti3C2. Calculated free energy diagrams for the ORR/OER reactions on the active surface of (f) Ti3C2 and (g) SASe–Ti3C2. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
To sum up, this chapter has focused on the progress of SACs-based cathodes of LOBs in terms of mechanisms, types and performance. The introduction of SACs as the catalytic cathode achieved optimized ORR/OER processes and improved battery performance. The critical parameters of the above-mentioned SACs in LOBs are summarized in Table 1, including the categories, loading, support, overpotential, discharge capacity, and cyclic life, for readers to grasp a full view. However, the battery is a complex system rather than a simple material and side reactions occur continuously along with cycling, significantly affecting the battery performance. In particular, the decomposition of electrolytes and electrodes always results in the formation of Li2CO3, an undesirable by-product blocking the catalytic sites within the cathode materials. To solve this issue and consider the current carbon neutrality context, the Li–CO2 battery, another important branch of LABs, has gradually come into vision. With a properly designed catalyst, it is also a promising electrochemically reversible battery system based on CO2 redox chemistry. In Chapter 4, we will introduce how SACs serve as promising cathode materials for reversible LCBs.
Table 1 Basic information and performances of SACs for Li–O2 batteries




Catalyst
Loading
Support
Active center
Overpotential
Discharge capacity
Cyclic life
Year
Ref.




Fe–N–C
∼0.39 wt%
—
Fe–C/N/O
0.8 V
—
>50 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1)
2012

58



Pt–CNHS
∼0.77 wt%
g-C3N4 Nanosheets
Pt–C/N
1.04 V
17059.5 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
100 cycles (600 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1)
2019

86



Ru SAs-NC
∼2.48 wt%
Porous carbon (N)
Ru–N4
0.55 V
13424 mA h g−1 (0.02 mA cm−2)
60 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 0.02 mA cm−2)
2020

87



ACo–NC
∼1.50 wt%
Carbon
Co–N4
1.0 V
14075 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
340 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1)
2020

159



N–HP–Co SACs
∼0.6 wt%
N-doped carbon
Co–N4
—
14777 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
261 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 400 mA g−1)
2020

25



Co SAs/N–C
∼2.01 wt%
N-doped carbon
Co–N4
0.4 V
20105 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)
260 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 400 mA g−1)
2020

22



Co–N–C
∼0.14 wt%
N-doped carbon
Co–N4
<1.3 V
—
>50 cycles (1 mA h cm2)
2020

43



CoSAs-NHCS-LiBr
∼0.1 mg cm−2
N-doped carbon spheres
Co–N4
0.69 V
—
∼250 cycles (400 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)
2021

49



Ru–N/rGO
∼2.42 wt%
N-rGO
Ru–N4
0.95 V
13500 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
100 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 500 mA g−1)
2021

146



RuNC/CoSA-3DNG
∼1.73 wt%
rGO
Co–N4
1.19 V
25632 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
300 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)
2021

161



Cu-NCNT
∼2.6 wt%
Carbon nanotube
Cu–N2C2
<1 V
7122 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)
104 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)
2021

157



SASe–Ti3C2
∼4.99 wt%
Ti3C2 nanosheets
Se–C
1.1 V
17260 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
170 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)
2021

88



NiSA-Co3O4/CC
∼1.01 wt%
Co3O4 nanosheets
NiSA–Co3O4
0.72 V
21442 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)
128 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)
2022

44



Pd SAs/NC
∼1.87 wt%
N-doped Carbon Spheres
Pd–N4
∼0.5 V
>10000 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)
>60 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 500 mA g−1)
2022

152



Co–Nx SACs
∼0.89 wt%
N-doped carbon
Co–N3
0.15 V (ORR)
—
>3500 h (500 mA h g−1, 300 mA g−1)
2023

109



Co–Nx SACs
∼0.85 wt%
N-doped carbon
Co–N4
0.03 V (ORR)
—
2519 h (500 mA h g−1, 300 mA g−1)
2023

109





4 Typical SACs applied in LCBs
In the context of a deteriorating environment, the excessive use of fossil fuels is associated with a rapid increase in CO2 emissions, and serious environmental problems are brought to the forefront, such as global warming and glacial melting. In this case, a series of technologies, including electrochemical reduction, photoelectric chemical reduction, catalytic hydrogenation, catalytic reforming, and metal-CO2 batteries, are emerging to solve or ease this issue.163,164 Among them, the Li–CO2 battery is a promising candidate for novel energy storage systems owing to its high theoretical energy density (1876 W h kg−1) and ability to fix CO2. In addition, it is considered to be a more promising priority in some high-CO2 environments, such as underwater operations and Mars exploration.165–172 LCBs have been extensively studied and developed since 2011173 but there are still many hurdles, such as the hysteretic kinetics of the CO2RR/CO2ER process. In particular, like the LOBs mentioned above, the introduction of SACs is becoming a feasible solution.42,45,75,174–181 In 2019, Qiao et al.45 loaded graphene oxide with adjacent Co atoms as the cathode catalyst for LCBs, which exhibited higher discharge capacity and enhanced cyclic stability as compared with the Co nanoclusters, inspiring the research spotlight on applying SACs in LCBs. In this chapter, we will first introduce the working principle of LCBs and then summarize and analyze the reported works of SACs in LCBs from two categories: (i) noble metal SACs, and (ii) non-precious metal SACs; we hope this will bring some enlightenment to readers.
4.1 Working principle of LCBs
A typical LCB consists of a metallic Li anode, an electrolyte and an air cathode, in which the electrolytes can be divided into three types, including liquid aprotic electrolytes, IL electrolytes, solid and quasi-solid electrolytes (Fig. 13a).182 Since the discovery of LCBs in 2013,183 the electrochemical reaction equation has been determined through concerted efforts and improvement.184 Overall, Li2CO3 is generated in the discharge process, which is commonly referred to as the CO2RR process, as shown in Fig. 13b as well as in the following eqn (10): 4Li + 3CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + C(10)Sometimes, the reactions may also occur in the following form (eqn (11)): 2Li + 2CO2 → Li2CO3 + CO(11)Similarly, these reactions are not completed in one step; there are a series of intermediate reactions that produce several intermediate products. These reaction equations are given by eqn (12)–(15). 2CO2 + 2e− → C2O42−(12) C2O42− → CO22− + CO2(13) C2O42− + CO22− → 2CO32− + C(14) CO32− + 2Li+ → Li2CO3(15)In the subsequent charging process, which is referred to as the CO2ER process herein, the discharge product Li2CO3 will decompose along with the release of CO2. It is worth noting that the amount of CO2 produced is far less than that consumed, which is also the key issue of LCBs, that is, the low energy efficiency or high voltage hysteresis. Therefore, the development of catalysts with abundant and effective catalytic sites for LCBs is urgent and significant. The reaction equations in the CO2ER process are illustrated as follows (eqn (16)–(18)): 2Li2CO3 + C → 3CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e−(16) 2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−(17) 2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2− + 4Li+ + 3e−(18)In principle, the recognized discharge mechanism of an aprotic Li–CO2 battery is that Li+ is dissociated from the lithium metal anode and reacts with the active substance CO2 to form amorphous carbon and Li2CO3 (CO2RR). During the subsequent charging, the discharge product returns to its initial state as the lithium metal and CO2 gas (CO2ER).185–190 Despite the Li2CO3 discharge product in LCBs, Li2C2O4 has also been reported as a possible discharge product, which is currently not suitable for SACs in LCBs. Hence, we will not discuss this battery chemistry here.
 Fig. 13  Mechanism and reaction pathways of LCBs with SACs. (a) Working mechanism diagram of Li–CO2 batteries. (b) The reaction pathways in rechargeable LCBs. 
4.2 Noble metal SACs
As mentioned above, noble metal SACs are favored by researchers because of their excellent properties, and they are also applicable in LCBs. The battery with the SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathode exhibited enhanced electrochemical performances including low overpotential, ultra-high capacity, and long cycle life.176 In detail, the carbon cloth substrate was first decorated with Co3O4 nanosheets with a MOF-based method, and the Ru SAC was further introduced by the ion exchange and annealing treatment (Fig. 14a). The whole synthesis process is simple and efficient, and only deionized water is used as the solvent, which shows potential for large-scale applications. It is worth noting that the weight percentage of Ru element on SA Ru–Co3O4 nanosheets was 3.05 wt%, higher than 2.48 wt% and 2.42 wt% of the reported works in LOBs. To highlight the excellent performance of SACs, the researchers developed several corresponding control groups, such as substrate CC, precursor Co3O4/CC and RuO2–Co3O4/CC. As depicted in Fig. 14b–d, the SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathode exhibited the highest reduction onset potential and lowest oxidation onset potential, meanwhile, the overpotential (1.05 V) was also significantly reduced, which suggests the higher catalytic activity. On the other hand, the SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathode showed a higher discharge capacity of 30915 mA h g−1 than the others (6468 mA h g−1 and 19228 mA h g−1) (Fig. 14d). It can also sustain stable discharge and charge potentials, which will operate for more than 2000 h, superior to that of the battery with CC (328 h) and Co3O4/CC (776 h) cathode, respectively. Although the electrochemical performances of RuO2–Co3O4/CC far exceed the pristine Co3O4, the catalytic activity is still lower than that of the SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathode. Moreover, the molecular simulations prove that Ru single-atom sites exhibit higher adsorption energy towards the intermediates including C2O4 and LiC2O4, illuminating the origin of catalytic activity and the growth pathway of the discharge product (Fig. 14e). Overall, this work not only shares a simple and gentle preparation strategy for SACs but also provides a new research direction for LCBs. Further efforts were devoted to investigating the catalytic activity of Ru SACs in LCBs, and these studies also confirmed the superior battery performance of SACs compared with that of nanoparticles.50,191
 Fig. 14  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Ru SACs in LCBs. (a) Illustration of the synthesis process of SA Ru–Co3O4/CC. Electrocatalytic performance evaluation of the various cathodes in Li–CO2 batteries. (b) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of CC, Co3O4/CC, and SA Ru–Co3O4/CC-based batteries, the scan rate is 0.1 mV s−1 (2.0–4.5 V). (c) Initial discharge/charge profiles of CC, Co3O4/CC, and SA Ru–Co3O4/CC at 100 mA g−1 under the limited discharge/charge capacities of 500 mA h g−1. (d) Full discharge profiles of CC, Co3O4/CC, and SA Ru–Co3O4/CC tested at 100 mA g−1. Study on the growth pathway of discharge product in the Li–CO2 battery. (e) Schematic illustrations of the working mechanism for the Co3O4/CC and SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathodes. Reproduced with permission.176 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
In 2022, Ryu et al.192 atomically dispersed IrOx/Ir bi-phase particles as SACs on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs) to accelerate the reversible formation and decomposition of the insulating carbonate products formed on the electrode of LCBs. Herein, to prove its effectiveness, researchers controlled the particle size and loading of Ir catalysts on the NCNTs (denoted as s-Ir/NCNTs, m-Ir/NCNTs, and l-Ir/NCNTs, with average particle sizes of 0.42, 1.75 and 2.69 nm, respectively). It was found that as the size of the Ir particles decreased, the abundance of defects on the particles increased, which together with the nitrogen groups on the CNTs functioned as artificial defects, providing strong adsorption and preferred nucleation sites for IrOx/Ir SACs as well as increasing the electron conductivity via the formation of unpaired electrons. Moreover, in terms of electrochemical performance, the l-Ir/NCNTs having the largest Ir particles exhibited more polarized discharge/charge profiles than the s-Ir/NCNT and m-Ir/NCNT catalysts, and the overpotential of the charge/discharge profiles increased as cycling continued. It deteriorated rapidly after 20 cycles and exhibited an unstable tendency in the CER region before the charge reaction was completed. Meanwhile, in the discharge region, the voltage plateau gradually decreased between the 15th and 20th cycles, thereafter, decreasing rapidly to the lower limit of the voltage window (2.35 V). In contrast, the s-Ir/NCNTs and m-Ir/NCNTs exhibited significantly lower CER overpotentials of 3.3 V/3.4 V, and they ran stably for 80 cycles/120 cycles, respectively. In general, the Li–CO2 cells employing IrOx/Ir SACs loaded on NCNTs exhibited improved cell performance, reduced polarization, lower charge transfer resistance, and more stable cyclability as compared to cells employing larger-sized Ir particles on NCNTs. To date, Ru and Ir are the solely reported noble metal SACs in LCBs, and there is still room for development.
4.3 Non-precious metal SACs
Cost and limited reserves always hinder large-scale applications. Therefore, in addition to the Ru noble metal SACs mentioned above, transition metal (non-precious metal) SACs, such as Fe, Co, Cu, Cr, Mn, and Ni, have also been reported as quite effective catalysts in LCBs.
As mentioned above, graphene is widely used in the field of catalysis based on its high electronic conductivity, light weight, high porosity, and great flexibility in tuning the surface functional groups for landing isolated metal atoms. In 2020, Fe SAC was reported as a catalytic cathode for LCBs. As shown in Fig. 15a, single Fe atoms were implanted into a 3D interconnected porous N,S-co-doped graphene architecture (Fe-ISA/N,S-HG) through a two-step approach with a mass loading of 0.7 wt%.174 Fe-ISA/N,S-G (3D rGO without holes implanted with single Fe atoms) and HGO-900 (slightly oxidized HG sheets) were also prepared for comparison. The Fe-ISA/N,S-HG cathode exhibited a discharge capacity and charge capacity of 23174 and 21520 mA h g−1, respectively. The corresponding areal and volumetric discharge capacities were 4.9 mA h cm−2 and 405.5 mA h cm−3, and the initial coulombic efficiency was around 92.9%, implying the effective decomposition of Li2CO3 during the charging process (Fig. 15b). In contrast, counterpart cathodes based on the Fe-ISA/N,S-G (discharge: 15279.9; charge: 12007.0 mA h g−1), and HGO-900 cathode (discharge: 12136.8; charge: 9496.7 mA h g−1) exhibited much lower capacities with the initial coulombic efficiency of ∼78.6% and ∼78.2%, respectively. At the same time, the Fe-ISA/N,S-HG exhibited the smallest potential gap of ∼1.17 V with the highest discharge potential (2.78 V), lowest charge potential (3.95 V), and good long-term stability (210 cycles), which all illuminate its highest bifunctional catalytic activity (Fig. 15c and d). Ding et al.178 reported another Fe–N–C work for LCB applications with a MOF-derived method (0.3 wt%), which also exhibited enhanced battery performance, especially a stable voltage time of ∼740 h, demonstrating the superiority of atomic iron catalysts.
 Fig. 15  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performances of some non-precious metal SACs in LCBs. (a) Illustration of the synthesis process of Fe-ISA/N,S-HG. Electrocatalytic performance evaluation of the various cathodes in Li–CO2 batteries. (b) Full discharge/charge profiles of Fe-ISA/N,S-HG, Fe-ISA/N,S-G, and HGO-900 tested at 100 mA g−1. (c) Discharge/charge profiles of the Fe-ISA/N,S-HG electrode with a Li-protected anode. (d) Potential gap comparison for the Fe-ISA/N,S-HG-, Fe/N,S-HG-, Fe-ISA/N,S-G-, and HGO-900-based Li–CO2 batteries tested at current densities of 100 and 400 mA g−1, respectively. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e and f) Corresponding fittings of the EXAFS spectra of SA Co/GO and adjacent Co/GO in R space, respectively. The insets of (e) and (f) show the schematics of SA Co/GO and adjacent Co/GO, respectively (Co: blue, O: red, and; C: gray). (g) Galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of SA Co/GO, adjacent Co/GO, and Co nanoclusters/GO at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 (2.0–4.5 V). Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (h) Synthesis route and Working diagram of the Li–CO2 battery. (i) The cycle life of CuPPc-CNTs and O-CNTs at a current density of 200 mA g−1 under a cutoff capacity of 1000 mA g−1. (j) Discharge voltage of CuPPc-CNTs and O-CNTs at different current densities. (k) The charge difference and Bader charge of CuPPc-CNTs and O-CNTs. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
Cobalt is never absent from metal–air batteries. Herein, researchers used GO as the carrier and prepared adjacent Co/GO and SA Co/GO with Co mass loadings of 5.3 wt% and 1.5 wt%, respectively. The EXAFS spectra (Fig. 15e and f) clarified the atomic dispersion structure and the difference between the sole Co SAC and the adjacent Co SAC.45 The unique adjacent Co/GO delivered the highest discharge capacity of 17358 mA h g−1 (14878 mA h g−1 for SA Co/GO, and 13240 mA h g−1 for Co nanoclusters/GO), and a relatively higher discharge voltage plateau of ∼2.51 V compared with the SA Co/GO (Fig. 15g). To sum up, this work not only provides a solution to increase the mass loading of SACs and improve the catalytic activity but also extends to research from mono-SACs to Bi-SACs or Tri-SACs, thus deepening the pool of potential catalysts.
According to a previous report, the defective regions on the graphene matrix with a lower work function and a higher reducing capacity could trigger the electroless deposition (ELD) of metal ions to form atomic metal clusters at the defect sites. Inspired by this, Xu et al.177 prepared copper polyphthalocyanine-carbon nanotube composites (CuPPc-CNTs) through the solvothermal in-situ polymerization of copper phthalocyanine on the surface of the carbon nanotubes (Fig. 15h). The loading rate of active substances on CNTs was 3.97 wt%. As shown in Fig. 15i and j, it exhibited a high discharge capacity of 18652.7 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1, 1.64 V polarization at 1000 mA g−1, a stable cyclability of 160 times, close to 1630 h of the charge–discharge process at 200 mA g−1, delivering excellent CO2 adsorption and activation capability, which were also verified with the simulation calculation (Fig. 15k). Afterwards, Wang et al.75 used the electrospinning technique and a two-step heat treatment along with a meteorological deposition method to prepare Cu/NCNF, a free-standing cathode for LCBs, with a Cu SACs mass loading of 1.54 wt%, a high specific capacity (14084 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1) with low polarization of 1.29 V, and long-lived stability of 133 cycles. Dai et al.179 also achieved atomic Cu deposition onto TDG-1000 (topological defect-rich graphene samples prepared under 1000 °C), and the formed topological defect-covered graphene was noted as TDCG-1000. The results indicate the critical role of topological defects in the carbon skeleton for the high catalytic activity of metal-free catalysts for CO2 reduction and evolution in battery cells, providing an effective strategy for realizing the highly efficient air–cathodes for metal–air batteries.
Porphyrins, macromolecular heterocyclic compounds composed of four interconnected pyrrole subunit α-carbon atoms through methylene bridges (CH–), can coordinate with metals such as iron, cobalt, and aluminum, which can be regarded as natural SACs and have attracted extensive attention in recent years, especially in the fields of batteries and catalytic systems. Lan et al.42 reported a porphyrin-based covalent organic framework (TTCOF-Mn, 4.11 wt%) to reveal intrinsic catalytic sites of aprotic CO2 conversion from the molecular level (Fig. 16a). Specifically, it exhibited a high discharge capacity of 13018 mA h g−1, a low overpotential of 1.07 V at 100 mA g−1 (1.36, 1.46 V at 300, 500 mA g−1, respectively), as well as excellent stability (180 cycles with a final discharge terminal potential of 2.60 V) at 300 mA g−1 (Fig. 16b–d). For comparison, researchers synthesized different TTCOF-M (M = 2H, Co, Ni, Cu), which revealed that different metalloporphyrin sites lead to different reaction pathways. For example, single-Mn(II) sites in TTCOF-Mn activated CO2 and achieved an efficient four-electron CO2 conversion pathway, revealing the catalytic active sites and reaction pathways in aprotic LCBs for the first time. Subsequently, Xie et al.175 achieved uniformly anchored single-metal atoms of Ni on N-doped rGO, designated as Ni1/N-rGO (Fig. 16e). It delivered a high discharge capacity of 12393 mA h g−1, a cycling lifespan of more than 150 cycles and an overpotential of ∼1.75 V, which are all better than the bare N-rGO (9963 mA h g−1/25 cycles/>2 V) (Fig. 16f–h). Cheng et al.180 conducted a detailed comparative analysis and theoretical calculation for various transition metal SACs for LCBs, including Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu. The experimental results and theoretical calculations both confirmed that the Cr single-atom has the best catalytic ability, and the catalytic active sites were confirmed as Cr–N4 through the EXAFS analysis (Fig. 16i). The authors used porous carbon foam as the substrate and then loaded monatomic Cr with a mass fraction of 7.82 wt% to obtain the final SAMe@NG/PCF, delivering a superior rate performance and cyclability, with a narrow voltage gap of 1.39 V and a long cycle life over 350 cycles at 100 μA cm−2 (Fig. 16j and k). This work is undoubtedly successful in terms of cycle life, and the loading of active components, and it provides a practical scheme for future studies.
 Fig. 16  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of some non-precious metal SACs in LCBs. (a) Synthesis route and building blocks of TTCOF-Mn. (b) Charging/discharging curves of TTCOF-Mn with the limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1. (c) Overpotentials of different COF cathode catalysts under current densities of 100 mA g−1, 300 mA g−1, and 500 mA g−1. (d) Long-term cycling of the TTCOF-Mn cathode catalyst and TTCOF-2H cathode catalyst at a current density of 300 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. € Schematic illustration of the M1/N-rGO synthetic process. (f) Full-discharge voltage curves of N-rGO and M1/N-rGO (M = Fe, Co, or Ni) cathodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (g) Overpotential of N-rGO and M1/N-rGO at 200 mA g−1 and 400 mA g−1. (h) Cycling performance of N-rGO and M1/N-rGO at 400 mA g−1 with a cut-off capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (i) Corresponding EXAFS fitting curves of SACr@NG. (j) Discharge and charge voltage of the four cathodes at a current density of 100 μA cm−2 with a limited capacity of 100 μA h cm−2. (k) Gibbs free energy diagram of reaction pathways in Li–CO2 batteries at U = 2.85 V. Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
This chapter focuses on the SACs of LCBs, explaining the working mechanism, summarizing and analyzing the current research progress. As summarized in Table 2, the categories, loading, overpotential, discharge capacity, and life cycles of reported SACs in LCBs were compared. SACs could significantly improve the electrochemical performance of LCBs. The SACs above function effectively in the cathode catalytic process of both LOBs or LCBs (Fig. 17a and b). In essence, SACs with unique electronic structures among metal atoms and the surrounding supports play a critical role in tuning the electronic transfer process during redox reactions to realize enhanced battery performance. Similarly, for the anode, the uncontrolled lithium deposition process, especially the dendrite issue, originated from the irregular electronic and charge transfer. Recently, SACs have also been used to quite effectively regulate the lithium plating/stripping behavior, and we will shed light on this in the next chapter.
Table 2 Basic information and performance of SACs for Li–CO2 batteries




Loading
Ratio
Support
Active center
Overpotential
Discharge capacity
Cyclic life
Year
Ref.




Co
∼5.3 wt%
Graphene oxide
Adjacent Co/GO
—
17358 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
>100 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 100 mA g−1)
2019

45



Mn
∼4.11 wt%
Porphyrin
TTCOF-Mn
1.07 V (100 mA g−1)
13018 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
180 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 300 mA g−1)
2020

42



Fe
∼0.7 wt%
N,S-codoped Holey Graphene
Fe-N4
1.17 V (100 mA g−1)
23174 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
>200 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 1 A g−1)
2020

174



Cu
—
Topological defect-rich graphene
Cu–N4
2.27 V (2000 mA g−1)
—
125 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 1 A g−1)
2021

179



Cu
∼3.97 wt%
Carbon Nanotubes
Cu–N4
1.64 V (1000 mA g−1)
18652.7 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
>160 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 200 mA g−1)
2021

177



Ru
∼3.05 wt%
Co3O4 nanosheets carbon cloth
—
1.05 V (100 mA g−1)
30915 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
251 cycles (800 mA h g−1 200 mA g−1)
2021

176



Fe
—
N-rGO
—
—
16835 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
>170 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 400 mA g−1)
2021

175



Co
—
N-rGO
—
—
12134 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
75 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 400 mA g−1)
2021

175



Ni
—
N-rGO
—
—
12393 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
150 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 400 mA g−1)
2021

175



Cr
∼7.82 wt%
N-doped graphene
Cr–N4
1.39 V (100 μA cm−2)
—
350 cycles (100 μA cm−2)
2022

180



Fe
∼0.3 wt%
Carbon
Fe–N4
0.81 V (100 mA g−1)
13238 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)
140 cycles (500 mA h g−1 200 mA g−1)
2022

178



Cu
∼1.54 wt%
Nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers
Cu–N4
1.29 V (100 mA g−1)
14084 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)
133 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 400 mA g−1)
2022

75



Ir
∼3.2 wt%
N-doped carbon nanotubes
Ir4+/N
<1.5 V (50 mA g−1)
—
>120 cycles (500 mA h g−1 50 mA g−1)
2022

192





 Fig. 17  The model of the Li–air battery and Li metal battery with SACs in catalyzing the cathode and regulating the lithium metal anode. (a) A model of the lithium–air battery. (b) A model of the single-atom catalyst. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) The model of lithium metal battery. 
5 Typical SACs applied in lithium metal anodes
As a key component of LABs, the lithium (Li) metal anode is a double-edged sword with the merits of extremely high theoretical gravimetric capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and low potential (−3.04 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)), as well as the undesired dendrite issue, dead lithium, severe volume expansion and safety concerns.76,193 Considering the case of LABs, they also suffer from the erosion of oxygen and moisture. Therefore, building a stable Li metal anode for the Li–air battery appears to be imminent. Various methods have been reported for tackling the above issues, such as surface coating, three-dimensional current collectors, electrolyte additives, etc. The introduction of lipophilic active sites to induce the electrochemical deposition of Li is one of the most effective strategies, and SACs were also investigated as a novel mediator in regulating the electron and charge transfer in the Li metal anode (Fig. 17b and c). In this chapter, we introduce the mechanism in the homogeneous deposition of lithium metal catalyzed by SACs and the improvement in the electrochemical performance.
In 2018, Zhang et al.66 first applied Co singlet atoms in the lithium metal anode; the Co–N4 structure with tailored local electronic structure can optimize the adsorption of Li+ as well as promote the subsequent nucleation process, finally improving the comprehensive performance of lithium metal batteries. The results show that the CoNC anode exhibited a CE of 99.2% for 400 and 300 cycles at 2.0 and 5.0 mA cm−2, and a CE >98% at 8.0 and 10.0 mA cm−2. Moreover, the full cell with the LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode can exhibit better cycling performance, higher rate capability, and smaller polarization, compared with the Cu foil and the commonly N-doped graphene matrix (NGM) (Fig. 18a). This work indicates the chemistry of energy materials that can effectively regulate the interactions between Li ions and hosts. More importantly, the concept of applying SACs in regulating the lithium metal anode extends the library of substances that can regulate Li deposition, providing a novel direction for the development of high-performance Li metal-based batteries (including but not limited to LABs and LSBs) in the future.
 Fig. 18  Characterization and electrochemical performance of SACs regulation of the lithium metal anode. Long-term electrochemical cycling performance. (a) CE of CoNC, NGM, and Cu electrodes at a fixed capacity of 2.0 mA h cm−2. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Voltage profiles of the 10th, 50th, 100th, and 150th cycles of the SANi-NG electrode with a cycling capacity of 1.0 mA h cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2. (c) Voltage profiles of the 20th Li plating/stripping on SANi-NG (red line), PG (cyan line), and NG (olive line) electrodes with an areal capacity of 1.0 mA h cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) A series of optical microscopy images of dendrite growth on bare Cu, C@Cu, and FeSA-N–C@Cu with a deposition current of 3 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Electron density difference and surface binding energy of graphene, ZnSAs, and N-graphene. (f) Li migration pathways and barriers on ZnSAs. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) Cycle properties for symmetric cells with Zn–MXene–Li, MXene–Li, and Cu–Li anodes at 1 mA h cm−2. The inset diagram in (g) shows the selected stripping-plating curves of the Zn–MXene–Li anode from 1194 to 1200 h. (h) Rate capabilities of the Zn–MXene–Li anodes at various current densities (1–16 mA cm−2). Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Gong et al.193 also introduced the applications of Ni, Pt and Cu single-atoms in the Li metal anode. The M–Nx–C not only increases the Li adsorption energy of the localized area around the metal atomic sites with a moderate adsorption energy gradient but also improves the atomic structural stability of the overall materials. Taking Ni as an example, except for the initial cycle, the voltage profiles of the SANi-NG electrode are almost coincident, indicating stable depositing/stripping behavior (Fig. 18b). The voltage hysteresis at the 20th Li plating/stripping cycle is only 19 mV (Fig. 18c), which is smaller than the PG electrode (45 mV) and NG electrode (24 mV). The same phenomenon is also reflected in Pt and Cu SACs, which will not be described one by one.193 In the same year, Yan et al.46 extended the research to the Fe single-atom. In this work, the authors focused on the description and analysis of the dendrite growth and regulation process on different pole pieces using an optical microscopy technique. As depicted in Fig. 18d, when lithium is continuously electrodeposited, mossy lithium dendrites are quickly generated on the bare Cu foil substrate, which is faster than the carbon matrix, indicating that carbon matrix can inhibit the dendrite growth to some extent. Surprisingly, no lithium dendrites were observed on FeSA–N–C under the same conditions, suggesting the superiority of SACs in regulating lithium deposition behaviors. Afterwards, Zhu et al.47 studied single-atom Zn, and the results showed that both overpotential (12 mV) and cycle stability (∼100% CE, >100 cycles) were significantly improved, while the stability of the symmetrical battery was remarkably prolonged (800 h). Moreover, it was found that the electron density distribution on graphene mainly converged near the chemical bond, with a significant delocalization on the entire plane of the ZnSAs, which indicated improved electron conductivity. The electrons gathered again near the nitrogen when the Zn atom was removed (Fig. 18e). Fig. 18f displays the Li migration pathways and barriers of ZnSAs, graphene and N-graphene, respectively. The Li migration on the SACs surface showed the smallest energy barrier, which implies that it can easily migrate to nearby areas rather than gather locally. Subsequently, Yang et al.76 also conducted studies but different from Zhu,47 they selected MXene (Ti3C2Clx) layers as the substrate for SACs, and the loading rate reached 0.87 wt%. The nucleation and growth mechanism of lithium on the prepared materials and MXene nanosheets were revealed, and the overall performance of the battery was enhanced with a low overpotential of 11.3 ± 0.1 mV, long cyclic life (1200 h), and deep stripping–plating levels up to 40 mA h cm−2 (Fig. 18g and h). Recently, two related studies were published successively, which further promoted the development of lithium metal deposition induced by SACs. In the study by Lin et al.,195 Li atom surface diffusion and lateral distribution were significantly realized by well-distributed atomic iron and nickel catalysts, embedded in ultralight nitrogen-doped carbon nanofiber paper (SAFeNi@LNCP). Under the impressive capacity of 20 mA h cm−2, Li modified with SAC-activator exhibiteds a low overpotential of ∼50 mV at 5 mA cm−2, a long lifespan of 900 h, and high coulombic efficiencies over 150 cycles. Besides, Yang et al.196 developed carbon-supported single-atomic Co with asymmetric N,O-coordination (Co–N/O) for the Li metal battery, which enhanced the binding ability toward Li and enabled uniform Li plating/stripping. Moreover, the Co–N/O around Co atoms induced co-activation effects, lowering the energy barriers toward Li+ to Li0 conversion and largely promoting the deposition kinetics. This work provides a comprehensive understanding of single-atomic metals with asymmetric heteroatom coordination in the design of Li metal anode.
This chapter sorts and analyzes the current of SACs in the Li anode. Generally speaking, introducing SACs can achieve a dendrite-free lithium metal anode and enhanced battery performance including low overpotential, long cycle life, and deep stripping-plating behavior. However, the relationship between SACs and the regulation of lithium metal anode needs further investigation. To date, SACs have opened a new window for the safe and efficient operation of LABs and other metallic batteries but the research on the SACs-regulated lithium metal anode is still in the germination stage and more efforts are needed. The abovementioned applications of SACs are summarized in Table 3, including the categories, loading, support, nucleation overpotential, coulombic efficiency, and cyclic life, which may help readers to grasp the entire view.
Table 3 Basic information and performance of SACs in the regulation of the lithium metal anode




Loading
Ratio
Support
Active center
Nucleation overpotential
Coulombic efficiency
Cyclic life
Year
Ref.




Co
∼0.4 wt%
N-G
Co–Nx
—
99.2% (2 mA cm−2)
400 cycles (2 mA cm−2, 2 mA h cm−2)
2018

66



Fe
3 mg cm−2
N-doped carbon
Fe–Nx
0.8 mV
98.8% (1 mA cm−2)
200 cycles (1 mA cm−2, 1 mA h cm−2)
2019

46



Ni
∼0.63 wt%
N-G
—
19 mV (0.5 mA cm−2)
98.45% (4 mA cm−2)
>250 cycles (0.5 mA cm−2, 1 mA h cm−2)
2019

193



Pt
—
N-G
—
—
—
—
2019

193



Cu
—
N-G
—
—
—
—
2019

193



Zn
—
—
Zn–Nx
50 mV
98% (0.5 mA cm−2)
>100 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1)
2019

47



Zn
∼0.87 wt%
MXene (Ti3C2Clx)
—
11.3 ± 0.1 mV (0.05 mA cm−2)
—
1200 h (1 mA cm−2, 1 mA h cm−2)
2020

76



Fe–Ni
∼1.6 wt%
CNT
—
25 mV
99.3%
450 cycles
2022

195





∼2.1 wt%




(3 mA cm−2)
(1 mA cm−2)
(3 mA cm−2, 3 mA h cm−2)






Co
∼2.1 wt%
GO
Co–N/O
28.8 mV (1 mA cm−2)
98.6% (1 mA cm−2)
250 cycles (1 mA cm−2, 1 mA h cm−2)
2023

196





6 Summary and perspectives
We have presented a timely review of the recent progress of SACs in the LABs applications. Taking LOBs and LCBs as examples, this article summarizes the reported SACs together with deciphering the characterization, electrochemical properties, theoretical calculation, and correlations. The applications of SACs in regulating the lithium metal anode are also well demonstrated for an overall understanding of the battery system. In particular, noble metal SACs (Pt, Ru, Pd), non-precious metal SACs (Fe, Cu, Co), and non-metallic SACs (Se) are summarized for LOBs. The LCBs section summarizes Ru, Ir, Fe, Co, Cu, Cr, Mn, and Ni SACs, while the lithium metal anode section summarizes Fe, Co, Ni, Pt, Cu, and Zn SACs.
All the above results show that the introduction of SACs significantly promotes the electrochemical performance of LABs through tailoring the catalytic kinetics (ORR/OER or CO2RR/CO2ER) and regulating the lithium stripping/plating process. However, when considering the existing scientific issues, practical working conditions (e.g., moisture corrosion), and hurdles between the lab and the market, many challenges remain, which calls for collective intelligence and efforts from all the related researchers.
1. Synthesis and characterization of SACs. As shown in Fig. 19a, the SACs mentioned in this paper usually have a low loading rate (<5 wt%), which leads to limited production and they are unfit for practical applications. Limited by these existing methods, we may inevitably face the issues of metal atom migration and agglomeration to form nanoparticles with the increase in loading rates. Besides, the active sites of SACs have not yet been thoroughly explored. The existing characterization techniques such as HAADF imaging and XAFS technologies mentioned above are still time-consuming, high-cost or hard to access; therefore, we need a more economical, universal, and simple synthesis method that is suitable for large-scale production and can balance the loading rate and practical applications. A more advanced single-atom characterization technology with high accessibility will accelerate the exploration and design of various SACs and the corresponding catalytic processes (in situ measurements).
 Fig. 19  (a) Support and loading of the SACs shown in this article. The relationship between the active substance loading rate and the (b) battery cycle life, (c) overpotential of SACs and NPs. (d) Classification of all current SACs substrates. 
2. The relationship between the mass loading of SACs and battery performance. As shown in Fig. 19b and c, SACs improve the overall performance of the battery as compared with traditional nanoparticles, including increasing the cycle life and reducing the overpotential. Nevertheless, the loading rate of the former is significantly lower than the latter, which can be clearly and intuitively observed on the scatter diagram with the loading rate of catalytic active substances as the abscissa and the battery performance as the ordinate. The following are some observations: (i) in a certain range, the SACs activity is the highest and the battery performance is the best. (Ii) If it is higher or lower than this value, the performance of the battery will be reduced, which indicates that there is a delicate balance between SACs loading and electrocatalytic activity. However, there is no precise conclusion on the relationship between both. Therefore, the specific mechanism still needs to be continuously explored and illuminated.
3. Excellent and high-efficiency SACs. As mentioned above, some researchers have already prepared a novel and highly efficient cathode catalyst by anchoring Ru nanoclusters on three-dimensional rGO doped with N and single Co atoms; to our surprise, the battery is better than ordinary Co SACs in different ways, including discharge capacity, cycling stability and others. This work provides us with new inspiration for designing better SACs for LABs, namely, two-element single-atom recombination, such as Fe–Ru, Co–Pt. At the same time, we need a more advanced in situ characterization method (as mentioned above) to understand the internal reaction mechanism for SACs catalytic action on the cathode of LABs, which will provide critical guidance for the design of SACs toward long-life, high-energy lithium–air batteries. For example, according to the reaction process, we can directly control the active center sites and optimize the ligands of SACs, which can greatly affect the electronic and geometric structure of metal centers to improve the catalytic activity. Therefore, an in-depth understanding of the catalytic mechanism through advanced characterization technology provides an effective development direction for the subsequent preparation of highly efficient SACs in LABs.
4. Investigation of the application of SACs in lithium metal anodes. Although relevant studies have confirmed its feasibility in inducing the uniform deposition of lithium atoms, and there has been preliminary mechanism analysis, including reducing the barrier energy and increasing the absorption energy, the research is still in its infancy. Our understanding of its internal reaction mechanism is also still shallow. At the same time, there is no precedent for the application of the SACs composite anode in lithium–air batteries until now, and most of the research is still focused on lithium-ion batteries, which still has great room for development. Once applied to LABs, it will greatly promote the development of this field, and even have pioneering significance. Therefore, further development of effective SACs in anodes needs the concerted efforts of researchers.
5. Application fields of SACs. In this paper, the application status of SACs in LABs is summarized and analyzed. However, in addition to LABs, there are also other metal–air batteries, such as zinc–air batteries (ZABs), sodium–air batteries (NABs), and potassium–air batteries (PABs). To date, there are more reports about SACs in ZABs,110,197–204 while rarely in NABs, and PABs, which demands researchers to be devoted to expanding the application fields of SACs.
6. The matrix of SACs. As shown in Fig. 19a, at present, all SACs substrates in LABs are carbon-based or two-dimensional carbon-containing materials, which are the two most widely used matrices of catalysts. Despite having high atom utilization (∼100%), ordered porosity, effortless immobilization through various metals, beneficial synergistic effects between active catalytic sites and carbon substrates, good electrical conductivity, and many other characteristics, they also face a lot of challenges as follows: (i) carbon-based substrates in M–N–C electrocatalysts are electro-oxidized to CO2 and CO under high potentials, which results in carbon surface destruction and active catalytic sites ruin. (ii) Carbon-based SACs face difficulty in stabilizing isolated metal atoms without compromising their catalytic activities, especially under high-temperature conditions or harsh reaction conditions. Last but not least, due to the diversity and complexity of structures and components, it is challenging to pinpoint exact atom arrangements and identify the origin of catalytic activity. Therefore, it is particularly important to develop SACs supported on other substrates for LABs, including transition metal compounds, 2D nitrides, MOFs, perovskites, polyoxometalates, black phosphorous, and conductive polymer materials (Fig. 19d).
Author contributions
Tiansheng Bai: Conceptualization, investigation, visualization, writing – original draft; Deping Li: conceptualization, funding acquisition, supervision, writing – review & editing; Shenyi Xiao: investigation, visualization; Fengjun Ji: investigation, writing – review & editing; Shuai Zhang: investigation, data curation; Chu Wang: investigation; Jingyu Lu: writing – review & editing; Quan Gao: validation; Lijie Ci: funding acquisition, supervision, writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
Tiansheng Bai and Deping Li contribute equally to this work. This work was supported by School Research Startup Expenses of Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) (Grant No. DD29100027, DD45001022), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52002094), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (Grant No. 2019A1515110756), Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (Grant No. JCYJ20210324121411031, JSGG202108021253804014, RCBS20210706092218040), the Open Fund of the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Storage materials (Grant. No. asem202107), the Foundation of State Key Laboratory of High-efficiency Utilization of Coal and Green Chemical Engineering (Grant No. 2022-K16).
References
Z. Xu, S. N. Chau, X. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Li, T. Dietz, J. Wang, J. A. Winkler, F. Fan, B. Huang, S. Li, S. Wu, A. Herzberger, Y. Tang, D. Hong, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nature, 2020, 577, 74–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Schulte, B. E. Dale, S. Bozzetto, M. Liebman, G. M. Souza, N. Haddad, T. L. Richard, B. Basso, R. C. Brown, J. A. Hilbert and J. G. Arbuckle, Nat. Sustainability, 2021, 5, 384–388 CrossRef .
L. Tang, J. Qu, Z. Mi, X. Bo, X. Chang, L. D. Anadon, S. Wang, X. Xue, S. Li, X. Wang and X. Zhao, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 929–938 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qian, S. Xu, J. Cao, F. Ren, W. Wei, J. Meng and L. Wu, Nat. Sustainability, 2021, 4, 417–425 CrossRef .
T. Ma, S. Sun, G. Fu, J. W. Hall, Y. Ni, L. He, J. Yi, N. Zhao, Y. Du, T. Pei, W. Cheng, C. Song, C. Fang and C. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Welsby, J. Price, S. Pye and P. Ekins, Nature, 2021, 597, 230–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Li, R. Xu, W. Zhou, Y. Li, S. T. Oyakhire, Y. Wu, J. Xu, H. Wang, Z. Yu, D. T. Boyle, W. Huang, Y. Ye, H. Chen, J. Wan, Z. Bao, W. Chiu and Y. Cui, Science, 2022, 375, 66–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. Li, J. Chen, D. Lei and C. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Lu, L. Wan, P. Zhou, Y. Xia, S. Yan, X. Chen, H. Zhou, H. Dong and K. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, P. E. Rudnicki, Z. Zhang, Z. Huang, H. Celik, S. T. Oyakhire, Y. Chen, X. Kong, S. C. Kim, X. Xiao, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, G. A. Kamat, M. S. Kim, S. F. Bent, J. Qin, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 94–106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Tao, Y. Wang, C. Jiang, C. Ma, O. Sheng, G. Lu and X. W. Lou, Science, 2022, 375, 739–745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, F. Qiao, J. You, Z. Ren, N. Li, K. Zhang, C. Shen, T. Jin and K. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chang, H. Yang, X. Zhu, P. He and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, S. Xiao, D. Li, J. Liao, F. Ji, H. Liu and L. Ci, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 48, 172–190 CrossRef .
A. Benítez, J. Amaro-Gahete, Y.-C. Chien, Á. Caballero, J. Morales and D. Brandell, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2022, 154, 111783 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, Q. Zhu, Y. Liu and B. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100457 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, R. Liu, Y. Xiao, F. Cao and H. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 40, 439–460 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, T. Wang, H. Tian, D. Su, Q. Zhang and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2003666 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhao, B. Q. Li, X. Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1095–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, B. Sun, Y. Xie, A. Tkacheva, F. Qiu, P. He, H. Zhou, K. Yan, X. Guo, S. Wang, A. M. McDonagh, Z. Peng, J. Lu and G. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabm1899 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kim, H. Lee, H. J. Kwon, S.-M. Bak, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer, G. Yoon, J. O. Park, D.-H. Seo, S. B. Ma and D. Im, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabm8584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Y. Ren, R. Wang, P. Zhang, M. Ding, C. Li, D. Zhao, Z. Qian, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Aetukuri, B. D. McCloskey, J. M. Garcia, L. E. Krupp, V. Viswanathan and A. C. Luntz, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 50–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Johnson, C. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, P. C. Ashok, B. B. Praveen, K. Dholakia, J. M. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 1091–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Song, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ge, L. C. Zou, H. F. Wang, X. X. Wang, Q. C. Liu, F. Li and J. J. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, G. Hou, Q. Chen, D. Li, K. Li, Q. Yuan, J. Wang and L. Ci, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132343 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Song, T. Zhu, J. Chen, Z. Yu, P. Wang, L. Yu, J. Xu, H. Zhou and K. Chen, Nano Energy, 2022, 100, 107521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Zhou, C. Lin, B. Chen, Z. Guan, A. M. Ebrahim, G. Qian, C. Ye, L. Chen, Y. Ge, Q. Yun, X. Wang, X. Zhou, G. Wang, K. Li, P. Lu, Y. Ma, Y. Xiong, T. Wang, L. Zheng, S. Chu, Y. Chen, B. Wang, C. S. Lee, Y. Liu, Q. Zhang and Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2202737,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202202737 .
L. Liu, Y. Qin, K. Wang, H. Mao, H. Wu, W. Yu, D. Zhang, H. Zhao, H. Wang, J. Wang, C. Xiao, Y. Su and S. Ding, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103681 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Lu, S. Ma, Z. Lian, X. Gu, J. Li, Z. Li and Q. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 419, 140424 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Gong, K. Fu, X. Han, Y. Yao, G. Pastel, C. Yang, H. Xie, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18809–18815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, N. W. Li, X. B. Cheng, Y. X. Yin, Q. Zhang and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600445 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Alias and A. A. Mohamad, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 237–251 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Yang, S. Wu, A. Wang, L. Zhao, D. Zhai, B. Ren, K. Cao and Z. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802805 CrossRef .
Y. Qiao, J. Wu, J. Zhao, Q. Li, P. Zhang, C. Hao, X. Liu, S. Yang and Y. Liu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 133–139 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, B. Zou, X. Bi, M. Li, J. Wen, F. Huo, K. Amine and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2782–2786 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, D. Li, Z. Chi, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Ding, S. Li, J. Liu, Z. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17865–17875 RSC .
Y. Liang, W. Wu, D. Li, H. Wu, C. Gao, Z. Chen, L. Ci and J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2202493 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, Y. Bo, D. Li, Y. Liang, J. Zhang, M. Cao, R. Guo, Z. Zhu, L. Ci, M. Li and J. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2022, 14, 44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou, Q. Lu, K. Liao and Z. Shao, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 45, 869–902 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, R. L. Zhong, M. Lu, J. H. Wang, C. Jiang, G. K. Gao, L. Z. Dong, Y. Chen, S. L. Li and Y. Q. Lan, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 175–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Q. Cao, Q.-Z. Wang, X. Yin, Y.-D. Sun, M. Ma, Y.-P. Wu and X.-J. Liu, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 10225–10231 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lian, Y. Lu, S. Ma, Z. Li and Q. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 445, 136852 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Zhang, Y. Jiao, D. L. Chao, C. Ye, Y. X. Wang, K. Davey, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904206 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, J. Zhou, H. Ji, J. Liu, T. Qian and C. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32008–32014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, M. Zhu, X. Wu, J. Liang, Y. Liu, T. Zhang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 587–593 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, B. J. Park, V. K. Paidi, R. Huang, Y. Lee, K.-J. Noh, K.-S. Lee and J. W. Han, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 640–649 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, K. Xu, M. Zhu, T. Xu, Z. Fan, L. Zhu and Y. Zhu, Small, 2021, 17, e2101620 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cheng, Y. Bai, Y. Lian, Y. Ma, Z. Yin, L. Wei, H. Sun, Y. Su, Y. Gu, P. Kuang, J. Zhong, Y. Peng, H. Wang and Z. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 18561–18569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Speck, J. H. Kim, G. Bae, S. H. Joo, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, C. H. Choi and S. Cherevko, JACS Au, 2021, 1, 1086–1100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang and J. Guan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000768 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, C. Ye, H. Yan, L. Li, H. He, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 3165–3182 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, B. Lu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801995 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, L. Huang, F. Liang, S. Liu, Y. Wang and H. Zhang, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1528–1539 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shang, X. Duan, S. Wang, Q. Yue, B. Gao and X. Xu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 663–673 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Shui, N. K. Karan, M. Balasubramanian, S. Y. Li and D. J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16654–16661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, A. Wang, B. Qiao, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, J. Lin, A. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Zhang and J. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 1505–1511 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, A. Wang, J. T. Miller, X. Liu, X. Yang, W. Wang, L. Li, Y. Huang, C.-Y. Mou and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1546–1553 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, K. Kawashima, M. Okumura and N. Toshima, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13498–13508 RSC .
S. H. Sun, G. X. Zhang, N. Gauquelin, N. Chen, J. G. Zhou, S. L. Yang, W. F. Chen, X. B. Meng, D. S. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Y. Li, S. Y. Ye, S. Knights, G. A. Botton, T. K. Sham and X. L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1775 CrossRef .
M. Moses-DeBusk, M. Yoon, L. F. Allard, D. R. Mullins, Z. Wu, X. Yang, G. Veith, G. M. Stocks and C. K. Narula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12634–12645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, X. Gu, Q. Cao, P. Hu, J. Hao, J. Li and X. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4198–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, X. Chen, X. B. Cheng, B. Q. Li, R. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Chen and Q. Zhang, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800354 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, Z. Yang, J. Wu, C. Jin, J.-H. Tian and R. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 64155–64164 RSC .
Y. Ding, A. Klyushin, X. Huang, T. Jones, D. Teschner, F. Girgsdies, T. Rodenas, R. Schlogl and S. Heumann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3514–3518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, M. J. Arellano-Jimenez, G. Ye, N. Dong Kim, E. L. Samuel, Z. Peng, Z. Zhu, F. Qin, J. Bao, M. J. Yacaman, P. M. Ajayan, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H. T. Kim, K. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, S. Liu, T. Qian, J. Liu, J. Zhou, H. Ji, J. Xiong, J. Zhong and C. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cheng, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 539–573 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Adv.
Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, H. Gong, L. Song, Y. Kong, C. Jiang, H. Xue, P. Li, X. Huang, J. He and T. Wang, Mater. Today Energy, 2022, 25, 100967 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, Q. Zhu, Y. Shi, H. Chen, D. Zhang, Z. Du and S. Yang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 891–898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Guo, P. Guan, C. Liu, H. Huang, F. Xue, X. Dong, S. J. Pennycook and M. F. Chisholm, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1924 CrossRef PubMed .
W. L. Wang, E. J. Santos, B. Jiang, E. D. Cubuk, C. Ophus, A. Centeno, A. Pesquera, A. Zurutuza, J. Ciston, R. Westervelt and E. Kaxiras, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 450–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lang, T. Li, D. Matsumura, S. Miao, Y. Ren, Y. T. Cui, Y. Tan, B. Qiao, L. Li, A. Wang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 16054–16058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, L. Li, X. Liu, X. C. Zeng and Z. Chen, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 3170–3175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, P. Lv, Z. Yang, S. Li, D. Ma and R. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 16795–16805 RSC .
Y. Tang, Y.-G. Wang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11281–11289 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng and X. Sun, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1508–1514 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ling, X. Niu, Q. Li, A. Du and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14161–14168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Wang, Z. Chen, H. S. Xu, W. Yu, C. Liu, X. Wang, K. Zhang, K. Xie and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1905879 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, J. Wang, R. Yin, B. Li, X. Huang, L. Zhao and L. Qian, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 564, 28–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, G. Luo, Q. Zhao, D. Wu, T. Yang, J. Wen, R. Wang, C. Xu and N. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16776–16786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, P. Wang, H. Di, P. Zhang, X. Hui and L. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010544 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hai, S. Xi, S. Mitchell, K. Harrath, H. Xu, D. F. Akl, D. Kong, J. Li, Z. Li, T. Sun, H. Yang, Y. Cui, C. Su, X. Zhao, J. Li, J. Perez-Ramirez and J. Lu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 174–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Singh, R. Handa and G. Manchanda, J. Controlled Release, 2021, 329, 1234–1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Saravanan, P. S. Kumar, S. Karishma, D. N. Vo, S. Jeevanantham, P. R. Yaashikaa and C. S. George, Chemosphere, 2021, 264, 128580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. I. Janjua, Y. Cao, C. Yu and A. Popat, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 1072–1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, T. Zaks, R. Langer and Y. Dong, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 1078–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Anselmo and S. Mitragotri, Bioeng. Transl. Med., 2021, 6, e10246 CAS .
A. Ali, T. Shah, R. Ullah, P. Zhou, M. Guo, M. Ovais, Z. Tan and Y. Rui, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 629054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Da, W. Zhou, Y. Shao, D. Li, S. Zhan, J. Yuan and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13466–13471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, A. J. Akey, Y. Li, Z. Lu, J. Lattimer, Y. Hu, C. Stokes, M. Gangishetty, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Hill, W.-B. Cai, D. Bell, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, Y. Cui and H. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 950–960 CAS .
J. Li, Q. Guan, H. Wu, W. Liu, Y. Lin, Z. Sun, X. Ye, X. Zheng, H. Pan, J. Zhu, S. Chen, W. Zhang, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14515–14519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, B. Mei, Y. Tong, Y. Li, M. Ruan, P. Song, G. Sun, L. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang, L. Gu, Z. Zhou and W. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Tan, A. Garcia, Z. Zhang, J. Lin, S. Wan, J.-S. McEwen, S. Wang and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7884–7893 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, D. Zheng, M. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Fan, B. Gao, L. Gu, Y. Guo, J. Qin, J. Wei, Y. Zhao and G. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14639–14646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, X. Zhou, J. Dong, A. Li, X. Zhao, Q. Liu, Y. Lin, J. Pei, Z. Li, Z. Jiang, D. Zhou, L. Zheng, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, Z. Yang, R. Cao, R. Sarangi, T. Sun, X. Yang, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, J. Li, W. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, Q. Shi, S. Fu, J. Song, H. Xia, D. Du and Y. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8779–8783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. U. Lee, B. J. Kim and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4754 RSC .
L. Zhang, J. Fischer, Y. Jia, X. Yan, W. Xu, X. Wang, J. Chen, D. Yang, H. Liu, L. Zhuang, M. Hankel, D. J. Searles, K. Huang, S. Feng, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10757–10763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, S. Zhang and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 8686–8705 CrossRef .
J. Su, L. Zhuang, S. Zhang, Q. Liu, L. Zhang and G. Hu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 2947–2962 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Zheng, Y. Yan, X.-X. Wang, L.-N. Song, H.-F. Wang and J.-J. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2023, 56, 331–341 CrossRef .
M. Liu, L. Wang, K. Zhao, S. Shi, Q. Shao, L. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2890–2923 RSC .
T. Chao, Y. Hu, X. Hong and Y. Li, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 289–303 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, D. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 673–689 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944–13960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Thomas, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7647–7661 RSC .
S. Tian, Z. Wang, W. Gong, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Q. Xu, C. Chen, C. Chen, Q. Peng, L. Gu, H. Zhao, P. Hu, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11161–11164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sun, Z. J. Zhao, R. Mu, S. Zha, L. Li, S. Chen, K. Zang, J. Luo, Z. Li, S. C. Purdy, A. J. Kropf, J. T. Miller, L. Zeng and J. Gong, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4454 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, C.-W. Roh, S. K. Sahoo, S. Yang, J. Bae, J. W. Han and H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701476 CrossRef .
S. Yang, J. Kim, Y. J. Tak, A. Soon and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2058–2062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-K. Gu, B. Qiao, C.-Q. Huang, W.-C. Ding, K. Sun, E. Zhan, T. Zhang, J. Liu and W.-X. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3886–3890 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhu, A. Patlolla, J. Shan, H. Yoshida, S. Takeda, A. I. Frenkel and F. Tao, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1011–1019 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Narula, L. F. Allard, G. M. Stocks and M. Moses-DeBusk, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xing, J. F. Chen, Y. H. Li, W. T. Yuan, Y. Zhou, L. R. Zheng, H. F. Wang, P. Hu, Y. Wang, H. J. Zhao, Y. Wang and H. G. Yang, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 2138–2144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, L. Liu, J. Zhang and Y. Deng, J. Catal., 2009, 261, 241–244 CrossRef CAS .
F. Grillo, H. Van Bui, D. La Zara, A. A. I. Aarnink, A. Y. Kovalgin, P. Kooyman, M. T. Kreutzer and J. R. van Ommen, Small, 2018, 14, e1800765 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yan, H. Cheng, H. Yi, Y. Lin, T. Yao, C. Wang, J. Li, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10484–10487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Piernavieja-Hermida, Z. Lu, A. White, K. B. Low, T. Wu, J. W. Elam, Z. Wu and Y. Lei, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15348–15356 RSC .
D.-H. Kwak, S.-B. Han, Y.-W. Lee, H.-S. Park, I.-A. Choi, K.-B. Ma, M.-C. Kim, S.-J. Kim, D.-H. Kim, J.-I. Sohn and K.-W. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 889–898 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wang, D. A. Cullen, Y. T. Pan, S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, H. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Shao, D. Su, K. L. More, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706758 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu, Z. Li, W. Chen, Y. Lin, T. Yuan, Z. Yang, C. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Zhao, X. Wang, F. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Huang and B. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2521–2531 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Ma, J. Chen and X. Tang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4250–4258 RSC .
J. Liu, B. R. Bunes, L. Zang and C. Wang, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2017, 16, 477–505 CrossRef .
W. J. Kwak, R. Sharma, D. Sharon, C. Xia, H. Kim, L. R. Johnson, P. G. Bruce, L. F. Nazar, Y. K. Sun, A. A. Frimer, M. Noked, S. A. Freunberger and D. Aurbach, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6626–6683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ding, X. Yu, Z.-F. Ma and X. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8160–8194 RSC .
B. D. McCloskey, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, G. Girishkumar and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23897–23905 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, G. Fu, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9901–9905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, Y. Xing, X. Bi, Y. Yuan, H.-H. Wang, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, L. Li, R. Chen, J. Lu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2016, 332, 96–102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Asakura, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Han, T. Tanaka, A. Wang, T. Zhang and N. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16100 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, D. Chen, C. Xu, Y. Zhan and J. Y. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12906–12912 RSC .
M. Lee, Y. Hwang, K.-H. Yun and Y.-C. Chung, J. Power Sources, 2015, 288, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, D. M. Tang, Y. Chen, D. Golberg, H. Kitaura, T. Zhang, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4702–4707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xin, K. Ito and Y. Kubo, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 261, 323–329 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, H. Mi, S. Luo, Y. Li, P. Zhang, L. Deng, L. Sun and X. Ren, J. Power Sources, 2017, 368, 88–96 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Q. Su, L. Yu, G. Du, C. Li, M. Zhang, S. Ding and B. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 886, 161189 CrossRef CAS .
P.-F. Zhang, Y.-Q. Lu, Y.-J. Wu, Z.-W. Yin, J.-T. Li, Y. Zhou, Y.-H. Hong, Y.-Y. Li, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 363, 224–233 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, C. Chen, J. Zhu, J. Xie, P. Zhao and M. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 842, 98–106 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, Y. Cao, S. Cai, J. Fan, Y. Li, Q.-H. Wu, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7788–7794 RSC .
K. Liao, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Li, Z. Jian, H. Yu and H. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1429–1434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shu, C. Wu, J. Long, H. Guo, S.-X. Dou and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 166–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, W. Zhang, R. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Zhai and X. Liu, Small, 2022, 2204559 Search PubMed .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Proietti, F. Jaouen, M. Lefevre, N. Larouche, J. Tian, J. Herranz and J. P. Dodelet, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 416 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. L. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Han, S. Lou, Z. Qiang, J. Zhu, Z. Ma, P. Zuo, C. Du and G. Yin, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106810 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger, M. C. Parent, V. Chiloyan and Y. Shao-Horn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A69 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, C. Dang, Y. Hou, F. Dang, Y. Fan and Z. Guo, Eng. Sci., 2020, 10, 85–94 CAS .
W. Yao, Y. Yuan, G. Tan, C. Liu, M. Cheng, V. Yurkiv, X. Bi, F. Long, C. R. Friedrich, F. Mashayek, K. Amine, J. Lu and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12832–12838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, J. Li, B. Chi, L. Zheng, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, T. Tang, L. Zheng and S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10747–10757 RSC .
Y. Zhou, K. Yin, Q. Gu, L. Tao, Y. Li, H. Tan, J. Zhou, W. Zhang, H. Li and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 26592–26598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, M. Yang, G. Zeng, J. Li, Z. Hu, D. Li, S. Wang, P. Si, Y. Tian and L. Ci, Small, 2022, 2203459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, D. Li, L. Dai, Z. Liang and L. Ci, Small, 2020, 16, 2005023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhao, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, Green Chem. Eng., 2020, 1, 79–81 CrossRef .
A. M. Appel, J. E. Bercaw, A. B. Bocarsly, H. Dobbek, D. L. DuBois, M. Dupuis, J. G. Ferry, E. Fujita, R. Hille, P. J. Kenis, C. A. Kerfeld, R. H. Morris, C. H. Peden, A. R. Portis, S. W. Ragsdale, T. B. Rauchfuss, J. N. Reek, L. C. Seefeldt, R. K. Thauer and G. L. Waldrop, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6621–6658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, N. Hormann, E. Oveisi, A. Loiudice, G. L. De Gregorio, O. Andreussi, N. Marzari and R. Buonsanti, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3117 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Li, C. Yang, Y. Li, K. Guo, J. Cheng, D. Yuan, C. Song, J. Lu and B. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804439 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Mu, H. Pan, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1903790 Search PubMed .
J. J. Lv, M. Jouny, W. Luc, W. Zhu, J. J. Zhu and F. Jiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1803111 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sato, T. Morikawa, T. Kajino and O. Ishitani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 988–992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, Y. Sun, L. Liu, J. Chen, B. Yang, S. Xu and X. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 887–922 RSC .
K. Takechi, T. Shiga and T. Asaoka, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3463–3465 RSC .
C. Hu, L. Gong, Y. Xiao, Y. Yuan, N. M. Bedford, Z. Xia, L. Ma, T. Wu, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Lu, K. Amine and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1907436 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, H. Wang, K. Zhang, Y. Qi, C. Shen, T. Jin and K. Xie, Sci. China: Mater., 2021, 64, 2139–2147 CAS .
Z. Lian, Y. Lu, C. Wang, X. Zhu, S. Ma, Z. Li, Q. Liu and S. Zang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, e2102550 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, C. Jiang, H. Gong, H. Xue, B. Gao, P. Li, K. Chang, X. Huang, T. Wang and J. He, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 4100–4107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, H. Xue, R. Xiao, Y. Xu, L. Song, H. Gong, X. Fan, K. Chang, X. Huang, T. Wang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 4511–4518 RSC .
F. Ye, L. Gong, Y. Long, S. N. Talapaneni, L. Zhang, Y. Xiao, D. Liu, C. Hu and L. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101390 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Zhao, D. Wang, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Sheng, X. Zhong, X. Zou, S. P. Jiang, G. Zhou and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1523–1532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W. C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu and A. Manthiram, Small Struct., 2020, 1, 2000027 CrossRef .
S. Xu, S. K. Das and L. A. Archer, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6656 RSC .
L. Huaiyu, Q. Yanping and C. Lei, IOP Conf. Series: Earth Environ. Sci., 2019, 218, 012156 CrossRef .
C. Li, Z. Guo, B. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9126–9130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, L. Wang, Y. Zhao, S. Li, X. Fu, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001619 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qiu, S. Ren, X. Mu, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 443–447 CrossRef .
X. Li, S. Yang, N. Feng, P. He and H. Zhou, Chin. J. Catal., 2016, 37, 1016–1024 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Z. Li and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5785–5789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, K. Guo, D. Yuan, J. Cheng and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6983–6990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, J. Ding, H. Wang, X. Yang, X. Zheng, Z. Huang, W. Song, J. Ding, X. Han and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2200559 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-J. Rho, B. Kim, K. Shin, G. Henkelman and W.-H. Ryu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 19710–19721 RSC .
P. Zhai, T. Wang, W. Yang, S. Cui, P. Zhang, A. Nie, Q. Zhang and Y. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1804019 CrossRef .
V. Fung, G. Hu, Z. Wu and D.-E. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 19571–19578 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Duan, L. Jia, Q. Xiao, H. Liu, H. Hu, S. Cheng, Z. Zhang, L. Li, W. Duan, Y. Zhang and H. Lin, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 8008–8017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Fang, X. L. Li, D. Yan, S. Xi, T. C. Li, C. Lin, S. Huang, J. Qiu, X. Xu and H. Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Mater., 2022, e12449,  DOI:10.1002/eem2.12449 .
X. Zhong, W. Yi, Y. Qu, L. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Zhu, J. Wan, S. Chen, M. Yang, L. Huang, M. Gu, H. Pan and B. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, R. Qin and R. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117778 CrossRef .
X. Sun, S. Sun, S. Gu, Z. Liang, J. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Deng, P. Wei, J. Peng, Y. Xu, C. Fang, Q. Li, J. Han, Z. Jiang and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, X. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Ma, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5359–5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zang, A. Sumboja, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Wu, H. Wu, Z. Liu, C. Guan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8961–8969 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Shi, D. Wang, Y. Lv and D. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 691–698 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lyu, Y. B. Mollamahale, S. Huang, P. Zhu, X. Zhang, Y. Du, S. Wang, M. Qing, Z. Q. Tian and P. K. Shen, J. Catal., 2018, 368, 279–290 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, P. Yuan, J. Zhang, Y. Hu, I. S. Amiinu, X. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Xia, Z. Song, Q. Xu and S. Mu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1894–1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Tiansheng Bai and Deping Li contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Tiansheng Bai
	Tiansheng Bai is currently a postgraduate at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT, Shenzhen). He received his undergraduate degree in materials science and engineering from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2021. His current research focuses on the structural design of carbon-based single-atom catalysts and their applications in lithium–air batteries.

Deping Li
	Deping Li is currently an assistant professor at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT, Shenzhen). He received his PhD in materials science and engineering from Shandong University under the supervision of Prof. Lijie Ci in 2019. His current research focuses on next-generation energy storage applications including lithium–air batteries, solid-state batteries, and Na/K-ion batteries.

Jingyu Lu
	Jingyu Lu is an assistant professor at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT, Shenzhen), Shenzhen. He obtained his bachelor, master, and PhD degrees from Northwestern Polytechnical University, HIT, and Nanyang Technological University, respectively. Then, he did his postdoc research at the National University of Singapore, Harvard University, and the University of Cambridge, before joining HIT (Shenzhen) in 2020. His research interests mainly include rechargeable batteries, in situ characterization techniques, and sensors.

Quan Gao
	Quan Gao is currently a university lecturer at Ningxia University. He received his PhD in materials science and engineering from Shandong University under the supervision of Prof. Chengguo Wang in 2021. His current research focuses on high-performance carbon fibers.

Lijie Ci
	Lijie Ci is currently a full professor at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT, Shenzhen). He received his PhD in mechanical engineering from Tsinghua University. He was a researcher at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ecole Central Paris in France, Max Planck Institute for Metals in Germany, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Rice University and Samsung Cheil Industry (San Jose Lab) in the USA. Before he joined HIT (Shenzhen), he was a full professor at Shandong University. His current scientific interest is focused on carbon-based materials and energy storage devices.

Broader context
Under the direction of the global carbon neutrality target, the development of highly efficient energy storage systems is critical. In this context, lithium metal is gradually being revived as the most promising anode with an ultra-high theoretical capacity of 3860 mA h g−1 and the lowest electrochemical potential of −3.04 V (vs. the standard hydrogen electrode). To match the lithium metal anode, batteries based on the redox chemistries of light elements are being explored, namely, lithium–sulfur batteries and lithium–air batteries, delivering theoretical energy densities of 2600 W h kg−1 and 3500 W h kg−1, respectively. However, these batteries face severe problems such as high overpotentials, sluggish kinetics and unsatisfactory cycling stability, exposing the inherent associations between redox chemistries and catalysts. Recently, single-atom catalysts (SACs) with fully exposed atom surfaces and extremely high catalytic activity have been attracting increasing attention as promising solutions for LABs and LSBs in both catalytic cathodes and lithium metal anodes. To this end, we offer this timely tutorial review for readers to quickly grasp the critical role of SACs in LABs and provide guidance on the development directions for the future.


 	Fig. 1  Advantages and application of SACs in LABs and other LMBs. Images have been reproduced with permission. Atomically dispersed cobalt catalyst. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. Covalent Organic Frameworks. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Co–N-Doped Carbon. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. SA-Co3O4 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. Adjacent Co Atoms on GO. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Li plating process on different electrodes. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Dendrite-tamed deposition kinetics (low and high dimensional deposition). Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. The image of SACs. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. Synergistic effect. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. Homogenizing Li2CO3 formation/decomposition. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Development and application of SACs. Reproduced with permission.25,45,49,57–66,75–89 Copyright 2011, 2013, 2020 and 2022 Springer Nature, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2017, 2018 and 2020 American Chemical Society, 2012, 2016, 2018, 2019 and 2021 Wiley-VCH, 2014 and 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2015, 2017, 2020 and 2022 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structure, synthetic strategies, and characterization techniques of single-atom catalysts. SACs images. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.	 
O2 + 2e− + 2Li+ ↔ Li2O2 (Eθ = 2.96 VLi)	(1)
O2 + e− + Li+ → LiO2	(2)
LiO2 + e− + Li+ → Li2O2 (surface pathway)	(3)
LiO2(sol) + LiO2(sol) → Li2O2 + O2 (solution pathway)	(4)
Li2O2 → O2 + 2Li+ + 2e−	(5)
Li2O2 → Li2−xO2 + xLi+ + xe−	(6)
Li2−xO2 → O2 + (2 − x)Li+ + (2 − x)e−	(7)
Li2−xO2 → LiO2 + (1 − x)Li+ + (1 − x)e−	(8)
LiO2 → O2 + Li+ + e−	(9)

 	Fig. 4  Mechanism and advantage of LOBs with SACs. (a) Working mechanism diagram of Li–O2 batteries. (b) The reaction pathways in non-aqueous LOBs. (c) Comparison before and after loading SACs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Pt SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the process for preparing CNHS and Pt–CNHS. (b) The initial discharge profiles of Pt–CNHS at different current densities. (c) Discharge/charge terminal voltages of CNHS and Pt–CNHS. DOS of (d) CNHS and (e) Pt–CNHS. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Ru SACs in LOBs. (a) Scheme of the formation of Ru SAs-NC on the flexible CC. (b) Normalized K-edge XANES and (c) K-edge FT-EXAFS in R space for Ru-foil, Ru(acac)3, Ru0.3SAs-NC, and Ru NPs-NC. (d) Initial deep discharge–charge curves of LOBs with the four kinds of electrodes at a current density of 0.02 mA cm−2. (e), Discharge–charge curves of Ru0.3SAs-NC electrodes with a fixed capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.02 mA cm−2 in the voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. (f) Gibbs free energy diagrams at 2.97 V for the discharge–charge reactions on the active surface of pyrolyzed ZIF-8, Ru0.1SAs-NC and Ru0.3SAs-NC. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of the Ru–N/rGO. (h) The initial galvanostatic discharge/charge curves of Ru–N/rGO and N/rGO at 100 mA g−1. (i) The initial galvanostatic discharge/charge curves of Ru–N/rGO and N/rGO electrodes at 100 mA g−1 with a capacity limit of 500 mA h g−1. (j) Cyclability and terminal voltages of Ru–N/rGO and N/rGO; the capacity limit is 500 mA h g−1. (k) The adsorption energies (ΔEads) of LiO2/Li2O2 adsorbed on N/rGO and Ru–N/rGO electrodes. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthesis and electrochemical performance of Pd SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the Pd SAs/NC catalyst. (b) Initial discharge/charge profiles of different cathodes at the current density of 500 mA g−1 and cut-off specific capacity of 500 mA h g−1. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of Pd SAs/NC at different stages. Inset is the corresponding equivalent circuit. (d) Voltage versus time curves of Li–O2 batteries based on different cathodes at a current density of 500 mA g−1 and cut-off specific capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. In situ differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) curves of the discharge process (e) and recharge process (f) of the Pd SAs/NC-based Li–O2 battery. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Characterization and electrochemical performance of Fe SACs in LOBs. (a) Normalized XANES of Fe/N/C-AP, -HT, and -AT with reference compounds at the Fe K-edge. (b) Magnitudes of k3-weighted Fourier-transform (phase-uncorrected) EXAFS data for Fe/N/C-AP, -HT, and -AT with some reference compounds. (c) Discharge/charge voltage profiles of Li–O2 cells using α-MnO2/XC-72 and Fe/N/C as cathode catalysts. (d) Load profiles of cells at first cycles. Fe/N/C and BP were used as cathode materials. The current was 0.05 mA with a duration of 5 h, corresponding to a capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1. (e) Cycling performance of cells with catalysts Fe/N/C and carbon black (BP) as cathode catalysts. The current was 0.05 mA with a duration of 5 h. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Cu SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Cu–NCNT. (b) TEM image. (c) Spherical aberration corrected HAAFD-STEM image of Cu–NCNT. (d) Galvanostatic discharge/charge curves at a current density of 200 mA g−1 under an upper-limit capacity of 500 mA h g−1. (e) EIS spectra of Li–O2 cells with Cu–NCNT at different discharge/charge stages under a current density of 200 mA g−1. (f) Cyclic performance of the Li–O2 cell with CNT, NCNT and Cu–NCNT at a current density of 200 mA g−1 with a capacity limitation of 500 mA h g−1. (g) Optimized structures of NCNT. (h) Top views of the deformation charge density diagrams for Cu–NCNT. (i and j) Top and side views of the deformation charge density diagrams for LiO2 on NCNT (i) and Cu–NCNT (j). (k and l) Calculated free energy diagrams for the discharge reactions on the active surface of NCNT (k) and Cu–NCNT (l). Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of several Co SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Co-Sas/N–C, Co-NPs/N–C and N–C catalysts. (b) The discharge–charge curves of Co-SAs/N–C, Co-NPs/N–C, and N–C electrodes at a current density of 200 mA g−1 under a capacity limitation of 1000 mA h g−1. (c) Discharge–charge profiles of the Co-SAs/N–C-based electrode with different cycles at 400 mA g−1. (d) Cycling stability and terminal discharge–charge voltages of the Co-SAs/N–C electrode at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (e) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of N–HP–Co SACs. The composition in the cell (left) and the synthesis procedures for the N–HP–Co SACs (right). (f) PXRD graphs of N–HP–Co NPs and Co-SACs. (g) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of N–HP–Co NPs and Co SACs at 77 K. BET: 80.5 cm3 g−1 with N–HP–Co NPs; 312.3 cm3 g−1 with N–HP–Co SACs. (h) CV curves. (i) Full-range rate performances of Li–O2 batteries at different current densities. (j) Voltage versus cycle number on the discharge terminal of the Li–O2 cells with commercial Pt/C and N–HP–Co SACs. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of the Co–N–C catalyst. (l) HAADF-STEM image (scale bar 2 nm). (m) N2 isothermal adsorption–desorption curves of Co–N–C. (n) pore distribution of Co–N–C. (o) Discharge load curves of Pt–C and Co–N–C. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of other Co SACs in LOBs. (a) A schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the ACoNC catalyst. (b) CV curves. (c) Initial discharge/charge profiles of the ACoNC electrode. (d) The cycling performance and the corresponding charge/discharge profiles of ACoNC and nano Co–NC catalyst. (e) The density of states (DOS) of different adsorbates on Co–N4 and the corresponding projected density of states (PDOS) of Co-3d. (f) Charge density differences of the different adsorbates LiO2 and Li2O2 on Co–N4. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2020, Engineered Science Publisher. (g) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process for single-atom cobalt anchored in porous N-doped hollow carbon spheres (CoSAs-NHCS). (h) Schematic illustration showing the synergistic effect of single-Co atom cathode materials and LiBr in Li–O2 batteries. (i) SEM image of the CoSAs-NHCS cathode at the state of charge (SoC) = 20%. (j) UV-vis spectrum of the TiO2SO4 complex prepared with different concentrations of H2O2 and the corresponding standard curve. (k) Terminal voltages and Coulombic efficiencies of the CoSAs-NHCS electrode with LiBr. (l) Galvanostatic discharge–charge voltage profiles of CoSAs-NHCS at 500 mA g−1, with and without LiBr. (m) The initial full discharge–charge curves of the CoSAs-NHCS electrode with and without LiBr. (n) Li2O2 yields of discharged/recharged cathodes obtained from the standard curve. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Se SACs in LOBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the SASe–Ti3C2 catalyst. Electrochemical performance of SASe–Ti3C2 and Ti3C2 electrodes. (b) CV curves of SASe–Ti3C2 and Ti3C2 electrodes at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 at a voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. (c) The initial deep discharge–charge curves of SASe–Ti3C2 and Ti3C2 electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (d) The discharge–charge profiles of the SASe–Ti3C2 electrode at various current densities ranging from 0.2 to 1.0 A g−1 at a capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. (e) Cycling stability and terminal discharge–charge voltages of the SASe–Ti3C2 electrode at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. DFT calculations and proposed mechanisms. (g) Optimized structure and the corresponding binding energy of LiO2 on SASe–Ti3C2. Calculated free energy diagrams for the ORR/OER reactions on the active surface of (f) Ti3C2 and (g) SASe–Ti3C2. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

Fe–N–C	∼0.39 wt%	—	Fe–C/N/O	0.8 V	—	>50 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1)	2012	
58

Pt–CNHS	∼0.77 wt%	g-C3N4 Nanosheets	Pt–C/N	1.04 V	17059.5 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	100 cycles (600 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1)	2019	
86

Ru SAs-NC	∼2.48 wt%	Porous carbon (N)	Ru–N4	0.55 V	13424 mA h g−1 (0.02 mA cm−2)	60 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 0.02 mA cm−2)	2020	
87

ACo–NC	∼1.50 wt%	Carbon	Co–N4	1.0 V	14075 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	340 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1)	2020	
159

N–HP–Co SACs	∼0.6 wt%	N-doped carbon	Co–N4	—	14777 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	261 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 400 mA g−1)	2020	
25

Co SAs/N–C	∼2.01 wt%	N-doped carbon	Co–N4	0.4 V	20105 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)	260 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 400 mA g−1)	2020	
22

Co–N–C	∼0.14 wt%	N-doped carbon	Co–N4	<1.3 V	—	>50 cycles (1 mA h cm2)	2020	
43

CoSAs-NHCS-LiBr	∼0.1 mg cm−2	N-doped carbon spheres	Co–N4	0.69 V	—	∼250 cycles (400 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)	2021	
49

Ru–N/rGO	∼2.42 wt%	N-rGO	Ru–N4	0.95 V	13500 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	100 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 500 mA g−1)	2021	
146

RuNC/CoSA-3DNG	∼1.73 wt%	rGO	Co–N4	1.19 V	25632 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	300 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)	2021	
161

Cu-NCNT	∼2.6 wt%	Carbon nanotube	Cu–N2C2	<1 V	7122 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)	104 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)	2021	
157

SASe–Ti3C2	∼4.99 wt%	Ti3C2 nanosheets	Se–C	1.1 V	17260 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	170 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)	2021	
88

NiSA-Co3O4/CC	∼1.01 wt%	Co3O4 nanosheets	NiSA–Co3O4	0.72 V	21442 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)	128 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 200 mA g−1)	2022	
44

Pd SAs/NC	∼1.87 wt%	N-doped Carbon Spheres	Pd–N4	∼0.5 V	>10000 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)	>60 cycles (1000 mA h g−1, 500 mA g−1)	2022	
152

Co–Nx SACs	∼0.89 wt%	N-doped carbon	Co–N3	0.15 V (ORR)	—	>3500 h (500 mA h g−1, 300 mA g−1)	2023	
109

Co–Nx SACs	∼0.85 wt%	N-doped carbon	Co–N4	0.03 V (ORR)	—	2519 h (500 mA h g−1, 300 mA g−1)	2023	
109

4Li + 3CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + C	(10)
2Li + 2CO2 → Li2CO3 + CO	(11)
2CO2 + 2e− → C2O42−	(12)
C2O42− → CO22− + CO2	(13)
C2O42− + CO22− → 2CO32− + C	(14)
CO32− + 2Li+ → Li2CO3	(15)
2Li2CO3 + C → 3CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e−	(16)
2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−	(17)
2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2− + 4Li+ + 3e−	(18)

 	Fig. 13  Mechanism and reaction pathways of LCBs with SACs. (a) Working mechanism diagram of Li–CO2 batteries. (b) The reaction pathways in rechargeable LCBs.	 

 	Fig. 14  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of Ru SACs in LCBs. (a) Illustration of the synthesis process of SA Ru–Co3O4/CC. Electrocatalytic performance evaluation of the various cathodes in Li–CO2 batteries. (b) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of CC, Co3O4/CC, and SA Ru–Co3O4/CC-based batteries, the scan rate is 0.1 mV s−1 (2.0–4.5 V). (c) Initial discharge/charge profiles of CC, Co3O4/CC, and SA Ru–Co3O4/CC at 100 mA g−1 under the limited discharge/charge capacities of 500 mA h g−1. (d) Full discharge profiles of CC, Co3O4/CC, and SA Ru–Co3O4/CC tested at 100 mA g−1. Study on the growth pathway of discharge product in the Li–CO2 battery. (e) Schematic illustrations of the working mechanism for the Co3O4/CC and SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathodes. Reproduced with permission.176 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performances of some non-precious metal SACs in LCBs. (a) Illustration of the synthesis process of Fe-ISA/N,S-HG. Electrocatalytic performance evaluation of the various cathodes in Li–CO2 batteries. (b) Full discharge/charge profiles of Fe-ISA/N,S-HG, Fe-ISA/N,S-G, and HGO-900 tested at 100 mA g−1. (c) Discharge/charge profiles of the Fe-ISA/N,S-HG electrode with a Li-protected anode. (d) Potential gap comparison for the Fe-ISA/N,S-HG-, Fe/N,S-HG-, Fe-ISA/N,S-G-, and HGO-900-based Li–CO2 batteries tested at current densities of 100 and 400 mA g−1, respectively. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e and f) Corresponding fittings of the EXAFS spectra of SA Co/GO and adjacent Co/GO in R space, respectively. The insets of (e) and (f) show the schematics of SA Co/GO and adjacent Co/GO, respectively (Co: blue, O: red, and; C: gray). (g) Galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of SA Co/GO, adjacent Co/GO, and Co nanoclusters/GO at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 (2.0–4.5 V). Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (h) Synthesis route and Working diagram of the Li–CO2 battery. (i) The cycle life of CuPPc-CNTs and O-CNTs at a current density of 200 mA g−1 under a cutoff capacity of 1000 mA g−1. (j) Discharge voltage of CuPPc-CNTs and O-CNTs at different current densities. (k) The charge difference and Bader charge of CuPPc-CNTs and O-CNTs. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 16  Synthesis, characterization and electrochemical performance of some non-precious metal SACs in LCBs. (a) Synthesis route and building blocks of TTCOF-Mn. (b) Charging/discharging curves of TTCOF-Mn with the limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1. (c) Overpotentials of different COF cathode catalysts under current densities of 100 mA g−1, 300 mA g−1, and 500 mA g−1. (d) Long-term cycling of the TTCOF-Mn cathode catalyst and TTCOF-2H cathode catalyst at a current density of 300 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. € Schematic illustration of the M1/N-rGO synthetic process. (f) Full-discharge voltage curves of N-rGO and M1/N-rGO (M = Fe, Co, or Ni) cathodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1. (g) Overpotential of N-rGO and M1/N-rGO at 200 mA g−1 and 400 mA g−1. (h) Cycling performance of N-rGO and M1/N-rGO at 400 mA g−1 with a cut-off capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (i) Corresponding EXAFS fitting curves of SACr@NG. (j) Discharge and charge voltage of the four cathodes at a current density of 100 μA cm−2 with a limited capacity of 100 μA h cm−2. (k) Gibbs free energy diagram of reaction pathways in Li–CO2 batteries at U = 2.85 V. Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

Co	∼5.3 wt%	Graphene oxide	Adjacent Co/GO	—	17358 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	>100 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 100 mA g−1)	2019	
45

Mn	∼4.11 wt%	Porphyrin	TTCOF-Mn	1.07 V (100 mA g−1)	13018 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	180 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 300 mA g−1)	2020	
42

Fe	∼0.7 wt%	N,S-codoped Holey Graphene	Fe-N4	1.17 V (100 mA g−1)	23174 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	>200 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 1 A g−1)	2020	
174

Cu	—	Topological defect-rich graphene	Cu–N4	2.27 V (2000 mA g−1)	—	125 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 1 A g−1)	2021	
179

Cu	∼3.97 wt%	Carbon Nanotubes	Cu–N4	1.64 V (1000 mA g−1)	18652.7 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	>160 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 200 mA g−1)	2021	
177

Ru	∼3.05 wt%	Co3O4 nanosheets carbon cloth	—	1.05 V (100 mA g−1)	30915 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	251 cycles (800 mA h g−1 200 mA g−1)	2021	
176

Fe	—	N-rGO	—	—	16835 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	>170 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 400 mA g−1)	2021	
175

Co	—	N-rGO	—	—	12134 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	75 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 400 mA g−1)	2021	
175

Ni	—	N-rGO	—	—	12393 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	150 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 400 mA g−1)	2021	
175

Cr	∼7.82 wt%	N-doped graphene	Cr–N4	1.39 V (100 μA cm−2)	—	350 cycles (100 μA cm−2)	2022	
180

Fe	∼0.3 wt%	Carbon	Fe–N4	0.81 V (100 mA g−1)	13238 mA h g−1 (200 mA g−1)	140 cycles (500 mA h g−1 200 mA g−1)	2022	
178

Cu	∼1.54 wt%	Nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers	Cu–N4	1.29 V (100 mA g−1)	14084 mA h g−1 (100 mA g−1)	133 cycles (1000 mA h g−1 400 mA g−1)	2022	
75

Ir	∼3.2 wt%	N-doped carbon nanotubes	Ir4+/N	<1.5 V (50 mA g−1)	—	>120 cycles (500 mA h g−1 50 mA g−1)	2022	
192


 	Fig. 17  The model of the Li–air battery and Li metal battery with SACs in catalyzing the cathode and regulating the lithium metal anode. (a) A model of the lithium–air battery. (b) A model of the single-atom catalyst. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) The model of lithium metal battery.	 

 	Fig. 18  Characterization and electrochemical performance of SACs regulation of the lithium metal anode. Long-term electrochemical cycling performance. (a) CE of CoNC, NGM, and Cu electrodes at a fixed capacity of 2.0 mA h cm−2. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Voltage profiles of the 10th, 50th, 100th, and 150th cycles of the SANi-NG electrode with a cycling capacity of 1.0 mA h cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2. (c) Voltage profiles of the 20th Li plating/stripping on SANi-NG (red line), PG (cyan line), and NG (olive line) electrodes with an areal capacity of 1.0 mA h cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) A series of optical microscopy images of dendrite growth on bare Cu, C@Cu, and FeSA-N–C@Cu with a deposition current of 3 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Electron density difference and surface binding energy of graphene, ZnSAs, and N-graphene. (f) Li migration pathways and barriers on ZnSAs. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) Cycle properties for symmetric cells with Zn–MXene–Li, MXene–Li, and Cu–Li anodes at 1 mA h cm−2. The inset diagram in (g) shows the selected stripping-plating curves of the Zn–MXene–Li anode from 1194 to 1200 h. (h) Rate capabilities of the Zn–MXene–Li anodes at various current densities (1–16 mA cm−2). Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

Co	∼0.4 wt%	N-G	Co–Nx	—	99.2% (2 mA cm−2)	400 cycles (2 mA cm−2, 2 mA h cm−2)	2018	
66

Fe	3 mg cm−2	N-doped carbon	Fe–Nx	0.8 mV	98.8% (1 mA cm−2)	200 cycles (1 mA cm−2, 1 mA h cm−2)	2019	
46

Ni	∼0.63 wt%	N-G	—	19 mV (0.5 mA cm−2)	98.45% (4 mA cm−2)	>250 cycles (0.5 mA cm−2, 1 mA h cm−2)	2019	
193

Pt	—	N-G	—	—	—	—	2019	
193

Cu	—	N-G	—	—	—	—	2019	
193

Zn	—	—	Zn–Nx	50 mV	98% (0.5 mA cm−2)	>100 cycles (500 mA h g−1, 100 mA g−1)	2019	
47

Zn	∼0.87 wt%	MXene (Ti3C2Clx)	—	11.3 ± 0.1 mV (0.05 mA cm−2)	—	1200 h (1 mA cm−2, 1 mA h cm−2)	2020	
76

Fe–Ni	∼1.6 wt%	CNT	—	25 mV	99.3%	450 cycles	2022	
195


	∼2.1 wt%	
	
	(3 mA cm−2)	(1 mA cm−2)	(3 mA cm−2, 3 mA h cm−2)	
	

Co	∼2.1 wt%	GO	Co–N/O	28.8 mV (1 mA cm−2)	98.6% (1 mA cm−2)	250 cycles (1 mA cm−2, 1 mA h cm−2)	2023	
196


 	Fig. 19  (a) Support and loading of the SACs shown in this article. The relationship between the active substance loading rate and the (b) battery cycle life, (c) overpotential of SACs and NPs. (d) Classification of all current SACs substrates.	 
Footnote
† Tiansheng Bai and Deping Li contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
