Recent insights into SnO 2 -based engineered nanoparticles for sustainable H 2 generation and remediation of pesticides  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NJ05808H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NJ05808H
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 4014-4048Recent insights into SnO2-based engineered nanoparticles for sustainable H2 generation and remediation of pesticides

        
          
            Bhawna
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Sanjeev 
            Kumar
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ritika 
            Sharma
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Akanksha 
            Gupta
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Adish 
            Tyagi
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Prashant 
            Singh
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Anup 
            Kumar
          
        
      g and 

        
          
            Vinod 
            Kumar
          
        
      *h
aDepartment of Chemistry, Kirori Mal College, University of Delhi, Delhi, India
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Delhi, Delhi, India
cDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Delhi, India
dDepartment of Chemistry, Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi, India. E-mail: akankshachem05@gmail.com
eChemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, India
fDepartment of Chemistry, Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, Delhi University, New Delhi, India
gSchool of Physics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
hSpecial Centre for Nano Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi, India. E-mail: kumarv@mail.jnu.ac.in
Received 
      6th December 2021
    , Accepted 21st January 2022First published on 21st January 2022AbstractDue to the ongoing industrial revolution, solar-driven water splitting and pesticide degradation are highly sought to cope with catastrophes such as depleting fossil reservoirs, global warming, and environmental degradation. The development of stable and efficient photocatalysts has been extensively attempted for past several decades. Herein, SnO2-based nanomaterials (NMs) have been extensively explored due to their higher stability and wide band gap semiconducting properties. Thus, this review summarizes the recent innovations made on SnO2-based NMs/electrodes/scaffolds for highly efficient photocatalytic water splitting and pesticide degradation based on the type of dopants, their nature, concentration, sensitizers, chemical additives, scavengers, etc., with the corresponding mechanistic aspects. The theoretical aspects of SnO2-based NMs have also been elaborated. Various trend-setting modifications such as band gap engineering, enhanced charge separation, and electron transfer with various SnO2-based NMs are discussed in light of the search for real-life photocatalysts.
1. Introduction
Energy and environment are the crucial areas throughout the world that demand immediate scientific attention. Global energy consumption and demands have significantly escalated over the past years owing to an exponential increase in population, urbanization, and industrialization. Although conventional fossil fuels have been extensively investigated to meet the energy demand, their implementation has led to the emission of CO2 and other greenhouse gases such as CH4 and NH3. They are known to cause detrimental effects on biodiversity and environment, leading to global warming. Therefore, there is a paucity of strategies that are beneficial for meeting today's energy demands and enhancing the development of renewable energy resources. The implementation of solar energy to enable photo-driven mechanisms has gained immense attention.1 Hence, promoted interest in photocatalytic energy production can provide a suitable alternative for fossil fuels. Nevertheless, this demands focused research and persistent innovation in solar cell efficiency, existing material modification, adoption of new H2 generation strategies, dye and pesticide degradation, and heavy metal removal from wastewater.2–7 Photocatalytic H2 generation using nanostructured materials is an attractive and demanding area of research, providing an opportunity to convert abundantly available photonic energy into usable chemical energy without harmful emissions and at an economical cost. Nanochemistry allows the utilization of inexpensive strategies to harvest sunlight by expeditiously capturing photon energy over a wide range of spectra.8 In addition, it also provides an avenue for pesticide degradation.9 Various materials such as perovskites, sulfides, graphene-based NMs, CdS, WO3, and TiO2 have been explored to harness abundant solar energy to catalyze water splitting and pesticide degradation.10–18 Reviews summarizing water splitting and pollutant degradation using perovskite oxide-based photocatalysts are available in the literature.1 Furthermore, graphene-based photocatalysts have attained utmost importance in photocatalytic reactions owing to their 2D layered structure and electronic properties.19 Literature reports N-doped CaTiO3 integrated with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and ternary nanocomposites of CaTiO3 with MoS2 fabricated on graphene nanosheets as an efficient photocatalyst for pesticide remediation and photocatalysis.20 Also, CaTiO3 with sulfur (S)-enriched MoS2 were fabricated on rGO via a facile hydrothermal approach, and showed enhanced photocatalytic performance with utilization in diverse applications.21 The resultant ternary complex shows enhanced photocatalytic performance owing to reduced charge recombination, high surface area, and increases H2 generation.20,21 On this note, there is a diverse array of literature that is available on various materials associated with photocatalytic degradation and environmental remediation. However, due to interesting physicochemical properties, SnO2 nanoparticles (NPs) have always garnered particular interest in industrial and photocatalytic applications.22,23
The methodology of SnO2-based NPs as a photocatalyst is economical and simple to perform. Further, photocatalytic reaction mediated by SnO2-based NPs is among the cogent mechanisms as an efficient photocatalyst to harness solar energy with potent applications in organic pollutant degradation. This strategy is much more appealing due to the abundant and renewable nature of sunlight. To date, several photocatalysts such as TiO2 and ZnO have been intensively investigated for their photocatalytic ability.24 The present review critically highlights photocatalytic water splitting for the evolution of H2 and O2 utilizing SnO2-based NMs such as doped and heterostructured NPs, and the mechanistic aspects of pollutant degradation as well as industrial utilization. The choice of SnO2 over TiO2 is considered because of its less toxicity, cost effectiveness, and wide band gap; however, no comprehensive review on SnO2 with insights into photocatalytic H2 generation and environmental remediation is available to the best of our knowledge.24 Therefore, addressing this knowledge gap is important for the development of a sustainable society.
Literature provides promising prospects of SnO2-based NMs in energy and environmental science. The significance of SnO2 can be accessed from the reviews focusing on the significance of SnO2 in perovskite solar cells (PSC), transparent conductors, electrochemical, and gas sensors.25–29 In a recent review, the photocatalytic performance of SnO2 such as organic pollutant degradation, CO2 and Cr(VI) reduction, purification of air, and sterilization has been discussed along with the basic aspects of photocatalytic improvement strategies.30 However, to the best of our knowledge, the photocatalytic aspects of SnO2 nanostructures with special reference to water splitting and pesticide degradation have been summarized for the first time; thus, a pivotal motive of this review is to give a comprehensive outline of the recent advances in water splitting and pesticide degradation via modified SnO2.31–33
1.1 Photocatalytic hydrogen generation
Fossil reservoirs are currently the primary energy sources and are depleting at a fast pace due to population expansion and increased energy demands.34 Hydrogen as a ‘synfuel’ has been considered as a clean and sustainable energy source with a high heat of combustion globally.35–38 Some H2 production methods, such as steam methane reforming method and coal gasification, are fossil fuel-dependent and generate CO2 along with H2 at high temperature and pressure, and hence, are not a long-lasting solution.39,40 Therefore, it is of utmost importance to use renewable resources for H2 production. One such reliable and environment-friendly method is to generate H2 through solar-driven processes such as photothermochemical, photobiological, photoelectrochemical, and photocatalytic approaches (Fig. 1).41–46 In photothermochemical water splitting, large solar concentrators are established to facilitate solar energy.
 Fig. 1  Different solar energy-based approaches for H2 generation. 
In photobiological water splitting, enzymes are used for the production of hydrogen.47 Photocatalytic or photoelectrochemical water splitting utilizes solar energy and produces H2 on the surface of the catalyst. They are the most promising alternatives to address the environmental and energy crisis. In these methods, omnipresent primary sources, such as water and solar energy, exhibit no adverse effects.48 Moreover, the emission of greenhouse gases is zero, which is a crucial issue in H2 production from fossil fuels.49,50 Photocatalytic water splitting has been considered a potential way for the utilization of solar energy to produce sustainable energy sources.51–54
H2 generation ability using photocatalytic materials has been explored since 1972. Fujishima and Honda first carried out water decomposition using a photoelectrochemical cell, comprising of an n-type TiO2 anode and a Pt cathode.55 Henceforth, numerous photocatalysts have been established for highly stable water splitting reactions.56–59 Shudo et al. reported the photocatalytic reaction of rGO and transition metal hybrids for H2 generation.60 Zhang et al. studied water splitting using the Pt/g-C3N4 photocatalyst without sacrificial reagents,61 while Liu et al. discussed water splitting on silicon nanowires.62 In contrast, Kudo et al. investigated water splitting on tantalate photocatalysts for H2 and O2 evolution, wherein NiO/NaTaO3:La tantalate photocatalyst was reported to show the highest activity over the others.63
Photocatalytic water splitting mechanism utilizing semiconductor nanostructured materials involves the following steps: excitation of electrons from the low energy valence band (VB) to the high energy conduction band (CB) when irradiated with light energy that is equal to or greater than the semiconductor band gap, leading to photogenerated electron–hole pair formation. The next step involves charge separation; afterward, the photogenerated carriers are transferred, and finally, the surface reacts with water to produce H2 and O2 gases (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  The mechanism of the photocatalytic water splitting reaction. 
Therefore, photocatalytic materials must fulfill the following requirements: (1) having an appropriate band structure promoting charge separation, (2) the VB of the semiconductor must be more positive than the oxidation potential of water (+1.23 eV) to produce O2 and the CB must be more negative than the reduction potential of water to produce H2 (0.0 V), (3) must be stable in an aqueous medium when irradiated with light, and (4) must exhibit stability against photocorrosion, and must be structurally stable after prolonged application. These critical factors in the photocatalytic splitting of water determines suitable semiconducting nanostructures that can capture light and generate electron–hole pairs. However, there is always the possibility of the rapid recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, thus significantly affecting the efficiency. Hence, to minimize the recombination of charge carriers, dopants, composite materials, heterostructures, and sacrificial agents are employed.
Similarly, the primary mechanism behind photoelectrochemical water splitting (PEC) plays a crucial role to convert solar energy into an efficient fuel, dihydrogen. The mechanism involves the immersion of photovoltaic materials into an electrolyte containing the redox couple. One of the semiconducting materials of the redox couple is photosensitive, which absorbs light on exposure. Semiconductor photocatalysts on capturing light carry out reduction and oxidation processes. Additional voltage to carry out the redox reactions at the electrodes is provided by an electric current. On the absorption of photons, electron excitation takes place from the photoelectrodes to generate the electron–hole pairs. Fig. 3 shows a simple diagram to explain the redox reactions taking place in photoelectrochemical water splitting reactions.
 Fig. 3  A simple representation of photoelectrochemical water-splitting reaction. 
1.2 Pesticide degradation
Population, industrialization, civilization, agricultural, and domestic activities pollute surface and ground waters. Among several pollutants, high amounts of pesticides, fluoride, arsenic, cadmium, lead, and other heavy metals have been reported in ground and surface waters across the world.64–66 High input levels of fertilizers, growth promoters, or pesticides are heavily used in agriculture for crop production. Being non-biodegradable, they get bioaccumulated and severely affect human health. They pollute water bodies and groundwater resources through leaching, runoffs, open disposal of used containers, etc., from agricultural fields.67
Researchers have made significant investigations from various disciplines to address pesticide removal from water and food.68 Various kinds of physical, chemical, and biological strategies have already been reported in the literature to remove pesticides.69–72 These methods include adsorption,73,74 filtration,75,76 chemical precipitation,77,78 oxidation,79,80 and photocatalytic degradation.81–83 Among these, photocatalytic degradation is an efficient method for pesticide excision.84 It involves degradation via light absorption through a direct or indirect mechanism. In direct photodegradation, a light absorber rearranges or cleaves some bonds to form a stable product. In indirect photodegradation, light is absorbed by photosensitizers such as lignin, Cu(II), O2, and NO3, and is transferred to produce reactive intermediates for degradation.85 The photogenerated positive holes in the VB oxidize surface-adsorbed H2O or surface hydroxyl groups (OH) to generate hydroxyl radical (˙OH). At the same time, the electrons in the CB contribute to the formation of superoxide radicals (O2˙−) by reducing molecular oxygen. The generated ˙OH can oxidize organic compounds and eventually carry out mineralization. Hence, these reactive radicals decompose pesticides into less toxic substances without secondary pollution (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Species formed during photocatalytic pesticide degradation in aqueous solution.81,86 
Pesticide transformation into less toxic substances occurs through the formation of intermediate species. Hence, it is necessary to detect and identify these intermediates to conclude whether or not these intermediates are harmful. NMs play a crucial role in detecting and destroying pesticides.87 The mechanism for the degradation of few pesticides is explained below.
Mills et al. proposed a simple mechanism to identify intermediates for the photocatalytic degradation of pentachlorophenol (PCP) using TiO2. The degradation mechanism involves the formation of semiquinone radical by the attack of an ˙OH radical at the para position of PCP, which is further disproportionated to give p-chloranil and tetrachlorohydroquinone as the transformed products (Fig. 5).88
 Fig. 5  Mechanism showing the formation of p-chloranil and tetrachlorohydroquinone. 
Tomašević et al. described the photo-Fenton degradation pathway for insecticide methomyl in water (Fig. 6). The photocatalytic degradation of methomyl using Fe-ZSM-5 occurs in 30 min results from ion chromatography showed the formation of CO2, H2O, and other inorganic ions, but no intermediates were detected.
 Fig. 6  3-D representation of the reaction showing the degradation of methomyl using Fe-ZSM-5. 
Tamimi et al. proposed the photocatalytic degradation pathway for pesticide methomyl using TiO2 (Fig. 6 and 7), and the degradation steps involve converting methomyl into CO2.89
 Fig. 7  Photocatalytic degradation pathway of methomyl using TiO2. 
In a nutshell, a suitable band gap possessing the semiconducting material that can absorb photons to generate reactive species is a must to assist pesticide degradation. Graphene-based NMs are very well known in the field of toxic substance removal from water. A review by Kommu et al. presents graphene-based materials for the removal of contaminants from wastewater.90 To meet the energy crisis and pesticide degradation for environmental remediation, SnO2-based NMs are considered as an immediate choice owing to their variable band gap nature.
2. SnO2: an obvious choice and unique characteristics
So far, various metal oxides have been investigated for photocatalytic reactions.12 TiO2 is the most commonly known semiconductor used for photocatalytic reactions. However, it absorbs only in the UV region of the visible spectrum (200–400 nm), thus limiting its photocatalytic performance. Apart from TiO2, other photocatalysts such as ZnO, WO3, Fe2O3, CuO, and CoO have also been reported for photocatalytic reactions. However, they also have certain drawbacks. For instance, ZnO significantly undergoes photocorrosion when irradiated for electron excitation from the VB.91 Also, it is unstable in aqueous solutions.92 On the other hand, WO3 has lower energy conversion efficiency due to relatively low reduction potential, limiting its use as a photocatalyst.93 Moreover, the CB level of WO3 is low; therefore, it is known mainly for O2 evolution and not for H2 evolution. Similarly, CoO is reported to have a short half-life and faster deactivation, makes it less favorable for photocatalytic reactions. Besides the above-mentioned metal oxides, SnO2 possesses the characteristics necessary for a photocatalyst to work under UV-visible light irradiation and, at the same time, makes up for the limitations encountered with oxides such as ZnO and CoO.
SnO2 is a significantly stable oxide and an n-type wide band gap (3.6 eV) semiconductor. Due to environmental compatibility and versatile functionality, it has a plethora of applications such as gas sensors, water splitting reactions to generate energy, electrocatalysts, anodes in Li-ion batteries and storage, electrodes in dye-sensitized solar cells, and organic pollutant degradation.32,94–98 In comparison, nanocrystalline SnO2 exhibits excellent physical, chemical, optical, magnetic, and conducting properties. Hence, researchers are making considerable efforts to develop SnO2 with variations in the structural arrangements such as nanofibers, nanowires, nanorods, and nanosheets.99–103 In addition, SnO2 is cheap and non-toxic; hence, it could be an essential photocatalyst for carrying out chemical reactions in the presence of solar energy. It demonstrates excellent chemical stability over a range of pH, different solvents, higher temperature range, and is therefore used for the removal and degradation of toxic dyes and organic pollutants from wastewater.104,105
SnO2 crystallizes in the rutile structure (direct energy band gap, 3.6 eV) (Fig. 8), possesses tetragonal symmetry, and adopts the P42/mnm (D144h) space group, with a = b = 4.755 Å and c = 3.199 Å.106 The crystal structure of SnO2 is a slightly distorted octahedra with six coordination from oxygen ions in the vicinity of the central Sn(IV) metal ion. Fig. 9 shows the rutile SnO2 structure as seen in different orientations. The SnO2 VB originates from the mixing of O 2p-orbital and Sn 5s- and 5p-orbitals, while the CB comprises mostly of the 5s-orbital.
 Fig. 8  Crystal structure of rutile SnO2. 
 Fig. 9  Rutile SnO2 in different orientations. 
2.1 Photocatalytic SnO2: barriers and defect chemistry
As stated previously, SnO2 stability along with a suitable band structure largely favors its use as a photocatalyst. Some inherent features of SnO2 need modification before their utilization as an efficient photocatalyst. For example, the wide band gap of a material only absorbs UV light, which is a small portion of sunlight. Furthermore, photogenerated electrons and holes in SnO2 are short-lived and can recombine readily, which tremendously affects its photocatalytic performance.
Several attempts have been made to enhance the photocatalytic performance and visible-light response of SnO2, including noble metal loading, ion doping, composite semiconductors, and heterojunctions. A few have proved to be very useful in increasing H2 evolution and degradation of pesticides. Modified SnO2 is better than pure SnO2 in terms of reduced charge recombination rates, improved light-harvesting efficiency, increased rate of electron transfer, and more defects and OVs, resulting in enhanced photocatalytic behavior.95,106–108
Introducing defects results in enhanced optical, electrical, and catalytic characteristics such as light absorption in the visible region and higher photoluminescence.109 Predominantly, the defects in metal oxides are lattice point defects. They are associated with cation or OVs and correlate with the preparation methods. One of the methods that results in OVs and metal interstitials is thermal treatment with hydrogen. In this method, hydrogen interacts with lattice oxygen and abstracts it from the lattice position, giving surface OVs.110 Another method to generate OVs is either by doping or by changing oxygen ion concentration. Doping the lattice with metal or non-metal ionic species is considered to be a preferential method for generating OVs. For example, when SnO2 is doped with a lower valence cation, it facilitates OVs formation.111 Similarly, anion doping such as N doping introduces substantial OVs in the SnO2 lattice.112 SnO2 is an n-type semiconductor as the impurities create filled states near the CB level in its band gap region.113 OVs are generated on the surface of metal oxides by substituting oxygen from their lattice sites. When in-plane oxygen and bridge oxygen are missing from their respective sites, then these defects are defined as in-plane OV and bridge OV. The vacancy formation energy can be calculated using the following equation.EOV = Edefect − Eperfect + 1/2Eoxywhere Edefect, Eperfect, and Eoxy are the energy of defected SnO2 surface, energy of the perfect SnO2 surface, and the chemical potential value of oxygen molecule calculated in the triplet state, respectively. The EOV values for bridging OV, in-plane OV, OV on top of 2nd layer, bridging vacancy in 2nd layer, and in-plane OV in 2nd layer are 1.92, 3.32, 2.87, 3.37, and 4.09 eV, respectively.114 Bridging OV has the lowest vacancy formation energy; hence, it is easy to detach the oxygen from the bridge site. Each bridging OV generates five-coordinate corresponding Sn atom on the surface of SnO2 (Fig. 10).115 When the ideal surface is heated above ∼500 K, it leads to the loss of bridge oxygen to form bridge OV. However, when the temperature is above ∼750 K, it leads to a loss of in-plane oxygen and forms in-plane OV.116,117
 Fig. 10  (a) Possible structure of SnO2, (b) bridging-oxygen vacancy, (c) in-plane oxygen vacancy, (d) oxygen vacancy on top of the 2nd layer, (e) bridging vacancy in the 2nd layer, and (f) in-plane oxygen vacancy in the 2nd layer. Oxygen, tin atoms, and oxygen vacancies are represented with red, dark grey, and yellow balls, respectively. Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. All rights reserved.115 
Both type of OVs are almost invisible and elusive, and affect the electrical conductivity and atomic structure of metal oxide NPs along with intrinsic physical or chemical properties.106,118–120 It also narrows the band gap and enhances the conductivity of the semiconductor. In-plane OVs rapidly enhance the surface conductivity of semiconductors than bridging OVs.117
Wang et al. demonstrated an excellent gas sensing behavior of SnO2–rGO hybrids toward one ppm NO2 with a response of 3.80 due to increased OVs.121 Kamble et al. reported band gap narrowing in SnO2 NPs due to the OVs' deep donor bands, created by the combustion method.122 Kumar et al. synthesized OV-engineered leaf-templated CaTiO3 materials for photocatalytic H2 generation reactions and demonstrated through various spectroscopic techniques that OVs play an important role in boosting the photocatalytic performance. Therefore, OV formation in the engineered material is of great importance as it influences the photocatalytic performance. The optimum OV sites are responsible for a larger surface area and prevents the recombination of charge carriers.123 In contrast, SnO2 OVs are generated due to charge compensation by the transfer of electrons by reducing Sn4+ to Sn2+ ions.113 Zhang et al. provided an in-depth cognizance of OVs role in designing defective ceria oxide for photocatalytic water oxidation.118 Yang et al. explained increased width of VB and narrowed the band gap of SnO2 NPs, facilitating efficient charge transfer and separation.124 DFT calculations found that OVs in rutile SnO2 affect the overlap of the new valence state with the VB edge. Hence, SnO2 having defects was found to have a narrower band gap to 2.4 eV due to the widened VB, consequently enhancing the light harvesting efficiency. Interestingly, by tuning the size and shape of SnO2 NPs, the optimized electronic structure can be accessed and hence better photocatalytic performance is achieved over pure SnO2.125
2.2 Synthesis of nanostructured SnO2
Altering the shape and size could lead researchers to customize several properties that the material exhibit: (1) chemical, (2) mechanical, (3) electronic, and (4) magnetic properties. Moving toward nanodimensions would often lead to undetermined characteristics about the material and would open whole new possibilities for various applications in different fields.126,127 In the case of SnO2, the atomic distribution and defects created can alter the surface energy and based on it, the surface area and energy could be enhanced to several orders of magnitude at nanodimensions.128 Few synthetic methods involve the thin film deposition of materials onto the substrate by physical means (physical vapor deposition method), whereas other methods involve electrically charged polymeric solution to make a loop through the bending of the fiber. The formation of ultrathin nanofibers takes place, exhibiting a range of properties, which differentiates them to form 1-D nanostructures.128,129
The performance of nanostructured SnO2 can be tuned by different synthetic strategies: (1) wet chemical route, (2) microwave-assisted method, (3) thermal deposition, (4) physical vapor deposition (PVD) method, (5) electrospinning method, (6) spray pyrolysis method, and (7) chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. Several widely used synthetic methods were discussed briefly, as depicted in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of widely employed methods for the synthesis of NMs. 

1. Wet chemical route. 
High purity catalysts are synthesized using wet chemical route, which includes sol–gel and co-precipitation methods. These are simple, economical, and low-temperature procedures. Kumar et al. reported the one-pot wet chemical synthesis to obtain SnO2 NPs by tin precursor in methanol solvent with H2O2 and for Ce-doped SnO2 NPs, cerium precursor was added into the same reaction mixture.106 There are several methods based on wet chemical synthesis: (1) sol–gel method, (2) nucleation and oriented attachment method, (3) hydro/solvothermal method, (4) self-assembly and micelles, and (5) electrodeposition method.128 Few of these methods are described briefly.
(a) Sol–gel method. 
In sol–gel processing, oxide materials are prepared at room temperature and have immense potential to produce thin-film coating, advanced ceramic powders, etc.128 The sol–gel method proceeds in five key steps; firstly, metal alkoxide solution is prepared by hydrolysis. Secondly, metal-oxide linkages are formed by condensation; then aging continues to produce structural changes and after drying, left residues are removed by thermal treatment.130Fig. 12 depicts the schematics of sol–gel processing, wherein a precursor's solution is prepared by dissolving the necessary salt into an appropriate solvent and stirred continuously for a few hours to produce the desired (NPs).
 Fig. 12  Schematic overview of the sol–gel processing method for the synthesis of NPs. 
Aziz et al. studied the size-controlled synthesis of SnO2 NPs. Tin chloride dihydrate was used as a tin precursor in polyethylene glycol (PEG). They identified the importance of PEG's molecular weight with calcination temperature in controlling the NPs’ size.131 Nanocomposites such as binary Zn–Sn oxides,132 SnO2-dispersed carbon matrix composites,133 ZnO–SnO2 nanocomposites,134 and metal-doped ZnO–Zn2SnO4–SnO2 nanocomposites135 have been prepared by the sol–gel approach. Gao et al. has developed SnO2-dispersed carbon matrix composites via sol–gel processing, exhibiting potential application in Li-ion batteries. The SnO2/Sn/C nanocomposite was formed at temperatures higher than 900 °C. Also, they observed an increase in the carbon content with increasing calcination temperature.133 Hamrouni et al. fabricated a ZnO–SnO2 nanocomposites using the sol–gel method, which possess high photocatalytic degradation efficiency of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) upon irradiation, as an attribute of enhanced charge separation among the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and energy difference in the CB and VB levels.134
Masjedi-Arani and Salavati-Niasari synthesized metal-doped ZnO–Zn2SnO4–SnO2 nanocomposites to study the photocatalytic performance with the use of eosin Y (anionic dye) under UV-light irradiation. They reported the highly efficient photocatalytic property of the Co-doped ZnO–Zn2SnO4–SnO2 nanocomposite prepared using the sol–gel method. Their results demonstrated that Mn-, Co-, and Cu-doped nanocomposites possess uniformity and spherical morphology with an average size of 20–110 nm.135 Ahmed et al. synthesized a novel AgIO4/SnO2 heterojunction via sol–gel method for photocatalytic H2 generation with size in the range of 32–41 nm and the tetragonal shape of pure SnO2 NPs with cavities throughout the matrix. The TEM images reveal the uniform distribution of AgIO4 onto SnO4, with size in the range of 17–25 nm and NPs bridging with each other (Fig. 13).136
 Fig. 13  TEM images of SnO2 and SnAg5 (5% w/w AgIO4/SnO2) prepared through the sol–gel route (© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).136 
(b) Hydrothermal or solvothermal method. 
This method involves the preparation of ultra-fine advanced size (NPs) using autoclaves under controlled temperature and pressure. The mechanism involves the preparation of the precursor solution, which is autoclaved and then incubated in a hydrothermal oven to produce the desired (NMs) (Fig. 14). Liu et al. reported a one-pot facile hydrothermal strategy for the fabrication of the SnO2/BiOBr heterojunction, where BiOBr nanosheets were arranged irregularly with length and width of 200 nm and 150 nm, respectively, and SnO2 NMs were uniformly anchored onto the nanosheets,137 whereas Ni et al. synthesized the SnO2–MoS2 composite heterostructure at a temperature of 230 °C, where the diameter of MoS2 in the composite was 100–200 nm, which was lesser in pure MoS2. As a result, with the decrease in the MoS2 content, the SnO2 content increases, leading to the formation of agglomerates. This is important because the MoS2 nanosheet number influences the photocatalytic performance.138
 Fig. 14  Schematic overview of the hydrothermal/solvothermal method for the synthesis of NPs. 
SnO2-Based NMs such as SnO2–α Fe2O3 heterostructures (200 nm),139 Zn-doped SnO2 nanoparticles (3.70 nm),140 SnO2–ZnS nanocomposite (∼65 nm),141 and SnO2@ZnO (∼1 μm) hierarchical nanostructures142 have been prepared by this technique. Song et al. developed the hierarchical Mn3O4@SnO2/Co3O4 nanoshell using a facile hierarchical arrangement, in which the Mn3O4 nanorods enclose the SnO2/Co3O4 nanosheets and demonstrate enhanced ability to perform O2 generation. The SEM images (Fig. 15a and c) reveal the homogenous distribution of the enclosed SnO2/Co3O4 nanosheets with thickness and length of about 50 nm and 400 nm, respectively. The TEM images (Fig. 15b and d) demonstrate the Mn3O4@SnO2/Co3O4 nanoshell.143 Bao et al. reported the fabrication of flower-like SnO2 with g-C3N4via the hydrothermal method to enhance the photocatalytic activity. The flower-like SnO2 uniformly grow on the surface of the layer structured g-C3N4, which enhanced the surface area of the nanocomposite (Fig. 16).144 Also, SnO2 was fabricated on the g-C3N4 nanosheet by Pham et al. to show excellent photocatalytic efficiency via the S-scheme process and the fabrication was confirmed by HRTEM, as shown in Fig. 17.145
 Fig. 15  Mn3O4@SnO2/Co3O4 core–shell nanostructure: (a and c) SEM images and (b and d) TEM images (© 2019 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).143 
 Fig. 16  The synthetic process of flower-like SnO2–g-C3N4. Copyright © 2021 Wiley Online Library. All rights reserved (© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH).144 
 Fig. 17  (a) Synthetic process of g-C3N4/SnO2 and (b) HRTEM image of g-C3N4/SnO2 (Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. All rights reserved).145 


2. Microwave-assisted method. 
Microwave-assisted method involve microwave radiations as the energy source. This method has the advantages of rapid and selective heating; therefore, it is highly useful for the synthesis of NPs (Fig. 18). Wang et al. used SnCl2·2H2O and PdCl2 as tin and palladium sources to synthesize Pd/SnO2 hierarchical structures, respectively, via a microwave-assisted hydrothermal method.146 Kim et al. prepared graphene–SnO2 nanocomposites (diameter 5–200 nm) through a microwave-assisted technique that possess potential application in gas sensors.147 Some of the SnO2-based materials that have been synthesized through the microwave-assisted method are SnO2–rGO nanocomposites and ultrathin SnO2 nanosheets with particle size of thickness less than 5 nm, and exhibit potential application in Li-ion batteries,148 SnO2 nanosheets with thickness and length of 20–25 nm and 270 nm, respectively,149 and g-C3N4/SnO2 nanocomposites are a potent photoactive material in water splitting.150
 Fig. 18  Schematic overview of the synthesis of graphene–SnO2 nanocomposites by microwave assisted method (Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society).147 


3. Thermal deposition method. 
Thermal deposition occurs in a tube furnace, where powdered materials are vapor condensed at conditions such as temperature and pressure.151–153 To form nanostructured materials, several steps are followed: (1) formation of evaporant at the source, (2) evaporant transport to the substrate, and (3) condensation onto the substrate to synthesize the desired NMs.128 To customize the nanostructure, specific parameters are to be considered, such as kinetic energy, flow rate, and scattering of gas.154 The state, composition, defect, and crystal structure can determine the properties of the material. This method helps researchers to develop 1-D nanostructures at ease.155 Sun et al. developed a novel SnO2/Pt/In2O3 Z-scheme photocatalytic system, using In2O3 as the substrate, which was loaded with noble Pt (a bridging element used for electron) and further cladding of SnO2 onto the surface of Pt/In2O3 (Fig. 19).156
 Fig. 19  Schematic overview of the synthetic process of the SnO2/Pt/In2O3 material (© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).156 
Mallikarjuna et al. developed a C-doped with SnO2via the thermal decomposition method, possessing high photocatalytic water splitting ability. Fig. 20 depicts the TEM images of the 30 wt% C-doped SnO2 nanostructures, where those with 60–80 nm size are polyhedral in shape and those with ∼15 nm are spherical NPs. With decreasing size, the surface-to-volume ratio increases and the atomic sites is observed. Therefore, small-sized NPs are beneficial for sensing or catalytic applications.157
 Fig. 20  Different magnification TEM images of the optimized carbon-doped SnO2 sample (a) 100 nm, (b) 20 nm, and (c) lattice planes (© 2020 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).157 


4. Spray pyrolysis method. 
In spray pyrolysis, the formed micro-sized droplets are sprayed onto the substrate via aerosol, followed by evaporation and condensation.158 Factors controlling the morphology, deposition, and thickness are (1) deposition temperature and (2) droplet size.128 This method is conventionally used for the deposition of films for metal oxides, including SnO2, due to its cost-effectiveness, coverage of more surface area, and mass production.128,159,160 Kim et al. showed carbon nanotube (CNT) as a promising material for water splitting. They developed the Zn2SnO4/SnO2/CNT nanocomposite using supersonic cold-spray deposition with enhanced performance of the photoanode for water splitting by the photoelectrochemical method. The TEM images reveal the uniform distribution of SnO2 and Zn2SnO4 NPs across the bamboo-like CNT (Fig. 21a and b).12
 Fig. 21  Structure of the Zn2SnO4/SnO2/CNT nanocomposite: (a) TEM image and (b) HRTEM image (© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).12 


5. Chemical vapor deposition method. 
This method involves the deposition of solid substances in the vapor form onto a substrate surface through chemical reactions. The interaction between the substance with the substrate must establish string binding for nucleation and desired nanostructure growth. Further, CVD can be categorized into several classes: (1) metal–organic, (2) low pressure, (3) atomic layer, (4) plasma-enhanced, and (5) atmospheric pressure plasma.128 Yu et al. employed the CVD method to prepare the SnO2/TiO2 heterostructure with a thickness of 810 nm.161 Zhang et al. synthesized high yields of SnO2 nanobelts by water-assisted CVD technique. The belt-like morphology of SnO2 showing the tetragonal rutile phase and length of 10 microns were prepared at 850 °C.162 TiO2/SnO2 nanocomposites (particle thickness of 40–70 nm)163 and Sb-doped SnO2 thin films (particle size in the range of 100–200 nm)164 have been prepared by the aerosol-assisted CVD method.
A brief discussion on photocatalytic water splitting and pesticide degradation or absorption using modified SnO2 will be discussed later in the review.

2.3 Factors affecting photocatalytic activity
Photodegradation and photocatalytic water splitting by a photocatalyst depend on external parameters such as amount of catalyst, temperature, pH, contaminant concentration, intensity of light, and surface area. The following parameters are discussed.
(1) Amount of the catalyst: the photocatalytic degradation efficiency is initially enhanced by the addition of the catalyst until an optimum amount of the catalyst is reached. After that, the degradation efficiency steadily decreases. The increase in the degradation corresponds to the enhanced surface area of the catalyst in solution. However, beyond an optimum concentration, the turbidity in the solution is increased, which restricts the light transmission in the solution and decreases the degradation efficiency as only the surface particles of the catalyst remain photocatalytically active.165,166 Mohanta et al. performed the degradation of clothianidin using different concentrations of doped SnO2, i.e., 1.0 to 5.0 mg L−1. An increase in the degradation efficiency was obtained when the catalyst's concentration was increased up to 3.0 mg L−1. However, on further increasing the catalyst amount, the efficiency decreases up to 5.0 mg L−1 catalyst due to the enhancement in the turbidity of the pesticide solution (Fig. 22a).167 The degradation of fenamiphos contaminant is checked using different amounts of the TiO2 catalyst (50 mg L−1 to 250 mg L−1) by Fenoll et al. The optimum amount for the degradation of fenamiphos was found to be 100 mg L−1 as after that, the extent of degradation declined.168
 Fig. 22  (a) Effect of concentration of the catalyst dose, (b) concentration of clothianidin, and (c) pH on the photocatalytic degradation efficiency (Copyright © 2020 Elsevier. All rights reserved).167 
(2) The concentration of the contaminant: basically, the photodegradation efficiency declines with an increase in the concentration of the contaminant.169 This behavior is attributed to the absorption of light by the organic dyes, which results in the shrinking of the available light radiations to activate the photocatalyst. Moreover, the organic dyes occupy the photocatalyst surface; in turn, fewer active sites are available for photodegradation.170,171 Mohanta et al. performed degradation using doped SnO2 for different concentrations of clothianidin (0.1 mg L−1 to 1.5 mg L−1). When the concentration of clothianidin was enhanced from 0.1 mg L−1 to 1.5 mg L−1, the degradation performance declined (Fig. 22b).167 Khodami et al. checked the photodegradation efficiency of the ZnO/SnO2/nanoclinoptilolite catalyst by degrading 4-methylbenzoic acid (MBA) and 2-chloro-5-nitrobenzoic acid (CNBA). The experiment was performed for 2–20 mg L−1 concentration of both the contaminants. The photodegradation efficiency was increased up to 5 mg L−1; after that, the efficiency toward both the contaminants decreases with increasing the pesticide concentration.172
(3) Effect of pH: the photodegradation efficiency is dependent on the pH value of the solution. Mostly, low pH values are considered to be favorable for the photodegradation of pollutants.173 The interaction of organic pollutants with the photocatalyst is enhanced in a slightly acidic medium, improving the photodegradation activity. But when the pH value is below a definite threshold, the photodegradation efficiency declines significantly.174 Abdullah et al. stated that photodegradation is enhanced when the pH of the reaction mixture lies between the pKa value of the organic acid and the pH of point zero charges (pHzpc) of the nanocomposite. This generates electrostatic interaction of the deprotonated acid with the positively charged surface of the photocatalyst.175 This is confirmed by Mohanta et al., who performed the experiment to degrade clothianidin using Au@SnO2/rGO nanocomposite at different pH values (3, 7, and 11). The pHzpc value of the nanocomposite was approximately 4. The degradation rate is highest and comparable at pH 3 and 7. However, the rate is declined when the pH of the solution is basic, i.e., 11 (Fig. 22c).167 Also, the generation of H2 gas via photocatalytic water splitting is dependent on the concentration of protons, i.e., the pH value. The generation of H2 is more effective when the solution is weakly basic than a strongly basic or acidic medium.176 Wu et al. observed maximum H2 generation in a weakly basic solution (pH 10), while a lesser amount of H2 was obtained at a pH value of 2 using CuOx/TiO2.177 Similarly, Fujita et al. showed the effect of pH on photocatalytic H2 production using the NiO/TiO2 catalyst. The photocatalytic production rate of H2 is the highest at pH 6.6, while the production rate is less in the pH range from 0 to 11 of the solution mixture (Fig. 23).178
 Fig. 23  H2 generation as a function of pH for 2.0 wt.% NiO/TiO2 catalyst (Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).178 
(4) Temperature: the photocatalytic efficiency is also influenced by the solution temperature.179 The rate of degradation, desorption, and absorption is excellent at conditions of elevated temperature.180 Moreover, at a higher temperature, the mobility of charge carriers increase, which results in faster reaction efficiency. However, the temperature of the system does not exceed a specific value. According to Malato et al., the maximum result is found when the temperature range is 20–80 °C.181 Huaxu et al. performed water splitting using Pt/TiO2 at different temperatures to check the photocatalytic activity and found H2 generation rates of 4.71 mmol g−1 and 15.18 mmol g−1 at 45 °C and 55 °C, respectively (Fig. 24).182
 Fig. 24  Effect of temperature conditions on H2 gas evolution (© 2017 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).182 
(5) Light intensity and wavelength: light intensity and wavelength have critical importance in photodegradation,183 and the activation of the catalysts depends on the irradiated light of a definite intensity and wavelength. The photocatalytic efficiency is enhanced with an increase in the light intensity more than the activation threshold energy.184,185 The formation of OH˙ is enhanced with an increase in the intensity and energy of light, even without an appropriate photocatalyst. Due to the formation of more OH˙, the photodegradation efficiency is enhanced.186–188 The excitation of electrons occurs when photons of suitable band gap energy are inclined on the photocatalyst surface. Based on the band gap values of the photocatalysts, the light source of an appropriate wavelength has been used. The band gap ranging from 3.1 eV to 3.9 eV needs an excitation wavelength from 315 nm to 400 nm, i.e., UV-A, while the band gap range from 3.9 eV to 4.4 eV needs an excitation wavelength from 280 nm to 315 nm, i.e., UV-B.189,190 To excite the catalysts with a broad band gap, the light source that emits light of different wavelengths enhances the photocatalytic efficiency.84
(6) Crystallinity and surface area: the photocatalytic activity also relies on the crystallinity of the catalyst.191 A heterogeneous catalyst having a wide surface area shows better absorption of the reactants on its surface and enhances the activity. The crystal structure of SnO2 is modified by doping with metals or other impurities that decline the particle size and enhance the surface area. Hence, the modification of SnO2 lowers the band gap, which improves the electrical properties and increases the adsorption area.192–194 It is reported that the SnO2 lattice is modified with various metals with different concentrations, increasing the photocatalyst's active surface area and photocatalytic activity (Table 1). This consistent increment is observed up to a definite value that differs for all contaminants.195 Due to the large average surface area, Ce-doped SnO2 and N-doped SnO2 NPs have higher photocatalytic activity than pure SnO2.106,196
Table 1 Particle size and surface area of various dopants in the SnO2 crystal structure using the Debye–Scherrer method195




Sr. no.
Dopant
Particle size (nm)
Surface area (m2 g−1)




1
Pure SnO2
8.4
28


2
Ce@SnO2
5.5
30


3
Nd@SnO2
4.1
35


4
La@SnO2
3.4
40


5
Gd@SnO2
3.2
58


6
I@SnO2
2.5
50


7
Sb@SnO2
1.8
54




(7) Doping amount: the photocatalytic activity is also dependent on the doping amount. At a definite amount, the photocatalytic activity is maximum, i.e., optimum amount. The g-C3N4 nanosheet is fabricated with different concentrations (2, 4, 6, and 8%) of SnO2 NPs to enhance the photocatalytic water splitting to generate H2 gas and degradation of 2-chlorophenol. The activity in both the cases is enhanced till the dopant concentration reaches at 6% but a decrease in the activity is reported on a further increase in the concentration of the dopant (Fig. 25). This is because SnO2 with increased concentration covers up the effective surface of g-C3N4, due to which the absorption of visible light photons is inhibited; hence, the activity declines.197 Eosin Y-sensitized Sb-doped SnO2 is used for the first time as a photocatalyst to generate hydrogen gas under light irradiation without any noble metal-based co-catalyst. Different concentrations of Sb (0, 0.27, 0.39, 0.57, 0.88, and 2.00 at%) were doped in the SnO2 lattice, causing a decrease in the band gap with an increase in the concentration (Fig. 26A).
 Fig. 25  Results of (A) hydrogen generation and (B) degradation of 2-chlorophenol using SnO2–C3N4 nanohybrid. Copyright © 2019 Frontiers in Chemistry. All rights reserved.197 
 Fig. 26  (A) Schematic energy level diagrams of the as-prepared non-doped SnO2 and Sb-doped SnO2 with varying Sb doping content and (B) H2 evolution rate of different doping amounts of Sb to SnO2. Copyright © 2017 Elsevier. All rights reserved (© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).198 
The H2 generation rate is enhanced on increasing the doping amount of Sb up to 0.39 at%, which then declines, as shown in Fig. 26B. The reason for this is that the surface defect increases on increasing the Sb doping amount. These defects behave as sites to trap the electrons excited from EY, resulting in enhanced electron transfer ability. However, with an increase in the doping amount, the trap sites density increases to capture more electrons from EY, which decreases the H2 generation rate.198 Similarly, a different amount of Nb (0. 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 mol%) is doped with the SnO2/V2O5 heterostructure. The optimum amount of Nb doping to obtain the maximum evolution rate of H2 gas is 2 mol%, which is 3 and 1.45 times higher than that of the SnO2 nanotubes and SnO2/V2O5 heterostructure, respectively, for the same time duration.199
3. Theoretical aspects of SnO2-based NMs
DFT calculations have emerged as theoretical explanations to the experimental observations. Researchers widely use DFT calculations to study the catalytic behavior of NPs. Bao et al. performed computational DFT studies to discuss the role of OVs on the SnO2-based composite. In the computational model, the oxygen atom was removed to create the O-vacancy, leading to charge redistribution around the vacancy site. These OVs are responsible for the generation of new energy states between the VB maximum and the CB minimum for effective electron transfer in defective SnO2 from the bulk to the surface, which are beneficial for enhancing the catalytic activities.144 Some more examples are cited and give an insight into the photocatalytic behavior of the SnO2 heterojunctions. DFT calculations were carried out by Gilani et al. using different functions.200 Yan et al. reported enhanced photocatalytic H2 generation using carbon-enclosed SnO2 QDs affixed on g-C3N4 sheets (SnO2@C/CN). DFT calculations demonstrated the stability of SnO2 QDs and established the reinforcement with g-C3N4 nanosheets due to the presence of carbon (Fig. 27). At the interface of SnO2 QDs and g-C3N4, an electric field is generated, which promotes the separation as well as migration of charge carriers. As a result, the SnO2@C/CN nanostructure showed higher H2 evolution than that of g-C3N4.201
 Fig. 27  Side-views of the adsorption configurations of bare SnO2 (left) and SnO2@C QDs (right) on the g-C3N4 surface (© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).201 
Ullah et al. studied the band structure and density states of pure SnO2 and W-doped SnO2. DFT study revealed the presence of W–O interactions within the SnO2 lattice originating through the overlap of W(5d) states with the O(2p) states. Theoretical calculations showed changes in the band gap values of pure and W-doped SnO2 (Fig. 28). The band gap value of 6 mol% W-doped SnO2 was found to be 2.8 eV. This engineered band gap value manifests improved light harvesting efficiency and boosts its photocatalytic degradation property and water splitting activity.202
 Fig. 28  Band structure and density of states (a) pure SnO2 and (b) W-doped SnO2 (© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).202 
Ding et al. performed first principles calculations to investigate the behavior of fullerene/SnO2 (Fig. 29). DFT calculations confirmed the closeness of the band gap through minimal difference in the calculated and experimental values. The calculated band gap value was found to be consistent with the theoretical values. The results indicated that the band gap value depends on the number of carbon atoms, extending the absorption spectrum to the visible region as one of the most important aspects of H2 generation through photocatalytic water splitting reaction and photocatalytic pesticide degradation.203
 Fig. 29  Representation of band structures for (a) bulk SnO2, (b) SnO2(101). The black horizontal line indicates the Fermi level. (c) Electron and hole density map distributions for the surface states of SnO2(101) (© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).203 
DFT calculations were also performed for SnO2 nanohybrids hetero-epitaxially grown from TiO2. Using the calculated values, an energy diagram (Fig. 30) was created, which exhibits increasing band gap with the decrease in the rod length. Moreover, it also emphasized on the decrease in the value of conduction band minima, facilitating electron transfer from TiO2 to SnO2, leading to effective charge separation, a favorable aspect for H2 generation through photocatalytic water splitting and photocatalytic pesticide degradation.204
 Fig. 30  Energy diagram of the SnO2–TiO2 hybrid-photocatalyzed reaction system (© 2021 MDPI All rights reserved).204 
Filippatos et al. performed DFT calculations to discuss the doping effect on the band gap value of halogen-doped SnO2. Through DFT calculations, it was concluded that the gap states were observed, originating from the hybridization of the O-2p with halogen 1s orbitals. These energy states reduce the band gap, resulting in comparatively better photocatalytic performance of halogen-doped SnO2 over undoped SnO2. Among halogens, iodine-doped SnO2 was reported to have the lowest band gap value of 2.60 eV, making it a suitable dopant for SnO2-based energy harvesting devices.205 A theoretical elucidation of the photocatalytic behavior by the MoS2/SnO2 nanocomposite was provided by DFT calculations (Fig. 31). Through density of states, it was elucidated that electron excitation takes place from the Mo 4d orbitals to SnO2, leading to the efficient separation of photogenerated charge carriers. The electron transfer was facilitated due to the band alignment of 0.49 eV between the monolayer MoS2 and SnO2. This effective separation promotes good photocatalytic activity of the nanocomposite.206
 Fig. 31  Band structures for (a) bulk SnO2, (b) SnO2(001), (c) MoS2, and (d) MoS2/SnO2(001). The Fermi level is indicated by the horizontal dashed line (© 2016 Author(s). Published by AIP Publishing).206 
Yang et al. performed DFT calculations to investigate the electronic structure of SnO2 before and after Sb doping. Fig. 32 shows the calculated total and partial density states for undoped and doped SnO2. The band gap was found to be narrowed for SnO2 on Sb doping. This has been attributed to the downward shift of the conduction band minimum (CBM), which is formed by the hybridization of O (2p), Sn (5s 5p), and Sb (5s 5p) states. This downward shift ultimately narrows the intrinsic band gap. The significant increase in the intensity of DOS near the Fermi level in Sb-doped SnO2 is an indication of the high carrier concentration and electrical conductivity over undoped SnO2.198
 Fig. 32  Representation of total densities of states for (a) undoped SnO2 and (b) Sb-doped SnO2 (© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).198 
DFT calculations were also carried out to understand the mechanism of catalytic activities of the SnS2/SnO2 heterointerface. Fig. 33 displays the aggregation of electrons at the SnO2 interface with electron deficiency at the SnS2 side, leading to the transfer of electrons from SnS2 to SnO2 near the interface. Due to this subsequent transfer of electrons to the SnO2 side, the abundance of electrons on SnO2 leads to the stabilization of H atoms and hence the acceleration of H2 generation. Also, the high mobility of electron carrier at the interface increases the hydrogen evolution activity of the SnS2/SnO2 catalyst.207
 Fig. 33  (a) Representation of differential charge densities of the SnS2/SnO2 heterointerface. Sections colored yellow and blue indicate the increase and decrease in the electron density, respectively; (b) charge analysis of Sn cations along the direction of SnS2 → SnO2via a heterointerface; (c) calculated DOSs for the SnO2, SnS2, and SnS2/SnO2 catalysts (© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).207 
4. SnO2-Based photocatalysts for H2 production enhancement
As shown in Fig. 34, CB of SnO2 lies at a lower position than the reduction potential of water to generate H2 gas. If the CB of SnO2 is engineered to higher energy, it becomes appropriate for efficient photocatalytic H2 generation. SnO2 is reported to undergo lattice modifications when doped with several metals or non-metals or carbon materials and coupled with other materials to improve its photocatalytic activity. Few methods have been explored to tailor the band gap and increase the efficacy of SnO2 as the photocatalyst, which has been briefly discussed.
 Fig. 34  Band positions and band gap energy (w.r.t. NHE) of different semiconductors at pH = 1.208 
4.1 Doping
Dopants alter the crystal structure of SnO2 and the impact of doping on the conductivity, resistivity, band gap position, etc., has been seen in the literature. For SnO2 modification and band gap engineering, ion doping is a promising path that results in enhanced efficacy. The doping of the catalyst leads to increased charge separation, distorted lattice, and hence results in enhanced photocatalytic activity.120 The Fermi level in doped semiconductors shows either a red or blue shift, as reflected by band gap engineering. Doped materials show generated energy states either below the CB edge or above the VB edge. These new states perform charge trapping and ultimately lead to wavelength extension to the visible region. Every dopant atom represents strong local perturbation to CB, causing large electron scattering in the conduction band, thereby reducing the mobility. Besides that, dopants that substitute for oxygen would mainly perturb the VB, leaving the CB relatively free of scattering with high mobility.209 Either OVs or interstitial tin atoms (Sni) are anticipated to be donors in pure SnO2.210
Vacancy sites are created in SnO2 when its lattice is doped with elements whose ionic radius are similar or different to Sn4+ ions (0.071 nm), such as Li (0.090 nm), Al (0.069 nm), Ga (0.076 nm), and In (0.094 nm). These elements substitute Sn and create a vacancy in and above the VB maxima. However, the introduction of dopants into the lattice occupies the interstitial site and donates an electron to the system, and thus, acts as a donor defect. An essential aspect of doping is its optimum concentration. For example, 8% doping is found to be optimum for Al-doped SnO2, whereas 20% doping is promising for Ga-doped SnO2. Other donor dopants on the Sn site are phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony. They substitute Sn in the SnO2 lattice, creating negative charges. Some elements that have one valence electron less than O and one valence electron more than Sn exhibit amphoteric behavior when doped into SnO2 and are group V elements. When they substitute oxygen atom and substitute for the Sn site, they act as acceptor dopants and donor dopants, respectively. The importance of vacancies has been discussed by Kumar et al., focusing on photocatalytic hydrogen generation application of vacancy-engineered materials.211
SnO2 doping can be of two types: (1) p-type doping and (2) n-type doping. p-Type doping can be introduced with cations of lower valency than that of Sn, acting as electron acceptors, whereas n-type doping can be introduced with cations having higher valency than of Sn, acting as electron donors (Fig. 35).
 Fig. 35  Schematic representation of doped SnO2. 
An interesting study is based on F-doped SnO2 (FTO), in which the Fermi level lies close to the CB level, increasing conductivity in FTO over pure SnO2. The introduction of F can explain this ion that substitutes for O2− ion into the lattice, binding only one electron and leaving other electrons free to move. However, as the concentration of F− ion increases, it leads to more occupation of CB and ultimately shifts the whole band structure downward w.r.t. the Fermi level. Similarly, Kumar et al. discussed the effect of excess F doping on the optoelectronic properties of SnO2, stating that a blue shift was observed in FTO, a consequence of the Moss–Burstein effect. The blue shift in the band gap is observed in the range of 3.52–3.87 eV due to excessive F doping, leading to increased carrier concentration and ultimately, the CB is filled by donated electrons.212–214
Another research by Kumar et al. could lead to charge imbalance, creating OVs in the semiconductor lattice in turn, which is responsible for the enhanced photocatalytic performance. They mentioned the blue shift of the band in Ce-doped SnO2 as a result of the Moss–Burstein effect, due to which the Fermi level is shifted more toward CB (more toward a negative potential).106 Research by Gahlawat et al. demonstrates the shifting of the CB edge toward a more negative potential as a result of increasing Ni concentration in Ni-doped hematite dendrite nanostructures. Further, XPS results demonstrate the shifting of the Fermi level close to the CB edge. The population of CB increases with the increase in the Ni concentration and hence results in a higher energy shift due to the Burstein–Moss effect and, finally, at 11% Ni concentration, the NixFe2−xO3 nanocomposite exhibits better photoelectrochemical performance.215Fig. 36 shows that the CB population becomes dense with an increase in the dopant concentration.
 Fig. 36  A pictorial representation of the populated states in the conduction band on increasing the extent of doping. 
Babu et al. reported that Cu-doped SnO2 showed nine times improved photocatalytic results than undoped SnO2.108 Similarly, V-doped SnO2 showed higher photocatalytic activity by decreasing the band gap energy.216 A considerable decrease in the SnO2 band gap was found when doped with the Eu3+ ion.217 Sn2+-Doped SnO2 showed exciting electronic, optical, and sensing properties, and are attributed to OVs and band gap engineering due to Sn2+ doping.218 Bhawna et al. synthesized N-doped SnO2 NPs via a facile wet chemical route, in which N was uniformly disturbed in the lattice and HRTEM confirms the NPs in nature (Fig. 37). Further, it is also explained that how doping leads to band gap engineering (Fig. 38), where N doping in the tin oxide lattice creates the mixing of N 2p- and oxygen 2p-levels. N doping increases the number and oxidation–reduction abilities of the charge carriers and ultimately results in enhanced photocatalytic efficiency.112
 Fig. 37  (A) Elemental mapping of N = doped SnO2 and (B) HRTEM images (a) N:SnO2 nanoparticles and (b) enlarged view showing the lattice fringes (© 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).112 
 Fig. 38  Proposed schematic diagram of water splitting by N-doped SnO2 (© 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).112 
Hence, doping is a phenomenon to engineer the materials’ band gap either by creating a donor level above the VB or an acceptor level below the CB, and modifying the band gap so that it becomes suitable for photocatalytic reactions or sometimes absorbs the visible portion of the spectrum.
4.2 Chemical additives
Chemical additives such as scavengers and sacrificial reagents play a substantial role in improving the photocatalytic performance. After the formation of photogenerated electrons and holes, there is a probability of recombination. If recombination occurs predominantly, it causes a waste of energy and minimizes the quantum yield.219 To avoid recombination, electron donors, also known as hole scavengers or sacrificial reagents, are used in photocatalytic water splitting.220,221 They remarkably enhance the H2 yield by irreversibly reacting with the VB holes, resulting in electron–hole separation and higher quantum efficiency. They are consumed in the reaction, and hence, to sustain H2 production, their continual addition is required.222
Alcohols, acids, hydrocarbons, and various organic compounds have been used as electron donors in water splitting. Zielinska et al. compared various organic donors such as acetic acid, formic acid, formaldehyde, 2-propanol, and methanol, and found that formic acid is the most efficient organic donor for H2 evolution.223 Nada et al. discussed the role of various sacrificial donors and ranked them based on the enhancement in the amount of H2 evolved as EDTA > methanol > ethanol > lactic acid.224 A sacrificial agent helps SnO2 to carry out either oxidation or reduction. The primary function is to react with one of the charge carriers. Simultaneously, another charge carrier is made free to perform either oxidation or reduction. Chemicals whose oxidation potentials are lower than that of water are ethanol, methanol, and ethylene glycol, which are used as sacrificial agents to inhibit electron–hole recombination. Haw et al. showed the mechanism for the generation of hydrogen gas using SnO2 QDs from non-aqueous medium, i.e., glycerol and aqueous phase, and S2−/SO32− as the hole scavengers (Fig. 39).225
 Fig. 39  Pictorial representation of the generation of hydrogen gas using SnO2 QDs (quantum dots) from (a) glycerol medium, (b) S2−/SO32− as hole scavengers (© 2016 Science Press and Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Published by Elsevier B.V. and Science Press. All rights reserved).225 
Kumar et al. attempted combinations of various sacrificial donors to enhance H2 generation through Ce:SnO2 water splitting activity. They concluded that EDTA–methanol is the most appropriate combination of sacrificial donors in specific H2 evolution (Fig. 40). Along with sacrificial donors, co-catalyst NiO is also used to facilitate electron transfer.106 A schematic diagram (Fig. 41) shows electron transfer using NiO as the co-catalyst. Electron transfer over the interfacial barrier occurs through the p–n junction depletion region formed by n-type SnO2 and p-type NiO. Here, NiO has been shown to act as an electron trap, thereby promoting the reduction of H2O to H2. Hole scavengers satisfy holes by providing electrons, whereas electron donors enhance the quantum efficiency by reducing H+ ions to H2 gas.
 Fig. 40  (a) Graphical representation of photocatalytic water splitting by Ce:SnO2 with various sacrificial agents, (b) bar diagram showing photocatalytic water splitting by Ce:SnO2 using multiple scavengers (© 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).106 
 Fig. 41  Proposed water splitting using NiO co-catalyst and SnO2 as a photocatalyst (© 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).106 
4.3 Dye sensitization
Dye sensitization is another approach to enhance the photocatalytic performance. Some dyes are sensitive to visible light, absorb it, and then transfer the excited electrons to the semiconductor photocatalyst, preventing charge carrier recombination and enhance the efficiency of water splitting reactions. Sensitizers act as an antenna that transfer absorbed light to the semiconductor and help in carrying out the excitation of electrons. Some dyes are sensitive to visible light and hence can be used in photocatalytic reactions. When irradiated with visible light, electrons from excited dyes are injected into the CB of semiconductors, which further carries out necessary photocatalytic reactions to reduce H2O to generate H2 gas.198,226
Yang et al. studied the H2 evolution rate using Sb-doped SnO2 sensitized by EY under irradiation by light (Fig. 42). SnO2 has a band gap of 3.5–3.8 eV, and hence electron excitation does not occur when irradiated with light. However, when sensitized with EY dye, electrons were excited to the CB of Sb-doped SnO2 and enhanced the H2 generation rate.198 Gurunathan et al. studied the effect of various dyes on photocatalytic H2 generation by SnO2. They found the efficiency of different sensitizers in H2 generation in the order Eosin Blue > Rose Bengal > Ru(bpy)32+ > Rhodamine B = Acriflavine > Fluorescein.226 Yao et al. demonstrated the photodegradation of indigo carmine dye using TPPN dye-sensitized metal oxide.227
 Fig. 42  The schematic diagram for possible photocatalytic reaction mechanism for the dye-sensitized semiconductor. 
4.4 Heterostructure
It is reported in the literature that when SnO2 is coupled with other semiconductors having a small band gap whose CB lies at a more negative value, then the CB electrons are transferred from a small band gap semiconductor to the CB of SnO2. This method is known as semiconductor coupling. Coupling or semiconductor composition is an efficient method that allows the utilization of a large portion of visible light for enhanced photocatalytic results. There should be a difference in the band gap values for the successful coupling of the semiconductors to prepare the composite. As the band gap of SnO2 is large, it should be coupled with a small band gap semiconductor whose CB level is at a more negative position than SnO2, and there should be an easy and fast electron transfer from SnO2 to the semiconductor. It makes the electrons available for H2O reduction to generate H2 gas, provided that the semiconductors should be photocatalytically stable and not undergo photocorrosion.
It has been reported that SnO2 coupled with CuO leads to higher photocatalytic H2 generation.228 SnO2 is an n-type semiconductor, whereas CuO is a p-type semiconductor and their coupling results in the formation of an n-SnO2/p-CuO heterojunction at the interface. CB of CuO is at a lower level than SnO2. When irradiated with light, photogenerated electrons and holes occur in the CB and VB of SnO2, respectively. The transfer of electron occurs from SnO2 to the CB of CuO. This migration effectively separates the photogenerated electrons and holes on the SnO2 surface, resulting in enhanced photocatalytic activity. Fig. 43 shows the mechanism for electron transfer process in the SnO2/SiC heterostructure. Under light illumination, the formation of photogenerated electrons and holes takes place in semiconductor SiC. Electrons are then transferred from the CB of SiC to the CB of SnO2. This electron transfer process suppresses the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes, which carry out the generation of H2 and O2 gases.229 The carbon/SnO2 nanocomposite has exhibited more significant photocatalytic performance by the efficient separation of electron–hole pairs.230 SnS2–SnO2 heterojunction decorated over graphene nanosheets exhibited excellent visible-light photocatalytic performance owing to the significant separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs (Fig. 44).231 The SnO2–TiO2 nanohybrid displayed enhanced photocatalytic activity by charge separation through electron transfer from TiO2 to SnO2 and reduced the barrier in the transport of electrons in SnO2 nanorods (NR). In this nanohybrid, the bundle of SnO2 NRs is hetero-epitaxially formed on the TiO2 nanocrystals, as shown in Fig. 45.232 Sulfur-doped g-C3N4 coupled with SnO2 (NPs) (SnO2/CNS) has shown excellent stability as a photocatalyst.233 Coupled SnO2–ZnO showed better photocatalytic performance by 96% decolorization of methylene blue.234 Wang et al. reported mesoporous ZnO–SnO2-coupled nanofibers with improved photocatalytic performance.235 Some reported SnO2-coupled compounds have been mentioned in Table 2.
 Fig. 43  Electron transfer process in coupled SnO2.229 
 Fig. 44  Electron transfer mechanism in the SnS2–SnO2/graphene nanocomposite.231 
 Fig. 45  SEM images of the SnO2–TiO2 nanohybrid at (a) low and (b) high magnifications (© 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).232 
Table 2 List of SnO2-coupled photocatalysts in photochemical water splitting reactions




Compound
Synthetic method
Co-catalyst
H2 yield/current density
Reason
Ref.




TiO2–SnO2–Al2O3
Hydrothermal


129.45
Appropriate band gap

236



CdS–NiS-10%/SnO2
Hydrothermal
—
35176 μmol g−1 h−1
Improved charge transfer efficiency

26



C doped SnO2
Thermal decomposition
—
38.43 μmol g−1 h−1
Increased lifetime of photogenerated carriers

237



g-C3N4/SnO2
Chemical synthesis
Pt
900 μmol g−1 h−1
Interfacial interactions between g-C3N4 and SnO2 prevent the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers

238



Mg-Reduced Zn2SnO4/SnO2
Reduction method
—
120 μmol g−1
Charge transfer between reduced Zn2SnO4 and SnO2 promotes effective charge separation

239



TiO2/SnO2
Electrospinning
—
200 μmol h−1
The synthesized compound exhibited good mesoporosity, nanofibrous structure, enhanced light absorption capacity, and ternary junctions for the separation of electrons and holes.

240



SnO2/SiC
Solvothermal
—
274 μmol g−1 h−1
Different band positions of heterostructure SnO2/SiC leads to the easy separation and transfer of photogenerated pairs

229



Pr2NiO4/SnO2
Sol–gel method
—
24.3 μmol g−1 min−1
Efficient charge separation and presence of S2O32− are responsible for high photocatalytic activity

241



Pt/Ni(OH)2–SnO2
Loading Ni(OH)2 on SnO2 by hydrolysis method
—
0.9 μmol g−1 h−1
Ni(OH)2 enhances light absorption in the visible region

242



Pt/Ni(OH)2–Ni2O3–SnO2
Loading Ni2O3 on the SnO2 surface, synthesized by the hydrolysis method
—
10.8 μmol g−1 h−1
Ni2O3 suppresses the recombination of photogenerated charges and hence acts as an electron trap

242



Au/SnO2/g-C3N4
Solid state
—
770 μmol g−1 h−1
Efficient charge separation by the transfer of excited electrons from plasmonic Au and C3N4 to SnO2

14



SnO2–TiO2
Incipient wetness impregnation
CuO, CoO
1486.4 μmol g−1 h−1
CuO carries out electron transfer and catalyzes water reduction to H2, whereas CoO catalyzes oxidation and helps in improving the charge separation

243



SnO2/ZnO
Electrospinning and hydrothermal
—
202.2 μmol g−1 h−1
Sulfurization using Na2S results in the widening and extension of the absorption spectra in the visible region

244



Sb doped SnO2
Hydrothermal
—
49.94 μmol h−1
Sb doping leads to the formation of surface defects and band gap narrowing

198



Ce, Sb co-doped SnO2
Sol–gel
—
8.5 μmol g−1 h−1
Ce doping enables absorption in the visible region, whereas Sb doping effectively separates the photogenerated electrons and holes

245



SnO2−x/In2O3−y
Annealing
—
Not defined
Controlling oxygen vacancies in the interfacial reactions of SnO2−x/In2O3−y

246



SnO2–SiC
Hydrothermal
—
471.8 μmol g−1 h−1
Synergistic effect of the SnO2–SiC heterojunction

247



Ce doped SnO2
Low-temperature reaction
NiO
25 μmol g−1 h−1
Ce doping in the SnO2 lattice induces enormous oxygen vacancies and surface defects

106



CuO/SnO2
Co-precipitation
—
6473 μmol g−1 h−1
Interparticle electron transfer from SnO2 to CuO inhibit electron–hole recombination

228



In–SnO2/Cr-doped-TiO2
Radio-frequency magnetron sputtering
—
24.4 μmol h−1
Deposition of multilayer films In–SnO2/Cr-doped-TiO2 lowers the charge recombination rate

248



In–SnO2/V-doped TiO2
Radio-frequency magnetron sputtering
—
31.2 μmol h−1
High visible light absorption by V-doped TiO2 and increased number of space charge ITO/TiO2 interlayers reduce charge recombination

249



Nb-doped SnO2/V2O5
Hydrothermal
—
1346 μmol g−1 h−1
Increased light absorption, efficient separation, and transfer of charge carriers

199



SnO2/g-C3N4
Fabrication of g-C3N4 sheets through muffle furnace
—
132 μmol h−1
Improved charge separation by transfer of electrons from g-C3N4 to SnO2

250



SnO2/g-C3N4 nanocomposite
Thermal oxidation method
—
0.2 mmol g−1 h−1
Z-Scheme improves the carrier separation and transfer efficiency

144





From Table 2, it can be concluded that SnO2 can be modified using various dopants or by forming heterojunctions, resulting in band gap tailoring, an essential criterion for photocatalytic water splitting. Ultimately, SnO2 satisfies all the conditions and criteria required by a photocatalyst for energy generation. Table 2 shows that doped SnO2 such as Sb-doped SnO2,251 Ce-doped SnO2,106 Ce, Sb-co-doped SnO2,245 and F-doped SnO2,212 and heterojunctions such as BiVO4/WO3/SnO2252 and SnO2−x/In2O3−y253 (band gap varies in the range of 3.6–3.8 eV) have resulted in considerable H2 generation under light irradiation and hence proved to be a better photocatalyst. Modified compounds exhibited higher H2 evolution results as they have reduced the recombination rate of the electron–hole pairs due to changes in the band gap. Zada et al. carried out the water splitting reaction for H2 production in visible light by synthesizing the SnO2/g-C3N4 heterojunction. It explained that the CB edge potential of SnO2 is 0.04 eV w.r.t. SHE, and hence inappropriate for H2 evolution thermodynamically. On the other side, the CB edge potential of CN lies at −1.3 eV. Hence, the coupling of SnO2 to g-C3N4 would shift the SnO2 CB level to a more negative potential, making a suitable photocatalyst for H2 generation.14 The SnO2–TiO2 heterojunction, when doped with CuO and CoO, yields H2 at a rate of 1486.4 μmol g−1 h−1.243 Similarly, efficient H2 is generated by heterojunction TiO2/SnO2 nanofiber. Lee et al. proposed a ternary phase-based mechanism to understand the pathway for H2 generation. Since the VB of rutile TiO2 lies at a higher position, the photogenerated holes from anatase TiO2 and rutile SnO2 are transferred into the VB of rutile TiO2. Hence, electrons in the CB of anatase TiO2 are easily available for H2 generation.240 This technique thus inhibits the recombination of excitons and promotes photocatalytic H2 generation.
In this way, the new coupled semiconductor formed has a suitable band gap for water splitting. Electron excitation takes place from the VB of one semiconductor and electrons are transferred to the CB of another semiconductor for the reduction process. Hence, non-photocatalysts can be made to undergo photocatalytic water splitting through coupling.
5. Concept of SnO2-based photoelectrochemical H2 generation
Photoelectrochemical reactions come under a particular case of photochemical reactions. In photoelectrochemical water splitting reactions, the electric current is directed to carry out redox chemical reactions at the electrode surface to transfer electrons to produce H2 gas.254 Sheza et al. incorporated SnO2 NPs into g-C3N4 sheets to prepare the g-C3N4/SnO2 nanocomposite. These nanocomposites were found to have a high specific surface area and increased electron–hole separation time, giving a photocurrent density of 33 μA cm−2, and hence showed efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting ability.150 Kim et al. found that when Zn2SnO4/SnO2 NPs were mixed with carbon nanotubes (CNTs), the maximum photocurrent density of 17.2 mA cm−2 was achieved without using any co-catalyst.12 Liu et al. functionalized 1D SnO2@BiVO4 core–shell nanorod arrays decorated with cobalt-phosphate co-catalyst that exhibited a photocurrent density of 2.63 mA cm−2, which is 6.58 times higher than that of pristine BiVO4 films. The maximum photocurrent density was exhibited for efficient charge separation due to the ternary heterojunction.255 When SnO2 is sandwiched between CdS and TiO2, efficient band alignment and charge transfer led to photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution. As SnO2 and TiO2 absorb only UV light, hence, under light illumination, on the absorption of visible light, electron excitation takes place from the VB of CdS to its CB. The band alignment is such that these electrons are transferred sequentially from the CB of CdS to the CB of TiO2, which is aligned at a lower position than CdS, and then to the even lower lying CB of SnO2. These electrons are then transferred to the FTO and at last, the hydrogen evolution reaction takes place at the counter Pt electrode. Such a band alignment provides efficient charge separation, hence decreasing the recombination rate (Fig. 46).256 Similarly, other heterojunctions including SnO2 such as Au–BiVO4/SnO2, SnO2/SiC, and BiVO4/WO3/SnO2 have been listed in Table 3, which exhibit efficient photoelectrochemical performances for H2 generation.
 Fig. 46  Scheme of band alignment and charge transfer process in the SnO2 NSs/TiO2/CdS QDs photoanode. The band gap of CdS, TiO2, and SnO2 are 2.4 eV, 3.2 eV, and 3.6 eV, respectively. (b) Scheme of light transmission inside the hybrid SnO2 NSs/TiO2/CdS QDs photoanode (© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).256 
Table 3 List of SnO2-coupled photocatalysts in photoelectrochemical water splitting reactions




Compound
Synthetic method
Current density
Reason
Ref.




In2O3/SnO2
Sol–gel and hard-template method
21.51 mmol g−1
Reduced band gap due to In2O3-sensitized porous SnO2

257



SnO2@BiVO4/Co-Pi
Chemical vapor deposition
2.63 mA cm−2
Efficient charge separation and charge transport

255



SnO2 NSs/TiO2/CdS QDs
Hydrothermal
7.6 μmol mA−1 h−1
TiO2 interlayered between CdS guest and SnO2 host reduces the charge recombination rate

256



In2O3/SnO2
Sol–gel and hard-template method
21.51 mmol g−1
Reduced band gap due to In2O3-sensitized porous SnO2

257



CuFeO2/SnO2
Solvent chemical route
0.026 mL h−1 mg−1
The photogenerated charge separation is attributed to the electron transfer between the Cu and Sn oxides

258



SnO2/TiO2/CdS
Chemical vapor deposition
8.75 mA cm−2
Acceleration of electron transfer by 3-D SnO2 nanowires reduce electron–hole recombination

259



ZnO/TiO2/CuO on FTO
Hydrothermal method
3.5 μmol cm−2
CuO extends the absorption in the visible range, provides a larger surface area, and efficient photogenerated electron–hole separation

260



CdS quantum dots decorated screw-like SnO2
CVD, hydrothermal and successive ionic layer absorption and reaction (SILAR)
159.6 μmol (h cm−2)
Screw such as structure provides high absorption capacity for the visible region, high-speed electron transport, and high surface area

261



3D TiO2/SnO2
CVD & hydrothermal
1 mA cm−2
Rutile TiO2 suppresses the charge recombination rate

262



Sb-doped SnO2
Self-organizing anodization of Sn films on the substrate
1.5 mA cm−2
High surface area and nanochannel geometry of Sb-doped SnO2

251



TiO2/SnO2 inverse opal films
Spin coating
5.46 mA cm−2
Photoactive TiO2 and conductive SnO2 provides high light-harvesting efficiency

263



BiVO4/WO3/SnO2
Sol–gel spin coating
∼3.1 mA cm−2
BiVO4/WO3/SnO2-based double-heterojunction showed better charge transfer efficiency and high transmittance even at longer wavelengths

252



p+n-Si–SnO2/TiO2
Atomic layer deposition
100 μA cm−2
The p+n− Si junction provides a potential of about 350 mV per e− to drive unbiased water splitting

264



Au–BiVO4/SnO2
Hydrothermal method
3.83 mA cm−2
The inverse opal structure provides a high specific surface area and the charge separation is attributed to the parallel structure of the band gap energy of the heterojunction

265



Sb-doped SnO2-supported TiO2
Atomic layer deposition
0.58 mA cm−2
The electron–hole recombination is inhibited by the transfer of electrons from the semiconductor shell to the conductive core

266



Zn2SnO4/SnO2/carbon nanotube
Cold spray film deposition
17.2 mA cm−2
Efficient charge separation and faster electron transport

12



TiO2/SnO2
RF sputtering
0.2 μA cm−2
Inclusion of 2% Sn and higher recombining time

267



g-C3N4/SnO2
Microwave-assisted method
33 μA cm−2
High surface area, high charge transfer, and large charge separation time

150



SnO2 ceramics
Aerosol-assisted CVD
2.8 mA cm−2
3-D morphology results in high charge transfer

268



Sb-doped SnO2 nanorods
Thermohydrolysis


Reduced charge recombination and higher charge transfer

269



SnO2/SiC nanowire
Solvothermal
62 mA cm−2
Effective electron–hole separation

229



BiVO4/SnO2 film
Electrodeposition
0.93 mA cm−2
High surface area and effective electron–hole separation

270



Mn3O4@SnO2/Co3O4 core shell nanocomposite
Hydrothermal
10 mA cm−2
Exposed high specific surface area and surface-active sites

271



SnO2 nanostructures
Solvothermal
10 mA cm−2
Good electrocatalytic stability

272



SnS2/SnO2 electrocatalyst
Hydrothermal
10 mA cm−2
High density active sites, lowered water dissociation energies, and optimized adsorption energies of hydrogen atoms

207



CoS2/SnO2@MoS2
Hydrothermal
10 mA cm−2
Long time stability

273





6. SnO2-Based photocatalysts for pesticide degradation
Modified SnO2 finds enormous applications in water treatment. Researchers have been working at a fast pace to develop SnO2-based NMs for the degradation of toxic substances to non-toxic substances.274–276 Pandey et al. in their review mentioned SnO2-based nanocomposites for the removal of pollutants from wastewater.277 As stated earlier, the wide band gap of SnO2 in conjunction with the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pair decreases the efficiency for photocatalytic degradation. However, when doped or coupled, it shows surprising results, as explained in earlier sections.
Several strategies have been practiced over the years for effective pesticide removal from the environment, yet the selection of the best is a hassle. However, photocatalysis is comparatively a better alternative and as highlighted in Table 4, SnO2-based nanosystems are promising photocatalysts for effective pesticide degradation. As of date, the recovery of photocatalysts is difficult by treating the contaminated medium, which might hamper the efficiency to harness solar light and carry out the photocatalytic reaction. The formation of a homogenous suspension of the photocatalyst in an aqueous medium could be another hurdle.278 To overcome these, chemical oxidants and heterojunctions could be taken into account and are briefly discussed below.
Table 4 Degradation of pesticides using SnO2-based catalysts




Compound name
Synthetic method
Pesticide
Pesticide degradation
Reason
Ref.





a TC – tricyclazole.
b Tz – 1H-1,2,4-triazole.
c PPC – propiconazole.
d 2,4-DCP – 2,4-dichloro phenol.





Cu2O/SnO2/graphene nanocomposite


Sol–gel method
Pendimethalin
Cu2O addition promotes the transfer of light-induced electrons and holes between Cu2O and SnO2

279



Au–SnO2–rGO
Hydrothermal
Clothianidin
97% degradation with 120 min of UV-LED irradiation
Better light harvesting efficiency of Au along with decreased charge recombination rate

280



C dots modified g-C3N4/SnO2
Thermal polymerization
Indomethacin
The degradation rate of CDs/g-C3N4/SnO2 was 5.62 times higher than that of pristine g-C3N4
Combining g-C3N4 with SnO2 results in the improved separation of charge carriers

33



SnO2-doped Cu2O
Ball mil method
Trifluralin
After 2 h irradiation, trifluralin was almost completely degraded.
The rate of separation of photons induced by Cu2O was significantly reduced by SnO2 doping

281



ZnO–SnO2 nanocomposite
Co-precipitation method
Triclopyr
Almost 100% degradation
Reduced recombination rate of photogenerated species

282



ZnO–SnO2
Ball milling method
4-Methylbenzoic acid
92.5% degradation in 600 min
The transfer of photogenerated e− from the CB of ZnO to the CB of SnO2 prevents e−–h+ recombination

172



2-Chloro-5-nitrobenzoic acid


SnO2–SrO
Hydrothermal and sol–gel method
Metalaxyl
Successfully removed
The hydrothermal route is better to achieve fine particle size, purity, and crystallinity

283



SnO2
Solvothermal
Glyphosate
Conversion rate reaches 91.2%
Electron transfer from SnO2 to graphite-like carbon led to effective e−–h+ separation

230



Ti0.85Sn0.15O2
Sol–gel
Chlorpyrifos
92% degradation at pH 5.8
Insertion of Sn into the TiO2 lattice narrows the band gap energy, which leads to a decrease in e−–h+ recombination

284



SnO2
Thermal decomposition
Atrazine
Complete atrazine removal within 1 h of electrolysis
The formation of OH˙ for degradation is promoted by the inactive nature of SnO2

104



Ti/SnO2
—
Methamidophos
Methamidophos electrooxidation was observed at all the applied current densities
Na2S2O8 prevents recombination by capturing the e−s and generating the SO4˙− radical for oxidation

285



ZnO, TiO2, WO3, SnO2 and ZnS
—
Chlorotoluron, diuron, fluometuron, isoproturon, linuron
90% degradation of isoproturon and linuron occurs in 23–47 min, respectively, using tandem ZnO/Na2S2O8
Na2S2O8 prevents recombination by capturing the e−s and generating the SO4˙− radical for oxidation

286



ZnO, TiO2, WO3, SnO2 and ZnS
—
Ethoprophos, isoxaben, metalaxyl, metribuzin, pencycuron, pendimethalin, propanil, tolclofos-methyl
The lower activity of SnO2 is due to shorter wavelengths necessary for catalyst activation
Na2S2O8 prevents recombination by capturing the e−s and generating the SO4˙− radical for oxidation

287



ZnO, TiO2, WO3, SnO2
—
Fenamiphos
The lower activity of SnO2 is due to shorter wavelengths necessary for catalyst activation.
Na2S2O8 prevents recombination by capturing the e−s and generating the SO4˙− radical for oxidation

168



SnO2 anode
SnO2 as an anode
Cypermethrin
Complete removal of cypermethrin at low conc. of NaCl
Oxidation was carried out by OH˙ and the other electrogenerated oxidant ClO−

105



SnO2 anode
SnO2 as an anode
Bupirimate
In 2% NaCl, COD removal was 59% on SnO2 anode.
Low NaCl conc. promotes hydroxyl, chloride, and oxychloride radical formation

288



TiO2-NTs/SnO2Sb/PbO2 anode
Sol–gel
TC,a Tz,b and PPCc
Degradation sequence: PPC > TC > Tz
Oxidation of triazole fungicides by OH˙

289



Ti/SnO2–Sb electrode
Sol–gel
2,4-DCPd
99.9% degradation after 20 min of electrolysis
Reaction of OH˙ with organic molecules on the anode surface enhances the oxidation process

290



Ti/SnO2–Sb/PbO2 electrodes
Electrodeposition and thermal deposition of SnO2–Sb coating onto titanium plates
4-Chloro-3-methyl phenol
Electrochemical degradation
Electrooxidation is carried out by OH˙ and active chlorine present on the electrode surface

291



Ti/SnO2 circular anode electrodes
Titanium coated with iridium oxide (Ti/IrO2) and titanium coated with tin (Ti/SnO2)
Atrazine
Ti/SnO2 is less effective than Ti/IrO2 for the oxidation of atrazine
Electrochemical generation of active chlorine

292



Ti/SnO2–Sb/PbO2 anode
Electrodeposition and thermal deposition of SnO2–Sb coating onto titanium plates
Tricyclazole
93.4% tricyclazole was removed after 150 min
OH˙-Induced degradation in the presence of supporting electrolyte Na2SO4

293



Ti/SnO2–Sb electrodes
Sol–gel
Pentachlorophenol
99.8% degradation after 30 min of electrolysis
The dechlorination process leads to the electrochemical degradation of PCP

294



Ti/IrSnO2, Ti/IrRuSnO2
Galvanostatic electrolysis
Atrazine
100% removal of atrazine in 0.10 M NaCl
Removal of atrazine and TOC was only achieved due to the formation of the oxidizing species ClO˙

295





6.1 Chemical oxidants
External donors or acceptors play an essential role in photocatalytic water splitting along with NPs and improve the photocatalytic degradation of water contaminants. This electron improved efficacy is either due to (1) prevention of recombination of charge carriers, taking electrons in the CB, (2) increase in the hydroxyl radical concentration or other oxidizing species necessary to carry out degradation, and (3) increase in the intermediate compounds’ oxidation rate.
The few reported electron acceptors in the literature are H2O2, KBrO3, and K2S2O8.86,187,296 Metal oxides have resulted in higher degradation rates of pesticides or herbicides with these oxidants. H2O2 is the most commonly used oxidant for this application and has been found to be cost-effective. H2O2 addition is known to increase the concentration of hydroxyl radicals, and ultimately, recombination between the electrons and holes is prevented due to reaction with electrons in the CB. Miguel et al. studied the effect of H2O2 using rutile-structured TiO2 for the photocatalytic degradation of 44 organic pesticides in natural water (Ebro river basin in Spain).297 H2O2, being a powerful oxidant, prevents the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. On the other hand, as an electron acceptor, it captures electrons present in the CB to produce radicals for surface reaction necessary for degradation. Besides having beneficial effects as an oxidant and electron acceptor, H2O2 sometimes has damaging effects on the degradation process. It proves to be helpful at an optimum concentration range, but the beneficial effects do not persist more at higher concentrations. The inhibition effects could be explained by the surface modification of the photocatalyst by H2O2 adsorption, scavenging photogenerated holes in VB, or consuming hydroxyl radicals. Thus, for favorable results, an optimum ratio of H2O2 concentration to the organic pollutant is a must to avoid detrimental effects.298
Other oxidants such as peroxodisulphate, chlorate, iodate, and bromate are also considered to enhance the effectiveness of degradation reactions. Among these, peroxodisulphate attracts more attention as it generates sulfate anion radical (SO4˙−) upon decomposition, which is itself a powerful oxidant. However, chlorate has not gained much importance for increasing the effectiveness compared to iodate and bromate.299 They are known to trigger photocatalytic degradation by increasing the concentration of hydroxyl radicals, inhibiting the recombination of electron–hole pairs. The addition of chemical oxidants is beneficial for optimum concentration only because the benefits do not persist as the concentration exceeds.
6.2 SnO2 heterojunction
The concept of heterojunction formation is important to facilitate easy electron transfer to carry out essential reduction and oxidation reactions. In the type II heterojunction C-TiO2/CoTiO3, C doping was performed to extend the region of visible light absorption and also upshifted the position of the VB of TiO2 to match the band structure with CoTiO3. The so-formed heterojunction exhibited enhanced photocatalytic degradation activity.300,301 Similarly, zinc-based oxide heterojunctions have been known as visible light-active photocatalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen generation and environmental remediation. SnO2 heterojunctions/nanocomposites are very well known in many application fields such as photoreduction and antimicrobial behavior.275,302,303 SnO2, when supported over graphene, exhibits remarkable results in the degradation of organic pollutants. Wang et al. prepared the Cu2O/SnO2/graphene nanocomposites and evaluated their photocatalytic performance through the degradation of pendimethalin. The transfer of photoexcited electrons from the SnO2 surface to graphene lowers the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers and hence showed better photocatalytic degradation reactions.279 Yadav et al. found that the ZnO/SnO2 nanocomposite showed promising results for the photocatalytic degradation of pesticides compared to pure oxides ZnO and SnO2. On light irradiation, the photogenerated electrons and holes are carried by the CB of SnO2 and the VB of ZnO; in this way, the heterojunction formed has an essential role in the separation of charge carriers and thus has comparatively better results compared to pristine SnO2.282 SnO2:Cu2O could degrade trifluralin after 2 h of light irradiation. On light irradiation, photo-induced holes were generated from Cu2O. Further, the lower position of the VB of SnO2 than that of Cu2O leads to the oxidation of holes generated from SnO2 to carry out the degradation of trifluralin.281 Mohanta et al. proposed the degradation performance of clothianidin using a ternary heterojunction (Au–SnO2–rGO) (Fig. 47). 97% degradation of the pesticide was shown after 120 min of UV-LED irradiation, thus proposing two degradation mechanisms. Superoxide radical anion species were found to be responsible for the effective degradation of pesticides and were investigated using LC/HRMS and ESR techniques. Through PL emission, the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs was compared for Au NPs, Au–SnO2, and Au–SnO2–rGO. The ternary heterojunction resulted in better photocatalytic performance as compared to pristine counterparts. The 99% degradation of clothianidin has been attributed to increased light-harvesting efficiency due to Au NPs and reduced charge recombination rate due to rGO.280
 Fig. 47  Electron transfer process in the Au–SnO2–rGO heterojunction. 
Recently, Li et al. studied the photocatalytic degradation of indomethacin (IDM) using Z-scheme heterojunction photocatalyst carbon dots (CDs)/g-C3N4/SnO2. The photocatalytic performance toward the degradation of IDM was significantly higher for the heterojunction when a comparison was made between pristine g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/SnO2. They discussed the direct photocatalytic mechanism for the degradation of IDM. At first, photogenerated electrons and holes were created after visible light illumination. After that, the electrons were transferred from the CB of SnO2 to the VB of CN. This electron transfer prevents the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Further, additional electrons in the CB of CN were transferred to the CDs, where the reduction of oxygen to superoxide radical takes place. Meanwhile, the holes left in the VB of SnO2 could quickly oxidize OH− and H2O to the hydroxyl radicals. Through ESR studies, holes and superoxide radicals were found to be responsible for the photocatalytic behavior.114
Sun et al. has developed a novel SnO2/Pt/In2O3 Z-scheme photocatalytic system, synthesized via in situ deposition and photoreduction. Their results demonstrate relevant significance in photocatalytic water splitting and 2,4-DCP degradation (Fig. 48). They proposed a mechanism of visible light-irradiated SnO2/Pt/In2O3 transfer of charge carrier (Fig. 49). Irradiation by visible light causes the excitation of SnO2 and In2O3 layers. Excitation causes the distribution of holes and electrons on their respective VB and CB. Pt acts as a bridge for carrier transport. Hence, the CB electrons in the SnO2 layer are transported to Pt via the Schottky barrier. At the same time, Pt gets illuminated by visible light, causing localized surface plasmon resonance (LSRP), leading to the generation of holes. Photogenerated electrons and holes in the CB of In2O3 and the VB of SnO2, respectively, can be protected for desired redox reaction by the Pt recombination center. The formation potential of hydroxyl and superoxide radicals occurs as the SnO2 VB potential is more positive and the In2O3 CB potential is more negative, respectively. Thus, the hydroxyl and superoxide radicals formed can react with 2,4-DCP to generate small organic molecules, which are degraded to CO2 and H2O by mineralization.156
 Fig. 48  Schematic overview of the mechanism shows water splitting and degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol using Z-scheme SnO2/Pt/In2O3 photocatalyst (© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).156 
 Fig. 49  Schematic diagram showing the mechanism of transfer of the charge carriers under light irradiation using SnO2/Pt/In2O3 (© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).156 

Table 4 concludes that photocatalytic pesticide degradation is a comparatively better technique, resulting in the complete mineralization of organic or inorganic pollutants. Other degradation methods require external agents such as H2O2 and ozone for enhanced photocatalytic efficiency.
7. Industrial approach
Indisputably, the SnO2-based NMs has garnered enormous reputation as a photocatalyst. Beyond this, these materials have also been explored on the industrial scale for several applications. Industries have widely implemented SnO2-based sensors to detect gases and other volatile compounds.304–306 SnO2-Based sensors exhibiting temperature sensitivity have been developed, which exhibit low operating temperature, as well as low production cost and power requirement, making them useful for industrial applications.304 Recent investigations have revealed the importance of SnO2 as a potential alternative to TiO2 in PSC, on account of the optimal energy level alignment, high electron mobility, outstanding stability under heat, and light. Recently, an SnO2-based PSC displayed a phenomenal performance with power conversion efficiency exceeding 25%, which has attracted the attention of researchers and people from the industry.307–309 The industrial application of SnO2 in dye-sensitized solar cells is not compared to conventionally established materials. SnO2 nanocomposites, ultrathin SnO2 layers, SnO2 nanofibers, SnO2 microspheres, etc., have been responding excellently in dye-sensitized solar cells.310–313 On considering the risk evolution, there is a need to highlight that SnO2 is generally considered as non-toxic owing to the lack of toxicity of bulk material.314,315 Owing to structural changes required to accommodate the volume changes during the charge–discharge process, SnO2 also stands out as an attractive electrode for Li-ion batteries at an industrial scale.
There has been immense interest by scientists for the innovation of optimal photocatalysts that possess improved quantum efficiency and photostability for H2 generation. However, the scientific literature is limited; therefore, innovative strategies for optimizing reactor design is very important for industrial implementation. A recent investigation by Yan et al. has demonstrated a novel strategy for the fabrication of SnO2 QDs and g-C3N4 for photocatalytic H2 generation. They have demonstrated enhanced photostability and quantum efficiency of the proposed material.201
From an industrial perspective, designing cost-effective photocatalytic reactors for the generation of H2 or O2 generated through photochemical water splitting can be stored into cylinders and used to run vehicles (replacing fossil fuels), while oxygen cylinders can be used to meet the oxygen crisis during a pandemic.316
8. Challenges and future aspects
Various studies and reports have projected SnO2-based NMs as an excellent photocatalyst to resolve energy-related environmental crisis by H2 generation and residual pesticide degradation, which pose a serious threat to human health, aquatic life, etc. Hence, SnO2 has proved to be a potential alternative, which can provide a sustainable solution to burgeoning environmental issues. To increase SnO2 applications, attempts for surface modification using adsorbents, carbon material coupling, various dopants, and co-dopants are required, which demands constant improvization in existing knowledge. In addition, applications could be widened when different morphologies such as nanowires, nanosheets,317 nanocomposites, nanorods, and nanospheres are taken into account. Morphological tuning exhibits comparatively better performance owing to the nanodimensions. However, to mitigate the environmental concerns and address sustainable energy resources, serious efforts are required to develop a cost effective green synthetic protocol for SnO2-based materials. Nanoscale compounds have the ability to form heteroepitaxial junctions, which has been validated for the SnO2@TiO2 heterostructure. It has improved the photocatalytic activity and has a high potential for several photocatalytic reactions.204
Further, the implementation of Z-scheme-based mechanism for the photocatalyst using SnO2 has the ability to mimic the chlorophyll-mediated degradation, and therefore, could be a suitable alternate for pollutant degradation. This is because the Z-scheme approach enhances the spectral scope, carrier separation, as well as the redox capacity. Recently, Bao et al. demonstrated the role of carrier transport medium in the interceding of Z-scheme hybrid heterostructures, where the CB electron of the photocatalyst migrates via the carrier medium to pair with the VB holes in the other photocatalyst. They fabricated a flower-like SnO2@g-C3N4 nanocomposite with improved photocatalytic performance. Here, the Sn2+/Sn4+ redox pair plays a critical role as the charge medium, facilitating H2O adsorption and carrier separation, consequently proposing an affirmative strategy for the innovation of Z-scheme-mediated photocatalytic nanocomposites.144 Another major limitation pertaining to the development of photocatalysts is the generation of electron–hole pairs and also their lifetime. Recently, a novel strategy was proposed by Yan et al., in which SnO2@g-C3N4 has an in-build electric field at the interface of carbon and SnO2, resulting in a significant increase in the electron–hole pair lifetime, thereby boosting the photocatalytic efficiency.201 Consequently, this novel approach can be utilized for heterostructure construction with improved photocatalytic performance.
The need for a sustainable development path and the need to cope with global water pollution issues require the development of novel and effective ways to detect and remove pollutants. With appropriately modified SnO2 along with band gap engineering, generating hydrogen gas will satisfy the energy demands in the future and will save the earth from exploitation, being a cleaner fuel.
9. Conclusions
This review emphasizes on the innovative strategies executed by researchers to replace fossil fuel consumption with energetically abundant resources (sun and water). Also, it promises to play a hand toward environmental conservation via promising photocatalytic pesticide degradation without any harmful residues. SnO2 (rutile) along with other characteristics related to the band structure, oxygen vacancies, etc., have been elaborated for better understanding. A detailed discussion on the synthetic strategies to access SnO2-based NMs have been incorporated. Each modification leads to a subtle variation in the band structure of SnO2, which in turn affects their photocatalytic performance. Experimental findings in conjunction with theoretical explanation indicated that these modifications have made a positive impact on the photocatalytic activity of SnO2-based NMs. Rationally designed SnO2-based NMs can tune the need for a sustainable path by satisfying future energy demands. Fundamental and applied knowledge gained from SnO2-based devices will thus be invaluable for researchers in designing next-generation materials for emerging technologies in energy conversion and storage, pesticide degradation, and gas sensing under moderate and extreme environments. Henceforth, this review presents in-depth knowledge and opens up new possibilities for researchers to extend the energy and environment-related aspects to SnO2, photocatalytic water splitting, and pesticide degradation. The researchers working in this field will be encouraged further to take up challenges for the synthesis of currently unexplored SnO2-based NMs with extensive photocatalytic performance and exploration in different fields.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that there is no potential conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
Authors Bhawna and Sanjeev Kumar would like to thank University Grant Commission, New Delhi, India and Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, India for the financial support, respectively.
References
A. Kumar, A. Kumar and V. Krishnan, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 10253–10315 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghazy, M. Safdar, M. Lastusaari, A. Aho, A. Tukiainen, H. Savin, M. Guina and M. Karppinen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 219, 110787 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhong, X. Wu, Y. Liu, X. Wang, J. Fan and H. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 280, 119455 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Rani, U. Shanker and J. Yadav, Sustainable Agriculture Reviews 48, Springer,  2021, pp. 259–310 Search PubMed .

          M. Altaf, N. Yamin, G. Muhammad, M. A. Raza, M. Shahid and R. S. Ashraf, Water Pollution and Remediation: Heavy Metals, Springer,  2021, pp. 471–511 Search PubMed .
M. I. Hossain, A. M. Saleque, S. Ahmed, I. Saidjafarzoda, M. Shahiduzzaman, W. Qarony, D. Knipp, N. Biyikli and Y. H. Tsang, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105400 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sorrell, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 47, 74–82 CrossRef .
C. Xu, P. R. Anusuyadevi, C. Aymonier, R. Luque and S. Marre, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3868–3902 RSC .

          L. M. Honorio, P. A. Trigueiro, B. C. Viana, A. B. Ribeiro and J. A. Osajima, Nanostructured Materials for Treating Aquatic Pollution, Springer,  2019, pp. 65–90 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Tao, L. Du, Z. Wei, Z. Yan, W. K. Chan, Z. Lian, R. Zhu, D. L. Phillips and G. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119568 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vikrant, K.-H. Kim and A. Deep, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118025 CrossRef CAS .
T.-G. Kim, E. Samuel, C.-W. Park, B. Joshi, M.-W. Kim, M. T. Swihart and S. S. Yoon, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 154374 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, C.-T. Kao, B.-H. Tang, W.-C. Chang and R.-J. Wu, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 6749–6754 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zada, M. Humayun, F. Raziq, X. Zhang, Y. Qu, L. Bai, C. Qin, L. Jing and H. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601190 CrossRef .
X. Sun, Y. Mi, F. Jiao and X. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3209–3221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, L. Mao, X. Guan, K. A. Tucker, H. Xie, X. Wu and J. Shi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 119, 109527 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, Q. Xu, J. Low, C. Jiang and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 556–565 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2167–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, S. Kumar, A. Bahuguna, A. Kumar, V. Sharma and V. Krishnan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 2391–2404 RSC .
A. Kumar, V. Navakoteswara Rao, A. Kumar, M. Venkatakrishnan Shankar and V. Krishnan, ChemPhotoChem, 2020, 4, 427–444 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lamba, A. Umar, S. Mehta and S. K. Kansal, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 653, 327–333 CrossRef CAS .
K. Santhi, C. Rani and S. Karuppuchamy, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 662, 102–107 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Gordon, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 52–57 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiong, Y. Guo, J. Wen, H. Liu, G. Yang, P. Qin and G. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802757 CrossRef .
R. Chen, Y. Ao and P. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 6299–6309 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dalapati, H. Sharma, A. Guchhait, P. Bamola, S. Zhuk, Q. N. Liu, S. Gopalan, A. M. S. Krishna, S. Mukhopadhyay and A. Dey, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 16621–16684 RSC .
N. Lavanya, S. Leonardi, C. Sekar, S. Ficarra, A. Galtieri, E. Tellone and G. Neri, Mini Rev. Org. Chem., 2018, 15, 382–388 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gupta and V. Rathore, Appl. Innov. Res., 2020, 1, 184–193 Search PubMed .
C. Sun, J. Yang, M. Xu, Y. Cui, W. Ren, J. Zhang, H. Zhao and B. Liang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 131564 Search PubMed .
J. Li, T. Peng, Y. Zhang, C. Zhou and A. Zhu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 201, 120–129 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Jiang, J. Mei, Y. Li, W. Han, M. Xie, F. Wang and E. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 331, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
K. Elasnaoui and Y. Chawki, J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn., 2020, 1–22 Search PubMed .
S. Basumatary, B. Nath, B. Das, P. Kalita and B. Basumatary, Fuel, 2021, 286, 119357 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Winter, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, S1–S52 CrossRef CAS .
S. Verhelst, P. Maesschalck, N. Rombaut and R. Sierens, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 2504–2510 CrossRef CAS .
L. Das, R. Gulati and P. K. Gupta, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2000, 25, 783–793 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, C. Zhao, M. Yu and W. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 281, 119514 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Chiarello, M. H. Aguirre and E. Selli, J. Catal., 2010, 273, 182–190 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hou and R. Hughes, Chem. Eng. J., 2001, 82, 311–328 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le Gal and S. p. Abanades, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13516–13523 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tan, H. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Shen, C. Cheng, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2257–2261 RSC .
X. Liao, J. Chen, M. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Ding and Y. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 658, 642–648 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dou, H. Zhang, Y. Song, L. Zhao, B. Jiang, M. He, C. Ruan, H. Chen and Y. Xu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 314–342 RSC .

          R. Poudyal, I. Tiwari, A. Koirala, H. Masukawa, K. Inoue, T. Tomo, M. Najafpour, S. Allakhverdiev and T. Veziroğlu, Compendium of Hydrogen Energy, Elsevier,  2015, pp. 289–317 Search PubMed .
X. Qian, J. He, E. Mastronardo, B. Baldassarri, C. Wolverton and S. M. Haile, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 9335–9346 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Liao, C.-W. Huang and J. Wu, Catalysts, 2012, 2, 490–516 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kothari, D. Buddhi and R. Sawhney, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 553–563 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ngoh and D. Njomo, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 6782–6792 CrossRef .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
J. Tang, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13885–13891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Gopinath and N. Nalajala, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1353–1371 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi and L. Guo, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2012, 22, 592–615 CrossRef .
T. Takata and K. Domen, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 542–549 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7851–7861 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tudu, N. Nalajala, P. Saikia and C. S. Gopinath, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900557 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shudo, M. R. Karim, K. Wakata, H. Ohmagari, N. Kameda and S. Hayami, J. Incl. Phenom. Macrocycl. Chem., 2019, 94, 283–286 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Wang, J.-J. Chen, M. Gao, Y.-X. Huang, X. Zhang and H.-Q. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 195, 69–76 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, L. Li, Y. Gao, C. Wang, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2980–2985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2673–2678 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dvininov, M. Ignat, P. Barvinschi, M. Smithers and E. Popovici, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 177, 150–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Tofighy and T. Mohammadi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 185, 140–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. L. Srivastav, Agrochemicals Detection, Treatment and Remediation, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 143–159 Search PubMed .
M. J. García-Galán, V. Matamoros, E. Uggetti, R. Díez-Montero and J. García, Environ. Res., 2020, 110278 Search PubMed .
B. Petrie, R. Barden and B. Kasprzyk-Hordern, Water Res., 2015, 72, 3–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Saleh, N. Zouari and M. A. Al-Ghouti, Environ. Technol. Innov., 2020, 101026 CrossRef .
D. B. Miklos, C. Remy, M. Jekel, K. G. Linden, J. E. Drewes and U. Hübner, Water Res., 2018, 139, 118–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. Xiong, Z. Ao, S. Pu, G. Yao and B. Lai, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 119136 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ren, H. Han, Y. Wang, S. Liu, J. Zhao, X. Meng and Z. Li, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Z. Memon, M. Bhanger, M. Akhtar, F. N. Talpur and J. R. Memon, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 138, 616–621 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shrivas, A. Ghosale, N. Nirmalkar, A. Srivastava, S. K. Singh and S. S. Shinde, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2017, 24, 24980–24988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Boussahel, S. Bouland, K. Moussaoui and A. Montiel, Desalination, 2000, 132, 205–209 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Doulia, E. K. Anagnos, K. S. Liapis and D. A. Klimentzos, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 317, 135–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Harper and N. W. Kingham, Water Environ. Res., 1992, 64, 200–203 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, S. Watts, M. C. Philix, S. A. Snyder and C. N. Ong, Chemosphere, 2018, 211, 210–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Badawy, M. Y. Ghaly and T. A. Gad-Allah, Desalination, 2006, 194, 166–175 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Lafi and Z. Al-Qodah, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 137, 489–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmed, M. Rasul, R. Brown and M. Hashib, J. Environ. Manage., 2011, 92, 311–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Yola, T. Eren and N. Atar, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 250, 288–294 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pandey, P. Singh and V. Kumar, Environ. Nanotechnol., Monit. Manage., 2021, 100596 Search PubMed .
O. Legrini, E. Oliveros and A. Braun, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 671–698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. King, L. A. Brandt and E. C. Adair, Biogeochemistry, 2012, 111, 57–81 CrossRef .
A. C. Affam and M. Chaudhuri, J. Environ. Manage., 2013, 130, 160–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Aragay, F. Pino and A. Merkoçi, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5317–5338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mills and M. R. Hoffmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1993, 27, 1681–1689 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tamimi, S. Qourzal, A. Assabbane, J.-M. Chovelon, C. Ferronato and Y. Ait-Ichou, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2006, 5, 477–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kommu and J. K. Singh, Soft Mater., 2020, 18, 297–322 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu and M. Zäch, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 4, 260–269 CrossRef .
S. Martha, K. H. Reddy and K. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3621–3631 RSC .
Z. Xu, I. Tabata, K. Hirogaki, K. Hisada, T. Wang, S. Wang and T. Hori, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 1252–1256 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Kamble, N. S. Harale, V. L. Patil, P. S. Patil and L. D. Kadam, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2017, 127, 38–46 CrossRef CAS .
A. Banik, M. S. Ansari and M. Qureshi, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 14482–14493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rabis, T. Binninger, E. Fabbri and T. J. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 4739–4746 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Small, 2013, 9, 1877–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhattacharjee, M. Ahmaruzzaman and T. Sinha, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 136, 751–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pascariu, A. Airinei, N. Olaru, I. Petrila, V. Nica, L. Sacarescu and F. Tudorache, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 222, 1024–1031 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pascariu, A. Airinei, M. Grigoras, N. Fifere, L. Sacarescu, N. Lupu and L. Stoleriu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 668, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
I. Khan, Z. H. Yamani and A. Qurashi, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 34, 484–490 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. T. M. Nguyet, N. Van Duy, N. T. Phuong, N. N. Trung, C. M. Hung, N. D. Hoa and N. Van Hieu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 238, 1120–1127 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, C. Zhu, D. Du, J. Zhu and Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14217–14231 RSC .
G. R. Malpass, D. W. Miwa, S. A. Machado and A. J. Motheo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 180, 145–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bouya, M. Errami, R. Salghi, L. Bazzi, A. Zarrouk, S. Al-Deyab, B. Hammouti, L. Bazzi and A. Chakir, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 7453 Search PubMed .
V. Kumar, Bhawna, S. K. Yadav, A. Gupta, B. Dwivedi, A. Kumar, P. Singh and K. Deori, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 3722–3729 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chen, J.-S. Yang and J.-J. Wu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2143–2149 CrossRef CAS .
B. Babu, A. Kadam, R. Ravikumar and C. Byon, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 703, 330–336 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z. Xiao, G. Luo, R. Chen, C. L. Dong, X. Chen, J. Cen, H. Yang, Y. Wang and D. Su, Small, 2019, 15, 1904903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhuang, Y. Jia, T. He, A. Du, X. Yan, L. Ge, Z. Zhu and X. Yao, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3509–3518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akbar, S. Hasanain, O. Ivashenko, M. Dutka, N. Ali, G. Blake, J. T. M. De Hosson and P. Rudolf, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 26342–26348 RSC .
Bhawna, A. Gupta, P. Kumar, A. Tyagi, R. Kumar, A. Kumar, P. Singh, R. P. Singh and V. Kumar, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 7775–7782 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Godinho, A. Walsh and G. W. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 439–448 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, J. Huang, R. Li, P. Chen, D. Chen, M. Cai, H. Liu, Y. Feng, W. Lv and G. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 401, 123257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eslamian, A. Salehi and E. Nadimi, Surf. Sci., 2021, 708, 121817 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Prades, J. Arbiol, A. Cirera, J. Morante, M. Avella, L. Zanotti, E. Comini, G. Faglia and G. Sberveglieri, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 126, 6–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. Oviedo and M. Gillan, Surf. Sci., 2000, 467, 35–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Zhang, L. Pan, X. Zhang, L. Wang and J.-J. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lei, Y. Sun, K. Liu, S. Gao, L. Liang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6826–6829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Bhawna, A. Gupta, P. Kumar, A. Tyagi, R. Kumar, A. Kumar, P. Singh, R. Singh and V. Kumar, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 7775–7782 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, T. Zhang, T. Han, T. Fei, S. Liu and G. Lu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 266, 812–822 CrossRef .
V. B. Kamble and A. M. Umarji, AIP Adv., 2013, 3, 082120 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, M. Kumar, V. N. Rao, M. V. Shankar, S. Bhattacharya and V. Krishnan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17006–17018 RSC .
Y. Yang, Y. Wang and S. Yin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 420, 399–406 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kar, S. Sain, S. Kundu, A. Bhattacharyya, S. Kumar Pradhan and A. Patra, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 1017–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Nail, J. M. Fields, J. Zhao, J. Wang, M. J. Greaney, R. L. Brutchey and F. E. Osterloh, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5135–5142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Zhao and F. Osterloh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2970–2976 RSC .
S. Das and V. Jayaraman, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 66, 112–255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Li, G. An and X. He, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 144, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. Parashar, V. K. Shukla and R. Singh, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 3729–3749 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aziz, S. S. Abbas and W. R. W. Baharom, Mater. Lett., 2013, 91, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Habibi and M. Mardani, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 137, 267–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, X. Chen, H. Pan, L. Xiang, F. Wu and Y. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 9067–9074 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hamrouni, N. Moussa, F. Parrino, A. Di Paola, A. Houas and L. Palmisano, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2014, 390, 133–141 CrossRef CAS .
M. Masjedi-Arani and M. Salavati-Niasari, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 248, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ahmed, A. Fahmy, M. Abuzaid and E. Hashem, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Chem., 2020, 400, 112660 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, C. Du, M. Li, S. Zhang, H. Bai, L. Yang and S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28686–28694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ni, C. Chen, Q. Wang and Z. Li, Chem. Phys., 2019, 525, 110398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niu, F. Huang, L. Cui, P. Huang, Y. Yu and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 681–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suthakaran, S. Dhanapandian, N. Krishnakumar and N. Ponpandian, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2020, 141, 109407 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, F. Chen, P. Hu, L. Zou and X. Hu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 411, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, S. Jia, C. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Yan, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, W. Zhao, J. Yun and Y. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 106, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, H. Liu, W. Dong and M. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 4501–4510 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, M. Xing, Y. Zhou, J. Lv, D. Lei, Y. Zhang, J. Cai, J. Wang, Z. Sun and W. Chen, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2021, 2100087 CrossRef CAS .
V. Van Pham, D.-Q. Mai, D.-P. Bui, T. Van Man, B. Zhu, L. Zhang, J. Sangkaworn, J. Tantirungrotechai, V. Reutrakul and T. M. Cao, Environ. Pollut., 2021, 117510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, C. Wang, H. Sun, P. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Lin and G. Lu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 222, 257–263 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kim, H. G. Na, Y. J. Kwon, S. Y. Kang, M. S. Choi, J. H. Bang, P. Wu and S. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31667–31682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. Guo, H. Zhai and C. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2745–2753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Tian, C. Fei, L. Lv, X. Liu, Z. Zhao and G. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25931–25938 CrossRef CAS .
A. Seza, F. Soleimani, N. Naseri, M. Soltaninejad, S. Montazeri, S. Sadrnezhaad, M. Mohammadi, H. A. Moghadam, M. Forouzandeh and M. Amin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 440, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
A. Johari, M. Bhatnagar and V. Rana, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 7903–7908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Calestani, M. Zha, A. Zappettini, L. Lazzarini, G. Salviati, L. Zanotti and G. Sberveglieri, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2005, 25, 625–630 CrossRef .
L. Li-jun, J. Funct. Mater., 2013, 9, 153–161 Search PubMed .
P. Nguyen, H. T. Ng and M. Meyyappan, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 549–553 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Gao, L. Wong, J. Tao, L. Liao, Z. Zheng, G. Xing, H. Peng, T. Yu and Z. Shen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 135605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Zhu, B. Bai, Y. Li and C. He, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124518 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mallikarjuna, G. A. R. Bari, S. P. Vattikuti and H. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 32789–32796 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nakaruk and C. Sorrell, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2010, 7, 665–676 CrossRef CAS .
G. Patil, D. Kajale, V. Gaikwad and G. Jain, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 6192–6201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, G. Zhao and Y. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 258, 914–918 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, K. Ma, R. Zhuang, K. Wu, Q. Liao, S. Zhong, H. Yue, C. Liu, S. Tang and B. Liang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 14655–14663 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Zhang, X. N. Li, S. L. Bai, R. X. Luo, A. F. Chen and Y. Lin, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 3277–3282 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Heale, I. P. Parkin and C. J. Carmalt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41804–41812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Heiras-Trevizo, P. Amézaga-Madrid, L. Corral-Bustamante, W. Antúnez-Flores, P. P. Ruiz and M. Miki-Yoshida, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 638, 22–27 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, C. Shifu, Z. Wei and Z. Sujuan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 164, 154–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pardeshi and A. Patil, Sol. Energy, 2008, 82, 700–705 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 397, 122685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fenoll, P. Hellín, C. M. Martínez, P. Flores and S. Navarro, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 115, 31–37 CrossRef .
A. Khataee and M. Zarei, Desalination, 2011, 273, 453–460 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Davis, J. L. Gainer, G. O'Neal and I. W. Wu, Water Environ. Res., 1994, 66, 50–53 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Konstantinou and T. A. Albanis, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 49, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Khodami and A. Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 409, 59–68 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, X. Liu, D. Wei, J. Fan and L. Wang, Water Res., 2001, 35, 3927–3933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmed, M. Rasul, W. N. Martens, R. Brown and M. Hashib, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2011, 215, 3–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Abdullah, L. K. Mun, Z. Zainal and M. Z. Hussein, Int. J. Chem., 2013, 5, 56–65 Search PubMed .
N. Fajrina and M. Tahir, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 540–577 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, G. Lu and S. Li, Catal. Lett., 2009, 133, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
S.-i. Fujita, H. Kawamori, D. Honda, H. Yoshida and M. Arai, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 818–824 CrossRef CAS .
I. Horovitz, D. Avisar, M. A. Baker, R. Grilli, L. Lozzi, D. Di Camillo and H. Mamane, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 310, 98–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Chong, B. Jin, C. W. Chow and C. Saint, Water Res., 2010, 44, 2997–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Malato, J. Blanco, A. Campos, J. Cáceres, C. Guillard, J. Herrmann and A. Fernandez-Alba, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 42, 349–357 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huaxu, W. Fuqiang, C. Ziming, H. Shengpeng, X. Bing, G. Xiangtao, T. Jianyu, L. Xiangzheng, C. Ruiyang and L. Wen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 12133–12142 CrossRef .
M. J. Hansen, W. A. Velema, M. M. Lerch, W. Szymanski and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3358–3377 RSC .
A. E. Cassano and O. M. Alfano, Catal. Today, 2000, 58, 167–197 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bahnemann, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 445–459 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faramarzpour, M. Vossoughi and M. Borghei, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 146, 79–85 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, S. Chen, W. Zhao and S. Zhang, Desalination, 2009, 249, 1288–1293 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pourata, A. Khataee, S. Aber and N. Daneshvar, Desalination, 2009, 249, 301–307 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Cutler and J. J. Zimmerman, Anim. Health Res. Rev., 2011, 12, 15 CrossRef PubMed .
A.-G. Rincón and C. Pulgarin, Catal. Today, 2005, 101, 331–344 CrossRef .
A. Sarkar, A. B. Ghosh, N. Saha, D. N. Srivastava, P. Paul and B. Adhikary, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 483, 49–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Alanko, A. Thurber, C. B. Hanna and A. Punnoose, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 07C321 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, Y. Lu, B. Kramm, F. Michel, C. T. Reindl, M. E. Kracht, P. J. Klar, B. K. Meyer and M. Eickhoff, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2016, 253, 1087–1092 CrossRef CAS .
C. Terrier, J. Chatelon, R. Berjoan and J. Roger, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 263, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Al-Hamdi, U. Rinner and M. Sillanpää, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2017, 107, 190–205 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, P. Kumar, A. Tyagi, R. Kumar, A. Kumar, P. Singh, R. Singh and V. Kumar, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 7775–7782 CrossRef .
S.-y. Liu, A. Zada, M. Khan, M. N. Qureshi and R. Wang, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 941 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, J. Huang, L. Shi, L. Cao, W. Zhou, K. Chang, X. Meng, G. Liu, Y. Jie and J. Ye, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 331–340 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sadeghzadeh-Attar, J. Asian Ceram. Soc., 2020, 8, 662–676 CrossRef .
R. Gilani, S. U. Rehman, F. K. Butt, B. U. Haq and F. Aleem, Silicon, 2018, 10, 2317–2328 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, Z. Song, H. Li, H. Xu and L. Y. S. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 131512 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ullah, A. Munir, S. Muhammad, S. Ali, N. Khalid, M. Zubair, M. Sirajuddin, S. Z. Hussain, S. Ahmed and Y. Khan, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 827, 154247 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Ding, W.-Q. Huang, B.-X. Zhou, P. Peng, W.-Y. Hu, M.-Q. Long and G.-F. Huang, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 1547–1556 CrossRef .
H. Tada and S.-I. Naya, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 205 CrossRef CAS .
P.-P. Filippatos, N. Kelaidis, M. Vasilopoulou, D. Davazoglou and A. Chroneos, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11, 551 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Ding, W.-Q. Huang, Y.-C. Yang, B.-X. Zhou, W.-Y. Hu, M.-Q. Long, P. Peng and G.-F. Huang, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 205704 CrossRef .
J. Wu, R. Zhao, H. Xiang, C. Yang, W. Zhong, C. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Li and N. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 292, 120200 CrossRef CAS .
M. d. O. Melo and L. A. Silva, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2011, 22, 1399–1406 CAS .
J. Hu and R. G. Gordon, Sol. Cells, 1991, 30, 437–450 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Porte, R. Maller, H. Faber, H. N. AlShareef, T. D. Anthopoulos and M. A. McLachlan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 758–765 RSC .
A. Kumar and V. Krishnan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2009807 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar, A. Govind and R. Nagarajan, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 5637–5645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nagarajan, V. Kumar and S. Ahmad, Indian J. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg., Bio-inorg., Phys., Theor. Anal. Chem., 2012, 145–154 CAS .
D. Mocatta, G. Cohen, J. Schattner, O. Millo, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Science, 2011, 332, 77–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gahlawat, J. Singh, A. K. Yadav and P. P. Ingole, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 20463–20477 RSC .
C. V. Reddy, B. Babu, S. P. Vattikuti, R. Ravikumar and J. Shim, J. Lumin., 2016, 179, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kar and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4375–4380 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, K. Dou, W. Y. Teoh, Y. Zhan, T. F. Hung, F. Zhang, J. Xu, R. Zhang and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4847–4853 CAS .
A. Younis, D. Chu, Y. V. Kaneti and S. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 378–387 RSC .
M. Zhukovskyi, P. Tongying, H. Yashan, Y. Wang and M. Kuno, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6615–6623 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and Q. Xu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1449–1458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Galińska and J. Walendziewski, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 1143–1147 CrossRef .
B. Zieliñska, E. Borowiak-Palen and R. J. Kalenczuk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1797–1802 CrossRef .
A. Nada, M. Barakat, H. Hamed, N. Mohamed and T. Veziroglu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 687–691 CrossRef CAS .
C. Haw, W. Chiu, N. H. Khanis, S. A. Rahman, P. Khiew, S. Radiman, R. Abd-Shukor and M. A. A. Hamid, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 691–701 CrossRef .
K. Gurunathan, P. Maruthamuthu and M. Sastri, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1997, 22, 57–62 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, D. Wang, C. Chang, K. Weng, L. Yang, S. Lee, T. Cheng and C. Hwang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2007, 202, 1329–1332 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, Z. Jiang, H. Shi, T. Xiao and Z. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5301–5309 RSC .
X. Liao, J. Chen, M. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Ding and Y. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 658, 642–648 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, F. Liu, B. Liu, L. Tian, W. Hu and Q. Xia, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 287, 126–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Huang, C. Wu, S. Huang, D. Chen, Q. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. Jiang, B. Zhao and Z. Chen, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Struct. Chem., 2019, 75, 812–821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Awa, R. Akashi, A. Akita, S. I. Naya, H. Kobayashi and H. Tada, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2155–2161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jourshabani, Z. Shariatinia and A. Badiei, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 248, 688–702 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Chiang and C.-C. Lin, Powder Technol., 2013, 246, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Li, H. Zhang and C. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 257–260 CrossRef CAS .
K. Alorku, M. Manoj, C. Yanjuan, H. Zhou and A. Yuan, Chemosphere, 2021, 273, 128575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mallikarjuna, G. A. R. Bari, S. P. Vattikuti and H. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 32789–32796 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zang, L. Li, X. Li, R. Lin and G. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 246, 277–286 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, S. Li, Y. Su, D. He and Z. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 463, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Lee, H. Bai, Z. Liu and D. D. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10575–10584 CrossRef CAS .
M. Benamira, H. Lahmar, L. Messaadia, G. Rekhila, F.-Z. Akika, M. Himrane and M. Trari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 1719–1728 Search PubMed .
Q. Du and G. Lu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 305, 235–241 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guerrero-Araque, P. Acevedo-Peña, D. Ramírez-Ortega, L. Lartundo-Rojas and R. Gómez, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2017, 92, 1531–1539 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Hong and G. W. Ho, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, K. Zhao, T. Wang, J. Deng and H. Zeng, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 40, 670–675 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tian, S. Xu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Li, H. Liu, R. Song, Z. Yu and J. Wang, Adv. Condens. Matter Phys., 2018, 2018, 1–6 CrossRef .
L. Sun, B. Wang and Y. Wang, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2018, 15, 111–117 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dholam, N. Patel, A. Santini and A. Miotello, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 9581–9590 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dholam, N. Patel and A. Miotello, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 6519–6528 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zada, M. Khan, M. N. Qureshi, S.-Y. Liu and R. Wang, Front. Chem., 2020, 7, 941 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, A. Palacios-Padrós, R. Kirchgeorg, A. Tighineanu and P. Schmuki, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 421–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Baek, B. J. Kim, G. S. Han, S. W. Hwang, D. R. Kim, I. S. Cho and H. S. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1479–1487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-T. Liu, B.-H. Wu, Y.-T. Lai, N.-H. Tai, T.-P. Perng and L.-J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 18–25 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, D. Chen, G. Luo, Y. R. Lu, C. Chen, Y. Zou, C. L. Dong, Y. Li and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901439 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Li, M. Shao and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6327–6336 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Li, C. K. Tan, C. Qian, A. C. Grimsdale and A. I. Y. Tok, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 470, 800–806 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, Y. Xiao, X. L. Wang, D. W. Feng, H. Yu and X. T. Dong, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 8460–8469 CrossRef CAS .
A. Derbal, S. Omeiri, A. Bouguelia and M. Trari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4274–4282 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, Z. Zhang, X. Li, L. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. He, F. Teng, J. Zhou, W. Han and E. Xie, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 101–107 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, Z. Wang, Y. Du, X. Qi, Y. Huang, C. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5374–5378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, C. Gao, Z. Wu, W. Han, Y. Wang, W. Fu, X. Li and E. Xie, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 318–327 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, W. Ren and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 5, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gun, G. Y. Song, V. H. V. Quy, J. Heo, H. Lee, K.-S. Ahn and S. H. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20292–20303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Sheridan, D. J. Hill, B. D. Sherman, D. Wang, S. L. Marquard, K.-R. Wee, J. F. Cahoon and T. J. Meyer, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2440–2446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, R. Tang, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 248, 593–602 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, B. Kalanyan, P. G. Hoertz, A. Miller, D. H. Kim, K. Hanson, L. Alibabaei, J. Liu, T. J. Meyer and G. N. Parsons, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1481–1488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Radecka, A. Wnuk, A. Trenczek-Zajac, K. Schneider and K. Zakrzewska, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 841–851 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Bondarchuk, I. Corrales-Mendoza, S. A. Tomás and F. Marken, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 19667–19675 CrossRef CAS .
H. Han, S. Kment, F. Karlicky, L. Wang, A. Naldoni, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Small, 2018, 14, 1703860 CrossRef PubMed .
M. N. Shaddad, P. Arunachalam, M. Hezam and A. M. Al-Mayouf, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 879 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, H. Liu, W. Dong and M. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 4501–4510 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Zou, Z. He, Y. Zhao, X. Kang, Y. Zhao and Z. Miao, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 865, 158597 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, S. Huang, M. Liu, P. Li, W. Sun and L. Hou, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 2660–2668 RSC .
A. Ansari and D. Nematollahi, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118226 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng and L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 231, 34–42 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, F. Sun, Z. Huang, H. Chen, Z. Zhuang, Z. Pan, J. Long and F. Gu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 215, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pandey, P. Singh and V. Kumar, Environ. Nanotechnol., Monit. Manag., 2021, 16, 100596 Search PubMed .
H. Dong, G. Zeng, L. Tang, C. Fan, C. Zhang, X. He and Y. He, Water Res., 2015, 79, 128–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Du, F. Zhang, Z. Zheng, X. Zhang, Q. Feng and C. Wang, Mater. Chem., 2013, 140, 373–381 CAS .
D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 122685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, N. Zhang and C. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2010, 11, 670–674 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yadav, N. Kumar, V. Kumari, A. Mittal and S. Sharma, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 642–645 CAS .
S. Sultana, M. Z. Khan, K. Umar, A. S. Ahmed and M. Shahadat, J. Mol. Struct., 2015, 1098, 393–399 CrossRef CAS .
S. Perveen and M. A. Farrukh, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 3219–3230 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Martínez-Huitle, A. De Battisti, S. Ferro, S. Reyna, M. N. Cerro-Lopez and M. A. Quiro, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 6929–6935 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fenoll, M. Martínez-Menchón, G. Navarro, N. Vela and S. Navarro, Chemosphere, 2013, 91, 571–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fenoll, P. Flores, P. Hellín, C. M. Martínez and S. Navarro, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 204, 54–64 CrossRef .
M. Errami, R. Salghi, N. Abidi, L. Bazzi, B. Hammouti, A. Chakir, E. Roth and S. Al-Deyab, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 4927–4938 CAS .
W. Han, C. Zhong, L. Liang, Y. Sun, Y. Guan, L. Wang, X. Sun and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 179–186 CrossRef CAS .
J. Niu, D. Maharana, J. Xu, Z. Chai and Y. Bao, J. Environ. Sci., 2013, 25, 1424–1430 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, L. Zhan, Z. He, L. Lin, J. Tu, Z. Zhang, J. Chen and L. Xu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 175, 614–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zaviska, P. Drogui, J.-F. Blais, G. Mercier and P. Lafrance, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 185, 1499–1507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhong, K. Wei, W. Han, L. Wang, X. Sun and J. Li, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 705, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
J. Niu, Y. Bao, Y. Li and Z. Chai, Chemosphere, 2013, 92, 1571–1577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. P. Malpass, D. W. Miwa, S. A. S. Machado, P. Olivi and A. D. J. Motheo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 137, 565–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Evgenidou, E. Bizani, C. Christophoridis and K. Fytianos, Chemosphere, 2007, 68, 1877–1882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Miguel, M. P. Ormad, R. Mosteo and J. L. Ovelleiro, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 2012, 1–11 CrossRef .
S. Malato, J. Blanco, C. Richter, B. Braun and M. Maldonado, Appl. Catal., B, 1998, 17, 347–356 CrossRef CAS .
S. Malato, P. Fernández-Ibáñez, M. I. Maldonado, J. Blanco and W. Gernjak, Catal. Today, 2009, 147, 1–59 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, S. Li, Y. Peng, Z. Chen and X. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 406, 124675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, A. Kumar, A. Kumar and V. Krishnan, Catal. Rev., 2020, 62, 346–405 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Zhu, S. Zhang, Y. Cai, Z. Lv, M. Fang, X. Tan and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 279, 119390 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, A. J. Misra, A. H. Rahman, B. Das, R. Jayabalan, A. J. Tamhankar, A. Mishra, C. S. Lundborg and S. K. Tripathy, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118065 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Ayesh, S. T. Mahmoud, S. J. Ahmad and Y. Haik, Mater. Lett., 2014, 128, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rieu, M. Camara, G. Tournier, J.-P. Viricelle, C. Pijolat, N. F. de Rooij and D. Briand, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 236, 1091–1097 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasbe, S. Deshmukh, T. Mujawar, V. Bachuwar, L. Deshmukh and A. Shaligram, Int. J. Sci. Eng. Res., 2015, 6, 1977 Search PubMed .
Q. Jiang, X. Zhang and J. You, Small, 2018, 14, 1801154 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ren, D. Yang, Z. Yang, J. Feng, X. Zhu, J. Niu, Y. Liu, W. Zhao and S. F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2421–2429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Deng, Q. Chen and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004209 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, X. Sun, T. Peng, Y. Liu, H. Zhu, S. Guo and X.-Z. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 402–407 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Yong, N. Tsvetkov, L. Larina, B. T. Ahn and D. K. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 556, 503–508 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Bakr, Q. Wali, S. Yang, M. Yousefsadeh, K. Padmasree, J. Ismail, M. H. Ab Rahim, M. M. Yusoff and R. Jose, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 58, 643–653 CrossRef .
A. Pang, X. Sun, H. Ruan, Y. Li, S. Dai and M. Wei, Nano Energy, 2014, 5, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Djurišić, Y. H. Leung, A. M. Ng, X. Y. Xu, P. K. Lee, N. Degger and R. Wu, Small, 2015, 11, 26–44 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Horie and K. Fujita, Advances in molecular toxicology, Elsevier,  2011, vol. 5, pp. 145–178 Search PubMed .
A. Gupta, S. Kumar, R. Kumar, A. K. Choudhary, K. Kumari, P. Singh and V. Kumar, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 7521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Q. Jiang, Z. Xiao, X. Li, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 5363–5367 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Different solar energy-based approaches for H2 generation.	 

 	Fig. 2  The mechanism of the photocatalytic water splitting reaction.	 

 	Fig. 3  A simple representation of photoelectrochemical water-splitting reaction.	 

 	Fig. 4  Species formed during photocatalytic pesticide degradation in aqueous solution.81,86	 

 	Fig. 5  Mechanism showing the formation of p-chloranil and tetrachlorohydroquinone.	 

 	Fig. 6  3-D representation of the reaction showing the degradation of methomyl using Fe-ZSM-5.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photocatalytic degradation pathway of methomyl using TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 8  Crystal structure of rutile SnO2.	 

 	Fig. 9  Rutile SnO2 in different orientations.	 
EOV = Edefect − Eperfect + 1/2Eoxy

 	Fig. 10  (a) Possible structure of SnO2, (b) bridging-oxygen vacancy, (c) in-plane oxygen vacancy, (d) oxygen vacancy on top of the 2nd layer, (e) bridging vacancy in the 2nd layer, and (f) in-plane oxygen vacancy in the 2nd layer. Oxygen, tin atoms, and oxygen vacancies are represented with red, dark grey, and yellow balls, respectively. Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. All rights reserved.115	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of widely employed methods for the synthesis of NMs.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic overview of the sol–gel processing method for the synthesis of NPs.	 

 	Fig. 13  TEM images of SnO2 and SnAg5 (5% w/w AgIO4/SnO2) prepared through the sol–gel route (© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).136	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic overview of the hydrothermal/solvothermal method for the synthesis of NPs.	 

 	Fig. 15  Mn3O4@SnO2/Co3O4 core–shell nanostructure: (a and c) SEM images and (b and d) TEM images (© 2019 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).143	 

 	Fig. 16  The synthetic process of flower-like SnO2–g-C3N4. Copyright © 2021 Wiley Online Library. All rights reserved (© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH).144	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Synthetic process of g-C3N4/SnO2 and (b) HRTEM image of g-C3N4/SnO2 (Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. All rights reserved).145	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic overview of the synthesis of graphene–SnO2 nanocomposites by microwave assisted method (Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society).147	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic overview of the synthetic process of the SnO2/Pt/In2O3 material (© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).156	 

 	Fig. 20  Different magnification TEM images of the optimized carbon-doped SnO2 sample (a) 100 nm, (b) 20 nm, and (c) lattice planes (© 2020 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).157	 

 	Fig. 21  Structure of the Zn2SnO4/SnO2/CNT nanocomposite: (a) TEM image and (b) HRTEM image (© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).12	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Effect of concentration of the catalyst dose, (b) concentration of clothianidin, and (c) pH on the photocatalytic degradation efficiency (Copyright © 2020 Elsevier. All rights reserved).167	 

 	Fig. 23  H2 generation as a function of pH for 2.0 wt.% NiO/TiO2 catalyst (Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).178	 

 	Fig. 24  Effect of temperature conditions on H2 gas evolution (© 2017 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).182	 

1	Pure SnO2	8.4	28
2	Ce@SnO2	5.5	30
3	Nd@SnO2	4.1	35
4	La@SnO2	3.4	40
5	Gd@SnO2	3.2	58
6	I@SnO2	2.5	50
7	Sb@SnO2	1.8	54

 	Fig. 25  Results of (A) hydrogen generation and (B) degradation of 2-chlorophenol using SnO2–C3N4 nanohybrid. Copyright © 2019 Frontiers in Chemistry. All rights reserved.197	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) Schematic energy level diagrams of the as-prepared non-doped SnO2 and Sb-doped SnO2 with varying Sb doping content and (B) H2 evolution rate of different doping amounts of Sb to SnO2. Copyright © 2017 Elsevier. All rights reserved (© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).198	 

 	Fig. 27  Side-views of the adsorption configurations of bare SnO2 (left) and SnO2@C QDs (right) on the g-C3N4 surface (© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).201	 

 	Fig. 28  Band structure and density of states (a) pure SnO2 and (b) W-doped SnO2 (© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).202	 

 	Fig. 29  Representation of band structures for (a) bulk SnO2, (b) SnO2(101). The black horizontal line indicates the Fermi level. (c) Electron and hole density map distributions for the surface states of SnO2(101) (© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).203	 

 	Fig. 30  Energy diagram of the SnO2–TiO2 hybrid-photocatalyzed reaction system (© 2021 MDPI All rights reserved).204	 

 	Fig. 31  Band structures for (a) bulk SnO2, (b) SnO2(001), (c) MoS2, and (d) MoS2/SnO2(001). The Fermi level is indicated by the horizontal dashed line (© 2016 Author(s). Published by AIP Publishing).206	 

 	Fig. 32  Representation of total densities of states for (a) undoped SnO2 and (b) Sb-doped SnO2 (© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).198	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Representation of differential charge densities of the SnS2/SnO2 heterointerface. Sections colored yellow and blue indicate the increase and decrease in the electron density, respectively; (b) charge analysis of Sn cations along the direction of SnS2 → SnO2via a heterointerface; (c) calculated DOSs for the SnO2, SnS2, and SnS2/SnO2 catalysts (© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).207	 

 	Fig. 34  Band positions and band gap energy (w.r.t. NHE) of different semiconductors at pH = 1.208	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic representation of doped SnO2.	 

 	Fig. 36  A pictorial representation of the populated states in the conduction band on increasing the extent of doping.	 

 	Fig. 37  (A) Elemental mapping of N = doped SnO2 and (B) HRTEM images (a) N:SnO2 nanoparticles and (b) enlarged view showing the lattice fringes (© 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).112	 

 	Fig. 38  Proposed schematic diagram of water splitting by N-doped SnO2 (© 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).112	 

 	Fig. 39  Pictorial representation of the generation of hydrogen gas using SnO2 QDs (quantum dots) from (a) glycerol medium, (b) S2−/SO32− as hole scavengers (© 2016 Science Press and Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Published by Elsevier B.V. and Science Press. All rights reserved).225	 

 	Fig. 40  (a) Graphical representation of photocatalytic water splitting by Ce:SnO2 with various sacrificial agents, (b) bar diagram showing photocatalytic water splitting by Ce:SnO2 using multiple scavengers (© 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).106	 

 	Fig. 41  Proposed water splitting using NiO co-catalyst and SnO2 as a photocatalyst (© 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).106	 

 	Fig. 42  The schematic diagram for possible photocatalytic reaction mechanism for the dye-sensitized semiconductor.	 

 	Fig. 43  Electron transfer process in coupled SnO2.229	 

 	Fig. 44  Electron transfer mechanism in the SnS2–SnO2/graphene nanocomposite.231	 

 	Fig. 45  SEM images of the SnO2–TiO2 nanohybrid at (a) low and (b) high magnifications (© 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).232	 

TiO2–SnO2–Al2O3	Hydrothermal	
	129.45	Appropriate band gap	
236

CdS–NiS-10%/SnO2	Hydrothermal	—	35176 μmol g−1 h−1	Improved charge transfer efficiency	
26

C doped SnO2	Thermal decomposition	—	38.43 μmol g−1 h−1	Increased lifetime of photogenerated carriers	
237

g-C3N4/SnO2	Chemical synthesis	Pt	900 μmol g−1 h−1	Interfacial interactions between g-C3N4 and SnO2 prevent the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers	
238

Mg-Reduced Zn2SnO4/SnO2	Reduction method	—	120 μmol g−1	Charge transfer between reduced Zn2SnO4 and SnO2 promotes effective charge separation	
239

TiO2/SnO2	Electrospinning	—	200 μmol h−1	The synthesized compound exhibited good mesoporosity, nanofibrous structure, enhanced light absorption capacity, and ternary junctions for the separation of electrons and holes.	
240

SnO2/SiC	Solvothermal	—	274 μmol g−1 h−1	Different band positions of heterostructure SnO2/SiC leads to the easy separation and transfer of photogenerated pairs	
229

Pr2NiO4/SnO2	Sol–gel method	—	24.3 μmol g−1 min−1	Efficient charge separation and presence of S2O32− are responsible for high photocatalytic activity	
241

Pt/Ni(OH)2–SnO2	Loading Ni(OH)2 on SnO2 by hydrolysis method	—	0.9 μmol g−1 h−1	Ni(OH)2 enhances light absorption in the visible region	
242

Pt/Ni(OH)2–Ni2O3–SnO2	Loading Ni2O3 on the SnO2 surface, synthesized by the hydrolysis method	—	10.8 μmol g−1 h−1	Ni2O3 suppresses the recombination of photogenerated charges and hence acts as an electron trap	
242

Au/SnO2/g-C3N4	Solid state	—	770 μmol g−1 h−1	Efficient charge separation by the transfer of excited electrons from plasmonic Au and C3N4 to SnO2	
14

SnO2–TiO2	Incipient wetness impregnation	CuO, CoO	1486.4 μmol g−1 h−1	CuO carries out electron transfer and catalyzes water reduction to H2, whereas CoO catalyzes oxidation and helps in improving the charge separation	
243

SnO2/ZnO	Electrospinning and hydrothermal	—	202.2 μmol g−1 h−1	Sulfurization using Na2S results in the widening and extension of the absorption spectra in the visible region	
244

Sb doped SnO2	Hydrothermal	—	49.94 μmol h−1	Sb doping leads to the formation of surface defects and band gap narrowing	
198

Ce, Sb co-doped SnO2	Sol–gel	—	8.5 μmol g−1 h−1	Ce doping enables absorption in the visible region, whereas Sb doping effectively separates the photogenerated electrons and holes	
245

SnO2−x/In2O3−y	Annealing	—	Not defined	Controlling oxygen vacancies in the interfacial reactions of SnO2−x/In2O3−y	
246

SnO2–SiC	Hydrothermal	—	471.8 μmol g−1 h−1	Synergistic effect of the SnO2–SiC heterojunction	
247

Ce doped SnO2	Low-temperature reaction	NiO	25 μmol g−1 h−1	Ce doping in the SnO2 lattice induces enormous oxygen vacancies and surface defects	
106

CuO/SnO2	Co-precipitation	—	6473 μmol g−1 h−1	Interparticle electron transfer from SnO2 to CuO inhibit electron–hole recombination	
228

In–SnO2/Cr-doped-TiO2	Radio-frequency magnetron sputtering	—	24.4 μmol h−1	Deposition of multilayer films In–SnO2/Cr-doped-TiO2 lowers the charge recombination rate	
248

In–SnO2/V-doped TiO2	Radio-frequency magnetron sputtering	—	31.2 μmol h−1	High visible light absorption by V-doped TiO2 and increased number of space charge ITO/TiO2 interlayers reduce charge recombination	
249

Nb-doped SnO2/V2O5	Hydrothermal	—	1346 μmol g−1 h−1	Increased light absorption, efficient separation, and transfer of charge carriers	
199

SnO2/g-C3N4	Fabrication of g-C3N4 sheets through muffle furnace	—	132 μmol h−1	Improved charge separation by transfer of electrons from g-C3N4 to SnO2	
250

SnO2/g-C3N4 nanocomposite	Thermal oxidation method	—	0.2 mmol g−1 h−1	Z-Scheme improves the carrier separation and transfer efficiency	
144


 	Fig. 46  Scheme of band alignment and charge transfer process in the SnO2 NSs/TiO2/CdS QDs photoanode. The band gap of CdS, TiO2, and SnO2 are 2.4 eV, 3.2 eV, and 3.6 eV, respectively. (b) Scheme of light transmission inside the hybrid SnO2 NSs/TiO2/CdS QDs photoanode (© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved).256	 

In2O3/SnO2	Sol–gel and hard-template method	21.51 mmol g−1	Reduced band gap due to In2O3-sensitized porous SnO2	
257

SnO2@BiVO4/Co-Pi	Chemical vapor deposition	2.63 mA cm−2	Efficient charge separation and charge transport	
255

SnO2 NSs/TiO2/CdS QDs	Hydrothermal	7.6 μmol mA−1 h−1	TiO2 interlayered between CdS guest and SnO2 host reduces the charge recombination rate	
256

In2O3/SnO2	Sol–gel and hard-template method	21.51 mmol g−1	Reduced band gap due to In2O3-sensitized porous SnO2	
257

CuFeO2/SnO2	Solvent chemical route	0.026 mL h−1 mg−1	The photogenerated charge separation is attributed to the electron transfer between the Cu and Sn oxides	
258

SnO2/TiO2/CdS	Chemical vapor deposition	8.75 mA cm−2	Acceleration of electron transfer by 3-D SnO2 nanowires reduce electron–hole recombination	
259

ZnO/TiO2/CuO on FTO	Hydrothermal method	3.5 μmol cm−2	CuO extends the absorption in the visible range, provides a larger surface area, and efficient photogenerated electron–hole separation	
260

CdS quantum dots decorated screw-like SnO2	CVD, hydrothermal and successive ionic layer absorption and reaction (SILAR)	159.6 μmol (h cm−2)	Screw such as structure provides high absorption capacity for the visible region, high-speed electron transport, and high surface area	
261

3D TiO2/SnO2	CVD & hydrothermal	1 mA cm−2	Rutile TiO2 suppresses the charge recombination rate	
262

Sb-doped SnO2	Self-organizing anodization of Sn films on the substrate	1.5 mA cm−2	High surface area and nanochannel geometry of Sb-doped SnO2	
251

TiO2/SnO2 inverse opal films	Spin coating	5.46 mA cm−2	Photoactive TiO2 and conductive SnO2 provides high light-harvesting efficiency	
263

BiVO4/WO3/SnO2	Sol–gel spin coating	∼3.1 mA cm−2	BiVO4/WO3/SnO2-based double-heterojunction showed better charge transfer efficiency and high transmittance even at longer wavelengths	
252

p+n-Si–SnO2/TiO2	Atomic layer deposition	100 μA cm−2	The p+n− Si junction provides a potential of about 350 mV per e− to drive unbiased water splitting	
264

Au–BiVO4/SnO2	Hydrothermal method	3.83 mA cm−2	The inverse opal structure provides a high specific surface area and the charge separation is attributed to the parallel structure of the band gap energy of the heterojunction	
265

Sb-doped SnO2-supported TiO2	Atomic layer deposition	0.58 mA cm−2	The electron–hole recombination is inhibited by the transfer of electrons from the semiconductor shell to the conductive core	
266

Zn2SnO4/SnO2/carbon nanotube	Cold spray film deposition	17.2 mA cm−2	Efficient charge separation and faster electron transport	
12

TiO2/SnO2	RF sputtering	0.2 μA cm−2	Inclusion of 2% Sn and higher recombining time	
267

g-C3N4/SnO2	Microwave-assisted method	33 μA cm−2	High surface area, high charge transfer, and large charge separation time	
150

SnO2 ceramics	Aerosol-assisted CVD	2.8 mA cm−2	3-D morphology results in high charge transfer	
268

Sb-doped SnO2 nanorods	Thermohydrolysis	
	Reduced charge recombination and higher charge transfer	
269

SnO2/SiC nanowire	Solvothermal	62 mA cm−2	Effective electron–hole separation	
229

BiVO4/SnO2 film	Electrodeposition	0.93 mA cm−2	High surface area and effective electron–hole separation	
270

Mn3O4@SnO2/Co3O4 core shell nanocomposite	Hydrothermal	10 mA cm−2	Exposed high specific surface area and surface-active sites	
271

SnO2 nanostructures	Solvothermal	10 mA cm−2	Good electrocatalytic stability	
272

SnS2/SnO2 electrocatalyst	Hydrothermal	10 mA cm−2	High density active sites, lowered water dissociation energies, and optimized adsorption energies of hydrogen atoms	
207

CoS2/SnO2@MoS2	Hydrothermal	10 mA cm−2	Long time stability	
273



Cu2O/SnO2/graphene nanocomposite	
	Sol–gel method	Pendimethalin	Cu2O addition promotes the transfer of light-induced electrons and holes between Cu2O and SnO2	
279

Au–SnO2–rGO	Hydrothermal	Clothianidin	97% degradation with 120 min of UV-LED irradiation	Better light harvesting efficiency of Au along with decreased charge recombination rate	
280

C dots modified g-C3N4/SnO2	Thermal polymerization	Indomethacin	The degradation rate of CDs/g-C3N4/SnO2 was 5.62 times higher than that of pristine g-C3N4	Combining g-C3N4 with SnO2 results in the improved separation of charge carriers	
33

SnO2-doped Cu2O	Ball mil method	Trifluralin	After 2 h irradiation, trifluralin was almost completely degraded.	The rate of separation of photons induced by Cu2O was significantly reduced by SnO2 doping	
281

ZnO–SnO2 nanocomposite	Co-precipitation method	Triclopyr	Almost 100% degradation	Reduced recombination rate of photogenerated species	
282

ZnO–SnO2	Ball milling method	4-Methylbenzoic acid	92.5% degradation in 600 min	The transfer of photogenerated e− from the CB of ZnO to the CB of SnO2 prevents e−–h+ recombination	
172

2-Chloro-5-nitrobenzoic acid
SnO2–SrO	Hydrothermal and sol–gel method	Metalaxyl	Successfully removed	The hydrothermal route is better to achieve fine particle size, purity, and crystallinity	
283

SnO2	Solvothermal	Glyphosate	Conversion rate reaches 91.2%	Electron transfer from SnO2 to graphite-like carbon led to effective e−–h+ separation	
230

Ti0.85Sn0.15O2	Sol–gel	Chlorpyrifos	92% degradation at pH 5.8	Insertion of Sn into the TiO2 lattice narrows the band gap energy, which leads to a decrease in e−–h+ recombination	
284

SnO2	Thermal decomposition	Atrazine	Complete atrazine removal within 1 h of electrolysis	The formation of OH˙ for degradation is promoted by the inactive nature of SnO2	
104

Ti/SnO2	—	Methamidophos	Methamidophos electrooxidation was observed at all the applied current densities	Na2S2O8 prevents recombination by capturing the e−s and generating the SO4˙− radical for oxidation	
285

ZnO, TiO2, WO3, SnO2 and ZnS	—	Chlorotoluron, diuron, fluometuron, isoproturon, linuron	90% degradation of isoproturon and linuron occurs in 23–47 min, respectively, using tandem ZnO/Na2S2O8	Na2S2O8 prevents recombination by capturing the e−s and generating the SO4˙− radical for oxidation	
286

ZnO, TiO2, WO3, SnO2 and ZnS	—	Ethoprophos, isoxaben, metalaxyl, metribuzin, pencycuron, pendimethalin, propanil, tolclofos-methyl	The lower activity of SnO2 is due to shorter wavelengths necessary for catalyst activation	Na2S2O8 prevents recombination by capturing the e−s and generating the SO4˙− radical for oxidation	
287

ZnO, TiO2, WO3, SnO2	—	Fenamiphos	The lower activity of SnO2 is due to shorter wavelengths necessary for catalyst activation.	Na2S2O8 prevents recombination by capturing the e−s and generating the SO4˙− radical for oxidation	
168

SnO2 anode	SnO2 as an anode	Cypermethrin	Complete removal of cypermethrin at low conc. of NaCl	Oxidation was carried out by OH˙ and the other electrogenerated oxidant ClO−	
105

SnO2 anode	SnO2 as an anode	Bupirimate	In 2% NaCl, COD removal was 59% on SnO2 anode.	Low NaCl conc. promotes hydroxyl, chloride, and oxychloride radical formation	
288

TiO2-NTs/SnO2Sb/PbO2 anode	Sol–gel	TC,a Tz,b and PPCc	Degradation sequence: PPC > TC > Tz	Oxidation of triazole fungicides by OH˙	
289

Ti/SnO2–Sb electrode	Sol–gel	2,4-DCPd	99.9% degradation after 20 min of electrolysis	Reaction of OH˙ with organic molecules on the anode surface enhances the oxidation process	
290

Ti/SnO2–Sb/PbO2 electrodes	Electrodeposition and thermal deposition of SnO2–Sb coating onto titanium plates	4-Chloro-3-methyl phenol	Electrochemical degradation	Electrooxidation is carried out by OH˙ and active chlorine present on the electrode surface	
291

Ti/SnO2 circular anode electrodes	Titanium coated with iridium oxide (Ti/IrO2) and titanium coated with tin (Ti/SnO2)	Atrazine	Ti/SnO2 is less effective than Ti/IrO2 for the oxidation of atrazine	Electrochemical generation of active chlorine	
292

Ti/SnO2–Sb/PbO2 anode	Electrodeposition and thermal deposition of SnO2–Sb coating onto titanium plates	Tricyclazole	93.4% tricyclazole was removed after 150 min	OH˙-Induced degradation in the presence of supporting electrolyte Na2SO4	
293

Ti/SnO2–Sb electrodes	Sol–gel	Pentachlorophenol	99.8% degradation after 30 min of electrolysis	The dechlorination process leads to the electrochemical degradation of PCP	
294

Ti/IrSnO2, Ti/IrRuSnO2	Galvanostatic electrolysis	Atrazine	100% removal of atrazine in 0.10 M NaCl	Removal of atrazine and TOC was only achieved due to the formation of the oxidizing species ClO˙	
295


 	Fig. 47  Electron transfer process in the Au–SnO2–rGO heterojunction.	 

 	Fig. 48  Schematic overview of the mechanism shows water splitting and degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol using Z-scheme SnO2/Pt/In2O3 photocatalyst (© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).156	 

 	Fig. 49  Schematic diagram showing the mechanism of transfer of the charge carriers under light irradiation using SnO2/Pt/In2O3 (© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved).156	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
