Toward non-volatile photonic memory: concept, material and design  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8MH00110C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8MH00110C
(Minireview)
Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 641-654Toward non-volatile photonic memory: concept, material and design

        
          
            Yongbiao 
            Zhai
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jia-Qin 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ye 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Jing-Yu 
            Mao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Ren
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Vellaisamy A. L. 
            Roy
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Su-Ting 
            Han
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Electronics Science & Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: sutinghan@szu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, P. R. China
cInstitute for Advanced Study, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: yezhou@szu.edu.cn
dDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. E-mail: val.roy@cityu.edu.hk
Received 
      25th January 2018
    , Accepted 21st March 2018First published on 21st March 2018AbstractDigital technology is one of the greatest modern breakthroughs, allowing sounds, words and images to be stored in binary form. However, there is a huge gap between the amount of data created daily and the capacities of existing storage media. Developing multibit memory in which 2n levels, typically represented by distinguishable current levels, can be achieved in a single cell is a critical specification for achieving high-density memory devices. Compared with electrically operated memory, photonic memory—in which electrical read-out is orthogonal to the photo-programming operation—promises high differentiation among different data levels. From another aspect, benefiting from its high density, multifunctionality, low power consumption, and multilevel data storage, photonic memory devices hold future promise for built-in, non-volatile memory and reconstructed logic operation and are expected to bridge this capacity gap. Thus, we present a review on the development of photonic memory, with a view towards inspiring more intriguing ideas on the elegant selection of materials and design of novel device structures that may finally induce major progress in the manufacture and application of photonic memory.
Yongbiao Zhai
Dr Yongbiao Zhai is a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. He received his PhD degree in Materials Chemistry from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (2017). His research interests include the fabrication and application of optoelectronic materials and devices.
Ye Zhou
Dr Ye Zhou is an IAS Fellow in the Institute for Advanced Study, Shenzhen University. His research interests include flexible and printed electronics, organic/inorganic semiconductors, surface and interface physics, nanostructured materials, and nano-scale devices for technological applications, such as logic circuits, data storage, energy harvesting, photonics and sensors.
Vellaisamy A. L. Roy
Dr Vellaisamy A. L. Roy is an associate professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on materials and device engineering for electronic devices, such as transistors, flash memory, photovoltaic devices, and sensors. His research is interdisciplinary, and he leads a team of physicists, chemists, and engineers.
Su-Ting Han
Dr Su-Ting Han is an associate professor at Shenzhen University. She received her MSc degree in Analytical Chemistry from Hong Kong Baptist University and her PhD degree in Physics and Materials Science from City University of Hong Kong. After graduation, she worked at the City University of Hong Kong as a postdoctoral fellow. Her research interests include functional electronic devices and flexible, stretchable, and wearable electronics.
1. Introduction
The storage and transmission of information have gone through many revolutionary advances, from cave paintings and hieroglyphic words to paper books and then to digital technology.1–3 Among them, digital technology is the greatest breakthrough, since it allows words, sounds and images to be stored in binary form. Noteworthy improvements in the performance of computers with versatile configurations have induced the explosive growth of information storage requirements, since memory is one of the main functions of computers in this era.4,5 Bekenstein predicted that the generated information will double every year and that stored data will reach around 109 GB in 2020.6 However, there is a huge gap between the amount of data created daily and the capacities of existing storage media. To boost the data storage ability of memory devices, the most popular method relies on continuous scaling down to integrate more memory cells per unit area.7–11 This strategy has intrinsic limits, since the miniaturization trend driven by Moore's law will reach its bottleneck by 2022, according to the latest “International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors,” due to technical complexity.12,13 An alternative method is to develop multilevel memory, in which 2n levels can be achieved in a single cell—a critical specification for achieving high-density memory chips. The main challenge of multilevel data storage is obtaining the highest current differences between storage levels and preventing each state from being close to others.14,15 Compared with electrically operated memory, light-modulated memory, in which electrical read-outs are orthogonal to the photoprogramming operation, promises large discrepancies among the different levels. In another aspect, conventional complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)-based volatile computers require frequent communications with external non-volatile memory devices.16 The fundamental von Neumann architecture is non-scalable and inefficient for processing interconnected neural networks, inducing the von Neumann bottleneck and forming a separation between processors and non-volatile memory devices.17–21 Benefiting from their high density and multilevel data storage, photonic memory devices show promise as built-in, non-volatile memory and for reconstructed logic operations.22,23 In addition, photonic memory could widen the devices’ function and integrate various photodevices, such as light-emitting diodes,24 photovoltaics,25 or photosensor platforms.26 Therefore, although electrically driven memory devices currently occupy a predominant position in data storage and processing, light-controlled memory devices have been extensively studied by scientists due to their remarkable potential.
Among various kinds of non-volatile photonic memory devices, field effect transistor (FET) memory, resistive random access memory (RRAM), and phase change memory (PCM) have been widely investigated. FET memory is a key ingredient of non-volatile memory devices, with its ability to use a single transistor, non-destructive reading, and high compatibility with the CMOS circuit.27–30 The operation principle of conventional FET memory devices is the voltage-driven trapping/detrapping of the charge carriers, while that of light-controllable FET memory is mainly based on controlled threshold voltage (VTh) shift through the photoinduced charge carriers.31 The light signal can be regarded as the fourth terminal compared with the gate, source and drain electrodes of FET memory devices.32 RRAM is regarded as a prospective next-generation memory device due to its easy miniaturization (10 nm), fast resistive switching speed (sub-ns), high storage density, and long retention time (108 s).33,34 The working mechanism of a RRAM device is mainly based on resistive switching, in which the resistance of active materials could be abruptly changed between the high resistive state (HRS) and low resistive state (LRS) under special stimuli (e.g. voltage, light, temperature or magnetic field). Phase-change materials have been widely applied in light-controlled PCM because there is high contrast of optical properties between crystalline and amorphous states (crystalline state can be termed as “0,” while amorphous state can be termed as “1”).35,36 This reversible switching between crystalline and amorphous state can be achieved by absorbing photon energy.
Nowadays, the key research on non-volatile, light-controlled memory focuses on the optimization of optical materials and the design of device architecture. Great progress has been made in multilevel storage and high integration with the optical sensor.26 However, to date, the progress achieved in this specific area lags far behind electrically driven, non-volatile memory, and there is no comprehensive review that provides a full picture of the material selection and structural design of photonic memory. Thus, we present a review on the development of photonic memory, with a view towards inspiring more intriguing ideas on the elegant selection of materials and design of novel device structures that may finally induce major progress in the manufacture and application of photonic memory. After an introduction to the photonic non-volatile memory devices in Section 1, the relevant light-responsive-material-based photonic memory devices and their working principles are discussed in Sections 2 to 4 in detail. Finally, existing challenges and the future outlook of photonic non-volatile memory devices are given in Section 5.
2. Field effect transistor memory
Solid-state drives (SSDs) based on FET memory technology have been intensively studied in the past few decades.27,37–39 However, conventional Si-based semiconductors are reaching a physical limit considering the requirement of new flexible and wearable electronic products, particularly those that require high integration. In this condition, optoelectronic materials are widely applied in light-assisted FET memory due to their unique characteristic—simultaneous excitation by light and voltage. Therefore, in this part, we mainly discuss four kinds of optoelectronic materials applied in FET-based memory according to the material's properties and research progress.
2.1 Organic semiconductors
Organic semiconductors, including polymers and small molecules, are very important building blocks because of their huge potential in fabricating flexible optoelectronic devices.40,41 Moreover, their optoelectronic properties can be readily modulated by controlling the molecular structure to optimize exciton generation and charge transportation depending on the targeted application.42 These properties have enabled the rapid development of organic phototransistors (OPT). In 2001, Narayan et al. first reported an OPT based on the conjugated polymer poly(3-octylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3OT), but it did not attract much attention because its performance was dismal.43 Later, 2,5-bis-biphenyl-4yl-thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (BPTT) was developed to improve the performance of OPT.44 The photocurrent value was around 100 times higher than that of previous reports and is even larger than that of amorphous-silicon based phototransistors. Meanwhile, other groups also reported high-performance OPTs based on organic semiconductors, including P3HT, pentacene, and CuPc.45 Most of the adopted organic semiconductors can be excited by visible light due to their optical energy band gap size, as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The light-responsive spectrum range of most widely used π-conjugated molecules in optoelectronic devices. 
This light-driven behavior motivates the development of optical FET-type memory devices. The basic working mechanism of optical memory is that the photogenerated charge carriers are trapped in the floating gate layer or at the interface between the semiconductor and dielectric. The trapped charge carriers lead to a change of threshold voltage, thus forming the memory characteristic. The threshold voltage could be modulated by both gate voltage and light illumination, providing the possibility of multilevel data storage. In 2009, Guo et al. first reported an optical FET memory device consisting of pentacene or copper phthalocyanine (as active layer) and polystyrene- or polymethylmethacrylate-coated SiO2 (as dielectric layer).31 A possible model of charge carriers being transferred and trapped between the active layer and dielectric layer is shown in Fig. 2. When the devices are illuminated, excitons are generated in the organic semiconductor layer by absorbing photons with energy higher than the semiconductor band gap. Excitons could be further separated into holes and electrons, and then injected and stored into the charge-trapping layer after the application of a gate bias.46 (The exact and detailed mechanisms of generating photoinduced charge carriers in organic semiconductors are described in previous reviews.47–50) As a result, multilevel data storage was achieved via tuning the light illumination and gate voltage. Furthermore, the programming/erasing speed is down to a microsecond timescale, and the retention time is up to 106 s. Similar works also were done by other groups, in which retention time is further extended. All the results demonstrated that photo-assisted memory provides a good prospect for multilevel storage memory.
 Fig. 2  (a) Device structure described in this work. (b) The molecular structures of organic molecules used in the study. (c) The corresponding current level change with light irradiation time (VSD = −60 V). Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. 
To gain in-depth understanding of the illumination effect, Gao et al. studied the memory performance, both in dark condition and upon light illumination, with a series of photon energy and optical powers, and the results exhibited that the memory window can be increased with the increase of light power and photon energy.51 Because most organic semiconductors exhibit unipolar (electrons or holes) conduction, the deficiency of minority charge carriers in the channel impedes the charge trapping, resulting in smaller memory windows. However, high light power and photon energy simultaneously generate more electrons and holes in the organic semiconductors, effectively increasing the concentration of trapped minority charge carriers in the channel and thus enlarging the memory window.52 This would help to distinguish each threshold voltage and enhance the performance of multilevel data storage.
A severe challenge of those memory devices is their high working voltage (several tens of volts).53 Thus, recent studies have focused on reducing the programming/erasing/reading voltage. Shang et al. successfully reduced the operating voltage to 10 V via adopting a high-k dielectric layer (PMMA-coated Al2O3). Meanwhile, Wang et al. also demonstrated that a polymeric insulator could also be used as the dielectric layer. In addition, optical absorption efficiency is a very tricky question because most of the abovementioned photonic memory devices can only be operated at specific wavelengths. Interestingly, Du et al. designed an organic broadband photomemory device with excellent UV-NIR response.54 In this proof-of-concept structure, fullerene (C60), the perylene derivative PTCDA and lead phthalocyanine (PbPc) were utilized to act as UV-blue, green and red-NIR photoabsorbers, respectively. Exciton dissociation efficiency was improved by this heterojunction structure, and the capability of broadband absorption was obtained through the multi-material channel layer as well.
Organic photonic memory can realize multilevel data storage by the synergistic action of light and electricity, leading to a fast operating speed on a microsecond timescale. However, it still cannot replace silicon-based memory devices, since it is difficult to integrate multiple functions in a small area. A viable approach that could solve this problem is embedding additional functional groups into organic π-conjugated semiconductors to give them supplementary functions.55,56 In this case, photochromic materials are added into organic semiconductors through various methods.
2.2 Photochromic materials
Photochromic materials are usually small organic molecules exhibiting reversible photoinduced chemical reaction, including bond cleavage and formation between two isomers, under different light illumination.55,57 Various high-performance photochromic molecules with enough stability and fast switching speed of two isomers have been synthesized, and these molecules have been widely applied as the key components for optical switching and optical data storage.58,59 Thus, scientists try to embed photochromic molecules into current organic semiconductors. In the attempt to graft photochromic functional groups into organic semiconductors, important research results have been generated on modulating their electrical and optical properties.60 However, this approach may impact semiconducting properties because it changes the semiconductors’ components. In addition, this approach is complex and time-consuming, and thus it is unsuitable for large-scale production.
Most optical memory is fabricated by directly embedding a photochromic molecular layer into the semiconductor layer. Troshin and his coworkers designed a light-assisted FET memory by sandwiching the photochromic layer between the semiconductor and the dielectric layers.61 Multibit memory was easily obtained by applying various programming voltages and illumination intensities. Long retention time and considerable reproducibility were achieved in photonic memory. Nevertheless, the only drawback of this photonic memory is that its programming time is still as long as 0.5 s. Thus, the authors continued to attempt various types of photochromic spiropyran-based compounds as light-active materials for FET photonic memory.62 The programming speed reached the microsecond timescale after the application of positive programming potentials combined with light illumination. These results demonstrated that the photochromic compounds could play an important role in FET photonic memory. In this case, Jeong et al. ingeniously synthesized a photosensitive compound, poly(3,5-benzoic acid hexafluoroisopropylidene diphthalimide) [6FDA-DBA-SP], by grafting the donor–acceptor-type group into polyimide-type polymers.63 The obtained photonic memory exhibited excellent memory performance, such as long retention time and fast programming/erasing speed.
To elucidate the working mechanism of this type of memory, Chen et al. designed a diarylethene-based photonic memory. Taking the orbital energy level of pentacene (HOMO: −5.00 eV, LUMO: −2.80 eV) into account, the LUMO level of the DAE-o molecule is −2.38 eV, which is higher than that of the pentacene (Fig. 3).64 The DAE-o molecule transformed to DAE-c molecule through the formation of C–C bond upon exposure to UV light (λ = 365 nm). It is worth noting that originating from the transformation, the LUMO level significantly decreased to −3.22 eV, which was lower than that of pentacene. Hence, more electrons could easily tunnel to DAE-c from pentacene; the high potential barrier created by more trapped electrons efficiently prevented leakage. Visible light irradiation could be used to recover the original DAE-o isomer and the initial electronic structure.
 Fig. 3  (a) Chemical formulae of DAE between open and closed forms (UV: λ = 365 nm, Vis: λ ≥ 420 nm). (b) Energy band structure of the pentacene and different DAE forms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. 
Nevertheless, the multilayered approach has high processing requirements, since it should ensure minimal interlayer penetration. Thus, researchers have tried to directly blend organic semiconductors and photochromic compounds. Theoretical calculations and experimental results both show that this approach is feasible for fabricating high-performance optoelectronics.60,65,66 Leydecker et al. fabricated a flexible optical memory based on blends of diarylethene moiety (DAE-Me, as photochromic moiety) and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, as semiconducting polymer), as shown in Fig. 4.67 The dual functionality of the device relies on the photoinduced variation in energy band structure of the photochromic molecules, which allows the light-controlled charge transport process. The HOMO of the open form (DEA-Me-o) is lower than that of the P3HT, so that DEA-Me-o only acts as scatter center for charge carriers. In contrast, the closed isomer (DEA-Me-c) can be used as a trapping site and accept holes. With prolonged 313 nm light irradiation, more DEA-Me molecules are transformed into DEA-Me-c; thus, the number of trapped charges increases accordingly. Each of the current levels (1, 2, 3 and 4) was achieved under light illumination at 313 nm with different illumination times, while the initial state (level 0) was recovered under light illumination at 546 nm. Dynamic source-drain current slowly increased under 313 nm illumination with small increment steps, indicating that 4-bit multilevel data storage with 16 distinct levels can be obtained. Furthermore, the absence of current fluctuation over 1000 bending cycles revealed that both the materials and device structure are mechanically stable. Due to the adaptability of this blending approach, semiconducting P3HT can be replaced by an alternative air-stable, p-type organic semiconductor with similar energy band structure. This design paves the way to developing high-performance, optically gated, non-volatile memory devices.
 Fig. 4  Electrical characterization of the P3HT/DEA-Me memory devices. (a) Chemical formulae of the DAE between open ring and closed ring. (b) Schematic structure of the proposed flexible memory devices. (c) Schematic illumination of multilevel storage at a fixed irradiation time; the readout current can be obtained in the dark at VGS = −40 V and VDS = −10 V. (d) IDS–time curves exhibit small steps with laser irradiation time, suggesting the ability to act as multilevel memory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. 
Overall, photonic memory devices were successfully fabricated by mixing photochromic molecules and organic semiconductors. The result fully demonstrated that the direct mixing is more appealing. Nonetheless, some challenges should be tackled in the future research, including (1) controlled component segregation in the mixture, and (2) the mutual effects of charge transport in the binary blend.
2.3 Photoluminescent materials
Photoluminescent (PL) material is the generic term for a type of compound which can emit light after the absorption of photons. These materials have been widely used in biomedicine, photocatalysis and others.68–70 Recently, due to their special optical and electrical properties, PL materials have also been applied in the field of optoelectronics, especially photonic memory devices.71 Lanthanide-containing photoluminescent materials, which respond to excitation and emit downshifting and upconversion luminescence, have recently received growing attention in the fields of physical, chemical and biomedical science.72 The fascinating features of lanthanide-containing luminescent materials include high quantum yield, high chemical stability, long luminescence lifetime, and low toxicity.73 To date, the studies on lanthanide-containing luminescent materials have mainly focused on molecular lanthanide compounds (lanthanide ion complexes)74,75 and inorganic compounds (Ln3+-doped nanoparticles).76–78 Lanthanide ion complexes mainly absorb ultraviolet (UV) light and emit visible and infrared light, while Ln3+-doped nanoparticles could emit a broad range of light, from ultraviolet (UV) to visible or infrared (IR) region, through various dopant schemes after absorbing IR light.
Lanthanide ion complexes have particular electronic and optical properties owing to their special electronic structure and bonding characteristics. Moreover, their luminous intensity can be enhanced after coordination with high-molar-absorption-coefficient organic ligands and formation of the rare earth complexes.79 Eu(tta)3ppta can be excited by UV light and emit red light. Based on these characteristics, an UV light-assisted, non-volatile memory consisting of the organic lanthanide complex Eu(tta)3ppta was reported, in which Eu(tta)3ppta film acts as charge-trapping layer to store injected carriers, as well as light-responsive material to absorb UV light.42 Upon UV illumination, 612 nm red light (corresponding to a photon energy of 2.0 eV) emitted from the Eu(tta)3ppta film can be further absorbed by the pentacene semiconductor layer. After that, the electrons and holes are generated and subsequently separated by external bias. As a result, the memory window and retention time has been significantly improved in the UV light-assisted memory device. Furthermore, Ln3+-doped nanoparticles possess a large anti-Stokes shift capability, and these materials can effectively convert IR photons to visible and UV emission.80,81
Therefore, upconverting (UC) materials have been widely applied in solar energy conversion, solid-state laser, biological imaging and cancer therapy.80 Meanwhile IR light–assisted flexible electronic devices have been vigorously studied in both academic and industrial fields owing to their nontoxicity to healthy cells.82 Under the guidance of these ideas, Zhou et al. designed an IR light-assisted photonic non-volatile memory based on UC nanoparticles (Fig. 5), in which UC materials NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ were coated by a NaYF4 shell, and the core/shell structured nanoparticles were uniformly dispersed in the semiconductor P3HT.22 Visible light was emitted by UC materials under IR illumination and was immediately reabsorbed by the semiconductor materials (P3HT). Eventually, a large number of photoinduced charge carriers were generated and trapped, resulting in a larger memory window. Thanks to the large band gap of the NaYF4 shell and organic ligand covering the UC nanoparticles, an insulating barrier was formed to prevent the release of trapped charge carriers. This memory device exhibited different degrees of charge-trapping capability with and without IR irradiation, resulting in multilevel data storage. Moreover, the difference between the two states also demonstrated that IR light can be used for data encryption.
 Fig. 5  (a) The working principle of upconverted materials: materials absorb 980 nm IR light and emit visible or UV light, in which 560 nm green light can be reabsorbed by the semiconductor (P3HT). (b) Schematic diagram of the fabricated memory device. (c) Transfer characteristics of the memory transistor with IR-assisted programming behavior; inset: transfer characteristics without IR illumination. (d) Retention time of the multilevel IR photonic memory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. 
At the same time, core–shell heterostructured quantum dots (QD), as a kind of PL material, have drawn extensive attention throughout the past decades because of their optoelectronic properties that can be tuned by adjusting the size and composition.83–85 A large number of experimental results have demonstrated that the shell with higher bandgap inorganic materials could enhance fluorescence quantum yield by passivating the surface trap states.85 CdSe/ZnS is a typical type-I heterostructure in which both the conduction band and valance band of the core material are surrounded by the forbidden band of shell materials; thus, both electrons and holes can be confined into the core region.86,87 Meanwhile, CdSe/ZnS QDs can efficiently absorb UV light and emit visible light. Han et al. designed a novel UV-assisted photonic memory, in which CdSe/ZnS QDs act as both photoresponsive material and charge-trapping layer.23 The structure of the memory devices is Ag/Al2O3 + PVA/QDs/Al2O3/pentacene/Au source-drain. The hybrid blocking dielectric layer (Al2O3 + PVA) was utilized to obtain uniform, closed-packed, monolayered CdSe/ZnS QDs and, subsequently, low operating voltage and less leakage current. It is worth noting that there was a UV-induced detrapping effect originating from the photo-generated excitons; therefore, multilevel data storage was obtained. The electrically programmed data level can be recovered to the initial state by UV light, while the stored charge carriers were not completely released by a reversible gate bias, suggesting the superiority of photonic memory over traditional Si-based, erasable–programmable read-only memory (EPROM).
In addition, other photoluminescent materials, such as fullerenes and perovskite, were also investigated in light-assisted FET memory.88–90 However, low light conversion efficiency may limit their large-scale application.
2.4 Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenide
Because of severe short channel effects, it is impossible to further reduce the size of silicon transistors below the 5 nm gate length.91 The characteristic length of planar FET can be expressed by λ = (tstoxεs/εox)1/2, where λ is channel characteristic length, ts and tox are the thickness of the semiconducting and dielectric layer, and εs and εox are the corresponding dielectric constants.92,93 Considering the thickness of 2D materials, the characteristic length of an FET based on 2D materials can be much smaller than that based on traditional silicon, thus providing a smaller FET device and higher degree of integration. Furthermore, 2D materials can effectively block the degradation of carrier mobility due to the absence of dangling bonds on their surface. Another critical feature is that the 2D layered structures are highly compatible with the existing electronic device processing systems, which accelerates their large-scale production and specific applications in the future.94 Inspired by the potential to scale down the device size, 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (containing MoS2, WSe2, MoTe2, etc.) were initially studied in FET.95,96 In this respect, many physical parameters, including ON/OFF ratio (Ion/Ioff), charge carrier mobility (μ) and power consumption should be taken into account. In 2013, Roy et al. designed a graphene–molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) heterostructure for multifunctional optical memory devices, demonstrating considerable photoresponsive properties.97 However, the dark current level was quite high, at about hundreds of μA, due to the high electrical conductivity of graphene, and thus, the ON/OFF current ratio is smaller than 2. Therefore, it is difficult to exactly distinguish current levels between the dark and light conditions. In addition, multilayered CuIn7Se11 obtained by mechanical exfoliation has also been used to fabricate photonic memory devices in which the retention time was extremely short of 50 s and the ON/OFF current ratio was less than 10, stemming from the low photosensitivity of the material.98 Therefore, an appropriate channel material for optoelectronic memory devices should fulfill the following properties: (1) relatively high photoresponsivity to enlarge the photocurrent and to achieve multibit storage, and (2) low OFF current to realize large ON/OFF current ratio. MoS2 is a typical 2D transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) semiconductor which undergoes a transition from indirect bandgap (Eg = 1.2 eV) to direct bandgap (Eg = 1.9 eV) when the thickness is reduced to monolayer, accompanied by a dramatic enhancement of the photoluminescence efficiency and strong light-matter interactions.99 These intriguing features of monolayer MoS2 make it a promising material for functional optoelectronic device applications. Considering the special electronic and optical properties of MoS2, Lee and coworkers fabricated a photonic memory based on classical FET memory structure, in which monolayered MoS2 was utilized as channel material and light absorption layer, and Au nanoparticles were embedded between the blocking layer and tunneling layer to behave as the floating gate to store the excited charge carriers (Fig. 6).100 Large-area monolayered MoS2 was fabricated through a specific transfer method to minimize the defects and wrinkles.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the MoS2 photonic memory device structure and voltage-controlled or light-controlled multilevel data storage in the MoS2 optoelectronic memory. (b) Schematic diagram depicting the transfer process of large-area, high-quality monolayered MoS2 flakes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. 
The resulting MoS2-based photonic memory showed excellent storage performance, including long retention time, large on/off current ratio and great cyclic endurance. In this work, the MoS2 memory showed an ultrahigh photoresponsivity exceeding 8000 A W−1 when the optical power approached 0.1 μW. More importantly, the extremely high photoresponsivity would result in a dramatically high photocurrent, which could help to achieve multilevel data storage by adjusting the optical power.
In order to simplify the device structure, Lee et al. designed a novel photonic memory without the blocking layer and tunneling layer. Large-scaled monolayer MoS2 was used not only as channel material and light-responsive material, but also as charge-trapping site.101 Oxygen plasma treatment was carried out to remove the unintended defects and generate uniformly distributed potential fluctuations in the MoS2 to form charge-trapping sites. The detailed working principle of this device is shown in Fig. 7. In the initial state, the MoS2 forms Schottky barriers with source/drain electrodes under gate voltage but without light illumination. Subsequently, electrons and holes are generated, and holes could escape from the MoS2 to the electrode while the electrons are trapped by the potential well. Finally, a large voltage bias between source and drain is applied to the memory, so that one side of the potential well opens and the trapped electrons are released. As a result, the obtained on/off current ratio is up to 4700, and the data storage lifetime is over 104 s, which is an acceptable device performance.
 Fig. 7  (a) The schematic diagram of the fabricated photonic memory. (b) The schematic illumination of MoS2 layered structure and energy band structure with local potential fluctuations. (c) The working principle of the fabricated photonic memory, including the initial state, programming state, and erasing state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. 
TMDs have a suitable intrinsic band gap and are promising candidates for next-generation optoelectronic devices. However, there is an inevitable trade-off between the thickness of TMDs and optical absorption. Ultrathin thickness may provide enhanced carrier extraction/transportation; however, relatively poor light absorption, especially for atomically thin TMDs, limits their implementation in high-performance optoelectronic devices. Another long-existing trade-off is photogain and light response time. The Schottky contact between source/drain electrodes and TMDs would exhibit higher photogain, but a slower response time. Conversely, the high Schottky contact would result in faster response time and lower photogain.
3. Resistive random access memory
RRAM is a new type of data storage device resulting from the resistive switching (RS) effect, in which the resistance of active materials could be reversibly changed between the high resistive state (HRS) and low resistive state (LRS).102–104 These two resistive states can be termed as “0” and “1” in the binary system, which could be attained in a simple metal-insulate-metal sandwich structure (Fig. 8). RS effect is mainly attributed to the reversible chemical and structural changes induced by ionic motion and reaction in response to special stimuli. Compared to exciting FET-type memory, RRAM possesses several advantages, such as simple device structure, fast storage speed, large storage density, low power consumption and high compatibility with CMOS technology.105–108 Therefore, it has been regarded as one of the most prospective non-volatile storage techniques.
 Fig. 8  (a) A typical structure schematic of RRAM. (b) The possible switching process of HRS and LRS. Schematic I–V curves of bipolar (c) and unipolar (d) resistive switching. 
The biggest feature of RRAMs is resistive change, and thus, a large number of researchers have proposed several mechanisms to explain the resistive change, such as conductive filament (CF) mechanism, space charge limited current (SCLC) mechanism, Pool–Frenkel (P–F) emission mechanism, etc.102 According to previous research, different electrodes would result in different resistive change mechanisms. For active metal electrodes (such as Ag or Cu), resistive change is controlled by cation migration and reaction, while for the inert metal electrodes (such as Au or W), oxygen vacancies would establish conductive channels. In addition, the selection of active layer materials also plays a significant role in the RS effect. With the development of optoelectronics, the RRAMs consisting of optoelectronic materials as storage media have attracted wide attention,109,110 with light source applied as a facile and low-energy stimulus. In addition, light-controlled RRAM could widen the functionalities and expand the integration of devices, such as the multilevel data storage and data encryption technique. For example, Lee and his coworkers have designed an advanced RRAM with high security by making use of upconversion photoluminescent nanoparticles with an ultra-wide light absorption range.111 This integrated technology affords us a novel concept of data-storage security for electronic products.
3.1 Organic optoelectronic materials
Organic optoelectronic materials can be excited by both electrical and optical signals. By utilizing these materials as storage medium, a device could obtain excellent performance under electrical input and optical illumination. With the assistance of light signals, the set voltages of RRAM are effectively reduced, allowing low energy consumption.112,113 Furthermore, the ON/OFF current ratios are enlarged, which facilitates multilevel storage with high resolution and accuracy.114 Compared with previously reported methods focusing on designing the storage medium, light-modulated RRAM provides a simple method to optimize device performance by utilizing multiple physical channels. More critically, it demonstrates an inspiring prospect for realizing integrated multilevel data storage technology with multifunctionality.115
In the past decades, most of the research has focused on adjusting the local structure for exciting organic optoelectronic materials, including tailoring molecular planarity, small-molecule doping or single-atom substitution. The aim is to enhance the light absorption efficiency of these materials and eventually lead to large ON/OFF ratio and multilevel data storage. These methods are effective to some extent but also face some questions, such as complex synthesis and uncontrollable experimental results.116,117 Therefore, a more suitable organic optoelectronic material, the meta-conjugated donor–bridge–acceptor (DBA) molecule, is utilized to fabricate a multilevel data storage device (Fig. 9).118 The meta-conjugated bridge, which separates the D–A pair, plays an important role, such as promoting charge transfer and suppressing the charge recombination. Meanwhile, DBA possesses an obvious bistable switch behavior under UV light. When this multilevel memory is in the “OFF” state, the electrostatic potentials of the DBA and the energy barrier between the electrode and DBA block the charge transfer, which results in the high resistive state. Under UV light of 405 nm, external light energy activates the D group and leads to hole injection (termed as “1” state). With the increasing electrical field, the Schottky barrier lowers, and the electrons inject into the active layer from the cathode, resulting in double injection (termed as “2” state). Thus, a light-induced medium-value resistive state is addressable to achieve multilevel data storage. Besides, an A–D–A type small molecule was also used to fabricate multilevel RRAM devices.119 All the results demonstrate that this photoelectric effect presents a new opportunity for fabricating high-performance multilevel data storage devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) Molecular structure of the DBA compound. Inset: The structure schematic of the ITO/DBA/Al RRAM device. (b) Schematic graph of multilevel data storage and possible transitions among three states. (c) Possible working principle of carriers’ migration at each state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. 
3.2 Inorganic optoelectronic materials
Inorganic optoelectronic materials are one of the first materials to be applied in light-modulated RRAM and have been widely studied. For example, Park et al. presented a resistive switching memory based on ZnO nanowires, where conductive filament formation and rupture strongly depended on the light illumination conditions.120 Furthermore, a ZnO nanowire/Nb:SrTiO heterojunction was used as active material to fabricate a RRAM device, where light-induced current can effectively modulate the resistance state, resulting in multilevel data storage.121 Tan et al. fabricated an optoelectronic RRAM consisting of a four-layer ITO/CeO2−x/AlOy/Al cell, which allows the integration of the storage and information processing in the same physical device.122 In addition, light-stimulated RRAM has also been observed in various inorganic materials, such as BiFeO3 thin film, TbMnO3/SrTiO3, and TiO2/a-Fe2O3 heterojunction.123–125 Although these studies open up a new opportunity for RRAM application in photonic devices, it is very difficult to integrate a RRAM device within a photonic circuitry.
Recently, a nano-sized RRAM device was fabricated with optical readout functionality via integrating a silicon on insulator (SOI) waveguide (Fig. 10).126 The SOI waveguide acts as the light propagation channel. The intensity of light signal is affected by changing the resistance state of a-Si; the detailed mechanisms of RS effect and origin has been discussed by previous reviews. When a positive voltage is applied to the Ag electrode, silver ions migrate into the a-Si and become trapped by various defect sites. Afterward, silver ions are reduced to silver nanoparticles, resulting in the formation of Ag filament (LRS). Thus, the transmitted light signal is scattered severely, and measured light signal is quite weak. Under the stimuli of negative voltage, the Ag conductive filament is dissociated (HRS), and thus, the measured light signal is strong. This approach provides an efficient strategy to read logic states optically by monitoring the intensity of the transmitted light signal.
 Fig. 10  (a) The structure diagram of the optically readable RRAM in this study. (b) Formation/annihilation of the nanoscale filament in the RRAM device. (c) Calculated field distribution of fundamental mode when light is transmitted through the SOI waveguide at LRS and HRS, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. 
This optical-readable RRAM has great potential to be applied in future optoelectronic systems, since it will reduce the time of optical and electrical conversions. In addition, this technique can be further utilized and extended to all-photonic memory, which could implement data storage and read under light but not electrical stimuli. All-photonic devices with non-volatile data storage will be discussed in the next section.
4. Phase change memory
Phase change materials can realize ultrafast and reversible transformation between crystalline and amorphous states; however, the electrical and optical properties of the two states are extremely different.127,128 The crystalline state often exhibits an octahedral-like atomic ordered arrangement, followed by huge vacancy concentrations and pronounced lattice distortion. This is mainly attributed to the p-orbital resonant bonding in the phase-change alloys. The ability of mutual conversion between two states with obvious optical or electrical contrast qualifies these materials for special applications in data storage.129–131 Noteworthy is the first commercial phase-change optical data storage technology successfully developed by Matsushita/Panasonic in the late 1980s.132 To program this storage system, phase-change materials are quickly heated up to the melting temperature and then abruptly quenched to form a disordered amorphous state under the irradiation of a high-energy laser beam. Conversely, to erase the program, a mediate-energy laser is utilized to locally heat the phase-change materials up to crystallization temperature, and then the atoms begin to move and eventually convert to the energetically favorable crystalline state. The optical properties of the amorphous state are different from those of the crystalline state. Thus, the obtained light intensity is obviously different when light signal is transmitted through the phase-change materials. Currently, some rewriteable optical storage devices, such as compact disks (CD), digital versatile disks (DVD) and Blu-ray disks (BD), have been commercialized.133–135 Interestingly, with the development of non-volatile storage technology, phase-change materials have been intensively applied in non-volatile, electrically driven memory, where the different resistive values of amorphous and crystalline states are used to store the data.
Raoux et al. successfully fabricated a nanoscale electrically driven PCM, where the cell size is 7.5 nm × 17.5 nm and switching time is in the subnanosecond regime.136 These researches demonstrate the great promising of phase-change materials in data storage.
In recent years, the ability to switch drastically and reversibly between two states with different optical properties has created the foundation for the emerging application of photonic memory.130,137 Depending on the desired photonic system, various properties of phase-change materials are crucial, such as the optical property contrast, the minimum size of different optical states, and the switching speed. The alloy Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) is a near-perfect material in this system, possessing one of the most pronounced optical contrasts among known phase-change materials. The switching occurs within a subnanosecond timescale with high reproducibility, and stable operation can be obtained over 1012 switching cycles.127 Furthermore, the optical contrast is retained over the visible and near-infrared spectral range. All of those properties make GST suitable for use in non-volatile photonic memory.
In 2012, Pernice et al. first introduced a tunable photonic platform based on GST material coupled to nanophotonic integrated circuits.35 The data can be stored in the GST material by using the interaction between light and the GST materials. This evanescent coupling results in the interconversion of crystalline and amorphous states. In the crystalline state, GST has a higher absorption coefficient; thus, light travelling along the waveguide is strongly attenuated, lowering the optical transmission (which we term “level 1”). In the amorphous state, the absorption coefficient is smaller and the GST material does not attenuate the light intensity to the same degree (“level 0”).
Writing information and erasing stored data are realized by light-induced phase transition under high-energy laser pulse. Hence, stored data are encrypted according to the intensity of light transmitted through the waveguide and can be read out with low-power optical pulses. Subsequently, similar photonic memory devices were further studied, and the obtained results exhibited great potential for on-chip photonic memory.
It has been demonstrated that by the evanescent interaction between light and GST, the intensity of light signal could be changed by switching the phase state of GST. Therefore, more recently, a photonic memory with more simplified device structure was designed and investigated (Fig. 11).138 In this study, the phase state of GST determines the optical travelling along the waveguide; the intensity of light signal can be modulated by changing the GST phase state under a higher-energy laser pulse. Meanwhile, this technology provides a possibility for optical readout in electrically driven PCM, where the current is used to switch the phase state of GST. The only difference is that light-induced phase change technology is used to fabricate an all-photonic, non-volatile memory. By integrating this all-photonic memory with microprocessors, it will be possible to overcome the von Neumann bottleneck. Furthermore, this all-photonic memory exhibits 8 data levels with distinguishable transmission states. Crucially, the results exhibit the ability to exactly move according to a specified program, which is a remarkable enhancement over electronically driven PCM.139 This is a great achievement in itself, since repeatable movement between levels is an important parameter for non-volatile memory devices. This result is representative of the culmination of research in phase-change materials in the past decades. The crystalline fraction, which can be termed as the ratio of the amorphous and crystalline volumes, determines the effective refractive index. In other words, the crystalline fraction determines the intensity of transmitted light within an optical waveguide. Thus, data can be stored and read according to the crystalline fraction. Impressively, GST has been optimized and engineered for some decades; thus, the power consumption is only in the order of picojoules, which is competitive. Although there are still some challenges, it is noteworthy that this technology can be a good candidate. This kind of memory is able to read and write simultaneously through multiple wavelengths, and the read-write speeds can be accelerated with cleverly designed algorithms.140,141 On the other hand, the von Neumann bottleneck severely limits data exchange between processor and memory, and all-photonic memory based on phase-change materials can provide a feasible and reasonable solution. In the future, the non-von Neumann processors could be integrated with all-photonic memory, which may overcome the von Neumann bottleneck.
 Fig. 11  (a) Memory model and operation principle of simplified all-photonic memory. (b) Information is stored in the phase charge materials; two-level and eight-level storage operate according to the mixture of amorphous and crystalline states. (c) SEM graph of fabricated PCM device with a footprint of 400 × 400 nm2. (d) Calculated field distribution of fundamental mode when light is transmitted through the SOI waveguide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. 
5. Conclusions and perspectives
In summary, photonic memory represents an emerging electronic technology that has drawn tremendous attention from many researchers in the past decade. Compared to the conventional non-volatile memory, one important advantage of emerging photonic memory is multilevel data storage, which enables high chip density within a limited area by a simple light trigger. Although considerable progress has been achieved in recent years, some challenges still need to be addressed toward future applications.
First, the most significant concern in photonic memory is the selection and optimization of light-responsive materials. Although a large range of materials with high photoresponsiveness has been successfully utilized in photonic memory devices with acceptable performance, the charge carrier capture capability and compatibility with channel layer cannot simultaneously meet the requirement of devices. Thus, we need to further explore novel materials with suitable energy band structure and functional groups based on the delicate design of the molecule structure. For example, Jeong et al. synthesized a novel photoresponsive polymer (6FDA-DBA-SP) with excellent charge-trapping properties by grafting the donor–acceptor-type group into a photosensitive polymer, and fabricated a flexible non-volatile memory using this novel photoresponsive material. The charge-trapping capability of 6FDA-DBA-SP was improved due to increased electron-withdrawing properties. The resulting memory exhibited an enhanced memory window and bistable current states under white illumination. In addition, the continuous progress made in memory devices using bulk materials will approach their physical limitation in the near future. Atomically thin two-dimensional materials can be utilized as a promising alternative to fabricate photonic memory due to their special electrical and optical properties. Monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenide (such as MoS2) with direct band gap could act as both semiconducting active channel and light-responsive material. Graphene could be used as either electrode or charge-trapping layer, and insulating BN could be used as gate dielectric layer or tunnelling dielectric layer. The device constructed based on novel two-dimensional materials can exhibit the ultimate size limit in the vertical direction and low power consumption due to its small short channel effect.
Second, incorporating light-responsive materials in the active layer leads to easy trapping of excitons by the semiconductor layer, which may pose detrimental effects on the parameters of devices, including mobility, ON/OFF ratio and subthreshold swing of FET. In another aspect, the quantum efficiency of photogenerated charge carriers is rather low, which in turn induces poor memory characteristics and impracticable multilevel data storage when the light-responsive materials are isolated from the semiconductor layer by the dielectric layer. Therefore, trade-off between the light absorption efficiency and overall device performance should be taken into consideration.
Third, practical application requires that photonic memory exhibit a sensitive response across a broad light spectrum. Nevertheless, most photonic memory devices can be only operated under light illumination of specific wavelengths. Thus, it is highly desired to explore light-responsive materials that cross over a broad band spectrum, as well as novel device structures to improve absorption efficiency. For example, a broadband photonic memory fabricated on hybrid materials can be used to achieve the broad spectra response.
The von Neumann bottleneck effect looms larger with the increase of processing speed. Processors will spend more idle time waiting for data to be fetched from electronic memory. This problem can be overcome perfectly through utilization of photonic memory that avoids the interconversion between electrical signal and optical signal during the information exchange between processor and memory. Although electronic memory devices still dominate the market, we firmly believe that photonic memory, especially all-photonic memory, may be commercialized by resolving the above scientific and technical issues.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61604097 and 61601305), the Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (JCYJ20170302145229928, JCYJ20170302151653768, KQJSCX20170727100433270 and KQJSCX20170327150812967), the Department of Education of Guangdong Province (No. 2015KQNCX141 and 2016KTSCX120) and Guangdong Provincial Department of Science and Technology (No. 2017A010103026), the Natural Science Foundation of SZU and the Research Grant Council of HKSAR (Grant No. T42-103/16-N and C7045-14E).
References
W. Lu and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Hwang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1400056 CrossRef .
M. Gu, X. Li and Y. Cao, Light: Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e177 CrossRef CAS .
A. Spinelli, C. Compagnoni and A. Lacaita, Computers, 2017, 6, 16 CrossRef .
T. Yang, D. Xie, Z. Li and H. Zhu, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2017, 115, 1 CrossRef .
G. B. Yodh, Y. Pal and J. S. Trefil, Phys. Rev. D: Part. Fields, 1973, 8, 3233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shim, H.-Y. Park, D.-H. Kang, J.-O. Kim, S.-H. Jo, Y. Park and J.-H. Park, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600364 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Ma and Y. Hao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600709 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Y. Zhou, V. A. L. Roy and S.-T. Han, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703950 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wuttig and N. Yamada, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 1004 CrossRef CAS .
S.-T. Han, H. Peng, Q. Sun, S. Venkatesh, K. S. Chung, S. C. Lau, Y. Zhou and V. A. L. Roy, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700375 CrossRef PubMed .
Holbrook, IEEE Ann. Hist. Computing, 2015, 37.
M. Li, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2012, 55, 2316 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, M. Wang, S. Song, M. Xia, Y. Jia, X. Shen, G. Wang, S. Dai and Z. Song, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 173103 CrossRef .
J. Lee, A. J. van Breemen, V. Khikhlovskyi, M. Kemerink, R. A. Janssen and G. H. Gelinck, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Z. Lu, C. Xiong, T. Zhu, W. Wu, Q. Zhang, H. Wu, X. Zhang and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605027 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. Velasquez and S. K. Jha, Parallel computing using memristive crossbar networks: Nullifying the processor-memory bottleneck, Design & Test Symposium,  2014, pp. 147–152 Search PubMed .

          C. H. Lu, C. S. Lin, H. L. Chao, J. S. Shen and P. A. Hsiung, Reconfigurable Multi-core Architecture – A Plausible Solution to the Von Neumann Performance Bottleneck, IEEE International Symposium on Embedded Multicore/manycore System-On-Chip, 2013, pp. 159–164.
N. P. Vasil'eva and S. I. Kasatkin, Autom. Remote Control, 2003, 64, 1369 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y.-X. Zhou, L. Xu, K. Lu, Z.-R. Wang, N. Duan, L. Jiang, L. Cheng, T.-C. Chang, K.-C. Chang, H.-J. Sun, K.-H. Xue and X.-S. Miao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34559 CAS .
J. F. Song, X. S. Luo, A. E. Lim, C. Li, Q. Fang, T. Y. Liow, L. X. Jia, X. G. Tu, Y. Huang, H. F. Zhou and G. Q. Lo, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, S.-T. Han, X. Chen, F. Wang, Y. B. Tang and V. A. L. Roy, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-T. Han, Y. Zhou, L. Zhou, Y. Yan, L.-B. Huang, W. Wu and V. A. L. Roy, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3173 RSC .
N. Thejo Kalyani and S. J. Dhoble, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 2696 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245 RSC .
C. J. O'Kelly, J. A. Fairfield, D. McCloskey, H. G. Manning, J. F. Donegan and J. J. Boland, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500458 CrossRef .
S.-T. Han, Y. Zhou and V. A. Roy, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Shih, W. Y. Lee and W. C. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 294 RSC .
S.-T. Han, Y. Zhou, C. Wang, L. He, W. Zhang and V. A. L. Roy, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-T. Han, Y. Zhou, Z. X. Xu, L. B. Huang, X. B. Yang and V. A. L. Roy, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, C.-A. Di, S. Ye, X. Sun, J. Zheng, Y. Wen, W. Wu, G. Yu and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1954 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, G. Zhu, J. Yang, H. Chang, Q. Meng, H. Zhao, X. Zhou, S. Yue, Z. Wang, J. Shi, L. Gu, D. Yan and Y. Weng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, L. Zhou, Y. Yan, S.-T. Han, J. Zhuang, Q.-J. Sun and V. A. L. Roy, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8415 RSC .
S.-T. Han, L. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. J. Zeng, S. Ruan, C. Pan and Z. Peng, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600435 CrossRef PubMed .
W. H. P. Pernice and H. Bhaskaran, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 171101 CrossRef .
M. Wuttig, H. Bhaskaran and T. Taubner, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 465 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. She, D. Gustafsson and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604769 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Kim, H. G. Yoo, S. M. Hong, B. Jang, D. Y. Park, D. J. Joe, J. H. Kim and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, J. Mao, Y. Ren, S.-T. Han, V. A. L. Roy and Y. Zhou, Small, 2018, 14, 1703126 CrossRef PubMed .
K. J. Baeg, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Caironi and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mao, Y. Wei, H. Li and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 717 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Jacobs and A. J. Moulé, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703063 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Narayan and N. Kumar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 1891 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Noh, D.-Y. Kim, Y. Yoshida, K. Yase, B.-J. Jung, E. Lim and H.-K. Shim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 043501 CrossRef .
H. Tsuji and E. Nakamura, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ostroverkhova, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. G. Scheblykin, A. Yartsev, T. Pullerits, V. Gulbinas and V. Sundström, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kippelen and J.-L. Bredas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251 CAS .
N. J. Hestand and F. C. Spano, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, C.-H. Liu, X.-J. She, Q.-L. Li, J. Liu and S.-D. Wang, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2486 CrossRef CAS .
M. Debucquoy, M. Rockelé, J. Genoe, G. H. Gelinck and P. Heremans, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1252 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Ji, L. Shang, Y. Chen, M. Han, X. Liu, Y. Peng and M. Liu, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1236 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, X. Luo, W. Lv, F. Zhao, Y. Peng, Y. Tang and Y. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13108 RSC .
E. Orgiu and P. Samori, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, S. T. Han, S. Shu, J. Zhuang, Y. Yan, Q. J. Sun, Y. Zhou and V. A. L. Roy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34101 CAS .
R. C. Shallcross, P. Zacharias, A. Köhnen, P. O. Körner, E. Maibach and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Stellacci, C. Bertarelli, F. Toscano, M. C. Gallazzi, G. Zotti and G. Zerbi, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 292 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata and Y. Kawata, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay and A. Salleo, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Frolova, P. A. Troshin, D. K. Susarova, A. V. Kulikov, N. A. Sanina and S. M. Aldoshin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6130 RSC .
L. A. Frolova, A. A. Rezvanova, B. S. Lukyanov, N. A. Sanina, P. A. Troshin and S. M. Aldoshin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11675 RSC .
Y. J. Jeong, E. J. Yoo, L. H. Kim, S. Park, J. Jang, S. H. Kim, S. W. Lee and C. E. Park, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5398 RSC .
H. Chen, N. Cheng, W. Ma, M. Li, S. Hu, L. Gu, S. Meng and X. Guo, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Roncali, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leydecker, M. Herder, E. Pavlica, G. Bratina, S. Hecht, E. Orgiu and P. Samori, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lu, L. Sui, J. Liu, S. Zhu, A. Chen, M. Jin and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603443 CrossRef PubMed .
L. X. Lovisa, J. Andrés, L. Gracia, M. S. Li, C. A. Paskocimas, M. R. D. Bomio, V. D. Araujo, E. Longo and F. V. Motta, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 695, 3094 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, Y. Chen, X. You, W. Lin, C.-H. Lu, H.-H. Yang and Y. Chi, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1028 RSC .
X. Sun, K. Yin, B. Liu, S. Zhou, J. Cao, G. Zhang and H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4951 RSC .
Y. Qiao, Y. Lin, S. Zhang and J. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Fang, A.-W. Xu, R.-Q. Song, H.-X. Zhang, L.-P. You, J. C. Yu and H.-Q. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 16025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 273–274, 87 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vetrone and J. A. Capobianco, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2008, 5, 1306 CrossRef CAS .
E. Debroye and T. N. Parac-Vogt, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8178 RSC .
M. Ding, D. Chen, D. Ma, J. Dai, Y. Li and Z. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2432 RSC .
D. Yang, G. Li, X. Kang, Z. Cheng, P. A. Ma, C. Peng, H. Lian, C. Li and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3450 RSC .
Q. Liu, D. M. Wang, Y. Y. Li, M. Yan, Q. Wei and B. Du, Luminescence, 2010, 25, 307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, C. Li, P. Yang, Z. Hou and J. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605434 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-D. Sun, Y.-F. Wang and C.-H. Yan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4765 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pinchetti, F. Meinardi, A. Camellini, G. Sirigu, S. Christodoulou, W. K. Bae, F. De Donato, L. Manna, M. Zavelani-Rossi, I. Moreels, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mishra, B. Mukherjee, G. Xing, S. Chakrabortty, A. Guchhait and J. Y. Lim, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14203 RSC .
A. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998 CrossRef .
S. Shen and Q. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1166 CrossRef CAS .
V. Biju, T. Itoh, A. Anas, A. Sujith and M. Ishikawa, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391, 2469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Jeong, D. J. Yun, S. H. Kim, J. Jang and C. E. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11759 CAS .
M. Kim, H. Seong, S. Lee, H. Kwon, S. G. Im, H. Moon and S. Yoo, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Wu, Y. Guo, Y. Zhao, X. Sun, Y. Wen, G. Yu and Y. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1080 CrossRef PubMed .
S. B. Desai, S. R. Madhvapathy, A. B. Sachid, J. P. Llinas, Q. Wang, G. H. Ahn, G. Pitner, M. J. Kim, J. Bokor and C. Hu, Science, 2016, 354, 99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Yan, A. Ourmazd and K. F. Lee, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1992, 39, 1704 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Li, K. Tsukagoshi, E. Orgiu and P. Samori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 118 RSC .
Y. Zhou, M. Zhang, Z. Guo, L. Miao, S.-T. Han, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Zhang and Z. Peng, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 997 RSC .
C. Liu, X. Yan, J. Wang, S. Ding, P. Zhou and D. W. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1604128 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Jiang, L. Yin, R. Cheng, X. Zhan, K. Xu, F. Wang, Y. Zhang and J. He, Small, 2017, 13, 1604298 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Roy, M. Padmanabhan, S. Goswami, T. P. Sai, G. Ramalingam, S. Raghavan and A. Ghosh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lei, F. Wen, B. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Gong, Y. He, P. Dong, J. Bellah, A. George, L. Ge, J. Lou, N. J. Halas, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C. Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, E. Hwang, Y. Lee, Y. Choi, J. S. Kim, S. Lee and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Pak, Y. W. Lee, Y. Cho, J. Hong, P. Giraud, H. S. Shin, S. M. Morris, J. I. Sohn and S. Cha, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee and W. D. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1702770 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Lee, S. Lee and T. W. Noh, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2015, 54, 1129 Search PubMed .
R. Waser, R. Dittmann, G. Staikov and K. Szot, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2632 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ligorio, M. V. Nardi and N. Koch, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1149 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, N. Lu, X. Zhao, H. Xu, W. Banerjee, H. Lv, S. Long, Q. Li, Q. Liu and M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, Y. Yang, S. K. Lee, G. Ruan, T. W. Kim, H. Fei, S. H. Lee, D. Y. Kim, J. Yoon and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, B. Gao, Y. Yao, X. Guan, X. Shen, Y. Wang, P. Huang, L. Liu, X. Liu, J. Li, C. Gu, J. Kang and R. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602976 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dai, W. Bao, L. Hu, C. Liu, X. Yan, L. Chen, Q. Sun, S. Ding, P. Zhou and D. W. Zhang, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025012 CrossRef .
E. Zhang, P. Wang, Z. Li, H. Wang, C. Song, C. Huang, Z. G. Chen, L. Yang, K. Zhang, S. Lu, W. Wang, S. Liu, H. Fang, X. Zhou, H. Yan, J. Zou, X. Wan, P. Zhou, W. Hu and F. Xiu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, B. Yoo, H. Lee, G. D. Cha, H. S. Lee, Y. Cho, S. Y. Kim, H. Seo, W. Lee, D. Son, M. Kang, H. M. Kim, Y. I. Park, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603169 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, C. Song, C. Chen, F. Zeng and F. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17955 CAS .
H. Ling, K. Tan, Q. Fang, X. Xu, H. Chen, W. Li, Y. Liu, L. Wang, M. Yi, R. Huang, Y. Qian, L. Xie and W. Huang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600416 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Wen, P. Li, R. Wang, G. Li, Y. Ma, L. Yang, Y. Song, Q. Yang and D. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 120 Search PubMed .
G. J. Dr, Y. S. Prof, Y. W. Dr, W. Y. Dr, H. W. Dr, Y. D. Zhi, A. X. Prof, F. D. Min, S. D. Dr and H. G. Prof, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1478 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Simão, M. Mas-Torrent, J. Casado-Montenegro, F. Otón, J. Veciana and C. Rovira, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13256 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Lee, S.-U. Kim, J. Min and J.-W. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ye, Q. Peng, M. Li, J. Luo, Z. Tang, J. Pei, J. Chen, Z. Shuai, L. Jiang and Y. Song, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Li, J. He, Q. Xu, N. Li, D. Chen and J. Lu, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, S. Lee and K. Yong, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 385707 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bera, H. Peng, J. Lourembam, Y. Shen, X. W. Sun and T. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4977 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, G. Liu, X. Zhu, H. Yang, B. Chen, X. Chen, J. Shang, W. D. Lu, Y. Wu and R. W. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, K. S. Yew, D. S. Ang, T. Kawashima, M. K. Bera, H. Z. Zhang and G. Bersuker, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 072107 CrossRef .
A. Mehonic, T. Gerard and A. J. Kenyon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 233502 CrossRef .
K. H. Chen, K. C. Chang, T. C. Chang, T. M. Tsai, S. P. Liang, T. F. Young, Y. E. Syu and S. M. Sze, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 224 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Emboras, I. Goykhman, B. Desiatov, N. Mazurski, L. Stern, J. Shappir and U. Levy, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lencer, M. Salinga, B. Grabowski, T. Hickel, J. Neugebauer and M. Wuttig, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kolobov, P. Fons, A. I. Frenkel, A. L. Ankudinov, J. Tominaga and T. Uruga, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Loke, T. H. Lee, W. J. Wang, L. P. Shi, R. Zhao, Y. C. Yeo, T. C. Chong and S. R. Elliott, Science, 2012, 336, 1566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feldmann, M. Stegmaier, N. Gruhler, C. Rios, H. Bhaskaran, C. D. Wright and W. H. P. Pernice, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, X. Yang, T. W. Maß, J. Hanss, M. Lewin, A. U. Michel, M. Wuttig and T. Taubner, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Burr, M. J. Breitwisch, M. Franceschini, D. Garetto, K. Gopalakrishnan, B. Jackson, B. Kurdi, C. Lam, L. A. Lastras, A. Padilla, B. Rajendran, S. Raoux and R. S. Shenoy, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2010, 28, 223 CAS .
D. Krebs, S. Raoux, C. T. Rettner, G. W. Burr, R. M. Shelby, M. Salinga, C. M. Jefferson and M. Wuttig, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 1450 CrossRef .
D. Ielmini and A. L. Lacaita, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 600 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, S. R. Lu and W. Jing, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 347 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Raoux, J. L. Jordan-Sweet and A. J. Kellock, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 383 CrossRef .
M. Wuttig and N. Yamada, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ríos, M. Stegmaier, P. Hosseini, D. Wang, T. Scherer, C. D. Wright, H. Bhaskaran and W. H. P. Pernice, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 725 CrossRef .
A. Pirovano, A. L. Lacaita, A. Benvenuti and F. Pellizzer, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2004, 51, 452 CrossRef .
M. Stegmaier, C. Ríos, H. Bhaskaran, C. D. Wright and W. H. P. Pernice, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600346 CrossRef .
A. Rios, P. Hosseini, C. D. Wright, H. Bhaskaran and W. H. Pernice, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1372 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Yongbiao Zhai
	Dr Yongbiao Zhai is a postdoctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. He received his PhD degree in Materials Chemistry from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (2017). His research interests include the fabrication and application of optoelectronic materials and devices.

Ye Zhou
	Dr Ye Zhou is an IAS Fellow in the Institute for Advanced Study, Shenzhen University. His research interests include flexible and printed electronics, organic/inorganic semiconductors, surface and interface physics, nanostructured materials, and nano-scale devices for technological applications, such as logic circuits, data storage, energy harvesting, photonics and sensors.

Vellaisamy A. L. Roy
	Dr Vellaisamy A. L. Roy is an associate professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on materials and device engineering for electronic devices, such as transistors, flash memory, photovoltaic devices, and sensors. His research is interdisciplinary, and he leads a team of physicists, chemists, and engineers.

Su-Ting Han
	Dr Su-Ting Han is an associate professor at Shenzhen University. She received her MSc degree in Analytical Chemistry from Hong Kong Baptist University and her PhD degree in Physics and Materials Science from City University of Hong Kong. After graduation, she worked at the City University of Hong Kong as a postdoctoral fellow. Her research interests include functional electronic devices and flexible, stretchable, and wearable electronics.

 	Fig. 1  The light-responsive spectrum range of most widely used π-conjugated molecules in optoelectronic devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Device structure described in this work. (b) The molecular structures of organic molecules used in the study. (c) The corresponding current level change with light irradiation time (VSD = −60 V). Reproduced with permission from ref. 31.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Chemical formulae of DAE between open and closed forms (UV: λ = 365 nm, Vis: λ ≥ 420 nm). (b) Energy band structure of the pentacene and different DAE forms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrical characterization of the P3HT/DEA-Me memory devices. (a) Chemical formulae of the DAE between open ring and closed ring. (b) Schematic structure of the proposed flexible memory devices. (c) Schematic illumination of multilevel storage at a fixed irradiation time; the readout current can be obtained in the dark at VGS = −40 V and VDS = −10 V. (d) IDS–time curves exhibit small steps with laser irradiation time, suggesting the ability to act as multilevel memory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The working principle of upconverted materials: materials absorb 980 nm IR light and emit visible or UV light, in which 560 nm green light can be reabsorbed by the semiconductor (P3HT). (b) Schematic diagram of the fabricated memory device. (c) Transfer characteristics of the memory transistor with IR-assisted programming behavior; inset: transfer characteristics without IR illumination. (d) Retention time of the multilevel IR photonic memory device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the MoS2 photonic memory device structure and voltage-controlled or light-controlled multilevel data storage in the MoS2 optoelectronic memory. (b) Schematic diagram depicting the transfer process of large-area, high-quality monolayered MoS2 flakes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The schematic diagram of the fabricated photonic memory. (b) The schematic illumination of MoS2 layered structure and energy band structure with local potential fluctuations. (c) The working principle of the fabricated photonic memory, including the initial state, programming state, and erasing state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) A typical structure schematic of RRAM. (b) The possible switching process of HRS and LRS. Schematic I–V curves of bipolar (c) and unipolar (d) resistive switching.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Molecular structure of the DBA compound. Inset: The structure schematic of the ITO/DBA/Al RRAM device. (b) Schematic graph of multilevel data storage and possible transitions among three states. (c) Possible working principle of carriers’ migration at each state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The structure diagram of the optically readable RRAM in this study. (b) Formation/annihilation of the nanoscale filament in the RRAM device. (c) Calculated field distribution of fundamental mode when light is transmitted through the SOI waveguide at LRS and HRS, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Memory model and operation principle of simplified all-photonic memory. (b) Information is stored in the phase charge materials; two-level and eight-level storage operate according to the mixture of amorphous and crystalline states. (c) SEM graph of fabricated PCM device with a footprint of 400 × 400 nm2. (d) Calculated field distribution of fundamental mode when light is transmitted through the SOI waveguide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
