A review of one-dimensional TiO 2 nanostructured materials for environmental and energy applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA09323F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA09323F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6772-6801A review of one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructured materials for environmental and energy applications

        
          
            Mingzheng 
            Ge
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunyan 
            Cao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianying 
            Huang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shuhui 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhong 
            Chen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ke-Qin 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            S. S. 
            Al-Deyab
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Yuekun 
            Lai
          
          
        
      *ab
aNational Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, College of Textile and Clothing Engineering, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. E-mail: yklai@suda.edu.cn
bResearch Center of Cooperative Innovation for Functional Organic/Polymer Material Micro/Nanofabrication, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore
dDepartment of Chemistry, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      17th November 2015
    , Accepted 22nd January 2016First published on 26th January 2016AbstractOne-dimensional TiO2 (1D TiO2) nanomaterials with unique structural and functional properties have been extensively used in various fields including photocatalytic degradation of pollutants, photocatalytic CO2 reduction into energy fuels, water splitting, solar cells, supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries. In the past few decades, 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials with a well-controlled size and morphology have been designed and synthesized. Compared to 0D and 2D nanostructures, more attention has been paid to 1D TiO2 nanostructures due to their high aspect ratio, large specific surface area, and excellent electronic or ionic charge transport properties. In this review, we present the crystal structure of TiO2 and the latest development on the fabrication of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials. Besides, we will look into some critical engineering strategies that give rise to the excellent properties of 1D TiO2 nanostructures such as improved enlargement of the surface area, light absorption and efficient separation of electrons/holes that benefit their potential applications. Moreover, their corresponding environmental and energy applications are described and discussed. With the fast development of the current economy and technology, more and more effort will be put into endowing TiO2-based materials with advanced functionalities and other promising applications.Mingzheng GeMingzheng Ge received his M.S. degree from College of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University in 2015. He is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree under Prof. Yuekun Lai and Prof. Keqin Zhang in College of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University. His research interests include inorganic semiconductor advanced materials and their applications in photocatalytic degradation, water splitting, supercapacitors, dye-sensitized solar cells and lithium-ion batteries.Yuekun LaiYuekun Lai has been a full professor at National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and School of Textile and Clothing Engineering in Soochow University since 2013. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Department of Chemistry, Xiamen University. During 2009–2011, he worked as a research fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. At July of 2011, he moved to Muenster University with Prof. Harald Fuchs and Prof. Lifeng Chi under the support of Humboldt Scholarship of Germany. His research interests are focused on TiO2 nanostructures for energy & environmental applications and bio-inspired intelligent surfaces with special wettability.
1. Introduction
The fast development of global economy and industrialization in the past century has also brought about serious problems to the world's population. Our rapacious consumption of fossil resources at an exponentially increasing rate has led to global warming and climate change. On the other hand, the extensive use of these energy sources has also caused much pollution in the environment.1–3 This has raised serious concerns over the need for renewable sources of clean energy and degradation of pollutants. For example, upon exposure to sunlight, solar energy can be utilized by photocatalysts to degrade organic pollutants, reduce CO2 into renewable hydrocarbon solar fuels and produce hydrogen by water splitting.4–6 Besides, supercapacitors, solar cells and lithium ion batteries are useful technology to overcome the shortage of nature resources.7–9 All these strategies are promising to solve the environmental contamination problems and energy crisis.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2), since discovered for water photolysis by Fujishima and Honda in 1972,10 has been paid much attention and widely used in photocatalytic degradation of pollutants,11,12 photocatalytic CO2 reduction into energy fuels,13,14 water splitting,15,16 solar cells,17,18 supercapacitors,19,20 biomedical devices21,22 and lithium-ion batteries.23,24 Most initial investigations were focused on 0D TiO2 nanoparticles and they showed excellent performances in photocatalysis, hydrogen production, solar cells, adsorbents and sensors due to their large surface area and broadened band gap.25–28 However, they also showed unavoidable disadvantages such as fast recombination of electrons and holes, slow charge carrier transfer and high recycling cost.29,30 The synthesis of 2D nanostructured materials was comparably complex and required harsh experimental conditions.31–33 Recently, 1D nanostructures have been extensively studied due to their distinctive advantages. Generally, a 1D nanostructure had a high aspect ratio with the diameter ranging from 1 to 100 nm, and it can be in the tube-, rod-, wire-, fiber- or belt-shape. Therefore, 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials inherited all the typical features of TiO2 nanoparticles and displayed a large specific surface area which is easy for photogenerated carriers to transfer along the axial direction. In addition, the relative ease of their production adds to their advantages. Meanwhile, the relatively large specific surface area and chemical stability make them ideal building blocks for assembling various surface heterostructures, allowing 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials to be widely used in photocatalysis, water splitting and nanodevices.34–37 However, the wide application of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials in some fields was limited due to several critical issues. Associated with the wide band gap, TiO2 (anatase: 3.2 eV, rutile: 3.0 eV) occupies only 3–5% of the total solar spectrum. Besides, fast recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs also leads to decreased efficiency in the photocatalytic activity. What's more, a relatively low specific surface area on a smooth surface and a single crystal phase may pose certain constraints on their performances.38–41 Fortunately, 1D TiO2 surface heterostructures can be designed and fabricated by introducing second phases with a special morphology (nanoparticles, nanorods, and nanowires)42,43 or doping with other materials (metals, non-metals, and semiconductors)44–46 to overcome the above-mentioned problems. As a result, light absorption can be broadened from UV light to visible light and the surface area can be increased at the same time.
In recent years, great progress has been made in the synthesis, modification and applications of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials and other semiconductor oxides. In this review, we first provided a detailed discussion on the crystal structure of TiO2 and the latest development on the fabrication of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials. Then, we will look into some critical structure engineering strategies that give 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials excellent properties. Finally, the environmental and energy applications of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials are summarized. Special focus has been given to their use as photocatalysts in supercapacitors, solar cells and lithium-ion battery electrodes.
2. Crystal structure and synthesis of 1D TiO2 nanomaterials
2.1 Crystal structure of TiO2
TiO2 exists naturally mainly in three crystalline phases: anatase (tetragonal, space group I41/amd), rutile (tetragonal, space group P42/mnm), and brookite (orthorhombic, space group Pbca) (Fig. 1a–c). In all polymorphs, titanium cations are six-fold coordinated to oxygen anions, forming distorted TiO6 octahedra. Anatase has corner sharing TiO6 octahedra and rutile has TiO6 octahedra joined by sharing the octahedral edges, while brookite has TiO6 octahedra joined by sharing both the octahedral corners and the octahedral edges. Besides, both anatase and rutile have a tetragonal structure with a = 0.536 nm and c = 0.953 nm (anatase) and a = 0.459 nm and c = 0.296 nm (rutile), respectively, while brookite has an orthorhombic structure with a = 0.915 nm, b = 0.544 nm, and c = 0.514 nm.47 Among the different polymorphs, rutile is generally considered to be the most stable bulk phase, while at the nanoscale, anatase and brookite are considered to be more stable due to their lower surface energy, although there are some arguments in the literature.48,49 The crystal phases are affected by the experimental conditions (synthesis method, annealing temperature, pH, duration, etc.) and different crystal phases affect the performance. In Yang's work,50 rutile, anatase, and brookite TiO2 nanorods with specific exposed crystal facets have been obtained by a hydrothermal method using peroxide titanic acid solution of different pH values. When the pH was lower than 8, only the rutile phase was found. When the pH ranged from 8 to 10, brookite and rutile were present in the mixed phases. However, when the pH was higher than 10, brookite and rutile disappeared, and only the anatase phase existed. Alsawat et al. discussed the effect of annealing temperature on the crystal phases and the performances.51 No obvious peak was observed in the XRD pattern of the TiO2 nanotube arrays (TiO2 NTAs) before annealing. Conversion of the amorphous TiO2 NTAs into anatase began at around 250 °C. The relative intensity of the anatase peaks increased with the increase in annealing temperature from 250 to 650 °C. When annealed at 650 °C, the TiO2 NTAs consisted of an anatase and rutile mixed phase, indicating that a part of the anatase phase changed into a rutile phase as the temperature increased. At 850 °C, the peak intensity of rutile increased, while that of anatase decreased. Besides, the TiO2 NTAs with an appropriate ratio of anatase and rutile showed the best photoelectric properties. Mi et al. also proved that the mixed phase of anatase and rutile showed higher photocatalytic performance than a pure one-phase crystal structure.52 Tay et al. synthesized two-phase anatase/brookite TiO2 nanostructures via a simple hydrothermal method.53 In comparison with highly crystalline pure brookite and P25, two-phase anatase/brookite TiO2 showed higher hydrogen production activity.
 Fig. 1  Crystal structures of TiO2 polymorphs: rutile (a), anatase (b), brookite (c) and TiO2(B) (d). Purple spheres represent Ti atoms, and the blue octahedra represent TiO6 blocks. Oxygen atoms at the corner of the octahedra are omitted for clarity. Reproduced from ref. 47. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides anatase, rutile and brookite, there exists another crystal phase of pure TiO2, TiO2(B) (Fig. 1d), which is usually synthesized by a hydrothermal method. Although TiO2(B) has the same chemical formula as TiO2, it has a more open framework structure, a relatively lower density and a larger specific capacity than other polymorphs. This has led to growing applications in the fields of energy conversions, such as photocatalysts, solar cells and lithium-ion batteries.54–57 Its space group C2/m is composed of only two TiO6 octahedra, with adjacent sheets joined together by edge-sharing. Zheng et al. denoted TiO2(B) as an intermediate product in the calcination of titanate, following the transformation sequence of protonated titanate → TiO2(B) → anatase TiO2.58 Besides, MxTiyOx/2+2y (M = H, Li, Na, K, etc.)59–62 is another formula crystal structure of nanotubular products from the alkaline hydrothermal treatment of TiO2. This structure is the intermediate product of TiO2 and its nanobelt, nanowire and nanorod structures tend to have good crystallinity after ion exchange or calcination.
Anatase and rutile are the most studied polymorphs of TiO2 for solar driven applications such as photocatalysis, water splitting, and solar cells. However, the wide band gap of TiO2 (anatase: 3.2 eV, rutile: 3.0 eV) and fast recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs limited their wide applications. Their properties can be further improved via doping or forming heterojunctions with other phases with favourable electronic coupling;63–65 this will be described in detail in Section 3.
2.2 Synthesis of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials
Many methods have been developed to prepare 1D TiO2 nanostructures with various morphologies, including nanotubes, nanorods, nanowires, nanobelts, nanosheets and nanofibers. In this section, we will briefly introduce six main preparation methods: hydrothermal, electrochemical anodization, vapor deposition, sol–gel, template-assisted, and electrospinning methods.

2.2.1 Hydrothermal method. 
The hydrothermal method is the most used method for the fabrication of 1D TiO2 nanostructures. It is usually conducted in a stainless steel vessel with high temperature and pressure. The hydrothermal method has attracted much attention due to its simple procedure and low production cost. Kasuga et al. reported the fabrication of TiO2-based nanotubular materials by the hydrothermal method for the first time in 1998.66,67 In this process, amorphous TiO2 powder was treated at high temperatures in a highly concentrated NaOH solution, and no sacrificial templates were needed. Since then, many investigations have been carried out on the synthesis of nanotubes,68,69 nanorods,70,71 nanowires,72,73 nanobelts74,75 and nanosheets76,77 using the hydrothermal method, as shown in Fig. 2. Obviously, the hydrothermal synthesis of 1D TiO2 nanostructures is a well-established technique and near 100% conversion of the precursors to 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials is achieved in one single process.
 Fig. 2  Different morphology types of 1D TiO2 nanostructures synthesized by hydrothermal methods: (a) TiO2 nanotubes, (b) TiO2 nanorods, (c) TiO2 nanowires, (d) TiO2 nanobelts, and (e and f) TiO2 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 69. Copyright 2004 Royal Society of Chemistry (a). Reproduced from ref. 71. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society (b). Reproduced from ref. 73. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (c). Reproduced from ref. 74. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society (d). Reproduced from ref. 77. Copyright 2011 Wiley (e and f). 
The synthesis method can be divided into acid-hydrothermal and alkali-hydrothermal approaches according to the reactants used for the hydrothermal synthesis of 1D TiO2 nanostructures.78 In the former method, the reactants are usually titanium salts with hydrochloric acid. The reaction normally leads to the formation of TiO2 nanorods. The reactants in the latter method are generally TiO2 nanoparticles using sodium hydroxide solution. Dissolution–recrystallization is always involved in this process and the products include nanotubes, nanowires, and nanobelts. These two methods have different reaction mechanisms, which produce different morphologies and crystalline phases of the product in the 1D nanostructures.
It is evident that TiO2 with different phases and morphologies can be transformed to nanotubes under specific hydrothermal conditions. During the hydrothermal process, layer-structured sodium titanate formed as an intermediate product on the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles. Then, the Na+ cations residing between the edge-shared TiO6 octahedral layers can be replaced gradually by H2O molecules. The size of intercalated H2O molecules is larger than that of Na+ ions, so the interlayer distance becomes enlarged, and the static interaction between neighboring TiO6 octahedral sheets is weakened, causing the layered titanate particles to exfoliate to form nanosheets. To release the high surface tension, the nanosheets curl up from the edges to form TiO2 nanotubes.79,80 The dominant driving force for this curving process is still in discussion. Besides, hydrothermal conditions such as the type of precursor (TiO2 nanoparticles or metal substrates), the type and concentration of the reaction solution, temperature, time, etc. have an important effect on the structures and morphologies of TiO2. Morgan et al. investigated the effect of concentration of NaOH solution and temperature on nanostructure formation from Degussa P25 through alkaline hydrothermal treatment.81 As shown in Fig. 3, different morphologies and structures of TiO2 can be transferred from each other by adjusting the hydrothermal conditions. Besides, Tanaka and Peng et al. investigated the effect of concentration of NaOH solution, temperature and reaction time on nanostructure formation by using a Ti substrate as a precursor through alkaline hydrothermal treatment.82,83 Their results are consistent with the ones obtained by Morgan et al.
 Fig. 3  Morphological phase diagram of Degussa P25 evolution indicating regions of nanostructure formation after 20 h of hydrothermal treatment. Reproduced from ref. 81. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
There are some disadvantages in the conventional hydrothermal method. First, slow reaction kinetics result in long reaction time. Second, the short length of the nanotubes limits their wide applications. Third, nanotubes are non-uniform on a large-scale. Various approaches, such as ultrasonication-assisted, microwave-assisted, and rotation-assisted hydrothermal methods, have been explored to solve these problems. In particular, Tang et al. grew elongated titanate nanotubes with length up to tens of micrometers by a stirring hydrothermal method (Fig. 4),84,85 which has a major breakthrough on the development process of TiO2 nanotubes. They obtained uniform nanotubes with a high aspect ratio by optimizing the stirring rate. This method has resulted in 1D TiO2-based nanotubular materials for long-life and ultrafast rechargeable lithium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 4  Fabrication and characterization of titanate nanotubes with different aspect ratios. (a) Fabrication scheme. (b) Digital photos of titanate solutions obtained by the stirring hydrothermal method at 500 (left) and 0 rpm (right) after sedimentation. (c) FESEM images of titanate nanotubes obtained at 500 rpm. (d) TEM image of (c), the arrow indicates a nanotubular structure. (e) XRD patterns of the products synthesized at different stirring speeds. (f–j) FESEM images of the titanate nanotubes obtained by the hydrothermal reaction at 130 °C for 24 h at stirring rates of 0, 300, 400, 500, and 1000 rpm, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 84. Copyright 2014 Wiley. 


2.2.2 Solvothermal method. 
The solvothermal method is also a common synthesis approach used for the fabrication of 1D TiO2 nanostructures.86–88 It is similar to the hydrothermal method which is usually conducted in a stainless steel vessel with high temperature and pressure. In addition, these two methods generally use TiO2 nanoparticles, TiCl4 or tetrabutyl titanate as the precursor. However, the solvothermal method is usually conducted in an organic solvent (ethanol, ethylene glycol, n-hexane, etc.), while the hydrothermal method usually reacts in water solutions.89,90 Wang et al. synthesized a bundle of nanowires and open-ended TiO2 nanotubes by the solvothermal method using ethanol and glycerol as solvents, respectively (Fig. 5a and b).91 The obtained 1D TiO2 nanostructures were found to exhibit a favourable discharge performance as anode materials in the application of lithium-ion batteries. What's more, anatase type nitrogen–fluorine (N–F) co-doped TiO2 nanobelts were prepared by a facile one-step solvothermal method (Fig. 5c). And the composites showed much higher photocatalytic degradation activity than TiO2 nanoparticles.92 Besides, Zhao's group successfully fabricated vertically aligned TiO2 nanorods by the solvothermal method for preparing photoanodes for dye-sensitized solar cells and discussed the effect of thermal treatment on their performances (Fig. 5d). It was found that the annealed TiO2 nanorods showed increased power conversion due to improved crystallites.93 Compared to the hydrothermal method, how to choose appropriate solvents is the key for the solvothermal method, which also limits its wide applications.
 Fig. 5  SEM images of various TiO2 morphologies synthesized by the solvothermal method: (a) nanowires, (b) nanotubes, (c) nanobelts, and (d) nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society (a and b). Reproduced from ref. 92. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society (c). Reproduced from ref. 93. Copyright 2014 Elsevier (d). 


2.2.3 Electrochemical anodization method. 
1D TiO2 nanotube arrays (TiO2 NTAs) can be synthesized by a facile electrochemical anodization method on a Ti metal substrate. Compared to other 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials, TiO2 NTAs are excellent photoanode materials that have been used for a long time because they are stable, non-toxic, environmentally friendly, inexpensive, recyclable and easily synthesized. The first report on anodized TiO2 dates back to 1984, Assefpour-Dezfuly et al. produced porous TiO2 by performing etching in alkaline peroxide first, followed by anodization in chromic acid.94 As presented before, Zwilling and co-workers reported on the formation of nanoporous anodized titania in a fluoride containing electrolyte in 1999, making a breakthrough of work undertaken on porous/tubular anodized Ti over the last two decades.95 Since then, much effort has been made to optimize experimental parameters with different electrolytes in order to efficiently achieve high quality self-organized TNAs. Categorized into 5 generations (Table 1 and Fig. 6), highly ordered anodic TiO2 nanotube arrays with long nanotubes have been realized, and the development is still ongoing. In general, the type of electrolyte, pH, applied potential, time and temperature affect the morphology and structure of TiO2 NTAs. Hydrofluoric acid based water aqueous electrolytes are most widely used in titanium anodization to produce TiO2 nanostructures. However, the length of nanotubes is only a few hundred nanometers. In F−-based inorganic and organic neutral electrolytes, much longer and smoother nanotubes could be grown. The anodization voltage influences the morphology of formed nanostructures, while the anodization time mainly affects the length of TiO2 nanotubes. The temperature of the electrolyte affects the dissolution rate. As a result, TiO2 NTAs are normally grown at 20–25 °C (room temperature). Appropriate selection of anodization parameters for the TiO2 NTA fabrication is key to the successful growth of high quality nanotubes.
Table 1 Brief summary of various synthesis generations of TiO2 TNAs




TiO2 NTAs
Electrolyte
Morphology
Ref.




1st generation (HF electrolyte)
0.5 wt% HF
Short nanotube length: 200–500 nm, diameter: 10–100 nm, and wall thickness: 13–27 nm

95



2nd generation F-based buffered electrolytes
1 M Na2SO4/(NH4)2SO4 + 0.5 wt% NH4F
Rough wall with wing length: 0.5–2.4 μm, diameter: 100 nm, and wall thickness: 12 nm

96



3rd generation organic electrolytes containing F
0.5 wt% NH4F + 2 v% H2O in ethylene glycol
Smooth and ultra-long tube length: 5–1000 μm, diameter: 100 nm, and wall thickness: 12 nm

97



4th generation fluoride-free electrolytes
0.01–3 M HClO4
Disordered tube length: 30 μm, diameter: 20–40 nm, and wall thickness: 10 nm

98



5th generation multiple-step anodization in organic electrolytes containing F
0.5 wt% NH4F + 2 v% H2O in ethylene glycol
Smooth and hexagonal tube length: 2–10 μm, diameter: 100 nm, and wall thickness: 15–20 nm

99 and 100





 Fig. 6  SEM images of the 1st generation in the HF electrolyte (a), 2nd generation in the Na2SO4/NaF electrolyte (b), 3rd generation in ethylene glycol/fluoride electrolytes containing a small amount of water (c), 4th generation in the F−-free electrolyte (d), 5th generation with two-step anodization in ethylene glycol/fluoride electrolytes containing a small amount of water (e) and 5th generation with three-step anodization in ethylene glycol/fluoride electrolytes containing a small amount of water (f). Reproduced from ref. 95. Copyright 1999 Wiley (a). Reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2005 Elsevier (b). Reproduced from ref. 97. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society (c). Reproduced from ref. 98. Copyright 2007 Elsevier (d). Reproduced from ref. 99. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry (e). Reproduced from ref. 100. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society (f). 


2.2.4 Chemical vapor deposition method. 
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) has been developed to construct high-quality 1D TiO2 nanostructures. 1D TiO2 nanostructures formed on a silicon substrate coated with Ti, TiCl4 or Ti(OC3H7)4 in a sealed chamber with high temperature. Du et al. have grown uniform TiO2 nanowires via the CVD method using TiCl4 as the source reagent (Fig. 7a).101 Chen and Hoa et al. successfully synthesized nanorods and nanobelts by the CVD method (Fig. 7b and c).102,103 However, stringent experimental conditions and high cost put a limit to their wide production.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of nanowires (a), nanorods (b) and nanobelts (c) prepared by chemical vapor deposition. Reproduced from ref. 101. Copyright 2007 Elsevier (a). Reproduced from ref. 102. Copyright 2008 IOP Science (b). Reproduced from ref. 103. Copyright 2008 The Electrochemical Society (c). 


2.2.5 Template-assisted method and sol–gel method. 
The template-assisted method is widely used in the fabrication of 1D TiO2 nanotubes and nanorods. An anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) nanoporous membrane, made of an array of parallel straight nanopores with a controllable diameter and length, is usually used as a template. The template was removed by chemical etching after TiO2 was deposited into the template. Sander et al. fabricated dense and well-aligned TiO2 nanotubes with well-controlled dimensions by the template-assisted method.104 The sol–gel method is a representative of wet chemistry methods to synthesize 1D TiO2 nanostructures with low temperature and easy control of morphology. The general route to prepare TiO2 sol gel is to mix tetrabutyl titanate or titanium isopropoxide in acetic acid. Then the solution is heated to high temperature with vigorous stirring to undergo hydrolysis and condensation reactions to obtain the nanostructured TiO2. Joo et al. successfully synthesized TiO2 nanorods with a diameter of about 5 nm by the sol–gel method.105 Usually, 1D TiO2-based nanostructures are constructed by the combination of the sol–gel and template-assisted processes. For example, as shown in Fig. 7, Qiu, Attar and Lin et al. respectively fabricated 1D well-aligned TiO2 nanotube arrays, nanorods and nanowires by a modified template-assisted sol–gel method (Fig. 8a–c).106–108 They can control the dimensions of TiO2 nanostructures by the template used.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of TiO2 nanotube arrays (a), nanorods (b) and nanowires (c) fabricated by the template-assisted sol–gel method. Reproduced from ref. 106. Copyright 2006 IOP Science (a). Reproduced from ref. 107. Copyright 2009 Elsevier (b). Reproduced from ref. 108. Copyright 2003 IOP Science (c). 


2.2.6 Electrospinning method. 
Since Li et al. synthesized TiO2 nanofibers with a diameter of 53 ± 8 nm by the electrospinning method for the first time in 2003,109 more and more researchers have paid attention to this simple method. During the electrospinning process, polymer solution is injected from a small nozzle under the influence of an electric field. The solution is then subjected to stretching by the continuous accumulation of electrostatic charges, forming ultralong and hollow nanofibers. Single-phase and highly crystalline TiO2 nanofibers can be obtained through calcination of the as-prepared samples. Yang et al. prepared TiO2 nanofibers by using titanium tetraisopropoxide, acetic acid, ethanol and poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) as starting materials.110 As displayed in Fig. 9, porous-shaped anatase TiO2, cluster-shaped anatase TiO2, hierarchical-shaped rutile (minor) TiO2 and nano-necklace rutile (major) TiO2 were achieved by annealing at different temperatures (500, 600, 700 and 800 °C). Along with the increased calcination temperature, the network structure and structural continuity of TiO2 nanofibers are well maintained while the diameters of the as-synthesized TiO2 nanofibers shrank from 200 nm to less than 100 nm. What's more, Ag, CuO, carbon, etc. could be used to modify TiO2 nanofibers by electrospinning to enhance photocatalytic activity.111–113 Du's group synthesized coaxial electrospun TiO2/ZnO core–sheath nanofibers by the electrospinning method and this novel structure improved the overall energy conversion of dye-sensitized solar cells.114
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the setup for electrospinning nanofibers (a). Schematic illustration of the morphology evolution mechanism from nanoporous to nanocluster, hierarchical and nanonecklace architectures of TiO2 nanofibers (b). SEM images of TiO2 nanofibers annealed at 500 °C (c), 600 °C (d), 700 °C (e) and 800 °C (f). The insets show the corresponding low-magnification views showing the network-like structure and continuity of the nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry (c–f). 

3. Surface engineering strategy
1D TiO2 nanostructured materials have been widely employed in photocatalytic degradation of pollutants, water splitting, solar cells, supercapacitors, biomedical devices and lithium batteries due to their low-cost and good physical and chemical properties. However, 1D TiO2 nanostructures show a lower specific surface area when compared to 0D TiO2 nanoparticles that can provide more photocatalytically active areas. Besides, associated with the wide band gap (anatase: 3.2 eV, rutile: 3.0 eV), TiO2 can only absorb ultraviolet light (3–5% solar light), which hinders the full utilization of solar light. The single crystalline phase also leads to fast recombination of the electron/hole pairs. These drawbacks (low surface area, wide band gap, absorption UV light and single crystalline) make 1D TiO2 inactive under visible light and limit its use for a wider range of applications. Considerable efforts have been made over the past years towards enlarging the surface area, extending light absorption for visible light and suppressing recombination of photogenerated electrons/holes.115–117 The common strategies include increasing the specific surface area and material modification via doping.
3.1 Enlargement of the photocatalytically active area
Photocatalytic reactions occur at the active sites on the surface of a photocatalyst. Therefore, some important parameters such as the specific surface area and high energy facets, which affect the efficiency of photocatalysis, should be taken into account for increasing the photocatalytic activity. These two factors will be discussed in the following subsections.

3.1.1 Enlargement of the specific surface area. 
As we all know, the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants and photocatalytic water splitting occur on the surface (or near surface) of the photocatalysts. Therefore, it is important to create sufficient surface areas to absorb the pollutants. Although the 1D TiO2 nanostructure has a unique surface and high aspect ratio, it has a lower surface area when compared to 0D TiO2 nanoparticles. There are two methods to enlarge the specific surface area. First, decorating second phase nanoparticles, nanorods or nanowires on the surface of the 1D TiO2 nanostructure has been proven beneficial to increase the specific surface area and absorption of pollutants. Besides, forming surface heterostructures can facilitate the separation of electrons/holes and improve the photocatalytic performance of the 1D nanostructure. However, it is difficult to control the size, distribution uniformity and density of the loaded nanoparticles, nanorods or nanowires on the 1D TiO2 nanostructure. Second, construction of a coarse surface through a hydrothermal acid corrosion process can create numerous nanoparticles and pits on the surface of the existing 1D nanostructure. In addition, the acid corrosion method results in intimate contact between the in situ created nanoparticles and the 1D TiO2 nanostructure, facilitating separation and transfer of photogenerated charges. Meng et al. successfully grew second phase TiO2 nanorods with high density on TiO2 nanofibers by electrospinning and hydrothermal methods (Fig. 10a–d).118 The diameter and the length of these rutile nanorods could be varied from 10 nm to 400 nm and 20 nm to 1 μm, respectively, by changing the parameters of the hydrothermal reaction. The total surface area of the hierarchical nanostructures was doubled after the treatment. The photocatalytic activity of the TiO2 hierarchical nanostructures was found to be superior to that of pure TiO2 nanofibers due to the enlarged surface area and efficient separation of electrons/holes. In another work, Wang and Zhou et al. created nanoparticles and pits on TiO2 nanorods and nanotubes by HCl corrosion, respectively (Fig. 10e–h). The modified 1D nanostructured materials showed higher photocatalytic degradation than the TiO2 nanorods and nanotubes before the modification.119,120
 Fig. 10  SEM and TEM images of pristine TiO2 nanofibers (a and b) and TiO2 hierarchical nanostructures (c and d). SEM images of pristine 1D TiO2 nanorods and nanobelts (e and g). SEM images of 1D TiO2 nanorods and nanobelts by HCl corrosion (f and h). Reproduced from ref. 118. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (a–d). Reproduced from ref. 119. Copyright 2015 Wiley (e and f). Reproduced from ref. 120. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (g and h). 


3.1.2 Exposure of high-energy facets. 
Different facets of anatase TiO2 were reported to possess different chemical properties, depending on the surface energy. The calculated surface formation energies of TiO2 are 0.90 J m−2 for the (001) surface, 0.53 J m−2 for the (100) surface and 0.44 J m−2 for the (101) surface.121 The higher surface energy of the (001) facet is due to the high densities of under-coordinated Ti atoms and the very large Ti–O–Ti bond angles at the surface.122 Although the high-energy (001) facet exhibits the highest photocatalytic activity, it is difficult to prepare a (001) facet in 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials because of its reduced stability. Zhang et al. reported that anatase nanorods with diameters around 10 nm were grown along the [001] direction, i.e., the c-axis of the anatase lattice, which has a minimum exposure of the high energy (001) surface.123 Recently, the hydrothermal method was used to prepare TiO2 structures with exposed (001) facets. Lu and co-workers made important progress in the preparation of anatase TiO2 single crystals with exposed (001) facets. They synthesized anatase TiO2 microcrystals with exposed (001) facets using TiF4 as the raw material via the hydrothermal method.124 Since then, more efforts have been put on preparing anatase TiO2 single crystals with exposed (001) facets from different starting chemicals, such as titanium fluoride, titanium chloride, titanium tetrabutoxide, titanium tetraisopropoxide, and so on.125–129 Wen's group synthesized large-sized well-defined anatase TiO2 nanosheets wholly dominated with thermodynamically unfavourable highly reactive (001) and (100) facets (98.7% and 1.3%, respectively) by the hydrothermal method.130 The as-prepared anatase TiO2 nanosheets show a well-faceted morphology and have a large size in length about 4.14 μm (Fig. 11). These TiO2 nanosheets with a high percentage of (001) facets showed high photocatalytic activity. Besides, Yu et al. fabricated anatase TiO2 nanosheets with exposed (001) facets by the hydrothermal method and they showed higher photoelectric conversion efficiency in dye-sensitized solar cells than pure TiO2 nanoparticles and P25.131 In addition, the prepared TiO2 nanosheet film electrode can be used in a wide range of applications including photocatalysis, electrochemistry, separation, and purification.
 Fig. 11  (a)–(c) FESEM images of anatase TiO2 nanosheets and (d) schematic structure of the as-obtained anatase TiO2 nanosheets. Scale bars in (a–c) are 5.0 μm, 2.0 μm and 300 nm, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 130. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.2 Modification strategy
TiO2 is an n-type semiconductor with a wide band gap, and optical absorption in the UV region (<400 nm). Besides, the photogenerated electrons and holes are easy to recombine for 0D, 1D, and 2D TiO2 nanostructures. However compared to TiO2 nanoparticles, the 1D nanostructure has superior charge transport through a one dimensional direction, which should result in lower charge recombination in the 1D TiO2 nanostructure. It is still necessary to modify 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials in the form of nanorods, nanotubes, nanowires, nanosheets, nanobelts and nanofibers with other materials to overcome these drawbacks. Numerous attempts toward achieving this goal have been made by employing various approaches including hydrothermal, sol–gel, thermal treatment, sputtering and electrochemical methods. Three essential benefits are expected: (1) doping with metal and non-metal elements to enhance light absorption and to prevent recombination of electrons/holes, (2) loading metal nanoparticles to act as a surface plasmon resonance (SPR) photosensitizer for driving visible light, and (3) compositing with another semiconductor or conductor to form a heterostructure that provides suitable energy levels for synergic absorption and charge separation for enhanced utilization of solar energy.

3.2.1 Doping with metal and non-metal elements. 
It is known that the crystal structure and chemical composition affect the functionalities and performance of materials. Incorporating a secondary electronically active species into the lattice is able to sensitize 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials for enhanced visible light absorption and suppressed recombination of electrons and holes. Asahi et al. first reported nitrogen doped TiO2 by sputtering in a nitrogen-containing gas mixture and it showed extended absorption from UV light to visible light regions, leading to enhanced photocatalytic degradation of methylene orange (MO) under visible light irradiation.132 Hou's group has conducted systematic investigation on N-doped TiO2 nanotubes which were immersed in hot ammonia solution via the hydrothermal method.133 As displayed in Fig. 12, it was found that the molar ratio between ammonia solution and deionized water had an effect on the morphology of TiO2 NTAs. Doping with nitrogen can effectively narrow the band gap of TiO2 nanotubes and facilitate the transfer of photogenerated carries, dramatically enhancing photocatalytic activity for degradation of MO under visible light irradiation. Besides, other non-metals such as C,134,135 S,136,137 and F138,139 have also been introduced into the TiO2 lattice by various methods such as hydrothermal, sputtering and thermal treatment methods. Ion implantation or sputtering in an atmosphere of doping species followed by an annealing process has been verified to be an effective doping method.140,141 However, this method needs high energy accelerators in a high vacuum environment. Thermal treatment of 1D TiO2 nanomaterials in a special atmosphere and hydrothermal treatment are recognized as facile doping routes. Compared to bare TiO2, non-metal doped TiO2 exhibited a significantly improved photoresponse and higher photoelectron conversion efficiency. Among all the non-metal materials, carbon is the second most used element (after nitrogen) to modify 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials. Huo et al. constructed a coaxial carbon/TiO2 NTA structure by hydrothermal treatment in a glucose solution and then carbonization under N2 at 700 °C.142 Besides, carbon quantum dot/titanium dioxide composite nanofibers were prepared via a facile one step hydrothermal method by Saud's group and they showed improved photocatalytic activity.143 Graphene, a one-atom-thick sp2-hybridized carbon material, has been widely used to modify TiO2 due to its superior mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties.134–137 Recently, our group has synthesized a reduced graphene oxide/TiO2 NTA composite via a combination of electrodeposition and carbonation techniques.99 The graphene/TiO2 composite showed improved photocatalytic degradation of pollutants and photocatalytic hydrogen production activity under solar light. Though there exist a few reports on the modification of 1D TiO2 nanomaterials with S and F, the existing literature is mainly focused on the co-doping of TiO2 with N and F, or N and S.144,145 These results all demonstrated that doping with non-metals into the TiO2 lattice can enhance the light absorption and suppress the recombination of electrons and holes, making TiO2 to be more widely used.
 Fig. 12  SEM images of the as-anodized TiO2 NTAs (a) after being immersed in water (b) and in ammonia solution (c–f, with the concentration of vol (A):vol (DI) = 1:10, 1:5, 1:2 and 1:1, respectively) obtained by the hydrothermal method. The bar scale is 200 nm. Schematic of the band structure of pure TiO2 NTAs and N-doped TiO2 NTAs (g). The absorption spectra of water immersed TNAs and different concentration nitrogen doped TiO2 NTAs, the inset shows the corresponding estimated bandgap (h). Photocatalytic degradation of MO under simulated visible light irradiation in the presence of photocatalysts (i). A and DI represent ammonia solution and deionized water, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 133. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
At the same time, TiO2 doped with transition metal cations such as Fe, V, Cu, and Mn has also been reported to enhance the photoelectron conversion efficiency under visible light illumination and suppress the recombination of photogenerated electron/hole pairs.146–148 Su et al. incorporated Fe into TiO2 nanotube arrays by an ultrasound-assisted impregnation-calcination method.149 The Fe/TiO2 NTA sample showed excellent stability and improved photocatalytic degradation of acid orange II with the synergistic effect of H2O2. It is noted that the performance of TiO2 is largely dependent on the doping content, energy state, electron configuration and distribution. For example, when the doping content is excessively high, it may act as a recombination center, rather than facilitating electron–hole separation, resulting in decreased photocatalytic activity. Therefore, it is important to overcome these adverse effects by choosing appropriate experimental parameters.


3.2.2 Loading with metal nanoparticles. 
Another promising approach is to decorate 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials with noble metal nanoparticles (Au, Ag, Pt, Pd, etc.).150–153 Modification with noble metals has been proven to facilitate the transfer of photogenerated carriers and enhance photoelectron conversion efficiency under visible light. The Fermi level of some noble metals (Au, Ag, Pt, etc.) is lower than the conduction band of TiO2. Upon visible light illumination, the electrons transfer from the valence band of TiO2 to the conduction band. Thus, noble metals act as the electron trap and the photogenerated electrons at the conduction band of TiO2 will move towards the conduction band of noble metals. Simultaneously, the photogenerated holes transfer from the valence band of noble metals to that of TiO2. Therefore, photogenerated electron–hole pairs are separated efficiently.154,155 Moreover, noble metals can also improve the photoresponse under visible light due to the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect.156,157 Many strategies have been adopted to decorate 1D TiO2 nanomaterials with noble metal nanoparticles by UV irradiation reduction, plasma sputtering, electrodeposition, electrospinning and hydrothermal methods. Among these methods, the hydrothermal method exhibited better control of the metal particle size and dispersion. Ye and his colleagues sensitized TiO2 NTAs with Pd quantum dots (Pd QDs/TiO2 NTAs) via a facile hydrothermal strategy with superior performance in photoelectrocatalytic water splitting.100 As shown in Fig. 13a and e, Pd quantum dots were uniformly dispersed over the entire surface of the nanotubes, both inside and outside of the nanotubes with a very small particle size of 3.3 ± 0.7 nm. Besides, Lin et al. reported a facile hydrothermal strategy for crafting TiO2 nanotubes sensitized by Pt nanoparticles (Fig. 13b and f).158 Pt nanoparticles with a diameter of 1.8 nm were tightly anchored on TiO2 nanotubes and Pt nanoparticles effectively suppressed the recombination of electron/hole pairs, improving the photocatalytic hydrogen production activity. In addition, Ghaffari et al. adopted a UV irradiation reduction method to construct highly dispersed Au nanoparticles on TiO2 nanorods (Fig. 13c and g).159 Both the particle size and the amount of loading were facilely controlled via adjusting the concentration of HAuCl4. The Au nanoparticles helped prevent photo-injected electrons from approaching the surface of nanorods by forming a Schottky energy barrier, which improved the overall conversion efficiency of the dye-sensitized solar cells. Nam's group synthesized Ag/TiO2 nanofiber composites via a one-step electrospinning process.160 As depicted in Fig. 13d and h, Ag nanoparticles with a size of 8 nm were uniformly embedded on the surface of TiO2 nanofibers. In comparison with that of pristine 1D TiO2 nanofibers, the specific capacity of Ag/TiO2 nanofiber composites was increased by at least 20% because Ag nanoparticles promoted charge transfer and lithium-ion diffusion. 1D TiO2 nanomaterials modified with noble metals can effectively prevent electron/hole recombination, facilitate the transfer of charge carriers and enhance visible light absorption, widening their applications in photocatalysis, solar cells, supercapacitors and lithium batteries.
 Fig. 13  SEM images of Pd/TiO2 NTAs (a), Pt/TiO2 nanotubes (b), Au/TiO2 nanorods (c) and Ag/TiO2 nanofibers (d). (e), (f), (g) and (h) show the corresponding TEM images of (a), (b), (c) and (d). Reproduced from ref. 100. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society (a and e). Reproduced from ref. 158. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (b and f). Reproduced from ref. 159. Copyright 2012 Elsevier (c and g). Reproduced from ref. 160. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (d and h). 


3.2.3 Compositing with a semiconductor or conductor. 
Incorporating a narrower band gap semiconductor (CdS, CdTe, PbS, Cu2O, etc.)161–163 into TiO2 to form a heterostructure for simultaneous visible light harvesting and charge separation has been proven to be an effective strategy. Under visible light irradiation, photogenerated electrons are injected from the conduction band of the small band gap semiconductor to that of TiO2, inhibiting the recombination of electrons and holes. At the same time, the holes from the valence of TiO2 will move to that of the semiconductor and then oxidize the targeted pollutants. Besides, the semiconductor can facilitate the transfer of charge carriers under solar light, improving the overall power conversion efficiency of solar cells.
Cadmium sulfide (CdS) is a well-known semiconductor and widely used to couple with TiO2. Its band gap is about 2.4 eV, matching well with the spectrum of sunlight, and it is able to absorb low energy photons up to 520 nm. Besides, its conduction band is more negative than that of TiO2, facilitating the charge transfer across the interface between CdS and TiO2. Electrochemical deposition and sequential chemical bath deposition (S-CBD) methods are the conventional methods to construct CdS/TiO2 heterostructures. Shao et al. developed a constant current electrochemical deposition route to make CdS nanoparticles uniformly dispersed on the TiO2 nanotubes and partially embed in the shell of TiO2 nanotubes (Fig. 14a and e).164 The size and distribution density of CdS nanoparticles can be tuned easily by controlling the concentration of the electrolyte. Coupling TiO2 nanotubes with the CdS nanoparticles extended the optical absorption from ultraviolet into the visible-light region up to 580 nm. Compared with plain TiO2 nanotube arrays, CdS/TiO2 nanotube arrays showed an 11-fold enhancement in photoelectrochemical activity. This unique method is also suitable for the synthesis of other narrow band gap semiconductor-sensitized TiO2 nanotubes. Kim's group fabricated CdS/TiO2 nanowires by the S-CBD method.165 First, TiO2 nanowires were synthesized by the hydrothermal method. Then, TiO2 nanowires were immersed in Cd2+ and S− solutions in sequence to uniformly deposit CdS nanoparticles with a size of 8 nm on the surface of TiO2 nanowires (Fig. 14b and f). Xie et al. decorated TiO2 NTAs with CdS quantum dots (QDs) by sonication-assisted sequential chemical bath deposition.166 As shown in Fig. 14c and g, compared to the conventional S-CBD method, this method prevented CdS QDs from aggregating at the entrance of TiO2 NTAs, and CdS QDs were uniformly dispersed both outside and inside TiO2 nanotube surfaces. The CdS QDs/TiO2 NTA samples exhibited an enhanced photocurrent generation and photocatalytic efficiency under visible illumination due to the efficient separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. Liu et al. reported on a novel core–shell TiO2 nanofiber/CdSe photoanode for photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation.167 The core–shell nanofiber films, with a hierarchical network structure, are prepared on fluorine-doped tin oxide coated substrates via electrospinning pyrolysis and chemical bath deposition. CdS nanoparticles were uniformly dispersed on the surface of TiO2 nanofibers (Fig. 14d and h). The hierarchical network structure shows significantly improved photoelectrochemical properties due to the separation of charges. In addition, CdTe, CdSe and PbS are also widely used semiconductors. Rao's group co-sensitized vertically aligned anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays with CdS/CdSe quantum dots (Fig. 14i–l).168 First, hierarchical TiO2 nanowire arrays were synthesized by a two-step hydrothermal process. Then, CdS/CdSe quantum dots were uniformly deposited onto hierarchical TiO2 nanowire arrays by electrodeposition. The hierarchical TiO2 nanowire array based cell showed 30% higher power conversion efficiency than smooth TiO2 nanowire devices due to the superior light-scattering ability of branched hierarchical TiO2 nanowires for enhanced light-harvesting efficiency and improved transfer of charge carriers in the presence of CdS and CdSe.
 Fig. 14  SEM images of CdS/TiO2 nanotubes (a), CdS/TiO2 nanowires (b), CdS/TiO2 NTAs (c) and CdS/TiO2 nanofibers (d). (e), (f), (g) and (h) show the corresponding TEM images. A schematic diagram showing the preparation process and structure of CdS/CdSe co-sensitized smooth and hierarchical TiO2 nanowires (i), SEM image (j), HAADF-STEM (k) and EDX mappings (l) of the CdS/CdSe/hierarchical TiO2 nanowire photoanode. Reproduced from ref. 164. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society (a and e). Reproduced from ref. 165. Copyright 2015 Elsevier (b and f). Reproduced from ref. 166. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (c and g). Reproduced from ref. 167. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (d and h). Reproduced from ref. 168. Copyright 2014 Elsevier (i–l). 
Since TiO2 is an n-type semiconductor, the construction of a p–n junction is believed to be one of the most effective strategies due to the existence of an internal electric field at the interface.169–171 Wang et al. prepared Cu2O/TiO2 NTA p–n heterojunction photoelectrodes via an ultrasonication-assisted sequential chemical bath deposition method.172 As displayed in Fig. 15a and e, the Cu2O nanoparticles were uniformly deposited on TiO2 nanotubes. The amount of Cu2O nanoparticles can be controlled by the deposition time. The p–n heterojunction effectively improved the separation of photogenerated electrons/holes and enhanced the absorption of visible light. Compared to bare photocatalysis and electrocatalysis, Cu2O/TiO2 composite photoelectrodes also possessed superior photoelectrocatalytic activity and stability in rhodamine B (RhB) degradation with a synergistic effect between electricity and visible light irradiation. Besides, Deng et al. constructed a p–n CuO/TiO2 nanofiber heterostructure via a combination of electrospinning and hydrothermal strategies (Fig. 15b and f).173 It showed a high response and excellent selectivity for formaldehyde and ethanol gases because CuO can trap electrons and facilitate the charge transfer. In addition, decoration of 1D TiO2 nanomaterials with an n-type semiconductor to form an n–n heterojunction is also beneficial for improving the photocatalytic activity and power conversion efficiency. Ye et al. decorated n-type TiO2 NTAs with n-type TiO2 nanoparticles by hydrolysis of TiCl4 solution, significantly increasing the surface area and improving the solar-cell efficiency (Fig. 15c and g).174 Besides, Yue's group synthesized an n–n type TiO2/CuInS2 nanorod core–shell heterostructure solar cell by the solvothermal method (Fig. 15d and h).175 CuInS2/TiO2 nanorods showed much higher power conversion efficiency under solar light than pure TiO2 nanorods due to the separation of electrons and holes and the solar light harvesting.
 Fig. 15  SEM images of Cu2O/TiO2NTAs (a),172 CuO/TiO2 nanofibers (b),173 TiO2 nanoparticles/TiO2 NTAs (c)174 and CuInS2/TiO2 nanorods (d).175 (e), (f), (g) and (h) show the corresponding TEM images. Reproduced from ref. 172. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry (a and e). Reproduced from ref. 173. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (b and f). Reproduced from ref. 174. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society (c and g). Reproduced from ref. 175. Copyright 2015 Elsevier (d and h). 
It is promising to construct perovskite (BaTiO3, SrTiO3, CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbCl3, etc.)/TiO2 heterostructures for photocatalytic degradation of pollutants, photocatalytic water splitting and solar cells because perovskite can absorb solar light and facilitate the transfer of charge carriers. Huo's group prepared ordered perovskite-type MTiO3/TiO2 NTAs (M = Zn, Co, and Ni) by a general hydrothermal route based on amorphous TiO2 NTAs via electrochemical anodization of Ti foil.176 MTiO3/TiO2 NTAs showed good photocatalytic activity because perovskite can enhance the light absorption and effectively suppress the recombination of electrons/holes. Meanwhile, Sun et al. modified TiO2 NTAs with SrTiO3/TiO2 hetero-nanoparticles by a two-step hydrothermal method.177 Compared with pure TiO2 NTAs or SrTiO3/TiO2 NTAs, TiO2 NTAs modified with SrTiO3/TiO2 hetero-nanoparticles showed higher hydrogen production activity. Besides, Kim and his colleagues fabricated a perovskite CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 nanorod hybrid solar cell and a remarkable power conversion efficiency over 9.4% was achieved based on the heterostructure.178 Recently, perovskite material coupled TiO2 has been a hot topic in photocatalysis, water splitting and solar cells due to its excellent performance.
Graphene, a two-dimensional carbon material with excellent electrical, mechanical and thermal properties, has been widely studied recently.179–182 For example, Xiang et al. modified TiO2 nanosheets with graphene by a microwave-assisted hydrothermal method.183 The graphene/TiO2 composite showed improved photocatalytic degradation of pollutants and photocatalytic hydrogen production activity under solar light. Besides, Perera's group prepared TiO2 nanotube/reduced graphene oxide composites by an alkaline hydrothermal process. It was found that the ratio of RGO to TiO2 in the composites significantly affects the photocatalytic activity. The composite with 10% RGO showed the highest photocatalytic activity, with a 3-fold enhancement in photocatalytic efficiency over pure TiO2 nanotubes both under UV light and visible light due to its high surface area and efficient separation of electrons/holes.184 What's more, Pan et al. synthesized GO/TiO2 nanowires and GO/TiO2 nanoparticles by the hydrothermal method. It was found that TiO2 nanowires, in comparison with TiO2 nanoparticles, have more uniform dispersion on graphene with less agglomeration, resulting in more direct contact between TiO2 and graphene, and hence further improved electron–hole pair separation and transportation. Therefore, the relative photocatalytic activity of GO/TiO2 nanowires is much higher than that of GO/TiO2 nanoparticles and pure TiO2 nanowires or TiO2 nanoparticles.185

4. Applications of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials
As described in Section 2, various kinds of 1D TiO2 nanostructures have been fabricated using different effective methods. Owing to their excellent ion-exchange/intercalation activities, as well as adsorption/photocatalytic properties, 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials have been paid much attention for photocatalytic degradation of pollutants, photocatalytic CO2 reduction into energy fuels, photocatalytic water splitting, solar cells, supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries. In this section, we will discuss the various applications of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials in detail.
4.1 Photocatalytic application
TiO2 nanostructured materials are widely used as photocatalysts due to their high oxidation and reduction ability. Whether aqueous pollutants or air pollutants, TiO2 shows good photocatalytic activity. Besides, TiO2 also displays good photoreduction activity of CO2 into hydrocarbon energy fuels.

4.1.1 Photo/photoelectron-catalytic degradation of aqueous pollutants. 
With the fast development of economy, the environmental problems become more and more serious, especially clean water reduction and water contamination. Human beings urgently need effective solutions for these problems. TiO2 has been shown to be an excellent photocatalyst due to its low-cost, non-toxicity, long-term stability and strong oxidizing power to be useful for the decomposition of unwanted organic compounds. Upon UV illumination, the electrons at the valence band transfer to the conduction band by photon energy. The electrons at the conduction band can attack oxygen molecules to generate peroxide anions, and holes at the valence band can react with water to generate hydroxyl radicals at the same time, resulting in degradation of pollutants (Fig. 16a). Compared to photocatalysis, photoelectrocatalysis has shown higher photocatalytic degradation efficiency of pollutants. As depicted in Fig. 16b, when a low bias potential was applied on the 1D TiO2 nanostructures, it significantly facilitated the transfer of photocarriers and suppressed the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes. Upon UV light irradiation, the electrons can leap up the valence band of TiO2 to the conduction band, and then drive to the counter electrode via the external circuit, and left the holes on the surface of the TiO2 NTA electrode. Meanwhile, a large number of active species were produced for pollutant degradation, following similar mechanisms for photocatalysis. Photocatalysis is mostly used for degradation of pollutants which is suitable for any form of TiO2, while photoelectrocatalysis is a more efficient and promising degradation strategy which needs 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials (nanotubes, nanorods, nanowires, nanobelts and nanofibers) grown on a Ti or FTO substrate.
 Fig. 16  Mechanism of photocatalytic (a) and photoelectrocatalytic (b) degradation of pollutants for 1D TiO2 photocatalysts. 
Alsawat and Lai et al. studied the structure factors on the photocatalysis of TiO2 nanotube arrays and demonstrated that they had strong photocatalytic activity under UV light.51,186 Wang et al. synthesized cellulose acetate/TiO2 ultrafine fibers via electrospinning for effective dyeing water treatment under UV light.187 However, as discussed before, due to the wide band gap and low solar light absorption, it is essential to couple 1D TiO2 with metals, nonmetals and semiconductors to narrow the band gap and enhance visible light absorption for improved photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic activity. Yang et al. prepared a Ag/TiO2 nanotube composite by a facile method.188 Ag nanocrystals about 3.8 nm in diameter were uniformly distributed over the TiO2 nanotube surface (Fig. 17a and b). The Ag/TiO2 nanotube composite exhibited higher visible-light photocatalytic activity of rhodamine B (RhB) than P25 and TiO2 nanotubes, which can almost degrade 100% RhB within 2 h due to the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of Ag nanocrystals for enhanced visible light absorption and the high adsorption capability of TiO2 nanotubes with a large specific surface area (Fig. 17c and d). Besides, TiO2@carbon core/shell nanofibers (TiO2@C NFs) with different thicknesses of carbon layers were fabricated by combining the electrospinning technique and hydrothermal method.189 By adjusting the hydrothermal fabrication parameters, the thickness of carbon layers could be easily controlled from 2 to 8 nm. Furthermore, the TiO2@C NFs exhibited enhanced photocatalytic efficiency of photodegradation of RhB compared with the pure TiO2 nanofibers under visible light irradiation, which might be attributed to the high separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and holes based on the synergistic effect between carbon as a sensitizer and TiO2 with a 1D structure. The TiO2@C NFs with a 2 nm thick carbon layer showed higher photocatalytic activity than those with an 8 nm thick carbon layer (Fig. 17e–h). Notably, the TiO2@C NFs could be easily recycled due to their one-dimensional nanostructural properties. In addition, Zhang et al. constructed a p–n Cu2O/TiO2 NTA heterostructure by an electrodeposition method. When compared with pure TNAs, the Cu2O/TiO2 heterojunction composites exhibit considerably higher photocurrent density and enhanced photoelectrocatalytic activity for the visible light driven photodegradation of methyl orange. Moreover, Cu2O/TiO2 NTA composite photoelectrodes also possessed superior photoelectrocatalytic activity and photocatalytic performance. Recently, Zhang et al. prepared Cu2O/TiO2 NTA p–n heterojunction photoelectrodes by the electrodeposition method (Fig. 18).190 The Cu2O nanoparticles were uniformly deposited on TiO2 nanotubes. The electric field caused by the p–n heterojunction effectively improved the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes and enhanced the absorption of visible light. Consequently, Cu2O/TiO2 NTA photoelectrodes exhibited a more effective photoconversion capability than single TiO2 nanotubes. Furthermore, compared to bare photocatalysts, Cu2O/TiO2 composite photoelectrodes also possessed superior photoelectrocatalytic activity and stability in RhB degradation with a synergistic effect between electricity and visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 17  TEM images of Ag/TiO2 nanotubes (a and b). Visible-light photocatalytic degradation curves of rhodamine B over P25, TiO2 nanotubes, and Ag/TiO2 nanotubes (c). Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic degradation mechanism of rhodamine B over the Ag/TiO2 nanotubes under visible light (d). SEM images (e) and TEM images (f) of S2. UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of the S0, S1 and S2 (g). Degradation profiles of rhodamine B over different samples (h). (S0: Pure TiO2 nanofibers. S1, S2: TiO2@C nanofibers with the thickness of carbon layers about 2 and 8 nm, respectively.) Reproduced from ref. 188. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society (a–d). Reproduced from ref. 189. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (e–h). 
 Fig. 18  SEM images of pure TiO2 NTAs (a and b). SEM image (c) and TEM image (d) of Cu2O/TiO2 NTAs with the deposition potential at −1.0 V. Photoelectrocatalytic activities of pure TiO2 NTAs and samples I–IV toward the degradation of MO at an applied potential of 0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) under visible light irradiation (e). Comparison of the electrochemical, photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic activities towards the degradation of MO for sample III (f). Photocurrent response of pure TiO2 NTAs and samples I–IV at a bias potential of 0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) (g). The schematic diagram of the photoelectrocatalytic mechanism of the Cu2O/TiO2 TNA heterojunction composite (h). (Samples I–IV: Cu2O/TiO2 NTAs with the deposition potential at −0.8, −0.9, −1.0 and −1.2 V, respectively.) Reproduced from ref. 190. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (a–h). 
In addition to photocatalytic degradation of the organic pollutants, the TiO2 photocatalysts are also reported to effectively absorb and photocatalytically reduce various toxic metal ions, such as Hg(II), As(V), Cd(II) and Cr(VI), into less toxic metallic or ion states. For example, Liu's group synthesized TiO2 nanotubes which displayed high photocatalytic reduction activity of Cr(VI) and Cr(III) in contaminated water.191 In addition, Lu et al. decorated TiO2 nanosheets with MnxOy nanoparticles via a facile one-pot hydrothermal method. The composites displayed high photocatalytic degradation activity of Cr under visible light irradiation.192 What's more, TiO2 nanomaterials coupled with Au, N, CdS, etc. also showed enhanced visible light photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic activity due to the separation of electrons/holes and solar light harvesting.193–195 Great efforts should be put on the modification of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials for improving the photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic degradation of pollutants in the future.


4.1.2 Photocatalytic degradation of air pollutants. 
Indoor and outdoor air pollution caused by factories, cars, new furniture, cooking, etc. has increased much more day by day. This problem poses a threat to human being's health and lives seriously. And researchers have paid much attention to dealing with it. Photocatalytic technology is considered as one of the potentially very efficient advanced oxidation and reduction processes for the improvement of air quality by degrading inorganic and organic air pollutants.196–199 Among semiconductors, TiO2 is most widely used in photocatalytic degradation of air pollutants due to its low-cost and physical and chemical stability.200–202 Compared to TiO2 nanoparticles, 1D TiO2 nanostructures are also widely used in photocatalytic degradation of air pollutants owing to their large specific surface area and low recombination of electrons/holes.203,204 Nguyen et al. synthesized TiO2 nanotubes by a hydrothermal method and discussed the effect of washing pH on the photocatalytic oxidations of NOx (NO, NO2) which are linked to many environmental issues and considered as criteria pollutants in many countries.205 It was found that the TiO2 nanotubes washed at pH from 3 to 5 provided the highest efficiencies for total NOx removal, which may be attributed to the synergistic effect of optimum conditions of sodium content, surface area, and amount of crystalline anatase achieved under these washing conditions (Fig. 19a–c). Besides, Yu's group first prepared TiO2 nanowires by a hydrothermal method and then calcined them at various temperatures.206 In a calcination temperature range of 400–600 °C, the TiO2 nanowires showed higher photocatalytic activity than P25 powders for photocatalytic oxidation of acetone. In particular, at 500 °C, the calcined H-titanate nanowires showed the highest photocatalytic activity, which exceeded that of P25 by a factor of about 1.8 times. This can be attributed to the synergetic effect of larger specific surface area, higher pore volume and the presence of brookite TiO2. In addition, Ren et al. studied the effect of the interaction between reactants and F-free or F-modified anatase TiO2 nanosheets on photodegradation of volatile organic compounds such as acetone, benzene, and toluene.207 The surface modification of TiO2 nanosheets with F increases the interaction with acetone as compared to F-free TiO2 nanosheets, resulting in the higher visible photocatalytic activity of the acetone, while F-free TiO2 nanosheets exhibited higher visible photocatalytic activity of benzene or toluene due to the more strong interaction. The findings provide fundamental insight into the effect of the interaction, and open up a novel strategy for considerably enhancing photocatalytic efficiency and developing visible photocatalysis for environmental cleanup or selective purification through controlling the interaction. In order to improve the photocatalytic activity, Tang et al. reported the synthesis of 1D composites of titanate nanotubes and carbon nanotubes (denoted as TNTs–CNTs) by the hydrothermal method (Fig. 19d–f).208 The titanate nanotube and carbon nanotube maintained tubular morphology well and were uniformly dispersed. By using the degradation of benzene in the gas phase as a testing reaction, doping with carbon nanotubes exhibited enhanced photocatalytic performances compared to pristine TiO2 nanotubes and TiO2 nanoparticles, which could be an interesting research topic regarding TiO2–carbon composites as photocatalysts for environmental remediation.
 Fig. 19  SEM image of TiO2 nanotubes (a). Photocatalytic NO conversion and NOx removal efficiency by TiO2 nanotubes with different washing pH values, respectively (b and c).205 Typical TEM images of TNT-30 wt% CNTs (d). Time-online data for gas-phase photocatalytic degradation of benzene over the samples of TNTs, and composites of TNTs–CNTs (e). The remaining fraction of benzene in the dark over the TNTs and TNT–CNT nanocomposites after reaching the adsorption equilibrium for gas-phase degradation of benzene (f).208 Reproduced from ref. 205. Copyright 2015 Elsevier (a–c). Reproduced from ref. 208. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society (d–f). 


4.1.3 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction into energy fuels. 
With the rapid consumption of fossil fuels, the problem of global warming caused by the increase in the atmospheric concentration of CO2 has raised public concern and attracted research attention. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction into hydrocarbon energy fuels is a promising and meaningful strategy which can both reduce the concentration of CO2 and relieve the shortage of energy.209–212 Since the discovery of photoreduction of CO2 by semiconductor by Inoue's group,213 tremendous endeavor has been put into synthesizing more effective and environmentally friendly photocatalysts to achieve CO2 conversion more economically. As compared to other semiconductors, TiO2 has been widely applied in photoreduction of CO2 into energy fuels due to its strong reduction ability.214–217 As photocatalysts, the electrons at the valence band of TiO2 transfer to the conduction band upon light illumination. The holes at the valence band can react with water to generate hydrogen ions, while the electrons at the conduction band can reduce CO2 into energy fuels such as CH4, CO, CH3OH, etc. at the same time, providing clean energy for the sustainable development (Fig. 20a).218,219 In the early stage, TiO2 nanoparticles were first investigated for photocatalytic reduction of CO2 due to their large surface area, high porosity and chemical stability. Tseng et al. synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles and Cu/TiO2 nanoparticle composites by the sol–gel method and compared their photoreduction rate with that of P25.220 The methanol yield of Cu/TiO2 was 20 μmol g−1 h−1 under UV illumination. The yield was much higher than those of sol–gel TiO2 and Degussa P25, whose yields were 0.8 and 6.4 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively. Besides, Wang's group fabricated Pt/TiO2 nanoparticle composites by a photoreduction method.221 For the optimized Pt/TiO2 photocatalysts, the CH4 yield reached 15 mmol g−1 h−1, together with a H2 yield of 22 mmol g−1 h−1 and a C2H6 yield of 0.7 mmol g−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation. The photocatalytic CO2 conversion ability of Pt/TiO2 was 3.7 times that of Pt/P25. In addition, noble metal (Pd, Pt, Au and Ag) modified reduced graphene oxide/TiO2 nanoparticle ternary nanostructures are constructed for efficient visible-light-driven photoreduction of CO2 into methane.222 The photocatalytic activity of CO2 reduction was found to follow the order: Pt/RGO/TiO2 (0.28 μmol g−1 h−1) > Pd/RGO/TiO2 (0.20 μmol g−1 h−1) > Ag/RGO/TiO2 (0.17 μmol g−1 h−1) > Au/RGO/TiO2 (0.13 μmol g−1 h−1) > RGO/TiO2 (0.11 μmol g−1 h−1) > P25 (0.02 μmol g−1 h−1) under visible light irradiation. Except for 0D nanoparticles, 1D and 2D TiO2 nanostructures are also applied in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 due to their large specific surface area (>50 m2 g−1) and slower recombination of electrons/holes. Wang's group synthesized a unique one-dimensional structure of TiO2 single crystals coated with ultrafine Pt nanoparticles (0.5–2.0 nm) via versatile gas-phase deposition methods.223 The 1D TiO2 film exhibited extremely high CO2 photoreduction efficiency with selective formation of methane (the maximum CH4 yield of 1361 μmol g−1 h−1) compared to pristine P25.
 Fig. 20  Mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 for 1D TiO2 photocatalysts (a). Methane production rates from the bare TiO2 NTAs and Pt/TiO2 NTA composite in carbon dioxide/water vapor and argon/water vapor environments (b). Product generation rates from a nitrogen-doped nanotube array film, 600 °C annealed, surface-loaded with both Pt and Cu catalysts (c). Depiction of a co-catalyst loaded flow-through nanotube array membrane for high rate photocatalytic conversion of CO2 and water vapor into hydrocarbon fuels (d). Reproduced from ref. 225. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (b). Reproduced from ref. 226. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society (c and d). 
Ping et al. fabricated TiO2 nanotube arrays by electrochemical anodization and applied them in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O into methanol and ethanol, and they showed higher photoreduction activity than TiO2 nanoparticles.224 In order to strengthen the visible light absorption and increase the photoreduction rate of CO2, many effective strategies have been adopted to improve their performances. Feng et al. deposited ultrafine Pt nanoparticles on high aspect ratio nanotube arrays by using a rapid microwave-assisted solvothermal approach (Fig. 20b).225 The Pt nanoparticles were uniformly dispersed on the TiO2 NTAs and the nanoparticle sizes can be controlled by adjusting the initial concentration of the metal ion precursor inside the nanotube. The Pt/TiO2 nanotube composite is shown to greatly promote the photocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide and water vapor into methane, which is attributed to the homogeneous distribution of metal co-catalyst nanoparticles over the TiO2 nanotube array surface providing a large number of active reduction sites and enhanced solar light absorption. This novel technique could prove useful for the deposition of metal, metal alloy, or metal oxide nanoparticles within a variety of nanotubular or nanoporous material systems with the resulting nanocomposites useful in catalysis, photocatalysis, photovoltaic, and photoelectrochemical applications. In addition, Varghese et al. synthesized nitrogen/TiO2 nanotube arrays loaded with both Cu and Pt nanoparticle composites and discussed the effect of annealing temperature on their photocatalytic reduction activity. And the composites annealed at 600 °C displayed the highest hydrocarbon production rate of 111 ppm cm−2 h−1 under outdoor sunlight, which is at least 20 times higher than that in previously published reports (Fig. 20c and d).226 Besides, Xu et al. succeeded in the preparation of 2D anatase TiO2 single crystals with marked photocatalytic activity via a facile and effective method.227 The 2D TiO2 nanosheets showed high photoreduction activity of CO2 into CH4 under solar light with a large surface area (57.1 m2 g−1).

4.2 Photo/photoelectron-catalytic water splitting
Faced with the challenge of fossil fuel reduction, human beings have urgently called on the sustainable energy economy. Since hydrogen was envisaged as a clean, renewable and abundant energy source, water splitting for hydrogen production by photocatalysts has become one of the efficient and promising ways to solve the problem of energy shortage in the future. Considering that the mechanism of photoelectrolytic water splitting is similar to photocatalytic degradation of pollutants (Fig. 21), 1D nanostructured materials are considered as good candidates for highly efficient water splitting. As for photocatalytic water splitting, the electrons at the conduction band can reduce H ions to generate hydrogen, and holes at the valence band can react with water to generate hydroxyl radicals at the same time, oxidizing pollutants (Fig. 21a). Compared to photocatalysis, photoelectrocatalysis has shown higher degradation efficiency of pollutants. As displayed in Fig. 21b, the electrons at the counter electrode and at the conduction band attack H ions to generate hydrogen, while the holes at the valence band can react with water to oxygen at the same time.
 Fig. 21  Mechanism of photocatalytic (a) and photoelectrocatalytic (b) water splitting for 1D TiO2 photocatalysts. 
TiO2 nanomaterials showed high photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic water splitting under UV light. Meanwhile, much effort has been made into improving their performances by widening UV regions to visible light regions and suppressing the recombination of electrons/holes (Table 2). Recently, Dang et al. reported a facile and green one-step hydrothermal method to prepare TiO2 nanotube/graphene (TNT/GR) photocatalysts.228 During the hydrothermal reaction, the reduction of graphene oxide (GO) into GR without using any reducing agents and the formation of 1D TiO2 nanotubes were achieved simultaneously, which resulted in the direct growth of well-defined TiO2 nanotubes uniformly distributed on GR substrates. TNT/GR nanocomposites with various GR contents (0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 10 wt%) were prepared. The photocatalytic hydrogen generation was demonstrated under 300 W Xenon lamp illumination with the light intensity about 60 mW cm−2 by using methanol as a sacrificial agent. A significantly enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production (12.1 μmol h−1) was obtained over the composition-optimized TNT/GR composite (with 1.0 wt% GR), three times higher than that of pure TNTs (4.0 μmol h−1) (Fig. 22a–c). In addition, a plasmonic Ag/TiO2 NTA photocatalytic composite was designed for photoelectrocatalytic hydrogen evolution.229 Ag quantum dots, with a tunable size (1.3–21.0 nm), could be uniformly deposited on the TiO2 NTAs by the electrodeposition method. The unique structure of the as-obtained photoelectrodes greatly improved the photoelectric conversion efficiency. The as-obtained Ag/TiO2 NTAs exhibited strong visible-light absorption capability, high photocurrent density, and enhanced photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) activity toward photoelectrocatalytic hydrogen evolution under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) (Fig. 22d–h). The enhancement in the photoelectric conversion efficiency and activity was ascribed to the synergistic effects of silver and the unique hierarchical structures of TiO2 nanotube arrays, and the strong SPR effect of Ag for enhanced visible light absorption. What's more, Mollavali's group first reported that TiO2 nanotube aligned arrays multiple-doped with nitrogen, nickel and carbon via one-step anodization showed enhanced photoelectrocatalytic hydrogen production activity under visible light.230 In general, the hydrogen production rate is greatly dependant on the electrolyte, external bias, light intensity, wavelength regions, and TiO2 structures. Therefore, it is important to optimize these parameters based on fundamental understanding in order to design and construct highly efficient cells for hydrogen generation.231
Table 2 Summary of TiO2 based 1D nanomaterials for water splitting




Photoanode
Light intensity (mW cm−2)
Electrolyte
Photocatalysis/photoelectrocatalysis
Water splitting efficiency
Ref.




TiO2 NTAs
UV light 70 mW cm−2
1 M KOH
Photelectrocatalysis
7.1 μmol h−1 cm−2

232



TiO2 NTAs
Solar light 150 W xenon lamp
1 M NaOH
Photelectrocatalysis
8.3 μmol h−1 cm−2

233



Cu2O/TiO2 nanorods
Solar light
50% glycerol and 50% water
Photocatalysis
50.3 mmol h−1 g−1

234



Ag/TiO2 nanotubes
Visible light 100 mW cm−2
MeOH/H2O = 1:10
Photocatalysis
535 μmol h−1 g−1

235



H/TiO2 nanowires
UV light 100 mW cm−2
1 M NaOH
Photoelectrocatalysis
5.6 μmol h−1 cm−2

236



Pt/TiO2 NTAs
UV light 30 mW cm−2
0.1 M Na2SO4 and 1 M ethylene glycol
Photoelectrocatalysis
135 μmol h−1 cm−2

237



Pt/TiO2 NTAs
Solar light 320 mW cm−2
2 M Na2CO3 and 0.5 M ethylene glycol
Photoelectrocatalysis
492 μmol h−1 cm−2

238



CdS/TiO2 nanotubes
Solar light 300 W xenon lamp
0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S
Photocatalysis
20 mmol h−1 g−1

239



Graphene/CdS/ TiO2 NTAs
Solar light 300 mW cm−2
0.1 M Na2S and 0.1 M Na2SO3
Photoelectrocatalysis
10 μmol h−1 cm−2

240



CdS/CdSe/TiO2 NTAs
Solar light 100 mW cm−2
10% ethylene glycol and 0.1 M Na2S
Photoelectrocatalysis
457 μmol h−1 cm−2

241



SrTiO3/TiO2 NTAs
Solar light 320 mW cm−2
0.5 M KOH and 0.5 M ethylene glycol
Photoelectrocatalysis
314 μmol h−1 cm−2

177



Pd/TiO2 NTAs
Solar light 320 mW cm−2
2 M Na2CO3 and 0.5 M ethylene glycol
Photoelectrocatalysis
592 μmol h−1 cm−2

100



C3N4/N/TiO2 nanofibers
Solar light 300 W xenon lamp
10 mL methanol and 40 mL water
Photocatalysis
8391 μmol h−1 g−1

242





 Fig. 22  SEM image of graphene/TiO2 nanotubes (a). Photocatalytic hydrogen production rate of pure TiO2 nanotubes and graphene/TiO2 nanotube composites with various GR contents under solar light (b). Schematic diagram of charge transfer in the graphene/TiO2 nanotube photocatalyst under Xe lamp irradiation (c). SEM (d) and TEM (e) images of pure TiO2 NTAs and Ag/TiO2 NTAs, respectively. Photocurrent (f) and photoelectrocatalytic hydrogen production rate (g) of pure TiO2 nanotubes and Ag/TiO2 NTAs with different deposition times at 0.7 V vs. SCE in a PEC cell containing a 2.0 M ethylene glycol and 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution under 300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm filter) irradiation. SPR charge carrier transfer under visible light irradiation at the Ag/TiO2 NTA interface and the photoelectrocatalytic process for H2 evolution (h). Reproduced from ref. 228. Copyright 2013 Elsevier (a–c). Reproduced from ref. 229. Copyright 2015 Wiley (d–h). 
4.3 Solar cells
One of the most promising applications of TiO2 today is in solar cells, particularly dye-sensitized, quantum dot sensitized and perovskite solar cells.243–247 For TiO2 nanoparticles, the overall efficiency is limited due to the electron loss during percolation through the nanoparticle network and photo-induced carrier recombination. Compared to TiO2 nanoparticles, 1D TiO2 nanostructures obtained high energy conversion efficiency due to their high aspect ratio and facile transfer of electrons. However, they showed low photoelectric conversion efficiency under solar light due to the wide band gap and low utilization of solar light. Therefore, sensitizing with organic dyes or inorganic narrow band gap semiconductors makes TiO2 absorb light into the visible region and convert solar energy into electrical energy.248–250 These will be discussed in the following.

4.3.1 Dye-sensitized solar cells. 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), a concept first introduced by O'Regan and Gratzel in 1991,251 are widely studied for achieving the goal of high efficiency and low cost in the utilization of solar energy.252–254 The working principle is displayed in Fig. 23a. A typical configuration of a DSSC exhibits a sandwich structure: a photoanode and a counter electrode are placed in parallel and separated by an electrolyte. A transparent conducting substrate composed of nanocrystalline semiconductors (TiO2 is most widely used) on one side served as a photoanode. A catalytic layer such as platinum or carbon materials usually serves as the counter electrode. An adsorbed Ru-dye is used as a sensitizer and electrolyte. Upon illumination, the dye molecules capture photons and then inject electrons into the conduction band of the semiconductor. Electrons migrate through the semiconductor layer and travel through the external circuit. Then the oxidized dye is reduced to its original state by electron donation from the redox couple in the electrolyte. Usually the electrolyte is an organic solvent or ionic liquid containing the I−/I3− redox system. The I3− loses electrons and is oxidized to I−, while the resulting I− species can diffuse to the Pt counter electrode where they are regenerated to I3− by reduction, regenerating the dye at the same time. During this process, charge injection and transport are always accompanied by charge recombination, which decays the output performance of the DSSC.255,256
 Fig. 23  Schematic overview of a dye-sensitized solar cell (a). Processes of preparing 1-D porous rutile TiO2 NRAs (b). Morphological development of single TiO2 NRAs by step 3 (c). SEM images of pristine TiO2 NRAs (d) and porous rutile TiO2 NRAs (e). J–V characteristics of the DSSC based on rutile TiO2 NRAs with different etching durations and P25 TiO2 nanoparticle films (f). Reproduced from ref. 255. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (a). Reproduced from ref. 264. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society (b–f). 
At the early stage of the development, Ohsaki's group synthesized TiO2 nanotubes by the hydrothermal method and applied them for DSSC applications.257 They studied the fabrication conditions (pH of paste, sintering temperature and the electrolyte) of the TiO2 nanotube electrode that affect the performance of DSSCs. In comparison with commercially available nanoparticles P25, the DSSC using the TiO2 nanotube electrode shows higher energy conversion efficiency (6.4%) than that using a P25 particle electrode (5.5%). The better performance was mainly due to the improved electron transfer with the tube structure. Shankar et al. fabricated long, vertically aligned TiO2 nanotube arrays with lengths between 10 and 220 μm by the electrochemical anodization method. Dye sensitized solar cells containing these arrays yielded a power conversion efficiency of 6.89%.258 In order to increase the overall conversion efficiency, surface modification and morphology design have been explored to enhance the electron transfer ability of 1D nanostructures. Plasmonic Ag and Au were used to decorate TiO2 nanofibers to improve the conversion efficiency of DSSCs, which reached 6.13% and 7.7%, respectively.259,260 Surface plasmon resonance of noble metals for visible light absorption, separation and better transfer of electrons were the contributing factors. Besides, TiO2 nanotubes coupled with TiO2 nanoparticles showed higher power conversion efficiency of more than 7.0%, which was great progress in the conversion efficiency of 1D TiO2 nanotubes.261–263 Lv et al. reported that optimized porous rutile TiO2 nanorod arrays (NRAs) with a large internal surface area were fabricated on the FTO substrate via two-step hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 23b–e).264 The porous rutile TiO2 NRAs with a large surface area achieved a record efficiency of 7.91% for the DSSC (Fig. 23f). Some researchers modified 1D TiO2 nanostructures with carbon, ZnO, etc. for improving photo-conversion efficiency.265–267 However, there exist several problems. The organic dyes are difficult to synthesize and the cost is high. Besides, limited photoelectric conversion efficiency has restricted the commercialization of DSSCs. However, with more interest and effort put on the DSSC, these problems will eventually be overcome and the conversion efficiency will continue to improve in the future.


4.3.2 Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells. 
In pursuit of low-cost, easy fabrication, and environmentally friendly energy, photovoltaic cells converting solar energy to electricity are a promising strategy to address the energy crisis. Quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) have been more and more popular and are considered as promising alternatives to DSSCs due to higher light absorption, low-cost and long cycling stability.268–270 As shown in Fig. 24A, the working principle of QDSSCs is similar to that of DSSCs. The classical architecture of a QDSSC consists of three components: TiO2 sensitized quantum dots as a photoanode, a counter electrode, and a redox electrolyte having S2−/Sn2− couples. A transparent conducting substrate composed of nanocrystalline semiconductors (TiO2 is most widely used) on one side coated with another semiconductor quantum dots served as the photoanode. A catalytic layer such as platinum or carbon materials usually serves as the counter electrode. The polysulfide serves as the electrolyte. Upon light irradiation, quantum dots can absorb photons and excite electrons from the valence band of quantum dots to their conduction band. Due to the good match of energy levels, electrons at the conduction band of quantum dots flow to that of TiO2. And then the photoelectrons in the CB are collected by transparent conductive oxide and flow through the external circuit. Quantum dots are subsequently regenerated by reducing species in the electrolyte. Finally, holes are transported to the counter electrode, where the oxidized counterpart of the redox system is reduced. During this process, photogenerated electrons and holes are effectively separated.271–273 In order to improve the photovoltaic performances of QDSSCs, many researchers have focused their attention on material selection and materials engineering. Quantum dots (CdS, CdSe, CdTe, PbS, carbon, etc.) with size-dependent band gaps provide new opportunities for harvesting light ranging from the visible to infrared regions of solar light. In addition, through the impact ionization effect, it is possible to generate multiple excitons from single-photon absorption in quantum dots.274,275 As have been reported, these quantum dots can be easily deposited on the surface of 1D TiO2 nanostructures at room temperature by a successive ionic layer-by-layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR),276 chemical bath deposition (CBD)277,278 and electrodeposition method.279 Sudhagar et al. prepared a CdS/CdSe coupled TiO2 nanofibrous electrode with a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.69%, while Sun et al. reported a novel CdS quantum dot sensitized TiO2 TNA photoelectrode by a sequential chemical bath deposition technique and the PCE of the QDSSC increased up to 4.15% under solar light due to the fast and efficient transfer of the photogenerated electrons and enhanced light harvesting (Fig. 24B–D).280 Recently, Chen et al. fabricated ultralong TiO2 nanorod arrays co-sensitized with CdS/CdSe quantum dots for QDSSCs by a combination of the SILAR and CBD method.281 17.6 μm thickTiO2 nanorod arrays with a large inner surface area were first used for sandwich-type ordered QDSSCs, and it is found that the cell exhibited a greatly enhanced short-circuit current density and the conversion efficiency reached 2.66%. In addition, as described in Section 3.2, Rao's group co-sensitized vertically aligned anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays with CdS/CdSe quantum dots by electrodeposition and showed an impressive photovoltaic performance of 4.20%.168 These results clearly demonstrate that the synergistic effect of the unique nanotube structure and quantum dots can facilitate the propagation and kinetic separation of photogenerated charges. Besides, multiple-dimensional hyperbranched ZnO/TiO2 heterostructure arrays showed high efficiency around 6% for quantum dot sensitized solar cells.282,283 However, QDSSCs have not been demonstrated as efficient photovoltaic cells as expected and the reported PCE is lower than 10%. Therefore, great efforts are still needed to inhibit charge recombination at the semiconductor surface and to seek for an effective organic dye for the efficiency improvement.284
 Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of the structures of a typical QDSSC (A). TEM (B and C) and HRTEM (D) images of CdS/TiO2 NTAs. Photocurrent versus voltage spectra (E) in 1 M Na2S solution under solar light illumination for plain (a) and CdS quantum dot modified TiO2 nanotube film electrodes (b). (c and d) Corresponding currents in the dark for curves a and b. Reproduced from ref. 271. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (A). Reproduced from ref. 280. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society (B–E). 


4.3.3 Perovskite solar cells. 
Perovskite solar cells based on organometal halides represent an emerging photovoltaic technology with high photovoltaic performances over than 50% in theory, which have attracted much attention in recent years.285–289 The mechanism of perovskite solar cells is displayed in Fig. 25a. A relatively thin layer of a mesoporous TiO2 film is deposited on the top of a compact layer (as a blocking layer) on a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) glass substrate. Then an absorber layer is formed by adsorbing a monolayer of a sensitizer on the mesoporous TiO2 layer, and the hole transporting material then infiltrates into the pores. As a result, a thin photoanode layer is a prerequisite to facilitate pore filling and to generate a suitable diffusion length to restrain charge recombination. Finally, a thin film of a metal (Au or Ag) counter electrode is deposited to collect the generated charges.290 As a new member of next generation photovoltaic materials, organometal halide perovskite was first demonstrated for efficient solar cells with the power conversion efficiency around 4% in 2009,291 and soon become the most important candidate to replace silicon, with low material cost and high efficiency. Burschka's group made a biggest scientific breakthrough on perovskite solar cells in 2013 and increased the PCE to 15%.292 Until now, perovskite solar cells have achieved stunning success in a very short period in terms of efficiency owing to their high light absorption coefficient and effective separation and transfer of electrons. Among inorganic hybrid perovskites CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I), CH3NH3PbI3 is mostly used to modify 1D TiO2 nanostructures.293–295 Recently, Wang's group successfully fabricated a flexible, solid-state TiO2 NTAs/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell.296 The Ti foil/TNTs act as a scaffold for perovskite loading and an electron transport layer, while the transparent carbon nanotube top electrode acts as a hole collecting layer and is available for light transmission. To date, the first attempt of the Ti metal foil substrate based flexible perovskite solar cell with a decent power conversion efficiency of 8.31% has been achieved. Besides, Jiang et al. reported a solvothermal method for the synthesis of rutile TiO2 nanowires with a controllable length-to-diameter ratio and well-separated wire-to-wire space.297 They also demonstrated that electron transport in these rutile nanowires is 200 times faster than that of mesoporous rutile films. The CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 nanowire perovskite solar cell with an optimized length showed a higher photo-conversion efficiency around 11.7%. What's more, a remarkable power conversion efficiency (PCE) around 10% was achieved based on the simple TiO2 nanorod/CH3NH3PbI3 hybrid perovskite solar cell (Fig. 25b–d).178,298,299 Since organometal halide perovskite solar cells are low-cost and have shown higher PCE values over 15%, perovskite solar cells will continue to receive a great deal of attention among the non-silicon based photovoltaic technologies.
 Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of the structures of a typical perovskite solar cell (a). Cross-sectional SEM image of the solid state TiO2 nanorod/CH3NH3PbI3 hybrid photoanode (b). Current density–voltage curves (c) and IPCE spectra (d) of the TiO2 nanorod/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell with different lengths of TiO2 nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 290. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry (b). Reproduced from ref. 178. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society (b–d). 

4.4 Lithium-ion batteries
Rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have attracted extensive attention in recent years for their potential applications in consumer devices and electric vehicles due to their high energy density and great longevity.300–303 Similar to the architecture of basic galvanic cells, a lithium-ion battery consists of three functional components: the anode, cathode, and electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 26a, the basic operating principle of LIBs is based on Li+ shuttling reactions between the anode and the cathode. When the battery is discharged, Li ions intercalate the positive materials and move from the anode to the cathode through the electrolyte, while electrons flow through external circuits to provide electricity. During the charging process, an external electrical power source forces the current to pass in the reverse direction and makes lithium ions migrate from the cathode to the anode across the electrolyte. Therefore, the properties of the active Li storage materials greatly influence the capacitance and performance of rechargeable LIBs. Generally, a larger number of Li ions accommodated in electrode materials lead to higher specific capacity of the battery. Besides, electrode materials with an open structure and a short diffusion length allowing for fast ionic/electronic transfer can obtain high current density and high power density.304,305 Graphite as an anode material has been used in majority commercial LIBs before. However, graphite electrodes suffer from poor rate capacity, short cycle life, safety concerns, and poor low temperature performance. Therefore, they cannot meet the increasing demand of electric devices and were replaced by transition metal oxides due to their excellent electrochemical properties.306,307 Among these materials, 1D TiO2 nanostructures have been considered a promising candidate due to their open, mesoporous structure, good safety, and efficient transport of lithium ions. In particular, 1D TiO2 nanotubes and nanowires have an open layered structure with a much larger interlayer spacing, making them good candidates to provide fast diffusion channels for reversible lithium ion intercalation and deintercalation, which results in a high value of charge/discharge capacity.308–310 The overall lithiation reaction for TiO2 nanomaterials is listed in eqn (1): xLi+ + TiO2 + xe− ↔ LixTiO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1)(1)
 Fig. 26  Schematic of the operating principle of traditional rechargeable LIBs (a). Variation of potential (versus a 1 M Li+/Li electrode) with charge passed for TiO2(B) nanowires prepared at different hydrothermal temperatures at 10 mA g−1 (b). Long-term cycling performance of TiO2 nanotubes at a high current density of 25C (c). Reproduced from ref. 304. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (a). Reproduced from ref. 316. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (b). Reproduced from ref. 85. Copyright 2014 Wiley (c). 
Until now, lithium-ion batteries with high specific capacity, high rate capacity, long-term stability and high safety have been obtained by using TiO2 nanomaterials as anode materials. In terms of specific capacity, the earliest work by Armstrong et al. suggested that an initial discharge capacity of 230 mA h g−1 at a current densitiy of 50 mA g−1 can be achieved by using TiO2(B) nanowires.311 After that, TiO2(B) nanowires have attracted much interest due to their lower intensity than that of anatase, rutile and brookite which makes them an ideal host for Li+ intercalation and hence the controlled introduction of Li+ and electrons into TiO2 nanowires.312–314 Potassium titanate nanowire electrodes showed a higher initial discharge capacity of around 305 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.05 mA cm−2.315 Li's group first reported a facile hydrothermal route for preparing TiO2(B) nanowires with an ultrahigh surface area.316 The surface area can be adjusted by the hydrothermal temperature, and a maximum surface area can be up to 210 m2 g−1. It can be seen from Fig. 26b that the initial discharge capacities of TiO2(B) prepared at 120, 150 and 180 °C were 364, 388 and 379 mA h g−1, respectively. The obtained TiO2(B) nanowires proved to be a good anode material for lithium-ion batteries, especially based on their fast charging and discharging performance. Besides, Zhang et al. prepared N-doped TiO2(B) nanowires by a solvothermal method. They exhibited a remarkably enhanced electrochemical performance compared to pure TiO2(B) and show a discharge capacity of 153 mA h g−1 at the 20C rate with a capacity retention of 76% after 1000 cycles. In addition, they can deliver a discharge capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at an ultra-high rate of 100C, indicating their great potential in high power lithium ion batteries.317 Except TiO2(B) nanowires, TiO2 nanotubes are also widely used as the anode materials of lithium-ion batteries. Li et al. prepared hydrogen titanate nanotubes by a hydrothermal method in 2005 and they exhibited an initial discharge capacity of 282.2 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.24 A g−1.318 However, the short and irregular TiO2 nanotubes showed low cycling ability and low discharge capacity. Recently, Chen et al. made a breakthrough on this problem.85 They synthesized ultralong and uniform TiO2 nanotubes via a novel stirring hydrothermal technique. The assembled cells exhibit high capacity for the first cycle with the discharge and charge capacities around 368 and 279 mA h g−1, respectively, at a current density of C/4. The electrode demonstrates excellent discharge capacities and cycling life due to the high conductivity of the long nanotubes and the high aspect ratio. In particular, a capacity of 114 mA h g−1 can be achieved after 10000 cycles at a rate of 25C, maintaining 100% efficiency (Fig. 26c). In addition, this strategy to synthesize elongated nanostructures can be extended to other systems, opening up new opportunities for manufacturing advanced materials for high-performance energy storage devices.
Compared to other typical layered inorganic materials (MoS2, MoO3, MnO2, SnO2, etc.), TiO2 possesses a low Li-ion diffusivity and electronic conductivity, leading to a relatively low discharge capacity. Therefore, it is necessary to couple TiO2 with other materials to facilitate the transport of Li ions and electrons. Xu's group successfully prepared MoS2 nanosheet@TiO2 nanotube hybrid nanostructures by a facile two-step method (Fig. 27a–c).319 First, porous TiO2 nanotubes were prefabricated by the sol–gel method. And then MoS2 nanoclusters that consist of ultrathin nanosheets were assembled on the surface of TiO2 nanotubes through a solvothermal process. The composites show an initial discharge capacity of 931 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and retained high capacity after 50 cycles. This is attributed to the unique structure for a large surface area and facilitates the transfer of Li ions. Besides, the MoS2@TiO2 nanobelt and MoS2@TiO2 nanosheet hybrid structures both exhibited a reversible capacity over 700 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles with highly stable capacity retention.320,321 What's more, a novel synergistic TiO2/MoO3 core–shell nanowire array anode has been fabricated via a facile hydrothermal method followed by a subsequent controllable electrodeposition process (Fig. 27d–f).322 Combined with the unique electrochemical properties of nanostructure arrays, the optimized TiO2/MoO3 hybrid anode simultaneously exhibits high gravimetric capacity (ca. 670 mA h g−1; approaching the hybrid's theoretical value), excellent cyclability (>200 cycles) and good rate capability (up to 2000 mA g−1). In addition, Liao's group synthesized unique TiO2–C/MnO2 core–double-shell nanowires for the first time to be used as anode materials for lithium ion batteries. Combining both advantages from TiO2 such as excellent cycle stability, MnO2 with high capacity (1230 mA h g−1) and carbon with high conductivity, the TiO2–C/MnO2 core–double-shell nanowire electrodes showed a high charge/discharge capacity and excellent rate performance of 332, 298, 235, 186, and 130 mA h g−1 at 2, 5, 10, 20, and 30C. Specifically, they also exhibited enhanced electrochemical cycling and rate properties compared to the TiO2 and TiO2–C nanowires.323 In general, carbon is widely used to modify 1D TiO2 nanofibers to improve the capacity and cycle life of LIBs.324,325 These results show that 1D TiO2 nanostructures are ideal and promising materials in replacing the commercial carbon electrodes for lithium-ion batteries to offer excellent rate capacity and ultralong cycle life with enhanced safety.
 Fig. 27  SEM (a) and TEM images (Inset (a)) of MoS2@TiO2 hybrids. Charge–discharge voltage profiles at a current density of 100 mA g−1 of MoS2@TiO2 hybrid nanostructures (b). Cycling performance of MoS2 flakes (I) and MoS2@TiO2 hybrid nanostructures (II) at different current densities indicated in (c). SEM images of TiO2/MoO3 core–shell nanowire arrays (d). Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency variation of TiO2/MoO3 at 50 mA g−1 (e). Cycling response at progressively increased current densities (f). Reproduced from ref. 319. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (a–c). Reproduced from ref. 322. Copyright 2015 Wiley (d–f). 
4.5 Supercapacitors
In response to the changing global landscape, energy has become a primary focus for major corporations and scientific communities all over the world. There has been increasing attention on developing efficient energy storage devices. In recent years, supercapacitors have attracted much interest for use in energy storage due to their high power density, fast rates of charge/discharge, reliable cycling life, and safe operation.326–330 As the electrode material of supercapacitors, the charge storage ability of 1D TiO2 nanotubes and nanorods (<1000 μF cm−2) is too low due to their low conductivity.331,332 Therefore, assembling 1D TiO2 nanostructures with metal oxides (RuO2, MnO2, NiO, etc.),333–335 conducting polymers (PANI)336 or carbon materials337 is an efficient approach to obtain low-cost, high performance supercapacitors. Li's group deposited hierarchical mesoporous manganese oxide (MnOx) nanoflakes on nitrided TiO2 nanorod arrays (NTNAs) grown on carbon fiber paper (CFP) by hydrothermal synthesis and electrodeposition.338 The MnOx/NTNA/CFP electrode showed a high areal capacitance of 327 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.25 mA cm−2 and good cycling stability with 96% retention after 5000 cycles, which can be attributed to the nitrided TiO2 nanorod arrays with higher conductivity offering low electrochemical impedance and fast ion/electron transfer (Fig. 28a–c). Besides, Shao et al. synthesized polyaniline nanowire/TiO2 nanotube array electrodes for supercapacitors by electro-polymerization.339 The specific capacitance of these electrodes is around 897.35 F g−1 at a current density of 0.21 A g−1 in 0.05 M H2SO4. The modified electrodes also show high cycling stability and retain 86.2% of their initial capacity after 1500 cycles. Peng's group reported that dye-sensitized solar cells and electrochemical capacitors, coaxially integrated into a novel “energy fiber”, can simultaneously realize photoelectric conversion and energy storage (Fig. 28d–f).340 A Ti wire substrate modified with perpendicularly aligned TiO2 nanotubes on the surface and a horizontally aligned multi-walled carbon nanotube sheet serve as two electrodes in the integrated “energy fiber” device. The capacitance was determined by the thickness of carbon nanotubes. A maximal photoelectric conversion efficiency was achieved at 2.73%, while the energy storage efficiency reached 75.7% with specific capacitances up to 3.32 mF cm−2 and power densities up to 0.27 mW cm−2 at a current of 50 μA by using a PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte. The “energy fiber” is flexible and stable, and provides useful experience for various portable electronic devices that require lightweight and weaveable materials. Among the carbon family, graphene is widely used to couple 1D TiO2 nanostructures as an electrode material for use in electrochemical supercapacitors. It exhibited improved specific capacitance and high cycling stability.341 As a new category of supercapacitor electrodes, more efforts are underway to further improve the specific capacitance and performance of 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials.
 Fig. 28  SEM image of MnOx/NTNA/CFP (a). Plots of gravimetric and areal capacitances versus mass loadings at 0.25 mA cm−2 for MnOx/NTNA/CFP (b). Cycling performance of the MnOx/NTNA/CFP and MnOx/CFP electrodes at 1 mA cm−2 in 1 M Na2SO4 for up to 5000 cycles (c). Schematic illustration of the structure of the coaxially integrated dye-sensitized solar cell and electrochemical capacitor into an “energy fiber” (d). SEM images of the carbon nanotube sheet wrapped on the TiO2 nanotubes (e). Cyclic performance at the increasing electric current (f). Reproduced from ref. 338. Copyright 2015 Wiley (a–c). Reproduced from ref. 340. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (d–f). 
5. Conclusions
Until now, a large number of fundamental studies on synthesis, modification and applications have been extensively carried out by many researchers for 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials. In this review, we present the state-of-the-art development on the fabrication, modification and applications of 1D TiO2-based materials with a well-controlled size and morphology. Guided by the basic formation principles of bulk materials by the solid-state reaction, 1D TiO2 nanostructures can be obtained via a hydrothermal method, electrochemical anodization method, vapor deposition method, sol–gel method, template-assisted method and electrospinning method. Among them, the hydrothermal route is most popular for the synthesis of 1D TiO2 materials due to the easy operation and rational control of the nanostructures. Both enlargement of the photocatalytically active area and modification with metals, nonmetals and semiconductors have been employed to improve the performances of 1D TiO2 nanomaterials. Owing to their high aspect ratio, large specific surface area, and excellent electronic or ionic charge transfer properties, 1D TiO2 nanostructured materials are widely used in various applications such as photocatalytic degradation of pollutants, water splitting, solar cells, supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries.
However, extensive challenges on the functionalities and performances of 1D TiO2 nanostructures remain. As a wide band gap material, TiO2 has a low utilization of the full solar energy spectrum, limiting its photocatalytic energy efficiency. Doping and coupling with other nanomaterials have shown good promise, but the cost of production increases. We expect new materials, having the nice attributes of TiO2 (low cost, stable, non-toxic, easy to prepare into various nanostructures, etc.) with improved light harvesting properties which will be discovered/engineered in the future. Meanwhile, it is vital to improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency of solar cells and lithium-ion batteries through improvement of the transport properties of the 1D TiO2 nanostructures. With the development of economy and technology, more and more effort will be put into overcoming these drawbacks and endowing TiO2-based materials with much improved functionalities under reasonable processing cost. In particular, commercialization of these 1D TiO2-based materials for efficient photocatalysts and photovoltaic materials will be realized in the future.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21501127; 51502185; 51373110), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (BK20130313; BK20140400), Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), Deanship of Scientific Research at King Saud University (PRG-1436-03), and Project for Jiangsu Scientific and Technological Innovation Team (2013) for financial support of this work.
Notes and references
E. G. Snyder, T. H. Watkins, P. A. Solomon, E. D. Thoma, R. W. Williams, G. S. W. Hagler, D. Shelow, D. A. Hindin, V. J. Kilaru and P. W. Preuss, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 11369–11377 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Kim, H. S. Han, S. Shin, G. S. Han, H. S. Jung, K. S. Hong and J. H. Noh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 17473–17480 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Xie, K. Zhang, B. D. Guo, Q. Liu, L. Fang and J. R. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3820–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
P. D. Tran, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. C. Loo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5902–5918 CAS .
S. Hu, B. Chi, J. Pu and L. Jian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19260–19267 CAS .
C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E26–E28 Search PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon, M. J. Ju, J. Xu, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, M. J. Kim, I. T. Choi, H. M. Kim, J. C. Kim, J. J. Lee, H. K. Liu, H. K. Kim, S. Dou, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1170–1179 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Luo, W. Lv, W. Yu, S. Wu, P. Hou, Q. Yang, Q. Meng, C. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 486–490 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Liu, J. B. Joo, M. Dahl, L. S. Fu, Z. Z. Zeng and Y. D. Yin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 286–296 CAS .
H. F. Zhuang, C. J. Lin, Y. K. Lai, L. Sun and J. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 4735–4740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai, S. T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 690–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Tan, W. J. Ong, S. P. Chai, S. T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1528–1547 CrossRef .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kang, J. Y. Cao, Y. J. Zhang, L. Q. Liu, H. Xu and J. H. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5766–5774 CAS .
Y. J. Ji, M. D. Zhang, J. H. Cui, K. C. Lin, H. G. Zheng, J. J. Zhu and A. C. S. Samia, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 796–804 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy, D. Kim, K. Lee, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 45–59 RSC .
H. Li, Z. H. Chen, C. K. Tsang, Z. Li, X. Ran, C. Lee, B. Nie, L. X. Zheng, T. F. Hung, J. Lu, B. C. Pan and Y. Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 229–236 CAS .
B. Chen, J. B. Hou and K. Lu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 5911–5919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Lai, L. X. Lin, F. Pan, J. Y. Huang, R. Song, Y. X. Huang, C. J. Lin, H. Fuchs and L. F. Chi, Small, 2013, 9, 2945–2953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Q. Li, Y. K. Lai, J. Y. Huang, Y. X. Tang, L. Yang, Z. Chen, K. Q. Zhang, X. C. Wang and L. P. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 342–347 RSC .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Tan, C. M. Li, Y. L. Cheah, D. Y. Luan, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6124–6130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Wang, M. D. Wei, M. A. Morris, H. S. Zhou and J. D. Holmes, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3016–3020 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, K. Nakata, M. Sakai, H. Saito, T. Ochiai, T. Murakami, K. Takagi and A. Fujishima, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1933–1939 CAS .
P. Hartmann, D.-K. Lee, B. M. Smarsly and J. Janek, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3147–3154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Han, S. Lee, J. H. Noh, H. S. Chung, J. H. Park, B. S. Swain, J. H. Im, N. G. Park and H. S. Jung, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6127–6132 RSC .
Y. Tang, Y. Lai, D. Goog, K. H. Goh, T. T. Lim, Z. Dong and Z. Chen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 7704–7708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Y. Wang, L. Sun, Y. Mao, M. Wang and C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8223–8229 CAS .
M. Z. Ge, C. Y. Cao, S. H. Li, S. N. Zhang, S. Deng, J. Y. Huang, Q. S. Li, K. Q. Zhang, S. S. Al-Deyab and Y. K. Lai, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11552–11560 RSC .
N. Kijima, M. Kuwabara, J. Akimoto, T. Kumagai, K. Igarashi and T. Shimizu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7006–7010 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Lee, J. K. Kim, J. Y. Lim and J. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20842–20850 CAS .
H. Yao, W. Fu, H. Yang, J. Ma, M. Sun, Y. Chen, W. Zhang, D. Wu, P. Lv and M. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 258–265 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhou, Z. Y. Yin, Y. P. Du, X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng, Z. X. Fan, H. Liu, J. Y. Wang and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 140–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kim, Y. K. Cho, J. Seok, N. S. Lee, B. Son, J. W. Lee, J. M. Baik, C. Lee, Y. Lee and M. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15321–15330 CAS .
J. Y. Huang, Y. K. Lai, F. Pan, L. Yang, H. Wang, K. Q. Zhang, H. Fuchs and L. F. Chi, Small, 2014, 10, 4865–4873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Lai, J. Y. Huang, Z. Q. Cui, M. Z. Ge, K. Q. Zhang, Z. Chen and L. F. Chi, Small, 2016, 11 DOI:10.1002/smll.201501837 .
A. N. Banerjee, Nanotechnol., Sci. Appl., 2011, 4, 35–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Lai, L. N. Wang, D. W. Liu, Z. Chen and C. J. Lin, J. Nanomater., 2015, 2015, 250632 Search PubMed .
W. J. Zhou, H. Liu, R. I. Boughton, G. J. Du, J. J. Lin, J. Y. Wang and D. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5993–6008 RSC .
J. Zhang, F. X. Xiao, G. Xiao and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11293–11302 RSC .
K. Pan, Y. Z. Dong, C. G. Tian, W. Zhou, G. H. Tian, B. F. Zhao and H. G. Fu, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 7350–7356 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hossain, J. Park, J. Y. Ahn, C. Park, Y. Kim, S. H. Kim and D. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 173, 665–671 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gyori, Z. Konya and A. Kukovecz, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 583–588 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ahn, W. S. Chi, J. T. Park, J. K. Koh, D. K. Roh and J. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Ge, C. Y. Cao, J. Y. Huang, S. H. Li, S. N. Zhang, S. Deng, Q. S. Li, K. Q. Zhang and Y. K. Lai, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2016, 5, 75–112 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhang, Z. L. Jiang, J. Y. Huang, L. Y. Lim, W. L. Li, J. Y. Deng, D. Gong, Y. X. Tang, Y. K. Lai and Z. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 79479–79510 RSC .
J. Muscat, V. Swamy and N. M. Harrison, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 224112 CrossRef .
M. Altomare, M. V. Dozzi, G. L. Chiarello, A. Di Paola, L. Palmisano and E. Selli, Catal. Today, 2015, 252, 184–189 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Yang, B. Wang, H. Cui, H. An, Y. Pan and J. P. Zhai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16905–16912 CAS .
M. Alsawat, T. Altalhi, J. G. Shapter and D. Losic, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 2091–2098 CAS .
Y. Mi and Y. X. Weng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Tay, X. F. Liu, Y. X. Tang, Z. L. Jiang, T. C. Sum and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14973–14982 CAS .
J. Dai, J. Yang, X. H. Wang, L. Zhang and Y. J. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 349, 343–352 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Qi, C. Y. Li and Y. J. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 539, 128–132 CrossRef .
A. G. Dylla, P. Xiao, G. Henkelman and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2015–2019 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Yang, H. W. Liu, Z. F. Zheng, Y. Yuan, J. C. Zhao, E. R. Waclawik, X. B. Ke and H. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17885–17893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Zheng, H. W. Liu, J. P. Ye, J. C. Zhao, E. R. Waclawik and H. Y. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 316, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Yang, Z. S. Jin, X. D. Wang, W. Li, J. W. Zhang, S. L. Zhang, X. Y. Guo and Z. J. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2003, 3898–3901 RSC .
G. H. Du, Q. Chen, R. C. Che, Z. Y. Yuan and L. M. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3702–3704 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Z. P. Xing, X. J. Yu and X. W. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 170, 182–190 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Hu, Y. K. Shi, Y. J. Zhang, B. L. Zhu, S. M. Zhang and W. P. Huang, Catal. Commun., 2015, 59, 45–49 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Lai and J. M. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15863–15868 CAS .
Z. H. Zhao, J. Tian, D. Z. Wang, X. L. Kang, Y. H. Sang, H. Liu, J. Y. Wang, S. W. Chen, R. I. Boughton and H. D. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23395–23403 RSC .
Y. S. Luo, D. Z. Kong, J. S. Luo, S. Chen, D. Y. Zhang, K. W. Qiu, X. Y. Qi, H. Zhang, C. M. Li and T. Yu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14413–14422 RSC .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3160–3163 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1307–1311 CrossRef .
G. Armstrong, A. R. Armstrong, J. Canales and P. G. Bruce, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2454–2456 RSC .
D. V. Bavykin, V. N. Parmon, A. A. Lapkin and F. C. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 3370–3377 RSC .
R. L. Dong, S. J. Jiang, Z. Li, Z. Y. Chen, H. P. Zhang and C. C. Jin, Mater. Lett., 2015, 152, 151–154 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Xie, C. Xia, H. X. Du and W. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 286, 561–570 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liao, B. X. Lei, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5750–5757 CAS .
D. Sarkar and K. K. Chattopadhyay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10044–10059 CAS .
M. C. Li, Y. J. Jiang, R. Q. Ding, D. D. Song, H. Yu and Z. Chen, J. Electron. Mater., 2013, 42, 1290–1296 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Wang, G. Q. Zhang, Z. Zhao, H. Q. Tan, W. X. Yu, X. M. Zhang and Z. C. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 9861–9864 RSC .
S. L. Feng, J. Y. Yang, H. Zhu, M. Liu, J. S. Zhang, J. Wu and J. Y. Wan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 310–315 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Z. H. Zhao, A. Kumar, R. I. Boughton and H. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6920–6937 RSC .
S. H. Lim, J. Z. Luo, Z. Y. Zhong, W. Ji and J. Y. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4124–4126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nakahira, T. Kubo and C. Numako, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 5845–5852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Morgan, H. Y. Zhu, R. L. Frost and E. R. Waclawik, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3800–3802 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Peng and A. C. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1355–1362 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Tanaka, N. Hirose and T. Tanaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, C789–C794 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Tang, Y. Y. Zhang, J. Y. Deng, D. P. Qi, W. R. Leow, J. Q. Wei, S. Y. Yin, Z. L. Dong, R. Yazami, Z. Chen and X. D. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13488–13492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Tang, Y. Y. Zhang, J. Y. Deng, J. Q. Wei, T. L. Hon, B. K. Chandran, Z. L. Dong, Z. Chen and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6111–6118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. Jia, W. X. Que and J. Zhang, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 2313–2316 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Nam, J. L. Falconer, L. M. Du and W. D. Yang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 51, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Wang, Y. H. Ao, C. Wang, J. Hou and J. Qian, Mater. Lett., 2013, 101, 41–43 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Q. Hoa and D. N. Huyen, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 24, 793–798 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Chen, G. H. Tian, Z. Y. Ren, C. G. Tian, K. Pan, W. Zhou and H. G. Fu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 5, 754–760 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Z. H. Wen and J. H. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 6944–6949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. He, W. X. Que, J. Chen, X. T. Yin, Y. C. He and J. B. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6816–6826 CAS .
J. Y. Zhao, J. X. Yao, Y. Z. Zhang, M. N. Guli and L. Xiao, J. Power
Sources, 2014, 255, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Assefpour-Dezfuly, C. Vlachos and E. H. Andrews, J. Mater. Sci., 1984, 19, 3626–3639 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zwilling, E. Darque-Ceretti, A. Boutry-Forveille, D. David, M. Y. Perrin and M. Aucouturier, Surf. Interface Anal., 1999, 27, 629–637 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, K. Sirotna and P. Schmuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3679–3684 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paulose, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, L. Peng, K. C. Popat, G. K. Mor, T. A. Desai and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14992–14997 CAS .
R. Hahn, J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 947–952 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Ge, S. H. Li, J. Y. Huang, K. Q. Zhang, S. S. Al-Deyab and Y. K. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3491–3499 CAS .
M. D. Ye, J. J. Gong, Y. K. Lai, C. J. Lin and Z. Q. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15720–15723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, X. Gu, H. Z. Guo, J. Liu, Q. Wu and J. G. Zou, J. Cryst. Growth, 2015, 427, 54–59 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Chen, Y. M. Chen, A. Korotcov, Y. S. Huang, D. S. Tsai and K. K. Tiong, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 075611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Q. Hoa and E. T. Kim, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, K1–K3 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Sander, M. J. Cote, W. Gu, B. M. Kile and C. P. Tripp, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2052–2057 CrossRef CAS .
J. Joo, S. G. Kwon, T. Yu, M. Cho, J. Lee, J. Yoon and T. Hyeon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15297–15302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Qiu, W. D. Yu, X. D. Gao and X. M. Li, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4695–4698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Attar, M. S. Ghamsari, F. Hajiesmaeilbaigi, S. Mirdamadi, K. Katagiri and K. Koumoto, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 113, 856–860 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, G. S. Wu, X. Y. Yuan, T. Xie and L. D. Zhang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2003, 15, 2917–2922 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and Y. N. Xia, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 555–560 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Y. Wang, Q. W. Zhou, M. Q. Kong, H. T. Ye and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10267–10274 RSC .
F. L. Zhang, Z. Q. Cheng, L. J. Kang, L. Y. Cui, W. Liu, X. J. Xu, G. H. Hou and H. J. Yang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 32088–32091 RSC .
L. L. Zhu, M. H. Hong and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 28–37 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. El-Deen, J. H. Choi, K. A. Khalil, A. A. Almajid and N. A. M. Barakat, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64634–64642 RSC .
P. F. Du, L. X. Song, J. Xiong, N. Li, Z. Q. Xi, L. C. Wang, D. L. Jin, S. Y. Guo and Y. F. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 392–397 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, X. Y. Li, Q. D. Zhao, X. Quan and G. H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18067–18076 RSC .
Y. C. Yang, X. B. Ji, M. J. Jing, H. S. Hou, Y. R. Zhu, L. B. Fang, X. M. Yang, Q. Y. Chen and C. E. Banks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5648–5655 CAS .
H. Y. Wang, G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, M. Lepert, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1463–1466 RSC .
X. Meng, D. W. Shin, S. M. Yu, J. H. Jung, H. I. Kim, H. M. Lee, Y. H. Han, V. Bhoraskar and J. B. Yoo, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3021–3029 RSC .
M. Y. Wang, D. J. Zheng, M. D. Ye, C. C. Zhang, B. B. Xu, C. J. Lin, L. Sun and Z. Q. Lin, Small, 2015, 11, 1436–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhou, G. J. Du, P. G. Hu, G. H. Li, D. Z. Wang, H. Liu, J. Y. Wang, R. I. Boughton, D. Liu and H. D. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7937–7945 RSC .
M. Lazzeri, A. Vittadini and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 119901 CrossRef .
X. Q. Gong and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19560–19562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Zhang, X. H. Zhong, S. H. Liu, D. F. Li and M. Y. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3466–3470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Fan, C. H. Ma, B. Y. Liu, H. Y. Chen, L. H. Dong and Y. S. Yin, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2014, 27, 47–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Wen, P. J. Liu, S. N. Xiao, K. Mori, Y. Kuwahara, H. X. Yamashita, H. Li and D. Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11029–11035 RSC .
X. H. Yang, Z. Li, C. Sun, H. G. Yang and C. Li, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3486–3494 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Jiang, Y. X. Tang, Q. L. Tay, Y. Y. Zhang, O. I. Malyi, D. P. Wang, J. Y. Deng, Y. K. Lai, H. F. Zhou, X. D. Chen, Z. L. Dong and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1368–1380 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Liu, J. Q. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4085–4093 CrossRef CAS .
C. Z. Wen, J. Z. Zhou, H. B. Jiang, Q. H. Hu, S. Z. Qiao and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4400–4402 RSC .
J. G. Yu, J. J. Fan and K. L. Lv, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2144–2149 RSC .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, C. W. Wang, W. D. Zhu, X. Q. Wang, Y. Li, J. Wang, J. B. Chen, T. Gan, H. Y. Hu and F. Zhou, Solid State Sci., 2014, 29, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and D. G. Li, Mater. Lett., 2015, 158, 119–122 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, H. S. Li, Q. Wu, Y. Zhao and Q. Z. Jiao, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 263, 144–150 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Shin, J. Y. Lee, K. S. Ahn, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13375–13383 CAS .
Y. Komaia, K. Okitsua, R. Nishimuraa, N. Ohtsub, G. Miyamotoc, T. Furuharac, S. Semboshic, Y. Mizukoshid and N. Masahashid, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 399–403 CrossRef .
Z. L. Hua, Z. Y. Dai, X. Bai, Z. F. Ye, H. X. Gu and X. Huang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 293, 112–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ramanathan and V. Bansal, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 1424–1429 RSC .
Y. Zhang, M. Creatore, Q. B. Ma, A. El Boukili, L. Gao, M. A. Verheijen, M. W. G. M. Verhoeven and E. J. M. Hensen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 330, 476–486 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghicov, J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, J. Kunze, V. Haeublein, S. Kleber and P. Schmuki, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 419, 426–429 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, X. X. Li, Y. W. Ma, Y. Cao, Z. Y. Hu, X. M. Zhang, J. J. Fu, K. F. Huo and P. K. Chu, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 584, 61–65 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Saud, B. Pant, A. M. Alam, Z. K. Ghouri, M. Park and H. Y. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 11953–11959 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. He, W. X. Que, J. Chen, X. T. Yin, Y. C. He and J. B. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6815–6825 Search PubMed .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4853–4861 RSC .
J. G. Yu, Q. J. Xiang and M. H. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 595–602 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Nian, S.-A. Chen, C.-C. Tsai and H. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25817–25824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. R. Inturi, T. Boningari, M. Suidan and P. G. Smirniotis, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 333–342 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Su, Z. Wu, Y. N. Wu, J. D. Yu, L. Sun and C. J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8537–8544 CAS .
Y.-C. Pu, G. Wang, K.-D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y.-K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C.-M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y.-J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, J. Li, C. L. Wang, S. F. Li, Y. K. Lai, H. B. Chen and C. J. Lin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 171, 1045–1050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Yu, L. F. Qi and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13118–13125 CAS .
T. T. Jiang, C. C. Jia, L. C. Zhang, S. R. He, Y. H. Sang, H. D. Li, Y. Q. Li, X. H. Xu and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 209–217 RSC .
H. Hua, C. G. Hu, Z. H. Zhao, H. Liu, X. Xie and Y. Xi, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 105, 130–136 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhou, G. J. Du, P. G. Hu, Y. Q. Yin, J. H. Li, J. H. Yu, G. C. Wang, J. X. Wang, H. Liu, J. Y. Wang and H. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 197, 19–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Li, T. T. Zhao, T. K. Chen, Y. B. Liu, C. N. Ong and J. P. Xie, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7502–7519 RSC .
B. X. Chen, W. F. Zhang, X. H. Zhou, X. Huang, X. M. Zhao, H. T. Wang, M. Liu, Y. L. Lu and S. F. Yang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 906–915 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lin, J. H. Chao, W. J. Tsai, M. J. He and T. J. Chiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23743–23753 RSC .
M. Ghaffari, M. B. Cosar, H. I. Yavuz, M. Ozenbas and A. K. Okyay, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 76, 446–452 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Nam, H.-S. Shim, Y.-S. Kim, M. A. Dar, J. G. Kim and W. B. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2046–2052 CAS .
S. Sarker, B. Mukherjee, E. Crone and V. Subramanian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4890–4893 CAS .
Y. Yang and W. Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 577–584 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pathak, S. Gupta, K. Grosulak, H. Imahori and V. Subramanian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7543–7553 CAS .
Z. B. Shao, W. Zhu, Z. Li, Q. H. Yang and G. Z. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2438–2442 CAS .
D. H. Kim, H. S. Han, I. S. Cho, W. M. Seong, I. J. Park, J. H. Park, S. Shin, G. Do Park, S. Park, S. Lee and K. S. Hong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 863–869 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, G. Ali, S. H. Yoo and S. O. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2910–2914 CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Zhao, M. T. Li and L. J. Guo, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7397–7404 RSC .
H.-S. Rao, W.-Q. Wu, Y. Liu, Y.-F. Xu, B.-X. Chen, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Zhang, C. L. Shao, X. H. Li, C. H. Wang, M. Y. Zhang and Y. C. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2915–2923 CAS .
H. C. He, P. Xiao, M. Zhou, Y. H. Zhang, Q. Lou and X. Z. Dong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 4967–4973 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, W. M. Cai, M. C. Long, B. X. Zhou, Y. H. Wu, D. Y. Wu and Y. J. Feng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6425–6432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Wang, L. Sun, Z. Q. Lin, J. H. Cai, K. P. Xie and C. J. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1211–1220 CAS .
J. Deng, L. Wang, Z. Lou and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9030–9034 CAS .
M. D. Ye, X. K. Xin, C. J. Lin and Z. Q. Lin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3214–3220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yue, C. W. Liu, Z. L. Qiu and M. T. Wang, Sol. Energy, 2015, 113, 358–368 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Zhang, B. Gao, L. S. Hu, L. M. Li, W. H. Jin, K. F. Huo and P. K. Chu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 10280–10285 RSC .
Z. Wu, Y. F. Su, J. D. Yu, W. Xiao, L. Sun and C. J. Lin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 9704–9712 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, J.-W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and N.-G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. H. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1362–1387 CAS .
Y. Y. Wen, H. M. Ding and Y. K. Shan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4411–4417 RSC .
Y. B. Liu, J. H. D. Lee, Q. Xia, Y. Ma, Y. Yu, L. Y. L. Yung, J. P. Xie, C. N. Ong, C. D. Vecitis and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16554–16562 CAS .
S. Gupta and V. Subramaniant, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18597–18608 CAS .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3670–3678 RSC .
S. D. Perera, R. G. Mariano, K. Vu, N. Nour, O. Seitz, Y. Chabal and K. J. Balkus, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 949–956 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, Y. Zhao, S. Liu, C. L. Korzeniewski, S. Wang and Z. Y. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3944–3950 CAS .
Y. K. Lai, L. Sun, Y. C. Chen, H. F. Zhuang, C. J. Lin and J. W. Chin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, D123–D127 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Wang, Q. Ma, H. Liu, K. Wang, L. Z. Ling and K. Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 40521–40530 RSC .
D. Yang, Y. Y. Sun, Z. W. Tong, Y. Tian, Y. B. Li and Z. Y. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5827–5835 CAS .
P. Zhang, C. L. Shao, Z. Y. Zhang, M. Y. Zhang, J. B. Mu, Z. C. Guo and Y. C. Liu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2943–2949 RSC .
J. F. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. P. Yu, X. Shu, L. Jiang, J. W. Cui, Z. Chen, T. Xie and Y. C. Wu, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4975–4984 RSC .
W. Liu, J. R. Li and X. C. Yin, Water Res., 2014, 53, 12–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Z. Lu, P. F. Fang, X. Z. Liu, S. B. Zhai, C. H. Li, X. N. Zhao, J. Q. Ding and R. Y. Xiong, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 558–573 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Wang, J. Ioccozia, L. Sun, C. J. Lin and Z. Q. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2182–2202 CAS .
L. Wu, F. Li, Y. Y. Xu, J. W. Zhang, D. Q. Zhang, G. S. Li and H. X. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Lai, J. Y. Huang, H. F. Zhuang, V. P. Subramaniam, Y. X. Tang, D. G. Gong, L. Sundar, L. Sun, Z. Chen and C. J. Lin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 184, 855–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Khin, A. S. Nair, V. J. Babu, R. Murugana and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8075–8109 CAS .
H. L. Huang, W. M. G. Lee and F. S. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 302, 198–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rodrigues, K. T. Ranjit, S. Uma, I. N. Martyanov and K. J. Klabunde, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2467–2471 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lyu, L. Z. Zhu and C. Burda, Catal. Today, 2014, 225, 24–33 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pichat, J. Disdier, C. Hoang-Van, D. Mas, G. Goutailler and C. Gaysse, Catal. Today, 2000, 63, 363–369 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Verbruggen, S. R. Deng, M. Kurttepeli, D. J. Cott, P. M. Vereecken, S. Bals, J. A. Martens, C. Detavernier and S. Lenaerts, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 160–161, 204–210 CrossRef CAS .
N. Seifvand and E. Kowsari, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 93706–93716 RSC .
W. K. Jo, J. Y. Lee and H. H. Chun, Materials, 2014, 7, 1801–1813 CrossRef .
X. Y. Fan, F. M. Qiu, H. S. Yang, W. Tian, T. F. Hou and X. B. Zhang, Catal. Chem., 2011, 12, 1298–1301 CAS .
N. H. Nguyen and H. Bai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 355, 672–680 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yu, J. G. Yu and B. Cheng, Chemosphere, 2007, 66, 2050–2057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ren, Y. Z. Li, J. T. Hou, J. L. Bai, M. Y. Mao, M. Zeng, X. J. Zhao and N. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 625–634 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Tang, F. Li, Y. H. Zhang, X. Z. Fu and Y. J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7880–7886 CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1249–1257 RSC .
W. J. Ong, L. K. Putri, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 530–543 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. K. Putri, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai, S. T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 757–770 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Kuai, Y. Zhou, W. G. Tu, P. Li, H. J. Li, Q. F. Xu, L. Q. Tang, X. Y. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. G. Zou, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 88409–88413 RSC .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Tan, W. J. Ong, S. P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6923–6926 RSC .
L. Yuan, C. Han, M. Pagliaro and Y. J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 265–273 CAS .
J. E. Benedetti, D. R. Bernardo, A. Morais, J. Bettinib and A. F. Nogueira, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 33914–33922 RSC .
D. N. Chen, X. G. Zhang and A. F. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14487–14516 CAS .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O'Sheaf, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331–349 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mori, H. Yamashita and M. Anpo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3165–3172 RSC .
I. H. Tseng, W. C. Chang and J. C. S. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 37, 37–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. H. Lai, F. Zhang, X. D. Shen, M. H. Fan, Y. M. He and S. Q. Ren, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 44442–44451 RSC .
L. L. Tan, W. J. Ong, S. P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166–167, 251–259 CrossRef CAS .
W. N. Wang, W. J. An, B. Ramalingam, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, S. Gangopadhyay and P. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11276–11281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Ping, C. Wang, D. Chen, S. Liu, X. N. Huang, L. S. Qin, Y. X. Huang and K. Y. Shu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 2503–2510 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Feng, J. D. Sloppy, T. J. LaTempa, M. Paulose, S. Komarneni, N. Z. Bao and C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13429–13433 RSC .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, S. X. Ouyang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1348–1354 CAS .
H. F. Dang, X. F. Dong, Y. C. Dong and J. S. Huang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 9178–9185 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Lian, W. C. Wang, S. N. Xiao, X. Li, Y. Y. Cui, D. Q. Zhang, G. S. Li and H. X. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mollavali, C. Falamaki and S. Rohani, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 12239–12252 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Huang, K. Q. Zhang and Y. K. Lai, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2013, 2013, 761971 Search PubMed .
Y. K. Li, H. M. Yu, W. Song, G. F. Li, B. L. Yi and Z. G. Shao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 14374–14380 CrossRef CAS .
M. Altomare, M. Pozzi, M. Allieta, L. G. Bettini and E. Selli, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 136, 81–88 CrossRef .
D. P. Kumar, N. L. Reddy, M. M. Kumari, B. Srinivas, V. D. Kumari, B. Sreedhar, V. Roddatis, O. Bondarchuk, M. Karthik, B. Neppolian and M. V. Shankar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 136, 157–166 CrossRef .
X. Yang, L. Wu, L. P. Du and X. J. Li, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 1771–1777 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Wang, H. Y. Wang, Y. C. Ling, Y. C. Tang, X. Y. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, N. Q. Pan and S. W. Lin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 13474–13480 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Lai, J. J. Gong and C. J. Lin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 6438–6446 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Long, J. Li, L. P. Wu and X. J. Li, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2014, 26, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Yu, J. L. Ren and M. Meng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 12266–12272 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Wang, W. Zhu, B. C. Chong and K. Qin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 90–99 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, Y. D. Wang, Y. P. Lei, B. Wang, N. Wu, Q. Shi and Q. Li, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1199–1209 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Zhou, H. Dai, Z. D. Li, T. Yu, J. G. Liu and Z. G. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11790–11794 CAS .
B. K. Liu, Y. J. Sun, X. S. Wang, L. J. Zhang, D. J. Wang, Z. W. Fu, Y. H. Lin and T. F. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4445–4452 CAS .
H. Huang, L. Pan, C. K. Lim, H. Gong, J. Guo, M. S. Tse and O. K. Tan, Small, 2013, 9, 3153–3160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Chandiran, A. Yella, M. T. Mayer, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4309–4312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Ye, X. R. Wen, M. Y. Wang, J. Iocozzia, N. Zhang, C. J. Lin and Z. Q. Lin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 155–162 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Seidalilir, R. Malekfar, H. P. Wu, J. W. Shiu and E. W. G. Diau, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12731–12739 CAS .
L. Y. Chen, Z. S. Yang, C. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ho, P. W. Liu and H. T. Chang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4940–4942 RSC .
H. S. Kim, J. W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O’Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
S.-C. Yang, D.-J. Yang, J. Kim, J.-M. Hong, H.-G. Kim, I.-D. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Tao, P. Ruan, X. Zhang, H. G. Sun and X. F. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3539–3547 RSC .
X. K. Xin, B. Li, J. Jung, Y. J. Yoon, R. Biswas and Z. Q. Lin, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 80–90 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Weng, H. Guo, X. Liu, S. Wu, K. W. K. Yeung and P. K. Chu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 24758–24775 RSC .
Y. Ohsaki, N. Masaki, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada, T. Okamoto, T. Sekino, K. Niihara and S. Yanagida, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 4157–4163 RSC .
K. Shankar, G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam, S. Yoriya, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 065707 CrossRef .
E. M. Jin, X. G. Zhao, J.-Y. Park and H.-B. Gu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 97 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Naphade, M. Tathavadekar, J. P. Jog, S. Agarkar and S. Ogale, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 975–984 CAS .
H.-S. Kim and J. S. Suh, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 74107–74114 RSC .
J. Zhang, Q. T. Li, S. Q. Li, Y. Wang, C. Ye, P. Ruterana and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 941–949 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Li, M. Peng, W. X. Song, H. Wang and D. C. Zou, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 341–347 CrossRef .
M. Q. Lv, D. J. Zheng, M. D. Ye, J. Xiao, W. X. Guo, Y. K. Lai, L. Sun, C. J. Lin and J. Zuo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1615–1622 CAS .
M.-H. Yeh, L.-Y. Lin, C.-Y. Chou, C.-P. Lee, H.-M. Chuang, R. Vittal and K.-C. Ho, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 609–621 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang and W. W.-F. Leung, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1792–1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. O. Williams, N. C. Jeong, C. Prasittichai, O. K. Farha, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6185–6196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Firoozi, H. Dehghani and M. Afrooz, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Du, H. Zhang, H. Bao and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13033–13040 CAS .
Z. K. Zheng, W. Xie, Z. S. Lim, L. You and J. L. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5721 CAS .
I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3046–3052 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Wu, X. Lin, Y. D. Wang and T. L. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19638–19656 CAS .
I. Concina and A. Vomiero, Small, 2015, 11, 1744–1774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov and D. W. McBranch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4028–4031 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Duan, H. H. Zhang, Q. W. Tang, B. L. He and L. M. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17497–17510 CAS .
Z. Li, L. B. Yu, Y. B. Liu and S. Q. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 200–209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Akimoto, T. Toyoda, T. Okuno, S. Hayase and Q. Shen, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 590, 90–97 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, L. K. Pan, T. Xu and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1472–1478 CAS .
H. L. Feng, W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, Q. Wan, L. B. Li, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5199–5205 CAS .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, M. D. Ye, M. Q. Lv, C. Gong, W. X. Guo and C. J. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 121, 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Feng, W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, L. B. Li, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14826–14832 CAS .
H. L. Feng, W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, Q. Wan, L. B. Li, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5199–5205 CAS .
Z. Yang, C.-Y. Chen, P. Roy and H.-T. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9561–9571 RSC .
G. C. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Y. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, J. Seo, S. Park, S. S. Shin, Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, H. W. Shin, T. K. Ahn, J. H. Noh, S. C. Yoon, C. S. Hwang and S. I. Seok, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4013–4019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Zhou, Z. W. Wang, Y. Y. Zhou, S. P. Pang, D. Wang, H. X. Xu, Z. H. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. L. Cui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9705–9709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. S. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, D. J. Zheng, M. Y. Wang, C. J. Lin and Z. Q. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5994–6003 CAS .
H. Sun, J. Deng, L. B. Qiu, X. Fang and H. S. Peng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1139–1159 CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. L. Ji, S. X. Li, W. W. He, K. Wang, H. B. Hu and C. H. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14902–14909 CAS .
N. Marinova, W. Tress, R. Humphry-Baker, M. I. Dar, V. Bojinov, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4200–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Xing, B. Wu, S. Chen, J. Chua, N. Yantara, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Small, 2015, 11, 3606–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Wang, Z. Li, W. J. Xu, S. A. Kulkarni, S. K. Batabyal, S. Zhang, A. Y. Cao and L. H. Wong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 728–735 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Jiang, X. Sheng, Y. X. Li, X. J. Feng and T. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14720–14723 RSC .
S.-S. Li, Y.-C. Wang, C.-M. Tsai, C.-Y. Wen, C.-H. Yu, Y.-P. Yang, J.-C. Lin, D.-Y. Wang, C.-C. Chen, Y.-C. Yeh and C.-W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14532–14537 RSC .
A. Fakharuddin, F. Di Giacomo, A. L. Palma, F. Matteocci, I. Ahmed, S. Razza, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia, J. Ismail, A. Di Carlo, T. M. Brown and R. Jose, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8420–8429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, W. Chen, J. Zhou, F. Yin, E. Uchaker, Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7862–7872 CAS .
L. Y. Zhang, Y. Y. Wang, B. Peng, W. T. Yu, H. Y. Wang, T. Wang, B. W. Deng, L. Y. Chai, K. Zhang and J. X. Wang, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3926–3934 RSC .
K. X. Wang, X. H. Li and J. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 527–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Tang, Y. Y. Zhang, X. H. Rui, D. P. Qi, Y. F. Luo, W. R. Leow, S. Chen, J. Guo, J. Q. Wei, W. L. Li, J. Y. Deng, Y. K. Lai, B. Ma and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28 DOI:10.1002/adma.201505161 .
H. Lee, M. Yanilmaz, O. Toprakci, K. Fu and X. W. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci, 2014, 7, 3857–3886 CAS .
Y. X. Tang, Y. Y. Zhang, W. L. Li, B. Ma and X. D. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5926–5940 RSC .
L. Peng, H. J. Zhang, Y. J. Bai, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8758–8765 RSC .
J. Qu, J. E. Cloud, Y. A. Yang, J. N. Ding and N. Y. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22199–22208 CAS .
D. D. Yuan, W. L. Yang, J. F. Ni and L. J. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 163, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Xia, J. Li, C. Peng, W. T. Sun, L. W. Li and L. M. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17376–17383 CAS .
H. Zheng, S. Fang, Z. K. Tong, G. Pang, L. F. Shen, H. S. Li, L. Yang and X. G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12476–12481 CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales, R. Garcia and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 862–865 CrossRef CAS .
G. Armstrong, A. R. Armstrong, P. G. Bruce, P. Reale and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2597–2600 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liao and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400403 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, M. Tian, A. Abdulagatov, S. M. George, Y. C. Lee and R. G. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 655–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Wang, Q. Chen, J. Hu, H. Li, Y. F. Hu and L. M. Peng, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 406, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Li, W. Wan, H. H. Zhou, J. J. Li and D. S. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3439–3441 RSC .
Y. Q. Zhang, Q. Fu, Q. L. Xu, X. Yan, R. Y. Zhang, Z. D. Guo, F. Du, Y. J. Wei, D. Zhang and G. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12215–12224 RSC .
J. R. Li, Z. L. Tang and Z. T. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5848–5855 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Y. Fan, S. J. Ding, D. M. Yu and Y. P. Du, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5245–5250 RSC .
M. L. Mao, L. Mei, D. Guo, L. C. Wu, D. Zhang, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12350–12353 RSC .
B. Chen, N. Q. Zhao, L. C. Guo, F. He, C. S. Shi, C. N. He, J. J. Li and E. Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12895–12905 RSC .
C. Wang, L. X. Wu, H. Wang, W. H. Zuo, Y. Y. Li and J. P. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3524–3533 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liao, D. Higgins, G. Lui, V. Chabot, X. C. Xiao and Z. W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5467–5473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Yang, G. D. Du, Q. Meng, Z. P. Guo, X. B. Yu, Z. X. Chen, T. L. Guo and R. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5848–5854 RSC .
B. T. Zhao, R. Cai, S. M. Jiang, Y. J. Sha and Z. P. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 85, 636–643 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. K. Lai, M. Z. Ge, Y. Zheng, K. Q. Zhang and Z. Q. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12761–12768 CAS .
Y. P. Fu, X. Cai, H. W. Wu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. C. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5713–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. T. Le, H. Kim, A. Ghosh, J. Kim, J. Chang, Q. A. Vu, D. T. Pham, J.-H. Lee, S.-W. Kim and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5940–5947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, R. Hao, H. S. Peng and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 618–622 CAS .
S. W. Pan, J. Deng, G. Z. Guan, Y. Zhang, P. N. Chen, J. Ren and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6286–6290 CAS .
M. Salari, S. H. Aboutalebi, K. Konstantinov and H. K. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5038–5041 RSC .
A. Ramadoss and S. J. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 561, 262–267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wang, Z. D. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 5641–5646 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Zhu, Y. D. Wang, G. L. Yuan and H. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2876–2878 RSC .
J.-H. Kim, K. Zhu, Y. Yan, C. L. Perkins and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4099–4104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Tan, Y. X. Xu, J. Yang, L. L. Qiu, Y. Chen and X. X. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 526–529 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Jiang, B. L. Yi, C. K. Zhang, S. Liu, H. M. Yu and Z. G. Shao, J.
Power Sources, 2015, 276, 80–88 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Li, X. M. Zhang, G. S. Wu, X. Peng, K. F. Huo and P. K. Chu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400446 Search PubMed .
Z. Shao, H. J. Li, M. J. Li, C. P. Li, C. Q. Qu and B. H. Yang, Energy, 2015, 87, 578–585 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Chen, H. Sun, Z. B. Yang, G. Z. Guan, Z. T. Zhang, L. B. Qiu and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897–1902 CAS .
A. Ramadoss, G.-S. Kim and S. J. Kim, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 10222–10229 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Mingzheng Ge	Mingzheng Ge received his M.S. degree from College of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University in 2015. He is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree under Prof. Yuekun Lai and Prof. Keqin Zhang in College of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University. His research interests include inorganic semiconductor advanced materials and their applications in photocatalytic degradation, water splitting, supercapacitors, dye-sensitized solar cells and lithium-ion batteries.
Yuekun Lai	Yuekun Lai has been a full professor at National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, and School of Textile and Clothing Engineering in Soochow University since 2013. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Department of Chemistry, Xiamen University. During 2009–2011, he worked as a research fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. At July of 2011, he moved to Muenster University with Prof. Harald Fuchs and Prof. Lifeng Chi under the support of Humboldt Scholarship of Germany. His research interests are focused on TiO2 nanostructures for energy & environmental applications and bio-inspired intelligent surfaces with special wettability.

 	Fig. 1  Crystal structures of TiO2 polymorphs: rutile (a), anatase (b), brookite (c) and TiO2(B) (d). Purple spheres represent Ti atoms, and the blue octahedra represent TiO6 blocks. Oxygen atoms at the corner of the octahedra are omitted for clarity. Reproduced from ref. 47. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Different morphology types of 1D TiO2 nanostructures synthesized by hydrothermal methods: (a) TiO2 nanotubes, (b) TiO2 nanorods, (c) TiO2 nanowires, (d) TiO2 nanobelts, and (e and f) TiO2 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 69. Copyright 2004 Royal Society of Chemistry (a). Reproduced from ref. 71. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society (b). Reproduced from ref. 73. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (c). Reproduced from ref. 74. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society (d). Reproduced from ref. 77. Copyright 2011 Wiley (e and f).	 

 	Fig. 3  Morphological phase diagram of Degussa P25 evolution indicating regions of nanostructure formation after 20 h of hydrothermal treatment. Reproduced from ref. 81. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Fabrication and characterization of titanate nanotubes with different aspect ratios. (a) Fabrication scheme. (b) Digital photos of titanate solutions obtained by the stirring hydrothermal method at 500 (left) and 0 rpm (right) after sedimentation. (c) FESEM images of titanate nanotubes obtained at 500 rpm. (d) TEM image of (c), the arrow indicates a nanotubular structure. (e) XRD patterns of the products synthesized at different stirring speeds. (f–j) FESEM images of the titanate nanotubes obtained by the hydrothermal reaction at 130 °C for 24 h at stirring rates of 0, 300, 400, 500, and 1000 rpm, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 84. Copyright 2014 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of various TiO2 morphologies synthesized by the solvothermal method: (a) nanowires, (b) nanotubes, (c) nanobelts, and (d) nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society (a and b). Reproduced from ref. 92. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society (c). Reproduced from ref. 93. Copyright 2014 Elsevier (d).	 

1st generation (HF electrolyte)	0.5 wt% HF	Short nanotube length: 200–500 nm, diameter: 10–100 nm, and wall thickness: 13–27 nm	
95

2nd generation F-based buffered electrolytes	1 M Na2SO4/(NH4)2SO4 + 0.5 wt% NH4F	Rough wall with wing length: 0.5–2.4 μm, diameter: 100 nm, and wall thickness: 12 nm	
96

3rd generation organic electrolytes containing F	0.5 wt% NH4F + 2 v% H2O in ethylene glycol	Smooth and ultra-long tube length: 5–1000 μm, diameter: 100 nm, and wall thickness: 12 nm	
97

4th generation fluoride-free electrolytes	0.01–3 M HClO4	Disordered tube length: 30 μm, diameter: 20–40 nm, and wall thickness: 10 nm	
98

5th generation multiple-step anodization in organic electrolytes containing F	0.5 wt% NH4F + 2 v% H2O in ethylene glycol	Smooth and hexagonal tube length: 2–10 μm, diameter: 100 nm, and wall thickness: 15–20 nm	
99 and 100


 	Fig. 6  SEM images of the 1st generation in the HF electrolyte (a), 2nd generation in the Na2SO4/NaF electrolyte (b), 3rd generation in ethylene glycol/fluoride electrolytes containing a small amount of water (c), 4th generation in the F−-free electrolyte (d), 5th generation with two-step anodization in ethylene glycol/fluoride electrolytes containing a small amount of water (e) and 5th generation with three-step anodization in ethylene glycol/fluoride electrolytes containing a small amount of water (f). Reproduced from ref. 95. Copyright 1999 Wiley (a). Reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2005 Elsevier (b). Reproduced from ref. 97. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society (c). Reproduced from ref. 98. Copyright 2007 Elsevier (d). Reproduced from ref. 99. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry (e). Reproduced from ref. 100. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society (f).	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of nanowires (a), nanorods (b) and nanobelts (c) prepared by chemical vapor deposition. Reproduced from ref. 101. Copyright 2007 Elsevier (a). Reproduced from ref. 102. Copyright 2008 IOP Science (b). Reproduced from ref. 103. Copyright 2008 The Electrochemical Society (c).	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of TiO2 nanotube arrays (a), nanorods (b) and nanowires (c) fabricated by the template-assisted sol–gel method. Reproduced from ref. 106. Copyright 2006 IOP Science (a). Reproduced from ref. 107. Copyright 2009 Elsevier (b). Reproduced from ref. 108. Copyright 2003 IOP Science (c).	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the setup for electrospinning nanofibers (a). Schematic illustration of the morphology evolution mechanism from nanoporous to nanocluster, hierarchical and nanonecklace architectures of TiO2 nanofibers (b). SEM images of TiO2 nanofibers annealed at 500 °C (c), 600 °C (d), 700 °C (e) and 800 °C (f). The insets show the corresponding low-magnification views showing the network-like structure and continuity of the nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry (c–f).	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM and TEM images of pristine TiO2 nanofibers (a and b) and TiO2 hierarchical nanostructures (c and d). SEM images of pristine 1D TiO2 nanorods and nanobelts (e and g). SEM images of 1D TiO2 nanorods and nanobelts by HCl corrosion (f and h). Reproduced from ref. 118. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (a–d). Reproduced from ref. 119. Copyright 2015 Wiley (e and f). Reproduced from ref. 120. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (g and h).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a)–(c) FESEM images of anatase TiO2 nanosheets and (d) schematic structure of the as-obtained anatase TiO2 nanosheets. Scale bars in (a–c) are 5.0 μm, 2.0 μm and 300 nm, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 130. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of the as-anodized TiO2 NTAs (a) after being immersed in water (b) and in ammonia solution (c–f, with the concentration of vol (A):vol (DI) = 1:10, 1:5, 1:2 and 1:1, respectively) obtained by the hydrothermal method. The bar scale is 200 nm. Schematic of the band structure of pure TiO2 NTAs and N-doped TiO2 NTAs (g). The absorption spectra of water immersed TNAs and different concentration nitrogen doped TiO2 NTAs, the inset shows the corresponding estimated bandgap (h). Photocatalytic degradation of MO under simulated visible light irradiation in the presence of photocatalysts (i). A and DI represent ammonia solution and deionized water, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 133. Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM images of Pd/TiO2 NTAs (a), Pt/TiO2 nanotubes (b), Au/TiO2 nanorods (c) and Ag/TiO2 nanofibers (d). (e), (f), (g) and (h) show the corresponding TEM images of (a), (b), (c) and (d). Reproduced from ref. 100. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society (a and e). Reproduced from ref. 158. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (b and f). Reproduced from ref. 159. Copyright 2012 Elsevier (c and g). Reproduced from ref. 160. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (d and h).	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of CdS/TiO2 nanotubes (a), CdS/TiO2 nanowires (b), CdS/TiO2 NTAs (c) and CdS/TiO2 nanofibers (d). (e), (f), (g) and (h) show the corresponding TEM images. A schematic diagram showing the preparation process and structure of CdS/CdSe co-sensitized smooth and hierarchical TiO2 nanowires (i), SEM image (j), HAADF-STEM (k) and EDX mappings (l) of the CdS/CdSe/hierarchical TiO2 nanowire photoanode. Reproduced from ref. 164. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society (a and e). Reproduced from ref. 165. Copyright 2015 Elsevier (b and f). Reproduced from ref. 166. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (c and g). Reproduced from ref. 167. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (d and h). Reproduced from ref. 168. Copyright 2014 Elsevier (i–l).	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM images of Cu2O/TiO2NTAs (a),172 CuO/TiO2 nanofibers (b),173 TiO2 nanoparticles/TiO2 NTAs (c)174 and CuInS2/TiO2 nanorods (d).175 (e), (f), (g) and (h) show the corresponding TEM images. Reproduced from ref. 172. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry (a and e). Reproduced from ref. 173. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (b and f). Reproduced from ref. 174. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society (c and g). Reproduced from ref. 175. Copyright 2015 Elsevier (d and h).	 

 	Fig. 16  Mechanism of photocatalytic (a) and photoelectrocatalytic (b) degradation of pollutants for 1D TiO2 photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 17  TEM images of Ag/TiO2 nanotubes (a and b). Visible-light photocatalytic degradation curves of rhodamine B over P25, TiO2 nanotubes, and Ag/TiO2 nanotubes (c). Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic degradation mechanism of rhodamine B over the Ag/TiO2 nanotubes under visible light (d). SEM images (e) and TEM images (f) of S2. UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of the S0, S1 and S2 (g). Degradation profiles of rhodamine B over different samples (h). (S0: Pure TiO2 nanofibers. S1, S2: TiO2@C nanofibers with the thickness of carbon layers about 2 and 8 nm, respectively.) Reproduced from ref. 188. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society (a–d). Reproduced from ref. 189. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (e–h).	 

 	Fig. 18  SEM images of pure TiO2 NTAs (a and b). SEM image (c) and TEM image (d) of Cu2O/TiO2 NTAs with the deposition potential at −1.0 V. Photoelectrocatalytic activities of pure TiO2 NTAs and samples I–IV toward the degradation of MO at an applied potential of 0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) under visible light irradiation (e). Comparison of the electrochemical, photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic activities towards the degradation of MO for sample III (f). Photocurrent response of pure TiO2 NTAs and samples I–IV at a bias potential of 0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) (g). The schematic diagram of the photoelectrocatalytic mechanism of the Cu2O/TiO2 TNA heterojunction composite (h). (Samples I–IV: Cu2O/TiO2 NTAs with the deposition potential at −0.8, −0.9, −1.0 and −1.2 V, respectively.) Reproduced from ref. 190. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (a–h).	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM image of TiO2 nanotubes (a). Photocatalytic NO conversion and NOx removal efficiency by TiO2 nanotubes with different washing pH values, respectively (b and c).205 Typical TEM images of TNT-30 wt% CNTs (d). Time-online data for gas-phase photocatalytic degradation of benzene over the samples of TNTs, and composites of TNTs–CNTs (e). The remaining fraction of benzene in the dark over the TNTs and TNT–CNT nanocomposites after reaching the adsorption equilibrium for gas-phase degradation of benzene (f).208 Reproduced from ref. 205. Copyright 2015 Elsevier (a–c). Reproduced from ref. 208. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society (d–f).	 

 	Fig. 20  Mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 for 1D TiO2 photocatalysts (a). Methane production rates from the bare TiO2 NTAs and Pt/TiO2 NTA composite in carbon dioxide/water vapor and argon/water vapor environments (b). Product generation rates from a nitrogen-doped nanotube array film, 600 °C annealed, surface-loaded with both Pt and Cu catalysts (c). Depiction of a co-catalyst loaded flow-through nanotube array membrane for high rate photocatalytic conversion of CO2 and water vapor into hydrocarbon fuels (d). Reproduced from ref. 225. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (b). Reproduced from ref. 226. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society (c and d).	 

 	Fig. 21  Mechanism of photocatalytic (a) and photoelectrocatalytic (b) water splitting for 1D TiO2 photocatalysts.	 

TiO2 NTAs	UV light 70 mW cm−2	1 M KOH	Photelectrocatalysis	7.1 μmol h−1 cm−2	
232

TiO2 NTAs	Solar light 150 W xenon lamp	1 M NaOH	Photelectrocatalysis	8.3 μmol h−1 cm−2	
233

Cu2O/TiO2 nanorods	Solar light	50% glycerol and 50% water	Photocatalysis	50.3 mmol h−1 g−1	
234

Ag/TiO2 nanotubes	Visible light 100 mW cm−2	MeOH/H2O = 1:10	Photocatalysis	535 μmol h−1 g−1	
235

H/TiO2 nanowires	UV light 100 mW cm−2	1 M NaOH	Photoelectrocatalysis	5.6 μmol h−1 cm−2	
236

Pt/TiO2 NTAs	UV light 30 mW cm−2	0.1 M Na2SO4 and 1 M ethylene glycol	Photoelectrocatalysis	135 μmol h−1 cm−2	
237

Pt/TiO2 NTAs	Solar light 320 mW cm−2	2 M Na2CO3 and 0.5 M ethylene glycol	Photoelectrocatalysis	492 μmol h−1 cm−2	
238

CdS/TiO2 nanotubes	Solar light 300 W xenon lamp	0.25 M Na2SO3 and 0.35 M Na2S	Photocatalysis	20 mmol h−1 g−1	
239

Graphene/CdS/ TiO2 NTAs	Solar light 300 mW cm−2	0.1 M Na2S and 0.1 M Na2SO3	Photoelectrocatalysis	10 μmol h−1 cm−2	
240

CdS/CdSe/TiO2 NTAs	Solar light 100 mW cm−2	10% ethylene glycol and 0.1 M Na2S	Photoelectrocatalysis	457 μmol h−1 cm−2	
241

SrTiO3/TiO2 NTAs	Solar light 320 mW cm−2	0.5 M KOH and 0.5 M ethylene glycol	Photoelectrocatalysis	314 μmol h−1 cm−2	
177

Pd/TiO2 NTAs	Solar light 320 mW cm−2	2 M Na2CO3 and 0.5 M ethylene glycol	Photoelectrocatalysis	592 μmol h−1 cm−2	
100

C3N4/N/TiO2 nanofibers	Solar light 300 W xenon lamp	10 mL methanol and 40 mL water	Photocatalysis	8391 μmol h−1 g−1	
242


 	Fig. 22  SEM image of graphene/TiO2 nanotubes (a). Photocatalytic hydrogen production rate of pure TiO2 nanotubes and graphene/TiO2 nanotube composites with various GR contents under solar light (b). Schematic diagram of charge transfer in the graphene/TiO2 nanotube photocatalyst under Xe lamp irradiation (c). SEM (d) and TEM (e) images of pure TiO2 NTAs and Ag/TiO2 NTAs, respectively. Photocurrent (f) and photoelectrocatalytic hydrogen production rate (g) of pure TiO2 nanotubes and Ag/TiO2 NTAs with different deposition times at 0.7 V vs. SCE in a PEC cell containing a 2.0 M ethylene glycol and 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution under 300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm filter) irradiation. SPR charge carrier transfer under visible light irradiation at the Ag/TiO2 NTA interface and the photoelectrocatalytic process for H2 evolution (h). Reproduced from ref. 228. Copyright 2013 Elsevier (a–c). Reproduced from ref. 229. Copyright 2015 Wiley (d–h).	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic overview of a dye-sensitized solar cell (a). Processes of preparing 1-D porous rutile TiO2 NRAs (b). Morphological development of single TiO2 NRAs by step 3 (c). SEM images of pristine TiO2 NRAs (d) and porous rutile TiO2 NRAs (e). J–V characteristics of the DSSC based on rutile TiO2 NRAs with different etching durations and P25 TiO2 nanoparticle films (f). Reproduced from ref. 255. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (a). Reproduced from ref. 264. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society (b–f).	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of the structures of a typical QDSSC (A). TEM (B and C) and HRTEM (D) images of CdS/TiO2 NTAs. Photocurrent versus voltage spectra (E) in 1 M Na2S solution under solar light illumination for plain (a) and CdS quantum dot modified TiO2 nanotube film electrodes (b). (c and d) Corresponding currents in the dark for curves a and b. Reproduced from ref. 271. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (A). Reproduced from ref. 280. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society (B–E).	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of the structures of a typical perovskite solar cell (a). Cross-sectional SEM image of the solid state TiO2 nanorod/CH3NH3PbI3 hybrid photoanode (b). Current density–voltage curves (c) and IPCE spectra (d) of the TiO2 nanorod/CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell with different lengths of TiO2 nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 290. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry (b). Reproduced from ref. 178. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society (b–d).	 
xLi+ + TiO2 + xe− ↔ LixTiO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1)	(1)

 	Fig. 26  Schematic of the operating principle of traditional rechargeable LIBs (a). Variation of potential (versus a 1 M Li+/Li electrode) with charge passed for TiO2(B) nanowires prepared at different hydrothermal temperatures at 10 mA g−1 (b). Long-term cycling performance of TiO2 nanotubes at a high current density of 25C (c). Reproduced from ref. 304. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (a). Reproduced from ref. 316. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry (b). Reproduced from ref. 85. Copyright 2014 Wiley (c).	 

 	Fig. 27  SEM (a) and TEM images (Inset (a)) of MoS2@TiO2 hybrids. Charge–discharge voltage profiles at a current density of 100 mA g−1 of MoS2@TiO2 hybrid nanostructures (b). Cycling performance of MoS2 flakes (I) and MoS2@TiO2 hybrid nanostructures (II) at different current densities indicated in (c). SEM images of TiO2/MoO3 core–shell nanowire arrays (d). Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency variation of TiO2/MoO3 at 50 mA g−1 (e). Cycling response at progressively increased current densities (f). Reproduced from ref. 319. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (a–c). Reproduced from ref. 322. Copyright 2015 Wiley (d–f).	 

 	Fig. 28  SEM image of MnOx/NTNA/CFP (a). Plots of gravimetric and areal capacitances versus mass loadings at 0.25 mA cm−2 for MnOx/NTNA/CFP (b). Cycling performance of the MnOx/NTNA/CFP and MnOx/CFP electrodes at 1 mA cm−2 in 1 M Na2SO4 for up to 5000 cycles (c). Schematic illustration of the structure of the coaxially integrated dye-sensitized solar cell and electrochemical capacitor into an “energy fiber” (d). SEM images of the carbon nanotube sheet wrapped on the TiO2 nanotubes (e). Cyclic performance at the increasing electric current (f). Reproduced from ref. 338. Copyright 2015 Wiley (a–c). Reproduced from ref. 340. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (d–f).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
