Molecular catalysts for hydrogen production from alcohols  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE00389F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE00389F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2464-2503Molecular catalysts for hydrogen production from alcohols

        
          
            Monica 
            Trincado
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dipshikha 
            Banerjee
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Hansjörg 
            Grützmacher
          
        
      ab
aETH Zürich, Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 1, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland
bLehn Institute of Functional Materials (LIFM), Sun Yat-Sen University, 510275, Guangzhou, China
Received 
      31st January 2014
    , Accepted 8th May 2014First published on 9th May 2014AbstractAn industrially applicable catalytic methodology for dihydrogen formation from a proton source remains at the forefront of all efforts to replace the present fossil fuel economy by a hydrogen economy. This review tries to summarize the achievements which have been made with molecular organometallic complexes as catalysts for the dehydrogenation of alcohols. Biology uses NAD+ as a metal-free hydrogen acceptor which converts with the help of enzymes (alcohol dehydrogenase, aldehyde dehydrogenase) alcohols in carbonyl compounds, NADH, and protons. In the regeneration of NADH to NAD+, electrons are stored in electron transfer enzymes (ferredoxines) which are subsequently used to reduce protons to hydrogen with the help of hydrogenases or nitrogenases which ensures a very low overpotential for the reduction. Man-made organometallic complexes are rather primitive with respect to this complex machinery but use some principles from biology as guide lines. Classical complexes like rhodium or ruthenium phosphane complexes achieve at best a few thousands of turn over frequencies (TOFs). Established reactions like oxidative addition of the hydroxyl group of the substrate to the metal centre, β-hydrogen elimination from the α-CH group of the coordinated alcohol, product dissociation, and reductive elimination of hydrogen are involved in the proposed catalytic cycles. Complexes which show metal–ligand cooperativity show a significantly better performance with respect to turn over frequencies (conversion rate = activity) and turn over numbers (number of product molecules per catalyst molecule = efficiency). In these catalytic systems, the alcohol substrate is converted with the help of active centres in the ligand backbone which participate directly and reversibly in the transformation of the substrate. Present results indicate that dehydrogenative coupling reactions of the type, R–CH2–OH + XH → RCOX + 2H2, proceed especially well and can be applied to a wide range of substrates including multiple dehydrogenative couplings leading to polyesters or polyamides. In photocatalytic conversions, alcohols can be deoxygenated to hydrocarbons, CO, and H2 which should be further explored in the future. New developments consist of the construction of organometallic fuel cells (OMFCs) where the anode is composed of molecular catalysts embedded into a conducting support material. Here no free hydrogen is evolved but it is directly converted to electric current and protons according to H2 → 2H+ + 2e. The review focuses on the catalysis with organometallic complexes but lists some selected results obtained with heterogeneous catalytic systems for comparison.

Broader context
In the future, alcohols may find broader application as fuels either directly or as a source of hydrogen. Further they may serve as a raw material for the clean synthesis of fine chemicals. The direct conversion of alcohols into fine chemicals, without the need for a sacrificial oxidant, and the production of H2 as a by-product is a notable example of an atom economic process. In nature, the transformation of alcohols is efficiently catalyzed by a cascade of metalloenzymes. Remarkably, metal–ligand cooperativity plays a key-role in the activation and transformation of the substrate. These bio-catalytic systems serve as inspiration for the development of novel artificial molecular catalysts with the aim to achieve similar activities but with smaller molecular catalysts. Indeed, synthetic catalysts which contain metal centers coordinated to cooperative ligands were developed in recent years and these show improved efficiency and activity under milder reaction conditions when compared to classical non-cooperative metal–ligand systems. Notably, these molecular catalysts could be incorporated as active sites into electrodes of organometallic fuel cells (OMFCs). In these new devices, alcohols are converted into electric current and fine-chemicals can be produced with a minimum of waste according to R–CH2–OH + NaOH → RCOONa + 4H+ + 4e. OMFC's are powered by an alcohol and may find applications in small portable electronic devices and medicinal implants. For the further development of this new concept in fuel cell technology, a detailed mechanistic understanding of the single steps within the catalytic cycle is a prerequisite. The current knowledge about such processes catalyzed by organometallic complexes is summarized here.

1. Introduction

“What will replace cheap oil…and when?” In the top of the 25 questions of “what we do not know?” Science 125

th

anniversary.1
Industry generates more than 50 million metric tons of hydrogen each year from fossil fuels.2 While half of the production is dedicated to the synthesis of NH3 by the Haber–Bosch process, the second part is mainly consumed by oil refineries. In the future, the demand for hydrogen may increase significantly by operating fuel cell systems.3 Hydrogen is an ideal energy carrier that is easily converted to electricity using fuel cell technology, and it liberates a large amount of energy per unit mass, and does not generate pollutants. While unquestionably energy efficient water splitting into oxygen and hydrogen is the method of choice for large scale H2 production, the past years have witnessed substantial improvements in the production of hydrogen from stable hydrogen-rich molecules with the help of new catalysts. Alcohols can be considered as “organic” molecular storage forms of energy. The utilization of this type of compounds may solve problems related to storage and transport of large quantities of hydrogen to potential users worldwide using the existing infrastructure. The efficient catalyzed decomposition of alcohols into molecular hydrogen and oxidized compounds, which may be of value themselves, offers the possibility of using stable and easily storable compounds as a source of hydrogen for fuel cells. Fig. 1 shows the development of the number of publications over the last two decades which are obtained when the terms “alcohols” and “fuel cells” are linked in a literature search.4a Most of the publications stem from US research institutions. Likely, the steep increase in publishing activity at the beginning of the new millennium is due to an initiative in the USA which focused on hydrogen as a fuel around 2002 and 2003.4b About five years later, a plateau phase is reached with a steady number of about 350 papers per year publications which may reflect the enormous challenges and difficulties in achieving a real breakthrough which would again initiate intense research activities.
 Fig. 1  Number of publications in the past 2 decades obtained with the search terms “alcohol and fuel cell”.4a 
This review will focus on the progress achieved in the production of hydrogen from alcohols with molecular catalysts in the homogeneous phase. Very brief comparisons to some heterogeneous systems will be made and some principles of catalysts operating in biological systems will also be addressed.
Different alcohol substrates from the simplest alcohols like methanol or ethanol to polyols (glycerol, sugars) derived from biomass can be considered as a resource for the production of H2. The energy required to generate hydrogen from the fuel substrate will be compensated by the exothermic reaction between H2 and O2 which amounts to ΔH°R = −242 kJ mol−1 per equivalent of H2. The role of the catalyst is to minimize the activation barriers for the individual steps involved in the dehydrogenation. Hence, the goal is to find an alcoholic fuel with a high hydrogen content which can be converted with a minimum of energy investment into a dehydrogenated (oxidized) product and hydrogen. In Table 1 we summarize the thermodynamic data for several dehydrogenative conversions of methanol, ethanol, and a secondary alcohol like 2-propanol to aldehydes, carbon monoxide or acetone. Furthermore, we list the data for selected dehydrogenative coupling reactions in which primary alcohols react with water, a second equivalent of alcohol, or ammonia to the corresponding carboxylic acid derivatives (i.e. acids, esters, or amides) with concomitant formation of molecular hydrogen. For every fuel, the potential “fuel energy”, ΔEF, which can be gained in the overall process through the combustion of H2 with O2 is given as ΔEF = [nΔHR(H2 + 1/2O2) − ΔHr] with n = number of equivalents of H2 liberated in the dehydrogenation step.
Table 1 Thermochemical data for hydrogen formation by dehydrogenation or dehydrogenative coupling of alcohols




Entry
Reaction
ΔHra (kJ mol−1)
H2 wt%
ΔEFa (kJ mol−1)





a NIST values: http://webbook.nist.gov/chemistry/.





1
CH3OH → H2CO + H2
89.1
6.2
−152.9


2
H2CO → CO + H2
5.4
6.6
−236.6


3
H2CO + H2O → HCO2H + H2
−20.9
4.2
−262.9


4
CH3OH + H2O → HCO2H + 2H2
68.2
8.0
−415.8


5
HCO2H → CO2 + H2
−14.9
4.3
−256.9


6
CH3OH + H2O → CO2 + 3H2
53.3
12.0
−672.7


7
2CH3OH → HCO2CH3 + 2H2
54.5
6.2
−429.5


8
3CH3OH → CH3OCH2OCH3 + H2 + H2O
26
2.1
−216


9
CH3OH + NH3 → HCONH2 + 2H2
64.9
8.1
−419.1


10
CH3OH + NH3 → CH2NH + H2 + H2O
120
4.1
−122


11
CH3CH2OH → CH3CHCO + H2
63.3
4.3
−178.7


12
CH3CHO + H2O → CH3CO2H + H2
−20.5
3.2
−262.5


13
CH3CH2OH + H2O → CH3CO2H + 2H2
42.8
6.2
−441.2


14
2CH3CH2OH → CH3CO2CH2CH3 + 2H2
22.6
4.3
−461.4


15
CH3CH2OH + NH3 → CH3CONH2 + 2H2
41.6
6.3
−442.4


16
CH3CH2OH + 3H2O → 2CO2 + 6H2
172.4
12
−1280


17
(CH3)2CHOH → (CH3)2CO + H2
37.5
3.3
−204.5




Methanol is the least expensive alcohol on the current market and does not interfere directly with the food chain. Although nowadays it is produced mainly from syn-gas, which is obtained by catalytic reforming of fossil fuels, it can also be obtained through the hydrogenation of CO2. Olah et al. suggested in late 90s an economy based on methanol. Methanol is a promising fuel, since it is a stable liquid under ambient conditions, and has a high content of hydrogen.5 The development of efficient processes for releasing hydrogen from methanol or for the direct conversion in electrical energy (in direct methanol fuel cells, DMFC) is essential for the success of this proposition. New strategies for steam reforming of methanol under mild conditions based on heterogeneous or molecular catalysts have raised the hopes and expectations on this fuel. As entries 1 and 2 (Table 1) show, the sequential conversion of methanol to formaldehyde and formaldehyde to carbon monoxide requires in total 89.1 kJ mol−1 + 5.4 kJ mol−1 = 94.5 kJ mol−1, which is compensated by combustion of the weight content of about 12.5 wt% H2 which makes the overall reaction sequence, H3COH → CO + 2H2 and 2H2 + O2 → 2H2O, exothermic by ΔEF = −389.5 kJ mol−1. However, the formation of CO is a principal problem when a homogeneously catalyzed process is envisioned, because catalyst deactivation may occur. The equations shown in entries 3 to 6 show a possible solution to this problem. Instead of dehydrogenating formaldehyde (H2CO) to CO, hydration to hemiacetal H2C(OH)2 and subsequent dehydrogenation to formic acid (HCOOH) could take place as shown in entry 3 (the overall reaction CH3OH + H2O → HCOOH + 2H2 is shown in entry 4). Formic acid is by itself an interesting hydrogen source and decomposes further to CO2 and H2. In summary, entry 6 shows the conversion of a 1:1 mixture of methanol and water which delivers inert CO2 and three equivalents of H2 (12 wt%) leading ideally to ΔEF = −672 kJ mol−1. Entries 7 and 8 show self-condensation reactions of methanol which also proceed under liberation of hydrogen and no formation of CO. Further interesting fuel combinations consist of mixtures of methanol and ammonia which give formamide, HCONH2, and two equivalents of H2 (8.1 wt%). The reaction shown in entry 10 is a side reaction to be expected and of lower interest because only 4.1 w% of H2 are liberated and the resulting imine H2CNH would oligomerize.
Ethanol is easily generated from biomass feedstock. This process requires the conversion of starch into maltose, followed by metabolism into ethanol and CO2. The emerging technology based on the direct fermentation of cellulose has the potential to produce ethanol from biological waste at competitive prices with gasoline. If this new feedstock materializes, ethanol may serve as a thermal or photosynthetic precursor to H2. Although its hydrogen content (13 wt%) is slightly higher than the one of methanol (12.5 wt%), its complete conversion to carbon oxide (CO or CO2) and H2 requires breaking of the C–C bond which is more difficult than the cleavage of C–H bonds. This adds a further challenge to an already challenging problem. In entries 11–16 we list reactions comparable to the ones discussed for methanol. Because of the lower gravimetric H2 content, these reactions give a lower energy gain per mass unit. Note however that ethanol is likely a more convenient substrate for homogeneously catalyzed processes as poisonous CO formation may be easier to suppress compared to reactions with methanol. It is also a substrate which can be easily purified from other catalyst poisons like sulphur.6
Hydrogen production from biomass carbohydrates like sugars and polyols would achieve very low carbon emissions throughout the life cycle. Currently, the latest advance in hydrogen production from sugars involves bio-catalysis (photo-fermentation, anaerobic fermentation, electrohydrogenesis), chemical catalysis (gasification, pyrolysis, gasification in critical water and aqueous phase reforming) and combinations of these procedures. All of them give relatively low yields of hydrogen. The drastic conditions required for the chemical aqueous phase reforming (temperature > 400 K and pressure > 70 bar) have been considerably reduced by the use of metal containing heterogeneous catalysts.7 Very few investigations focussed on the development of single site molecular catalysts to achieve this transformation with high efficiency.
2. Hydrogen production from alcohols in biological systems
In photosynthesis, carbohydrates are produced by reduction of carbon dioxide, while O2 is released by the oxidation of water. The (solar) energy stored in carbohydrates (or their metabolic products) can be released in fermentation processes which produce H2 under anaerobic conditions. In such fermentation processes, the carbohydrates are converted to oxygenated products (aldehydes, carboxylates, CO2) under the formal production of protons as oxidation equivalents. The biological hydrogen production is fundamentally dependent upon nitrogenase and FeFe- or NiFe-hydrogenase enzymes that catalyse the reduction of these protons (eqn (1)). 2H+ + 2e− ⇌ H2(1)
Only key-features of enzymatic catalytic systems will be mentioned in this article. All known enzymes which are able to catalyse hydrogen evolution contain metallo clusters as active sites. Nitrogenase is a two component system that uses a Mg(ATP) complexed Fe–protein associated with a MoFe–protein which contains the Fe7MoS9C co-factor (FeMoco) as the active site (Scheme 1)8 and low potential electrons from reduced ferredoxin or flavodoxin to reduce protons to hydrogen.9 The NiFe-hydrogenases are heterodimeric proteins containing a small unit consisting of two [4Fe–4S], one [3Fe–4S] cluster, a large subunit containing a dinuclear thiolate and a hydride bridged nickel iron unit. The iron centre is further coordinated to two terminal CN and one CO ligand.10 The FeFe-hydrogenase (or Fe-only hydrogenase) contains a completely different protein structure where the active site is a Fe2S2 butterfly-shape core bridged by residual cysteines and the Fe atoms are coordinated to CN and CO ligands, configuring the H-cluster (Scheme 1). These metal complexes are concealed within the protein matrix while the redox mediators (e.g. ferredoxin) are bound to the protein surface and the [Fe–S] clusters ensuring the electron transfer from ferredoxin to the polymetallic active sites. These enzymes belong to the class of the most efficient catalysts known, e.g. FeFe-hydrogenase of Desulfovibrio desulfuricans produces 2 × 105 L of H2 per mol enzyme per s.11 A simplified mechanistic proposal for proton reduction involves the active participation of the ligands coordinated to these metal centres. For the [FeFe]-hydrogenases, the first step is proposed to be the protonation of the bridging azapropanedithiolate ligand which lowers the redox potential of the H-cluster. The reduction of the protonated species results in the formation of a highly reactive terminal hydride which undergoes a fast intramolecular proton–hydride interaction forming molecular hydrogen. As for the [NiFe]-hydrogenases, protonation is proposed to occur at the sulphur site of a terminal or the bridging cysteine ligand, and the redox active centre has been assigned to Ni rather than to the Fe centre.12 In nitrogenases the mechanism at the FeMoco is not well understood. The reported data disfavour any model that involves protonation of sulphur sites and suggests that the intermediate instead contains two chemically equivalently bound hydrides; it appears unlikely that these are terminal monohydrides.13
 Scheme 1  Active sites of nitrogenase and hydrogenase enzymes. 
2.1. Photofermentation
Photoheterotrophic H2 production or photofermentation uses metabolic products from glucose as electron donors. The mechanistic pathway of photofermentation has been studied in purple non-sulfur bacteria (PNSB). Under anaerobic conditions, electron transfer for organic substrates to oxidized ferredoxin (Fdox) occurs through a series of membrane-bound electron transport carrier molecules, promoting the reduction of molecular dinitrogen to NH3. Nevertheless, in the absence of N2, nitrogenase catalyses instead the reduction of protons to H2 according to eqn (2). The key aspects that affect the efficiency of H2 production are currently under investigation.14 (2)
2.2. Dark fermentation
This process is mostly carried out by species of bacteria, protozoa and fungi that live in anaerobic environments without light. Carbohydrates (mainly glucose) are the preferred carbon sources for the dark fermentation process where hydrogen together with volatile fatty acids are generated.15Eqn (3) shows a maximal theoretical yield of 4 mol H2 per mol glucose which is produced in dark fermentation (Thauer limit).16 C6H12O6 + 2H2O ⇌ 2CH3CO2− + 2CO2 + 4H2 + 2H+(3)
Oh et al.17 proposed three types of biochemical reactions involved in the dark fermentation process (Scheme 2). The first one employs pyruvate formate lyase (PFL) and formate hydrogen lyase (FHL). Pyruvate is formed in the Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas (EMP) pathway and is converted by PFL into acetyl-CoA and formate under anaerobic conditions. Formate is then converted into H2 and CO2 by the action of FHL, a complex consisting of two metalloenzymes: formate dehydrogenase and hydrogenase. The formate dehydrogenase (FDH) contains an active centre with a Mo atom coordinated to two ene–dithiolate ligands. The second type of H2-producing reaction involves pyruvate ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR) and ferroxin-dependent hydrogenase (HydA). PFOR catalyses the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to form acetyl-CoA and CO2 under anaerobic conditions. The electrons are first transferred to Fdox, and from the reduced form are then transferred to protons to form H2. The third type of reaction utilizes NAD(P)H to evolve H2 and is catalyzed by two major enzymes, NAD(P)H: ferredoxin oxidoreductase (NFOR) and HydA. In this reaction, Fdox is reduced by NAD(P)H, which is formed during the carbon metabolism.
 Scheme 2  Metabolic pathway for H2 production during glucose fermentation in E. coli and enterobacteriaceae. Additional pathways to improve H2 yield were introduced by Veit et al.19 and Jones et al. (in blue).20 Active sites of ferredoxine-dependent hydrogenase, formate dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase are indicated. ACK: acetate kinase; ALD: alcohol dehydrogenase; Fdox: oxidized ferredoxin; Fdrd: reduced ferredoxin; FHL: formate hydrogen lyase; HydA: ferredoxin-dependent hydrogenase; LDH: lactate dehydrogenase; PP pathway: pentose phosphate pathway; NFOR, NAD(P)H: ferredoxin oxidoreductase; PDH: pyruvate dehydrogenase; PF: pyruvate formate lyase; PFOR: pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (adapted from ref. 17). 
Alcohol dehydrogenase (ALD) with coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), catalyzes the reversible oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde. A close-up of the active site of ALD is shown in Scheme 2 where a Zn centre is coordinated to two cysteine and a histidine residues. ADH utilizes a Zn2+ ion to coordinate the alcohol oxygen and increase the acidity of the hydroxy group. During activation, a sequential proton transfer from a threonine to a histidine residue through NAD+ takes place. The resulting anionic Thr accepts then a proton from the alcohol substrate while the NAD+ receives a hydride forming NADH and a molecule of aldehyde. This represents an archetypical example where the metal and a ligand cooperate and their interplay facilitates a transfer hydrogenation process. This principle has direct implications in the development of enzymatic fuel cells and direct alcohol organometallic fuel cells using biomimetic models (see Section 3.2.1).
Dark fermentative H2 production reminds of the fermentative methane (CH4) production. This simplest hydrocarbon (with a gravimetric hydrogen content of 25%) is produced in the anaerobic digestion of organic wastes and biological production processes have been well established commercially. H2 is more valuable as an energy source but the development of a similar biofermentation process still needs to be improved with respect to the yield of H2 which is currently too low. To increase productivity and efficiency, detailed studies of the H2 metabolism are essential which will eventually allow engineering microorganisms at the cellular level to optimize the H2 yield. First encouraging results reveal an enormous potential for improving the H2 yield in the transformation of organic substrates (alcohols, sugars, acids).18
Structural and electronic features of these biocatalytic systems inspired the search for artificial molecular catalysts during the past decade. These models frequently use established reaction steps from organometallic chemistry like oxidative insertion or nucleophilic substitution, β-hydrogen elimination, and reductive elimination to explain and plan a reaction mechanism for hydrogen production from sugars. More recent studies have also taken the coordination of functional ligands into account that cooperate with the metal to facilitate the reactions that lead to H2 production.21
3. Hydrogen production from alcohols in artificial systems
The focus of this review is on homogenous catalytic systems and we only very briefly mention the progress made with heterogeneous catalysts and refer to the recent literature for detailed reviews.22
3.1. Heterogeneous catalysis for dehydrogenation of alcohols

3.1.1. Electro-oxidation of alcohols. 
Although proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) due to their low operating temperature can be used as suitable power sources for automotive applications,23 storage of hydrogen as fuel in the liquid form or as gas under high pressure in a vehicle is considered to be potentially dangerous. Here we mention only very briefly some concepts used in heterogeneous electro-oxidation of methanol and refer to the articles dedicated to this particular topic.24
Alcohols which are liquid under ambient conditions can be used as an instant fuel in the so called “Direct Alcohol Fuel Cell (DAFC)”.
Amongst different alcohols such as ethanol, 2-propanol and ethylene glycol, the direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) (Fig. 2) is the most developed system. In a DMFC, methanol is electro-oxidized to carbon dioxide at the anode, which is most commonly made from Pt. The anode reactions which are proposed to occur on a Pt electrode are represented in Scheme 3.24a
 Fig. 2  Simplified graphic presentation of a DMFC. 
 Scheme 3  Proposed reaction steps for methanol oxidation on a Pt anode. 
Besides many advantages of a DMFC, the major drawbacks that this system still has to overcome are the slow anode kinetics, lack of selectivity, and long-term stability. Although oxidation of methanol is fast on a clean Pt anode, adsorption of carbon monoxide which is generated as an intermediate in this reaction poisons the catalyst making the overall methanol oxidation sluggish. To overcome this challenge considerable efforts have been devoted in the development of suitable anode materials to achieve high reactivity, stability and durability. Furthermore, attempts are made to reduce the costs by decreasing the amount of expensive Pt-based noble metal catalysts. Amongst different Pt-alloys with more oxophilic metals such as Pt–Sn, Pt–Ni, Pt–Cu, Pt–Mo, Pt–Au, especially Pt–Ru based catalysts have been thoroughly investigated.25 An extensive amount of research has been dedicated for the development of DMFCs as portable low power devices and remarkable results were achieved using Pt–Ru based catalytic systems which give power densities ranging from 45–207 mW cm−2 at temperatures ranging from 25–70 °C.26 The most performant DMFC for application in transportation was developed by Siemens AG (Germany) which reaches a maximum power density of 250 mW cm−2 at 110 °C. Also ethanol has been widely explored as fuel for DAFCs.25 The best catalysts so far are based on Pd metal. A Pd(Ni–Zn) catalyst offers power densities of 58 mW cm−2 at ambient temperature and 160 mW cm−2 at 80 °C,27 whereas a Pd(CeO2)/C catalyst delivers power densities of 66 mW cm−2 at room temperature and 160 mW cm−2 at 80 °C,28 both in alkaline media.


3.1.2. Thermal dehydrogenation of alcohols. 
As stated above, methanol is an especially promising hydrogen source because it can be produced from renewable or fossil stocks with solar or wind based energy supply and has a high H:C ratio. An established valuable method of hydrogen production consists of the steam reforming of methanol (SRM) using heterogeneous catalysts.29 However, SRM is an endothermic process (ΔHr = 53.3 kJ mol−1; Table 1, entry 6) and hence finding reaction conditions for efficient large-scale operation might be difficult. Partial oxidation of methanol (POM; eqn (4)) is a fast reaction but shows low selectivity and it is highly exothermic (ΔHr = −188.5 kJ mol−1) which makes the control of the reaction parameters problematic. Oxidative steam reforming which is a combination of SRM and POM gives a higher hydrogen concentration in the product (eqn (5)). All methanol steam reforming processes involve first decomposition of methanol into hydrogen and carbon monoxide (eqn (6)) which is followed by a water gas shift reaction (eqn (7)) which reduces the carbon monoxide content. CH3OH + 1/2O2 ⇌ 2H2 + CO2 ΔHr = −188.5 kJ mol−1(4) 2CH3OH + H2O + 1/2O2 ⇌ 5H2 + 2CO2 ΔHr = −135.2 kJ mol−1(5) CH3OH ⇌ 2H2 + CO ΔHr = 94.5 kJ mol−1(6) CO + H2O ⇌ CO2 + H2 ΔHr = −41.2 kJ mol−1(7)
The most difficult task in heterogeneous steam reforming remains the reduction of the amount of CO that is produced to avoid hydrogen fuel cell poisoning. Copper based catalysts have shown good performance in SRM as well as in the water gas shift reaction and have been extensively studied. The catalytic activity and stability of the catalyst are largely dependent on the homogeneity of the copper nano-particles on the surface and the surface area of the support material. To ensure the homogeneous dispersion of copper particles and enhance the stability, metal oxides are used as support materials. Besides ZnO29 that is most commonly used, CeO,29a,30 SnO2,31 ZrO2,32 Cr2O3,33 or combinations of oxides as ZnO/ZrO2,34 CeO2/ZrO2,29j,35 Fe2O3,36 CoO,37 MnO,38 ZnO/NiO39 have shown promising activity in the SRM reaction. In late 2012, a direct route for SRM was investigated avoiding formation of any syngas (CO/H2).40 In a single step reaction, over a CuZnGaOx catalyst, methanol was directly converted to CO2 and H2 without any detectable CO formation (below 1 ppm). The high selectivity of the catalytic system implies that neither decomposition of methanol to H2 and CO (syngas formation, eqn (6)) nor a subsequent water gas shift reaction (eqn (7)) is involved in the catalytic process. A clean production of hydrogen with 393.6 mL per g catalyst per h was reached at 150 °C.
Copper based catalysts are currently applied in industrial SRM processes although they still suffer from limitations like low thermal stability, tendency of sintering at temperatures above 270 °C, and the pyrophoric nature of copper nanoparticles.41 Alternatively, palladium nanoparticles can be used which likewise promote the methanol decomposition to hydrogen and carbon monoxide (eqn (6)),42 and allow the partial oxidation of methanol (eqn (4)).43 Pd supported on ZnO shows excellent selectivity in the SRM process liberating hydrogen and carbon dioxide with very low carbon monoxide contamination. A detailed study by Iwasa et al. demonstrated that Pd/ZnO and copper based catalysts show very comparable activities but the Pd containing catalyst is superior in terms of long-term stability.44 The formation of a robust Pd/Zn bimetallic alloy is made responsible for the high reactivity and stability of the Pd/ZnO catalyst and consequently this Pd/ZnO catalytic system is considered as a suitable alternative for the presently established SRM catalysts.45 Further palladium based catalytic systems with Ga2O3 (ref. 46) and In2O3 (ref. 47) as support materials were studied by Penner et al. Also metals other than Cu and Pd were investigated and Pt-alloys48 as well as Ni,49 Mo50 based catalysts have been utilized for the hydrogen production from methanol. Recently, Shimizu et al. explored the heterogeneous dehydrogenation of cyclic secondary alcohols using Co/TiO2 and Ni/Al2O3 catalyst which led to promising results.51
Likewise, ethanol steam reforming is of great interest because ethanol is a non-toxic, liquid, and easy-to-handle fuel and may become available on a large scale from plant waste. Ideally, the steam reforming of ethanol produces six molecules of hydrogen gas and two equivalents of CO2 per molecule of ethanol (entry 16 in Table 1). Indeed, hydrogen production from ethanol has been extensively investigated during the last couple of years and interested readers are referred to the reviews by Fernando,52 Fierro,29p Homs,53 Weckhuysen and Bruijnincx54 as well as to a recent report by Schmidt et al.55
Furthermore, a report from Cuenya et al. gives an excellent account concerning the decomposition of ethanol and higher order alcohols such as 2-propanol and 2-butanol over platinum nanoparticles supported on ZrO2 which leads to the production of hydrogen gas.56


3.1.3. Photocatalytic decomposition of alcohols. 
The energy needed to promote the endothermic dehydrogenation of alcohols to form hydrogen alongside aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic derivatives as dehydrogenated (oxidized) organic molecules can be provided by light (photons). In these processes semiconductors can be used as catalysts in order to lower the activation barriers of the photolytic reaction steps. Since the first experiments reported by Fujisima and Honda, the photocatalytic hydrogen production from water is one of the most promising approaches.57 After the first reports which described the use of TiO2 as a photocatalyst, a large number of other semiconducting metal oxides and sulfides (CdS, ZnO, ZrO2, titanates, niobates, and tantalates) have been identified to have suitable properties (band gaps of ca. 3 eV and conduction bands in the range of −2 to −1 V for proton reduction in aqueous media) for the photocatalytic splitting of water using UV light. Visible-light-responsive photocatalysts are accessible by coupling a wide band gap semiconductor (e.g. TiO2 3.2 eV) with a narrow one (CdS 2.44 eV, In2S3 2.1 eV) as a sensitizer.58 It has been demonstrated that the rate of hydrogen production from alcohol–water mixtures is much higher compared to that from pure water. Under irradiation, the TiO2-promoted photocatalytic reaction is initiated by charge-separation into electrons (e) and holes (h+) with photons of energy equal or higher than the band gap. The electrons injected into the conduction band reduces water to generate H2 while the remaining h+ in the valence band oxidizes the hydroxide ions (HO−), to give a highly reactive HO˙ radical.59 With alcohols as sacrificial electron donors, the reaction is accelerated since they are not only consumed by the photogenerated holes but they react also rapidly with the photogenerated HO˙ radicals thereby decreasing the rate of electron–hole recombination and suppressing the “Knallgas” reaction between photogenerated H2 and O2 which both lower the quantum yield of the H2 production.60 Methanol plays a crucial role as a sacrificial donor for the hydrogen production from water and its photochemistry has been extensively investigated on single-crystalline TiO2 surfaces61 and on TiO2 powders.62 Although little is known about the mechanistic details, these studies show that beside hydrogen, formaldehyde, formic acid and carbon dioxide are the further oxidation products generated from methanol.63 Noble metal deposits including Pt, Au, Pd, Rh, Ni, Cu and Ag have been reported to enhance significantly the efficiency of TiO2 mediated photocatalysis. The Fermi levels of these noble metals lie below that of TiO2 and photo-excited electrons are efficiently injected from the TiO2 conduction band to the metal particles deposited on the surface of TiO2. The photo-generated holes remain in the valence band of TiO2. This modification reduces significantly electron–hole recombination, enhances the life time of the charge separated state of the photocatalysts, and thereby raises the photocatalytic yield in the reduction of protons to H2.64
To date there are only few reports on the photocatalytic reforming of biomass to hydrogen. The first attempt of a photocatalytic conversion of saccharides was reported by Kawai et al. who showed that hydrogen could be generated from starch or cellulose on a complex Pt (5% wt)/RuO2 (10% wt)/TiO2 photocatalyst using a 500 W Xe lamp as the photon source which gave turn over numbers (TONs) of about 43 (Scheme 4).65
 Scheme 4  H2 and CO2 evolution from sugar mixtures with the photocatalyst Pt/RuO2/TiO2 suspended in neutral water or 6 M NaOH solution. QY = quantum yield. 
Fu et al. reported that Pt-doped TiO2 (Pt 1%wt/TiO2) catalyses the photochemical H2 evolution using a hexose as a sacrificial reagent with a maximum rate of hydrogen evolution of 0.28 mmol h−1. The performance of the catalytic system is highly dependent on the pH of the solution and under the strictly anaerobic conditions a TON = 108 is achieved.66 A highly speculative reaction mechanism proposed by the authors is represented in Scheme 5. It is assumed that photo-reduced Pt nanoparticles react with solvated protons to give H2 while hydroxide and alkoxide anions are oxidized to highly reactive oxy radicals from which carbonyl compounds (aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids) and hydrocarbons are produced. Yasuda et al. implemented this process for the photo-degradation of pentoses in order to develop an efficient method to produce H2 from cellulosic materials.67 The same authors reported recently that also other polyols (eritryol or glycerol) serve as sacrificial multi-electron donors and allow the quantitative decomposition into CO2 and H2O using a similar photocatalytic system (Scheme 6).68
 Scheme 5  Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic reforming of glucose on Pt/TiO2 by Fu et al. (adapted from ref. 66). 
 Scheme 6  Photocatalytic H2 evolution from pentose, glycerol or 2-propanol using Pt–TiO2 under neutral conditions. 
In their pioneering experiments, Grätzel et al. described a hybrid system composed of hydrogenase enzymes and an inorganic light-harvesting support. Three different redox enzymes fixed to TiO2 as a semiconducting support were able to catalyse the H2 production under excitation of the band gap in the presence of MeOH as the electron donor. The H2 formation was obtained by direct electron transfer from the conduction band of the TiO2 particles to the active site of the enzyme at pH > 7. In addition, rhodium polypyridyl complexes were used to enhance the efficiency of the electron transfer from the TiO2 particles to the adsorbed enzyme. The maximum rate of hydrogen evolution was 1.42 mmol per g TiO2 per h in the presence of [Rh(bpy)3]+.69

3.2. Dehydrogenation of alcohols under acceptorless conditions using molecular catalysts

3.2.1. Electrocatalytic oxidation of alcohols. 
The production of hydrogen from alcohols is intimately connected with the reversible generation of electric current and protons via the equation H2 ⇆ 2H+ + 2e−. For that reason we list here selected examples where alcohols were electrocatalytically dehydrogenated (oxidized) with molecular catalysts although these reactions do not produce hydrogen directly (see also the short discussion in Section 2 on hydrogenases).70 Besides the heterogeneous catalysts used for direct alcohol fuel cells as discussed in Section 3.1.1, the fuel cell design has embarked into a new direction with the development of molecular catalysts for electro-oxidation. The molecular catalyst can be used in two different ways: either it is dissolved in the electrolyte and catalyses a reaction in homogeneous solution (Fig. 3A) or is heterogenized by embodiment into the electrode surface (Fig. 3B).71
 Fig. 3  Electrocatalytic oxidations. 
An advantage of molecular catalysis is that it leaves large room for improvements through the design of the active species with the use of different metals and ligands. Moreover, a defined catalytic system offers the opportunity of developing an understanding of the mechanistic details. Savéant et al. has classified homogeneous electrocatalysis into two categories: (a) redox catalysis where the catalyst couple plays only the role of an electron carrier, and (b) chemical catalysis where temporary catalyst-substrate adduct formation takes place.72 Ruthenium and nickel based electrocatalysts were extensively reviewed by Wong et al. in 2007 (ref. 71) and hence, we will detail here only the molecular electrocatalysts that were developed afterwards. The most commonly used molecular catalysts are based on ruthenium and more specifically, ruthenium–oxo complexes are most frequently used. In the eighties of the last century, Meyer et al. developed versatile synthetic routes for high-valent ruthenium(IV)–oxo complexes and applied them in the catalytic electro-oxidation of alcohols.73 In aqueous solution, [RuII(bpy)2(py)(OH2)]2+ (1) can be reversibly converted to the high valent [RuIV(O)(bpy)2(py)]2+ oxo complex (3) by 2e− oxidation (Scheme 7) which then oxidizes alcohols electrocatalytically.
 Scheme 7  Redox reaction of the Ru–polypyridyl complex. 
Over the last decades, different research groups focused on the modification of the ligand structure and specifically investigated various polypyridyl ligands (L1–L7, L9 and L11). Other ligand types like [9]aneS3 (L8) were less intensely studied (see Fig. 4).74 Many of these complexes with polyaromatic ligands like AC (L10) or the polypyridyl ligand bpy* (L11), etc. (Fig. 4) are adsorbed on the electrode surface and act as heterogenized catalysts according to a system of type 3B in Fig. 3. Generally, these Ru(IV)–oxo complexes suffer from low stability, low product selectivity and gave rather low rates of conversion.71
 Fig. 4  Ligands used in Ru catalyzed electro-oxidation. 
Ruthenium–dioxolene–amine complexes were studied by Tanaka et al. and these were able to oxidize alcohols under electrocatalytic conditions, although they fell short in product selectivity and did not generate high current densities.75 Heterobimetallic Ru/Pt (4), Ru/Pd (5), and Fe/Pt (6) cyclopentadienyl carbonyl complexes (Fig. 5) have been utilized as soluble electrocatalysts in the oxidation of alcohols by McElwee-White et al.76 However, in the electrocatalytic dehydrogenation of methanol and ethanol, these complexes showed poor product selectivity and gave a mixture of products including aldehyde, acid and ester.
 Fig. 5  Heterobimetallic complexes used in the electro-oxidation of alcohols. 
In this context, it is worth mentioning that in a conceptually related approach bimetallic homogeneous Ru/Ni complexes have been successfully utilized in hydrogen fuel cells by Ogo et al. although again with low current densities.77
Meyer et al. have reported the electrocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol promoted by a polypyridyl ruthenium(V)–oxo complex and they were able to identify a number of intermediates.78 This particular complex [Ru(Mebimpy)4,4-{(H2O3PCH2)2bpy}(OH2)]2+ [Mebimpy = 2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2yl)] is equipped with a phosphonate-modified bipy ligand [4,4-(H2O3PCH2)2bpy] (L9 in Fig. 4) and is attached to a nanostructured ITO surface leading to a catalyst of type 3B in Fig. 3. This device works as electrocatalysts in the water oxidation reaction. Four distinct intermediates were observed during water oxidation, namely RuIVO2+, RuIV(OH)3+, RuVO3+ and RuV(OO)3+ species, each of them were found to be active in the electro-oxidation of benzyl alcohol to form benzaldehyde as the major product (up to 66% faradaic efficiency). In the case of the nanoITO/RuV(OO)3+ catalytic system, a TON of 2440 was obtained and the catalytic activity improved by a factor of 3000 as compared to the RuIVO2+ species.
Waymouth et al. could successfully apply the cymene ruthenium complex 7 in the electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol.79 Complex 7 was supported on an edge-plane graphite (EPG) electrode and showed activity in the alcohol oxidation in alkaline aqueous solution (Scheme 8).
 Scheme 8  Ru-catalyzed electro-oxidation of methanol. 
The amido alcohol complex 7 oxidizes methanol by four electrons to formate at a rate of 1.35 M−1 s−1 (1 turnover per s). Mechanistic studies reveal that the reaction is promoted by a graphite supported Ru(IV)–oxo complex.
Seok et al. studied the electrochemical properties of rhodium polypyridyl oxo complexes.80 The oxidation of the structurally elucidated complexes [RhIII(bpy)(trpy)(OH2)]3+ and [RhIII(phen)(trpy)(OH2)]3+ by Ce(IV) afforded the spectroscopically characterized oxo-complexes [RhV(O)(bpy)(trpy)]3+ and [RhV(O)(phen)(trpy)]3+, speculated as the first examples of Rh(V) complexes. The authors used the complex [RhIII(phen)(trpy)(OH2)]3+ in homogeneous electro-oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde (TON up to 13). Significantly better results were achieved very recently with rhodium porphyrin catalysts. Yamazaki et al. immobilized the complex [RhIII(Cl)(OEP)] (OEP = 2,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-octaethylporphyrinato; L12 in Fig. 6) on carbon black and applied this system as an anode in the oxidation of ethanol in an alkaline medium.81 Other alcohols such as methanol, propanol, 2-propanol, and benzyl alcohol derivatives also underwent electro-oxidation promoted by [RhIII(Cl)(OEP)]/C at a low-over-potential. The oxidation of benzaldehyde afforded a mixture of benzoic acid and benzyl alcohol. Current densities were relatively low and found to be significantly dependent on the nature and the concentration of the alcohol ranging from 1.2 to maximal 4.8 mW cm−2.
 Fig. 6  Ligands used in Rh and Ir catalyzed electro-oxidation. 
Another electrocatalytically active rhodium porphyrin complex has been recently described by Cosnier et al.82 The rhodium(III) complex with the deuteroporphyrin dimethyl ester ligand (DPDE; L13 in Fig. 6) immobilized on a multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)/Nafion support served as an anode in a glucose fuel cell. At alkaline pH, the two electron redox-couple RhI(DPDE)/RhIII(DPDE) oxidized glucose to gluconate. The experimental findings indicate an oxidative deactivation/reductive reactivation (OD/RR) mechanism which is likely operative in this catalytic electro-oxidation (Scheme 9). At high pH glucoxide and hydroxide ions compete in the coordination with the oxidized form of the rhodium complex and the formation of the [RhIII(OH)(DPDE)] (10) deactivates the catalytic cycle. However, the catalyst is regenerated by the reduction of [RhIII(OH)(DPDE)] (10) to [RhI(DPDE)]− (9). On the other hand, the glucoxide complex [RhIII(OR)(DPDE)] (8) with OR representing deprotonated glucose oxidizes this molecule to gluconate and completes the catalytic cycle forming 9. This molecular catalyst based glucose/O2 fuel cell delivers a power density of 0.182 mW cm−2 at 0.22 V and an open circuit voltage of 0.64 V.
 Scheme 9  Proposed mechanism for Rh-catalyzed oxidation of alcohol. OD = oxidative deactivation, RR = reductive reactivation. 
Bianchini, Vizza, Grützmacher et al. reported a highly selective conversion of ethanol to acetate catalyzed by a rhodium(I) amido complex [Rh(trop2N)(PR3)] which is assessed with the diolefin amine ligand trop2NH (L14 in Fig. 6).83 Different support materials as well as rhodium(I) complexes with different combinations of phosphine ligands and counter ions were tested. Complex 11 [Rh(trop2N){P(4-nBuPh)3}][OAc] deposited on Ketjenblack EC-600JD (Ck) worked as an excellent anode catalyst in a DAFC fuel cell for the oxidation of ethanol affording up to 45% conversion and remaining active in three consecutive galvanometric cycles with catalyst loading as low as 0.1 mg cm−2 (Scheme 10). This example represents the highest specific activity (10000 A gRh−1) achieved in a half cell for ethanol electro-oxidation until now. The system delivers a power density of 18 mW cm−2 and TON = 3850 at 60 °C in an active cell which used a Fe/Co/C cathode exposed to air.
 Scheme 10  Electro-oxidation of ethanol using Rh-complex 11. 
The [Ir(trop2DACH)][OTf] iridium complex (12) with the related diamino diolefin ligand trop2dach (L15 in Fig. 6) was reported to be an excellent catalyst for the highly chemoselective conversion of a broad range of primary alcohols into aldehydes.84 Using very low catalyst loadings (0.01 mol%) in the presence of benzoquinone as a hydrogen scavenger and catalytic amounts of base, the product aldehydes were obtained in good to excellent yields. This catalyst was also successfully employed for the dehydrogenative oxidation of allylic alcohols in the presence of an external oxidant and catalytic amounts of base (Scheme 11).85
 Scheme 11  Ir-catalyzed highly selective oxidation of allylic alcohols. 
Inspired by these results, Bonitatibus et al. applied 12 as a homogeneous electro-oxidation catalyst for the dehydrogenation of alcohols.86 For example, the dehydrogenative oxidation of 4-methoxybenzyl alcohol using Grützmacher's catalyst 12 at an applied potential of −0.06 V (vs. Fc/Fc+) during 20 h gave 32% of p-anisaldehyde (Scheme 12). Running the electrolysis for 96 h gave the aldehyde in 64% yield which corresponds to a faradaic efficiency of 94%.
 Scheme 12  Electro-oxidation of alcohol catalyzed by Ir-complex 12. 


3.2.2. Acceptorless thermal dehydrogenation of alcohols. 
3.2.2.1. Transformations catalyzed by Ru-complexes. 
3.2.2.1.1. Dehydrogenation of alcohols to aldehydes and ketones. 
The dehydrogenation of alcohols under homogeneous conditions to provide hydrogen gas and functionalized organic molecules (aldehydes, ketones and/or carboxylic acid derivatives) has been especially successfully achieved with Ru complexes. An early example of an acceptorless dehydrogenation – that means hydrogen is directly liberated and not transferred to an acceptor molecule – of alcohols was reported by Robinson et al. in 1975. With perfluorocarboxylate complexes [M(OCORF)2(CO)(PPh3)2] (M = Ru, Os; RF = CF3, C2F5 or C6F5) as catalysts and an acid as a proton source a homogeneous catalytic system for the dehydrogenation of primary and secondary alcohols to aldehydes and ketones was developed.87 With low catalyst loadings of complex 13 (0.03 mol%) (Scheme 13) and an excess of trifluoroacetic acid, an initial turnover frequency (TOF) of 8172 h−1 was achieved for benzyl alcohol (converted to benzaldehyde), while inferior TOFs were reached for secondary alcohols (529 h−1 for cyclohexanol). A comparison of relative efficiencies shows that Ru(II) complexes are more active than Os(II) and that carboxylates with enhanced fugitive properties increase the catalytic activity (CF3 > C2F5 > C6F5). Initial coordination of a molecule of alcohol as entry into the catalytic cycle is likely and is indicated by the isolation of the stable adduct [Ru(OCOCF3)2(CH3OH)(CO)(PPh3)2] which is not further converted. The coordinated ROH molecule is internally deprotonated by the coordinated carboxylate ligand under liberation of the free acid. The formed alkoxide complex would subsequently undergo a β-hydride elimination to form an aldehyde (or ketone) and the hydride species [MH(OCORF)(CO)(PPh3)2]. Reaction with the acid leads to H2 formation and closes the catalytic cycle with regeneration of [M(OCORF)2(CO)(PPh3)2] (M = Ru, Os). Methanol as a substrate is not dehydrogenated which is attributed to the slightly stronger α-CH bond in methyl groups when compared to alkyl groups present in higher primary or secondary alcohols. The original Robinson complex was also tested as catalyst for dehydrogenation of alcohols and immobilized on a polystyrene support by Ziolkowski.88 Under comparable reaction conditions, the former authors reported activities that were 6 times higher than those determined by the latter group for secondary alcohols. Primary alcohols were poorly converted. Catalytic activities for secondary alcohols with TOF values up to 250 h−1 (cyclohexanol) were obtained by Garrou et al. who used the complex 14 with a chelating diphosphine instead of the monodentate PPh3 ligands in the Robinson complex.89 The major drawback of these catalytic systems is that they do not show high turnover numbers for primary alcohols as they become deactivated by decarbonylation reactions.
 Scheme 13  Ru-complexes as homogeneous catalysts for the thermal dehydrogenation of primary and secondary alcohols to aldehydes and ketones. 
Cole-Hamilton et al. demonstrated that simple alcohols can be dehydrogenated by using the complex [RuH2(N2)(PPh3)3] (15) and an excess of base. The dehydrogenation of primary and secondary alcohols produced reasonable rates of hydrogen gas (up to TOF = 150 h−1 for EtOH). High temperatures and continuous removal of the generated hydrogen in order to make the reaction irreversible and suppress the hydrogenation of the carbonyl products were required. The Ru catalysts showed significantly increased activity when irradiated with visible light and with EtOH as a substrate a TOF = 210 h−1 was achieved. As previously mentioned for the Robinson catalyst, decarbonylation of the aldehyde products can result in catalyst poisoning by formation of stable and catalytically inactive Ru carbonyl complexes. Irradiation with light may promote the release of CO and regeneration of the active species.90 A mechanism in which the Ru center in the various catalytically active intermediates remains coordinated to all three PPh3 ligands was initially proposed90b while later studies indicated that the active catalyst is generated in a pre-equilibrium involving PPh3 dissociation.90d Bühl et al. inspected computationally four different reaction pathways for alcohol dehydrogenation promoted by the Cole-Hamilton catalyst precursor [RuH2(N2)(PPh3)3] which is assumed to convert to the hydrogen complex [RuH2(H2)(PPh3)3] as active species. In all of them, the rate determining step for hydrogen evolution was found to be the β-hydrogen elimination from a methanol or methoxide complex. The different reaction channels differ by various ligand dissociations (PPh3 or H2) prior to β-hydrogen elimination. Remarkably, it was found that all pathways are competitive with respect to their energy profile.90e Note that the role of base is difficult to assess in this computational study. But the addition of base is clearly necessary to achieve an efficient turn over although also undesired side reactions like decarbonylation and aldol condensations are observed.
Beller et al. have screened a vast variety of Ru precursor complexes in combination with phosphine or amine ligands for the in situ generation of active alcohol dehydrogenation catalysts. Simple mixing of [{RuCl2(p-cymene)}2] 16 with tetramethylethylene diamine (TMEDA) (L16) leads to a catalytic system which shows a remarkable high turnover frequency (TOF > 500 h−1) for the dehydrogenation of 2-propanol. The reaction requires a reaction time up to 11 days and the scope of substrates is limited. The unprecedented stability of this catalytic system (>250 h) indicates that di- or polyamine chelates may have a high potential as steering ligands for future investigations.91 As will be shown below, a compendium of ruthenium complexes bearing non-innocent pincer ligands (PNPs and PNNs) have proven to be very efficient in the dehydrogenation of alcohol substrates. The structurally simple aliphatic PNP ligand L17 cooperates with the Ru centre and during the catalytic dehydrogenation of secondary alcohols a metal–amide N(sp2)/metal–amine N(sp3) interconversion takes place.92 By combining the Ru precursor 17 and an aliphatic PNN pincer-ligand L17 shown in Scheme 13, Beller et al. found a highly efficient catalytic system for the clean dehydrogenation of neat 2-propanol to acetone under neutral conditions at 90 °C with an initial TOF of 8382 h−1 (after 2 h reaction time).93 To date, only very few complexes showed a higher activity (see next section).
Milstein et al. reported that Ru(II) complexes with an electron-donating tBuPNP pincer ligand [tBuPNP = 2,6-bis-(di-tert-butylphosphinomethyl)pyridine] catalyzed the dehydrogenation of secondary alcohols to ketones. A fourfold excess of base with respect to the catalyst was necessary in order to achieve high conversions and selectivity to the corresponding ketone. While the higher concentration of base was detrimental for the selectivity, lower concentrations resulted in reaction inhibition.94 A dinuclear [Ru2(Cl)4(μ2-κ2-N2)(PNN)2] complex 19 based on a hemilabile PNN pincer ligand [PNN = 2(di-tert-butylphosphinomethyl)-6-(diethylaminomethyl)pyridine], showed higher efficiency after activation with 4 equivalents of base (NaOiPr).95 The electron-rich PNP– and PNN–ruthenium(II) pincer complexes which contain a BH4− ligand in the coordination sphere of the metal, [RuH(BH4)(tBu-PNP)] (20) and [RuH(BH4)(tBu-PNN)] (21), showed improved TOFs of 11–19 h−1 in the dehydrogenation of 2-propanol. The catalytic activity of the PNN ruthenium complex is slightly higher than the complex bearing a PNP pincer ligand, which was taken as an indication of the “hemilabile” NEt2 amino group, which is a coordination and de-coordination within the catalytic cycle.96
As mentioned above, the efficient dehydrogenation of primary alcohols to aldehydes is a challenging transformation. The catalytic systems based on the discussed Ru complexes show the tendency to further decarbonylate the aldehydes or to promote the dehydrogenative coupling reaction whereby primary alcohols are converted into their corresponding esters (Tishchenko type reaction; see following section).
3.2.2.1.2. Dehydrogenation of alcohols into esters or acids. 
The direct conversion of alcohols into carboxylic acid derivatives, without the need for a sacrificial oxidant and the only production of H2 as a by-product is a remarkable example of an atom economic process. With alcohols available from biomass as feedstock such a process opens up a realistic environmentally friendly alternative to conventional alcohol oxidations. Before the pioneering work of Murahashi and Shvo, the catalytic dehydrogenation of two equivalents of a primary alcohol to the corresponding “symmetric” ester under evolution of H2 (2R–CH2–OH → R–CO–O–CH2–R + 2H2) was limited to few non-selective heterogeneous systems. Murahashi et al. reported the successful transformation of primary alcohols to esters (Scheme 14A) and of diols to lactones (Scheme 14B) with [RuH2(PPh3)4] (22) as a catalyst.97 Independently, Shvo et al. demonstrated that [(η4-tetracyclone)(CO)3Ru]98 and a related dimeric complex 24 were effective pre-catalysts for the direct oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzyl benzoate, omitting the use of an hydrogen acceptor and insinuating the cooperativity of the cylcopentadienone ligand in the catalytic cycle.99 The concept of metal–ligand cooperativity in dehydrogenative processes has been developed extensively in recent years, especially for dehydrogenation and reversible hydrogenation processes.21 Considerably more efficient catalysts were developed by Milstein et al. and others with the previously mentioned ruthenium pincer complexes shown in Scheme 13. Ruthenium(II) hydride complexes bearing PNP (26) or PNN ligands (19, 27) catalyzed the direct dehydrogenation of two equivalents of alcohols to esters (dehydrogenative coupling reaction, DHC). The reversible aromatization/dearomatization of the central N-heterocycle of the ligand and the hemilability of the amino group were proposed as key-features of a novel dehydrogenation mechanism. RCH2OH → RCHO + H2(8) RCHO + RCH2OH → RCH(OH)(OCH2R)(9) RCH(OH)(OCH2R) → RCO2CH2R + H2(10)
 Scheme 14  Active Ru-catalysts for the conversion of alcohols to esters and H2 according to equations (A)–(E). 
While these complexes require basic conditions in order to achieve respectable turn over numbers, the most efficient catalyst [RuH(CO)(PNN–H)] (25) operates under neutral conditions and is obtained by deprotonation of the PNN ligand and concomitant chloride elimination from [RuH(Cl)(CO)(PNN)] (27). The catalytic activities of the hydrido borohydride Ru(II) pincer complex 21 were also tested with a series of primary alcohols and diols. Esters and lactones, respectively, were obtained as products (see Scheme 14B), with TONs up to 1000 (esters) and 900 (lactones). The complexes do not disproportionate pure benzaldehyde to benzyl benzoate which leads to the following mechanistic proposal including three general reaction steps: dehydrogenation of the alcohol to the aldehyde (eqn (8)), hemiacetal formation from the aldehyde and unreacted alcohol (eqn (9)) and dehydrogenation of the hemiacetal to the corresponding ester (eqn (10)). It is likely, that these steps are involved in all the reactions shown in Scheme 14, that is homo-coupling (A), intramolecular coupling (B), cross-coupling (C), dehydrogenative transesterification (D), and dehydrogenative polymerisations (E).100 The NEt2 amino group in the Milstein complex was replaced by a thioether group resulting in a PNS ligand. Although the thioether “arm” of the PNS complex 29 was expected to be hemilabile, the ligand lacks the ability to serve as an internal base and consequently little selectivity and efficiency was observed with this catalyst.101
Following the dearomatization/aromatization concept as a key-feature of a successful ligand in the catalytic dehydrogenation of alcohols, an acridine-based ruthenium pincer complex [RuHCl(CO)(A-iPr-PNP)] (28) [(A-iPr-PNP) = 4,5-bis-(diisopropylphosphinomethyl)acridine] was prepared. In the presence of catalytic amounts of base (1 equiv. of KOH relative to Ru) a high yield of hexyl hexanoate was obtained from 1-hexanol with TON 4145. The reaction could be controlled to give selectively hexyl acetal under base free conditions (TON 3575).102
The dehydrogenation of ethanol to the symmetric ester and H2 is of particular interest because ethyl acetate (AcOEt) is a widely used industrial bulk chemical. This reaction was extensively studied using heterogeneous catalysts under acceptorless conditions.103 Milstein's Ru based catalytic system is able to promote the effective dehydrogenation of primary and secondary alcohols but only limited activity has been observed with ethanol as a substrate. Gusev et al. studied the steric and electronic factors of the pincer backbone that influence the catalytic activity104 and via extensive screening of known pincer complexes, an optimized catalyst was found for this transformation.105 With low catalyst loadings of [RuClH(HPNPPh)(CO)] (31) [HPNPPh = bis-(2-diphenylphosphinoethyl)amine] in the presence of base, high yields of the ester AcOEt were obtained with a TON of 15400. The addition of precise amounts of base is essential so that under these conditions the most efficient catalytic system for the homogeneously catalyzed dehydrogenation of alcohols is reached.
Cross-dehydrogenative coupling of primary and secondary alcohols (Scheme 14C) has been accomplished using a ruthenium bipyridine pincer complex under neutral conditions by taking advantage of the diminished reactivity of secondary alcohols to undergo dehydrogenation.106,107 The symmetric esterification from primary alcohols was only observed as a minor side reaction.
An interesting example of an atom economic process is the dehydrogenative transesterification reaction outlined in Scheme 14D. When symmetrical esters are reacted with an excess of a secondary alcohol, unsymmetrical esters are obtained as products under the release of two equivalents of hydrogen. Ketones from the secondary alcohols are obtained as by-products.108 The process is efficiently catalyzed by a de-aromatized complex 25 without the need for any additive. Upon transesterification, the released primary alcohol undergoes dehydrogenative coupling with a second equivalent of the secondary alcohol to give an additional equivalent of the unsymmetrical ester.
Typically polyesters are synthesized using a step-by-step polycondensation reaction. This classical simple method tolerates a broad range of substrates but is limited by the low molecular weights of the resulting polymers. Established procedures use the condensation of diacids and diols and at temperatures of about 250 °C, reduced pressure and with Lewis-acids as promoters give polymers in the range Mw 5000 to 10000. The presence of by-products that are retained in the polymer matrix influence the properties of the final polymer. More defined polymer properties are obtained in ring opening polymerization (ROP) of cyclic monomers but here the process is confined by the availability of cyclic monomers. Under these aspects, the polydehydrogenative coupling (see Scheme 14E) of diols with liberation of H2 offers an attractive alternative because a wide range of diol substrates is available and the process is highly atom economic. The dearomatized [RuH(CO)(PNN)] complex 25 served as an efficient catalyst in the dehydrogenative polymerization of α,ω-diols to generate polyesters. The gaseous hydrogen produced was continuously removed under vacuum to drive the equilibrium towards the product side, resulting in the formation of a high molecular weight polymer (Mn up to 145000 g mol−1) and moderately narrow PDI values of 2–3.100c To date, this method can only be applied in the polymerization of diols in which the hydroxyl groups are separated by at least six carbons. Diols with fewer carbons between the hydroxyl functions undergo cyclization to lactones with 1,5-pentanediol as the bifurcation point which under dehydrogenation leads to a mixture of polyester and lactone in a ratio of about 1:2.
Most of the oxidations of alcohols to acids proceed by using stoichiometric amounts of toxic oxidizing agents or the use of pressurized dioxygen. A recent report demonstrated that complex 25 served as a catalyst for the conversion of primary alcohols to carboxylic acids in one-step with water as the terminal oxidant and the reaction proceeded with liberation of two molecules of H2.109 This represents the first example of an efficient metal based catalyst that operates in water and drives this reaction without the addition of a further oxidant.
Ruthenium-based homogeneous catalysts for the production of hydrogen from methanol have been investigated in the past years but they show little activity and selectivity. Most of the reactions unselectively afforded carbon-containing by-products: formaldehyde,110 methyl formate (Scheme 14B),111 formate salts,112 or acetic acid.113 The groups of Beller114 and Grützmacher115 described recently the first efficient aqueous-phase methanol dehydrogenation process, catalyzed in both cases by well-defined ruthenium complexes (33 and 36) bearing cooperative ligands. As mentioned in the introduction, this approach may establish the starting point for the development of methanol as hydrogen storage “material” since the reaction temperatures in both examples lie significantly below 100 °C. At ambient pressure almost the complete 3 equivalents of H2 are released from the H3COH–H2O mixture allowing the direct use of methanol in PEM fuel cells.116
The catalytic cycle for methanol dehydrogenation shown in Scheme 15A was developed by Beller et al. based on the known properties of complexes [RuClH(HPNPPh)(CO)] (30 and 31) in the dehydrogenation of secondary alcohols to ketones or EtOH to AcOEt which was reported by the same authors and Gusev et al.92,105,106 As in the dehydrogenation of higher primary or secondary alcohols, addition of base is essential to remove HCl from the pre-catalyst 33 and generate the bifunctional [Ru(II)PNP] active species 34. The authors propose the activation of a methanol molecule which binds with the acidic protic OH group to the amide function of the catalyst and the (weakly) hydridic α-CH group to the Ru centre (see TS-A in Scheme 15). This interaction triggers the liberation of a hydrogen molecule and transient generation of formaldehyde (H2CO) which is further converted under aqueous alkaline conditions to H2C(OH)2 as a direct precursor of formate (HCO2−) after losing a second molecule of hydrogen. Decomposition of formate to CO2 and a third hydrogen molecule regenerates the active form of the catalyst (Scheme 15A). Very high TONs of 350000 were reported using this catalytic system. A very similar reaction sequence was established in the dehydrogenation reaction with the catalyst [K(dme)2][RuH(trop2dad)] (36). This complex contains the chemically and redox non-innocent diolefin diazadiene ligand trop2dad which participates actively in the alcohol dehydrogenation. The methanol molecule is added across the Ru–N bond and thereby a methoxide group is bound to the metal centre. Activation of the α-C–H bond of the coordinated methoxide occurs and a hydride (H−) is transferred to the diazadiene-backbone of the ligand (see TS-B in Scheme 15) which is fully hydrogenated from a trop2dad ligand to a bis(amino)ethylene ligand (trop2dae). This process is further accompanied by a reduction of the Ru(II) centre to Ru(0) (see Scheme 15B). Model reactions indicate that in this catalytic process, methanol is first dehydrogenated to formaldehyde: MeOH → H2CO + H2, which – likely still coordinated to the metal centre and thereby activated – reacts rapidly with water to form di(hydroxy)methane: H2CO + H2O → H2C(OH)2. This is again catalytically dehydrogenated to formic acid: H2C(OH)2 → HCOOH + H2, which is finally converted to CO2 and H2, with the highest TOF reported to date for the decomposition of pure formic acid (24000 h−1). The dehydrogenation of aqueous methanol proceeds best under slightly basic conditions which are needed to promote the dehydrogenation of the isolated complex 37 to the active hydride complex 36 and to sequestrate the released CO2 as carbonate.
 Scheme 15  Catalyzed sequential decomposition of MeOH–H2O to CO2–3H2 and proposed catalytic cycles for aqueous phase methanol dehydrogenation by Beller and Grützmacher catalysts. 
3.2.2.1.3. Bimolecular dehydrogenation of alcohols and amines to amides. 
The amide group is one of the most common functional groups needed in the synthesis of pharmaceutically active compounds.117 New chemical reactions leading to amide formation are investigated in order to overcome the limitations associated with the need for stoichiometric oxidants or pre-functionalized substrates. Amide bond formation using enzymatic catalysis solves some of these issues, but the narrow substrate specificity of the currently available enzymes limits their practical use. A new reaction for amide formation that may contribute to circumvent these problems is the catalyzed dehydrogenative (intra or intermolecular) coupling of primary alcohols with amines under liberation of H2.
A number of homogeneous catalytic systems have been reported based on Ru complexes with pyridine pincer, carbene or phosphine ligands. Selected examples are given in Scheme 16. The dearomatized Ru–PNN complex 25 catalyses efficiently the transformation of equivalent amounts of alcohols and amines under neutral conditions (TON 1000).118 Likely the mechanism involves the three general steps (a) dehydrogenation of the primary alcohol to an intermediate aldehyde; (b) reaction with the amine to form a hemiaminal and (c) hemiaminal dehydrogenation to give the amide product, similar to eqn (8)–(10) in the case of dehydrogenative coupling of alcohols. When amines of low nucleophilicity (e.g. an aniline derivative) are used, the alcohol competes with the amine in the reaction with the aldehyde and esters are formed as side-products. The reactions selectively convert primary amines while secondary amines such as dibenzylamine do not react. The amidation reactions are sensitive to steric hindrance at the α positions of either the alcohol or the amine. For example the use of sterically hindered 2-methyl-1-butanol and 2-methylhexamine resulted in much lower yields of amides. One further competing reaction is the elimination of water from the hemiaminal to form an imine. This transformation can be influenced by a careful selection of the pincer ligand (see next section).119 The same authors presented recently an example of a catalyst that allows the synthesis of amides from secondary amines using a RuII(PNN) pincer type catalyst (32) containing a bipyridine derivative as a ligand. TONs up to 2750 were obtained in the conversion of secondary amines to tertiary amides.120 Madsen et al. reported the in situ formation of a Ru carbene complex which can also catalyze the dehydrogenative cross coupling of alcohols and amines, although the protocol requires higher catalyst loadings (5 mol%) and the need for rather large, sub-stoichiometric amounts of base.121 Hong et al. introduced the well-defined N-heterocyclic carbene ruthenium complex 39 that catalyzed efficiently the direct amide synthesis from alcohols using secondary amines.122 Another prominent example reported by Crabtree et al. features the easily tunable amidation catalyst (40) which is assessed with aminopyridine and diphosphine chelate ligands. This class of complexes is well known as catalysts for hydrogenation and transfer dehydrogenation reactions and in consequence, based on the principle of microscopic reversibility, catalytic activity can be expected for the reverse process that is dehydrogenation. After an extensive catalyst screening, the authors concluded that the presence of an N–H group in the ligand is essential for the activity of the catalyst and presumed that hydrogen bonding with the substrate favours the hydrogen release.123 Glorious et al. reported the dehydrogenative coupling of primary and secondary amines with methanol to generate formamides promoted by the biscarbene ruthenium complex 41 as a pre-catalyst. The reaction is limited to one example under acceptorless conditions and shows moderate yields. With styrene as a hydrogen acceptor, however, a quantitative conversion of methanol was achieved.124
 Scheme 16  Ru based catalytic system for the one-pot dehydrogenation alcohols and amines to amides. 
Note in this context, that alcohols and amines can be very efficiently coupled (TOF > 10000 h−1; TONs > 10000) using sacrificial hydrogen acceptors and catalysts based on the concept of metal–ligand cooperativity.125,126
By using the dearomatized RuII(PNN) pincer complex 25, dehydrogenative coupling of chiral β-amino alcohols with an amine gave β-hydroxy amides under retention of the configuration and liberation of H2. In the absence of an external amine, intramolecular-dehydrogenative coupling reactions of β-amino alcohols lead to the formation of cyclic or linear peptides. The selectivity of the reaction catalyzed by 25 is strongly influenced by the steric demand of the substituents in the substrate. Large substituents in the α-position to the amino group lead to the formation of the corresponding cyclic dipeptides. In contrast, when (S)-(+)-2-amino-1-propanol is used as a substrate, good yields of polyalanine (73%) are obtained in the dehydrogenation reaction. Hence, this protocol may be indeed developed into a convenient alternative method to traditional peptide syntheses. The dearomatized RuII(PNP) complex 42 leads, on the other hand, to a sequential dehydrogenative coupling and dehydration of β-aminoalcohols to pyrazines (Scheme 17).126a
 Scheme 17  Ru-catalyzed dehydrogenative coupling of β-aminoalcohols to amides, peptides and pyrazines. 
Polyamides, such as nylon and related structures are highly relevant macromolecules and widely used materials. Consequently, any synthetic method giving polyamides and tolerating functional groups is welcome and the dehydrogenative coupling between polyols and polyamines under elimination of hydrogen may be just such a method. Guan and Milstein demonstrated independently that the direct polyamidation reaction using low catalyst loadings of the dearomatized Ru–PNN complex 25 (1 mol%) is feasible (Scheme 18). In an optimization procedure, anisole was identified as the polar solvent for the especially efficient polymerization leading to polyamides with Mn > 13 kD. With the addition of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) the molecular weight was improved to Mn > 22 kD. The reaction shows very high selectivity for amide formation and polyesters were not detected. This atom economic process could become valuable for a low cost production of polyamides applicable in biomaterials under avoidance of waste.126b,c
 Scheme 18  Dehydrogenative coupling diols and diamines to polyamides. 
Similar to the alcohol acylation process, the acylation of amines with liberation of two equivalents of H2 has been likewise achieved with RuII(PNN)-type complexes (Scheme 19). The coordination of both the ester and the amine to the Ru centre followed by intramolecular nucleophilic attack of the pre-activated N–H of the amine on the acyl functionality is proposed as key-step in the mechanism. This reaction proceeds smoothly with ethyl acetate as a convenient acetylating agent of amines.126d
 Scheme 19  Dehydrogenative coupling of esters and amines to amides. 
Details of the proposed reaction mechanism for the Ru–PNN catalyzed amidation have been investigated using density functional theory calculations.127 It has been proposed that initial dehydrogenation of the alcohol occurs by proton transfer to the backbone of the ligand. Pyridine aromatization and formation of the alkoxide Ru complex (43) are the result of this process. Experiments at low temperature (−80 °C) demonstrated that the addition of alcohols to the dearomatized complex 25 resulted in the reversible formation of an alkoxide complex. When the reaction mixture containing the intermediate was warmed to −30 °C, alcohol dehydrogenation occurred and formation of the trans-hydride complex (44) was observed. However no free aldehyde was detected, which was reversibly trapped between the metal centre and the methine carbon of the side arm of the ligand forming a new complex. These findings implied that a typical alkoxide β-hydride elimination may not account for the alcohol dehydrogenation in this case, as it will require an open coordination site in the cis-position and the CO or PNN ligands are not labile at low temperatures. Another possibility supported by the latest calculations involves direct “krypto”-(H+,H−)-hydrogen transfer from the alcohol to the side arm of the ligand and the metal centre reminiscent to the Noyori's bifunctional mechanism.128 In the next step, elimination of dihydrogen from complex 44 would regenerate the active catalyst. The second dehydrogenation of the hemiaminal as a key-intermediate occurs in a very similar manner forming the amide. This prevails as product in this catalytic system relative to the formation of the imine (Scheme 20).
 Scheme 20  Mechanism proposed on DFT computations for the dehydrogenative acylation of amines with alcohols. 
3.2.2.1.4. Tandem dehydrogenative coupling–dehydration reactions with alcohols. 
3.2.2.1.4.1. Conversion of alcohols to acetals. 
While the pyridine pincer Ru complex 25 failed as a catalyst in the conversion of alcohols to acetals, the acridine based species 28 can promote the reaction in the absence of any additive with good efficiency (yields up to 92%). However, only 1-hexanol and 1-pentanol are successfully converted to the corresponding acetals and hydrogen. When base is added, the reaction gives exclusively the symmetric ester as a product. It is proposed that in contrast to the pyridine type ligand in 25, the much longer Ru–N bond and bent central acridine ring enhances the “hemilability” of the ligand, creating a vacant coordination site. Therefore, an alcohol molecule is more readily coordinated and deprotonated by the basic site in the acridine ligand. Subsequently, β-H elimination leads to an aldehyde which reacts with a second molecule of alcohol to form a hemiacetal [see also eqn (8) and (9)]. The hydride form of the catalyst loses one equivalent of H2 and the hemiacetal undergoes a loss of water (dehydration) to the corresponding enol ether intermediate. Finally, the addition of a third molecule of alcohol to the double CC enol bond yields the acetal product shown in Scheme 21.129 With the simple phosphine complex [Ru(SO4)(ACN)2(PPh3)2] (45) as catalyst, also 1-butanol and benzyl alcohol were converted in 44–73% yield at even lower temperatures.130
 Scheme 21  Dehydrogenative coupling–dehydration of alcohols to esters or acetals catalyzed by Ru complexes. 
3.2.2.1.4.2. Conversion of alcohols to imines, pyrazines, or pyrroles. 
The RuII(PNN) and RuII(PNP) pincer type complexes show very different performances in catalytic dehydrogenation reactions. The complex 42 catalyzes under neutral conditions the dehydrogenative coupling of alcohols with amines leading to imines instead of amides and only one equivalent of hydrogen.131 It has been proposed that the formation of amides vs. imines may require that the hemiaminal remains coordinated to the metal and is rapidly dehydrogenated to give an amide. When the hemiaminal dissociates from the metal, simple thermal dehydration to the corresponding imine occurs under the reaction conditions. In the case of Ru(PNP) complexes which lack the hemilabile amine “arm” and are sterically more encumbered, the aldehyde may dissociate more easily from the metal, form free hemiaminal in solution which then eliminate water to give the imine. DFT calculations on this catalytic system are in agreement with the observed selectivity.132
Following the investigation of the amidation of alcohols catalyzed by several ruthenium N-heterocyclic carbene complexes (see Scheme 16), Madsen et al. used a modified catalytic system which consisted of a Ru(II) arene NHC–carbene precursor complex (46), DABCO as base, and molecular sieves to continuously remove water during the reaction. This protocol has been applied with success for the dehydrogenative coupling of benzylic alcohols and sterically hindered primary amines as coupling partners (Scheme 22).133 Huang et al. reported a modified version of pyridine based PNN and PNP pincer ligands in which the CH2 group of the phosphine “arm” is replaced by an NH group in order to influence electronically the deprotonation and dearomatization steps. These new complexes gave interesting preliminary results in the dehydrogenative coupling of two amines to symmetric imines with the concomitant formation of H2 and NH3.134
 Scheme 22  Tandem dehydrogenative coupling and dehydration of alcohols to imines catalyzed by Ru complexes. 
As already mentioned, the combination of 1 mol% of RuII(PNP) complex 26 and one equivalent of base or the direct application of a deprotonated and dearomatized RuII(PNP) complex 42 leads to sequential dehydrogenative coupling and dehydration of β-aminoalcohols to pyrazines. Given that the PNP ligand is less hemilabile, sterically more bulky, and provides no free coordination site for the amino group, one can assume that the aldehyde formed in the first dehydrogenation step dissociates more readily from the metal centre and condenses with a second equivalent of amino alcohol to form a 1,4-dihydropyrazine intermediate. This is subsequently converted in a second dehydrogenative process to give pyrazine as the final product (Scheme 17).
The catalyzed dehydrogenative version of the Paal–Knorr synthesis of pyrroles, using a 1,4-diol instead a 1,4-diketone has been investigated by Crabtree et al. The combination of a diphosphine aminopyridine Ru(II) complex (41) and sodium formate promoted the dehydrogenation of 2,5-hexanediol and condensation with a series of primary amines to the corresponding N-functionalized 2,5-dimethyl pyrroles which were obtained in moderate yields (up to 48%; see Scheme 23A).124
 Scheme 23  Ru-promoted dehydrogenation–dehydration of alcohols and amines to pyrroles. 
Besides the synthesis of peptides and pyrazines from β-amino alcohols under the extrusion of H2, the catalyzed dehydrogenative coupling reaction between amino alcohols with substituents R2 adjacent to the NH2 group and a secondary alcohols resulted in the formation of 2,3-susbtituted pyrroles (Scheme 23B). The reaction is efficiently promoted by ruthenium complex 32 as catalysts with a phosphine bipyridine PNN pincer ligand in combination with a base.135
3.2.2.2. Transformations catalyzed by Os, Rh, Ir, Co, and Re-complexes. 
Besides ruthenium, recently bis(phosphine)–diamine osmium complexes have been utilized in the acceptorless dehydrogenation of alcohols. The bis(phosphine) ferrocene derived osmium complex 47 shown in Scheme 24 showed good reactivity and converted secondary alcohols to the corresponding ketones and hydrogen.136 This complex showed especially good reactivity in the dehydrogenation of homo-allylic alcohols such as the steroidal alcohol shown below. The isomerized α,β-unsaturated ketone was obtained in nearly quantitative yield.
 Scheme 24  Os-catalyzed dehydrogenation of homo-allylic alcohol. 
In 2011, Gusev et al. reported another type of osmium pincer-complexes bearing a PNP-ligand. These complexes were tested in various alcohol dehydrogenation reactions.137 The osmium(II) dihydride complex 48 shown in Scheme 25 was shown to be effective in the dehydrogenative coupling of primary alcohols to afford the corresponding esters and two molecules of hydrogen were released (Tishchenko-type reaction).
 Scheme 25  Os-catalyzed dehydrogenative coupling of primary alcohols. 
Following Milstein's report on the ruthenium catalyzed synthesis of imines from alcohols and amines under clean release of hydrogen, Esteruelas et al. reported a polyhydride osmium complex 49 bearing a pincer-type POP ligand that, in a similar fashion, allowed access to imines (Scheme 26).138
 Scheme 26  Imine synthesis by a polyhydride Os catalyst. 
A plausible mechanism is shown in Scheme 27. The catalytically active complex is accessible from the catalyst precursor 49 by protonolysis which leads to an osmium trihydrido alkoxo complex 50 and H2 as entrance into the catalytic cycle. The saturated complex 50 loses an equivalent of H2 giving the 16 electron complex 51. Via β-hydrogen activation the alkoxy group is converted to the carbonyl species in complex 52. Loss of the aldehyde product molecule – which reacts further with a primary amine to form the imine and water – again generates an unsaturated 16 electron osmium dihydride complex 55 which adds an alcoholic substrate molecule to turn the catalytic cycle over. This mechanistic proposition is bolstered to some extent by the isolation of complex 53 with R = Ph. This complex converts to the carbonyl complex 54 which is inactive and turns off the catalytic cycle. Furthermore, assuming an equilibrium between dihydride 55 and the aldehyde complex 52, which is shifted towards 52 with increasing aldehyde concentration, rather fast catalyst deactivation via the exit to 53 and 54 can be explained as the alcohol conversion progresses. Strong bases lead to better catalytic performance by facilitating the imine formation and thereby preventing the decarbonylation of the aldehyde.
 Scheme 27  Mechanistic hypothesis for the Os-catalyzed imine synthesis. 
This catalytic system allowed for the formation of aromatic as well as aliphatic imines in high yields, the latter being more challenging to synthesize. An advantage of this over Milstein's catalytic system relies on its shorter reaction time while the requirement of osmium as rather toxic and expensive metal is a drawback.
In late 1980s, Cole-Hamilton et al. reported the first hydrogen evolution from ethanol catalyzed by a rhodium complex in a thermal homogeneous process.139 Using [Rh(Cl)(bipy)2] as the catalyst and in the presence of sodium hydroxide, decomposition of ethanol (containing 5% of water) was effected with TOFs up to 100 h−1 generating hydrogen, methane and carbon dioxide gases (eqn (11)).140 CH3CH2OH + H2O ⇌ CH4 + CO2 + 2H2(11)
A mechanistic proposal is shown in Scheme 28. The interesting point of the catalytic cycle is the formation of a [Rh(CO)]+ species (59) via complex 58 in a decarbonylation reaction of a metal bound acyl group (57). In the presence of strong alkaline base, rapid nucleophilic attack of the hydroxide group leads to the formation of [Rh(CO2H)] (60) which decarboxylates to the hydride [Rh(H)] (61). The high basicity of 61 allows the protonation generating the [Rh(H)2]+ (62) species in spite of the alkaline environment. The species 62 loses H2 as the final step in the Rh-catalyzed water–gas shift reaction, H2O + CO → H2 + CO2. However, this catalytic system was not very efficient in the dehydrogenation of methanol.
 Scheme 28  Proposed catalytic cycle for the Rh-catalyzed decomposition of ethanol. 
The same group reported also a process where secondary alcohols namely, 2-propanol and 2,3-butanol, were dehydrogenated using a Rh(I)-catalyst producing hydrogen gas and the corresponding carbonyl compounds.141
Rhodium(I) catalyzed thermal dehydrogenation of 2-propanol was reported by Saito et al.142 The simple rhodium hydrido complex [Rh(H)(PPh3)4] (64) in the presence of excess triphenylphosphine and triethylamine as additives, dehydrogenated 2-propanol generating equimolecular amounts of hydrogen and acetone. The proposed catalytic cycle is depicted in Scheme 29. In the presence of triethylamine, the alkoxide ion of the corresponding alcohol is generated. From that, the alkoxide complex 66 is formed via complex 65, which is obtained by dissociation of one equivalent of Ph3P. Subsequent β-hydride elimination afforded the acetone complex 67, that after liberating acetone formed the Rh(I)–dihydride complex 68. Subsequent proton transfer to the metal centre from [Et3NH]+ gives the trihydride 69. In the presence of triphenylphosphine, this complex loses one equivalent of molecular hydrogen and the catalytic cycle is closed with the regeneration of 64.
 Scheme 29  Plausible catalytic pathway for the Rh-catalyzed dehydrogenation of 2-propanol. 
In 1987, Lu et al. discovered that Crabtree's iridium pentahydride complex [Ir(H)5(PiPr3)2] (70) can be used for the dehydrogenative oxidation of secondary alcohols in the absence of any hydrogen or hydride ion acceptor.143 A range of secondary alcohols both cyclic and acyclic were dehydrogenated to produce the corresponding ketone in moderate to high yield and TONs up to 150 were reached. The reactions were performed in hexamethylsiloxane as a solvent at a temperature of about 100 °C (Scheme 30).144
 Scheme 30  Dehydrogenative oxidation of cyclohexanol catalyzed by a polyhydride Ir-complex. 
In the polyhydride complexes involved in the catalytic process, a dynamic equilibrium between classical dihydrides H–[M]–H and η2-dihydrogen complexes [M]–(H2) was proposed that leads to continuous hydrogen evolution. The proposed mechanism for this transformation is shown in Scheme 31. The initial reductive H2 loss from the 18 valence electron configured pentahydride with iridium (71) in the oxidation state +5 generates the 16 electron Ir(III) complex [Ir(H)3(PiPr3)2] (72) with a free coordination site. This allows the addition of an alcohol molecule whereby the catalytic cycle is triggered. The subsequent loss of another H2 molecule is followed by β-hydrogen activation of the metal bound O–CHR2 group and formation of the carbonyl function in the coordination sphere of the iridium centre. The loss of the product molecule regenerates the Ir(III) catalyst 72 and turns the catalytic cycle over.
 Scheme 31  Proposed mechanism for the Ir-catalyzed dehydrogenation of alcohol. 
Based on the concept of “ligand-promoted dehydrogenation”, Fujita and Yamaguchi et al. has developed Ir(Cp*) derived complexes 76–79 with iridium in the oxidation state +3 that are able to oxidize primary and secondary alcohols and liberate molecular hydrogen (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Ir(III) complexes used in the ligand-promoted dehydrogenation of alcohol. 
Complex 76 can dehydrogenate aromatic, aliphatic, and cyclic secondary alcohols in refluxing toluene in the absence of any additives. The highest TON of 2120 was obtained when the reaction was performed in refluxing xylene (approx. 140 °C) in the presence of 0.025% of catalyst 76 (Scheme 32) and needed extended reaction times (100 h).145
 Scheme 32  Dehydrogenation of secondary alcohol catalyzed by complex 76. 
Complex 76 was not efficient for the dehydrogenation of primary alcohols. But the Ir(Cp*) complex 77 with a C,N-chelating ligand is able to oxidize primary alcohols in moderate to good yields in the presence of bases such as Na(OMe) and Na(HCO3). The oxidation of the aromatic and aliphatic secondary alcohols was achieved with excellent yields under neutral reaction conditions and relatively low catalyst loadings (0.1 mol%) (Scheme 33).146
 Scheme 33  Dehydrogenation of alcohols catalyzed by complex 77. 
In the saturated 18 valence electron Ir(III) complexes 76 and 77 the ligands play a cooperative role as shown in the proposed mechanism for this dehydrogenative oxidation of alcohols (Scheme 34). In the first step a chloride ligand is substituted by an alkoxy group when 76 or 77 were treated with the corresponding alcohol. In the next step, β-hydride elimination occurs in the resulting iridium alkoxy complexes 80 and 83, which generates iridium–hydride species 81 and 84 respectively and carbonyl compounds as products. Intramolecular protonolysis of 81 and 84 with hydroxyl groups on the ligand (cooperative metal–ligand effect) generates one equivalent of molecular hydrogen. Finally, the resulting iridium oxypyridyl complex 82 containing a four-member N,C,O-metallaheterocycle or the iridium pyridonate complex 85 react with alcohol molecules to give back the alkoxy iridium complexes 80 and 83 respectively and another catalytic cycle is started.
 Scheme 34  Proposed catalytic cycle for the oxidation of alcohols catalyzed by 76 and 77. 
A further step forward towards a more efficient catalytic system working under environmentally friendly conditions was achieved when the same group introduced the dicationic iridium(III) complex 78 bearing a 2,2-bis(hydroxy)bipyridine ligand.147 This complex performed the dehydrogenative oxidation of secondary and primary alcohols in good to excellent yields with TONs up to 2550 in aqueous media. The advantage of this water soluble catalyst system is that the aldehydes or ketones can be extracted into an organic solvent which allows separating the products from the catalyst by simple phase separation. This procedure also allows recycling the catalyst and it was shown that the iridium complex could be used eight times without significant loss in catalytic activity (Scheme 35).
 Scheme 35  Schematic presentation of reusability of the water soluble catalyst 78. 
The efficiency of this catalytic system with complex 78 was demonstrated with the transformation of various primary and secondary alcohols.
The neutral iridium complex 79 with a dianionic bipyridonate ligand is related to 78 and is obtained by double deprotonation of the hydroxyl groups. The neutral complex 79 achieved the oxidation of secondary alcohols under mild reaction conditions (at 36 °C).148 At elevated temperatures, in refluxing p-xylene (138 °C), the dehydrogenation of 1-phenylethanol proceeded with high efficiency and TONs up to 275000 was reached (Scheme 36). Benzyl alcohol afforded benzaldehyde in refluxing toluene (111 °C) and released hydrogen gas with TONs up to 47500 (Scheme 36).
 Scheme 36  Dehydrogenative oxidation of alcohols using catalyst 79. 
In parallel to this work, Rauchfuss et al. reported dehydrogenative oxidation of 1-phenylethanol under liberation of molecular hydrogen utilizing the related complex [Ir(Cl)(Cp*)(Hcmhp)] (86) as catalyst.149 In comparison to Fujitas catalysts, 85 showed moderate dehydrogenating activity (TONs up to 339) (Scheme 37).
 Scheme 37  Cp*–Ir(III) catalyzed dehydrogenation of a secondary alcohol. 
Another example of ligand assisted acceptorless dehydrogenation of alcohols was reported by Gelman et al.150 The iridium pincer complex 87 showed catalytic activity for the transformation of a variety of primary and secondary alcohols into the corresponding aldehydes and ketones, respectively, and TONs up to 3600 were reached. The suggested key-steps in the reaction mechanism with this complex are presented in Scheme 38. Again, metal–ligand cooperativity is proposed. In complex 87, the protic hydroxyl group interacts with the hydrido ligand and facilitates the release of one H2 molecule. The resulting cyclic iridium alkoxy complex 88 reacts subsequently with the alcohol substrate to regenerate 87 and one equivalent of product. This mechanistic proposal is bolstered by the isolation of complex 88 which was also structurally characterized with X-ray diffraction methods.
 Scheme 38  Ligand promoted dehydrogenative oxidation of alcohol catalyzed by complex 87. 
Catalyst 87 is air-sensitive which limits its application. Furthermore, it cannot be easily recycled. In order to circumvent these drawbacks, Gelman et al. incorporated the iridium catalyst 87 in a sol–gel matrix and thereby obtained a heterogenized catalytic system.151 Although the immobilized catalyst needed higher reaction temperatures and higher catalyst loadings when compared to the iridium complex in the homogeneous phase, the entrapment of the complex in the sol–gel afforded a recyclable catalyst that was capable of running five consecutive cycles without considerable loss in catalytic activity. This catalytic system cleanly converts secondary alcohols to the corresponding ketones. However, in the dehydrogenation of primary alcohols, RCH2OH, a Tishchenko-type reaction was observed and the carboxylic esters were obtained as the major product (Scheme 39). This finding indicates that aldehydes, RCHO, as intermediates react with non-reacted starting material to the corresponding hemi-acetals, RCH(OH)(OCH2R). These are then significantly more rapidly dehydrogenated than the alcohols used as starting materials.
 Scheme 39  Dehydrogenative coupling of alcohol using the immobilized catalyst 87. 
In a recent study aimed at transfer hydrogenation of ketones and enones, Zhang et al. discovered the dehydrogenating properties of a cationic “abnormal” N-heterocyclic carbene iridium complex 89.152 This iridium complex was able to dehydrogenate benzyl alcohol to benzyl benzoate in 52% yield under the release of two molecules of hydrogen (Scheme 40).
 Scheme 40  Use of a carbene–Ir complex in dehydrogenative coupling of alcohol. 
Madsen et al. reported the dehydrogenative decarbonylation of primary alcohols to hydrocarbons liberating syngas as the further product. For example, 2-naphthyl alcohol was converted to naphthalene using [Ir(coe)2Cl]2 as the catalyst and rac-BINAP as the ligand. A mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen was produced in the absence of any scavenger.153 In a plausible mechanism (Scheme 41), two consecutive catalytic cycles operating in parallel were proposed. The first one consists of a catalytic alcohol dehydrogenation yielding an aldehyde via a classical β-hydrogen activation of a primary alkoxy substrate coordinated to an iridium centre (91). This reaction leads to an iridium dihydride complex 93 from which H2 is lost. The resulting highly unsaturated 14 valence electron configured iridium complex 90 oxidatively adds an aldehyde molecule via a C–H activation reaction and triggers the second decarbonylation cycle (Scheme 41). Besides the high reaction temperature, the major drawback of this reaction is the contamination of the hydrogen with carbon monoxide which makes the gas unusable in a fuel cell.
 Scheme 41  Postulated catalytic cycle for the dehydrogenative decarbonylation of alcohol. 
An iridium pincer complex 97 bearing a bis(phosphinite)benzene ligand has been successfully applied in the dehydrogenation of secondary alcohols. Dehydrogenative oxidation of 1-phenylethanol afforded acetophenone with TONs up to 3420 under liberation of molecular hydrogen (Scheme 42).154
 Scheme 42  Oxidation of alcohol catalyzed by the pincer Ir-complex 97. 
In early 2013, Kempe et al. communicated a remarkable iridium catalyzed new synthesis of pyrroles from secondary alcohols and amino alcohols which proceeds under H2 production.155 In this reaction, the secondary alcohol and the amino alcohol were dehydrated and eliminated two equivalents of hydrogen molecules. Air and moisture stability of the iridium complex 98 and its high functional group tolerance combined with the fact that it offers highly substituted and bicyclic pyrroles makes this method an excellent choice for the synthesis of such heterocycles with very high atom economy (Scheme 43).
 Scheme 43  Synthesis of pyrroles using Ir-catalyst 98. 
Activity of cobalt(II) pincer complexes in the dehydrogenation of alcohols was reported by Hanson et al.156 Co(II) complexes 99 and 100 ligated with aliphatic PNP pincer ligands converted 1-phenylethanol to acetophenone in high yields (Scheme 44). Comparable reactivity of both the complexes showed the little importance of the N-methyl substituent on the PNP ligand.
 Scheme 44  Dehydrogenative oxidation of alcohol using Co(II) catalysts. 
A Co(III) aryl hydride complex 101 was isolated when the alcohol was reacted with complex 99 (Scheme 45). Deuterium labeling experiments identified cleavage of the α-C–H bond to be involved in this reaction.
 Scheme 45  Synthesis of Co(III) complex 101. 
Complex 101 was found to have a similar catalytic activity as compared to its parent complex 99 and hence, 101 was proposed to be the resting state of the catalyst in the mechanistic hypothesis presented in Scheme 46. Starting from 101 reductive elimination generates the cobalt(I) complex 102 which now can undergo a ligand exchange with another molecule of alcohol followed by an oxidative addition to give the cobalt(III) alkoxide complex 103. The dihydride complex 104 was formed by β-hydride elimination of acetophenone. Removal of molecular hydrogen from 104 regenerated the Co(I) complex 102.
 Scheme 46  Proposed mechanism for Co-catalyzed dehydrogenative oxidation of alcohol. 
By the end of 2013, Abu-Omar et al. reported his findings on acceptorless dehydrogenation of alcohols using unsupported rhenium nanocrystalline particles (Re/NPs) as the catalyst.157 When NH4ReO4 was refluxed at 180 °C in alcohol, Re/NPs (2 nm) were formed that oxidized an alcohol liberating molecular hydrogen. This catalyst system showed excellent activity in the oxidation of a variety of secondary alcohols to the corresponding ketones (up to 100% conversion) with a very good selectivity (up to 99%). Primary alcohols, with the exception of benzyl alcohol (55% benzaldehyde formation) showed poor conversion in this method for dehydrogenative oxidation. The kinetic isotope effect was determined (inverse KIE = 0.38) and indicates that a distinctive γ-CH activation is involved in this mechanism (Scheme 47).
 Scheme 47  Catalytic cycle for the oxidation of secondary alcohol catalyzed with Re(0) nanoparticles. 
It is proposed that the alcohol oxidatively adds to the Re/NPs represented as Re(0) in Scheme 47, and the resulting alkoxy Re(II) species 105 after γ-C–H activation affords the Re(IV) metallacycle 107. After ring opening and proton release, the α,β-unsaturated alkoxy Re(II) compound (108) is generated. The Re–O bond in this intermediate is cleaved by protonolysis and the α,β-unsaturated alcohol which isomerizes to the ketone is eliminated. The Re(II) dihydride (109) is formed which undergoes reductive elimination of one equivalent of hydrogen whereby Re(0) is regenerated and the catalytic cycle turns over.


3.2.3. Photochemical dehydrogenation of alcohols. 
3.2.3.1. Mononuclear complexes. 
The principle of microscopic reversibility dictates that any complex that is active for hydrogenation of a carbonyl compound should in principle also be active for the dehydrogenation of an alcohol. For that reason, well-known hydrogenation catalysts were investigated for the dehydrogenation of alcohols. Decarbonylation of the oxidized product has to be expected as an undesired side reaction, because many of the classical coordinatively unsaturated complexes involved in thermal hydrogenation/dehydrogenation reactions catalyse this follow-up reaction as well. In order to make the dehydrogenations irreversible, the reactions were performed under radiation with light. Sugi158 and Smith et al.159 discovered that the efficiency of the photolytic hydrogen generation is enhanced with Wilkinsons catalyst [RhCl(PPh3)3] (in the presence of an excess of PPh3 or Ph3PO). The authors observed that the catalyst was more efficient under aerobic conditions, required an induction period, and the catalyst performance was strongly dependent on the photon energy. The role of oxygen in the reaction remains speculative, but it was proposed that de-coordinated PPh3 becomes oxidized to Ph3PO which is a weak binding ligand and hence higher concentrations of unsaturated active Rh complexes are achieved. With the phosphite complex [RhCl(P(OPh)3)3], TONs of 6410 h−1 for the dehydrogenation of 2-propanol were attained under radiation with UV light at room temperature. Light with longer wavelengths (λ > 400 nm) did not promote the reaction. The role of the photons is unclear but likely are involved in the photoextrusion of H2 from the intermediate Rh(III) hydride complex [RhCl(H)2(PPh3)2L] (L = substrate). Vaska-type complexes like [RhX(PR3)2(CO)] have also been employed as photocatalysts in the dehydrogenation of 2-propanol.160 The efficiency of the reaction reached a maximum with PR3 = PEt3 and X = I achieving TOFs of 1114 h−1 at 84 °C. Importantly, the generation of hydrogen was best when the irradiation wave lengths (340–420 nm) coincided with that required for the removal of CO from the coordination sphere of the metal. This observation strongly supports a 14e− [RhX(PR3)2] fragment as the active catalytic species (Table 2).
Table 2 Active mononuclear complexes for the hydrogen production from secondary and primary alcohols under photolytic conditions




Catalyst
Alcohol
Product
Additives

λ
exc (nm)

T (°C)
TOF (h−1)
TON (H2)
Ref.





a Detected traces of ethanal and condensation products.





[RhCl(PPh3)3]
2-Propanol
Acetone
—
<300
21
—
5370

159



[RhCl(P(OPh)3)3]
2-Propanol
Acetone
—
<300
21
—
6410

159



[RhCl(CO)2]2
2-Propanol
Acetone
—
<300
21


2980

159



[RhBr(PEt3)2(CO)]
2-Propanol
Acetone
—
340–420
84
750
—

160



[RhI(PEt3)2(CO)]
2-Propanol
Acetone
—
340–420
84
1114
—

160



[RhBr(PMe3)2(CO)]
2-Propanol
Acetone
—
340–420
84
810
—

160



[RhH(PiPr3)3]
EtOH
H2–CH4
—
—
150
0.9
—

162



[RhH(PiPr3)3]
EtOH
H2–CH4–CO
—
>400
150
6.2
—

162



[RuH2(N2)(PPh3)3]
EtOH
H2–CH4–CO
—
>400
150
14.5
—

162



[RuH2(N2)(PPh3)3]
EtOH
H2–CH4–CO2
NaOH
>400
150
210
—

161



[RuH2(PPh3)4]
EtOH
H2–CH4–CO2
NaOH
>400
150
138
—

161



[RhH(PiPr3)3]
EtOH
H2–CH4–CO2
NaOH
>400
150
23
—

162



[Rh(bipy)2]Cla
EtOH
H2–CH4–CO2
NaOH
>400
120
95
—

161





The photochemical dehydrogenation of primary alcohols like ethanol can be catalyzed by classical hydrogenation catalysts such as [RhCl(PPh3)3], [RhH(PiPr3)3], [RhH(PiPr3)3], [RhCl(bipy)2], [RuH2(N2)(PPh3)3] and [RuH2(PPh3)4].161 Under photochemical conditions, EtOH was catalytically dehydrogenated to give H2, CH4, and CO. If the poisonous CO, which is formed in a catalyzed decarbonylation reaction of aldehydes as intermediates, can be removed efficiently from the product mixture (by water gas shift reaction, see eqn (7)), the overall decomposition of alcohols proceeds according to eqn (12) leading to hydrocarbons and hydrogen as energetic materials and CO2. RCH2OH + H2O → RH + CO2 + 2H2(12)
This reaction involves the addition of OH− to coordinated CO promoting the release of CO2 and the formation of a metal hydride. Indeed, Cole-Hamilton et al. reported the improved hydrogen release from a wide range of primary and secondary alcoholic substrates with rates up to 1000 h−1 when the metal complex [RuH2(N2)(PPh3)3] was combined with a base to give a catalytic system that operated under photochemical and thermal conditions (150 °C).139,162
Sadow et al. showed that a photocatalytic deoxygenation of alcohols could be accomplished through a tandem dehydrogenation/decarbonylation process without sacrificial reagents promoted by the complex [Rh(ToM)(CO)2] (110) [ToM = tris(4,4-isopropyl-2-oxazolinyl)phenylborate]. A wide scope of primary alcohols was efficiently converted into alkanes, CO, and H2.163 Although many mechanistic details remain speculative, the authors demonstrated that (a) CO dissociation from the complexes [Rh(ToM)(CO)2] (110) and [Rh(ToM)H2(CO)] (112) is required to allow alcohol dehydrogenation, (b) alcohols are more reactive than aldehydes towards [Rh(ToM)(CO)] (111), and (c) [Rh(ToM)H2] (113) formation and catalytic turnover is limited by a competition between CO and the substrate for coordination sites at the metal. These observations are in agreement with the proposed mechanistic cycle shown in Scheme 48.
 Scheme 48  Photocatalytic dehydrogenation of primary alcohols to alkanes and a proposed mechanism mediated by hydrido rhodium species. 
Metal porphyrins have been also used as a photocatalyst in alcohol dehydrogenation. Ogoshi et al. reported in 1977 that hydrogen gas was evolved by heating a solution containing an hydridoporphyrin rhodium complex [Rh(OEP)H] (OEP = octaethylporphyrin, L12 in Fig. 4). Wayland et al. reported two years later that the hydrogen release rate is significantly enhanced under photochemical conditions.164,165 Based on these findings, Saito et al. developed a catalytic process where the tetraphenyl porphyrin rhodium(III) complex [RhIII(TPP)Cl] (114) promoted the dehydrogenation of secondary alcohols. Neat 2-propanol166 or cyclohexanol167 were dehydrogenated to the corresponding ketones at reflux temperatures and radiation with visible light (λ > 360 nm) and long irradiation times. TOFs of 7 h−1 and TONs of 3430 were reached. The speculative photocatalytic cycle proposed by Saito et al. is shown in Scheme 49. The trivalent species [RhIII(TPP)]+ (118) reacts with 2-propanol to give acetone, [RhI(TPP)]− (116) and two proton equivalents. This dehydrogenative oxidation of the alcohol is not dependent on the radiation process. The complex [RhI(TPP)]− (116) is then protonated to the complex [RhIII(TPP)H] (117). Kinetic studies indicated that the reaction between a (π–π*)-photoexcited 117* and a ground-state molecule of [RhIII(TPP)H] results in the formation of H2. The species [RhIII(TPP)]+ (118) and [RhI(TPP)]− (116) are obtained as products in a disproportion reaction. These intermediates activate a 2-propanol molecule and regenerate [RhIII(TPP)H] (117) and [RhIII(TPP)OiPr] (115) whereby the catalytic cycle is closed.
 Scheme 49  Mechanism for the photocatalytic dehydrogenation of 2-propanol with Rh porphyrin complexes [RhIII(TPP)X]. 
3.2.3.2. Binuclear complexes. 
Initial studies by Saito168 have shown that homogeneous catalytic systems based on rhodium–tin complexes dehydrogenate secondary alcohols although with low catalyst efficiencies. A mixture of RhCl3, SnCl2, and LiCl dehydrogenated 2-propanol using UV light (254 nm) under reflux conditions achieving rates of TOF 6 h−1(Φ > 1). In a following communication the same authors reported their investigations on the influence of the catalyst composition, temperature, and wave-length of radiation on the efficiency of the reaction. A TOF of 88 h−1 was attained and the quantum efficiency at 254 nm was estimated to be 2.2 at 82 °C. In order to rationalize quantum yields >1, a mechanism was proposed in which irradiation into a M(dp) → Sn(p*) transition induces photolytic cleavage of the Rh–Sn bond and generates the coordinatively unsaturated active catalyst which is proposed to dehydrogenate 2-propanol thermally for several turnovers before it is trapped by ligand recombination with SnCl3−. The re-coordination of the tin ligand is assumed to be a fast process and no catalytic activity is observed when the irradiation source is switched off (Scheme 50).169
 Scheme 50  Proposed mechanism of the catalytic cycle for 2-propanol dehydrogenation with Sn(II)-coordinated metal complexes (X = Cl−, SnCl3−). 
A quantum yield of 12 for the same reaction was obtained with a Sn(II)–Ir(III) bimetallic complex, where the active catalyst was suggested to be either trans-IrIIICl2(SnCl3)43− or IrIIIH(SnCl3)53−.170 Photocatalytic dehydrogenation activities of bimetallic IrIII–SnII complexes formed in situ from IrCl3–SnCl2–LiCl mixtures were obtained for methanol decomposition to molecular hydrogen and methoxyethane in an equimolecular ratio (TOF 1.1 h−1). Addition of aqueous HCl enhanced the photocatalytic reaction rates up to 2.9 h−1. Thermo- and photocatalytic dehydrogenation of 2-propanol was subsequently studied with a catalyst formed by simply mixing RuCl3 with SnCl2 in HCl aq. Spectroscopic studies indicated the formation of [Ru(SnCl3)6]4− and [RuCl(SnCl3)5]4− and the latter as the catalytically active species. As postulated for other M–Sn based catalysts, the dehydrogenation reaction of alcohols is mediated by unsaturated species formed by SnCl3− dissociation upon irradiation and hydrido Ru intermediates may play an important role in the dehydrogenation.171
Alcohol dehydrogenation accompanied by H2 evolution may also be accomplished by homonuclear bimetallic late transition metal complexes. Methanol and 2-propanol are photocatalytically dehydrogenated upon irradiation with cis-[Rh2(μ-Cl2)(dpm)2 (CO)2] or [Pd2(μ-Cl2)(dpm)2] as catalysts (dpm = bis(diphenylphosphino)methane).172,173 For methanol dehydrogenation the reaction rate was greatly enhanced by adding 10% acetone from TOF = 2.2 h−1 to 130 h−1. The Pd complex showed a slightly better performance (TOF = 156 h−1). Analysis of the gas phase demonstrated the presence of H2 and traces of CH4, while analysis of the liquid phase indicated the formation of formaldehyde, dimethoxymethane, ethylene glycol, 2,3-dimethyl-2,3-butanediol, 2-propanol and 2-methyl-1,2-propanediol. This product spectrum points to condensation and hydrogen transfer processes. The product distribution is significantly dependent on the type of catalyst employed. While Rh catalysts favour the formation of ethylene glycol and formaldehyde, Pd based complexes give formaldehyde and its dimethyl acetal as major products. The authors investigated the rate, product distribution and quantum efficiency dependence of the acetone concentration and wavelength of the irradiation for the Rh-catalyzed reaction. Control experiments using only acetone and no transition metal catalyst showed low catalytic activity and a markedly different product ratio. It was assumed that direct excitation into the n → π* transition of the acetone molecule (λ < 312 nm) initiated the reaction and generated a ketyl radical and ˙CH2OH from methanol. Subsequent reaction of the Rh catalyst with the organic radicals yields formaldehyde, acetone and a rhodium hydride intermediate.
In 1977 Sperline et al.174 reported an intense luminescence from a Pt(II) compound that was later identified as a dimer [Pt2(μ-P2O5H2)4]4− (Pt2) (119) containing bridging P,P-bonded pyrophosphito ligands.175,176 The electronic spectroscopy and photochemistry of these binuclear d8–d8 complexes have been studied extensively. The room temperature absorption spectrum of Pt2 exhibits an intense band at 360 nm and a weak band at 450 nm that are assigned to the dσ*pσ singlet and triplet states (1A1g → 1A2u and 1A1g → 3A2u).174 Photophysical studies confirm that the properties of the photoactive excited state are a consequence of d8–d8 metal–metal interactions. An unusual feature of the complex is that aqueous solutions show an intense green emission at 514 nm. This long lived phosphorescence (τ = 9.8 μs) from a triplet excited state is accompanied by a shorter lived fluorescence (8–40 ps) at 407 nm. Triplet Pt*2 is a one-electron reductant in aqueous solution and these reactions likely occur via an inner-sphere pathway at the vacant axial site of the Pt2 dimer. Pt*2 can also react as a free radical with an unpaired electron residing in a ds* orbital that is localized at an axial site. This free radical reactivity is manifested by atom-transfer reactions that occur without prior electron transfer. The 3A2u excited state of Pt*2 abstracts hydrogen from a number of organic and organometallic substrates. In a pioneering report from Roundhill et al., the binuclear species Pt2 was established as the first photocatalytic system of platinum(II) complexes that converts isopropyl alcohol into acetone and hydrogen (TON of 400, TOF 133 h−1).177 From detailed studies of this system it was concluded that the first step is the abstraction of the α-hydrogen from 2-propanol by 3Pt*2 to form a divalent-trivalent dinuclear monohydride-bridged species PtII(μ-H)PtIII (120) (detected by transient absorption spectroscopy).178 Pinacol is found as a by-product from the photoreaction and supports the suggestion of the formation of isopropyl radical intermediates. The mixed valence intermediate PtII(μ-H)PtIII (120) abstracts a second H atom to form the trivalent dihydride, PtIII(μ-H)2PtIII (121), in analogy to the previously reported work on the thermal oxidation chemistry of Pt2 complexes.179,180 The complex PtIII(μ-H)2PtIII thermally or photochemically reductively eliminates H2 (Scheme 51). Gray et al. reported that Pt2 is also a photochemical catalyst for the conversion of EtOH in hydrogen and acetaldehyde (TON = 33, TOF = 4.7 h−1).181 The proposed mechanism is shown in Scheme 51 and the reaction has been applied to numerous secondary alcohols as substrates using also iridium(I) dinuclear complexes as catalysts.182
 Scheme 51  Mechanism for the photogeneration of H2 from 2-propanol catalyzed by 119. 
3.2.3.3. Polymetallic complexes. 
Polyoxometalates (POMs) are molecular oxides that contain early transition metals (usually M = Mo, W, less frequently V, Nb, Ta) in their highest oxidation states (d0, d1). These aggregates may contain a variety of heteroatoms like P, As, Si, and Ge as few examples. Two general types of POM polyanions are distinguished in aqueous solutions: (i) isopolyanions [MnOm]p− and (ii) heteropolyanions (HPA) of general formula XsMmOny−. The arrangement of twelve metal atoms (M = V, Nb, Ta, Mo, W) around one single heteroatom (X) form the basis of so-called Keggin structures where X/M = 1/12. The combination between two lacunary Keggin monomers XW9O34z− yields a dimer denominated Dawson POM, where X/M = 2/18. The assembly of two or several Keggin or Dawson fragments leads to the formation of more complex structures.183 One of the most significant properties of POMs is their ability to participate in reversible electron transfer processes without decomposition or change in the structure. POMs can be activated by near-UV photons in the presence of organic compounds (alcohols, acids) and give rise to blue species (HPB = heteropolyblue) with concomitant oxidation of organic compounds. In anaerobic solution, oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes or ketones by photoexcited POMs is accompanied by H2 production. It was shown by several groups that it is crucial to use a cluster which can undergo multiple electron reductions in order to prevent cluster decomposition and allow catalytic turn-over.184 Under aerobic conditions, the reduced HPBs are oxidized generating water as the by-product.185 Papaconstantinou et al. examined these processes in detail.186 The low-energy electronic transitions are due to inter valence charge transfer (IVCT) bands within the lattice of polyoxymetallate. The HPBs are ESR active and at low temperatures give signals with hyperfine couplings indicative of localization of the unpaired spin on a single metal centre. The products obtained after two-electron reduction products are EPR-silent, indicating strong antiferromagnetic coupling of the unpaired spins within the lattice.187 As the clusters typically contain oxidized d0 metal centres, light absorption is mainly due to (2n)O → (d)M ligand-to-metal charge transfer bands in the region of 200–500 nm and as a result the excited state possesses significant radical character on oxygen.188,189 In general, two possible mechanisms are accepted depending if the reaction proceeds in the absence or presence of water molecules. Water molecules will attach to the cluster shell by hydrogen bonding. After photoexcitation of the M–O bonds, the bound H2O molecules suffer from H-abstraction and form hydroxyl radicals, that is, OH˙ and protonated reduced M–OH species. In the absence of water, the alcoholic substrate is associated with the metal cluster and upon excitation H-atom abstraction from the alcohol is achieved directly by the oxo-radical in the cluster.190–192 The extended degradation of 2-propanol to CO2 and H2 shows slow reaction kinetics which is 100 times slower than the conversion to acetone.193 In Scheme 52, a proposed mechanism is shown for the photo-oxidation of 2-propanol by the heteropolyanion [SiW12O40]4− (SiW12) (122) which under anaerobic conditions proceeds with formation of hydrogen. The reduction potentials for heteropolytungstates are sufficiently low in order to reduce water in acidic solution (pH < 6),194 so reaction (3) can be replaced by reaction (5) and the overall reaction reads as: 2-propanol + hν → Me2CO + H2 (6). Darwent et al. demonstrated that the rate of H2 production can be accelerated in the presence of a heterogeneous catalyst. The quantum yield for H2 production from a solution of 0.5 M MeOH–H2SO4 (1:1) containing Pt (0.002 mol%) and SiW12 (0.02 mol%) was 0.1 mol per einstein at 340 nm, which is suitable for conversions using solar energy. A system based solely on SiW12 absorbs light only below 360 nm and is not applicable. Other alcohols like propanol, ethanol and 2-propanol were tested and the highest relative rates were observed for the secondary alcohol. Recently Muradov et al. tested the potential of using polyoxometalates of tungsten for solar hydrogen production using alcohols as feedstock in a photocatalytic flat-bed reactor of small portable-pilot plant dimensions. A reaction mixture consisting of an aqueous solution of 2-propanol or sugar with isopolytungstates ([W10O32]4− or [SiW12O40]4−) and colloidal Pt as the photo-catalytic system was pumped through fused-silica tubes equipped with solar concentrators and exposed to sunlight. With this solar photoreactor a steady-state production of hydrogen gas of 180 mL h−1 was achieved for several days using a radiation reflux of 800–1000 W m−2.195
 Scheme 52  Photo-dehydrogenation of 2-propanol under aerobic or anaerobic conditions using dodecawolframosilic acid. 

4. Concluding remarks and outlook
Decades after the discovery that metal complexes can cleave off molecular hydrogen from alcohols, the dehydrogenation of these substances has been developed into a very active and focussed topic of research. Without question this research is driven by the desire to develop alternative methods to ensure mankind with a sufficient energy supply using rapidly renewable resources.
Biological organisms have developed over millions of years a rather complicated machinery by which alcohols are converted to carbonyl compounds (aldehydes, carboxylic acid derivatives) and hydrogen. Several enzymes are involved in this process as shown in a highly simplified sketch in Scheme 53. The conversion of alcohols is promoted by enzymes like alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase. In this process, two protons and two electrons are involved which convert NAD+ into its reduced form NADH and a proton equivalent. Electron transfer enzymes like ferredoxines reconvert NADH into NAD+ and a second proton equivalent. These protons are reduced with the help of a third type of enzymes (hydrogenases or nitrogenases) using the electrons stored in the ferredoxines to dihydrogen.
 Scheme 53  Schematic representation of the dehydrogenation of alcohols which requires various enzymes. Hydrogen is produced by reduction of protons with electrons stored in ferredoxins with the help of hydrogenases or nitrogenases. 
With this approach nature achieves a spatially and timely resolved oxidation of alcohols and reduction of protons. This allows for a specific control over each reaction step and the implementation of repair mechanisms. These enzymatically catalyzed processes are highly efficient, especially the ones catalyzed by hydrogenases, and achieve turn over frequencies in seconds which are not reached by man-made catalysts within an hour.
The first investigations into artificial hydrogen-evolving processes with organometallic complexes were inspired by the mechanistic understanding which evolved from homogeneously catalyzed hydrogenation reactions. Indeed, many complexes which were successfully applied in hydrogenations like Rh(I) complexes (see Schemes 28 and 29 for examples) were investigated as dehydrogenation catalysts as well. Generally, it is assumed that these reactions proceed via classical steps which are very well established in organometallic chemistry, and in Scheme 54 we show a simplified mechanism. In most cases, the metal complex [MLn] which is used in the reaction needs to be activated by loss of a ligand L to generate an unsaturated complex [MLn−1] which is the true catalyst (step i). The “free” coordination site, which is mostly occupied by a weakly bound solvent molecule, is indicated by a square. In the next step (ii) an alcohol molecule is bound to the metal centre for example via an oxidative addition. Subsequently, the α-CH bound in the coordinated substrate is activated by the metal centre, the C–H bond is broken and hydrogen is transferred to form a metal dihydride in step (iii). A molecule with a CO double bond is released in step (iv). The loss of molecular hydrogen in step (v) closes the catalytic cycle and regenerates the catalyst.
 Scheme 54  Classical organometallic catalytic cycle which involves activation (i), oxidative addition (ii), β-hydrogen elimination (iii), product dissociation (iv), and reductive elimination (v). 
With variations, the catalytic cycles shown in Schemes 27–31 correspond to this approach. Catalytic turn over frequencies and turn over numbers are rather low and at best a few thousands were reached so far with ruthenium complexes like the Robinson catalyst, [Ru(OCORF)2(CO)(PPh3)2]. The rather low conversion rates are likely due to the fact that either the oxidative addition or the reductive elimination requires rather high activation barriers.196 Note, that the oxidation states of the metal centre change in course of the catalytic cycle which provokes significant structural changes of the metal complexes which are involved in the catalytic cycle. This makes an accurate design of the structure of the metal complex difficult. Sterically bulky ligands will favor the stability of the unsaturated metal complexes [MLn] but at the same time may lead to higher activation barriers for reaction steps within complexes with higher coordination numbers [cf. steps (ii) and (iii)].
More recently, organometallic complexes were developed which benefit from metal ligand cooperation. Scheme 55 shows two simplified cycles which highlight the role of the cooperating ligand which directly and reversibly participates in the chemical transformation of the substrate molecules. Mostly the cooperating ligand is a chelating ligand (indicated by a bow “∩”) which is tightly wrapped around the metal centre and contains one or more functional sites. In cycle (A) the ligand has a basic site, Lb, and DFT computations suggest that the alcohol molecule adds with the protic OH group to the ligand and with the weakly “hydridic” α-CH bond to the metal centre [step (ia)]. In a more or less concerted reaction, hydrogen is transferred as “krypto”-hydrogen (Hδ−, Hδ+) to the metal complex and the dehydrogenated molecule is released [step (iia)]. In step (iiia), hydrogen is dissociated from the M–Lb bond in the complex and the catalytic cycle turns over. Anionic amide functions, NR2, directly connected to the metal centre proved to be especially effective as the basic cooperating ligand, Lb (see for example rhodium(I) amides in Scheme 10, and ruthenium amides in Scheme 15). However, the good performance and broad applicability of Milstein-type catalysts like [RuH(CO)(PNN)] (25) show that the basic site may reside in a remote position with respect to the metal centre.
 Scheme 55  Two possible catalytic cycles with complexes that show metal–ligand cooperativity. Note that in cycle A, the metal centre does not change its oxidation state and the substrate molecule is bound in the second coordination sphere. In cycle B, the substrate binds to the metal centre and the α-CH-bond is cleaved by an active site X in the ligand. The arrows are meant to indicate that the quality of the M–Lb or M–X bond changes (from a covalent bond “–” between M and an anionic Lb or X ligand to a “coordinative” bond “→” between a LbH or XH as a neutral two electron donor ligand). 
A slightly different approach is shown in Scheme 55B. Here the cooperating ligand contains two active sites, Lb and X, and both participate in the transformation of the substrate. In the first step the polar OH bond of the alcohol is added across the polar M(δ+)–Lb(δ−) bond with the metal centre as Lewis-acid and the ligand as Lewis-base [step (ib)]. In the second step (iib), an active site X in the ligand which can be a weakly Lewis-acidic or basic or radicaloid site abstracts the α-CH hydrogen centre and performs the dehydrogenative oxidation of the alcohol to a carbonyl species which is released in (iiib). A thermal dehydrogenation of the ligand occurs in step (ivb) and closes the catalytic cycle. While the metal oxidation state does not change in cycle (A), this cannot be ruled out in cycle (B) and has been demonstrated with the ruthenium complex [Ru(trop2dad)] shown in Scheme 15. This complex carries a redox- and chemically non-innocent ligand and the metal oxidation state does change by two units within the catalytic cycle. The electronic character of the metal ligand bonds changes: in Scheme 55, a covalent, shared two-electron bond between the metal and an anionic ligand is given by “–” while a coordinative dative bond between the metal and a neutral ligand is indicated by arrows. Special cases are complexes with so called PNN and PNP pincer ligands (see Schemes 13 and 14). With these the highest activities were reported (up to 2670 h−1). The role of the coordinated NH function, which is easily deprotonated to form an amide and a Lb active site, is clearly established. It is, however, suspicious that the highest activities are observed with pincer ligands which have ethylene bridges, –CH2–CH2–, in their backbone. It may very well be that these become reversibly dehydrogenated and hydrogenated whereby the mechanism switches from (A) to (B). Catalytic systems which show metal ligand cooperativity show generally significantly higher activities than classical complexes. A principal advantage of this type of catalyst is that they do not need an activation step by ligand dissociation. Note that in catalysts following the steps shown in cycle A, the substrate molecule binds in the second coordination sphere which minimizes severe structural changes in the first coordination sphere of the catalytically active complex. This feature facilitates a catalyst design and indeed catalysts which show metal–ligand cooperativity can be directly synthesized and isolated. Because the binding of the substrate molecules in the second coordination sphere – frequently achieved through hydrogen bridges – is weaker than the direct binding of the substrate molecules to the metal centres in classical complexes, the activity of the catalyst is sensitive to steric effects. Too large substituents which reach into the binding site for the substrate molecule will lower the conversion rates by several orders of magnitude.
Which future developments can be foreseen? Catalysts which show metal–ligand cooperativity offer high potential for future developments and are expected to provide significant improvements in the conversion of renewable alcohols into chemicals and hydrogen by finding the perfect electronic and steric match between a metal and its ligand. Numerous combinations including ligands which were specifically synthesized for metal–ligand cooperativity are possible. Likewise, the combination of fuels as listed in Table 1 offers much room for improvements. At present it seems that coupling reactions in which two “fuel” molecules are combined under the evolution of hydrogen proceed with higher efficiency than for every fuel alone. With these catalytic systems, new devices may be constructed like organometallic fuel cells (OMFCs) in which no elemental hydrogen but electric current and protons are produced according to H2 ⇆ 2H+ + 2e−. It may be questioned whether these devices can contribute substantially to the production of energy but they may lead to the development of fine-chemicals from renewable sources with a minimum of waste (the only by-product is electric current). OMFCs powered by an alcohol may also find applications in small portable electronic devices and medicinal implants.
The photocatalytic conversion of alcohols and sugars into dehydrogenated oxidized products and hydrogen must find more attention in the future. Although the first experiments were carried out about four decades ago, there is relatively little progress. Most remarkable are photocatalytic conversions of alcohols which proceed under deoxygenation, that is the alcohols are directly converted to carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, and hydrogen, R–CH2–OH → RH + H2 + CO. The use of sunlight to achieve this process efficiently is a significant breakthrough for the development of a H2 economy.
As the development of highly efficient fermentation processes advances, which provides ethanol from vegetable waste, the demand for catalysts to convert ethanol with a minimum of loss of energy will increase. The benchmark to date is the dehydrogenative coupling of two ethanol molecules to ethyl acetate and two equivalents of hydrogen which proceeds with a TOF of 15000 h−1 using metal complexes with cooperative pincer ligands. The conversion of methanol as an almost ideal liquid fuel is much more challenging. But recent progress gives reason to hope that new catalysts and catalytic systems will be found which show even higher activity and especially longevity.
The hydrogen production from alcohols with organometallic complexes has come some way and made good progress with respect to efficiency. But there remains a very long way to be walked before catalytic systems are developed which can halfway compete with biological systems. Organometallic chemistry can provide a strong impetus especially with respect to a better mechanistic understanding of key-steps in the dehydrogenation of alcohols and related molecules from renewable biomass. The ultimate goal will and must be to develop organometallic complexes which contain earth abundant, little-toxic, and cheap metal centres and ligands which are prepared with components that do not consume more energy than the device can deliver during its life-cycle. In that respect, phosphorus containing ligands which are frequently encountered are almost prohibitive given that the production of elemental phosphorus from phosphate rock requires 46000 kJ per kg. Here again the creativity of chemists is challenged in order to find alternatives.
Acknowledgements
The own work cited in this paper was supported by the ETH of Zurich and the Swiss National Foundation (SNF). Also, the dedication of the master, PhD students, and post-doctoral fellows to their work which helped to expand the knowledge about the catalytic conversion of alcohols with transition metal complexes is gratefully acknowledged. Their names are listed in the cited publications.
References
R. A. Kerr and R. F. Service, Science, 2005, 309, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. D. Holladay, J. Hu, D. L. King and Y. Wang, Catal. Today, 2009, 139, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Konieczny, K. Mondal, T. Wiltowski and P. Dydo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 264 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) R. M. Navarro, M. A. Pena and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) 
            D. Stolen, in Hydrogen and Fuel Cells: Fundamentals, Technologies and Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2010 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            A. Züttel, in Hydrogen as a Future Energy Carrier, ed. A. Züttel, A. Borgschulte and L. Schlapbach, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) Toward a Hydrogen Economy, editorial and special issue: Science,  2004, 305, 957 Search PubMed; 
  (d) 
            J. J. Romm, in The Hype about Hydrogen, Island Press, Washington,  2004 Search PubMed .

  (a) Source: Scifinder (http://www.cas.org/products/scifinder), search on all data bases with the criteria: “alcohols and fuel cells”; 
  (b) 
            N. H. Behling, in Fuel Cell: Current Technologies, Challenges and Future Research Needs, Elsevier,  2013 Search PubMed .

  (a) 
            G. A. Olah, in Chemical Research—2000 and Beyond: Challenges and Vision, ed. P. Barkan, American Chemical Society, Washington D. C. Gand Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1998 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) G. A. Olah, G. Prakash and A. Goeppert, Chem. Eng. News, 2008, 81, 5 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. Surya Prakash, in Beyond Oil and Gas: the Methanol Economy, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .

  (a) F. Mariño, M. Boveri, G. Baronetti and M. Laborde, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 67 CrossRef ; 
  (b) G. A. Deluga, J. R. Salge, L. D. Schmidt and X. E. Verykios, Science, 2004, 303, 993 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Fernando and M. Hanna, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 1695 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Cortright, R. R. Davda and J. A. Dumestic, Nature, 2002, 418, 964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Recently, XES of isolated FeMoco indicated that the active site contains a central C4-ligand:   K. M. Lancaster, M. Roemelt, P. Ettenhuber, Y. Hu, M. W. Ribbe, F. Neese, U. Bergmann and S. DeBeer, Science, 2011, 334, 974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Bioenergy, ed. J. D. Wall, C. S. Harwood and A. Demain, ASM Press, Washington, D.C.,  2008 Search PubMed .
A. J. Pierik, W. Roseboom, P. R. Happe, K. A. Bagley and S. P. J. Albracht, J. Biol. Chem., 1999, 274, 3331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cammack, Nature, 1999, 397, 214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
For a selection of reviews of proposed mechanism of proton reduction by the active sites of hydrogenases, see: 
  (a) J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. Volbeda, C. Cavazza and Y. Nicolet, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4273 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Bruschi, C. Greco, M. Kaukonen, P. Fantucci, U. Ryde and L. De Gioia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3503 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Frey, ChemBioChem, 2002, 3, 153 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. Volbeda and J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, Dalton Trans., 2003, 4030 RSC ; 
  (e) A. L. De Lacey, V. M. Fernandez, M. Rousset and R. Cammack, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) I. Dance, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10925 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. M. Hoffman, D. Lukoyanov, D. R. Dean and L. C. Seefeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. McKinlay and C. S. Harwood, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Levin, L. Pitt and M. Love, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 173 CrossRef CAS .
K. Thauer, K. Jungermann and K. Decker, Bacteriol. Rev., 1977, 41, 100 Search PubMed .
Y. K. Oh, S. M. Raj, G. Y. Jung and S. Park, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 8357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) E. Eroglua and A. Melis, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 8403 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Krupp and R. Widmann, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 509 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Veit, K. Akhtar, T. Mizutani and P. R. Jones, Microb. Biotechnol., 2008, 1, 382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Akhtar and P. R. Jones, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 78, 853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Grützmacher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1814 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) 
            M. S. Scott and H. Idriss, Heterogeneous Catalysis for Hydrogen Production, in Handbook of Green Chemistry, Wiley-VCH,  2010, pp. 223–246 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            V. Subramani, P. Sharma, L. Zhang, and K. Liu, Catalytic Steam Reforming Technology for the Production of Hydrogen and Syngas, in Hydrogen and Syngas Production and Purification Technologies, ed. K. Liu, C. Song and V. Subramani, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA,  2009 Search PubMed .

          K. Dircks, in Recent Advances in Fuel Cells for Transportation Application, EVS15, Brussels (Belgique),  October 1998 Search PubMed .

  (a) A. Hamnett, Catal. Today, 1997, 38, 445 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Heinzel and V. M. Barragán, J. Power Sources, 1999, 84, 70 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Iwasita, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3663 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. Lamy, A. Lima, V. LeRhun, F. Delime, C. Coutanceau and J. M. Léger, J. Power Sources, 2002, 105, 283 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) H. Liu, C. Song, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Wang and D. P. Wilkinson, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 95 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) V. Neburchilov, J. Martin, H. Wang and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 169, 221 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) 
            C. Lamy, J.-M. Léger and S. Srinivasan, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. J. O. M. Bockris and B. E. Conway, Plenum Press, New York,  2000, vol. 34, ch. 3, pp. 53–117 Search PubMed ; 
  (h) I. A. A. Tillaart, B. F. M. Kuster and G. B. Marin, Appl. Catal., A, 1994, 120, 127 CrossRef ; 
  (i) W. Zhou, Z. Zhou, S. Song, W. Li, G. Sun, P. Tsiakaras and Q. Xin, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 46, 273 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) E. Antolini, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. Garcia, V. Baglio, A. Stassi, E. Past, V. Antonucci and A. S. Aricò, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2007, 11, 1229 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) W. E. Mustain, H. Kim, V. Narayanan, T. Osborn and P. A. Kohl, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2010, 7, 41013 CrossRef ; 
  (c) J.-N. Jo, H.-G. Lee and Y.-T. Yu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, 89 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) C.-H. Hsu, H.-Y. Liao, Y.-F. Wu and P.-L. Kuo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2169 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) S. Naidoo, Q. Y. Naidoo and G. Vaivars, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2009, 103, 80 CrossRef ; 
  (f) S. Kageyama, S. Seino, T. Nakagawa, H. Nitani, K. Ueno, H. Daimon and T. A. Yamamoto, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 5275 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) A. B. Kashyout, A. B. A. Nassr, L. Giorgi, T. Maiyalagan and B. A. B. Youssef, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 379 CAS ; 
  (h) P. N. Ross, Jr in Electrocatalysis, Frontiers of Electrochemistry, ed. J. Lipkowski and P. N. Ross, Jr., Wiley-VCH Publishers, New York, 1998 and the references in ref. 25a–g.
R. Dillon, S. Srinivasan, A. S. Aricò and V. Antonucci, J. Power Sources, 2004, 127, 112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bianchini, V. Bambagioni, J. Filippi, A. Marchionni, F. Vizza, P. Bert and A. Tampucci, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Bambagioni, C. Bianchini, Y. Chen, J. Filippi, P. Fornasiero, M. Innocenti, A. Lavacchi, A. Marchionni, W. Oberhauser and F. Vizza, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Liu, T. Hayakawa, T. Tsunoda, K. Suzuki, S. Hamakawa, K. Murata, R. Shiozaki, T. Ishii and M. Kumagai, Top. Catal., 2003, 22, 205 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Choi and H. G. Stenger, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 38, 259 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Takezawa and N. Iwasa, Catal. Today, 1997, 36, 45 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) L. Ma, D. L. Trimm and M. S. Wainwright, Top. Catal., 1999, 8, 271 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) B. A. Peppley, J. C. Amphlett, L. M. Kearns and R. F. Mann, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 179, 21 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) B. A. Peppley, J. C. Amphlett, L. M. Kearns and R. F. Mann, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 179, 31 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) S. D. Jones, L. M. Neal and H. E. Hagelin-Weaver, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 84, 631 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) T. Shishido, Y. Yamamoto, H. Morioka and K. Takehira, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 268, 185 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) P. J. Lindner and R. S. Besser, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 13338 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) Y.-K. Lin, Y.-H. Su, Y.-H. Huang, C.-J. Hsu, Y.-K. Hsu, Y.-G. Lin, K.-H. Huang, S.-Y. Chen, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9186 RSC ; 
  (k) S. Danwittayakul and J. Dutta, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 223, 304 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (l) Y. G. Lin, Y. K. Hsu, S. Y. Chen, Y. K. Lin, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7586 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (m) X. Du, Y. Shen, L. Yang, Y. Shi and Y. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 12271 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (n) M. Behrens, S. Kißner, F. Girsgdies, I. Kasatkin, F. Hermerschmidt, K. Mette, H. Ruland, M. Muhler and R. Schlögla, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1701 RSC ; 
  (o) S. Murcia-Mascarós, R. M. Navarro, L. Gómez-Sainero, U. Costantino, M. Nocchetti and J. L. G. Fierro, J. Catal., 2001, 198, 338 CrossRef ; 
  (p) R. M. Navarro, M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3952 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (q) D. R. Palo, R. A. Dagle and J. D. Holladay, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Papavasiliou, G. Avgouropoulos and T. Ioannides, Catal. Commun., 2004, 5, 231 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, T. Hayakawa, K. Suzuki, S. Hamakawa, T. Tsunoda, T. Ishii and M. Kumagai, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 223, 137 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Valdés-Solís, G. Marbán and A. B. Fuertes, Catal. Today, 2006, 116, 354 CrossRef PubMed .
E. K. Lee, H. S. Kim, K. D. Jung, O. S. Joo and Y. G. Shul, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 2004, 81, 177 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Purnama, F. Girgsdies, T. Ressler, J. H. Schattka, R. A. Caruso, R. Schomäcker and R. Schlogl, Catal. Lett., 2004, 94, 61 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Agrell, H. Birgersson, M. Boutonnet, I. Melián-Cabrera, R. M. Navarro and J. L. G. Fierro, J. Catal., 2003, 219, 389 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Szizybalski, F. Girgsdies, A. Rabis, Y. Wang, M. Niederberger and T. Ressler, J. Catal., 2005, 233, 297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. Ma, B. Gong, T. Tran and M. S. Wainwright, Catal. Today, 2000, 63, 499 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Laine, Z. Ferrer, M. Labady, V. Chang and P. Frias, Appl. Catal., A, 1988, 44, 11 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. Ma, D. L. Trimm and M. S. Wainwright, Top. Catal., 1999, 8, 271 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) S. Kameoka, M. Okada and A. P. Tsai, Catal. Lett., 2008, 120, 252 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Matter, D. J. Braden and U. S. Ozkan, J. Catal., 2004, 223, 340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Oguchi, T. Nishiguchi, T. Matsumoto, H. Kanai, K. Utani, Y. Matsumura and S. Imamura, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 281, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. D. Jones and H. E. Hagelin-Weaver, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Kameoka, T. Tanabe and A. P. Tsai, Catal. Lett., 2005, 100, 89 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. S. Chen, W. H. Cheng and S. S. Lin, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 257, 97 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, L. Ma and M. S. Wainwright, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 257, 235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. O. Idem and N. N. Bakhshi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1995, 34, 1548 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. O. Idem and N. N. Bakhshi, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1996, 51, 3697 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Valdés-Solís, G. Marbán and A. B. Fuertes, Catal. Today, 2006, 116, 354 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Yu. Kapran, S. N. Orlik and N. K. Lunev, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2012, 48, 135 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. K. Yu, W. Tong, A. West, K. Cheung, T. Li, G. Smith, Y. Guo and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 2242 Search PubMed .
J. D. Holladay, Y. Wang and E. Jones, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4767 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Matsumura, M. Okumura, Y. Usami, K. Kagawa, H. Yamashita, M. Anpo and M. Haruta, Catal. Lett., 1997, 44, 189 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W.-J. Shen and Y. Matsumura, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 153, 1658 CrossRef ; 
  (c) J. Yang, Y. Zhou, H. Su and S. Jiang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 662, 251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. L. Cubeiro and J. L. G. Fierro, J. Catal., 1998, 179, 150 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. L. Cubeiro and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 168, 307 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. Iwasa, S. Masuda, N. Ogawa and N. Takezawa, Appl. Catal., A, 1995, 125, 145 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. Takezawa and N. Iwasa, Catal. Today, 1997, 36, 45 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Iwasa, T. Mayanagi, O. Ogawa, K. Sakata and N. Takezawa, Catal. Lett., 1998, 54, 119 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) N. Iwasa and N. Takezawa, Top. Catal., 2003, 22, 215 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) N. Iwasa, M. Yoshikawa, W. Nomura and M. Arai, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 292, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y.-H. Chin, R. Dagle, J. Hu, A. C. Dohnalkova and Y. Wang, Catal. Today, 2002, 77, 79 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y.-H. Chin, Y. Wang, R. A. Dagle and X. S. Li, Fuel Process. Technol., 2003, 83, 193 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Suwa, S.-i. Ito, S. Kameoka, K. Tomishige and K. Kunimori, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 267, 9 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) C. Cao, G. Xia, J. Holladay, E. Jones and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 262, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) C. Rameshan, C. Weilach, W. Stadlmayr, S. Penner, H. Lorenz, M. Hävecker, R. Blume, T. Rocha, D. Teschner, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schlögl, D. Zemlyanov, N. Memmel, G. Rupprechter and B. Klötzer, J. Catal., 2010, 276, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) K. Föttinger, J. A. van Bokhoven, M. Nachtegaal and G. Rupprechter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 428 CrossRef ; 
  (g) A. Ota, E. L. Kunkes, I. Kasatkin, E. Groppo, D. Ferri, B. Poceiro, R. M. N. Yerga and M. Behrens, J. Catal., 2012, 293, 27 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) C. Rameshan, W. Stadlmayr, C. Weilach, S. Penner, H. Lorenz, M. Hävecker, R. Blume, T. Rocha, D. Teschner, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schlögl, N. Memmel, D. Zemlyanov, G. Rupprechter and B. Klötzer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3224 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) H. Lorenz, M. Friedrich, M. Armbrüster, B. Klötzer and S. Penner, J. Catal., 2013, 297, 151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Penner, H. Lorenz, W. Jochum, M. Stöger-Pollach, D. Wang, C. Rameshan and B. Klötzer, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 358, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Lorenz, S. Penner, W. Jochum, C. Rameshan and B. Klötzer, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 358, 203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lorenz, S. Turner, O. I. Lebedev, G. V. Tendeloo, B. Klötzer, C. Rameshan, K. Pfaller and S. Penner, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 374, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. I. Ito, Y. Suwa, S. Kondo, S. Kameoka, K. Tomishige and K. Kunimori, Catal. Commun., 2003, 4, 499 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Miyao, M. Yamauchi, H. Narita and S. Naito, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 299, 285 CrossRef CAS PubMed   and the references therein; 
  (c) J. H. Park, Y. T. Kim, E. D. Park, H. C. Lee, J. Kim and D. Lee, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 806 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsumura, N. Tode, T. Yazawa and M. Haruta, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1995, 99, 183 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Barthos and F. Solymosi, J. Catal., 2007, 249, 289 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Q. Gao, C. Zhang, S. Wang, W. Shen, Y. Zhang, H. Xu and Y. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6494 RSC .

  (a) K.-i. Shimizu, K. Kon, M. Seto, K. Shimura, H. Yamazaki and J. N. Kondo, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 418 RSC ; 
  (b) K.-i. Shimizu, K. Kon, K. Shimura and S. S. M. A. Hakim, J. Catal., 2013, 300, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Haryanto, S. Fernando, N. Murali and S. Adhikari, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 2098 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Piscina and N. Homs, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2459 RSC .
C. Angelici, B. M. Weckhuysen and P. C. A. Bruijnincx, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Deluga, J. R. Salge, L. D. Schmidt and X. E. Verykios, Science, 2004, 7, 993 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mostafa, J. R. Croy, H. Heinrich and B. R. Cuenya, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 366, 353 CrossRef CAS PubMed   and the references cited therein.
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Dai, T. Y. Peng, D. N. Ke and B. Q. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 125603 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) S. S. Qian, C. S. Wang, W. J. Liu, Y. H. Zhu, W. J. Yao and X. H. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4945 RSC ; 
  (c) E. Edri, E. Rabinovich, O. Niitsoo, H. Cohen, T. Bendikov and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13092 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H. J. Huang, D. Z. Li, Q. Lin, W. J. Zhang, Y. Shao, Y. B. Chen, M. Sun and X. Z. Fu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 4164 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) H. Park, W. Choi and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2379 RSC .
A. Galińska and J. Walendziewski, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 1143 CrossRef .

  (a) J. R. Bolton, Solar Energy, 1996, 57, 37 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 172 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Hashimoto, T. Kawai and T. Sakata, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 4083 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) T. Sakata, J. Photochem., 1985, 29, 205 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) A. A. Nada, M. H. Barakat, H. A. Hamed, N. R. Mohamed and T. N. Veziroglu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. R. Zhang, O. Bondarchuk, J. M. White, B. D. Kay and Z. Dohnálek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4198 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Oviedo, R. Sanchez de Armas, M. A. San Miguel and J. F. Sanz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Zhao, J. L. Yang and H. Petek, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 235 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) C. Y. Zhou, Z. B. Ma, Z. F. Ren, X. C. Mao, D. X. Dai and X. M. Yang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1980 RSC ; 
  (e) Q. Guo, C. Xu, Z. Ren, W. Yang, Z. Ma, D. Dai, H. Fan, T. K. Minton and X. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. V. Awate, S. S. Deshpande, K. Rakesh, P. Dhanasekaran and N. M. Gupta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11329 RSC ; 
  (b) G. L. Chiarello, M. H. Aguirre and E. Selli, J. Catal., 2010, 273, 182 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) H. Kominami, H. Sugahara and K. Hashimoto, Catal. Commun., 2010, 11, 426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .

  (a) T. Yamakawa, T. Katsurao, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1987, 42, 183 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Nomura, Y. Saito and S. Shinoda, J. Mol. Catal., 1989, 52, 99 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Morton, D. J. Cole-Hamilton, I. D. Utuk, M. Paneque-Sosa and M. Lopez-Poveda, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1989, 489 RSC ; 
  (d) T. Yoshida, T. Okano and S. Otsuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 5966 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) T. Takahashi, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1985, 31, 301 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) H. Yamamoto, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1985, 30, 259 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) S. Shinoda, H. Moriyama, Y. Kise and Y. Saito, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1978, 348 RSC ; 
  (h) H. Moriyama, T. Aoki, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1982, 369 RSC ; 
  (i) T. Matsubara, Y. Saito, T. Yamakawa and S. Shinoda, J. Mol. Catal., 1991, 67, 175 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) K. Makita, K. Nomura and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1994, 89, 143 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (k) T. Yamakawa, H. Miyake, H. Moriyama, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 326 RSC ; 
  (l) T. Matsubara, Y. Saito, T. Yamakawa and S. Shinoda, J. Mol. Catal., 1993, 79, 29 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (m) H. Moriyama, P. S. Pregosin, Y. Saito and T. Yamakawa, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1984, 2329 RSC ; 
  (n) R. Irie, X. Li and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1983, 18, 263 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (o) R. Irie, X. Li and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1984, 23, 17 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (p) R. Irie, X. Li and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1984, 23, 23 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (q) S. Shinoda, X. Li and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1989, 49, 113 CrossRef ; 
  (r) G. B. W. L. Ligthart, R. H. Meijer, M. P. J. Donners, J. Meuldijk, J. A. J. M. Vekemans and L. A. Hulshof, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 1507 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (s) F. Gärtner, S. Losse, A. Boddien, M. M. Pohl, S. Denurra, H. Junge and M. Beller, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 530 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kawai and T. Sakata, Nature, 1980, 286, 474 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, J. Long, X. Wang, D. Y. C. Leung, Z. Ding, L. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Li and X. Fu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 6484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shiragami, T. Tomo, H. Tsumagari, R. Yuki, T. Yamashita and M. Yasuda, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 29 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shiragami, T. Tomo, T. Matsumoto and M. Yasuda, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2013, 86, 382 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cuendet, K. K. Rao, M. Grätzel and D. O. Hall, Biochimie, 1986, 68, 217 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ogo, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3317 RSC .
K.-C. Cheung, W.-L. Wong, D.-L. Ma, T.-S. Lai and K.-Y. Wong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Andrieux, J. M. Dumas-Bouchiat and J. M. Savéant, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1978, 87, 39 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. A. Moyer, M. S. Thompson and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 2310 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. S. Thompson and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4106 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. Roecker and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 746 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) V. J. Catalano, R. A. Heck, A. Öhman and M. G. Hill, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 2150 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) V. J. Catalano, R. A. Heck, C. E. Immoos, A. Öhman and M. G. Hill, Polyhedron, 2000, 19, 1049 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C.-M. Che, K.-W. Cheng, M. C. W. Chan, T.-C. Lau and C.-K. Mak, J. Org. Chem., 2000, 65, 7996 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) N. Chanda, B. Mondal, V. G. Puranik and G. K. Lahiri, Polyhedron, 2002, 21, 2033 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. Rodriguez, I. Romero, A. Llobet, A. Deronzier, M. Biner, T. Parella and H. Stoeckli-Evans, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) C. Sens, M. Rodriguez, I. Romero, A. Llobet, T. Parella and J. Benet-Buchholz, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 8385 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) X. Sala, A. Poater, I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, A. Llobet, X. Solans, T. Parella and T. M. Santos, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 612 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) L. A. Gallagher and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5308 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) F. Geneste, C. Moinet and G. Jezequel, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 1539 RSC ; 
  (j) F. Geneste and C. Moinet, New J. Chem., 2004, 28, 722 RSC ; 
  (k) A. L. B. Marques, W. Li, E. P. Marques and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Hino, T. Wada, T. Fujihara and K. Tanaka, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33, 1596 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Miyazato, T. Wada and K. Tanaka, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 79, 745 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Ozawa, T. Hino, H. Ohtsu, T. Wada and K. Tanaka, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2011, 366, 298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Serra, M. C. Correia and L. McElwee-White, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 5568 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Matsumoto, K. Kim and S. Ogo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11202 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Matsumoto, K. Kim, H. Nakai, T. Hibino and S. Ogo, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1368 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Vannucci, J. F. Hull, Z. Chen, R. A. Binstead, J. J. Concepcion and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Brownell, C. C. L. McCrory, C. E. D. Chidsey, R. H. Perry, R. N. Zare and R. M. Waymouth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Kim, W. K. Seok, Y. Dong and H. Yun, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2001, 319, 194 CrossRef CAS .
S. -i. Yamazaki, M. Yao, N. Fujiwara, Z. Siroma, K. Yasuda and T. Ioroi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4353 RSC .
K. Elouarzaki, A. Le Goff, M. Holzinger, J. Thery and S. Cosnier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. P. Annen, V. Bambagioni, M. Bevilacqua, J. Filippi, A. Marchionni, W. Oberhauser, H. Schönberg, F. Vizza, C. Bianchini and H. Grützmacher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7229 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Bevilacqua, C. Bianchini, A. Marchionni, J. Filippi, A. Lavacchi, H. Miller, W. Oberhauser, F. Vizza, G. Granozzi, L. Artiglia, S. P. Annen, F. Krumeich and H. Grützmacher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8608 RSC .
M. Königsmann, N. Donati, D. Stein, H. Schönberg, J. Harmer, A. Sreekanth and H. Grützmacher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3567 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Donati, M. Königsmann, D. Stein, L. Udino and H. Grützmacher, C. R. Chim., 2007, 10, 721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Bonitatibus, M. P. Rainka, A. J. Peters, D. L. Simone and M. D. Doherty, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10581 RSC .

  (a) A. Dobson and S. D. Robinson, J. Organomet. Chem., 1975, 87, C52 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Dobson and S. D. Robinson, Inorg. Chem., 1977, 16, 137 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Rybak and J. J. Ziolkowski, J. Mol. Catal., 1981, 11, 365 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Jung and P. E. Garrou, Organometallics, 1982, 1, 658 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Morton and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 248 RSC ; 
  (b) D. Morton and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 1154 RSC ; 
  (c) D. Morton, D. J. Cole-Hamilton, I. D. Utuk, M. Paneque-Sosa and M. Lopez-Poveda, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1989, 489 RSC ; 
  (d) L. C. Yang, T. Ishida, T. Yamakawa and S. Shinoda, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1996, 108, 87 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) N. Sieffert and M. Bühl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Junge, B. Loges and M. Beller, Chem. Commun., 2007, 522 RSC .

  (a) M. Bertoli, A. Choualeb, A. J. Lough, B. Moore, D. Spasyuk and D. G. Gusev, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 3479 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Spasyuk, S. Smith and D. G. Gusev, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nielsen, A. Kammer, D. Cozzula, H. Junge, S. Gladiali and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. Gandelman, L. J. W. Shimon, H. Rozenberg and D. Milstein, Organometallics, 2004, 23, 4026 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Gandelman, L. J. W. Shimon and D. Milstein, Dalton Trans., 2007, 107 RSC .
J. Zhang, E. Balaraman, G. Leitus and D. Milstein, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 5716 CrossRef CAS .
In this early report, the conversion to lactones is accomplished by addition of acetone as hydrogen acceptor:   S. I. Murahashi, K. Ito, T. Naota and Y. Maeda, Tetrahedron Lett., 1981, 22, 5327 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Bruce and J. R. Knight, J. Organomet. Chem., 1968, 12, 411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Blum and Y. Shvo, J. Organomet. Chem., 1985, 282, C7 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Zhang, G. Leitus, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10840 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Zhang, M. Gandelman, L. J. W. Shimon and D. Milstein, Dalton Trans., 2006, 107 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) D. M. Hunsicker, B. C. Dauphinais, S. P. Mc Ilrath and N. J. Robertson, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gargir, Y. Ben-David, G. Leitus, Y. Diskin-Posner, L. J. W. Shimon and D. Milstein, Organometallics, 2012, 31, 6207 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gunanathan, L. J. W. Shimon and D. Milstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
See, for example: 
  (a) P. C. Zonetti, J. Celnik, S. Letichevsky, A. B. Gaspar and L. G. Appel, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 334, 29 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. R. S. Medeiros, J. G. Eon and L. G. Appel, Catal. Lett., 2000, 69, 79 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Spasyuk, S. Smith and D. G. Gusev, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2772 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Spasyuk and D. G. Gusev, Organometallics, 2012, 31, 5239 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nielsen, H. Junge, A. Kammer and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Srimani, E. Balaraman, B. Gnanaprakasam, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354, 2403 CrossRef CAS .
The same complex has demonstrated catalytic activity in the reverse processes: 
  (a) hydrogenation of amides:   E. Balaraman, B. Gnanaprakasam, L. J. W. Shimon and D. Milstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16756 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) cyclic diesters:   E. Balaraman, E. Fogler and D. Milstein, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1111 RSC ; 
  (c) urea compounds:   E. Balaraman, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11702 CrossRef CAS PubMed   and ; 
  (d) organic carbonates, carbamates and formates:   E. Balaraman, C. Gunanathan, J. Zhang, L. J. W. Shimon and D. Milstein, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gnanaprakasam, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2010, 352, 3169 CrossRef CAS .
E. Balaraman, E. Khaskin, G. Leitus and D. Milstein, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shinoda, H. Itagaki and Y. Saito, Chem. Commun., 1985, 860 RSC .
T. A. Smith, R. P. Aplin and P. M. Maitlis, J. Organomet. Chem., 1985, 291, C13 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujii and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1991, 67, 185 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamakawa, M. Hiroi and S. Shinoda, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1994, 2265 RSC .
M. Nielsen, E. Alberico, W. Baumann, H.-J. Drexler, H. Junge, S. Gladiali and M. Beller, Nature, 2013, 494, 85 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Rodriguez-Lugo, M. Trincado, M. Vogt, F. Tewes, G. Santiso-Quinones and H. Grützmacher, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
For the only precedent of a metal based catalyst for the conversion of amino alcohols to acids in water under nitrogen pressure at 160 °C (6 TON), see: 
  (a) 
            T. S. Franczyk and W. L. Moench, US Pat. 6646160,  2003 ; 
  (b) The uncatalysed reaction of primary alcohols with NaOH to form carboxylic acid salts at >300 °C in a high-pressure reactor has been reported:   E. M. Reid, H. Worthington and A. W. Larchar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1939, 61, 99 CrossRef CAS .
ACS GCI Pharmaceutical Roundtable which emerged to integrate green chemistry and green engineering into the pharmaceutical industry and provide a list of main research areas to be improved in the future, decided that amide formation avoiding poor atom economy reagents was one of the key challenges in chemical synthesis.   D. J. C. Constable, P. J. Dunn, J. D. Hayler, G. R. Humphrey, J. L. Leazer, R. J. Linderman, K. Lorenz, J. Manley, B. A. Pearlman, A. Wells, A. Zaksh and T. Y. Zhang, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 411 RSC .
C. Gunanathan, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Science, 2007, 317, 790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
When instead the PNN complex is used a PNP complex as catalyst the reaction is directed to the corresponding imines with liberation of dihydrogen.
D. Srimani, E. Balaraman, P. Hu, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2013, 355, 2525 CrossRef CAS .
L. U. Nordstrøm, H. Vogt and R. Madsen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17672 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Zhang and S. H. Hong, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 10005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Schley, G. E. Dobereiner and R. H. Crabtree, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 4174 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ortega, C. Richter and F. Glorius, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 1776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Zweifel, J. V. Naubron and H. Grüetzmacher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 559 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. J. A. Watson, A. C. Maxwell and J. M. J. Williams, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 2667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Synthesis of peptides from amino alcohols:   B. Gnanaprakasam, E. Balaraman, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12240 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Synthesis of polymides from diols and diamines:   H. Zeng and Z. Guan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1159 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) B. Gnanaprakasam, E. Balaraman, C. Gunanathan and D. Milstein, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 1755 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Synthesis of amides from amines and esters:   B. Gnanaprakasam and D. Milstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Li, X. Wang, F. Huang, G. Lu, J. Jiang and Z.-X. Wang, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 5233 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Cho, K. C. Ko and J. Y. Lee, Organometallics, 2013, 494, 85 Search PubMed .

  (a) T. Ohkuma, H. Ooka, S. Hashiguchi, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, J. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 2675 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Ohkuma, H. Ooka, S. Hashiguchi, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10417 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Hashiguchi, A. Fuji, J. Takehara, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 7562 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gunanathan, B. Gnanaprakasam, M. A. Iron, L. J. W. Shimon and D. Milstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kossoy, Y. Diskin-Posner, G. Leitus and D. Milstein, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354, 497 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gnanaprakasam, J. Zhang and D. Milstein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
For DFT calculations of the selective imine formation from alcohol and amine catalysed by the ruthenium(II)–PNP pincer complex, see:   H. Li, X. Wang, M. Wen and Z. Wang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 5011 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maggi and R. Madsen, Organometallics, 2012, 31, 451 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, T. Chen, D. Gong, Z. Lai and K. Huang, Organometallics, 2012, 31, 5208 CrossRef CAS .
D. Srimani, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Baratta, G. Bossi, E. Putignano and P. Rigo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bertoli, A. Choualeb, A. J. Lough, B. Moore, D. Spasyuk and D. G. Gusev, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 3479 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Esteruelas, N. Honczek, M. Oliván, E. Oñate and M. Valencia, Organometallics, 2011, 30, 2468 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Simpson and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1996, 155, 163 CrossRef CAS .
D. Morton and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 248 RSC .
D. Morton and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, Polyhedron, 1987, 6, 2187 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsubara and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1994, 92, l CrossRef .
Y. Lin, D. Ma and X. Lu, Tetrahedron Lett., 1987, 28, 3115 CrossRef CAS .
The dehydrogenation of alcohols using a hydrogen acceptor or the dehydrogenation in presence of proton acids as hydride scavengers is very well established and is not further discussed here.
K.-i. Fujita, N. Tanino and R. Yamaguchi, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. -i. Fujita, T. Yoshida, Y. Imori and R. Yamaguchi, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 2278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kawahara, K. -i. Fujita and R. Yamaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kawahara, K. -i. Fujita and R. Yamaguchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Royer, T. B. Rauchfuss and S. R. Wilson, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Musa, I. Shaposhnikov, S. Cohen and D. Gelman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oded, S. Musa, D. Gelman and J. Blum, Catal. Commun., 2012, 20, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, H. Zhang and X. Li, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52, 5596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. K. Olsen and R. Madsen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 16023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Polukeev, P. V. Petrovskii, A. S. Peregudov, M. G. Ezernitskaya and A. A. Koridze, Organometallics, 2013, 32, 1000 CrossRef CAS .
S. Michlik and R. Kempe, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. Zhang and S. K. Hanson, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 650 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. Zhang, K. V. Vasudevan, B. L. Scott and S. K. Hanson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yi, J. T. Miller, D. Y. Zemlyanov, R. Zhang, P. J. Dietrich, F. H. Ribeiro, S. Suslov and M. M. Abu-Omar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arakawa and Y. Sugi, Chem. Lett., 1981, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Griggs and D. J. H. Smith, J. Organomet. Chem., 1984, 273, 105 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Yamakawa, T. Katsurao, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1987, 42, 183 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Nomura, Y. Saito and S. Shinoda, J. Mol. Catal., 1989, 52, 99 CrossRef CAS .
Known catalyst for hydrogenation of alkenes and/or aldehydes: 
  (a) G. Mestroni, R. Spogliarich, A. Camus, F. Martinelli and G. Zassinovich, J. Organomet. Chem., 1978, 157, 345 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. F. Young, J. A. Osborn, F. H. Jardine and G. Wilkinson, Chem. Commun., 1965, 31 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Yoshida, T. Okano and S. Otsuka, Chem. Commun., 1979, 870 RSC ; 
  (d) R. A. Sanchez-Delgado, A. Andriollo, O. L. de Ochoa, T. Suarez and N. Valencia, J. Organomet. Chem., 1981, 209, 77 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) F. Pennella, J. Organomet. Chem., 1974, 65, C17 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Morton, D. J. Cole-Hamilton, I. D. Utuk, M. Paneque-Sosa and M. Lopez-Poveda, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1989, 489 RSC ; 
  (b) E. Delgado-Lieta, M. A. Luke, F. A. Jones and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, Polyhedron, 1982, 1, 839 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Ho, K. Manna and A. D. Sadow, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ogoshi, J. Setsune and Z. Yoshida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 3869 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Wayland and A. R. Newman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 6472 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Irie, X. Li and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1983, 18, 263 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Irie, X. Li and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1984, 23, 17 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Irie, X. Li and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1984, 23, 23 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shinoda, X. Li and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1989, 49, 113 CrossRef .
S. Shinoda, H. Moriyama, Y. Kise and Y. Saito, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1978, 348 RSC .
H. Moriyama, T. Aoki, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1982, 369 RSC .

  (a) T. Matsubara, Y. Saito, T. Yamakawa and S. Shinoda, J. Mol. Catal., 1991, 67, 175 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Makita, K. Nomura and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1994, 89, 143 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Yamakawa, H. Miyake, H. Moriyama, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 326 RSC .
T. Matsubara, Y. Saito, T. Yamakawa and S. Shinoda, J. Mol. Catal., 1993, 79, 29 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Takahashi, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1985, 31, 301 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Yamamoto, S. Shinoda and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1985, 30, 259 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shinoda, A. Kobayashi, T. Aoki and Y. Saito, J. Mol. Catal., 1986, 38, 279 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Sperline, M. K. Dickson and D. M. Roundhill, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 62 RSC .
F. D. R. Pinto, P. J. Sadler, S. Neidle, M. R. Sanderson, A. Subbiah and R. Kuroda, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 13 RSC .
D. M. Roundhill, H. B. Gray and C. M. Che, Acc. Chem. Res., 1989, 22, 55 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Roundhill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 4354 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Roundhill, S. J. Atherton and Z. P. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6076 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Che, W. P. Schaefer, H. B. Gray, M. K. Dickson, P. Stein and D. M. Roundhill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4253 CrossRef CAS .
The dinuclear axial dihydride structure was confirmed by independent synthetic investigations:   E. L. Harvey, A. E. Stiegman, A. J. Vlcek and H. B. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 5233 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Che, W. M. Lee, K. C. Cho, P. D. Harvey and H. B. Gray, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 3095 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. M. Che, W. M. Lee, K. C. Cho, P. D. Harvey and H. B. Gray, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 3095 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. C. Smith and H. B. Gray, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1990, 100, 169 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. J. Sweeney, E. L. Harvey and H. B. Gray, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1990, 105, 23 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            M. T. Pope, in Inorganic Chemistry Concepts, ed. C. K. Jorgensen, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1983 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) E. Papaconstantinou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1989, 18, 1 RSC .

  (a) J. R. Darwent, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1982, 798 RSC ; 
  (b) T. Yamase, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1982, 64, L155 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) E. N. Savinov, S. S. Saidkhanov, V. N. Parman and K. I. Zamaraev, Dokl. Phys. Chem., 1983, 272, 916 CAS ; 
  (d) T. Yamase, N. Takabayashi and M. Kaji, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1984, 793 RSC ; 
  (e) P. Argitis and E. Papaconstantinou, J. Photochem., 1985, 30, 445 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) C. L. Hill and D. A. Bouchard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 5148 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) R. Akid and J. R. Darwent, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1985, 395 RSC ; 
  (h) R. F. Renneke and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 3528 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) A. Hiskia and E. Papaconstantinou, Polyhedron, 1988, 7, 477 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) N. Muradov and A. T. Raissi, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2006, 128, 326 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Ward, J. F. Brazdil and R. K. Grasselli, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 4210 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Papaconstantinou, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1982, 12 RSC ; 
  (b) E. Papaconstantinou and A. Ioannidis, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1983, 75, 235 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) E. Papaconstantinou, D. Dimotikali and A. Politou, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1980, 46, 155 CrossRef .

          O. Kahn, in Molecular Magnetism, VCH Publishing, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
D. C. Duncan, T. L. Netsel and C. L. Hill, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 4640 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox, R. Cardona and E. Gailard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6347 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. Kraut and G. Ferraudi, Inorg. Chem., 1990, 29, 4834 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Tanielian, K. Duffy and A. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4276 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Swallow, Prog. React. Kinet., 1978, 9, 195 CAS .
A. Mylonas, A. Hiskia, E. Androulaki, D. Dimotikali and E. Papaconstantinou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 437 RSC .

  (a) A. Mylonas and E. Papaconstantinou, J. Mol. Catal., 1994, 92, 261 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Mylonas and E. Papaconstantinou, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1996, 94, 77 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Mylonas, A. Hishkia and E. Papaconstantinou, J. Mol. Catal., 1996, 114, 191 CrossRef CAS .
For reduction stoichiometries and reduction potential of a selection of polyheterotungstates, see:   M. T. Pope and G. M. Varga, Inorg. Chem., 1966, 5, 1249 CrossRef CAS .
N. Muradov and A. T. Raissi, J. Solar Energy Eng., 2006, 128, 326 CrossRef CAS .
M. Torrent, M. Solà and G. Frenking, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
In the future, alcohols may find broader application as fuels either directly or as a source of hydrogen. Further they may serve as a raw material for the clean synthesis of fine chemicals. The direct conversion of alcohols into fine chemicals, without the need for a sacrificial oxidant, and the production of H2 as a by-product is a notable example of an atom economic process. In nature, the transformation of alcohols is efficiently catalyzed by a cascade of metalloenzymes. Remarkably, metal–ligand cooperativity plays a key-role in the activation and transformation of the substrate. These bio-catalytic systems serve as inspiration for the development of novel artificial molecular catalysts with the aim to achieve similar activities but with smaller molecular catalysts. Indeed, synthetic catalysts which contain metal centers coordinated to cooperative ligands were developed in recent years and these show improved efficiency and activity under milder reaction conditions when compared to classical non-cooperative metal–ligand systems. Notably, these molecular catalysts could be incorporated as active sites into electrodes of organometallic fuel cells (OMFCs). In these new devices, alcohols are converted into electric current and fine-chemicals can be produced with a minimum of waste according to R–CH2–OH + NaOH → RCOONa + 4H+ + 4e. OMFC's are powered by an alcohol and may find applications in small portable electronic devices and medicinal implants. For the further development of this new concept in fuel cell technology, a detailed mechanistic understanding of the single steps within the catalytic cycle is a prerequisite. The current knowledge about such processes catalyzed by organometallic complexes is summarized here.


 	Fig. 1  Number of publications in the past 2 decades obtained with the search terms “alcohol and fuel cell”.4a	 


1	CH3OH → H2CO + H2	89.1	6.2	−152.9
2	H2CO → CO + H2	5.4	6.6	−236.6
3	H2CO + H2O → HCO2H + H2	−20.9	4.2	−262.9
4	CH3OH + H2O → HCO2H + 2H2	68.2	8.0	−415.8
5	HCO2H → CO2 + H2	−14.9	4.3	−256.9
6	CH3OH + H2O → CO2 + 3H2	53.3	12.0	−672.7
7	2CH3OH → HCO2CH3 + 2H2	54.5	6.2	−429.5
8	3CH3OH → CH3OCH2OCH3 + H2 + H2O	26	2.1	−216
9	CH3OH + NH3 → HCONH2 + 2H2	64.9	8.1	−419.1
10	CH3OH + NH3 → CH2NH + H2 + H2O	120	4.1	−122
11	CH3CH2OH → CH3CHCO + H2	63.3	4.3	−178.7
12	CH3CHO + H2O → CH3CO2H + H2	−20.5	3.2	−262.5
13	CH3CH2OH + H2O → CH3CO2H + 2H2	42.8	6.2	−441.2
14	2CH3CH2OH → CH3CO2CH2CH3 + 2H2	22.6	4.3	−461.4
15	CH3CH2OH + NH3 → CH3CONH2 + 2H2	41.6	6.3	−442.4
16	CH3CH2OH + 3H2O → 2CO2 + 6H2	172.4	12	−1280
17	(CH3)2CHOH → (CH3)2CO + H2	37.5	3.3	−204.5
2H+ + 2e− ⇌ H2	(1)

 	Scheme 1  Active sites of nitrogenase and hydrogenase enzymes.	 
	(2)
C6H12O6 + 2H2O ⇌ 2CH3CO2− + 2CO2 + 4H2 + 2H+	(3)

 	Scheme 2  Metabolic pathway for H2 production during glucose fermentation in E. coli and enterobacteriaceae. Additional pathways to improve H2 yield were introduced by Veit et al.19 and Jones et al. (in blue).20 Active sites of ferredoxine-dependent hydrogenase, formate dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase are indicated. ACK: acetate kinase; ALD: alcohol dehydrogenase; Fdox: oxidized ferredoxin; Fdrd: reduced ferredoxin; FHL: formate hydrogen lyase; HydA: ferredoxin-dependent hydrogenase; LDH: lactate dehydrogenase; PP pathway: pentose phosphate pathway; NFOR, NAD(P)H: ferredoxin oxidoreductase; PDH: pyruvate dehydrogenase; PF: pyruvate formate lyase; PFOR: pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (adapted from ref. 17).	 

 	Fig. 2  Simplified graphic presentation of a DMFC.	 

 	Scheme 3  Proposed reaction steps for methanol oxidation on a Pt anode.	 
CH3OH + 1/2O2 ⇌ 2H2 + CO2 ΔHr = −188.5 kJ mol−1	(4)
2CH3OH + H2O + 1/2O2 ⇌ 5H2 + 2CO2 ΔHr = −135.2 kJ mol−1	(5)
CH3OH ⇌ 2H2 + CO ΔHr = 94.5 kJ mol−1	(6)
CO + H2O ⇌ CO2 + H2 ΔHr = −41.2 kJ mol−1	(7)

 	Scheme 4  H2 and CO2 evolution from sugar mixtures with the photocatalyst Pt/RuO2/TiO2 suspended in neutral water or 6 M NaOH solution. QY = quantum yield.	 

 	Scheme 5  Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic reforming of glucose on Pt/TiO2 by Fu et al. (adapted from ref. 66).	 

 	Scheme 6  Photocatalytic H2 evolution from pentose, glycerol or 2-propanol using Pt–TiO2 under neutral conditions.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrocatalytic oxidations.	 

 	Scheme 7  Redox reaction of the Ru–polypyridyl complex.	 

 	Fig. 4  Ligands used in Ru catalyzed electro-oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 5  Heterobimetallic complexes used in the electro-oxidation of alcohols.	 

 	Scheme 8  Ru-catalyzed electro-oxidation of methanol.	 

 	Fig. 6  Ligands used in Rh and Ir catalyzed electro-oxidation.	 

 	Scheme 9  Proposed mechanism for Rh-catalyzed oxidation of alcohol. OD = oxidative deactivation, RR = reductive reactivation.	 

 	Scheme 10  Electro-oxidation of ethanol using Rh-complex 11.	 

 	Scheme 11  Ir-catalyzed highly selective oxidation of allylic alcohols.	 

 	Scheme 12  Electro-oxidation of alcohol catalyzed by Ir-complex 12.	 

 	Scheme 13  Ru-complexes as homogeneous catalysts for the thermal dehydrogenation of primary and secondary alcohols to aldehydes and ketones.	 
RCH2OH → RCHO + H2	(8)
RCHO + RCH2OH → RCH(OH)(OCH2R)	(9)
RCH(OH)(OCH2R) → RCO2CH2R + H2	(10)

 	Scheme 14  Active Ru-catalysts for the conversion of alcohols to esters and H2 according to equations (A)–(E).	 

 	Scheme 15  Catalyzed sequential decomposition of MeOH–H2O to CO2–3H2 and proposed catalytic cycles for aqueous phase methanol dehydrogenation by Beller and Grützmacher catalysts.	 

 	Scheme 16  Ru based catalytic system for the one-pot dehydrogenation alcohols and amines to amides.	 

 	Scheme 17  Ru-catalyzed dehydrogenative coupling of β-aminoalcohols to amides, peptides and pyrazines.	 

 	Scheme 18  Dehydrogenative coupling diols and diamines to polyamides.	 

 	Scheme 19  Dehydrogenative coupling of esters and amines to amides.	 

 	Scheme 20  Mechanism proposed on DFT computations for the dehydrogenative acylation of amines with alcohols.	 

 	Scheme 21  Dehydrogenative coupling–dehydration of alcohols to esters or acetals catalyzed by Ru complexes.	 

 	Scheme 22  Tandem dehydrogenative coupling and dehydration of alcohols to imines catalyzed by Ru complexes.	 

 	Scheme 23  Ru-promoted dehydrogenation–dehydration of alcohols and amines to pyrroles.	 

 	Scheme 24  Os-catalyzed dehydrogenation of homo-allylic alcohol.	 

 	Scheme 25  Os-catalyzed dehydrogenative coupling of primary alcohols.	 

 	Scheme 26  Imine synthesis by a polyhydride Os catalyst.	 

 	Scheme 27  Mechanistic hypothesis for the Os-catalyzed imine synthesis.	 
CH3CH2OH + H2O ⇌ CH4 + CO2 + 2H2	(11)

 	Scheme 28  Proposed catalytic cycle for the Rh-catalyzed decomposition of ethanol.	 

 	Scheme 29  Plausible catalytic pathway for the Rh-catalyzed dehydrogenation of 2-propanol.	 

 	Scheme 30  Dehydrogenative oxidation of cyclohexanol catalyzed by a polyhydride Ir-complex.	 

 	Scheme 31  Proposed mechanism for the Ir-catalyzed dehydrogenation of alcohol.	 

 	Fig. 7  Ir(III) complexes used in the ligand-promoted dehydrogenation of alcohol.	 

 	Scheme 32  Dehydrogenation of secondary alcohol catalyzed by complex 76.	 

 	Scheme 33  Dehydrogenation of alcohols catalyzed by complex 77.	 

 	Scheme 34  Proposed catalytic cycle for the oxidation of alcohols catalyzed by 76 and 77.	 

 	Scheme 35  Schematic presentation of reusability of the water soluble catalyst 78.	 

 	Scheme 36  Dehydrogenative oxidation of alcohols using catalyst 79.	 

 	Scheme 37  Cp*–Ir(III) catalyzed dehydrogenation of a secondary alcohol.	 

 	Scheme 38  Ligand promoted dehydrogenative oxidation of alcohol catalyzed by complex 87.	 

 	Scheme 39  Dehydrogenative coupling of alcohol using the immobilized catalyst 87.	 

 	Scheme 40  Use of a carbene–Ir complex in dehydrogenative coupling of alcohol.	 

 	Scheme 41  Postulated catalytic cycle for the dehydrogenative decarbonylation of alcohol.	 

 	Scheme 42  Oxidation of alcohol catalyzed by the pincer Ir-complex 97.	 

 	Scheme 43  Synthesis of pyrroles using Ir-catalyst 98.	 

 	Scheme 44  Dehydrogenative oxidation of alcohol using Co(II) catalysts.	 

 	Scheme 45  Synthesis of Co(III) complex 101.	 

 	Scheme 46  Proposed mechanism for Co-catalyzed dehydrogenative oxidation of alcohol.	 

 	Scheme 47  Catalytic cycle for the oxidation of secondary alcohol catalyzed with Re(0) nanoparticles.	 


[RhCl(PPh3)3]	2-Propanol	Acetone	—	<300	21	—	5370	
159

[RhCl(P(OPh)3)3]	2-Propanol	Acetone	—	<300	21	—	6410	
159

[RhCl(CO)2]2	2-Propanol	Acetone	—	<300	21	
	2980	
159

[RhBr(PEt3)2(CO)]	2-Propanol	Acetone	—	340–420	84	750	—	
160

[RhI(PEt3)2(CO)]	2-Propanol	Acetone	—	340–420	84	1114	—	
160

[RhBr(PMe3)2(CO)]	2-Propanol	Acetone	—	340–420	84	810	—	
160

[RhH(PiPr3)3]	EtOH	H2–CH4	—	—	150	0.9	—	
162

[RhH(PiPr3)3]	EtOH	H2–CH4–CO	—	>400	150	6.2	—	
162

[RuH2(N2)(PPh3)3]	EtOH	H2–CH4–CO	—	>400	150	14.5	—	
162

[RuH2(N2)(PPh3)3]	EtOH	H2–CH4–CO2	NaOH	>400	150	210	—	
161

[RuH2(PPh3)4]	EtOH	H2–CH4–CO2	NaOH	>400	150	138	—	
161

[RhH(PiPr3)3]	EtOH	H2–CH4–CO2	NaOH	>400	150	23	—	
162

[Rh(bipy)2]Cla	EtOH	H2–CH4–CO2	NaOH	>400	120	95	—	
161

RCH2OH + H2O → RH + CO2 + 2H2	(12)

 	Scheme 48  Photocatalytic dehydrogenation of primary alcohols to alkanes and a proposed mechanism mediated by hydrido rhodium species.	 

 	Scheme 49  Mechanism for the photocatalytic dehydrogenation of 2-propanol with Rh porphyrin complexes [RhIII(TPP)X].	 

 	Scheme 50  Proposed mechanism of the catalytic cycle for 2-propanol dehydrogenation with Sn(II)-coordinated metal complexes (X = Cl−, SnCl3−).	 

 	Scheme 51  Mechanism for the photogeneration of H2 from 2-propanol catalyzed by 119.	 

 	Scheme 52  Photo-dehydrogenation of 2-propanol under aerobic or anaerobic conditions using dodecawolframosilic acid.	 

 	Scheme 53  Schematic representation of the dehydrogenation of alcohols which requires various enzymes. Hydrogen is produced by reduction of protons with electrons stored in ferredoxins with the help of hydrogenases or nitrogenases.	 

 	Scheme 54  Classical organometallic catalytic cycle which involves activation (i), oxidative addition (ii), β-hydrogen elimination (iii), product dissociation (iv), and reductive elimination (v).	 

 	Scheme 55  Two possible catalytic cycles with complexes that show metal–ligand cooperativity. Note that in cycle A, the metal centre does not change its oxidation state and the substrate molecule is bound in the second coordination sphere. In cycle B, the substrate binds to the metal centre and the α-CH-bond is cleaved by an active site X in the ligand. The arrows are meant to indicate that the quality of the M–Lb or M–X bond changes (from a covalent bond “–” between M and an anionic Lb or X ligand to a “coordinative” bond “→” between a LbH or XH as a neutral two electron donor ligand).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
