Antimony selenide nanostructures: morphology control through modulation of ligand chemistry and variation of the precursor ratio   - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CE00434F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CE00434F
(Communication)
CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 3098-3102Antimony selenide nanostructures: morphology control through modulation of ligand chemistry and variation of the precursor ratio†

        
          
            Alexey Y. 
            Koposov
          
        
      
Materials and Devices Applications Laboratory, Sharp Laboratories of America, Inc., 5750 NW Pacific Rim Blvd., Camas, WA 98607, USA. E-mail: kopo0003@gmail.com
Received 
      1st March 2017
    , Accepted 11th May 2017First published on 15th May 2017AbstractNanocrystalline antimony chalcogenides belong to a class of materials that offer significant potential for photovoltaics, display and lighting applications. However, a lack of synthetic methodologies that allow facile solution-based access to these nanomaterials currently restricts their practical use. Herein, a new synthetic route for the controlled preparation of antimony selenide nanostructures through colloidal chemistry is reported. A collection of nanostructures ranging from nanorods and nanocrystals to hollow spheres was successfully synthesized through the reported methodology, for which the morphological control during the particle formation was accomplished through both modulation of ligand chemistry for passivating the nanocrystal surface and accurate adjustment of the precursor ratio.
Introduction
Within the development of modern photovoltaic (PV) technologies, there is a significant demand for new materials that enable solar cell application alternatives for conventional silicon solar cells. Examples of such are represented by flexible PV, building-integrated PV and thin film PV technologies. Over the most recent decade, extensive research and development in this direction gave rise to cadmium telluride (CdTe) and copper indium gallium selenide (CIGSe) solar cells based on thin film technologies,1 organic photovoltaics,2 quantum dot solar cells,3 and mesostructured solar cells.4 In addition, PV technologies based upon hybrid organic/inorganic perovskite materials have recently emerged as a consequence of the relentless pursuit and evaluation of new materials as absorbers in solar cells.5
Among promising materials for solar cell fabrication, antimony-based chalcogenides represent a special subgroup. In comparison with many other commonly utilized materials, antimony-based chalcogenides are relatively non-toxic and earth abundant, and offer improved stability compared to their more popular rivals such as lead or cadmium-based chalcogenides, when utilized in solar cells in a form of nanomaterials.6,7 Furthermore, their binary composition eliminates the chemical complexity associated with solution-based fabrication of non-toxic tertiary and quaternary semiconductor materials, such as copper indium sulfide (selenide), CIS(Se), and copper zinc tin sulfide (CZTS), which have recently achieved remarkable performances in solar cells.8,9 The binary nature and the absence of alternative crystalline phases at moderate temperatures imply a relatively straightforward solution-based preparation for antimony sulfide and antimony selenide including handling methods . In addition, the band structure of antimony chalcogenides (particularly the positions of conduction and valence bands) is energetically close to conventional solar absorbers and organic/organometallic sensitizing dyes utilized in mesoporous solar cells.10 Such a favorable energy structure enables the use of conventional electron and hole transporting materials, which ultimately makes antimony-based materials as appealing candidates for photovoltaic absorber materials.10,11 Moreover, antimony sulfide has the advantage of an optical band gap of 1.7 electron volts (eV), which qualifies this material as a promising candidate for tandem solar cells.12 In contrast, antimony selenide has a narrower band gap ∼1.1 eV, which makes this material attractive as an absorber in single junction solar cells.13,14
Although antimony selenide has been shown to perform adequately in thin film solar cell architectures,13,15 the most efficient solar cell based on antimony chalcogenides relies on a sensitized architecture including the mesoporous titanium scaffold.16 At the present, thin film antimony selenide solar cells have failed to demonstrate comparable efficiencies compared to their mesoporous counterparts. It is currently assumed that the poor performance of antimony selenide is due to defect states formed during material preparation and/or poor interface formation, despite the fact that selenide has been shown to provide significant photocurrents.12 In contrast, the mesoporous architecture provides a tolerance to material quality due to efficient charge extraction by both the hole transporting material (HTM) and n-type metal oxides (titanium dioxide as a common example). Therefore, a single step deposition could be utilized for the fabrication of device structures to provide an antimony sulfide-based solar cell with relatively high photovoltaic efficiency up to 7.5%.12
As mentioned above, the binary nature of antimony chalcogenides may provide seemingly facile methods of preparation. Indeed, various approaches for the formation of antimony selenide in either mesoporous structures or as thin films have included the electrodeposition of both elements,17 thermal evaporation,15 atomic layer deposition,18 chemical bath deposition,19 and single-step deposition of antimony-chalcogen precursors using hydrazine solution in accordance with the processes reported for CIS and CZTS technologies.20 In most cases, the materials are initially formed as amorphous and therefore require an additional annealing step for conversion into a crystalline semiconductor phase.18 Moreover, for the preparation of the bulk or thin film material, these techniques generally provide absorber materials with diminished quality, ultimately resulting in poor performances in solar cells. This primarily originates from the random distribution of defect/trap sites located throughout the absorber material of the solar cell.21 Recently, inspired by hybrid organic/inorganic perovskite solar materials, new techniques for the fabrication of antimony-based chalcogenides have utilized spin-coating of appropriate precursors such as an antimony salt and thiourea.12,22 Conceivably, such an approach could be further extended to include the fabrication of composite materials containing sulfur and selenium.16 Undoubtedly, the ability to prepare antimony chalcogenides on the nanoscale would be advantageous for the application of antimony-based materials into solar cell structures such as quantum dot sensitized solar cells. Moreover, preparation of antimony chalcogenides in the quantum-confined regime may provide pathways to new color-converting materials for display and lighting applications. Consequently, the chemical preparation of antimony chalcogenide nanostructures is of particular interest. To the best of the author's knowledge, a majority of the attempts to synthesize nanostructured antimony chalcogenides reported in the literature have primarily targeted the preparation of antimony chalcogenide nanowires.23 Despite their attractiveness, these procedures lack the necessary versatility to permit the fully controlled chemical preparation of such nanostructures, which is a critical requirement for the practical application of these materials in a sensitized solar cell architecture.
Results and discussion
It is well recognized in the literature that the appropriate preparation of nanostructured materials through colloidal chemistry requires the use of reactive precursors, high temperatures and the presence of surface ligands, the latter of which is necessary for growth control and passivation of nanocrystals.24 Therefore, within the present work, the initial selection of precursors for preparing antimony chalcogenide nanostructures was primarily based on their commercial availability and potential to be applied within analogous processes used for the synthesis of the quantum dots of II–VI semiconducting materials. However, the majority of preliminary attempts to utilize conventional Se precursors ultimately failed due to rapid formation of the bulk material. Indeed, it can be concluded that the products obtained using highly or moderately reactive sources of selenium or even sulfur (such as hexamethyldisilathiane ((TMS)2S), tri-n-octylphosphine selenide and sulfide) were consistently amorphous and rapidly formed aggregates that precipitated out from the reaction mixture. It is reasonable to assume that the formation of such aggregates is due to the random orientation of reactive sites which does not allow for the effective surface passivation required for a controlled growth process. Therefore, slow decomposition of the selenium precursor together with the appropriate ligand system would be expected to enable the controlled growth of nanocrystalline antimony selenide. For the initial nanocrystal growth, a procedure that includes antimony chloride in the presence of oleic acid with selenourea, dissolved in oleylamine, has been adopted. The in situ formation of antimony (III) oleate upon further addition of a selenium precursor of a relatively low reactivity provides an appropriate set of reaction conditions for controlled colloidal growth. The formation of antimony selenide was confirmed by XRD analysis (Fig. S1 in the ESI†), while the morphology of the reaction product was determined by TEM, which revealed the formation of antimony selenide nanorods, as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(a and b) presents the TEM images of a sample of Sb2Se3 nanorods at low (a) and high (b) magnifications, which show the ensemble of nanorods and the lattice fringes and confirms the high crystallinity of the material. The sizes of the nanorods were estimated to average 150–200 nm in length and 25 nm in width using the TEM images, although some smaller nanorods with a length of about 50 nm were also observed. Overall, the growth of the nanorods can be controlled by adjusting the reaction time as well as through small adjustments in the ratio of the reactants. Temperature variations in the synthetic procedure lead to either bulk-type precipitates (at higher temperatures) or to the formation of an amorphous material (at lower temperatures). Such phenomena are most reasonably attributed to poor passivation of the nanocrystal using the ligand, which leads to aggregation of the particles during the growth process.
 Fig. 1  TEM analysis of antimony selenide nanostructures: (a) low magnification view and (b) high magnification view of a single nanorod. 
Not surprisingly, the ratio of the reactants was found to exert a significant influence on the nanorod formation. Indeed, the use of higher amounts of Se precursors ultimately led to the formation of rods with different dimensions (see Fig. S2 in the ESI†). In contrast to the large nanorods shown in Fig. 1, the aspect ratio for the smaller nanorods was reduced, including the average diameter around 10 nm and the length of 30 to 50 nm. The EDX analysis unambiguously revealed a Se-rich content, resulting in Sb2Se4.8, which confirms that the surface of the nanorods is extremely Se-rich. This result is not surprising since the stoichiometry of the surface can be chemically modified from metal-rich to chalcogen-rich.25 In addition, it was revealed that the amount of selenium precursors provides an additional control over the final particle size whereby an increased ratio of selenium versus antimony proceeds with the formation of smaller particles.
The aggregation or growth processes could be potentially modulated by employing ligands that would be more competitive towards the surface of the forming nanocrystal. In particular, since the surface of the nanorods was found to be selenium rich, or selenium terminated, it would be beneficial to control the growth through the addition of ligands which preferentially bind to metal atoms (antimony). This approach would provide additional surface control and allow the antimony atoms to participate in the growth process. Phosphines, phosphine oxides and high temperature boiling amines, which are widely utilized in the synthesis of II–VI semiconductor nanocrystals, are often good candidates for such a strategy. Therefore, conventional procedures including the addition of tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO) or oleylamine as the surface ligand were also investigated. TOPO and oleylamine, both of which are well-known surface ligands used for the preparation of quantum dots, would be expected to partially suppress the nanorod formation and growth, thereby allowing smaller nanostructures to be formed. However, due to the chemical differences between the two, they would be expected to exhibit different affinities towards the surface of the growing particles and therefore provide different reaction products. Indeed, both ligands demonstrated at least partial suppression of aggregation, preventing the formation of the bulk amorphous material. Noteworthy, the more strongly bound TOPO almost completely suppressed the growth of the material and provided ultra-small nanocrystals with sizes below 2 nm. In addition, through adjustment of the antimony and selenium precursors and quenching of the reaction immediately following the addition of the precursors, it was possible to obtain ultra-small (“magic-sized”) particles that were detectable only through STEM, as shown in Fig. S3 in the ESI.† In contrast, the more labile oleylamine ligand afforded larger nanoparticles with dimensions ranging from 2 nm to 10 nm depending on reaction conditions (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Low magnification TEM view of antimony selenide nanoparticles. 
Noteworthy is the fact that the oleylamine-based procedure required substantially higher temperatures than those utilizing TOPO, which resulted in trace amounts of amorphous materials along with nanocrystals observable only in STEM. Following quenching, neither precipitation nor any indication of aggregation was observed for either procedure. Thus, the modification of the standard procedure by the addition of TOPO leads to inhibited growth of the particles, while oleylamine provided more benign conditions for nanoparticle growth including the prevention of the nanorod formation. Remarkably, none of the nanoparticles described above exhibited any detectable photoluminescence, as would be expected from confined semiconductors with a direct bandgap. The absence of emission is most likely due to the anionic surface (Se-terminated), which serves as a trap for charges, thereby eliminating excitonic emission.25 The formed nanoparticles exhibit irregular morphologies, which suggest that the growth methods warrant further optimizations and may provide an additional explanation for the absence of photoluminescence. Moreover, the absorbance spectrum of the nanoparticles does not show any distinguishable features that are common for the transitions in quantum confined structures, which possibly originates from the broad size distribution26 (Fig. S4 in the ESI†) or the absence of quantum confinement due to small Bohr exciton radius as previously reported.27
Additional manipulation of the reaction conditions furnished unusual nanoparticles including hollow spheres, as was unambiguously determined by TEM (Fig. 3). As depicted in Fig. 3, the presence of crystalline materials in the center of the rings (Fig. S5 in the ESI†) clearly identifies these structures as spheres rather than o-rings. The size distribution for the hollow spheres was relatively large such that a variety of spheres with outer diameters ranging from about 10 to 25 nm were obtained (Fig. S6 in the ESI†).
 Fig. 3  TEM view of antimony selenide nanosphere. 
Similar nanostructured materials (O-rings) based on the more common CdSe were recently deliberately synthesized by Talapin's group.28 The proposed mechanism for the formation of CdSe nanorings was strain driven rearrangement, which was initiated by the selective etching of the quasi-two dimensional CdSe nanoplatelets. However, in the present case, no evidence of the quasi-2D or alternative structures was observed, which supports the assertion that the formation of the hollow spheres is not driven through rearrangement of materials formed at the earlier stages of the reaction, but rather as a direct consequence of the combination of reaction conditions. The mechanism for the formation of the hollow spheres is currently unclear while such studies reside outside the scope of the present investigation. However, it is reasonable to speculate that the formation of the hollow spheres was driven through the formation of amorphous nanospheres (or nanoparticles) during the initial stages of the reaction. In fact, such processes are not unusual for antimony chalcogenides, as discussed above. Through the course of the reaction, it is reasonable to assume that the elevation of temperature resulted in the formation of the crystalline phase on the surface along with dissolution of the amorphous core. Since the thickness of the walls of the hollow spheres varies (as seen in the low magnification image in the ESI†), it is also possible to assume that the growth of the walls may be occurring in response to the crystallization of the amorphous core.
Besides altering the ratio of the ligands, the growth of the abovementioned nanostructures is also additionally modulated by the ratio of the selenium and antimony precursors. The schematic representation of such control is shown in Fig. 4. Briefly, larger amounts of selenium favor the formation of smaller and spherical structures. At the same time, the ratio of ligands such as oleic acid and oleylamine provides an additional tool for modulation of the morphology.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the morphology controlled using Sb:Se ratio. 
Conclusions
In summary, within the present communication, methods for controlled, solution-based synthesis of antimony selenide nanostructures are reported. Through variation of the Sb to Se ratio, it was possible to modulate the morphology of the nanoparticles from nanorods to spherical nanoparticles and hollow spheres. It is anticipated that such methodologies could be further extended to the preparation of analogous materials such as antimony sulfide and, possibly, bismuth-containing chalcogenides. This synthetic methodology offers potential for the direct synthesis of pnictogen chalcogenides for solar cells and light-emitting applications.
Acknowledgements
The present work was funded by the Corporate Research and Development Division of SHARP Corporation. The author kindly acknowledges Dr. Sean Vail (Sharp Laboratories of America) for proof reading this manuscript.
Notes and references
J. Jean, P. R. Brown, R. L. Jaffe, T. Buonassisi and V. Bulović, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1200 CAS ; 
          G. Cheek, F. Yang and H. Lee, 2013 IEEE 39th Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), Tampa, FL,  2013, p. 3407 Search PubMed.
O. Ostroverkhova, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115(23), 12732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. A. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
P. Gao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448 CAS .
G.-H. Kim, F. P. García de Arquer, Y. J. Yoon, X. Lan, M. Liu, O. Voznyy, Z. Yang, F. Fan, A. H. Ip, P. Kanjanaboos, S. Hoogland, J. Y. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115(23), 12732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, K. B. Reuter and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2010, 22(20), E156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Hibberd, E. Chassaing, W. Liu, D. B. Mitzi, D. Lincot and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18(6), 434 CAS .
N. Guijarro, T. Lutz, T. Lana-Villarreal, F. O'Mahony, R. Gómez and S. A. Haque, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3(10), 1351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Chang, J. H. Rhee, S. H. Im, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(7), 2609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Choi, D. U. Lee, J. H. Noh, E. K. Kim and S. I. Seok, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3587 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, L. Wang, S. Chen, S. Qin, X. Liu, J. Chen, D.-J. Xue, M. Luo, Y. Cao, Y. Cheng, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 409 CrossRef CAS .
D. Choi, Y. Jang, J. H. Lee, G. H. Jeong, D. Whang, S. W. Hwang, K.-S. Cho and S.-W. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Chen, M. Luo, M. Leng, Z. Xia, Y. Zhou, S. Qin, D.-J. Xue, L. Lv, H. Huang, D. Niu and J. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(13), 10687 CAS .
Y. C. Choi, Y. H. Lee, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, W. S. Yang and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(7), 1301680 CrossRef .
T. T. Ngo, S. Chavhan, I. Kosta, O. Miguel, H.-J. Grande and R. Tena-Zaera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(4), 2836 CAS .
H. Wedemeyer, J. Michels, R. Chmielowski, S. Bourdais, T. Muto, M. Sugiura, G. Dennlerb and J. Bachmann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 67 CAS .
Y. Rodríguez-Lazcano, L. Guerrero, O. Gomez, M. Daza, T. S. Nair and P. K. Nair, Superficies Vacio, 1999, 9, 100 Search PubMed .
B. Yang, D.-J. Xue, M. Leng, J. Zhong, L. Wang, H. Song, Y. Zhou and J. Tang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Leng, M. Luo, C. Chen, S. Qin, J. Chen, J. Zhong and J. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105(8), 083905 CrossRef .
Y. C. Choi and S. I. Seok, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 25(19), 2892 CrossRef .
R. J. Mehta, C. Karthik, W. Jiang, B. Singh, Y. Shi, R. W. Siegel, T. Borca-Tasciuc and G. Ramanath, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(11), 4417 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; J. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Peng, J. Lian, X. Duan, Z. Liu, X. Liu, Q. Chen, T. Kim, G. Yao and W. Zheng, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2369 RSC .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110(1), 389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jasieniak and P. Mulvaney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(10), 2841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mu, F. Wang and W. E. Buhro, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(8), 3686 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Y. Chen, B. Dneg, G.-B. Cai, T.-K. Zhang, W.-F. Dong, W.-X. Zhang and A.-W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(3), 672 CAS .
I. Fedin and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(31), 9771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthetic procedures and additional characterization are included. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ce00434fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  TEM analysis of antimony selenide nanostructures: (a) low magnification view and (b) high magnification view of a single nanorod.	 

 	Fig. 2  Low magnification TEM view of antimony selenide nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM view of antimony selenide nanosphere.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the morphology controlled using Sb:Se ratio.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthetic procedures and additional characterization are included. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ce00434f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
