What will happen when microorganisms “meet” photocatalysts and photocatalysis?  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EN01318K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EN01318K
(Critical Review)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2020, 7, 702-723What will happen when microorganisms “meet” photocatalysts and photocatalysis?

        
          
            Yaocheng 
            Deng
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Zaiyun 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rongdi 
            Tang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Ouyang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chanjuan 
            Liao
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Fang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chunxia 
            Ding
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Lihua 
            Yang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Long 
            Su
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Daoxin 
            Gong
          
          
        
      ab
aCollege of Resources and Environment, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha 410128, China. E-mail: dengyaocheng@hunau.edu.cn; cjliao@hunau.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 731 84617710;   Tel: +86 731 84617710
bInstitute of Agricultural Environmental Protection, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha 410128, China
cCollege of Science, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha 410128, China
Received 
      19th November 2019
    , Accepted 16th January 2020First published on 16th January 2020AbstractIn recent years, photocatalytic technology has been widely studied as an environmental restoration technology and energy production technology to solve the two crises of energy shortage and environmental pollution. Meanwhile, with the continuous research and improvement in photocatalysis technology, it has been found that the interaction between microorganisms and photocatalysts has good application prospects. In general, the interaction between photocatalysts and microorganisms can be summarized as follows: first of all, in terms of environmental pollution control, photocatalysts can damage microorganisms and sterilize them; secondly, in the production of energy materials, photocatalysts can couple with microorganisms to produce energy or degrade pollutants more efficiently; thirdly, in the preparation of photocatalysts, microorganisms can help the construction of photocatalysts. Although the relationship between microorganisms and photocatalysts is very important and significant, related reviews about this are rare. Therefore, in this paper, we have summarized the interaction between microorganisms and photocatalysts, the mechanism and application of photocatalysts in microorganism damage, and the mechanism and application of photocatalysts and microorganism synergism, and the preparation of photocatalysts by biological methods was also reviewed. Moreover, the problems and challenges that should be faced and addressed in future research are discussed.Yaocheng DengYaocheng Deng is an associate professor of the College of Resources and Environment, Hunan Agricultural University. He received his Ph.D. in 2018 under the supervision of Prof. Lin Tang at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University. His research includes photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical removal of pollutants from the environment, and photocatalytic energy production. Dr. Deng has co-authored over 40 papers in peer-reviewed international journals.Zaiyun LiZaiyun Li is a college student, and she majors in biotechnology at the Orient Science & Technology College, Hunan Agricultural University. She studied as part of Yaocheng Deng's research team. Her research interest is the relationship between microorganisms and photocatalysis.Rongdi TangRongdi Tang received a B.E. in Pharmaceutical Engineering from Central South University in 2016, and acquired an M.S. in Chemistry from The University of Manchester in 2017. Now she is a Ph.D student at Hunan Agricultural University, under the guidance of Prof. Gong and Prof. Deng. Her research is mainly focused on the removal of environmental contaminants using photocatalytic materials.Kai OuyangKai Ouyang is a lecturer at the College of Resources and Environment, Hunan Agricultural University, China. He received his Ph.D. degree from Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China in 2018. His research interests include bacterial biofilms and environmental biochemistry.Chanjuan LiaoChanjuan Liao received her B.S. from Hunan Normal University in 2006, and her Ph.D. in 2011 under the supervision of Prof. Yunbai Luo at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University. Now she works at the College of Resources and Environment, Hunan Agricultural University. Her research mainly includes the application of photocatalysts and membrane treatment technology in the field of environmental water treatment. Dr. Liao has co-authored over 10 papers in peer-reviewed international journals.Daoxing GongDaoxing Gong is a professor at the College of Resources and Environment, Hunan Agricultural University, China. He received his Ph.D. degree from Zhejiang University, China in 2004. His research interests include environmental chemistry and environmental toxicology (pesticide residue test, organic pollution chemistry). He has worked in the field of pesticide residue detection for more than 30 years. He has served as the chief expert in the formulation of agricultural residue standards for many years.

Environmental significance
In order to solve the two crises of energy shortage and environmental pollution, photocatalytic technology has been widely studied in recent years as an environmental restoration technology and energy production technology. Although microorganisms and photocatalysis have good application prospects in environment control and energy production, due to the multiplicity of the relationship between microorganisms and photocatalysis, there are no comprehensive reviews of the relationship between photocatalysts and microorganisms. In this paper, the interaction between microorganisms and photocatalysts, the mechanism and application of photocatalysts in microorganism damage, and the mechanism and application of photocatalysts and microorganism synergism, and the preparation of photocatalysts by biological methods was reviewed. Finally, the problems and challenges that should be faced and addressed in future research are discussed. Therefore, this review will help researchers fully understand their relationship and promote the development of research in the field of photocatalysis and microorganisms.

1. Introduction
In order to alleviate the increasing pressure caused by energy shortage and environmental problems, photocatalytic technology has been widely studied as an environmental restoration technology and energy production technology in recent years.1–11 Whether in environmental restoration or energy production, the role of photocatalysts cannot be separated from their delicate relationship with microorganisms. Besides, the rapid development of photocatalysis has greatly enhanced the opportunities of interaction between photocatalysis and microorganisms. So the questions are what is the fascinating relationship between photocatalysts and microorganisms? What will happen when microorganisms meet photocatalysts and photocatalytic technologies? With such doubts, we have collected a large number of literature and summary studies, and three relationships between microorganisms and photocatalysts were concluded. As for the relationship between microorganisms and photocatalysts, the antagonistic relationship is mainly presented, that is, photocatalytic sterilization technology. In 1985, Matsunaga et al. reported for the first time that photocatalysts could kill bacterial cells in water,12 since then photocatalytic technology has been widely studied and proved to be a low cost, safe and promising alternative wastewater treatment and water purification technology.13 Deng and co-workers have also confirmed an efficient photocatalytic system for the degradation of environmental contaminants, such as methylene blue (MB), ciprofloxacin (CIP), tetracycline, 2,4-dichlorophenol and other antibiotics.14–18 At present, one less studied but a promising one is the synergy between photocatalysts and microorganisms. When microorganisms and photocatalysts can coexist in a friendly manner, the cooperation between them can solve the major problems of environmental pollution and energy shortage. In recent years, many publications have reported that the coupling effect of microorganisms and photocatalysis can promote the biodegradation of refractory substances.19–23 In a system with the existence of both a photocatalytic process and a biodegradation effect, the biodegradability is enhanced, which further improves pollutant degradation efficiency.18,23–25 The coupling system of a photocatalytic system and a biodegradation system (ICPB) is a new type of pollutant degradation system. In a bioelectrochemical system, photocatalysts can accelerate the biodegradation rate of refractory organic pollutants as a promising electrode material while recovering the current.26 Meanwhile, some microorganisms can use electrons generated by photocatalysts to produce valuable chemicals, such as hydrogen and acetic acid, through metabolic pathways in the body.27–29 Another less well studied relationship between microorganisms and photocatalysts is similar to the symbiotic relationship defined in biology. Some studies have shown that photocatalysis can promote the growth of microorganisms.30–32 At the same time, it has also attracted people's attention to the design of highly efficient photocatalysts to obtain excellent photocatalytic performance with the help of microorganisms.33,34 At present, most of the reported preparation methods often use harmful chemicals, which will cause serious pollution when these chemicals are discharged into the natural environment.35 So a green preparation and improvement method is urgently needed. Therefore, the symbiotic relationship between photocatalysis and microorganisms has been well applied. The typical environmental friendly preparation approach is to synthesize photocatalysts using an electrochemical active biofilm (EAB).36,37 This method can not only reduce the cost of preparation process and the amount of toxic chemicals to be used, but also improve the performance of photocatalysts, and it also has good potential for realistic application.
Although microorganisms and photocatalysis have good application prospects in environment control and energy production, due to the multiplicity of the relationship between microorganisms and photocatalysis, there are no comprehensive reviews of the relationship between photocatalysts and microorganisms. Therefore, in this review, we will systematically summarize and describe the three interactions between microorganisms and photocatalysis (Fig. 1). This will help researchers fully understand their relationship and promote the development of research in the field of photocatalysis and microorganisms.
 Fig. 1  Three main relationships between photocatalysis and microorganisms. 
2. Damage effect of photocatalysts on microorganisms
2.1 Photocatalytic sterilization mechanism
In 1985, Matsunaga et al. reported that TiO2 photocatalysts can kill bacteria in water.12 Since then, photocatalytic technology has attracted extensive attention, and a large number of studies have reported that common pathogens and microorganisms in water can be inactivated by photocatalysts under light.38–40 In order to understand the damage effect of photocatalysts on microorganisms, it is necessary to study the bactericidal mechanism of photocatalysis. It is well known that most photocatalysts are semiconductor materials, and a photocatalytic process based on semiconductor materials can be briefly described as follows: when a semiconductor is irradiated by light, photogenerated electrons (e−) and holes (h+) would be generated and react with other substances to form reactive oxygen species (ROS), including ˙OH, H2O2, H+ and ˙O2−, and these ROS participate in the photocatalytic removal of bacteria process. Through the understanding of the contents of a large number of studies, at present, we summarized the photocatalytic bactericidal mechanism roughly in the following three ways as shown in Fig. 2. (I) Reactive oxygen species attack the cell membrane, and coenzyme A on the cell membrane is damaged, resulting in inhibition of respiration dependent on the intact cell membrane, reduction or loss of cellular respiration activity, and eventually cause cell death. Matsunaga et al. first proposed a new concept of photochemical sterilization through photocatalytic treatment of different microorganisms (S. cerevisiae, lactobacillus acidophilus, E. coli and Chlorella vulgaris). They believed that coenzyme A in bacterial cells was photochemically oxidized into a dimer form, which inhibited the respiration dependent on coenzyme A and eventually led to cell death.12 Maness et al. have showed the intracellular lipid peroxidation of the decomposition product of MDA and confirmed that the unsaturated fatty acid in membrane was oxidized, at the same time by measuring the 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride proved cells rely on integrated membrane breathing activity loss.41 (II) Studies have proved that the bactericidal mechanism of photocatalysts is that reactive oxygen species attack cell membranes to enhance their permeability, and reactive oxygen species enter cells to further oxidize macromolecular substances such as nucleic acids and proteins, and eventually the cells die.42 Wu et al. used a combination of chemical assays and several microscopy techniques to reveal that the mechanism of visible light-induced killing of bacteria by PdO/TiON nanoparticles causes the initial oxidative damage to cell walls and cell membranes, followed by damaging internal DNA molecules, which ultimately leads to severe oxidative reactions. This process causes morphological and structural damage to cells.43 (III) Some other studies have suggested that the bactericidal mechanism of photocatalysis is the oxidation of cell membranes by reactive oxygen species, and then breaks down cell membranes and cell walls, causing intracellular macromolecules (nucleic acids, proteins) and some cations (such as K+) to leak out and finally lead to the death of bacterial cells.44–47 Saito et al. found in the study of TiO2 photocatalytic inactivation of streptococcus AHT that K+ in bacterial cells permeated out of the cells, while the cell activity decreased, and proteins and RNA were slowly released.48 The bactericidal activity and mechanism of AgI/AgBr/BiOBr under visible light irradiation also have proved that the leakage of intracellular substances (K+) caused cell death after cell membrane rupture.47 At present, the exact function of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in photocatalytic disinfection is not clear. We summarized some specific photocatalytic sterilization mechanisms as shown in Table 1. From which we can see that bacteria are the most commonly used model pathogens or pathogen substitutes to evaluate the photocatalytic disinfection efficiency of materials,49,50 and there are few studies on photocatalytic inactivation of viruses. Viruses have simpler structures than bacteria, and most viruses use protein shells to coat their genetic material. Therefore, in the reaction of photocatalyst disinfection, the loss of protein on the surface of the virus and oxidative damage lead to the leakage and rapid destruction of RNA, which ultimately leads to the death of the virus and thus it cannot regenerate.51 The above studies on the photocatalytic sterilization mechanism involve different factors (i.e. bacterial strain, photocatalyst, reactor configuration, water quality parameters, etc.). Therefore, the dominant ROS is not the same, and the photocatalytic mechanism cannot be uniquely determined. And because of the complexity of microorganisms, the whole mechanism of photocatalytic deactivation is still unknown.52 Therefore, it is still necessary to study the mechanism of photocatalytic sterilization in detail.
 Fig. 2  Photocatalytic bactericidal mechanism. 
Table 1 Selected representative photocatalysts with their disinfection mechanisms




Photocatalysts
Target microorganisms
Reactive species
Ref.




PdO/TiON

E. coli

˙OH

43



AgVO3/g-C3N4

Salmonella

e˙−, ˙O2−

45



Pt/TiO2

E. coli

ROS (not specified)

53



B–Ni–TiO2

E. coli

˙O2−, H2O2

54



AgBr–TiO2

E. coli

H2O2

55




S. aureus

˙OH, ˙O2


AgBr–Ag Bi2WO6

E. coli

˙OH

56



BiVO4

E. coli

h+, ˙OH ads, e−

46, 57, 58



Natural sphalerite

E. coli

H2O2, e−

59




M. barkeri



Natural magnetic sphalerite

E. coli

˙O2−, H2O2

60



Red phosphorus

E. coli

˙OH˙O2−, H2O2

61





2.2 Photocatalytic treatment of water pollution
Harmful microorganisms cause millions of deaths and diseases each year.62 Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop effective and low-cost disinfection techniques to solve these problems. With the development of disinfection techniques, semiconductor photocatalyst based disinfection systems have attracted great attention. Results show that they are efficient to kill large numbers of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, filamentous and single-celled fungi, algae, protozoa, mammalian viruses and phages as a promising environmental remediation technology,63 which is suitable for medical, pharmaceutical, food protection, wastewater treatment and disinfection.64 At present, according to statistics, there are more than 20000 articles on photocatalytic bactericidal technology.
The presence of different types of microorganisms in wastewater (bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae, plankton, etc.) is harmful to health and can cause a variety of diseases,65 and photocatalytic disinfection technology has been widely used in wastewater treatment and water disinfection. The photocatalytic technology can replace the traditional water purification method because of its economical, safe, high efficiency and other bactericidal properties. And a great deal of photocatalysts have been designed and synthesized to study the deactivation effects of photocatalysts on microorganisms, including metal oxides, sulfides, graphene-based photocatalysts and natural mineral photocatalysts.66 Titanium dioxide (TiO2), as a model photocatalyst has been widely used to explore the damage of photocatalysts to microorganisms. In the practical application of photocatalysis in water disinfection, the use of immobilized photocatalysts is essential. Therefore, Wang et al. prepared an immobilized TiO2 coating by plasma electrolysis oxidation, and studied the photocatalytic activity of the TiO2 coating on the inactivation of Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella. Results show that the inactivation rate of the TiO2 coating on 108 CFU ml−1Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella reached 98.20% and 94.82% after exposure to a UV lamp for 120 min, presenting a good sterilization effect.67 Although TiO2 is highly efficient in sterilization, it can only use 4% of the solar spectral energy (ultraviolet light), which limits its application in actual water disinfection and wastewater treatment. In order to use visible light to kill bacteria efficiently, visible light-driven (VLD) photocatalysts are necessary. Some studies demonstrated that using metals (Pt, Au, and Ag) or non-metallic modified TiO2 can significantly improve the utilization rate of visible light.68,69 Zinc oxide (ZnO) is also a photocatalyst with some advantages, but its application in water treatment is limited by its band gap (3.4 eV). To solve this problem, Pandey et al. coupled ZnO and ZnS into ZnO0.6S0.4 nanostructures via co-precipitation and calcination methods, because ZnO0.6S0.4 had the narrowest band gap of 2.7 eV in a series of ZnOS semiconductors with different O/S molar ratios.70 Moreover, the photocatalytic activity of two semiconductors with an appropriate band position can be effectively expanded by combining them.71 With the help of UV-visible DRS spectroscopy, they found that ZnO0.6S0.4 nanoparticles irradiated by visible light had stronger photocatalytic activity than pure ZnO and ZnS (Fig. 3(a)). Finally, the inactivation experiment of E. coli K-12 also confirmed that ZnO0.6S0.4 nanoparticles had strong photocatalytic performance. It can be seen from Fig. 3(b) that the sterilization rate of ZnO0.6S0.4 is about 6.5 times that of ZnO and ZnS, Fig. 3(c–f) show the fluorescence microscopy images of E. coli K-12 treated with ZnO0.6S0.4 nanoparticles under visible light irradiation at 0 h, 1 h, 2 h, and 3 h.72 In addition, there are other metal oxide photocatalysts that can significantly improve the photocatalytic performance through combination, such as BiVO4/CeO2 nanocomposites,73 p–n junction Bi2O3/Bi2WO6 hollow microspheres,74 and Bi2WO6/TiO2 fractional heterogeneous structures.75
 Fig. 3  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of ZnO, ZnS and ZnO0.6S0.4 nanoparticles. (b) Photocatalytic bacterial inactivation of E. coli K-12 in the presence of ZnO, ZnS and ZnO0.6S0.4 under visible LED irradiation. (c–f) Fluorescence microscopy images of E. coli K-12 photocatalytically treated by ZnO0.6S0.4 nanoparticles under visible LED irradiation for (c) 0 h, (d) 1 h, (e) 2 h, and (f) 3 h. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides, sulfide nanoparticles also have novel electronic and optical properties. In recent years, PdS, CdS, Ag2S and other sulfide nanoparticles have been used as photocatalysts because of their thin semiconductor quantum dots.76–79 Among them, CdS has the advantages of being active in sunlight or visible light, chemical stability, easy preparation and low cost.80 In practice, however, there are still problems in removing CdS from treated water and improving its charge separation efficiency. Recently, the preparation of single graphene or GO based CdS nanocomposites has been shown to be a potential measure to overcome these defects.81,82 There are many reports on the synthesis and application of GO/CdS composites.83–85 Gao et al. reported the disinfection activity of GO/CdS composites.77 They used a two-phase method to synthesize GO/CdS, and the synthesis diagram is shown in Fig. 4(a). Gao et al. selected Gram-negative E. coli and gram-positive B. subtilis as the standard microorganisms for the disinfection experiment. The results show that the sterilization efficiency of the GO/CdS composite is about twice that of CdS alone (Fig. 4(b and c)). In addition, due to the large size of GO nanosheets, they can be easily recycled after photocatalytic oxidation. By using the GO/CdS composite material to degrade AO7, the results show that the GO/CdS composite has high photocatalytic efficiency and stability. Graphite carbon nitride (g-C3N4) as a metal-free semiconductor photocatalyst was first reported in 2009.86 Since then, g-C3N4 has been proved to be an efficient photocatalyst and widely used in solar energy conversion and environmental restoration.87–89 Zhao et al. first used E. coli to confirm antibacterial functions on the surface of g-C3N4 polymers, which provided new opportunities for the creation of antibacterial agents based on g-C3N4. The researchers prefer to improve the photocatalytic activity by changing the structure of g-C3N4 or coupling it with other metallic/nonmetallic elements and semiconductor photocatalysts.51,90–94 Li et al. reported the photocatalytic inactivation of phage MS2 by g-C3N4 under visible light irradiation. The results showed that the disinfection effect was best when 150 mg L−1 of g-C3N4 was used, and the inactivation of MS2 decreased to 7.5log after 6 h of reaction (Fig. 5(a and b)). Then a virus regrowth test was carried out to further understand the killing effect of the virus. The results showed that no plaque formation was visible even after culture in the dark for 72 h, which means that MS2 was completely inactivated by photocatalysis. In order to understand the mechanism of g-C3N4 induced virus disinfection, a series of scavengers were used to compare the photocatalytic inactivation of the virus. Fig. 5(c) shows the disinfection mechanism of g-C3N4.51 Additionally, g-C3N4 has rich content, low cost, strong photocatalytic activity and very low cytotoxicity. It can be used as a drug carrier for cancer treatment.95,96 In a word, g-C3N4 is a relatively safe and environmentally friendly photocatalyst.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-phase synthesis of GO–CdS composites. (b) Time course for antibacterial activity towards E. coli in the presence of GO, CdS and GO–CdS under visible light irradiation for 30 min; (c) B. subtilis inactivation without any catalysts and after being treated with GO, CdS and GO–CdS with/without visible light for 10 min, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Elsevier. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Photocatalytic inactivation efficiency against MS2 (1 × 108 PFU mL−1, 100 mL) in the presence of different doses of g-C3N4 under visible light irradiation. (b) Photographs of MS2 plaque formation before and after photocatalytic disinfection with g-C3N4 (150 mg L−1) under visible light irradiation. (c) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism of viral inactivation by g-C3N4 under visible light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Elsevier. 
In addition to the above mentioned photocatalysts, natural semiconductor minerals are abundant on earth and can be used as visible light driven (VLD) photocatalysts for environmental restoration.97–99 Compared with VLD photocatalysts, natural VLD minerals are easily available, have lower cost and have great potential for environmental application. Chen et al. first studied photocatalytic disinfection of natural semiconductor mineral sphalerite and found that the natural sphalerite could be completely inactivated 1.5 × 107 CFU mL−1E. coli K-12 after 6 h of visible light irradiation (Fig. 6(a)),100 presenting the high efficiency of natural sphalerite. Subsequently, Wang et al. reported the bactericidal performance of a new type of visible light driven photocatalyst for natural Pb–Zn sphalerite (NMS), and the results of sterilization experiments showed that within 6 h of fluorescent tube irradiation, NMS could inactivate 7log10 CFU ml−1 of E. coli K-12 (Fig. 6(b and c)). In addition, Backlight kit fluorescence microscopy was used to confirm the sterilization effect of NMS during the sterilization process, as shown in Fig. 6(d–i).60 Due to the limitation of low photocatalytic activity and potentially toxic ion release in the practical application of NMS, Wang et al. carried out a thermal modification method. For example, natural pyrite (NP) is found to have the best photocatalytic activity and stability after heat treatment at 600 °C in air. The total inactivation of 107 CFU ml−1E coli K-12 under fluorescent tube irradiation within 4 h was shorter and more efficient than that of NMS.101
 Fig. 6  (a) Photocatalytic disinfection of E. coli K-12 by natural sphalerite under VL irradiation under different experimental conditions. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from American Chemical Society. (b and c) Photocatalytic deactivation efficiency (2 107 CFU mL−1, 50 mL) of E. coli K-12 by NMS under different experimental conditions under VL irradiation. (b) Nonpartition system and (c) partition system. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d–i) Fluorescence microscopy images of E. coli K-12 (2 107 CFU mL−1, 50 mL) after photocatalytic treatment or NMS (50 mg) treatment under VL irradiation. (d) NMS, (e) mixture of NMS and E. coli K-12 before irradiation, and (f) 1 h, (g) 2 h, (h) 4 h, (i) 6 h after VL irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
In other words, the purpose of these studies is devoted to applying photocatalytic bactericidal technology in practical applications. The improvement of photocatalysts is mainly reflected in three aspects: (I) improved visible light utilization; (II) enhanced charge transfer and separation in photocatalysts; (III) enhanced stability of the photocatalytic system.
2.3 Disinfection of public environments
Photocatalytic disinfection technology has broad application prospects. Studies of sewage treatment and water disinfection application are more than those of disinfection and sterilization in indoor, hospital and other public places. Related studies have shown that the pollution level in indoor environments is higher than that in outdoor environments.102–104 Air biological pollution includes bacteria, mold and viruses. Many central air treatment systems are breeding grounds for biological pollutants.105–107 Places like hospitals and some nursing institutions are more likely to breed harmful pathogens.108,109 These potential pollutants endanger human health. Therefore, air purification of indoor and public environments has also attracted our attention. Le et al. studied the purification of indoor air by deposition of nanometer-sized titanium dioxide (TiO2) materials in photocatalytic filtration tubes, which can remove most butanol, acetone, ether and benzene. In addition, more than 99% of bacteria and fungi will be killed when air passes through the device.102 In view of the efficient sterilization effect of the equipment, it can be used in hospitals to purify indoor air effectively.102 The use of photocatalytic bactericidal technology (TiO2) to purify indoor gas can thoroughly destroy some toxic organic compounds and microorganisms.110 Air purifiers containing a photocatalyst (nano silver/titanium dioxide) can effectively inhibit or disinfect the bacteria in air to improve the air quality. Therefore, these photocatalytic disinfection technologies can be applied to air disinfection in nursing institutions, hospitals and other public areas.111
Besides, hospital laundry wastewater, which has high toxicity and a large number of pathogens, is one of the typical environmental hazardous substances in various departments of medical units.112,113 A combination of UV/O3/TiO2 was used to sterilize hospital laundry wastewater. The results showed that catalytic photo-ozonation had a good bactericidal effect, providing an alternative method for the treatment of hospital laundry wastewater.114 CWPO-photoelectric assisted process is also an effective alternative method for on-site treatment of hospital wastewater. It can degrade many drugs in hospital wastewater (such as antibiotics, antidepressants, analgesics, blockers, etc.) and completely eliminate the total coliform group.115 Many studies have examined microbial contamination in hospital environments. A strain of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) causes hospital-acquired infections (HALs).116–118 In order to control the bacterial infection, photoactive antibacterial surfaces were studied. Photoactive antibacterial surfaces are divided into polymers containing a photosensitizer and a TiO2 photocatalyst film, which are applied to antibacterial surfaces of medical devices. Photo-activated antibiotics provide super hydrophilic surfaces and reactive oxygen species, which are easy to clean, not easy to be adhered by microorganisms, and can kill microorganisms. Photoactive antimicrobial surfaces also avoid the potential problem of microbial resistance to microbicides.119 For example, a TiO2 film was prepared on medical grade AISI 304 stainless steel by arc ion plating, and the coating was evaluated. The results showed that the antibacterial activity (R) of the TiO2 film on E. coli and Staphylococcus aureus was 2.5 and 3.0, far beyond the specified value of the JIS standard.120 There is also a new type of transparent immobilized super-hydrophilic coating with fluoro-copper co-doped titanium dioxide, which can effectively reduce the number of Staphylococcus aureus and reduce the risk of hospital acquired infection due to its photocatalytic and efficient antibacterial activity.121
Antibacterial ceramic is a new technology that often composed of inorganic antibacterial agent (TiO2) and ceramic glaze. In addition to its original function, this ceramic can also be used in sterilization, disinfection and deodorization. In the late 1980s, antibacterial ceramics were used in hospitals, restaurants and other places. In recent years, the conventional ceramics have been replaced by antibacterial ceramics gradually, which are effective enough to prevent harm of pathogenic microorganisms to human health.122 From a more macroscopic aspect, super-hydrophilic photocatalysts can also be applied on building materials; the dirt of the wall is easily washed away by the rain, so that the external walls of the building can be kept clean for a long time.123 Therefore, with the mature development of photocatalytic sterilization technology, photocatalytic sterilization technology will be widely used in the future.
3. Synergistic effect of photocatalysts on microorganisms
The coupling system of photocatalysis and microorganisms has broad application prospects in environmental pollution control and clean energy production.124–127 For example, photocatalysts that can decompose water to produce hydrogen have been successfully applied in wastewater treatment of pesticides, surfactants, dyes, drugs and other refractory organic compounds under light irradiation.128–135 Before this, we also studied a variety of photocatalysts to degrade pollutants efficiently.18,136–138 Traditionally, biodegradation technology breaks down toxic substances into non-toxic products through the metabolic activities of microorganisms, and the microbial metabolic activity can also produce some valuable chemical compounds.139–141 However, due to the high cost of the complete mineralization technology for photocatalytic degradation of pollutants,142,143 some pollutants with low biodegradability (such as azo fuel, trichlorophenol, oxytetracycline, acid red 183, etc.) have strong resistance to biodegradation.144 To address these problems, an emerging approach combined the advantages of photocatalysis and microbiology has been explored to overcome these limitations. A number of experimental results have shown that the photosynthetic coupled system is more efficient than photocatalysis and microbial treatment alone in terms of degradation of pollutants and production of energy materials.145–147 As mentioned above, photocatalytic reactions are toxic to microorganisms. Therefore, in the coupled system, photocatalysts are generally coated on the surface of the carrier, and microorganisms accumulate in the carrier to avoid the toxicity of ultraviolet light or photocatalytic reactive oxygen species.148,149 In addition, it has been proved that microorganisms can use photoexcited electrons to maintain cell metabolism, stimulate growth and regulate community structure through semiconductor photocatalysts. The results showed that microorganisms had a certain antioxidant activity,150 and proved the feasibility of coupling photocatalytic systems with microorganisms.
To present the synergistic effect between photocatalysis and microorganisms more clearly, we summarized several ways of the synergistic interaction, which were mainly divided into the synergistic production of H2, acetic acid and other valuable chemicals (Fig. 7(a)), degradation of organic pollutants in wastewater (Fig. 7(b and c)), and photocatalytic synergistic microorganisms as electrode materials to enhance the performance of photosynthetic bioelectrochemical systems (Fig. 7(d)).
 Fig. 7  (a) Photocatalytic coupling of microbial degradation of pollutants (ICPB). (b) Photocatalytic pretreatment of pollutants in wastewater enhances the biodegradability of refractory materials. (c) Microbes use photogenic electrons to make valuable chemicals through their own metabolic cycles. (d) Photocatalysts as electrode materials improve the degradation of pollutants and power generation performance of bioelectrochemical systems. 
3.1 Photocatalysts work with microorganisms to transform energy
A photosynthetic hybrid system formed by combining the photocatalyst's light response ability and biological catalytic ability can produce some valuable chemical products.24,29,151–153 Kelsey et al. developed a hybrid approach that combines the efficient lighting of inorganic semiconductors with the high specificity, low cost, self-replication, and repair of biocatalysts. They used cadmium sulphide (CdS) nanoparticles to induce autosensitization in Moorella thermoacetica, allowing carbon dioxide to be used in photosynthesis to produce acetic acid. In this process, thermal acetic acid bacteria receive photoelectrons as electron receptors, and photoelectrons and CO2 go through the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway and other pathways to convert about 90% of photosynthetic products into acetic acid, thus reducing the cost of diversification to other chemical products. Fig. 8(a and b) show the reaction principle of this process.28,154,155 They designed the surface of gold nanocrystals using ligands to extend the life of photoelectrons and enable them to be transferred to the electron transfer system in the cytoplasm.156 In contrast, another hybrid system of photosynthetic organisms (PBSs) feeds the product acetic acid to genetically engineered organisms to upgrade to a wider range of products. The system combines efficient inorganic light harvesters with enzyme catalysts and whole cell organisms to achieve or exceed the efficiency of only natural photosynthesis or chemical catalysis to convert CO2 into valuable CO2-derived chemicals (Fig. 8(c)).29 In order to further improve the electron transfer process of the PBS system, Yang et al. induced Cd NP precipitation on CO2 reducing bacteria. They internalized a photosensitizer (gold nanocrystals) in the same bacteria to bypass the slow mass transfer of electrons across the cell membrane. Using ligands, they designed the surface of gold nanocrystals to extend the lifetime of photoelectrons, allowing them to transfer to electron transfer systems in the cytoplasm (Fig. 8(d)).157 Differently, Yoon Sung Nam et al. co-assembled a photosensitizer and a metal oxide catalyst at the proximal end of the M13 virus scaffold to form photocatalytic nanostructures. After 90 minutes of illumination, the oxygen precipitation rate of the nanostructure was 94%, indicating a high hydrogenation capacity.158 In addition, the combination of AglnS2/In2S3 and facultative anaerobic bacteria E. coli can also be used in the production of biological H2. The productivity of H2 can be improved by utilizing the endogenous hydrogenase synthesized by anaerobic bacteria and the photoelectron generated by AglnS2/In2S3 hybridization.24 This photosynthetic hybrid system combines photocatalytic light harvesting ability with biological catalytic ability using solar energy to produce valuable chemical substances such as H2, acetic acid and derivatives of CO2.
 Fig. 8  
M. thermoacetica–CdS reaction schematics. (a) Depiction of the M. thermoacetica–CdS hybrid system, proceeding from the growth of the cells and bio-precipitation (loading) of the CdS nanoparticles (shown in yellow) through photosynthetic conversion of CO2 (center right) to acetic acid (right). (b) Pathway diagram for the M. thermoacetica–CdS system. Two possible routes to generate reducing equivalents, [H], exist: generation outside the cell (dashed line) or generation by direct electron transport to the cell (solid line). Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Closed material loop concept for PBSs for future space missions. PBSs have the potential to supply all the requirements for human habitation in space, using only solar energy to recycle waste products back into useful goods. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Scientific Visualization Studio. (d) Overview of different PBS architectures. Utilizing e− derived from a semiconductor light harvester (A), PBSs channel reducing equivalents to generate H2 (B) to feed CO2 reducing microorganisms. This e− may also go directly to the bacterium (C) to generate reduced CO2 products, such as acetic acid. This acetic acid may then be fed to genetically engineered organisms (D) to upgrade to a wide range of products. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Microorganisms combine with photocatalysts to degrade pollutants
A large number of chemical factories producing waste and discharging sewage seriously harm the environment.159–165 Many herbicides, insecticides, plastics, antibiotics, methyl orange, methylene blue dye and so on, exhibit biological enrichment and toxicity. These substances discharged into the environment caused serious damage to the water environment.166–169 To efficiently treat wastewater, a new technique combining photocatalysis and microorganisms to degrade pollutants has shown good performance in wastewater treatment. At present, this new wastewater treatment technology is divided into two types: one uses photocatalysis for pre-treatment, followed by biodegradation of pollutants, and the other is the coupling system of photocatalysis and microorganisms. Both types showed that the synergistic effect of photocatalysis and microorganisms significantly improved the removal rate of pollutants in treated water.
Momani et al. reported a new approach to the treatment of textile dye wastewater. They used a UV/TiO2 scheme to pretreat dye wastewater for 60 min (optimal irradiation time) before biodegradation. This method can make the color in textile dye wastewater and the COD removal rate reach 81% and 80%, and the degradation effect is significantly higher than the single light degradation (70%, 54%) and biological degradation (32%, 57%). The treatment method significantly improves the performance of wastewater treatment, attributed to light catalytic pretreatment, and improves the biodegradability of various kinds of refractory organic compounds. Using UV/TiO2 light irradiation of 60 min (best irradiation time), the next biodegradation of the reoccupy after that can make the color in textile dye wastewater and COD removal rate reaching 81% and 81%, respectively, the degradation effect is dramatically higher than the single light degradation (70%, 70%) and biological degradation (32%, 32%), and the biogas production is 2.7 times higher than that without the photocatalytic pretreatment. The significant improvement in wastewater treatment performance can be attributed to the enhancement of biodegradability of various refractory organic compounds by photocatalytic pretreatment. The biodegradability index (BOD/COD ratio) has been used to measure the biodegradability of various wastewater streams. A ratio greater than 0.4 indicates a high biodegradability, while a ratio lower than 0.4 indicates a low biodegradability.170,171 When photocatalytic pretreatment was used, the COD in the solution was notably reduced, and a large number of organic pollutants could be easily removed by biodegradation with the increase of the biodegradability index. S. Parra et al. also proved the effectiveness of a photoassisted TiO2 process as a pretreatment method for biological treatment of wastewater for complete mineralization of biodegradable substances. They mineralized isoproturon solution (IP) in a semi-continuous mode in a flow reactor with photochemistry (supporting TiO2 in a glass) and microorganisms (supporting bacteria on a bioluminescent rock), and the results showed that the process could remove 100% initial IP concentration and 95% dissolved organic carbon (DOC).172 In the coke oven industrial wastewater treatment, it was found that photocatalytic pretreatment did not significantly reduce the COD in the wastewater, only after the use of biological degradation treatment, and then photocatalytic treatment.173 Yu et al. used metal ions to modify microorganisms to prepare biological adsorbents. Methyl orange was removed from aqueous solution by the combination of bio-sorption and photodegradation. The adsorption capacity of modified biomass to methyl orange was 7 times that of unmodified biomass. After adsorption of pollutants by biomass, the eluent containing methyl orange was treated with photocatalyst P25.174 In these studies, photocatalysis and biological co-degradation of pollutants not only improved the degradation rate, but also reduced the cost of sewage treatment. The co-degradation of pollutants between the two is undoubtedly a sewage treatment technology with broad application prospects.
At present, there are many papers on photocatalytic coupled microorganism system (ICPB) treatment of wastewater. Marsolek149 and Zhang et al.175 introduced and demonstrated the concept of “close coupling of photodegradation/photocatalysis to biodegradation (ICPB)”. Photocatalysis and biodegradation (ICPB) is a novel wastewater treatment technology, which has potential application prospects in the treatment of refractory wastewater. Marsolek et al. demonstrated the high performance of 2,4,5-TCP degradation by the coupling of photocatalysis and biodegradation in a novel photocatalytic circulating bed biofilm reactor (PCBBR) using macroporous cellulose carriers. They achieved tight coupling by using macroporous carriers to protect biofilms from toxic reactants and UV light. The coupling system reduced trichlorophenol (TCP) and the COD in wastewater to 2% and 4%, and the degradation rate was higher than that of the photocatalytic and physical degradation processes alone (TCP was degraded to 32% and COD to 26%).149 Ding et al. modified the tightly coupled photocatalysis and biodegradation (ICPB) process by using a carrier with a higher porosity than the one used in previous work. They covered the surface of polyurethane sponge with a Bi2O17Cl2 photocatalyst, and microorganisms accumulated inside the sponge to construct a tightly coupled photocatalytic and biodegradation system. The results showed that the degradation rate of oxytetracycline by ICPB was up to 94%.23 The photocatalytic and biodegradation (ICPB) system described above combines the characteristics of an efficient and rapid photocatalytic reaction with the advantages of microbial degradation. Under this circumstance, biodegradation and photocatalysis occur simultaneously in a reactor. Generally, porous sponge or macroporous cellulose is selected as a photocatalyst and a microbial carrier. These porous carriers can protect microorganisms from forming biofilms inside them and avoid the toxicity of ultraviolet light, free radicals or some toxic organic compounds. But at the same time, they will cause two defects: firstly, since there is no sufficient light inside the carrier, the load of photocatalytic materials needs to be increased to ensure the efficiency of the photocatalytic reaction; secondly, the electron transfer efficiency of semiconductor materials and microorganisms under the conditions of electronic excitation is neglected.23 Compounds that are difficult to degrade are first converted into biodegradable products by photocatalytic oxidation, and then further degraded by microorganisms through metabolism. Therefore, a large number of studies are still needed to improve their shortcomings in practical applications.
3.3 The coupling of photocatalysis and microbial fuel cells promotes electricity generation and degradation
The collaboration between photocatalysts and microorganisms is also applied in bioelectrochemical systems (BESs). Biobatteries were first developed by Lewis in the early 1960s.176 BESs combined the strengths of physical chemistry and biological processes to become a promising technology for integrated wastewater treatment and energy resource recovery. BESs include microbial fuel cells (MFCs) and microbial electrolytic cells (MECs).177 BESs can be used to degrade azo dyes and generate electricity. However, many harmful intermediates are produced in the degradation process of dyes, which lead to the damage of biological batteries. In order to solve this problem, a coupling of a bioelectrochemical system and photocatalysis has been proposed to degrade these harmful intermediates. This integration envisages coupling of a biocathode with a photoanode,178 the combination of a bioanode and a photocatalytic anode179,180 and the combination of a photocathode and a microbial electrolysis cell and a microbial fuel cell. These combinations greatly enhance the production of valuable chemicals such as organic matter, hydrogen, formic acid, and acetic acid, as well as electricity.
About the combination of microbial with cathode and anode for photocatalysis, Majumdar et al. introduces the cathode and anode containing new enzyme reduction of CO2 and O2 release of electrochemical system integration light biological photobioelectrochemical systems. The anode photocatalyst BiVO4 was coupled with oxygen evolution Co-p to produce hydrogen gas in the anode water. When this reaction system works, the photogenerated electrons move to the cathode through an external circuit, and H+ is transferred to the biological cathode to participate in the metabolic process of microorganisms to convert CO2 into formic acid. This reaction system is completely driven by solar energy and has good efficiency and stability.7Fig. 9(a) shows the structure and principle of the system. In addition, Du et al. proposed a new biocathode coupled photochemical battery (Bio-PEC), which combined the advantages of a photocatalytic anode and a biological cathode. They used a TiO2 nanotube array as a battery anode and carbon brush and carbon cloth as carriers. The results showed a good degradation rate of methyl orange (0.0120 min−1) and a maximum power density (211.32 mW m−2).181Fig. 9(b) shows the structural and mechanism of the Bio-PFC system.178 In this study, the author prepared a CNT@TiO2 nano-hybrid by using CNTs decorated with dispersed TiO2 nanoparticles. This hybrid nanostructure combines the advantages of CNTs and TiO2. Its unique properties include relatively high surface area, good biocompatibility, improved conductivity, excellent stability and good surface functionalization of interfacial electrochemical reactions. Moreover, the MFCs of CNTs@TiO2 were significantly better than the MFCs of CNTs or TiO2 nanoparticles in terms of output current density and power density.182
 Fig. 9  (a) Graphical representation of a self-biased integrated photobioelectrochemical system (IPBES) for continuous electrolysis of CO2 into formate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7 with permission from Elsevier. (b). Schematics showing the working principles of the Bio-PEC system. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the reactor setup, where PS and h+ represent the potentiostat and electron holes, respectively. (d) a. Current output with time of the PBEC and BEC (in the dark); b. the startup time of current (startup); c. the transient current responses (I–t curve; days 21–25) to the ON–OFF illumination cycle on the composite photobioanode at an applied potential of 0 V with a graphite electrode as the counter electrode during steady-state reactor operation. Reproduced from ref. 188 with permission from Elsevier. 
Photocatalysts can also be coupled with microorganisms as battery anode materials.183–186 The anode of a bioelectrochemical system produced by the coupling of photocatalysts and microorganisms can effectively improve the function of a battery. The pore structure and surface biocompatibility of the anode material coupled with a photoanode are the key factors for the performance of the anode of the microbial fuel cell. A titanium dioxide (TiO2) semiconductor has the advantages of good biocompatibility, good stability and environmental friendliness, and is a promising anode for microbial fuel cells.187 Liu et al. demonstrated the successful preparation of high-performance MFCs with a TiO2/3DOM-C modified carbon cloth anode. The composite provides an easily accessible surface area for bacterial adhesion. The high bacteria carrying capacity of TiO2/3DOM-C can ensure a greater functional output. An enhanced biomass load improves the electron transfer efficiency and MFC performance, and the power output of the photosynthetic bioanode was 2.3 times higher than that of the bioanode.187 Feng et al. used a photocatalyst (alpha-Fe2O3) and bacteria-bound carbon materials as anodes for photobiochemical battery systems (PBEC). The mechanism of the reactor is shown in Fig. 9c. The system can use visible light to accelerate biofilm formation and extracellular electron transfer in PBEC. The experimental results show that there is an active electron transfer at the interface of the photoanode, and the electrical resistance is half that of the photoanode. In Fig. 9d, the start-up time of the system was reduced from about 2.5 days to 1.1 days, and the maximum current density was almost twice as high as that of the bioelectrochemical system (BEC). Moreover, the current density of PBEC hardly decreased after illumination for 40 d, which reflected the good stability and power output of the photobiological anode.188 Zhou et al. successfully prepared photocatalytic biological anodes (ICPB anodes) by coating n-doped TiO2 on macroporous carbon foam and depositing biofilms inside it.185 As an anode, ICPB accelerates the biodegradation of refractory organic pollutants while recovering the current. The ICPB anode improved the degradation rate of 4-chlorophenol, SCOD removal and current generation. A photocatalytic biological anode has the advantages of high current density, high output power and short start-up time. And the formation rate of an anode biofilm is accelerated. Therefore, under the irradiation of visible light, the decrease of electrode resistance and the increase of the electron transfer rate can maintain good stability. It provides high bacteria carrying capacity, enhances the load of biomass and improves the performance of photoelectrochemical batteries.
Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) and microbial electrolysis cells (MECs) are composed of photocatalyst cathodes and biological anodes. The control factor of battery power generation is the cathode oxygen reduction rate, while the cathode oxygen reduction rate of MFCs and MECs is usually not high. In order to improve the cathode reduction rate, the cathode surface needs to be modified to improve the performance of bioelectrochemical cells. At present, many studies use composite materials, such as photocatalysts as cathode materials to improve the performance of MXCs (MECs or MFCs). Photocatalyst cathodes can significantly improve microbial fuel cell generation. TiO2 has excellent conductivity, high surface area and good biocompatibility. Therefore, TiO2 and its composite materials with other materials are widely used as cathodes of biological batteries to improve the function of batteries.189 For example, Ansari et al. used a PtOx@M-TiO2 nanocomposite material as the cathode of a microbial fuel cell. Due to the high catalytic activity of platinum and the hole of M-TiO2, the functional density of the battery was higher than that of ordinary carbon paper.182 Chen et al. designed a new type of microbial fuel cell by coupling the TiO2 semiconductor with an n-type nanostructure as the cathode and the biological anode, and generating hydrogen and electricity spontaneously by consuming the acetate matrix without dc power supply. The new cell can obtain a maximum power density of 6.0 mW m−2 and a hydrogen evolution rate of 4.4 μL h−1 at the TiO2 cathode.190 Hou et al. also constructed a single-compartment microbial electrolytic cell (PMEC) with titanium-coated photoelectrodes. The addition of photoelectrodes significantly accelerated the degradation of methyl orange (MO) under ultraviolet radiation and synchronous hydrogen recovery. Their evaluation of the battery showed that the degradation of methyl orange could reach up to 96%, the maximum current could reach 8.45 mA, and the hydrogen production could reach up to 113 mL. The performance of the microbial electrolysis cell is obviously improved.191 In addition to TiO2 photocathodes, there are other excellent photocatalysts as cathode materials, which also show a good promotion effect. For example, Liang et al. reported that p-type semiconductor Cu2O was used as the cathode material of a microbial photochemical battery. P–Cu2O had the advantages of visible light absorption and showed superior photocatalytic potential in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Under 0.2 V external bias continuous illumination, the H2 yield from the MPEC was 5.09 μL h−1 cm−2.192 Besides, Hou et al. developed a biological photochemical system (BPES) with a g-C3N4/BiOBr photocathode. The MO decolorization efficiency of the g-C3N4/BiOBr photocathode reached 97.8% within 4 h at an applied voltage of 0.8 V and simulated solar irradiation, the current increased by 63.6%, the H2 yield reached 143.8 lm−3 d−1, and the COD removal rate reached 80.4%.177 To understand how the photocatalytic cathode and anode build light biological electrochemical and biological system more deeply, relative operation mechanism is shown followed. When photocatalytic cathode was irradiated by the light, the cathode surface electron holes trigger the anodic microbial metabolic activity by oxidation of substrates, such as acetate) produce excess protons and electrons, electronic travel through the external circuit to the cathode accelerate photocatalytic cathode electron hole to produce. At the same time, protons produced by microbial degradation of organic matter are transferred to the cathode through the proton exchange membrane and then reduced to hydrogen. The organic pollutants in electrolyte can be degraded by reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as free radicals. Photocatalysts, as cathode materials, significantly improve the power output, hydrogen production, degradation rate of organic pollutants and current density of the bioelectrochemical system and biophotoelectric chemical system. Therefore, photocatalytic coupled biological cells have very broad application prospects.
4. Preparation of photocatalysts with the help of microorganisms
As a green and sustainable technology, photocatalysis has attracted much attention in the past decades because of its potential to solve energy and environmental problems.193 Many metal oxides (such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, CeO2) have become the first choice for basic research and practical application due to their high activity, good stability, low cost, non-toxicity and chemical inertness, but their limited activity under visible light irradiation has prompted people to seek for modification.194,195 A lot of work has been done to improve the photocatalytic activity in the visible region. From the perspective of current semiconductor technology, a semiconductor with an impurity lattice or defect tends to control the conductivity. However, most of the reported methods use harmful chemicals, and the release of harmful reaction solutions into the environment is a major concern. Therefore, a new and green preparation method is needed for the improvement of photocatalysts. At present, the use of electrochemical active biofilms to synthesize photocatalysts for visible light response is a promising green preparation method.
It has been proved that electrochemical active biofilms (EABs) can reduce the band gap of metal oxides,196 synthesize metal semiconductor nanocomposite materials69 and precious metal nanoparticles,197–199 and present more efficient performance than other synthesis methods. Band gap narrowing is important and beneficial for potentially visible light photocatalytic applications involving metals. For example, mixed cultured EABs were used to promote the oxygen vacancies of zinc oxide (p-ZnO) and titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanostructures. By increasing the amount of the oxygen vacancies, the band gap of ZnO (ref. 200) and TiO2 (ref. 196) was narrowed, so as to enhance their photocatalytic activity. EABs break down acetate, generate electrons and protons to attack ZnO and TiO2, and modify ZnO and TiO2 by producing oxygen vacancies and defects. This is different from traditional techniques used to narrow the band gap of nanomaterials. The new scheme improves the visible light catalytic activity of the modified metal oxides. Compared with traditional doping methods, oxygen vacancy is a kind of doping method that often with impurity free self-doping process, which is more conducive to maintaining the inherent structure of the nanostructure and improving the photocatalytic activity of visible light.201 In the improvement of photocatalysts, the use of nanometal particles (such as Au, Ag) on the surface of semiconductor metal oxides (such as TiO2, SnO2, CeO2, etc.) to enhance the photocatalytic cracking activity of their nanoparticles also has attracted extensive attention.36,68,180 This kind of method uses electrochemical activity of the biofilm (EAB) as an electron donor to the synthesis of Ag@TiO2,68 Au@TiO2,69 Ag–ZnO,201 AgSnO2,36 Ag@CeO2 (ref. 37) and other metal nanocomposites. Fig. 10(a and b) show the mechanism of electrochemical synthesis of Ag@CeO2 and Ag–SnO2 nanocomposites. In this synthesis process, metal ions are first adsorbed on the surface of the semiconductor metal oxide under intense magnetic agitation. The EAB is used as a reduction tool, providing extra electrons and protons through the biological breakdown of sodium acetate. These electrons are injected into the conduction band (CB) of metal oxide nanoparticles, and then the captured electrons in the CB of the metal oxide nanoparticles migrate to Au3+ and Ag+ ions on the surface of the nanoparticles, which are reduced to Au and Ag, and subsequently the metal nanoparticles are anchored or adsorbed on the surface of the metal oxide. With the help of the EAB synthesis method, the photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical properties of metal nanocomposites were improved and demonstrated by the degradation of different dyes and 4-nitrophenol. These studies provide a simple biosynthesis approach, which does not involve the use of hazardous chemicals, and does not require any external energy input, capping agent, reducing agent, etc.201 The method is simple, with great commercial potential. Despite extensive research, many questions about the functionality of EABs remain unanswered. So far, the performance of biological production process has not reached the level required for practical application. Whether biocatalysts exist as planktonic cells, monolayers or fully developed biofilms, effective electron transfer and high process performance are required. Bioelectrochemical processes are complex, so it is still necessary to improve the stability and efficiency of photocatalysts synthesized by biological methods.
 Fig. 10  (a) Biogenic synthesis of the Ag@CeO2 nanocomposites using an electrochemically active biofilm. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of Ag–SnO2 nanocomposite synthesis. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Conclusions and future perspectives
Here, we have reviewed the interaction between photocatalysts and microorganisms, and the typical relationships include photocatalytic damage to microorganisms: mechanisms and applications of photocatalytic sterilization; the synergistic effect of photocatalysis and microorganisms: photocatalysis and microorganisms cooperate to produce energy substances; photocatalysis and microbial coupling (ICPB) systems degrade organic pollutants: photocatalysts, as electrode materials, are coupled with bioelectrochemical systems to enhance the degradation of organic pollutants and the production of hydrogen and power supply; photocatalyst preparation with the help of microorganisms. The influence of photocatalysts on microorganisms is to inhibit or promote the growth of microorganisms, which determines the mode of the interaction between them.
With the inhibition or promotion of microbial growth by photocatalysis, the interaction between photocatalysts and microorganisms mainly results in the change of activity of microorganisms or microbial systems. Through reasonable design and optimization, the inhibition of photocatalysis on microbial growth can be applied to the sterilization of water, air and other environments. The interaction between photocatalysts and microorganisms has broad application prospects in environmental management and energy production. Over the past decades, through continuous research and improvement of photocatalysts, photocatalysts have improved the visible light responsiveness and catalytic activity, and promoted the application of photocatalysts in practical applications. Although the interaction between photocatalysis and microorganisms has shown good bactericidal, productivity and degradation properties its future widespread application still faces several key problems:
(I) The effects and potential mechanisms of interactions between photocatalytic microorganisms need to be further understood.
(II) There are few studies on the inactivation effect of photocatalysis on viral microorganisms. In addition, the sterilization of some bacterial spores in the dormant period needs a longer disinfection time, and a longer time of photocatalysis will lead to an expensive disinfection process, which is not conducive to its wide practical application.
(III) The photocatalytic activity, visible light responsiveness and recyclability of photocatalysts still need to be further improved and optimized.
(IV) At present, there are few biocompatible photocatalysts. In order to enhance the synergistic effect between photocatalysis and microorganisms, it is necessary to constantly strive to find biocompatible materials with low cost, high photocatalytic activity and easy synthesis.
(V) In the system of microbial coupling with photocatalysts, there is no sufficient light inside the carrier, which will affect the efficiency of photocatalysis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51909089), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2019 M662781), and the Science Foundation for Young Scholars of Hunan Agricultural University (19QN35).
References
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamiltone, J. A. Byrne and K. O'Shea, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331–349 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bahnemann, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 445–459 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ba-Abbad, M. S. Takriff, A. Benamor, E. Mahmoudi and A. W. Mohammad, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 12100–12107 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Coronado, F. Fresno, M. D. Hernández-Alonso and R. Portela, Design of Advanced Photocatalytic Materials for Energy and Environmental Applications, Springer London,  2013, vol. 17, pp. 35–66 Search PubMed .
A. P. Günter, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1996, 1275, 27–32 CrossRef .
P. Majumdar, D. Pant and S. Patra, Trends Biotechnol., 2017, 35, 285–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, R. Y. Yan, D. Zhang and T. X. Fan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 9870–9885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Maruthamuthu, S. Muthu, K. Gurunathan, M. Ashokkumar and M. V. C. Sastri, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1992, 17, 863–866 CrossRef CAS .
R. de Richter and S. Caillol, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
M. Junginger, S. Agterbosch, A. Faaij and W. Turkenburg, Energy Policy, 2004, 32, 1053–1073 CrossRef .
T. Matsunaga, R. Tomoda, T. Nakajima and H. Wake, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 1985, 29, 211–214 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Q. Zhang and R. Harrison, International Symposium on Bioinformatics Research and Applications,  2007, vol. 4463, p. 496 Search PubMed.
Y. C. Deng, L. Tang, C. Y. Feng, G. M. Zeng, Z. M. Chen, J. J. Wang, H. P. Feng, B. Peng, Y. N. Liu and Y. Y. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 235, 225–237 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, L. Tang, C. Feng, G. Zeng, J. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Liu, B. Peng and H. Feng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 344, 758–769 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Deng, L. Tang, G. Zeng, J. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Wang, J. Tang, L. Wang and C. Feng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 509, 219 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Deng, L. Tang, G. M. Zeng, C. Y. Feng, H. R. Dong, J. J. Wang, H. P. Feng, Y. N. Liu, Y. Y. Zhou and Y. Pang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1494–1511 RSC .
Y. C. Deng, L. Tang, G. M. Zeng, Z. J. Zhu, Y. Ming, Y. Y. Zhou, J. J. Wang, Y. N. Liu and J. J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 343–354 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Li, S. Park, D. W. Kang, K. B. Rosa and B. E. Rittmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 8359–8367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Apollo, M. S. Onyango and A. Ochieng, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 245, 241–247 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Li, P. Seongjun and B. E. Rittmann, Water Res., 2012, 46, 6489–6496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Zhou, Z. X. Xu, S. S. Dong, M. X. Huo, S. S. Dong, X. D. Tian, B. Cui, H. F. Xiong, T. T. Li and D. M. Ma, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 13075–13076 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ding, W. F. Yan, Y. Wu, Y. Xiao, H. Y. Gang, S. H. Wang, L. X. Chen and F. Zhao, Water Res., 2018, 143, 589–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Jiang, B. Wang, J. C. Yu, J. F. Wang, T. C. An, H. J. Zhao, H. M. Li, S. Q. Yuan and P. K. Wong, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wen, G. Z. Li, R. Xing, S. Park and B. E. Rittmann, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2012, 95, 263–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Benzaouak, N. E. Touach, V. M. Ortia-Martinez, M. J. Salar-Garcia, F. Hernandez-fernandez, A. P. de los Rios, M. El Mahi and E. Lotfi, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2018, 26, 1985–1991 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627–5636 CAS .
K. K. Sakimoto, S. J. Zhang and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5883–5887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, N. Kornienko and P. D. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 476–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Lu, Y. Li, S. Jin, X. Wang, X. L. Wu, C. P. Zeng, Y. Li, H. R. Ding, R. X. Hao and M. Lv, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 768 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Q. Wang, Precambrian Res., 2013, 231, 401–408 CrossRef .
A. H. Lu, Y. Li and S. Jin, Elements, 2012, 8, 125–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Xu, W. Z. Wang, S. M. Sun and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111, 126–132 CrossRef .
L. Tang, C. Y. Feng, Y. C. Deng, G. M. Zeng, J. J. Wang, Y. Liu, H. P. Feng and J. J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 230, 102–114 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sobhani-Nasab and B. Mohse, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2016, 27, 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, M. O. Ansari, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 26013–26021 RSC .
M. M. Khan, S. A. Ansari, J. H. Lee, M. O. Ansari, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 431, 255–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Sun, J. H. Tay and K. M. Tan, Water Res., 2003, 37, 3452–3462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nakano, H. Ishiguro, Y. Y. Yao, J. Kajioka, A. Fujishima, K. Sunada, M. Minoshima, K. Hashimoto and Y. Kubota, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2012, 11, 1293–1298 RSC .
F. N. Chen, X. D. Yang and Q. Wu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 4606–4611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Maness, S. Smolinski, D. M. Blake, Z. Huang, E. J. Wolfrum and W. A. Jacoby, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1999, 65, 4094–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Ning, H. X. Lin, Y. C. Tong, X. Y. Zhang, Q. Y. Lin, Y. Q. Zhang, J. L. Long and X. X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Wu, J. A. Imlay and K. S. Jian, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 7526–7533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gang, Z. Xi, W. Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, H. J. Su and T. W. Tan, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170–171, 255–262 Search PubMed .

          R. Wang, X. Y. Kong, W. T. Zhang, W. X. Zhu, L. J. Huang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, X. N. Liu, N. Hu and Y. R. Suo, Cas. Ir. Grid.,  2018, vol. 225, pp. 228–237 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Yu, T. An, G. Li, H. Y. Yip, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 4599–4606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Liang, J. Deng, M. Li and M. Tong, Colloids Surf., B, 2016, 138, 102–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Saito, T. Iwase, J. Horie and T. Morioka, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1992, 14, 369–379 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Wang, G. Y. Li, D. H. Xia, T. C. An, H. J. Zhao and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 782–799 RSC .
P. Ganguly, C. Byrne, A. Breen and S. C. Pillai, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 51–75 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2308–2326 RSC .
J. A. Byrne, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, P. Fernandez-Ibanez, I. Polo-Lopez, P. K. Sharma and A. S. M. Vennard, Molecules, 2015, 20, 5574–5615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Devipriya, S. Yesodharan and E. P. Yesodharan, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 8,  DOI:10.1155/2012/970474 .
W. J. Wang, L. Z. Zhang, T. C. An, G. Y. Li, H. Y. Yip and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 108, 108–116 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Lan, C. Hu, X. X. Hu and J. H. Qu, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 73, 354–360 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Zhang, K. H. Wong, H. Y. Yip, C. Hu, J. C. Yu, C. Y. Chan and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 1392–1398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Wang, M. Shang, W. Z. Yin, J. Ren and L. Zhou, Wuji Cailiao Xuebao, 2012, 27, 11–18 CAS .
Y. Wang, X. C. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Chen, T. W. Ng, A. H. Lu, Y. Li, H. Y. Yip, T. C. An, G. Y. Li, H. J. Zhao, M. H. Gao and P. K. Wong, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 234, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Xia, T. W. Ng, T. C. An, G. Y. Li, Y. Li, H. Y. Yip, H. J. Zhao, A. H. Lu and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 11166–11173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Xia, Z. R. Shen, G. C. Huang, W. J. Wang, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 6264–6273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Marinas and A. M. Mayes, Nature, 2008, 452, 301–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Foster, I. B. Ditta, V. Sajnu, S. Alex and A. Steele, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 90, 1847–1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gamage and Z. S. Zhang, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2010, 2010, 11 CrossRef .
H. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. G. Chen and H. Mu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9835–9842 RSC .
Z. Q. Liu, G. Q. Ji, D. B. Guan, B. Wang and X. L. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 457, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Ferreira, S. C. Nunes, V. A. Q. Santos, E. C. Pereira and M. D. S. Sikora, Environ. Technol., 2018, 28, 1–12 Search PubMed .
K. M. Mansoob, S. A. Ansari, A. M. Ikhlasul and J. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4427–4435 RSC .
S. Kalathil, M. M. Khan, A. N. Banerjee, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1051 CrossRef .
S. K. Pandey, S. Pandey, V. Parashar, R. S. Yadav, G. K. Mehrotra and A. C. Pandey, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1602–1606 RSC .
S. C. Hu, Z. Feng, L. Z. Wang and J. L. Zhang, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 794–797 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, W. Wang, T. W. Ng, G. C. Huang, D. H. Xia, H. Y. Yip, H. K. Lee, G. Y. Li, T. C. An and P. K. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1052–1059 RSC .
N. Wetchakun, S. Chaiwichain, B. Inceesungvorn, K. Pingmuang, S. Phanichphant, A. I. Minett and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, R. Huang, Y. Hu, Y. Chen, W. Liu, R. Yuan and Z. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Meng, W. Z. Wang, Z. Ling, S. M. Sun and Z. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14727–14731 CrossRef .
Q. Kang, Q. Z. Lu, S. H. Liu, L. X. Yang, L. F. Wen, S. L. Luo and Q. Y. Cai, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 3317–3326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, J. C. Liu, D. D. Sun and W. Ng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 250, 412–420 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fakhri and S. Behrouz, Sol. Energy, 2015, 117, 187–191 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Synnott, M. K. Seery, S. J. Hinder, G. Michlits and S. C. Pillai, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 130, 106–111 CrossRef .
Y. X. Li, Y. F. Hu, S. Q. Peng, G. X. Lu and S. B. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9352–9358 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. He, G. H. Guai, J. Liu, C. X. Guo, J. S. C. Loo, L. C. Ming and T. T. Y. Tan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4613–4616 RSC .
A. N. Cao, Z. Liu, S. S. Chu, M. H. Wu, Z. M. Ye, Z. W. Cai, Y. L. Chang, S. F. Wang, Q. H. Gong and Y. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 103–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, B. D. Guo, J. G. Yu, J. R. Ran, B. H. Zhang, H. J. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Gao, L. Ning, D. P. Wu, W. G. Tao, X. Fang and J. Kai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 2473–2478 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Li, B. Shen, Z. H. Hong, B. Z. Lin, B. F. Gao and Y. L. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 12017–12019 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Y. Liu, Y. Z. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. H. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mamba and A. K. Mishra, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 347–377 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhao, H. T. Yu, X. Quan, S. Chen, Y. B. Zhang, H. M. Zhao and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152, 46–50 CrossRef .
J. Xu, Z. P. Wang and Y. F. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27727–27735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Ma, S. H. Zhan, Y. N. Jia, Q. Shi and Q. X. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 186, 77–87 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Li, X. Nie, J. Y. Chen, Q. Jiang, T. C. An, P. K. Wong, H. M. Zhang, H. J. Zhao and H. Yamashita, Water Res., 2015, 86, 17–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Long, T. Du, H. Chao, J. N. Chen and H. Y. Han, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8693–8701 CrossRef .
S. W. Cao, J. X. Low, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Lin, Z. X. Cong, J. Li, K. M. Ke, S. S. Guo, H. H. Yang and G. N. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1031–1037 RSC .
A. H. Lu, Y. Li, M. Lv, C. Q. Wang, L. Yang, J. Liu, Y. H. Wang, K. H. Wong and P. K. Wong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1849–1855 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, A. H. Lu, C. Q. Wang and X. L. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 953–959 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Yang, Y. Li, A. H. Lu, Y. H. Yan, C. Q. Wang and P. K. Wong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1915–1921 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Chen, A. H. Lu, Y. Li, L. S. Zhang, H. Y. Yip, H. J. Zhao, T. C. An and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 5689–5695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Xia, Y. Li, G. C. Huang, C. C. Fong, T. C. An, G. Y. Li, H. Y. Yip, H. J. Zhao, A. H. Lu and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176, 749–756 CrossRef .
T. S. Le, T. H. Dao, D. C. Nguyen, H. C. Nguyen and I. L. Balikhin, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 8 Search PubMed .
A. J. Prussin, E. B. Garcia and L. C. Marr, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2015, 2, 84–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Yassin and S. Almouqatea, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 7, 535–544 CrossRef .
A. Vohra, D. Y. Goswami, D. A. Deshpande and S. S. Block, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 64, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
J. Spiegelman and H. Friedman, J. Allergy, 1968, 42, 193–202 CrossRef .
J. Auvinen and L. Joonas, Atmos. Environ., 2008, 42, 4101–4112 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Solberg, Scand. J. Infect. Dis., 2000, 32, 587–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qudiesat, K. Abu-Elteen, A. Elkarmi, M. Hamad and M. Abussaud, Afr. J. Microbiol. Res., 2009, 3, 66–76 Search PubMed .
D. Y. Goswami, D. M. Trivedi and S. S. Block, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2005, 119, 92–96 CrossRef .
Y. K. Zhao, W. P. Sung, T. T. Tsai and H. J. Wang, J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc., 2010, 60, 337–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Kern, R. D. Schwaickhardt, G. Mohr, E. A. Lobo, L. T. Kist and E. L. Machado, Sci. Total Environ., 2013, 443, 566–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Fuentefria, A. E. Ferreira and G. Corcao, J. Environ. Manage., 2011, 92, 250–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Kist, C. Albrecht and E. L. Machado, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2010, 36, 775–780 Search PubMed .
P. Garcia-Munoz, G. Pliego, J. A. Zazo, M. Munoz, Z. M. de Pedro, A. Bahamonde and J. A. Casas, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4337–4343 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Cooper, S. P. Stone, C. C. Kibbler, B. D. Cookson, J. A. Roberts, G. F. Medley, G. Duckworth, R. Lai and S. Ebrahim, BMJ, 2004, 329, 533–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Gould, Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents, 2006, 28, 379–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. French, J. A. Otter, K. P. Shannon, N. M. T. Adams, D. Watling and M. J. Parks, J. Hosp. Infect., 2004, 57, 31–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Page, M. Wilson and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3819–3831 RSC .
C. J. Chung, H. I. Lin, H. K. Tsou, Z. Y. Shi and J. L. He, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2010, 85, 220–224 Search PubMed .
N. S. Leyland, J. Podporska-Carroll, J. Browne, S. J. Hinder, B. Quilty and S. C. Pillai, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Jun, in Recent Highlights in Advanced Materials, ed. S. Liu and X. H. Yuan, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Stafa-Zurich,  2014, vol. 575–576, pp. 302–305 Search PubMed .

NetAnswer, Springer Netherlands,  2011, p. 5 Search PubMed .
C. Pulgarin and J. Kiwi, Chimia, 1996, 50, 50–55 CAS .
I. Oller, S. Malato, J. A. Sánchez-Pérez, W. Gernjak, M. I. Maldonado, L. A. Pérez-Estrada and C. Pulgarín, Catal. Today, 2007, 122, 150–159 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Sakimoto, N. Kornienko, S. Cestellos-Blanco, J. Lim, C. Liu and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang and P. L. Tremblay, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2017, 10, 249 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chatterjee and S. Dasgupta, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2005, 6, 186–205 CrossRef CAS .
F. Petronella, A. Truppi, C. Ingrosso, T. Placido, M. Striccoli, M. L. Curri, A. Agostiano and R. Comparelli, Catal. Today, 2016, 281, 85–100 CrossRef .
J. M. Herrmann and C. Guillard, C. R. Acad. Bulg. Sci., 2000, 3, 417–422 CAS .
E. Pelizzetti, C. Minero, V. Maurino, A. Sclafani, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, Crit. Rev. Environ. Control, 1989, 23, 1380–1385 CAS .
R. Saravanan, M. M. Khan, V. K. Gupta, E. Mosquera, F. Gracia, V. Narayanan and A. Stephen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 452, 126–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kaur and S. K. Kansal, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 302, 194–203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Kai, L. L. Wang, X. L. Lu, Y. Q. Zhang, Y. T. Liu, D. F. Yan, Y. Z. Song and S. L. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 537–544 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Wang, X. D. Duan, G. M. Wang, C. B. Liu, S. L. Luo, S. Q. Zhang, Y. X. Zeng, Y. Z. Xu, Y. T. Liu and X. F. Duan, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 186, 88–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, L. Tang, G. Zeng, J. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Wang, J. Tang, Y. Liu, B. Peng and F. Chen, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 421, 209–221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Deng, L. Tang, G. M. Zeng, H. R. Dong, Y. Ming, J. J. Wang, W. Wu, J. J. Wang, Y. Y. Zhou and J. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 387, 882–893 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Deng, L. Tang, C. Y. Feng, G. M. Zeng, J. J. Wang, Y. Lu, Y. N. Liu, J. F. Yu, S. Chen and Y. Y. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8349 Search PubMed .
D. Ghosal, S. Ghosh, T. K. Dutta and Y. Ahn, Front. Microbiol., 2016, 7, 1369 Search PubMed .
M. Gavrilescu, K. Demnerova, J. Aamand, S. Agathos and F. Fava, New Biotechnol., 2015, 32, 147–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tiwari, B. Sellamuthu, Y. Ouarda, P. Drogui, R. D. Tyagi and G. Buelna, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 224, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Zhang, L. H. Ding, J. Q. Luo, M. Y. Jaffrin and B. Tang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 302, 446–458 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dahlan, H. A. Aziz, P. Palaniandy, H. A. Aziz and I. Dahlan, J. Chem. Res., 2016, 40, 704–712 CrossRef .
D. Chebli, F. Fourcade, S. Brosillon, S. Nacef and A. Amrane, Environ. Technol., 2011, 32, 507–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bilińska, M. Gmurek and S. Ledakowicz, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 306, 550–559 CrossRef .
M. Punzi, A. Anbalagan, R. A. Borner, B. M. Svensson, M. Jonstrup and B. Mattiasson, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 270, 290–299 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Guin, Y. K. Bhardwaj and L. Varshney, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2017, 122, 153–157 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Z. Li, S. Park, D.-W. Kang, R. Krajmalnik-Brown and B. E. Rittmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 8359–8367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Marsolek, C. I. Torres, H. Martina and B. E. Rittmann, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2010, 101, 83–92 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Duan, T. M. Fu, J. Liu and C. M. Lieber, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 351–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Guo, M. Suastegui, K. K. Sakimoto, V. M. Moody, G. Xiao, D. G. Nocera and N. S. Joshi, Science, 2018, 362, 813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, Z. F. Jiang, J. C. Yu, J. F. Wang and P. K. Wong, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9296–9301 RSC .
M. Y. Xu, P. L. Tremblay, L. L. Jiang and T. Zhang, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 2392–2400 RSC .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. D. Yang, Science, 2016, 351, 74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kornienko, K. K. Sakimoto, D. M. Herlihy, S. C. Nguyen, A. P. Alivisatos, C. B. Harris, A. Schwartzberg and P. D. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., India, Sect. B, 2016, 113, 11750–11755 CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Q. Tian, D. Lu, Y. Yu, S. Cestellos-Blanco, K. K. Sakimoto and P. D. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Crookes-Goodson, J. M. Slocik and R. R. Naik, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2403–2412 RSC .
Y. S. Nam, A. P. Magyar, D. Lee, J. W. Kim, D. S. Yun, H. Park, T. S. Pollom, D. A. Weitz and A. M. Belcher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Khan and A. Malik, Environmental and Health Effects of Textile Industry Wastewater, Springer,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. Bielen, A. Simatovic, J. Kosic-Vuksic, I. Senta, M. Ahel, S. Babic, T. Jurina, J. J. G. Plaza, M. Milakovic and N. Udikovic-Kolic, Water Res., 2017, 126, 79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and Z. M. Yang, Environ. Pollut., 2016, 218, 358–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dixit, A. Yadav, P. D. Dwivedi and M. Das, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 87, 39–49 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, C. Zhang, Z. Zheng, L. Hu, X. Li, Z. Yang, C. Ma and G. Zeng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 403, 413–425 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, L. Hu and I. M. C. Lo, Chemosphere, 2019, 216, 428–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, J. Huang, L. Hu, W. Zhang and I. M. C. Lo, J. Environ. Sci. Water Resour., 2019, 5, 28–38 RSC .

          K. R. Hakeem, M. S. Akhtar and S. N. A. Abdullah, Plant, Soil and Microbes || Effects of Pesticides on Environment, Plant, Soil and Microbes,  2016 Search PubMed .
H. S. Auta, C. U. Emenike and S. H. Fauziah, Environ. Int., 2017, 102, 165–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rodriguez-Mozaz, S. Chamorro, E. Marti, B. Huerta, M. Gros, A. Sànchez-Melsió, C. M. Borrego, D. Barceló and J. L. Balcázar, Water Res., 2015, 69, 234–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Rawat, V. Mishra and R. S. Sharma, Chemosphere, 2016, 155, 591–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Al-Momani, E. Touraud, J. R. Degorce-Dumas, J. Roussy and O. Thomas, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 153, 191–197 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Scott and D. F. Ollis, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2010, 14, 88–103 Search PubMed .
S. Parra, S. Malato and C. Pulgarin, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 36, 131–144 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Sharma and L. Philip, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 295, 20–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Yu, R. A. Chi, Z. Y. He, Y. F. Qi, G. Zhan and J. Guo, Eng. Life Sci., 2011, 11, 309–315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Shi, X. J. Pu, H. S. Zhang and B. E. Rittmann, Biodegradation, 2010, 21, 881–887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Puig, M. Coma, J. Desloover, N. Boon, J. Colprim and M. D. Balaguer, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 2309–2315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Hou, Y. Y. Gan, Z. B. Yu, X. X. Chen and J. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 371, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, Y. J. Feng, Y. P. Qu, J. Liu, N. Q. Ren and H. Liu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 7634–7641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qian, G. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bennani, M. C. F. M. Peters, P. W. Appel and L. C. Rietveld, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 604–612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, Y. J. Feng, Y. P. Qu, J. Liu, N. P. Ren and H. Liu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 7634–7641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Wen, S. Q. Ci, S. Mao, S. M. Cui, G. H. Lu, K. H. Yu, S. L. Luo, H. Zhen and J. H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 100–106 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yan, S. J. Bao, L. C. Ming, X. Q. Cui, Z. S. Lu and J. Guo, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 113–119 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Min and I. Angelidaki, Energy Fuels, 2009, 1334 Search PubMed .
D. D. Zhou, S. S. Dong, J. L. Shi, X. C. Cui, D. W. Ki, C. I. Torres and B. E. Rittmann, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 882–889 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, A. H. Lu, H. R. Ding, J. Song, Y. H. Yan, C. Q. Wang, C. P. Zen and X. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1496–1499 CrossRef .
M. M. Liu, M. H. Zhou, H. J. Yang, G. B. Ren and Y. Y. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Feng, Y. X. Liang, K. Guo, N. Li, D. S. Shen, Y. Q. Cong, Y. Y. Zhou, Y. F. Wang, M. Z. Wang and Y. Y. Long, Water Res., 2016, 102, 428–435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Wen, S. Q. Ci, S. Mao, S. M. Cui, G. H. Lu, K. H. Yu, S. L. Luo, Z. He and J. H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 100–106 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Chen, J. S. Liu, Y. Liu and Y. H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 238, 345–349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Hou, R. D. Zhang, Z. B. Yu, L. R. Huang, Y. X. Liu and Z. L. Zhou, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 224, 63 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Liang, G. D. Han, Y. J. Zhang, S. Y. Rao, S. F. Lu, H. N. Wang and Y. Xiang, Appl. Energy, 2016, 168, 544–549 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Adesina, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2004, 8, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kumar and K. S. R. Koteswara Rao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 124–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Khan, S. F. Adil and A. Al-Mayouf, J. Saudi Chem. Soc., 2015, 19, 462–464 CrossRef .
S. Kalathil, M. M. Khan, S. A. Ansari, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6323–6326 RSC .
R. Georgekutty, M. K. Seery and S. C. Pillai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13563–13570 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Khan, S. Kalathil, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2012, 33, 2592–2596 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalathil, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, Green Chemistry Electrochemically active biofilm-mediated synthesis of silver nanoparticles in water, Green Chem., 2011, 1482–1485 RSC .
S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, S. Kalathil, A. Nisar, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9238–9246 RSC .
S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, M. O. Ansari, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 27023–27030 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Yaocheng Deng	Yaocheng Deng is an associate professor of the College of Resources and Environment, Hunan Agricultural University. He received his Ph.D. in 2018 under the supervision of Prof. Lin Tang at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University. His research includes photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical removal of pollutants from the environment, and photocatalytic energy production. Dr. Deng has co-authored over 40 papers in peer-reviewed international journals.
Zaiyun Li	Zaiyun Li is a college student, and she majors in biotechnology at the Orient Science & Technology College, Hunan Agricultural University. She studied as part of Yaocheng Deng's research team. Her research interest is the relationship between microorganisms and photocatalysis.
Rongdi Tang	Rongdi Tang received a B.E. in Pharmaceutical Engineering from Central South University in 2016, and acquired an M.S. in Chemistry from The University of Manchester in 2017. Now she is a Ph.D student at Hunan Agricultural University, under the guidance of Prof. Gong and Prof. Deng. Her research is mainly focused on the removal of environmental contaminants using photocatalytic materials.
Kai Ouyang	Kai Ouyang is a lecturer at the College of Resources and Environment, Hunan Agricultural University, China. He received his Ph.D. degree from Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China in 2018. His research interests include bacterial biofilms and environmental biochemistry.
Chanjuan Liao	Chanjuan Liao received her B.S. from Hunan Normal University in 2006, and her Ph.D. in 2011 under the supervision of Prof. Yunbai Luo at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University. Now she works at the College of Resources and Environment, Hunan Agricultural University. Her research mainly includes the application of photocatalysts and membrane treatment technology in the field of environmental water treatment. Dr. Liao has co-authored over 10 papers in peer-reviewed international journals.
Daoxing Gong	Daoxing Gong is a professor at the College of Resources and Environment, Hunan Agricultural University, China. He received his Ph.D. degree from Zhejiang University, China in 2004. His research interests include environmental chemistry and environmental toxicology (pesticide residue test, organic pollution chemistry). He has worked in the field of pesticide residue detection for more than 30 years. He has served as the chief expert in the formulation of agricultural residue standards for many years.

Environmental significance
In order to solve the two crises of energy shortage and environmental pollution, photocatalytic technology has been widely studied in recent years as an environmental restoration technology and energy production technology. Although microorganisms and photocatalysis have good application prospects in environment control and energy production, due to the multiplicity of the relationship between microorganisms and photocatalysis, there are no comprehensive reviews of the relationship between photocatalysts and microorganisms. In this paper, the interaction between microorganisms and photocatalysts, the mechanism and application of photocatalysts in microorganism damage, and the mechanism and application of photocatalysts and microorganism synergism, and the preparation of photocatalysts by biological methods was reviewed. Finally, the problems and challenges that should be faced and addressed in future research are discussed. Therefore, this review will help researchers fully understand their relationship and promote the development of research in the field of photocatalysis and microorganisms.


 	Fig. 1  Three main relationships between photocatalysis and microorganisms.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photocatalytic bactericidal mechanism.	 

PdO/TiON	
E. coli
	˙OH	
43

AgVO3/g-C3N4	
Salmonella
	e˙−, ˙O2−	
45

Pt/TiO2	
E. coli
	ROS (not specified)	
53

B–Ni–TiO2	
E. coli
	˙O2−, H2O2	
54

AgBr–TiO2	
E. coli
	H2O2	
55


S. aureus
	˙OH, ˙O2
AgBr–Ag Bi2WO6	
E. coli
	˙OH	
56

BiVO4	
E. coli
	h+, ˙OH ads, e−	
46, 57, 58

Natural sphalerite	
E. coli
	H2O2, e−	
59


M. barkeri

Natural magnetic sphalerite	
E. coli
	˙O2−, H2O2	
60

Red phosphorus	
E. coli
	˙OH˙O2−, H2O2	
61


 	Fig. 3  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of ZnO, ZnS and ZnO0.6S0.4 nanoparticles. (b) Photocatalytic bacterial inactivation of E. coli K-12 in the presence of ZnO, ZnS and ZnO0.6S0.4 under visible LED irradiation. (c–f) Fluorescence microscopy images of E. coli K-12 photocatalytically treated by ZnO0.6S0.4 nanoparticles under visible LED irradiation for (c) 0 h, (d) 1 h, (e) 2 h, and (f) 3 h. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-phase synthesis of GO–CdS composites. (b) Time course for antibacterial activity towards E. coli in the presence of GO, CdS and GO–CdS under visible light irradiation for 30 min; (c) B. subtilis inactivation without any catalysts and after being treated with GO, CdS and GO–CdS with/without visible light for 10 min, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photocatalytic inactivation efficiency against MS2 (1 × 108 PFU mL−1, 100 mL) in the presence of different doses of g-C3N4 under visible light irradiation. (b) Photographs of MS2 plaque formation before and after photocatalytic disinfection with g-C3N4 (150 mg L−1) under visible light irradiation. (c) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism of viral inactivation by g-C3N4 under visible light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photocatalytic disinfection of E. coli K-12 by natural sphalerite under VL irradiation under different experimental conditions. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from American Chemical Society. (b and c) Photocatalytic deactivation efficiency (2 107 CFU mL−1, 50 mL) of E. coli K-12 by NMS under different experimental conditions under VL irradiation. (b) Nonpartition system and (c) partition system. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d–i) Fluorescence microscopy images of E. coli K-12 (2 107 CFU mL−1, 50 mL) after photocatalytic treatment or NMS (50 mg) treatment under VL irradiation. (d) NMS, (e) mixture of NMS and E. coli K-12 before irradiation, and (f) 1 h, (g) 2 h, (h) 4 h, (i) 6 h after VL irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photocatalytic coupling of microbial degradation of pollutants (ICPB). (b) Photocatalytic pretreatment of pollutants in wastewater enhances the biodegradability of refractory materials. (c) Microbes use photogenic electrons to make valuable chemicals through their own metabolic cycles. (d) Photocatalysts as electrode materials improve the degradation of pollutants and power generation performance of bioelectrochemical systems.	 

 	Fig. 8  
M. thermoacetica–CdS reaction schematics. (a) Depiction of the M. thermoacetica–CdS hybrid system, proceeding from the growth of the cells and bio-precipitation (loading) of the CdS nanoparticles (shown in yellow) through photosynthetic conversion of CO2 (center right) to acetic acid (right). (b) Pathway diagram for the M. thermoacetica–CdS system. Two possible routes to generate reducing equivalents, [H], exist: generation outside the cell (dashed line) or generation by direct electron transport to the cell (solid line). Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Closed material loop concept for PBSs for future space missions. PBSs have the potential to supply all the requirements for human habitation in space, using only solar energy to recycle waste products back into useful goods. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center Scientific Visualization Studio. (d) Overview of different PBS architectures. Utilizing e− derived from a semiconductor light harvester (A), PBSs channel reducing equivalents to generate H2 (B) to feed CO2 reducing microorganisms. This e− may also go directly to the bacterium (C) to generate reduced CO2 products, such as acetic acid. This acetic acid may then be fed to genetically engineered organisms (D) to upgrade to a wide range of products. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Graphical representation of a self-biased integrated photobioelectrochemical system (IPBES) for continuous electrolysis of CO2 into formate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 7 with permission from Elsevier. (b). Schematics showing the working principles of the Bio-PEC system. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the reactor setup, where PS and h+ represent the potentiostat and electron holes, respectively. (d) a. Current output with time of the PBEC and BEC (in the dark); b. the startup time of current (startup); c. the transient current responses (I–t curve; days 21–25) to the ON–OFF illumination cycle on the composite photobioanode at an applied potential of 0 V with a graphite electrode as the counter electrode during steady-state reactor operation. Reproduced from ref. 188 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Biogenic synthesis of the Ag@CeO2 nanocomposites using an electrochemically active biofilm. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of Ag–SnO2 nanocomposite synthesis. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
