Photoinduced electron transfer in composites of conjugated polymers and dendrimers with branched colloidal nanoparticles  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD00081K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD00081K
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 323-337Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhotoinduced electron transfer in composites of conjugated polymers and dendrimers with branched colloidal nanoparticles

        
          
            Smita 
            Dayal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nikos 
            Kopidakis
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Garry 
            Rumbles
          
        
      *ab
aNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, 1617 Cole Boulevard, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA. E-mail: garry.rumbles@nrel.gov
bDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA
Received 
      24th April 2011
    , Accepted 23rd May 2011First published on 6th July 2011AbstractCharge generation and separation dynamics in donor:acceptor systems based on composites of branched CdSe nanoparticles with a phenyl-cored thiophene-containing dendrimer (4G1-3S), or a low-bandgap conjugated polymer (PCPDTBT) are reported upon exclusive excitation of the donor or the acceptor. Time-resolved microwave conductivity is used to study the dynamics of either transfer of holes from the nanoparticle to dendrimer, or conversely the transfer of electrons from the polymer to the nanoparticle. Higher photoconductance signals and longer decay-times are correlated with device efficiencies, where composites with higher nanoparticle concentration exhibit higher solar photovoltaic power conversion efficiencies and an increase in external quantum efficiencies. This work evaluates the contribution of both components to device performance, but specifically the role of photoexcited nanoparticles.
Introduction
Photovoltaic solar cells based on photoinduced charge transfer in organic donor–acceptor systems1,2 have enormous potential to serve as a low-cost solution for the harvesting of solar energy. Over the last decade the efficiency and understanding of bulk-heterojunction (BHJ)-based devices containing a conjugated polymer and a fullerene derivative have improved tremendously with state-of-the-art efficiency exceeding 8%.3 BHJ cells consist of an intimate mixture of donor and acceptor phases, where the large donor/acceptor interface is designed to provide for shorter exciton diffusion lengths and therefore more efficient dissociation.4,5 In these devices, extraction of the free carriers that are generated at the two respective electrodes depends on the percolation networks within the donor and acceptor phase. One disadvantage of these fullerene-based bulk heterojunction systems is the dilution of the polymer phase by the low-absorbing fullerene derivative that demands a thicker device in order to absorb all the incident light. The replacement of fullerenes with quantum-confined, colloidal semiconductor nanoparticles (NPs) offers the advantage of providing an acceptor that can also absorb light.6,7Nanoparticles of these types exhibit higher absorption coefficients than their fullerene counterparts along with absorption spectra that can be tuned using composition, size and shape. Like the fullerenes, nanoparticles can also exhibit high electron affinities and can therefore not only facilitate the exciton dissociation at the nanoparticle/polymer interface but can also contribute to the overall device performance. This contribution has long been a topic of interest and for future development of solar cell devices that are based on inorganic nanoparticles and conjugated molecules it is important to determine the overall role that the nanoparticles play in device performance. One of the main challenges is to understand the role that each individual component plays in contributing towards photovoltaic device efficiency, which is often complicated by the overlapping absorption spectra of most commonly-used donor and acceptor phases. Semiconductor nanoparticles have well-defined energy states and it is known that they act as electron acceptors following photoexcitation of the polymer, due to the type-II band offset formed at the interface between the polymer and nanoparticle.6–8 The chemical synthesis of cadmium selenide, CdSe, nanoparticles is well understood to produce monodisperse nanoparticles with good control over shape,9,10 and the quantum confinement effect can be used to tune their optoelectronic properties. Photovoltaic devices that take advantage of this effect have been shown to demonstrate good efficiencies when blended with several polymers.
We recently demonstrated a certified power conversion efficiency of 3.2%, for a photovoltaic solar cell that comprised branched nanoparticles of CdSe as the electron acceptor, and blended with the polymer, poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT) (see Scheme 1).11 This low-band-gap polymer has an absorption spectrum that extends to 850 nm, well beyond the absorption spectrum of the nanoparticles. Therefore, excitation of this system at longer wavelengths (>700 nm) can be used to study the transfer of electrons from polymer to nanoparticles upon selective excitation of the polymer phase (Fig. 1). There is, in addition, good evidence to suggest that absorption of light by the nanoparticles contributes at shorter wavelengths to the spectral response of devices,12,13 indicating that they too are photoactive.
 Scheme 1  Molecular structures of (a) PCPDTBT, (b) 4G1-3S, and (c) a TEM image of the branched CdSe nanoparticles. 
 Fig. 1  (A) Absorption (attenuation) spectra of films of neat branched CdSe nanoparticles (solid, black); PCPDTBT (dotted, red) and the composite of the two (dot-dashed, blue). (B) External quantum efficiency (EQE) action spectrum of the photovoltaic device containing the CdSe nanoparticles and PCPDTBT, and the corresponding attenuation spectrum of the composite for comparison. 
Although fluorescence studies have reported the quenching of nanoparticle photoluminescence that is attributed to the transfer of holes from the nanoparticles to a hole scavengers such as thiols and amines,14,15 little is known about the transfer of holes to the polymer by direct photoexcitation of the nanoparticles. Lian and co-workers observed the formation of a phenothiazine cation using transient absorption spectroscopy confirming the transfer of holes from excited CdSe nanoparticles to phenothiazine.16 However, a clear demonstration has yet to be made of a photovoltaic effect arising from the transfer of a hole from a photoexcited acceptor-nanoparticle to a donor-polymer. The absorption spectra of most nanoparticles overlap directly with that of commonly-used conjugated polymers, such as the ubiquitous poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), and there is thus an inability to selectively excite the nanoparticles and probe the study of this hole-transfer contribution.7,11,17,18 This can be overcome by choosing a model conjugated molecule system that has an absorption profile that is blue-shifted compared to that of the nanoparticles. In this regard, conjugated dendrimers constitute an attractive class of molecular donors for OPV devices19 and, unlike the polymer counterpart, they also afford mono-dispersity and high purity.19,20 Using a phenyl-cored thiophene-armed dendrimer20 (4G1-3S, Scheme 1) as the electron donor, a device fabricated using PCBM as the electron acceptor exhibited a maximum power conversion efficiency of 1.3% in an organic photovoltaic construct.19 Although the efficiency of these devices is low compared to those using thiophene-based polymers, the blue-shifted absorption spectrum of this particular dendrimer provides an opportunity to selectively excite the CdSe nanoparticles providing a model, donor–acceptor system that can enable photoinduced charge transfer from the nanoparticles to a conjugated molecule to be investigated.
Here, we describe studies of two nanoparticle-based systems chosen to enable us to probe selectively the processes of electron transfer and hole transfer between conjugated donor molecules and nanoparticle acceptors. We describe studies that use the technique of flash photolysis, time-resolved microwave spectroscopy (fp-TRMC), which enables us to probe directly photoinduced charge generation and recombination dynamics in these two systems without the complexity of adding electrodes. First, we report the electron-transfer process from a polymer to branched nanoparticles in a nanoparticle:PCPDTBT composite, where the PCPDTBT affords selective, long-wavelength excitation of the donor polymer. Second, we examine the hole-transfer process in a 4G1-3S:CdSe composite, where the dendrimer enables selective excitation of the branched nanoparticles. In both cases, we correlate our fp-TRMC results with observed device efficiencies. The broader scope of this work is to understand how the two photoinduced charge transfer processes can both individually contribute to the photovoltaic device performance and ultimately lead to enhanced solar photoconversion efficiencies.
Experimental
Solar cell device fabrication and characterization
Branched nanoparticles have been shown to work better in photovoltaic devices than the corresponding nanorods or spherical quantum dots and are therefore used in this study.8,12 Branched CdSe nanoparticles were synthesized according to a previously published procedure.8,12,21 As-synthesized nanoparticles were heated in pyridine overnight at 108 °C to exchange the capping ligand with pyridine. The treated particles were recovered with hexane and re-dissolved in a 9:1 chloroform–pyridine mixture. They were then sonicated for an hour to facilitate colloidal suspension, and filtered through a 1.0 μm PTFE filter to remove non-suspended particles. The final concentration of NPs was 30 mg ml−1 as determined by drying and weighing a known volume of the sample. A 4G1-3S stock solution was prepared in toluene at a concentration of 20 mg ml−1. Nanoparticle and dendrimer solutions were mixed to achieve the desired ratio in the composites and thoroughly stirred overnight. In this report, nanoparticle concentration in composites is reported in weight percentage for consistency with existing nanoparticle literature. However, a 90% by weight nanoparticle composite corresponds to ∼60% by volume ratio. Photovoltaic cells were fabricated in a sandwich geometry and constructed on a pre-patterned ITO substrate that was cleaned with water followed by sonication in acetone and isopropyl alcohol. The substrates were oxygen-plasma cleaned, followed by deposition of a 30 nm thick layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate), PEDOT:PSS, annealed at 120 °C and then transferred to a nitrogen-purged glove box. The active layer was spin coated and annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. A top-contact layer comprising a 6 Å thick LiF layer followed by 100 nm of aluminium was deposited to complete the device. The complete construction comprised 6 individual devices each of area 0.11 cm2. For the fp-TRMC measurements, the same solutions of composite were spin-coated onto acetone-cleaned, pre-cut quartz substrates.

UV-Vis
electronic absorption spectra of solutions and thin films were obtained with a UV-3600 Shimadzu UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere. This system provides the fraction of light absorbed, FA, by the sample and is given as 1 − FT − FR where FT and FR are the fraction of incident light transmitted and reflected, respectively.
The current–voltage, J–V, data were acquired in a glove box using a home-built solar simulator. A calibrated filtered Silicon photodiode (Hamamatsu, S1787-04) was used as the reference cell for the J–V measurements. External quantum efficiency, EQE, measurements were made with a fiber-coupled monochromator, a Stanford Research SR830 lock-in amplifier and a silicon photodiode (UDI, UV-100) NIST-calibrated for visible wavelengths.

Time-resolved microwave conductivity


Flash photolysis, time-resolved microwave conductivity (fp-TRMC) is a contactless photoconductivity probe, that it is sensitive to both charge carrier density and mobility. Detailed descriptions of the general method, as well as our particular system, which is shown in Scheme 2, are available elsewhere.22–26 We measure the transient microwave-frequency absorption of solid thin-films in response to a ∼5 ns laser pulse, tuneable between 200–2000 nm, and at a repetition rate of 10 Hz (OPO – Continuum Panther, pumped with a Nd:YAG laser: Continuum Powerlite). Microwave absorption originates from the non-resonant interaction of mobile photogenerated charges in the sample with the microwave electric field. Samples are mounted at the electric-field maximum of an X-band TE102 microwave resonance cavity tuned to 9 GHz, which increases sensitivity at the expense of time resolution due to the ring-down time of the cavity (5–10 ns).
 Scheme 2  Schematic representation of the flash photolysis, time-resolved microwave conductivity (fp-TRMC). system. 
The change in microwave power, ΔP(t), reflected from the cavity is monitored with sub-nanosecond time resolution over the course of an excitation event. The transient change in reflected microwave power is related to the measured photoconductance, ΔGexp(t), by: (1)
Where K is an empirical calibration factor that accounts for the resonance characteristics of the microwave cavity, sample geometry, and the dielectric properties of the sample. The laser spot was diverged to uniformly illuminate the 1.01 cm × 2.29 cm sample area, and the photon flux was varied between ∼1011–1015photons/cm2/pulse using a set of neutral density filters.
All of the TRMC transients reported here were fit using a triple-exponential function convoluted with the instrument response function, the latter of which is a Gaussian laser pulse convoluted with the measured exponential decay time of the microwave cavity: ΔGexp(t) = F(t)⊗ΔG(t)(2)
ΔGexp(t) is the experimentally measured time-dependant photoconductance; F(t) is the instrument response function, and ΔG(t) is the actual, photoconductance decay that is modelled by the empirical function: (3)
The functional form of F(t) was chosen to contain a normalization factor, N, an exponential rise (trise) and an exponential decay (tdecay) both centred around : (4)
Fitting was implemented in Igor Pro 6, using a global analysis procedure to fit simultaneously all transients measured at varying photon fluxes for a given sample. The decay constants for the photoconductance, and the width and position of the laser pulse were allowed to vary, but were linked to be constant across all the transients in a sample set. The exponential pre-factors in the triple exponential function were varied freely, and the time-constant of the cavity decay, tdecay, was fixed at a value determined experimentally.
We use a figure of merit known as the yield-mobility product in order to compare the magnitude of the photoconductance for different samples and light intensities. This quantity is denoted ϕΣμ because it gives the quantum yield of free charges, ϕ, multiplied by the sum of the electron and hole mobilities, Σμ. This figure normalizes out variations in photon flux and film thickness that skew direct comparisons of photoconductance transients, such as those in Fig. 2. The relationship between photoconductance, ΔG, and the yield-mobility product, ϕΣμ, is: (5)
 Fig. 2  (A) Photoconductance transients of neat PCPDTBT (red), and nanoparticle:PCPDTBT composite (blue) containing 90 wt% nanoparticles after illumination with a light at a photon flux of 3.5 × 1013 photon/cm2/pulse. The excitation wavelength was 720 nm and solid lines represent fit using eqn (3). (B) ϕΣμ, determined at t = 0, as a function of absorbed photon flux. 
Where β = a/b with a and b being the long and short dimensions of the waveguide cavity cross-section; qe is the elementary charge; I0 is the incident photon flux; and FA is the fraction of photons absorbed. In our experiments, we assume that the carrier mobility sum, Σμ, is constant and the time dependence arises from a change in carrier yield over time. In this paper we focus on two particular times: t < 100 ns, and t > 100 ns, the reasons for which will be explained fully in the next section. A plot of ϕΣμ vs. I0FA determined at t = 0, previously estimated by the end-of-pulse signal,27 should yield a constant value of ϕΣμ that provides an estimate of the yield of carriers produced by exciton dissociation. However, this is rarely the case, with processes such as exciton-hole quenching giving a non-linear response. To compensate for this effect, we use a procedure first introduced by Dicker22et al. to extrapolate our experimental data down to low intensities where non-linear processes are negligible, and which is not experimentally accessible due to low signals. The empirical equation is given by: (6)
Where A, B, and C, are empirical fitting coefficients, and in the limit of low photon fluxes ϕt=0Σμ = A. Fig. 7 demonstrates the use of this function for the dendrimer: nanoparticle samples.
Results and discussion

Electron transfer studies upon excitation of donor only
The attenuation spectra (fraction of light absorbed, FA) of neat, branched CdSe nanoparticles, neat PCPDTBT and their composite are shown in Fig. 1A The attenuation spectrum of the CdSe nanoparticles exhibits well-defined absorption features, which is indicative of a good quality sample. The neat PCPDTBT film exhibits a very broad spectrum with two distinct absorption bands at 410 and 717 nm. Devices made with a 90:10 by weight ratio of nanoparticles to PCPDTBT have previously displayed a certified power conversion efficiency of 3.2% a short-circuit current, JSC = 10.1 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage, VOC = 678 mV and a fill factor, FF = 0.51 as published previously.11 A maximum in the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of ∼55% was observed in a range of 630–720 nm for these devices (Fig. 1B). A comparison of the absorption spectrum of the composite with the EQE spectrum (Fig. 1B) shows evidence of both the CdSe nanoparticles and the PCPDTBT response in a wavelength range of 350 to 850 nm, with the small peak at 480 nm, where PCPDTBT has very low absorption, showing evidence of a contribution to the photocurrent by the nanoparticles. In this composite, the polymer can exclusively be excited at wavelengths longer than 700 nm in order to study the electron transfer process from the polymer to the CdSe nanoparticles.
Photoconductance transients of the neat PCPDTBT polymer and nanoparticle:polymer composite (90% by weight nanoparticle) with excitation at a wavelength of 720 nm and with a photon flux of 3.5 × 1013photon/cm2/pulse are shown in Fig. 2A. At this wavelength only the polymer is photoexcited and no microwave absorption by the neat nanoparticle film can be measured, as expected. These transients were fit with a three-exponential decay function, as explained in the Experimental section, and the fitting parameters are summarized in Table 1. Neat PCPDTBT exhibits characteristics decay times of ∼2, 26 and 625 ns which are similar to those of 5, 30 and 750 ns observed for the composite. The signal that emanates from the neat polymer in the absence of an acceptor is often observed for conjugated polymers, with yields as high as 3% observed for poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT).22,23 The exact origin of these intrinsic carriers remains unclear and here, like P3HT, the microwave absorption is assumed to originate from just the holes, with the electrons being readily trapped in the neat polymer.22,23 It is interesting to note that, like P3HT, these carriers live for long periods of time, as depicted by the 625 ns decay time component, τ3, which indicates a slow recombination process. The fast initial decay, depicted by the decay times τ1 and τ2, we attribute to a process associated with the equilibration of the photogenerated holes with holes that are resident in the polymer in the dark; an assumption that is based on our understanding of a detailed study of P3HT.28 When the nanoparticles are added to the polymer, the signal increases dramatically in magnitude, although the shape of the transient remains almost unchanged. This increase in ϕΣμ at t = 0 is plotted in Fig. 2B for both samples. As explained earlier we fit these trends to eqn (6), which provides a reasonable extrapolation to low light levels where any non-linearities between charge generation and photon flux are reduced. The value of ϕΣμ extracted from this procedure shows an increase of more than an order of magnitude. This increase can be attributed to two effects: an increase in the yield of charge generation, combined with an increase in the microwave absorption as a result of the electrons that reside within the branched nanoparticles. A difficulty often encountered in fp-TRMC studies, is knowledge of the carrier mobilities generated by photoexcitation, and this is a difficulty also encountered here. However, the photocurrent data of the composite sample indicates an EQE of ∼40%, which gives an upper limit of the charges extracted by the electrodes. Effects caused by internal fields in the device must be taken into consideration here, but it is clear that the yield of charges is significant, and therefore the microwave carrier mobility of the electrons in the nanoparticles is not the main reason for the increase in microwave absorption, yet it may still be the dominant factor. The pre-exponential factor, ΔG3, associated with the long decay time of 750 ns is, however, a better comparison with the EQE data, as it is these long-lived charges that are primarily responsible for the photocurrent. Although we are unable at this stage to offer a full description of the kinetics that control carrier recombination and trapping in this system, the similar transient profiles of both neat polymer and composite do provide a clue. In the neat polymer, the kinetics are controlled by only the holes and, by comparison with P3HT,28 at early times they are controlled by equilibration of mobile holes with trapped holes, and at long times by recombination with the trapped electrons. For the composite, although the transient is larger, the functional form of the decay appears very similar, even though both electrons and holes are detected in the TRMC experiment. However, the kinetics of the two separated carriers are still coupled, and the whole process remains controlled by just the kinetics of the holes. Interestingly, the similar long decay time, τ3, which is associated with the recombination process, is the same for both samples regardless of where the electron resides; trapped in the polymer, or resident on the nanoparticle. The inefficiency of this recombination process is the key to the 3.2% solar cell efficiency for the composite, but it is the long-range hopping mobility of the electrons between the nanoparticles that enables the device to function, and that is absent in the neat polymer sample.
Table 1 Global fitting parameters using the procedure described in the Experimental section are given for the transients shown in Fig. 2A




Sample

τ
1/ns

                    ΔG1

τ
2/ns

                    ΔG2

τ
3/ns

                    ΔG3





                    PCPDTBT only
1.84
6.7 × 10−9
26
9.7 × 10−10
625
6.6 × 10−10


90% by weight CdSe NP
5.19
3.1 × 10−8
30
5.9 × 10−9
750
3.0 × 10−9




Hole transfer studies upon excitation of acceptor only
The attenuation spectra, FA, of the sample of neat, branched CdSe nanoparticles and 4G1-3S dendrimer films are shown in Fig. 3A, along with that of the 90:10 by weight composite of nanoparticles and dendrimer. The film of neat 4G1-3S shows a broad absorption spectrum with a maximum at ∼425 nm and little absorption beyond 600 nm. In the composites, the nanoparticles can be selectively excited at wavelengths longer than 600 nm and charge transfer from the nanoparticles to the dendrimer can be studied.
 Fig. 3  Attenuation spectra of (A) thin films of neat, branched CdSe nanoparticles (solid, black), neat 4G1-3S dendrimer (solid, red) and a nanoparticle:dendrimer composite (dashed, green) containing 90 wt% nanoparticles. (B) Nanoparticle:dendrimer composites containing 60 wt% (solid, blue), 70 wt% (dotted, black), 80 wt% (dot-dashed, red) and 90 wt% (dashed, green) by weight nanoparticles dispersed with dendrimer. 
The performance of the nanoparticle:polymer composite device is dependent strongly on the ratio of nanoparticles to polymer.17 For the optimization of the nanoparticle:dendrimer ratio to achieve the best device efficiency, devices with weight ratios varying from 60:40 up to 90:10 were fabricated. The corresponding attenuation spectra of these composites are shown in Fig. 3B. An increase in weight ratio of the composites show the increased absorption at wavelengths corresponding to presence of the nanoparticles; the first exciton peak at 600 nm becomes more pronounced, and the absorption extends out to ∼670 nm.
The current density-voltage (J–V) curves for the four nanoparticle:dendrimer composite devices under illumination with a simulated AM 1.5 global spectrum are shown in Fig. 4A. The data are corrected for spectral mismatch according to literature procedures,29 and are summarized in Table 2. With the increase in nanoparticle ratio, increases in short-circuit current, fill factor and efficiency were all observed, but the open circuit-voltage decreases slightly. Devices with a 90:10 by weight ratio of nanoparticles:dendrimer result in the best observed efficiency of 0.3%.
Table 2 Short-circuit current (Jsc), corrected for spectral mismatch; open circuit voltage (Voc); fill factor (FF); and power conversion efficiency (η) for nanoparticle:dendrimer devices under simulated AM 1.5G light illumination




Device

V
OC/mV

J
SC/mA cm−2
FF

η (%)




60 wt% CdSe NP
957
0.18
24.2
0.04


70 wt% CdSe NP
870
0.69
28.3
0.16


80 wt% CdSe NP
793
1.08
33.6
0.28


90 wt% CdSe NP
712
1.32
33.9
0.30




 Fig. 4  (A) J–V characteristics of 60 wt% (solid, blue), 70 wt% (dotted, black), 80 wt% (dot-dashed, red) and 90 wt% (dashed, green) of nanoparticles in the 4G1-3S dendrimer. (B) The corresponding EQE action spectra. EQE of device containing 60 wt% nanoparticles was too low to be measured. EQE action spectrum of pure CdSe (circles, yellow) device is also shown. 
The EQE data of these devices are shown in Fig. 4B and closely resemble the attenuation spectra of each composite with an increase in the EQE observed with increasing nanoparticle concentration. Devices containing 90 wt% nanoparticle show a maximum EQE of 27% at 470 nm with an action spectrum that extends beyond the absorption of the dendrimer; an observation that suggests a contribution of hole transfer from nanoparticles to dendrimer upon selective excitation of the nanoparticles.12,13 However, a device fabricated of only nanoparticles yields the EQE data also shown in Fig. 4B; unlike a dendrimer-only device that does not function. These neat nanoparticle-only devices exhibit a maximum EQE of 8% at 420 nm and a response that spans the whole range of absorption of the branched CdSe nanoparticles, which indicates a photoaction response that does not necessitate hole transfer from the nanoparticles to dendrimer; an effect that is becoming quite common.30 The transfer of holes to the dendrimer through photoexcitation of the nanoparticles, and the contribution that this makes to the EQE of devices is one of the key motivations of the following study.

Flash photolysis
time-resolved microwave conductivity provides an ideal means of unravelling the specific charge-generating processes in these nanoparticle:dendrimer composites. While excitation at a wavelength of 500 nm excites both the nanoparticle and dendrimer phases, excitation at 640 nm selectively excites the nanoparticles and removes the complications of absorption by the dendrimer allowing for hole transfer from the nanoparticle to the dendrimer to be probed directly through time-resolving the photoconductance.
The photoconductance transients of samples of neat nanoparticles, neat dendrimer and a 90 wt% nanoparticle:dendrimer composite with excitation at a wavelength of 500 nm and a photon flux of 1014photon/cm2/pulse are shown in Fig. 5. With excitation at 500 nm both the nanoparticles and dendrimer absorb the incident radiation and contribute to the transient microwave signal of the composite. The neat nanoparticles exhibit a large, but very fast-decaying photoconductance signal that is limited by the response time (∼8 ns) of the microwave cavity.23 The photoconductance transient of the neat dendrimer exhibits a much longer-lived photoconductance signal than that of neat nanoparticles but it is two orders of magnitude lower. The composite exhibits an initial, short-lived component similar to neat nanoparticles, but is followed by a prominent slower decay; an observation that suggests the significant presence of long-lived carriers.8 The short-time component in the composite is very similar to that seen in the pure nanoparticle film and this can be attributed to generation and detection of carriers in the nanoparticle phase.
 Fig. 5  Photoconductance transients of neat nanoparticles (purple), neat dendrimer (yellow) and nanoparticle:dendrimer composite (green) containing 90 wt% nanoparticles after illumination at 500 nm with 1014photon/cm2/pulse. 
Our observations for the nanoparticle:dendrimer composites upon excitation at a wavelength of 500 nm compare well with previously studied nanoparticle composites with P3HT and serve to establish: a) that the dendrimer acts as an electron donor similar to P3HT, and b) the long-lived charge separation observed in the photoconductance transients can be correlated with device performance.8 However, our main interest is in exploring the contribution that the exclusive excitation of nanoparticles makes towards the device performance, which can be accomplished in the composite with the dendrimer using selective excitation of the nanoparticles at a wavelength of 640 nm.
The photoconductance transients of neat nanoparticles and composites with the dendrimer at varying weight ratios (60%–90%) with excitation with 640 nm laser pulse with a photon flux of ∼3 × 1013photon/cm2/pulse are shown in Fig. 6. As only the nanoparticles are photoexcited, no TRMC photoresponse was measured in the neat dendrimer film. The film of neat nanoparticles exhibits a strong, but short-lived, photoconductance signal similar to that using excitation at 500 nm. The composites exhibit a short-lived decay component, similar to neat nanoparticles, which is then followed by a much slower decay component that indicates the presence of charges separated between the nanoparticle and the dendrimer.8,23,31–33 This state arises following photoexcitation of the nanoparticles, and due to the type-II band offset that exists between the two species and is attributed to the hole transfer from the excited nanoparticle to the dendrimer. The amplitude of both the initial fast decay signal and also of the long-lived component in composites increases with nanoparticle concentration. Again, the observation of the long-lived component in the composites can be attributed to the charge separation at the nanoparticle-dendrimer interface only, with the neat nanoparticles exhibiting a fast decaying signal and the neat dendrimer not absorbing at 640 nm. Increasing the nanoparticle concentration in the composites leads to an increase in charge separation, as observed by the higher amplitude of the long-lived component in TRMC analysis (Fig. 6), but also results in better device performance (Table 2).
 Fig. 6  Photoconductance transients of nanoparticle:dendrimer composites containing 60 wt% (solid, blue), 70 wt% (dotted, black), 80 wt% (dot-dashed, red) and 90 wt% (dashed, green) of nanoparticles in dendrimer upon excitation at 640 nm. The excitation photon flux was ∼3 × 1013photon/cm2/pulse. Neat nanoparticle transient is shown in purple. Solid lines represent a fit to the data as described earlier, with the decay times summarized in Table 3. 
The mobility-sum product at t = 0, ϕΣμ, for samples of neat nanoparticles and the composites upon excitation with 640 nm are plotted as a function of incident photon flux in Fig. 7. With the increase in nanoparticle concentration, the ϕt=0Σμ signal for composites approaches that of neat nanoparticles indicating that this signal is dominated by free-carriers in CdSe phase of the composites.
 Fig. 7  
ϕΣμ at t = 0 as a function of incident photon flux for neat nanoparticles (diamond, purple), 60 wt% (square, blue), 70 wt% (upward triangle, black), 80 wt% (downward triangle, red) and 90 wt% (circles, green) nanoparticles in dendrimer, with excitation at 640 nm. The solid lines are empirical fits to the data using eqn (6). 
The photoconductance transients with excitation at 640 nm were fit with a tri-exponential decay function convoluted with the instrument response function of the TRMC experiment, as described in the Experimental section. For each sample, the transients associated with different light intensities were analysed globally, keeping the instrument response function and the decay times, τ1, τ2 and τ3 fixed within each sample, and allowing only the pre-exponential factors, ΔG1 ΔG2, and ΔG3 to vary for each absorbed photon flux, I0FA. The three decay times extracted by this method associated with each of the 5 nanoparticle-containing samples are summarized in Table 3, and the associated pre-exponential factors are plotted in Fig. 8. The transients for the neat nanoparticles show a fast decay component of ∼2 ns, which is a value limited by the ∼8 ns response time of the microwave cavity, in agreement with previous work.8 The characteristic decay time, τ1, should not therefore be considered to be assigned to the rate of a carrier loss mechanism. Transients for the composite samples also exhibit a similar decay time, τ1, in a range of 1–3 ns that is comparable to that of the neat nanoparticles and can therefore be attributed to direct production of carriers within the nanoparticles. The additional characteristic time, τ2, required for adequate fitting of the composite samples falls in the range of 4–23 ns while the long decay time component τ3 falls in the range of 280–565 ns; showing a consistent increase with additional wt% of nanoparticles in the sample. Using this analysis, we can identify two distinct time regimes: less than 100 ns after excitation and 100 ns after. For the earlier time window, the transients are dominated by direct excitation of carriers in the nanoparticles (τ1), but with a contribution (τ2) associated with carriers in the polymer, similar to that observed for the PCPDTBT:nanoparticle system described earlier. The longer time window (>100 ns) uniquely characterises the long-lived carriers that exist between the nanoparticles and the dendrimer. Therefore, the pre-exponential factors, ΔG1 and ΔG2, represent the sub-100 ns contribution to the photoconductance signal and ΔG3 represents the post-100 ns window and is associated with a characteristic decay time due to long-lived carriers generated at the donor:acceptor interface by the transfer of a hole from the excited nanoparticle to the dendrimer.
Table 3 Decay times associated with tri-exponential fitting of transients for the 5 nanoparticle-containing samples




Sample

τ
1/ns

τ
2/ns

τ
3/ns





                    CdSe NP only
1.7
—
—


90 wt% CdSe NP
1.3
9.7
565


80 wt% CdSe NP
2.6
22.0
335


70 wt% CdSe NP
2.0
—
300


60 wt% CdSe NP
0.9
4.1
282




 Fig. 8  Pre-exponential factors extracted from the tri-exponential fitting of transients for the nanoparticle:denrimer composites as a function of absorbed photon flux, I0FA. 
The use of a tri-exponential decay function to describe the photoconductance transients is purely empirical, and serves only to provide this simple separation of early and late times. Although Fig. 8 depicts how all three pre-exponential factors vary with photon flux, the two important terms can be seen to be ΔG1 and ΔG3; while the former characterizes the importance of carriers generated directly in the nanoparticles, the latter is associated with carriers separated in the two phases. As the fast decay time associated with ΔG1 is limited by the instrument response function, little can be said at this stage about its magnitude, other than it increases with nanoparticle concentration. Carriers generated directly in nanoparticles with hole-scavenging ligands can result in long-lived photoconductivity signals as the hole can trapped by the ligand and long-lived transients are then a measure of a slow combination of de-trapping and recombination, and this is clearly not the case here.
The more important parameter is ΔG3, and its associated characteristic decay time, τ3. The magnitude of ΔG3, increases moderately by a factor of three from the 60 wt% composite to the 90 wt% sample, while the decay time increases by a factor of two, from 282 ns to 565 ns.
The pre-exponential factor ΔG3 represents the contribution of long-lived carriers that ultimately get extracted at the electrodes and can contribute towards the observed external quantum efficiency and short circuit current of the device. In Fig. 9 the ΔG3 values for transients excited with a low photon flux of 1013photon/cm2/pulse are plotted as a function of the volume of branched CdSe nanoparticles in the composites along with the short circuit current, JSC measured for the same samples. From these data, it is evident that the long-lived carriers and the short circuit current are correlated, and the latter results from photoexcitation of the nanoparticles, and not the dendrimer.
 Fig. 9  
            ΔG3 (squares, black) at incident photon flux of 1013photon/cm2/pulse verses CdSe nanoparticle volume percentage in the composites. Also shown as solid circles are the values of JSC as a function of CdSe nanoparticle volume ratio measured in photovoltaic devices. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have studied the charge generation and decay dynamics in branched CdSe nanoparticles blended with a low band gap polymer, PCPDTBT, and a phenyl-cored, thiophene-armed dendrimer, 4G1-3S, using time-resolved microwave conductivity. These two systems have provided the opportunity to investigate charge carrier generation with selective excitation of the donor or acceptor system. For the electron transfer studies we exclusively excited PCPDTBT with a wavelength of 720 nm and observed a photoconductivity signal an order of magnitude higher than that of pure polymer, indicating an efficient charge separation at the donor–acceptor interface. For hole transfer studies, the nanoparticles were excited at 640 nm in a dendrimer composite. With the increase in nanoparticle concentration an increase in the long-lived carriers was observed indicating the efficient charge transfer at the interface between the nanoparticles and the dendrimer. This observation agrees well with the nanoparticle:dendrimer device performance where short circuit current density closely follow the observed ΔG3 value as a function of nanoparticle volume percentage. This study confirms the contribution of the donor–acceptor components in charge transfer dynamics leading towards the better photovoltaic device performance.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Solar Photochemistry Program of the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U. S. Department of Energy through Grant DE-AC36-08GO28308 to NREL. The authors would like to thank Benjamin Rupert for providing the dendrimer sample, and Konarka for the polymer sample. The authors would also like to thank Andrew Ferguson and Obadiah Reid for helpful discussions.
References
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2011, 19, 84–92 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guenes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef CAS .
N. Greenham, X. Peng and A. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 17628–17637 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huynh, J. Dittmer and A. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, M. O. Reese, A. J. Ferguson, D. S. Ginley, G. Rumbles and N. Kopidakis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2629–2635 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. B. Li, L. W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190–195 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 239–242 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, E. Marx and N. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961–963 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, H. Snaith, A. Dhoot, S. Westenhoff and N. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 014914 CrossRef .
A. M. Munro and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2585–2590 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma, Z. Pillai and P. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 10088–10093 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Huang, S. Jin and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19734–19738 CAS .
W. Huynh, J. Dittmer, W. Libby, G. Whiting and A. Alivisatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, A. Abrusci, H. M. P. Wong, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1789–1793 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kopidakis, W. J. Mitchell, J. van de Lagemaat, D. S. Ginley, G. Rumbles, S. E. Shaheen and W. L. Rance, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 103524 CrossRef .
W. Mitchell, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, D. Ginley and S. Shaheen, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4518–4528 RSC .
W. Wang, S. Banerjee, S. Jia, M. L. Steigerwald and I. P. Herman, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2573–2580 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dicker, M. P. De Haas, L. D. A. Siebbeles and J. M. Warman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 1–8 CrossRef .
A. J. Ferguson, N. Kopidakis, S. E. Shaheen and G. Rumbles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9865–9871 CAS .
M. DeHaas and J. Warman, Chem. Phys., 1982, 73, 35–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Kroeze, T. J. Savenije and J. M. Warman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7608–7618 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Kroeze, T. J. Savenije, M. J. W. Vermeulen and J. M. Warman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7696–7705 CrossRef CAS .
J. Piris, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3849–3857 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Ferguson, N. Kopidakis, S. E. Shaheen and G. Rumbles,  2011, J. Am. Chem. Soc., submitted Search PubMed.
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2016–2023 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luther, M. Law, M. C. Beard, Q. Song, M. O. Reese, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3488–3492 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. C. Quist, T. J. Savenije, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 469–474 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. C. Quist, W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen, T. J. Savenije and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10315–10321 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Savenije, J. E. Kroeze, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon and J. M. Warman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 1–11 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Molecular structures of (a) PCPDTBT, (b) 4G1-3S, and (c) a TEM image of the branched CdSe nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 1  (A) Absorption (attenuation) spectra of films of neat branched CdSe nanoparticles (solid, black); PCPDTBT (dotted, red) and the composite of the two (dot-dashed, blue). (B) External quantum efficiency (EQE) action spectrum of the photovoltaic device containing the CdSe nanoparticles and PCPDTBT, and the corresponding attenuation spectrum of the composite for comparison.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic representation of the flash photolysis, time-resolved microwave conductivity (fp-TRMC). system.	 
	(1)
ΔGexp(t) = F(t)⊗ΔG(t)	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  (A) Photoconductance transients of neat PCPDTBT (red), and nanoparticle:PCPDTBT composite (blue) containing 90 wt% nanoparticles after illumination with a light at a photon flux of 3.5 × 1013 photon/cm2/pulse. The excitation wavelength was 720 nm and solid lines represent fit using eqn (3). (B) ϕΣμ, determined at t = 0, as a function of absorbed photon flux.	 
	(6)


                    PCPDTBT only	1.84	6.7 × 10−9	26	9.7 × 10−10	625	6.6 × 10−10
90% by weight CdSe NP	5.19	3.1 × 10−8	30	5.9 × 10−9	750	3.0 × 10−9

 	Fig. 3  Attenuation spectra of (A) thin films of neat, branched CdSe nanoparticles (solid, black), neat 4G1-3S dendrimer (solid, red) and a nanoparticle:dendrimer composite (dashed, green) containing 90 wt% nanoparticles. (B) Nanoparticle:dendrimer composites containing 60 wt% (solid, blue), 70 wt% (dotted, black), 80 wt% (dot-dashed, red) and 90 wt% (dashed, green) by weight nanoparticles dispersed with dendrimer.	 

60 wt% CdSe NP	957	0.18	24.2	0.04
70 wt% CdSe NP	870	0.69	28.3	0.16
80 wt% CdSe NP	793	1.08	33.6	0.28
90 wt% CdSe NP	712	1.32	33.9	0.30

 	Fig. 4  (A) J–V characteristics of 60 wt% (solid, blue), 70 wt% (dotted, black), 80 wt% (dot-dashed, red) and 90 wt% (dashed, green) of nanoparticles in the 4G1-3S dendrimer. (B) The corresponding EQE action spectra. EQE of device containing 60 wt% nanoparticles was too low to be measured. EQE action spectrum of pure CdSe (circles, yellow) device is also shown.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photoconductance transients of neat nanoparticles (purple), neat dendrimer (yellow) and nanoparticle:dendrimer composite (green) containing 90 wt% nanoparticles after illumination at 500 nm with 1014photon/cm2/pulse.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photoconductance transients of nanoparticle:dendrimer composites containing 60 wt% (solid, blue), 70 wt% (dotted, black), 80 wt% (dot-dashed, red) and 90 wt% (dashed, green) of nanoparticles in dendrimer upon excitation at 640 nm. The excitation photon flux was ∼3 × 1013photon/cm2/pulse. Neat nanoparticle transient is shown in purple. Solid lines represent a fit to the data as described earlier, with the decay times summarized in Table 3.	 

 	Fig. 7  
ϕΣμ at t = 0 as a function of incident photon flux for neat nanoparticles (diamond, purple), 60 wt% (square, blue), 70 wt% (upward triangle, black), 80 wt% (downward triangle, red) and 90 wt% (circles, green) nanoparticles in dendrimer, with excitation at 640 nm. The solid lines are empirical fits to the data using eqn (6).	 


                    CdSe NP only	1.7	—	—
90 wt% CdSe NP	1.3	9.7	565
80 wt% CdSe NP	2.6	22.0	335
70 wt% CdSe NP	2.0	—	300
60 wt% CdSe NP	0.9	4.1	282

 	Fig. 8  Pre-exponential factors extracted from the tri-exponential fitting of transients for the nanoparticle:denrimer composites as a function of absorbed photon flux, I0FA.	 

 	Fig. 9  
            ΔG3 (squares, black) at incident photon flux of 1013photon/cm2/pulse verses CdSe nanoparticle volume percentage in the composites. Also shown as solid circles are the values of JSC as a function of CdSe nanoparticle volume ratio measured in photovoltaic devices.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
