Tungsten dichalcogenides (WS 2 , WSe 2 , and WTe 2 ): materials chemistry and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA04268J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA04268J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18299-18325Tungsten dichalcogenides (WS2, WSe2, and WTe2): materials chemistry and applications

        
          
            Ali 
            Eftekhari
          
          
        
      *ab
aThe Engineering Research Institute, Ulster University, Newtownabbey BT37 OQB, UK. E-mail: eftekhari@elchem.org
bSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Queen's University Belfast, Stranmillis Road, Belfast BT9 5AG, UK
Received 
      16th May 2017
    , Accepted 31st July 2017First published on 31st July 2017AbstractTungsten is the heaviest transition metal in the family of common transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs). Despite the essential similarities of TMDCs, the considerable differences in the size and charge of the building elements can make the typical 2D layered structure suitable for various applications. There is not much flexibility on the chalcogen side, as the popular elements are S and Se. Following the successful history of transition metal sulphides in various applications, transition metal selenides are now the rising stars. On the transition metal side, WS2 and WSe2 have recently attracted considerable attention. In comparison with the Mo counterparts, W is more abundant in the Earth's crust and thus cheaper, and less toxic. The significantly larger size of W atoms can substantially tune the TMDC properties. The popularity of molybdenum dichalcogenides has somehow overshadowed the potentials of tungsten dichalcogenides. This manuscript attempts to collect the recent reports on various applications of WS2 and WSe2 to provide a general overview of tungsten dichalcogenides. Due to the popularity of sulphides, the prime focus of the present review is on WSe2, which is an emerging member of this family. Although WTe2 is not a common material like all transition metal tellurides, it is also briefly reviewed as a member of this sub-family of TMDCs owing to its unique properties, which named it as a potential candidate for giant magnetoresistance and superconductivity.Ali EftekhariAli Eftekhari is a professor of chemistry temporarily with the University of Ulster and Queen's University Belfast. He has worked in different capacities in various universities across 4 continents and has founded two internationally recognized academic schools from scratch, which were considered as exceptional success stories by major media such as the British newspaper, The Guardian. His research interest is focused on the material design for electrochemical systems and has worked on energy storage systems for 20 years. He is the principal author of over 100 papers published in leading scholarly journals and has supervised over 110 postdoctoral researchers and graduate students. He is the President of the American Nano Society.
Introduction
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have been among the promising materials for a broad range of applications for decades, but sudden attention has been paid due to their excellent performance in demanding applications. Historically, first-row transition metal chalcogenides were mainly the centre of focus due to the elemental abundance, but heavier transition metals have also shown impressive properties in the structure of chalcogenides.
The characteristic of these transition metal chalcogenides is the famous two-dimensional lattice structure in which the metal and chalcogen are arranged periodically in a hexagonal structure. Although TMDCs are referred to as 2D materials, this hexagonal structure is not atomically thin as in the case of graphene where the thickness is just a carbon atom. In TMDCs, the hexagonal structure vertically observed (e.g., in TEM) is composed of a sandwiched composition of X–M–X (where M stands for the transition metal and X the chalcogen).
Although the overall structure is similar for all TMDCs, the material properties can be significantly changed depending on the size and charge of both elements. Owing to this intrinsic similarity, TMDCs are usually investigated together. This is the reason that there are numerous comparative studies of TMDCs in various applications. This has provided a useful opportunity for a better understanding of the performance of TMDCs. However, it might also be misleading, as essential differences can be obscured when interpreting the behaviour of a TMDC by a mechanism proposed for another TMDC. Nevertheless, the performance of a TMDC can provide a new insight of another application. Therefore, it is highly beneficial to review a TMDC performance in various applications.
The classical examples of TMDCs are based on the first-row transition metals, as they are cheap and abundant. However, the tendency for the formation of a 2D structure pillared by van der Waals forces is more for heavier elements, and first-row transition metal dichalcogenides tend to form crystal structures with a three-dimensional symmetry. On both transition metal and chalcogen sides, recent attention has been paid to heavier elements. Heavier chalcogens provide better electrical conductivity, which is critically important for energy storage, and optoelectronic and magnetic applications, as will be reviewed here. Se is a rising star in the family of chalcogens because it is reasonably cheap with high electrical conductivity. Te is too expensive for most applications, and thus, its potential is limited to specific applications. The interaction energies decrease for heavier chalcogens due to the longer distance between the metal atoms.1 Heavier transition metals provide a better opportunity to alter the 2D structure to control the materials properties.
The flagship of 2D TMDCs is MoS2 due to its long history and ideal 2D structure. Tungsten dichalcogenides have recently attracted considerable attention because of larger W size, which can alter the 2D structure. This alteration may result in new opportunities, as will be shown for the case of WTe2 in the last section. Although W is a heavier element, its natural abundance is similar (slightly higher according to some sources) to that of Mo.2 However, the industrial consumption of Mo is currently higher while having a lower amount of mineral resources. This makes W commercially more favourable for future industrial applications.
Although WS2 is still the popular member of this TMDC sub-family in various optoelectronic applications,3–10 tungsten dichalcogenide (WSe2) is among the rising stars in the family of TMDC, and has been successfully utilized for various applications such as photodetector,11–13 field-effect transistors (FETs),14–20etc. Its lattice structure is that of the typical TMDCs with W atoms confined in a trigonal prismatic coordination sphere neighbored to Se atoms. Excluding the common first-row TMDCs, WSe2, WS2, MoSe2, and MoS2 make a common sub-family of TMDCs with similar properties. This is the reason that these four TMDCs are usually examined together in comparative studies.21–29 Despite considerable similarities, their potentials shift towards different types of applications. MoS2 has been a common material for various electrochemical applications, and the first alternative attention is MoSe2. In general, there is a tendency to examine the applicability of transition metal selenides as alternatives to sulphides for various applications.30,31 In a similar fashion, special attention is paid to WSe2 as a rising star of this sub-family of TMDCs in the present manuscript. In fact, MoSe2 has considerable advantages in such applications,30 but less attention has been paid to WSe2 as a similar alternative.
The key characteristic features of WSe2 is due to its electronic structure and preference. The first distinguishable feature of WSe2 is that its spin–orbit coupling (SOC) is more enhanced as compared with other TMDCs.32,33 For instance, the splitting of the valence band maximum (VBM) of WSe2 is 0.46 eV while this value is only 0.15 eV for MoS2.33 This has made WSe2 a promising candidate for spintronic applications. Furthermore, p-type doping is dominant for WSe2 because of the high positions of the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the VBM34–36 in comparison with common TMDCs such as MoS2 as the doping preference is n-type.37–39 Of course, this is just the general tendency, as doping MoS2 with group V elements leads to p-type.40 In the same fashion, n-type WSe2 can also be prepared.41

Fig. 1 demonstrates how the semiconducting nature of WSe2 is different from its closest member of the TMDC family. Note that this difference is a gradual shift because of the variation in the size of the composing elements in the 2D structure. Therefore, the semiconducting properties can be tuned by altering the chemical composition, which controls the lattice structure.42 In the 2D crystal structure of TMDCs, the spin–orbit interactions of the constituent atoms are large in the absence of any inversion symmetry. Therefore, the spin splitting of the bands increases the spin-valley coupling.33 This phenomenon has also been confirmed experimentally.43–48 As a result, depending on the transition metal, the SOC splitting can significantly adjust the valence band (VB) but rarely the conduction band (CB).49–52 The reason is that the Bloch waves of the VB are mainly made of the transition metal d orbitals at the K points, which results in a valley dependent splitting of the bands.53 For the CB, the dominant contribution by the lowest energy state cancels the spin–orbit splitting, and thus, the CB spin splitting is negligible.33 However, some recent studies suggest that interband coupling to remote bands results in a finite CB splitting.49,54 This typical example shows that the electronic properties of the TMDCs can be altered with different mechanisms depending on the choice of the elements.
 Fig. 1  Simple band structure scheme in the K+ valley (at the K point of the Brillouin zone) to indicate the different signs and magnitudes of the valence DVB SO and conduction band spin splittings DCB SO when going from MoSe2 to WSe2 monolayers. Optically bright (red arrows) and dark (gray arrows) A-exciton transitions are indicated. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
The present manuscript reviews the materials chemistry of tungsten dichalcogenides by describing the structural tunability of these TMDCs for various applications. The primary focus is on the electrochemical applications for energy storage and conversion, as the electrochemical activities can reveal important information about the chemical reactivity and electronic properties of the underlying lattice structures. Solid-state diffusion of counterions reveals the internal accessibility of the TMDC 2D architecture. In the same direction, the potentials of tungsten dichalcogenides for the fabrication of various sensors and biosensors are narrated. The tunable semiconducting properties of TMDCs make them engaging materials for photocatalysis and solar energy conversion, which will be discussed. Finally, WTe2, as a special member of the whole TMDC family, is reviewed, which has huge potential for particular applications.
Structure and manipulation
Lattice characterization
The lattice structure of tungsten dichalcogenides is similar to that of molybdenum counterparts, but having a slightly larger cation. Therefore, it is quite difficult to differentiate between WX2 and MoX2 by the conventional characterization techniques. Both spectra show similar E2g1 and A1g peaks. A typical application of Raman spectroscopy is to estimate the number of layers in the 2D TMDC structure by considering the intensity of the substrate peak.55–57 The difference between WS2 and WSe2 is noticeable because of the interaction of two large ions58 (see Fig. 2, for example). This is indeed a common behaviour for heavy dichalcogenides, which tend to have lower symmetry in-plane anisotropy.59 This difference is less intense for the case of MoS2 and MoSe2.60 A subtle comparison of the Raman spectra reveals enormous differences including the thickness-dependency characteristics (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 2  Optical contrast of 3L (a1) WS2 and (a2) WSe2 flakes. The grey dashed arrows indicate the wavelength of the excitation lasers used for Raman measurements. (b) Schematics showing atomic displacement of four Raman active modes in WS2 and WSe2. (c and d) Unpolarized Raman spectra of bulk (c) WS2and (d) WSe2 obtained with 473 and 633 nm laser excitation, respectively. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of 1 to 5L and bulk WX2 flakes. The spectra are normalized and vertically offset for clarity. (b)Position of the A1g and E2g1 modes (right vertical axis) and their difference (left vertical axis) as a function of the number of layers (n). (c) Intensity ratio (left vertical axis) and FWHM (right vertical axis) of A1g and E2g1 modes as a function of the number of layers. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The large size of W makes the lattice structure sensitive to tiny changes, which result in enormous differences in the overall structure formed. Since all applications of 2D TMDCs depends on the arrangements of active sites (whether edge sites of basal plane), the material properties significantly change.61Fig. 4 compares the Raman and photoluminescence spectra for a series of WS2 materials prepared by similar chemical vapour deposition methods. It is evident that a small change in the synthesis route results in considerable differences in the electronic properties of the material. Such changes are more severe for exfoliation approaches (as will be discussed later) controlling the formation of active sites.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of (a) Raman and (b and c) PL spectra of different monolayered WS2 samples. Laser wavelength is 514.5 nm for Raman and 488 nm for PL measurements. For (b), the PL intensity is normalized to 1 whereas in (c), the PL intensity is normalized to the A′1 Raman intensity. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2016, Materials Research Society. 
2H and 1T phases
It is well known that TMDCs can exist in two common forms of semiconducting 2H and metallic 1T. In a general sense, the 1T phase is less stable and transforms into the 2H phase. This phenomenon is stronger for lightweight TMDCs. For instance, the 1T phase of MoSe2 is considerably more stable than MoS2 or even WSe2.62 In any case, these phases have been investigated when a well-defined mono- or few-layer TMDC is deposited on a substrate, as the 1T phase is less stable in bulk materials. In the electrochemical applications, for example, the metallic 1T phase can be more advantageous, but almost all of the sample synthesised in bulk are semiconducting TMDCs. In a series of electronic applications, of course, the semiconducting properties are required.
In fact, controlling the thermodynamically unstable metallic 1T phase of TMDCs including tungsten dichalcogenides is of particular interest from a materials chemistry perspective, as this can introduce new opportunities in a series of applications. Since it is unlikely to synthesise a thermodynamically stable 1T phase in bulk form, the most likely approach is to confine the 1T phase subtly in a larger architecture. Computational studies suggested that the metallicity of the WS2 monolayer can be fairly tuned by introducing dopants into the lattice structure.63
Nayak et al. showed that applying pressure transforms the semiconducting to metallic structure of WS2 due to the overlap of the highest valence and lowest conduction bands.64 A pressure of ca. 22 GPa is required at 280 K to make this transformation, which can result in a 6-order decrease in resistivity, a 2-order decrease in mobility, and a 4-order increase in carrier concentration. This suggests that although the semiconducting structure of TMDCs is thermodynamically favourable, preparation of metallic phases might be beneficial for specific applications.
Curvature
Although the characteristic structure of graphene is the 2D flat sheet, the van der Waals forces are responsible for this flatness, and it is difficult to preserve the 2D structure of a free-standing graphene. On the other hand, there is a growing interesting in non-flat graphene, as altering the regular sp2 hybrid improves the chemical activity of graphene, which is essentially required in chemical applications.65 This is the same for TMDCs. In electronic applications, a monolayer or few-layer WSe2 is usually formed on a flat substrate. In electrochemical or photocatalytic applications,66 the bulk structure should be reduced to a few layers. This is the reason for the essential requirement of exfoliation step. However, hydrothermal synthesis can result in the formation of graphene-like broken sheets.67Fig. 5 shows the morphological structure of the WSe2 sheets prepared hydrothermally.
 Fig. 5  (a, b) SEM, (c, d) TEM, and (e, f) HRTEM images of graphene-like WSe2. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
This graphene-like structure of WSe2 can be employed for the fabrication of carbon-based nanocomposites, which normally provide high surface area and electrical conductivity. Wang et al. synthesised an interwoven WSe2/CNT hybrid network in which carbon nanotubes had been wrapped between the curly sheets of WSe2.68
Monolayer
The interesting feature of WSe2 is its 2D structure and no wonder that a significant part of its applications is based on monolayers deposited on a substrate surface. Yun et al. deposited a monolayer of WSe2 on a gold surface by controlling the growth temperature and the partial pressure of hydrogen in a CVD synthesis.69 The former controls the growth rate while the latter the amount of tungsten which is provided by the reduction of WO3. The gold surface facilitates the growth mediation for the formation of a uniform film.
In a typical CVD synthesis, the W precursor is WO3, and Se is used in its elemental form. The reaction temperature is normally above 900 °C, and the pressure is as low as 1 Torr.70–75 Li et al. synthesised highly crystalline monolayers of WSe2 in a lower temperature CVD (700–800 °C) and replaced the Se precursor by introducing an alkali metal halide into the reactor.76 They proposed that the alkali metal halide (e.g., NaCl) initially reacts with WO3 to form WOCl4 and WO2Cl2. The reaction of these intermediates with Se in a reductive atmosphere is more facile to form WSe2 at low temperature and ambient pressure.
Exfoliation of 2D layers
Since the structure of WSe2 is held by the van der Waals interactions between the layers (similar to the structure of graphite), the individual layers can be exfoliated. This is of the utmost importance for a series of applications of WSe2 in which the reaction is not solid-state within the bulk material. In almost every aspect, TMDCs resemble graphene; in a sense, they are seen as alternative materials to graphene, and sometimes referred to as graphene-analogous materials.77 In the same fashion, the simplest method for exfoliating the WSe2 layers is the so-called Scotch-tape,78–80 which somehow led to the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics. However, this method is not practical for the preparation of a significant amount of active material for common applications.
The most common approach is liquid phase exfoliation, which has been widely employed for the preparation of few-layer TMDCs over the last years.81 The exfoliation is conducted by using an intercalating agent such as lithium. Although the layered structure of WSe2 can be potentially exfoliated to individual layers, the presence of the van der Waals forces on the basal planes attract the sheets to each other. Therefore, the samples prepared by this method are typically few-layer WSe2. However, this is a demanding challenge to prepare atomically thin WSe2.82 The process involves the intercalation of small ions within the interlayer spaces to weaken the van der Waals interactions. Further reaction of the intercalated ions with the solution, which has diffused into the interlayer spaces as a result of the interlayer expansion, can completely separate the layers. Though, if the layers collide side by side, they will rejoin again, as some do to form few-layer sheets.
Gerchman and Alves profoundly inspected the liquid phase exfoliation of WSe2.82 They proposed that a solution of 30% propan-2-ol in water is a better alternative to the commonly utilised N-methyl pyrrolidone, which is more expensive and toxic while requiring a high temperature for the subsequent removal.
Usually, less attention is paid to the exfoliation process, but this can have a huge impact on the properties of WSe2.27Fig. 6 shows the WSe2 samples exfoliated with various agents. By a simple comparison of morphology, one can assume how much the material properties can be different for these samples. This indicates that the comparison of the WSe2 properties reported in the literature is not appropriate without considering the exfoliation process.
 Fig. 6  Morphological characterization: SEM images of WS2 and WSe2 (bulk) and after Li ion intercalation using methyllithium (Me–Li), n-butyllithium (n-Bu–Li) and tert-butyllithium (t-Bu–Li). The scale bars are 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Liquid exfoliation of TMDCs is not limited to lithium intercalation, and other intercalating species might be more appropriate depending on the application. The popularity of Li intercalation can be attributed to its presence in various energy storage systems, and simplicity and solubility of its salts. Other exfoliating agents such as large surfactants and polymers can facilitate a better dispersion and separation of single sheets, but the key point is if the exfoliating agent may interfere with the material performance in the target application.
Zhao et al. showed the impact of the exfoliation process when utilising a surfactant on the electrocatalytic performance of WS2 nanodots.83 The reason is the importance of the TMDC edges in the electrochemical reactions, and the accessible edge sites significantly vary depending on the exfoliation procedure. Exfoliation with polymers can control the nanosheet dispersion within the medium to avoid unfavourable agglomeration.84 Backes et al. extensively reviewed various exfoliation methods for separating the 2D sheets of TMDCs including tungsten dichalcogenides.85 However, it should be taken into account that an exfoliation method does not work for all TMDCs in the same way because the exfoliation process is the direct interaction of the intercalating agents with the nanosheets. For instance, similar exfoliation methods resulted in opposite electrocatalytic activities of MoTe2 and WTe2.86
Fullerene-like structure
In addition to the common 2D structure, tungsten dichalcogenides (specifically WS2 and WSe2) can form a fullerene-like structure, which is indeed a multilayered hollow spherical particle without dangling bonds. In fact, the tungsten dichalcogenide layers are curved to form a closed onion-like structure. Since the unsaturated edge atoms are absent, this material is less chemically and electrochemically active. Hence, fullerene-like WS2 or WSe2 is not a promising material for common applications, which will be reviewed here; though, some authors have utilised fullerene-like tungsten dichalcogenide for the electrochemical applications. This is exactly similar to the limited number of potential applications for fullerenes in comparison with graphene. However, they have their own applications. Fullerene-like WS2 is a promising candidate as a lubricant nano-additive87 or shock absorber.88 It has been proposed that WSe2 is a better candidate because of less chemical reactivity of Se as compared with S.89
Fullerene-like WS2 has also attracted attention recently for similar applications. Several studies investigated the friction and wear behaviour of epoxy materials utilising the fullerene-like WS2 as an additive.90–92 The outcome was noticeable not only because of the substantial improvement in the friction and wear behaviour but also the fracture toughness.93,94 Shneider et al. reported that adding only 0.3% fullerene-like WS2 can improve the toughness by 70%.93 However, Haba et al. proposed that the mechanism of the toughening effect of the fullerene-like WS2 should be much more complicated and dependent on the epoxy's crosslink density and its molecular defect fraction.92
Nanomaterials
Selenization of a W film is a versatile approach for controlling the WSe2 morphology,95,96 as a similar method can be used for the synthesis of WS2.97 Kim et al. synthesised highly ordered WSe2 in a CVD route starting from W as the precursor.98 First, they grew WO3 nanowires by annealing a W film; then, the WSe2 was grown on the WO3 nanotubes via two steps: forming a tubular WSe2 structure over the WO3 nanowires and growing the WSe2 nanotubes at the tips of the WO3 nanowires. The key controllable feature of this approach is that supplying the hydrogen gas would stop the formation of WO3 nanowires in favour of the selenization in which oxygen atoms in the WO3 nanowires are replaced by the Se atoms. Fig. 7 depicts the microscopic images of the WSe2 nanotubes. Although there are some-non-uniform coats, the structure of the nanotubes and its outer walls are highly ordered. Such an ordered structure can be very advantageous in various applications such as electrochemical applications, photoelectrochemical applications, photocatalysis, etc., but most of the research studies for such applications utilise WSe2 samples synthesised by simpler routes such as hydrothermal. WS2 nanotubes have also been synthesised by this approach.97 Of course, the capability of this method is not limited to the synthesis of core/shell nanotubes of WO3@WX2, as the morphology can be adjusted by the synthesis conditions.99
 Fig. 7  HR-TEM analysis of the WSe2 nanotube and core–shell structure. (a–c) TEM images of a WSe2 nanotube. The red arrows in (b) indicate the reduced number of walls near the WSe2 tip. The inset of (c) presents the FFT pattern of the whole region depicted in (c). (d, e) TEM images of core–shell structure; red and white arrows indicate broken regions in the outermost and innermost WSe2 layers, respectively. The inset of (e) presents the FFT pattern of the whole region depicted in (e). The interlayer distance of WSe2 for the nanotube and core–shell structures is 6.5 Å, as indicated in (c) and (e). (f) EDX spectra of WSe2 nanotube and core–shell structure, respectively. The oxygen peak is clearly observed in the core–shell structure, whereas no oxygen peak is detected in the WSe2 nanotube. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Owing to the 2D architecture of TMDCs, nanoribbons are among the common nanostructured morphologies. The interesting feature of nanoribbons is the possibility for controlling the basal plane to edge ratio, which is of the utmost importance in tuning the properties of tungsten dichalcogenides.100 For example, metallic WS2(1–x)Se2x nanoribbons have been employed as an electrocatalyst.101 With this architecture, the interlayer spaces of TMDCs are electrochemically accessible. Liu et al. used a monolayer WS2 nanoribbon to inspect single-atom defects during plastic deformation.102
A similar method but with an inverse strategy has been employed for the preparation of WO3-decorated WSe2 by high power laser-induced oxidation of WSe2 nanosheets.78 In fact, the WSe2 substrate can control the structure of the WO3 formed by oxidation. For instance, the WO3 grows with a hexagonal structure on a monolayer WSe2 (or up to three layers), while a monoclinic structure is formed on thicker WSe2 substrates. Li et al. investigated the Raman and photoluminescence spectra of the few-layer WSe2 exposed to a remote oxygen plasma.103 They reported that the oxidation occurs at the topmost layer, which systematically tunes the photoluminescence behaviour of the few-layer WSe2. McCreary et al. indicated that large WS2 monolayers exhibit an exceptional photoluminescence, which can be tuned by controlling the synthesis conditions.104 However, they suggested that the stoichiometric chemical composition results in the optimised behaviour.
Lee et al. synthesised a series of ordered mesoporous TMDCs by utilising a KIT-6 mesoporous silica as a hard template.105Fig. 8 compares the morphological structures of the TMDCs at different scales. Although the morphologies are similar at the micro scale, substantial differences appear at smaller scales. The main difference is in the shape of the mesopores. Only MoS2 properly replicates the mesoporosity of the original silica template, and the mesopores are more disordered by increasing the atomic weight of the TMDC building elements. Of course, all TMDCs have high crystallinity at the lattice scale.
 Fig. 8  (A) SEM, (B) HR-SEM, (C) TEM and (D) HR-TEM images of the mesoporous (a) MoS2, (b) MoSe2, (c) WS2, and (d) WSe2. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Cao et al. employed cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) as a soft template in a hydrothermal route for controlling the morphology of WS2 at the nanoscale.106 Vattikuti et al. developed this method to prepare mesoporous WS2 having a specific surface area of 197 m2 g−1.107 Since the dominant structure of the TMDCs is flat sheets attached to each other, mesoporosity is very beneficial for creating more unsaturated edges, which are electrochemically and catalytically active.108 In addition to the electrochemical accessibility, it has been discussed that the solid-state electrochemistry of mesoporous electroactive materials is different from the bulk lattice since the mesopore walls are composed of a few unit cells.109 For a 2D material such as TMDCs, the walls are indeed few-layer sheets, which is the common structure but on substrate surfaces. Controlling the nucleation and growth mechanism can alter the morphological structure such as 3D microspheres110 for specific applications. Zou et al. grew flower-like WSe2 on carbon nanofiber mates by diffusion-controlled CVD.111 Since the flower petals were porous, this nanostructured WSe2 showed excellent electrocatalytic performance.
Porous particles
Since the porosity of TMDCs is advantageous in a series of applications to expose a larger surface area, it is desirable to form flower-like porous particles of TMDCs. This can be done by compositing the TMDC with a high surface area such as graphene or controlling the hydrothermal synthesis. Li et al. synthesised WSe2 microspheres in a one-pot solvothermal synthesis utilising W(CO)6 as the W precursor and Se.112 They ascribed the morphological structure formed to the W intermediate generated as a result of the W(CO)6 decomposition. Of course, this mechanism is not limited to WSe2, and similar flower-like TMDCs have also been synthesised by this approach. Fig. 9 shows the microscopic images of the flower-like WSe2. This somehow resembles the fullerene-like architecture, but the structure is not closed here, and on the contrary, more edge sites are exposed. For this reason, this structure has a huge potential for the electrochemical applications.
 Fig. 9  SEM images (a and b) and TEM images (c and d) of the WSe2 microspheres. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Surface modification
Although the basal plane of the TMDCs is electrochemically inactive (or more precisely less active) like graphene due to the difficulty of charge transfer across the uniform distribution of charge over a 2D structure, the surface chemistry is significantly different owing to the presence of more active chalcogen atoms (in comparison with carbon atoms in graphene) which can better facilitate the adsorption of active species. For instance, self-assembly of thiolated compounds on WS2 nanosheets has been reported.113 This provides a great opportunity for surface functionalization of the TMDCs for various applications, as will be described later on.
Doping
Two types of doping are considered for tuning the semiconducting and chemical properties of TMDCs. As mentioned before, WSe2 has a tendency towards p-type doping. Like other doped semiconductors, a precise doping of TMDCs is a challenge. Since doping during the crystal growth has a little flexibility, the current approach is to chemically facilitate the doping by oxidising or reducing agents having appropriate redox potential.114–116 First-principle calculations suggested that substituting W with other transition metals in WS2 can result in spin polarisation to control the magnetic properties.117 The size difference of W and the dopant can be an advantage for tungsten dichalcogenides in general. Electronic and optical responses of Cr-doped MoSe2 and WSe2 by Compton measurements suggested a higher ionic character of WSe2, which can be beneficial in the photovoltaic performance.118
Doping can directly redistribute the charge over the 2D structure of TMDCs, and this activates some sites for having higher chemical and catalytic activities because of an enhanced charge transfer at those points. This is the reason that doped graphene materials are overtaking the popularity of pure graphene. The influence of dopants is even more visible when applying strain engineering.119 Therefore, combining the doping and strain engineering approaches is a promising strategy for tuning the electronic and magnetic properties of WS2 WSe2 as well as other 2D TMDCs.120–127
Not only can direct doping of the WSe2 lattice alter its chemical activity, but also metallic impurities can interact with the Se atoms to affect the charge distribution over the WSe2 lattice, which somehow is acting like dopants. For instance, it is thermodynamically favourable for Nb to substitute W atoms in WSe2 while the crystal structure remains intact.128
Wang et al. demonstrated that exposure of WSe2 to the appropriate oxidants results in the adsorption of oxygen, which can lead to oxygen-induced doping.129 This process proceeds over a few days and forms p-type doped WSe2. This increases the hole density via a non-covalent charge transfer process resulting in an increase in the hole conduction.
The electronic and magnetic properties of tungsten dichalcogenides can be controlled by n- or p-type dopants. When the electronic state of the dopant is close to the VB, a p-type doping is likely while being close to the CB is accompanied by an n-type doping. Zhao et al. investigated the functionality of various elements from groups V and VII for doping a WSe2 monolayer and concluded that group V elements facilitate a p-type doping while the elements from group VII result in an n-type doping.130
Ternary tungsten dichalcogenides
When mixing two tungsten dichalcogenides, a chalcogen is practically serving as a dopant in the dominant structure. Owing to the similarity of chalcogens, the resulting architecture is subject to deformation but with uniformity.131 This can distribute the charge over the TMDC structure, which is very beneficial for some applications such as electrochemical systems. For example, the electrocatalytic activity of WS2(1–x)Se2x is much better than that of individual WS2 and WSe2.132 The chemical composition also controls the band gap of this ternary tungsten dichalcogenide.133 In a different context, it has been reported that the interaction of S and Se in a lithium-(sulphur/selenium) battery results in a better electrochemical stability to avoid the so-called shuttle effect.31
This is not limited to the electrochemical properties of ternary TMDCs, as other material properties can be tuned by the chemical composition of the chalcogens. The electronic properties of WS2xSe2–2x alloy nanosheets directly depend on the chemical composition, as the p-type behaviour of a Se-rich alloy gradually transforms to n-type behaviour for S-rich alloy.134
Electrocatalysis
Similar to other TMDCs, tungsten dichalcogenides provide active sites for catalytic reactions,135,136 but electrocatalysis is more subtle in understanding the involvement of these active sites due to the traceable electron transfer. As a general rule for the TMDC electrocatalysts, the catalytic active sites are almost absent on the basal plane and located at the edges where unsaturated atoms can facilitate the intermediary adsorption process. As described above, doping can create a non-uniform charge distribution over the basal plane making some sites catalytically active. The most common electrocatalytic application of this class of TMDCs is for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER),137 though they can be potential candidates for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER)138 and lithium-oxygen batteries139 too. In the electrocatalytic applications of tungsten dichalcogenides, the focus is on the material morphology to expose more edge sizes to enhance the electrocatalytic performance.67,140–142
Huang et al. prepared a cobalt-doped WSe2 which exhibited an excellent electrocatalytic activity for the HER.143 If mixing CoSe2 and WSe2 physically, the electrocatalytic activity would be poor, indicating that the presence of a dopant in the basal plane is vital and the electrocatalytic performance is not a result of a simple interaction of CoSe2 and WSe2.143 Since the WSe2 material is mainly composed of relatively large sheets, activating the basal plane to participate in the electrocatalysis is of the utmost importance to achieve acceptable performance. Similar results have been reported for the HER electrocatalytic activity of N-doped WS2 nanosheets.144
However, this cannot be generalised for the influence of doping for enhancing the electrocatalytic activities of tungsten dichalcogenides. Although computational predictions support this idea, experimental results showed that p-dopants such as niobium and tantalum reduce the electrocatalytic activity of WS2 for the HER.145
The role of a conductive agent is essential for the electrocatalytic performance of WSe2. Substituting some of the Se atoms by S can create defects on the basal plane which can improve the electrocatalytic activity toward HER, but the impact of the carbon conductive agent is stronger.146 In the presence of an appropriate amount of the carbon conductive agent, the electrocatalytic performance of pure WSe2 is better than that of defective WSe2–xSx. This indicates that WSe2 has a potential to provide sufficient active sites for the electrocatalytic reactions.
Schenato et al. reported that the HER electrocatalytic activity of WS2 increased with the annealing temperature.147 This is indeed an unusual behaviour, as thermal treatment normally weakens the electrocatalytic activity due to the increased crystallinity which typically reduces the number of active sites conducting the electrocatalysis. In fact, the electrocatalytic performance of WS2 is not as straightforward as it seems, because a different procedure should be involved in creating the catalytic active sites.
In applications such as electrocatalysis, the electrochemical accessibility of the active site is of the utmost importance. Therefore, it is vital to properly distribute the electrocatalysts over a substrate with a high specific surface area. Carbon nanomaterials are common candidates for this purpose, and graphene is now a popular member of this family. A potential advantage of graphene for hybridising with 2D TMDCs is the possible van der Waals interactions between the two components having 2D architectures. This feature has been used to tune the band gap of WSe2 by introducing a van der Waals layer of graphene.148–150 In most studies utilising tungsten dichalcogenide, the electrode material is a nanocomposite of WS2 and graphene,151,152 and thus, the nanocomposite architecture should also be taken into account. In this direction, doping the graphene with carbon neighbouring elements such as N, O, P, etc. can further improve the electrocatalytic activity of the WS2/graphene nanocomposite.151 This is the reason that the presence of functional groups in reduced graphene oxide is beneficial for more interactive connection between WS2 and graphene.152
An important factor in the comparison of the electrocatalytic activities of TMDCs reported in the literature is the neglection regarding the role of the exfoliation process, which is directly responsible for the formation of electrocatalytic edge sites. In fact, the impact of the exfoliation process is not that high in other applications. For example, bulk WTe2 is a better electrocatalyst for HER as compared with MoTe2, but the available exfoliation methods work for MoTe2 and not WTe2.86 Unfortunately, most of the studies reported in the literature have typically used an exfoliating agent without considering its impact on the electrocatalytic activities. The effect of the exfoliation method can be ignored by direct synthesis of nanostructured TMDCs, e.g., via chemical vapour deposition. However, even in this case, the substrate controls the growth mechanism, and thus, the electrocatalytic sites formed. In this case, the electrocatalytic activity is highly dependent on the substrate electrode.153 The interesting feature is that the impact of the substrate surface is more than changing the metal atoms in the TMDCs (e.g., MoSe2vs. WSe2). Although the chemical composition provides flexibility in design, the key feature in tailoring the electrocatalysts is how to arrange the edge sites in TMDCs.
In general, it seems that the available exfoliation methods are not suitable for the preparation of tungsten dichalcogenide electrocatalysts. Even in the case of Mo and S sulphides, whilst the electrochemical activity of bulk WS2 is higher than that of MoS2, the electrocatalytic activity of the exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets is significantly higher.154 This is in agreement with the case of WTe2 quote before, and seems to be a general behaviour. Quite interestingly, Pumera and his co-workers investigated the influence of sonication time during the exfoliation process on the electrocatalytic performance of a series of commercial WS2 materials.155 Although the sonication time directly increased the electrochemical activity due to the exfoliated nanosheets, this dependency was highly dependent on the source material. This proves that the data reported in the literature cannot be simply compared without considering the starting bulk tungsten dichalcogenide and the exfoliation process, as the electrocatalytic performance is highly sensitive to these factors.
Another important factor is the TMDC dominant phase. The electrocatalytic activity of WS2 with metallic edges is noticeably higher than that of 2H phase.156 The reason is lower charge transfer resistance at the electrode/electrolyte interface facilitating a more effective adsorption/desorption process. This feature adds to the importance of the exfoliation method, as the TMDC phase is dependent on the exfoliation process too. In a similar fashion, metallic WS2 displays a significantly stronger performance for supercapacitor applications as compared with the 2H phase.157–162
Solid-state diffusion
Both WS2 and WSe2 have been employed as potential candidates for the anode of lithium-ion batteries.163–166 Chen et al. synthesised a highly ordered mesoporous crystalline WSe2 by using a mesoporous silica SBA-15 hard template.163 The battery performance was considerable with a specific capacity of 530 mA h g−1. Considering the fact that both W and Se are heavy elements, achieving this specific capacity is quite interesting. However, since the solid-state diffusion in 2D nanomaterials can be engineered, TMDCs can be a good candidate for fast charging lithium-ion batteries.167
The most important factor in the battery performance is the electrochemical accessibility of the diffusion channels, which are located along the 2D layers of TMDCs. Qian et al. deposited the WS2 nanosheets vertically on the substrate surface and the electrode displayed considerable battery performance, while that of a similar electrode prepared by horizontally depositing the WS2 nanosheets was negligible.164
In a series of electrochemical applications such as secondary batteries, the key process is the solid-state diffusion of the counterion into/from the electroactive material. Solid-state diffusion through spacious channels within layered materials is facile, and this is the reason that layered metal oxides are among the most common materials for lithium-ion batteries and similar systems. The 2D structure of TMDCs also resembles the same solid-state diffusion. Zhang et al. synthesised a WSe2/C composite as an anode material for sodium-ion batteries.168 Finding an appropriate anode material is still a key challenge for sodium-ion batteries as common graphitic materials are not thermodynamically suitable for the intercalation of Na ions. The latter results showed reversible performance for the intercalation and de-intercalation of Na into/from the WSe2 layered structure. In general, TMDCs based on larger elements provides more spacious interlayer for the diffusion of Na ions, which are significantly larger than the common Li counterpart.169 As described earlier, carbon doping can improve the interaction of carbon and the TMDC in the nanocomposite architecture, and this approach is also useful for the solid-state charge storage. In a nanocomposite of WS2/C, the presence of N-doped carbon can substantially improve the cyclability of the sodium-ion battery to retain its capacity fully after 100 cycles while the undoped carbon results in 70% capacity fading.170
Even in comparison with WS2, WSe2 provides better battery performance for the intercalation/de-intercalation of Na ions.171Fig. 10 compares the electrochemical behaviours of WS2 and WSe2. The redox peaks are stronger and sharper in the case of WSe2 while the harmful Na electroplating is much weaker. The charge/discharge profiles show the typical battery performance; though not ideally a flat plateau or high capacity, considerably better than most of the TMDCs even in lithium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 10  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of the first three cycles a WSe2 electrode in sodium-battery performance, and (b) and comparison of WSe2 and WS2 during the 3rd cycle. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In general, solid state diffusion into the layered structure of WSe2 is not straightforward and causes severe structural changes. In fact, the WSe2 sheets are broken into smaller ones and misplaced at different directions. However, this is not a harmful change in the material structure as this rearrangement opens the diffusion channels within the electroactive particles. Fig. 11 compares the structural changes of WSe2 after repetitive intercalation/de-intercalation of Na ions.
 Fig. 11  (a) EDS composite map of a WSe2 electrode before cycling, scale bar ¼ 100 nm (b) EDS composite map of a WSe2 battery electrode after the 5th discharge showing W and Se, scale bar ¼ 100 nm (c) the same EDS spectrum as (b) but with the Na added (d) schematic illustrating the storage mechanism of Na in WSe2. Upon Na+ insertion segregated domains of NaxSe and W form. After the Na+ has been removed, WSe2 is reformed but it is less crystalline than in its original state. (e) XRD pattern of the initial WSe2, the NaxSe product formed after the 5th discharge, and the less crystalline WSe2 formed after the 5th charge (f) zoomed XRD patterns displayed in (e). Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
WS2 has also been tested as a potential candidate for lithium-ion batteries. Since the electrical conductivity of the particles is not sufficient enough, the presence of a conductive agent (normally a carbonaceous material) is required; otherwise, the cyclability will be poor. Huang et al. prepared a composite of WS2 and Super P carbon as a candidate for the anode of lithium-ion batteries.172 The battery performance was much better than the individual components while the cyclability was significantly improved because of slow increase of the charge transfer resistance. The improved cyclability of WS2 has also been reported by using graphene as the conductive agent.173
The chemical interactions of the electroactive material with the carbon conductive agent have a huge impact on the battery performance because of the internal interfaces formed between these two components of the nanocomposite. Zeng et al. deposited WS2 nanosheets on the surface of hollow nitrogen-doped carbon spheres.174 Due to the presence of N dopants across the carbon, there are stronger chemical interactions with the WS2 nanosheets facilitating the charge transfer. As a result, they achieved a specific capacity of 801 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1. On the other hand, the porous architecture provided by the conductive agent can significantly improve the electrochemical accessibility of the redox sites to shorten the solid-state diffusion length. For instance, a specific capacity of 927 mA h g−1 has been reported for the WS2 nanoflakes grown on a 3D graphene network.175
Lin et al. deposited WS2 film on a Cu substrate by a magnetron sputtering method.176 Like the inorganic films prepared by this method, the electroactive film has good electrochemical stability and a concrete structure. In the absence of a carbonaceous conductive agent, the electrode could fully retain its capacity after almost 100 cycles. Quite interestingly, if depositing an intermediary layer of Ni on the Cu substrate, the capacity could grow in the course of cycling. In the latter case, the electrode could deliver a specific capacity of over 1000 mA h g−1 at the rate of 0.1 A g−1.
Pseudocapacitance
Along with other TMDCs, tungsten dichalcogenides have been recently examined as potential candidates for the fabrication of supercapacitors.157 Even in the battery applications of TMDCs, the electrochemical performance is based on a complex response consisting of both battery and pseudocapacitive behaviours.177 Pumera and his coworkers compared the pseudocapacitive behaviour of a series of TMDCs.27 While WSe2 was not the TMDC delivering the highest specific capacitance, but the pseudocapacitive behaviour was closer to the ideal one in the absence of sharp peaks associated with an irreversible process at low or high potentials. The pseudocapacitive behaviour of WSe2 is generally better than its TMDC counterparts to be closer to the ideal capacitive behaviour. However, since the pseudocapacitance is mainly a surface reaction or at least dominated by the redox systems at the surface or sub-surface, the electrochemical accessibility of the lateral structure is a key factor.
In general, there is no direct advantage for utilising heavy elements in TMDCs for the fabrication of pseudocapacitors because of the lower specific capacitance. This situation is different from alkali-metal ion batteries in which the solid-state diffusion prefers more spacious channels, and the disadvantage of heavy elements is compensated by the easier and faster diffusion through wider interlayers of WSe2. In addition to the direct application of pseudocapacitance in supercapacitors, it also has an impact on other electrochemical properties of the electroactive materials. For example, a better pseudocapacitive behaviour is indicative of a more facile adsorption mechanism, which can be accompanied by stronger electrocatalytic performance.178 The ideal pseudocapacitive behaviour of WSe2 suggests that the redox centres are active at quite different energies.
Sensors and biosensors
MoS2 has been widely employed as an active material for various types of sensors such as chemical gas sensors,179 but WS2 has been recently considered as a potential alternative. Huo et al. reported that the photocurrent of WS2 changes in the presence of gaseous species such as ethanol and ammonia, and thus, it can have the potential for the design of gas sensors. Li et al. investigated the performance of WS2 nanoflakes as a gas sensor for the detection of ammonia at room temperature and found that this sensor has a good selectivity and sensitivity.180 The presence of sulfide-related species such as SO42− on the surface of WS2 nanoflakes caused a Lewis acidity, which could be responsible for the good chemical response of ammonia. They proposed that the sensor mechanism is based on the catalytic oxidation of the adsorbed ammonia along with the other species adsorbed from the environment because the sensor response was strengthened by increasing the humidity. In such sensors, the recovery rate is of practical importance, which usually can be improved by reducing the number of WS2 layers.181 The reason is the entrapment of NH3 molecules within the interlayers. This indicates the importance of exfoliation process in the preparation of 2D TMDCs. Perrozzi et al. reported that WS2 is thermally unstable and oxidised to WO3 in the air, and concluded that the performance of the common WS2-based gas sensors depends on the structure of the resulting WS2/WO3 nanocomposite.182
Owing to the possibility of surface functionalization of TMDCs, WS2 has been recently employed as an active material for the design of biosensors.183–191 Since WS2 provides a 2D covalent-network, it is a good substrate for the immobilisation of biospecies. Yuan et al. adsorbed single-strand DNA (ssDNA) chains on the WSe nanosheets resulted in fast quenching of a fluorescent dye-tagged to the DNA chain.186 Since this ssDNA adsorbed onto WS2 can be detached by an appropriate interaction with other molecules, the fluorescence is restorable. Xi et al. revealed that WS2 nanosheets display a differential affinity toward short oligonucleotide fragments versus ssDNA probe, and thus, are an efficient quencher for adsorbed fluorescence probes.187 This provides a good possibility for a selective detection of miRNA.
Lin et al. reported that WS2 nanosheets can exhibit an intrinsic peroxidase-like activity to catalyse the peroxidase substrate 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB).183 In the presence of H2O2, this conducts a colour reaction, which has been used for the visual detection of blood glucose by a glucose oxidase/WS2 biosensor. In a similar fashion, Zuo et al. developed a dual-color fluorescent biosensor based on WS2 nanosheets with an excellent sensitivity and selectivity for the detection of Hg2+ and Ag+.188
Overall, the sensing performance of WS2 is similar to that of MoS2.192,193 It should be taken into account that in the electrochemical sensors, the sensing mechanism is based on the electrocatalytic reactions conducted at the edge atoms. Therefore, the problem of inappropriate exfoliation approach discussed above is a serious matter in the comparison of exfoliated MoS2 and WS2. However, this is just in the conventional cases. When manipulating the electronic and optical properties of TMDCs, for example by strain engineering, tungsten dichalcogenides normally exhibits stronger versatility in displaying new properties,194 though TMDCs are not usually tailored for the fabrication of sensors as there is no vivid strategy on how the lattice structure should be altered.
Photocatalysis and solar energy conversion
WS2 has shown similar behaviour to that of MoS2 as a co-catalyst along with CdS for the photocatalytic water splitting for producing H2 since the performance was comparable with those of noble metals.195 Zhong et al. demonstrated that the WS2/CdS photocatalyst is very efficient and stable as the presence of WS2 co-catalysts improved the CdS photocatalytic activity by 56 times.196Fig. 12 shows how the presence of the WS2 co-catalyst can be beneficial for the photocatalytic production of H2. The optimum ratio is about 40% WS2, but this should be influenced by the composite architecture too. The interesting point is that the WS2 component is not subject to photo-corrosion, and then, the co-catalyst is significantly stable in comparison with the CdS photocatalyst. Various WS2 nanocomposites197–200 and morphologies201–203 have been designed to improve its photocatalytic activities for practical applications.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of charge separation and transfer in the CdS/WS2 nanocomposites under visible light. (b) H2 evolution of different samples with varying weight amounts of WS2 nanosheets and cycling behavior in 5 h. (c) The concentration of S2−, Cd2+, and W4+ decomposed from CdS/WS2 nanocomposites during the irradiation. (ICP-AES Condition: sampling at different times and centrifuged to remove the photocatalyst powder). Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
WSe2 also have shown excellent photocatalytic properties.204 Abruña and coworkers employed an n-type WSe2 photoelectrode for the electrolysis of HI forming H2 and HI3.41 They reported a shift of the n-type WSe2 flat band potential as a result of specific interactions between the photoelectrode and electrolyte assist the electrolysis of HI to occur spontaneously. Velazquez et al. demonstrated that, contrary to the common paradigm of the edges as the sole source of deleterious electron–hole recombination, microscopic terraces are the major sites causing the performance decay of p-WSe2 photoelectrodes.205
A Schottky junction based on WSe2 has exhibited an 8.6% energy conversion efficiency in a photovoltaic (PV) cell.206 The efficiency of photoelectrochemical water splitting has been reported to be above 14%.207 The optoelectric properties of the van der Waals heterojunctions of MoS2/WS2 (ref. 208–212) and MoS2/WSe2 (ref. 210, 213–217) have shown promising potentials for various photochemical and photoelectrochemical applications.218 The main obstacle in this regard is the lack of appropriate synthesis routes for the preparation of a large surface area with desirable crystallinity. Although CVD can fairly produce few-layer crystalline WSe2 and its heterojunctions, this method is not practically suitable for the large-scale production of solar panels or similar solar energy conversion devices. On the contrary to the electrochemical applications in which the metallic 1T phase is advantageous, solar energy conversion systems require the semiconducting 2H phase.
van der Waals (vdW) p–n heterojunctions composed of two TMDCs are promising candidates for various electronic and optoelectronic devices. Huo et al. reported that p-WSe2/n-WS2 heterojunctions exhibit novel electrical transport properties associated with distinct rectifying, ambipolar and hysteresis characteristics.219 Due to the presence of conducting channels for the electrical transport in the whole system, the WSe2/WS2 p–n heterojunctions220 have tunable polarity transition along with a route of n-anti-bipolar/p-ambipolar.
The structural similarity of 2D TMDC and graphite can be the basis of designing similar intercalation materials. Hongjian et al. incorporated Ag3PO4 into the interlayer space of WS2 to design a photocatalyst.221 They proposed that the heterojunction structure formed hinders the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes. Computational studies of the interaction of C60 with the van der Waals structure of monolayer TMDCs suggested a possible effective interaction for the preparation of photovoltaic heterojunctions depending on the TMDC and the fullerene dopant.222 Owing to the weak van der Waals forces at the interface of a TMDC/graphene heterojunction, the electronic properties of both components are practically preserved.223 In a comparison of MoS2 and WS2, the latter was able to effectively separate the photogenerated electrons and holes. In a different context, WS2 is capable of a significantly better thermoelectric performance as compared with MoS2.224–226
Yu et al. synthesised a thin film of WSe2 made by solvent-exfoliated few-layer flakes.227 The photoelectrode delivered a superior performance for the photoelectrochemical water splitting with no overpotential. The p-type WSe2 served as photocathode displaying 1.0 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE).
Another approach for the solar photocatalytic water splitting is utilising colloidal catalytic particles which act as a whole electrochemical system. Lin et al. deposited a film of WSe2 on a carbon foam substrate and built the catalytic sheets by casting a nanodiamond-embedded Cu2O photocatalyst.228 The catalytic performance of these floating sheets was 13.2 times higher than that of the conventional powder-dispersing system.
Photocatalytic applications of TMDCs are not limited to water splitting, as they can facilitate the photocatalytic oxidation of organic molecules with a broad range of practical potentials, particularly pollution photodegradation. Owing to its both semiconducting and catalytic properties, WS2 has been successfully used for this purpose.229,230 Sang et al. pointed out that WS2 has a superior electrocatalytic activity for photodegradation due to its capability to work in the full solar light spectrum. However, less attention had been paid to this application as the main focus is on energy storage.
Quantum performance
The quantum Hall effect of 2D materials including tungsten dichalcogenides is of both fundamental and practical interest as has been widely investigated both experimentally and computationally.231 WSe2 quantum dots have been utilised for integrated solid-state quantum photonics232,233 and quantum information processing.234 Chakraborty et al. reported the possibility of leveraging an atomically thin layer of a WSe2 semiconductor as a host for quantum dot-like defects.235 These quantum dots display an excited-state lifetime of about 1 ns and a large excitonic g-factor of 10.
Ding et al. reported that excitons spatially localised by defects in the 2D structure of WSe2 results in the appearance of single quantum emitters with an optical emission with narrow linewidths of 130 μeV.236 Koperski et al. showed that at the WSe2 edge connection with the Si/SiO2 substrate, there are some centres which can give rise to sharp emission lines (100 μeV) at low temperatures as a result of serving as single photon emitters.237 These narrow linewidths are two orders of magnitude smaller than those of delocalized valley excitons in monolayer WSe2.238 Bayat and Saievar-Iranizad synthesised WS2 quantum dots from the mineral resources by an ultrasonic treatment.239 The resulting quantum dots were 5 nm in size and displayed excellent blue photoluminescence performance. Forming heterojunctions with other photoactive materials can further tune the luminescence properties of the WS2 quantum dots.240
WTe2
Tungsten telluride (WTe2) is the combination of the heaviest elements in the common TMDCs (undoubtedly, a much heavier combination can be synthesised, but those TMDCs are not seriously considered). As a result, the conventional properties of the TMDCs are shifted to a boundary in WTe2.241–268 In a sense, WTe2 is a special TMDCs because of its additional structural distortion caused by the W atoms from zigzag chains along the crystallographic an axis producing a quasi-one-dimensional arrangement. On the other hand, the metallic nature of the TMDCs is noticeably strong in the case of WTe2, which can be considered as a semimetal with a reduced density of states at the Fermi level. This is due to the small overlap between the VB and CB leaving no band gap. This is indeed a unique feature of WTe2 in the family of 2D TMDCs, as its metallic phase is more stable than its semiconducting phase.269,270
Magnetoresistance (MR) is the change in the electrical resistance of a material upon applying a magnetic field, which is a useful phenomenon for the development of magnetic memory devices, magnetic sensors, spintronics. The primary candidates were magnetic transition metal of the first row, but new players have come recently, and WTe2 is definitely one of them. Ali et al. recently reported extraordinary magnetic properties of WTe2 in the family of TMDCs for delivering.241 WTe2 displays an extremely large uniaxial positive magnetoresistance, which does not saturate in a magnetic field as large as 60 T.241,258 This considerable behaviour is attributed to an appropriate compensation of electrons and holes. Das et al. inspected the role of W and Te atoms by angle- and spin-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, supported by DFT calculations.253 They concluded that the electronic behaviour of WTe2 is not strictly two-dimensional. This means that the balance of electron and hole states needs at least three Te–W–Te layers.
WTe2 has shown a giant MR of 452700 percent at 4.5 K and 14.7 T.241 This MR can be increased to 13 million percent at 0.53 K. The physical origin of this MR is attributed to the nearly perfect compensation of electron and hole packets. Subsequent Fermi surface determination by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES)271 and suppressed MR under external mechanical pressure272 have also supported this theory. Nevertheless, the exact origin of such an extremely large MR is still subject to debate. Lv et al. demonstrated that substituting W with other transition metal decreases the carrier mobility and results in a substantial reduction in the MR. This is the reason that non-stoichiometric WTe2 crystals exhibit smaller MR in comparison with stoichiometric composition. In a comparative study, Yi et al. concluded that the key factor responsible for the giant and non-saturating nature of MR in WTe2 is due to the mobility of charge carriers.273 In addition to bulk WTe2, its monolayer is also capable of delivering extraordinary MR response due to the considerably high mobility of the charge carriers.274 Atomically thin WTe2 showed tunable magnetoresistivity, which can be changed from positive to negative.275 This feature is beneficial for the other applications reviewed above, but Te is too expensive for most applications regardless of the performance. Surface modification of WTe2 by oxidation276 or metal adsorption277 has been recently attempted to tune its MR performance. On the other hand, WTe2 is under investigation for superconductivity278–280 quantum spin Hall effect,242,281etc.
WTe2 has also been employed for the applications of energy storage and conversion, though it is not very economical for the commercial development. The electrocatalytic performance of bulk WTe2 is noticeably better than its MoTe2 counterpart, but exfoliation reverses this superiority.86 The problem is that the exfoliation methods, which work well for MoTe2, do not work for WTe2.
Perspective
The layered structure of TMDC is highly influenced by the size and electronic charge of the building elements. Following the historical popularity of first-row transition metal sulphides, the attention is shifting towards large elements on both sides, though the popularity of elements usually declines when going down in a column of the periodic table due to their less natural abundance. Although Te is not available enough to serve as a popular chalcogen in the practical applications of TMDCs, Se is a promising candidate. On the side of the transition metals, Mo and W are the most popular transition metals below the first row, whose TMDCs have been practically considered for various applications. W is indeed the largest atom in the common TMDCs. This provides an opportunity for the formation of more spacious interlayer channels and a larger hexagonal structure from the vertical view.
On the other hand, larger atoms provide a better flexibility for tuning the material properties by doping. Since the key feature of doping in the alteration of the uniform charge distribution over the 2D structure, the difference in the size of the dopant as compared with the substituted element is an important factor. While it is not easy to replace smaller atoms with larger ones, it is much easier to do the other way around. This means it is not easy to uniformly substitute the first-row transition metals in TMDCs with a W dopant, but it is facile to substitute W in the tungsten chalcogenides by the first-row transition metals.
In general, tungsten dichalcogenides provide a collection of properties which make them suitable for a broad range of applications. WS2 is favoured when a high chemical reactivity is required at the unsaturated sulphur edges such as electrocatalytic reactions. WSe2 provides a rigid and spacious interlayer architecture suitable for solid-state diffusion of counterions. Despite the heavy weight, the specific capacity is considerable because of the facile diffusion. The semi-metallic nature of WTe2 plus a collection of unique properties makes it a promising candidate for special applications such as MR and superconductivity.
In fact, this family of TMDCs has huge potential for various applications but is somehow obscured by the popularity of other TMDCs. This manuscript attempted to highlight its potential by collecting the noticeable findings reported in the literature during the past few years (mostly within 2–3 years). The advancements in this short period of time clearly show the bright horizon ahead for tungsten dichalcogenides.
Tungsten dichalcogenides are normally considered as an alternative to Mo counterparts. While W has several advantages over Mo such as abundant natural resources, lower prices, less toxicity, etc., the interesting feature of W is its larger size, which can alter the 2D structure. In most cases, the general behaviour of WX2 is similar to that of MoX2 in most applications, but the real advantage of WX2 appears when manipulating the lattice, e.g., by strain engineering. Hence, the future research strategy should shift towards manipulation of the WX2 2D structure, as this is indeed the real advantage of large W atoms in the family of TMDCs.
An important factor, which has been neglected in the literature, is that the available exfoliation methods have been developed and tested for more common TMDCs such as MoS2. However, these methods do not seem to be efficient for WX2, probably because of differences in the lattice structure and chemical reactivity, and new methods should be developed for WX2 materials. Therefore, the comparison of typical reports in the literature might not be reliable as the material characteristics could be significantly different, though they have been prepared by similar methods.
References
L. Gan, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlögl, Order-Disorder Phase Transitions in the Two-Dimensional Semiconducting Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Alloys Mo1−xWxX2 (X = S, Se, and Te), Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6691,  DOI:10.1038/srep06691 .
T. Taylor, Abundance of Chemical Elements in the Continental Crust: a New Table, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1964, 28, 1273–1285,  DOI:10.1016/0016-7037(64)90129-2 .
H. Tan, Y. Fan, Y. Zhou, Q. Chen, W. Xu and J. H. Warner, Ultrathin 2D Photodetectors Utilizing Chemical Vapor Deposition Grown WS2 with Graphene Electrodes, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7039–7046,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b03722 .
L. Zeng, L. Tao, C. Tang, B. Zhou, H. Long, Y. Chai, S. P. Lau and Y. H. Tsang, High-Responsivity UV-Vis Photodetector Based on Transferable WS2 Film Deposited by Magnetron Sputtering, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20343,  DOI:10.1038/srep20343 .
R. Levi, O. Bitton, G. Leitus, R. Tenne and E. Joselevich, Field-Effect Transistors Based on WS2 Nanotubes with High Current-Carrying Capacity, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3736–3741,  DOI:10.1021/nl401675k .
T. Paul, S. Ghatak and A. Ghosh, Percolative Switching in Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Field-Effect Transistors at Room Temperature, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 125706,  DOI:10.1088/0957-4484/27/12/125706 .
Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Huang, X. Wang, X. Li, H. Deng, Z. Wei and J. Li, Anti-Ambipolar Field-Effect Transistors Based on Few-Layer 2D Transition Metal Dichalcogenides, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15574–15581,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b02513 .
H. M. W. Khalil, M. F. Khan, J. Eom and H. Noh, Highly Stable and Tunable Chemical Doping of Multilayer WS2 Field Effect Transistor: Reduction in Contact Resistance, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23589–23596,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.5b06825 .
C. Lan, C. Li, S. Wang, T. He, Z. Zhou, D. Wei, H. Guo, H. Yang and Y. Liu, High Responsive and Broadband Photodetectors Based on WS2-Graphene van Der Waals Epitaxial Heterostructures, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1494–1500,  10.1039/c6tc05037a .
J. Yao, Z. Zheng and G. Yang, Layered-Material WS2/topological Insulator Bi2Te3 Heterostructure Photodetector with Ultrahigh Responsivity in the Range from 370 to 1550 Nm, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7831–7840,  10.1039/c6tc01453d .
Z. Zheng, T. Zhang, J. Yao, Y. Zhang, J. Xu and G. Yang, Flexible, Transparent and Ultra-Broadband Photodetector Based on Large-Area WSe2 Film for Wearable Devices, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 225501,  DOI:10.1088/0957-4484/27/22/225501 .
S. Jo, D. Kang, J. Shim, J. Jeon, M. H. Jeon, G. Yoo, J. Kim, J. Lee, G. Y. Yeom, S. Lee, H. Yu, C. Choi and J. Park, A High-Performance WSe2/h-BN Photodetector Using a Triphenylphosphine (PPh3)-Based N-Doping Technique, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4824–4831,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201600032 .
L. Ye, P. Wang, W. Luo, F. Gong, L. Liao, T. Liu, L. Tong, J. Zang, J. Xu and W. Hu, Highly Polarization Sensitive Infrared Photodetector Based on Black Phosphorus-On-WSe2 Photogate Vertical Heterostructure, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 53–60,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.05.004 .
T. Roy, M. Tosun, M. Hettick, G. H. Ahn, C. Hu and A. Javey, 2D-2D Tunneling Field-Effect Transistors Using WSe2/SnSe2 Heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 083111,  DOI:10.1063/1.4942647 .
J. Xu, J. Shim, J. Park and S. Lee, MXene Electrode for the Integration of WSe2 and MoS2 Field Effect Transistors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5328–5334,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201600771 .
W. Kang, I. Cho, J. Roh, C. Lee and J. Lee, High-Gain Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Inverter Based on Multi-Layer WSe2 Field Effect Transistors without Doping, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 105001,  DOI:10.1088/0268-1242/31/10/105001 .
S. J. Hong, M. Park, H. Kang, M. Lee, D. H. Jeong and Y. W. Park, Fabrication and Independent Control of Patterned Polymer Gate for a Few-Layer WSe2 Field-Effect Transistor, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 085320,  DOI:10.1063/1.4961990 .
J. Park, I. Cho, W. Kang, B. Park and J. Lee, Elimination of the Gate and Drain Bias Stresses in I–V Characteristics of WSe2 FETs by Using Dual Channel Pulse Measurement, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 053503,  DOI:10.1063/1.4960459 .
B. Liu, Y. Ma, A. Zhang, L. Chen, A. N. Abbas, Y. Liu, C. Shen, H. Wan and C. Zhou, High-Performance WSe2 Field-Effect Transistors via Controlled Formation of In-Plane Heterojunctions, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5153–5160,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b00527 .
H. C. P. Movva, A. Rai, S. Kang, K. Kim, B. Fallahazad, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, E. Tutuc and S. K. Banerjee, High-Mobility Holes in Dual-Gated WSe2 Field-Effect Transistors, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10402–10410,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.5b04611 .
F. Dybała, M. P. Polak, J. Kopaczek, P. Scharoch, K. Wu, S. Tongay and R. Kudrawiec, Pressure Coefficients for Direct Optical Transitions in MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 Crystals and Semiconductor to Metal Transitions, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 26663,  DOI:10.1038/srep26663 .
J. Kopaczek, M. P. Polak, P. Scharoch, K. Wu, B. Chen, S. Tongay and R. Kudrawiec, Direct Optical Transitions at K- and H-Point of Brillouin Zone in Bulk MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 235705,  DOI:10.1063/1.4954157 .
Y. V. Morozov and M. Kuno, Optical Constants and Dynamic Conductivities of Single Layer MoS2, MoSe2, and WSe2, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 083103,  DOI:10.1063/1.4929700 .
G. Rubio-Bollinger, R. Guerrero, D. de Lara, J. Quereda, L. Vaquero-Garzon, N. Agraït and R. Bratschitsch, A. Castellanos-Gomez, Enhanced Visibility of MoS2, MoSe2, WSe2 and Black-Phosphorus: Making Optical Identification of 2D Semiconductors Easier, Electronics, 2015, 4, 847–856,  DOI:10.3390/electronics4040847 .
S. H. El-Mahalawy and B. L. Evans, Temperature Dependence of the Electrical Conductivity and Hall Coefficient in 2H-MoS2, MoSe2, WSe2, and MoTe2, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1977, 79, 713–722,  DOI:10.1002/pssb.2220790238 .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, M. Guo, C. Niu, J. Lu and B. Huang, Electronic and Magnetic Properties of Perfect, Vacancy-Doped, and Nonmetal Adsorbed MoSe2, MoTe2 and WS2 Monolayers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15546–15553,  10.1039/c1cp21159e .
C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, A. Ambrosi, A. Y. S. Eng, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2) Exfoliation Technique Has Strong Influence Upon Their Capacitance, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 56, 24–28,  DOI:10.1016/j.elecom.2015.03.017 .
A. H. Loo, A. Bonanni, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Exfoliated Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2): an Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopic Investigation, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 50, 39–42,  DOI:10.1016/j.elecom.2014.10.018 .
H. Chuang, B. Chamlagain, M. Koehler, M. M. Perera, J. Yan, D. Mandrus, D. Tománek and Z. Zhou, Low-Resistance 2D/2D Ohmic Contacts: a Universal Approach to High-Performance WSe2, MoS2, and MoSe2 Transistors, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1896–1902,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b05066 .
A. Eftekhari, Molybdenum Diselenide (MoSe2) for Energy Storage, Catalysis, and Optoelectronics, Applied Materials Today, 2017, 8, 1–17,  DOI:10.1016/j.apmt.2017.01.006 .
A. Eftekhari, The Rise of Lithium–Selenium Batteries, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 14–29,  10.1039/c6se00094k .
H. Yuan, M. S. Bahramy, K. Morimoto, S. Wu, K. Nomura, B. Yang, H. Shimotani, R. Suzuki, M. Toh, C. Kloc, X. Xu, R. Arita, N. Nagaosa and Y. Iwasa, Zeeman-Type Spin Splitting Controlled by an Electric Field, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 563–569,  DOI:10.1038/nphys2691 .
D. Xiao, G. Liu, W. Feng, X. Xu and W. Yao, Coupled Spin and Valley Physics in Monolayers of and Other Group-VI Dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 196802,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.196802 .
M. Tosun, S. Chuang, H. Fang, A. B. Sachid, M. Hettick, Y. Lin, Y. Zeng and A. Javey, High-Gain Inverters Based on WSe2 Complementary Field-Effect Transistors, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4948–4953,  DOI:10.1021/nn5009929 .
H. Fang, S. Chuang, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, T. Takahashi and A. Javey, High-Performance Single Layered WSe2 P-FETs with Chemically Doped Contacts, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3788–3792,  DOI:10.1021/nl301702r .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Band Offsets and Heterostructures of Two-Dimensional Semiconductors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 012111,  DOI:10.1063/1.4774090 .
J. Kang, W. Liu, D. Sarkar, D. Jena and K. Banerjee, Computational Study of Metal Contacts to Monolayer Transition-Metal Dichalcogenide Semiconductors, Phys. Rev. X, 2014, 4, 031005,  DOI:10.1103/physrevx.4.031005 .
S. Das, H. Chen, A. V. Penumatcha and J. Appenzeller, High Performance Multilayer MoS2 Transistors with Scandium Contacts, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 100–105,  DOI:10.1021/nl303583v .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Single-Layer MoS2 Transistors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2010.279 .
K. Dolui, I. Rungger, C. Das Pemmaraju and S. Sanvito, Possible Doping Strategies for MoS2 Monolayers: an Ab Initio Study, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 075420,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.88.075420 .
J. R. McKone, R. A. Potash, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, Unassisted HI Photoelectrolysis Using N-WSe2 Solar Absorbers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13984–13991,  10.1039/c5cp01192b .
G. Wang, C. Robert, A. Suslu, B. Chen, S. Yang, S. Alamdari, I. C. Gerber, T. Amand, X. Marie, S. Tongay and B. Urbaszek, Spin–Orbit Engineering in Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Alloy Monolayers, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10110,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms10110 .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Graphene-Like Two-Dimensional Materials, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798,  DOI:10.1021/cr300263a .
T. Cao, G. Wang, W. Han, H. Ye, C. Zhu, J. Shi, Q. Niu, P. Tan, E. Wang, B. Liu and J. Feng, Valley-Selective Circular Dichroism of Monolayer Molybdenum Disulphide, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 887,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms1882 .
H. Zeng, J. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao and X. Cui, Valley Polarization in MoS2 Monolayers by Optical Pumping, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 490–493,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2012.95 .
K. F. Mak, K. He, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Control of Valley Polarization in Monolayer MoS2 by Optical Helicity, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 494–498,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2012.96 .
G. Sallen, L. Bouet, X. Marie, G. Wang, C. R. Zhu, W. P. Han, Y. Lu, P. H. Tan, T. Amand, B. L. Liu and B. Urbaszek, Robust Optical Emission Polarization in MoS2 Monolayers Through Selective Valley Excitation, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 081301,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.86.081301 .
H. Zeng, G. Liu, J. Dai, Y. Yan, B. Zhu, R. He, L. Xie, S. Xu, X. Chen, W. Yao and X. Cui, Optical Signature of Symmetry Variations and Spin-Valley Coupling in Atomically Thin Tungsten Dichalcogenides, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 01608,  DOI:10.1038/srep01608 .
A. Kormányos, V. Zólyomi, N. D. Drummond, P. Rakyta, G. Burkard and V. I. Fal'ko, Monolayer MoS2: Trigonal Warping, the Valley, and Spin–Orbit Coupling Effects, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 045416,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.88.045416 .
K. Kośmider and J. Fernández-Rossier, Electronic Properties of the MoS2-WS2 Heterojunction, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 075451,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.87.075451 .
T. Cheiwchanchamnangij and W. R. L. Lambrecht, Quasiparticle Band Structure Calculation of Monolayer, Bilayer, and Bulk MoS2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 205302,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.85.205302 .
E. S. Kadantsev and P. Hawrylak, Electronic Structure of a Single MoS2 Monolayer, Solid State Commun., 2012, 152, 909–913,  DOI:10.1016/j.ssc.2012.02.005 .
Z. Y. Zhu, Y. C. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlögl, Giant Spin-Orbit-Induced Spin Splitting in Two-Dimensional Transition-Metal Dichalcogenide Semiconductors, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 153402,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.84.153402 .
H. Ochoa and R. Roldán, Spin-Orbit-Mediated Spin Relaxation in Monolayer MoS2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 245421,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.87.245421 .
A. Berkdemir, H. R. Gutiérrez, A. R. Botello-Méndez, N. Perea-López, A. L. Elías, C. Chia, B. Wang, V. H. Crespi, F. López-Urías, J. Charlier, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Identification of Individual and Few Layers of WS2 Using Raman Spectroscopy, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 01755,  DOI:10.1038/srep01755 .
E. del Corro, H. Terrones, A. Elias, C. Fantini, S. Feng, M. A. Nguyen, T. E. Mallouk, M. Terrones and M. A. Pimenta, Excited Excitonic States in 1L, 2L, 3L, and Bulk WSe2 Observed by Resonant Raman Spectroscopy, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9629–9635,  DOI:10.1021/nn504088g .
W. Zhao, Z. Ghorannevis, K. K. Amara, J. R. Pang, M. Toh, X. Zhang, C. Kloc, P. H. Tan and G. Eda, Lattice Dynamics in Mono- and Few-Layer Sheets
of WS2 and WSe2, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9677–9683,  10.1039/c3nr03052k .
E. D. Corro, A. Botello-Méndez, Y. Gillet, A. L. Elias, H. Terrones, S. Feng, C. Fantini, D. Rhodes, N. Pradhan, L. Balicas, X. Gonze, J. Charlier, M. Terrones and M. A. Pimenta, Atypical Exciton–Phonon Interactions in WS2 and WSe2 Monolayers Revealed by Resonance Raman Spectroscopy, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2363–2368,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b05096 .
E. Lorchat, E. Lorchat, G. Froehlicher, G. Froehlicher, S. Berciaud and S. Berciaud, Splitting of Interlayer Shear Modes and Photon Energy Dependent Anisotropic Raman Response in N-Layer ReSe2 and ReS2, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2752–2760,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.5b07844 .
S. Chen, C. Zheng, M. S. Fuhrer and J. Yan, Helicity-Resolved Raman Scattering of MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 Atomic Layers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2526–2532,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b00092 .
A. McCreary, A. Berkdemir, J. Wang, M. A. Nguyen, A. L. Elías, N. Perea-López, K. Fujisawa, B. Kabius, V. Carôzo, D. A. Cullen, T. E. Mallouk, J. Zhu and M. Terrones, Distinct Photoluminescence and Raman Spectroscopy Signatures for Identifying Highly Crystalline WS2 Monolayers Produced by Different Growth Methods, J. Mater. Res., 2016, 31, 931–944,  DOI:10.1557/jmr.2016.47 .
A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, 2H → 1T Phase Transition and Hydrogen Evolution Activity of MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2 Strongly Depends on the MX2 Composition, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8450–8453,  10.1039/c5cc00803d .
H. Li, S. Liu, S. Huang, D. Yin, C. Li and Z. Wang, Impurity-Induced Ferromagnetism and Metallicity of WS2 Monolayer, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 2364–2369,  DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2015.10.033 .
A. P. Nayak, Z. Yuan, B. Cao, J. Liu, J. Wu, S. T. Moran, T. Li, D. Akinwande, C. Jin and J. Lin, Pressure-Modulated Conductivity, Carrier Density, and Mobility of Multilayered Tungsten Disulfide, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9117–9123,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.5b03295 .
A. Eftekhari and H. García, The Necessity of Structural Irregularities for the Chemical Applications of Graphene, Mater. Today Chem., 2017, 4, 1–16,  DOI:10.1016/j.mtchem.2017.02.003 .
A. Eftekhari and P. Jafarkhani, Curly Graphene with Specious Interlayers Displaying Superior Capacity for Hydrogen Storage, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25845–25851,  DOI:10.1021/jp410044v .
X. Wang, Y. Chen, B. Zheng, F. Qi, J. He, Q. Li, P. Li and W. Zhang, Graphene-Like WSe2 Nanosheets for Efficient and Stable Hydrogen Evolution, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 691, 698–704,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.08.305 .
X. Wang, Y. Chen, F. Qi, B. Zheng, J. He, Q. Li, P. Li, W. Zhang and Y. Li, Interwoven WSe2/CNTs Hybrid Network: a Highly Efficient and Stable Electrocatalyst for Hydrogen Evolution, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 72, 74–78,  DOI:10.1016/j.elecom.2016.09.007 .
S. J. Yun, S. M. Kim, K. K. Kim and Y. H. Lee, A Systematic Study of the Synthesis of Monolayer Tungsten Diselenide Films on Gold Foil, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2016, 16, 1216–1222,  DOI:10.1016/j.cap.2016.02.010 .
L. Chen, B. Liu, A. N. Abbas, Y. Ma, X. Fang, Y. Liu and C. Zhou, Screw-Dislocation-Driven
Growth of Two-Dimensional Few-Layer and Pyramid-Like WSe2 by Sulfur-Assisted Chemical Vapor Deposition, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11543–11551,  DOI:10.1021/nn504775f .
K. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Du, M. Safdar, C. Jiang and J. He, Atomic-Layer Triangular WSe2 Sheets: Synthesis and Layer-Dependent Photoluminescence Property, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 465705,  DOI:10.1088/0957-4484/24/46/465705 .
J. Huang, J. Pu, C. Hsu, M. Chiu, Z. Juang, Y. Chang, W. Chang, Y. Iwasa, T. Takenobu and L. Li, Large-Area Synthesis of Highly Crystalline WSe2 Monolayers and Device Applications, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 923–930,  DOI:10.1021/nn405719x .
G. Clark, S. Wu, P. Rivera, J. Finney, P. Nguyen, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Vapor-Transport Growth of High Optical Quality WSe2 Monolayers A, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 101101,  DOI:10.1063/1.4896591 .
B. Liu, M. Fathi, L. Chen, A. Abbas, Y. Ma and C. Zhou, Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of Monolayer WSe2 with Tunable Device Characteristics and Growth Mechanism Study, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6119–6127,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.5b01301 .
H. Zhou, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, X. Huang, Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, Z. Lin, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Large Area Growth and Electrical Properties of P-Type WSe2 Atomic Layers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 709–713,  DOI:10.1021/nl504256y .
S. Li, S. Wang, D. Tang, W. Zhao, H. Xu, L. Chu, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and G. Eda, Halide-Assisted Atmospheric Pressure Growth of Large WSe2 and WS2 Monolayer Crystals, Applied Materials Today, 2015, 1, 60–66,  DOI:10.1016/j.apmt.2015.09.001 .
F. Reale, K. Sharda and C. Mattevi, From Bulk Crystals to Atomically Thin Layers of Group VI-Transition Metal Dichalcogenides Vapour Phase Synthesis, Applied Materials Today, 2016, 3, 11–22,  DOI:10.1016/j.apmt.2015.12.003 .
H. Li, G. Lu, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, C. Cong, Q. He, L. Wang, F. Ding, T. Yu and H. Zhang, Mechanical Exfoliation and Characterization of Single- and Few-Layer Nanosheets of WSe2, TaS2, and TaSe2, Small, 2013, 9, 1974–1981,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201202919 .
M. M. Benameur, B. Radisavljevic, J. S. Héron, S. Sahoo, H. Berger and A. Kis, Visibility of Dichalcogenide Nanolayers, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 125706,  DOI:10.1088/0957-4484/22/12/125706 .
H. Li, J. Wu, X. Huang, G. Lu, J. Yang, X. Lu, Q. Xiong and H. Zhang, Rapid and Reliable Thickness Identification of Two-Dimensional Nanosheets Using Optical Microscopy, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10344–10353,  DOI:10.1021/nn4047474 .
M. A. Hussain, M. Yang, T. J. Lee, J. W. Kim and B. G. Choi, High Density Decoration of Noble Metal Nanoparticles on Polydopamine-Functionalized Molybdenum Disulphide, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 451, 216–220,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcis.2015.03.062 .
D. Gerchman and A. K. Alves, Solution-Processable Exfoliation and Suspension of Atomically Thin WSe2, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 468, 247–252,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcis.2016.01.073 .
X. Zhao, X. Ma, J. Sun, D. Li and X. Yang, Enhanced Catalytic Activities of Surfactant-Assisted Exfoliated WS2 Nanodots for Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2159–2166,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.5b06653 .
M. Sahu, L. Narashimhan, O. Prakash and A. M. Raichur, Noncovalently Functionalized Tungsten Disulfide Nanosheets for Enhanced Mechanical and Thermal Properties of Epoxy Nanocomposites, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14347–14357,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.7b01608 .
C. Backes, T. M. Higgins, A. Kelly, C. Boland, A. Harvey, D. Hanlon and J. N. Coleman, Guidelines for Exfoliation, Characterization and Processing of Layered Materials Produced by Liquid Exfoliation, Chem. Mater., 2016, 29, 9500–9508,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b03335 .
J. Luxa, P. Vosecky, V. Mazanek, D. Sedmidubský, M. Pumera, P. Lazar and Z. Sofer, Layered Transition Metal Ditellurides in Electrocatalytic Applications – Contrasting Properties, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5706–5716 CrossRef .
L. Rapoport, N. Fleischer and R. Tenne, Fullerene-Like WS2 Nanoparticles: Superior Lubricants for Harsh Conditions, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 651–655,  DOI:10.1002/adma.200301640 .
Y. Q. Zhu, T. Sekine, Y. H. Li, W. X. Wang, M. W. Fay, H. Edwards, P. D. Brown, N. Fleischer and R. Tenne, WS2 and MoS2 Inorganic Fullerenes—Super Shock Absorbers at Very High Pressures, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1500–1503,  DOI:10.1002/adma.200401962 .
V. B. Niste and M. Ratoi, Tungsten Dichalcogenide Lubricant Nanoadditives for Demanding Applications, Mater. Today Commun., 2016, 8, 1–11,  DOI:10.1016/j.mtcomm.2016.04.015 .
M. Shneider, L. Rapoport, A. Moshkovich, H. Dodiuk, S. Kenig, R. Tenne and A. Zak, Tribological Performance of the Epoxy-Based Composite Reinforced by WS2 Fullerene-Like Nanoparticles and Nanotubes, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2013, 210, 2298–2306,  DOI:10.1002/pssa.201329162 .
L. Rapoport, O. Nepomnyashchy, A. Verdyan, R. Popovitz-Biro, Y. Volovik, B. Ittah and R. Tenne, Polymer Nanocomposites with Fullerene-Like Solid Lubricant, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2004, 6, 44–48,  DOI:10.1002/adem.200300512 .
D. Haba, A. J. Brunner, M. Barbezat, D. Spetter, W. Tremel and G. Pinter, Correlation of Epoxy Material Properties with the Toughening Effect of Fullerene-Like WS2 Nanoparticles, Eur. Polym. J., 2016, 84, 125–136,  DOI:10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2016.09.022 .
M. Shneider, H. Dodiuk, R. Tenne and S. Kenig, Nanoinduced Morphology and Enhanced Properties of Epoxy Containing Tungsten Disulfide Nanoparticles, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2013, 53, 2624–2632,  DOI:10.1002/pen.23517 .
D. Haba, A. J. Brunner and G. Pinter, Dispersion of Fullerene-Like WS2 Nanoparticles Within Epoxy and the Resulting Fracture Mechanics, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2015, 119, 55–61,  DOI:10.1016/j.compscitech.2015.09.013 .
H. Li, D. Gao, K. Li, M. Pang, S. Xie, R. Liu and J. Zou, Texture Control and Growth Mechanism of WSe2 Film Prepared by Rapid Selenization of W Film, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 394, 142–148,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.10.050 .
H. Li, D. Gao, S. Xie and J. Zou, Effect of Magnetron Sputtering Parameters and Stress State of W Film Precursors on WSe2 Layer Texture by Rapid Selenization, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36451,  DOI:10.1038/srep36451 .
S. M. Ng, H. F. Wong, W. C. Wong, C. K. Tan, S. Y. Choi, C. L. Mak, G. J. Li, Q. C. Dong and C. W. Leung, WS2 Nanotube Formation by Sulphurization: Effect of Precursor Tungsten Film Thickness and Stress, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 181, 352–358,  DOI:10.1016/j.matchemphys.2016.06.069 .
H. Kim, S. J. Yun, J. C. Park, M. H. Park, J. Park, K. K. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Seed Growth of Tungsten Diselenide Nanotubes from Tungsten Oxides, Small, 2015, 11, 2192–2199,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201403279 .
G. A. Asres, A. Dombovari, T. Sipola, R. Puskas, Á. Kukovecz, Z. Kónya, A. Popov, J. Lin, G. S. Lorite, M. Mohl, G. Toth, A. L. Spetz and K. Kordas, A Novel WS2 Nanowire-Nanoflake Hybrid Material Synthesized from WO3 Nanowires in Sulfur Vapor, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25610,  DOI:10.1038/srep25610 .
K. Chen, Z. Luo, D. Mo and S. Lyu, WSe2 Nanoribbons: New High-Performance Thermoelectric Materials, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 16337–16344,  10.1039/c6cp02456d .
F. Wang, J. Li, F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, Z. Cheng, Z. Wang, K. Xu, X. Zhan, Q. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Jiang and J. He, Enhanced Electrochemical H Evolution by Few-Layered Metallic WS2(1–X)Se2x Nanoribbons, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6077–6083,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201502680 .
Z. Liu, K. Suenaga, Z. Wang, Z. Shi, E. Okunishi and S. Iijima, Identification of Active Atomic Defects in a Monolayered Tungsten Disulphide Nanoribbon, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 213,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms1224 .
Z. Li, S. Yang, R. Dhall, E. Kosmowska, H. Shi, I. Chatzakis and S. B. Cronin, Layer Control of WSe2 via Selective Surface Layer Oxidation, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4087–4093,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b02488 .
K. M. McCreary, A. T. Hanbicki, G. G. Jernigan, J. C. Culbertson and B. T. Jonker, Synthesis of Large-Area WS2 Monolayers with Exceptional Photoluminescence, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19159,  DOI:10.1038/srep19159 .
Y. Y. Lee, G. O. Park, Y. S. Choi, J. K. Shon, J. Yoon, K. H. Kim, W. Yoon, H. Kim and J. M. Kim, Mesoporous Transition Metal Dichalcogenide ME2 (M = Mo, W; E = S, Se) with 2-D Layered Crystallinity As Anode Materials for Lithium Ion Batteries, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 14253–14260,  10.1039/c5ra19799f .
S. Cao, T. Liu, S. Hussain, W. Zeng, X. Peng and F. Pan, Hydrothermal Synthesis of Variety Low Dimensional WS2 Nanostructures, Mater. Lett., 2014, 2014, 205–208,  DOI:10.1016/j.matlet.2014.05.013 .
S. P. Vattikuti, C. Byon and C. V. Reddy, Preparation and Improved Photocatalytic Activity of Mesoporous WS2 Using Combined Hydrothermal-Evaporation Induced Self-Assembly Method, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 75, 193–203,  DOI:10.1016/j.materresbull.2015.11.059 .
A. Eftekhari and Z. Fan, Ordered Mesoporous Carbon and Its Applications for Electrochemical Energy Storage and Conversion, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1001–1027,  10.1039/c6qm00298f .
A. Eftekhari, Ordered Mesoporous Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 243, 355–369,  DOI:10.1016/j.micromeso.2017.02.055 .
S. Cao, C. Zhao and L. Peng, The 3D WS2 Microspheres: Preparation, Characterization and Optical Absorption Properties, Mater. Lett., 2016, 164, 452–455,  DOI:10.1016/j.matlet.2015.11.012 .
M. Zou, J. Zhang, H. Zhu, M. Du, Q. Wang, M. Zhang and X. Zhang, A 3D Dendritic WSe2 Catalyst Grown on Carbon Nanofiber Mats for Efficient Hydrogen Evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12149–12153,  10.1039/c5ta02538a .
W. Li, D. Chen, F. Xia, J. Z. Y. Tan, J. Song, W. Song and R. A. Caruso, Flowerlike WSe2 and WS2 Microspheres: One-Pot Synthesis, Formation Mechanism and Application in Heavy Metal Ion Sequestration, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4481–4484,  10.1039/c6cc00577b .
S. S. Chou, M. De, J. Kim, S. Byun, C. Dykstra, J. Yu, J. Huang and V. P. Dravid, Ligand Conjugation of Chemically Exfoliated MoS2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4584–4587,  DOI:10.1021/ja310929s .
P. Zhao, D. Kiriya, A. Azcatl, C. Zhang, M. Tosun, Y. Liu, M. Hettick, J. Seuk Kang, S. McDonnell, S. Kc, J. Guo, K. Cho, R. M. Wallace and A. Javey, Air Stable P-Doping of WSe2 by Covalent Functionalization, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10808–10814,  DOI:10.1021/nn5047844 .
H. Schmidt, F. Giustiniano and G. Eda, Electronic Transport Properties of Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Field-Effect Devices: Surface and Interface Effects, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7715–7736,  10.1039/c5cs00275c .
B. Liu, L. Chen, G. Liu, A. N. Abbas, M. Fathi and C. Zhou, High-Performance Chemical Sensing Using Schottky-Contacted Chemical Vapor Deposition Grown Monolayer MoS2 Transistors, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5304–5314,  DOI:10.1021/nn5015215 .
N. Singh and U. Schwingenschlögl, Extended Moment Formation in Monolayer WS2 Doped with 3d Transition-Metals, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7039–7046,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b05670 .

          K. Kumar, N. L. Heda, A. R. Jani and B. L. Ahuja, Electronic and Optical Response of Cr-Doped MoSe2 and WSe2: Compton Measurements and First-Principles Strategies, J. Phys. Chem. Solids,  2017, 107, 23–31,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpcs.2017.03.019.
X. Ma, X. Zhao and T. Wang, Effect of Strain on the Electronic and Magnetic Properties of an Fe-Doped WSe2 Monolayer, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 69758–69763,  10.1039/c6ra15063b .
X. Su, W. Ju, R. Zhang, C. Guo, J. Zheng, Y. Yong and X. Li, Bandgap Engineering of MoS2/MX2 (MX2 = WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2) Heterobilayers Subjected to Biaxial Strain and Normal Compressive Strain, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 18319–18325,  10.1039/c5ra27871f .
C. Yang, X. Zhao and S. Wei, Manipulation of Electronic Structure in WSe2 Monolayer by Strain, Solid State Commun., 2016, 245, 70–74,  DOI:10.1016/j.ssc.2016.07.003 .
P. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Wang, X. Dai and C. Xia, Electronic and Magnetic Properties of Ag-Doped Monolayer WS2 by Stain, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 680, 659–664,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.04.095 .
N. Wu, X. Zhao and T. Wang, Strain-Dependent Electronic and Magnetic of Co-Doped Monolayer of WSe2, Phys. E, 2016, 84, 505–510,  DOI:10.1016/j.physe.2016.07.008 .
X. Liu, X. Zhao, X. Ma, N. Wu, Q. Xin and T. Wang, Effect of Strain on Electronic and Magnetic Properties of N-Type Cr-Doped WSe2 Monolayer, Phys. E, 2017, 87, 6–9,  DOI:10.1016/j.physe.2016.10.050 .
P. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Wang, X. Dai and C. Xia, Strain-Dependent Electronic and Magnetic Properties of Au-Doped WS2 Monolayer, Solid State Commun., 2016, 230, 35–39,  DOI:10.1016/j.ssc.2016.01.007 .
B. Amin, T. P. Kaloni and U. Schwingenschlögl, Strain Engineering of WS2, WSe2, and WTe2, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 34561–34565,  10.1039/c4ra06378c .
X. He, H. Li, Z. Zhu, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, P. Yang, Q. Zhang, P. Li, U. Schwingenschlögl and X. Zhang, Strain Engineering in Monolayer WS2, MoS2, and the WS2/MoS2 Heterostructure, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 173105,  DOI:10.1063/1.4966218 .
H. Li, S. Liu, S. Huang, Q. Zhang, C. Li, X. Liu, J. Meng and Y. Tian, Metallic Impurities Induced Electronic Transport in WSe2: First-Principle Calculations, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 658, 83–87,  DOI:10.1016/j.cplett.2016.06.030 .
S. Wang, W. Zhao, F. Giustiniano and G. Eda, Effect of Oxygen and Ozone on P-Type Doping of Ultra-Thin WSe2 and MoSe2 Field Effect Transistors, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4304–4309,  10.1039/c5cp07194a .
C. Yang, X. Zhao, T. Wang and S. Wei, Characters of Group V and VII Atoms Doped WSe2 Monolayer, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 699, 291–296,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.12.433 .
A. Azizi, Y. Wang, G. Stone, A. L. Elías, Z. Lin, M. Terrones, V. H. Crespi and N. Alem, Defect Coupling and Sub-Angstrom Structural Distortions in W1–xMoxS2 Monolayers, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2894–2904,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b05045 .
K. Xu, F. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Zhan, Q. Wang, Z. Cheng, M. Safdar and J. He, Component-Controllable WS2(1–x)Se2x Nanotubes for Efficient Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8468–8476,  DOI:10.1021/nn503027k .
J. Huang, W. Wang, Q. Fu, L. Yang, K. Zhang, J. Zhang and B. Xiang, Stable Electrical Performance Observed in Large-Scale Monolayer WSe2(1−X)S2x with Tunable Band Gap, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 13LT01,  DOI:10.1088/0957-4484/27/13/13lt01 .
X. Duan, C. Wang, Z. Fan, G. Hao, L. Kou, U. Halim, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Jiang, A. Pan, Y. Huang, R. Yu and X. Duan, Synthesis of WS2xSe2–2x Alloy Nanosheets with Composition-Tunable Electronic Properties, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 264–269,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b03662 .
A. V. Pashigreva, E. Kondratieva, R. Bermejo-Deval, O. Y. Gutiérrez and J. A. Lercher, Methanol Thiolation Over Al2O3 and WS2 Catalysts Modified with Cesium, J. Catal., 2017, 345, 308–318,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcat.2016.11.036 .
V. C. dos Santos, L. J. Durndell, M. A. Isaacs, C. M. Parlett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, A New Application for Transition Metal Chalcogenides: WS2 Catalysed Esterification of Carboxylic Acids, Catal. Commun., 2017, 91, 16–20,  DOI:10.1016/j.catcom.2016.12.003 .
A. Eftekhari, Electrocatalysts for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 11053–11077,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.02.125 .
A. Eftekhari, Tuning the Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Mater. Today Energ., 2017, 5, 37–57,  DOI:10.1016/j.mtener.2017.05.002 .
A. Eftekhari and B. Ramanujam, In Pursuit of Catalytic Cathodes for Lithium–Oxygen Batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7710–7731,  10.1039/c7ta01124e .
X. Shang, K. Yan, Z. Liu, S. Lu, B. Dong, J. Chi, X. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Chai and C. Liu, Oxidized Carbon Fiber Supported Vertical WS2 Nanosheets Arrays As Efficient 3 D Nanostructure Electrocatalyts for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 402, 120–128,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.01.059 .
M. Zhou, Z. Zhang, K. Huang, Z. Shi, R. Xie and W. Yang, Colloidal Preparation and Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Production of MoS2 and WS2 Nanosheets with Controllable Lateral Sizes and Layer Numbers, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15262–15272,  10.1039/c6nr04775k .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, N. Li, Z. Xu, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Vertically Oriented MoS2 and WS2 Nanosheets Directly Grown on Carbon Cloth As Efficient and Stable 3-Dimensional Hydrogen-Evolving Cathodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 131–135,  10.1039/c4ta04858j .
Y. Huang, Z. Ma, Y. Hu, D. Chai, Y. Qiu, G. Gao and P. Hu, An Efficient WSe2/Co0.85Se/graphene Hybrid Catalyst for Electrochemical Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 51725–51731,  10.1039/c6ra08618g .
C. Sun, J. Zhang, J. Ma, P. Liu, D. Gao, K. Tao and D. Xue, N-Doped WS2 Nanosheets: a High-Performance Electrocatalyst for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11234–11238,  10.1039/c6ta04082a .
X. J. Chua, J. Luxa, A. Y. S. Eng, S. M. Tan, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Negative Electrocatalytic Effects of P-Doping Niobium and Tantalum on MoS2 and WS2 for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction and Oxygen Reduction Reaction, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5724–5734,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.6b01593 .
M. Zou, J. Chen, L. Xiao, H. Zhu, T. Yang, M. Zhang and M. Du, WSe2 and W(SexS1–x)2 Nanoflakes Grown on Carbon Nanofibers for the Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18090–18097,  10.1039/c5ta04426j .
M. Schenato, C. L. A. Ricardo, P. Scardi, R. Edla, A. Miotello, M. Orlandi and R. Morrish, Effect of Annealing and Nanostructuring on Pulsed Laser Deposited WS2 for HER Catalysis, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 510, 156–160,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcata.2015.11.009 .
Y. Zhang, M. M. Ugeda, C. Jin, S. Shi, A. J. Bradley, A. Martin-Recio, H. Ryu, J. Kim, S. Tang, Y. Kim, B. Zhou, C. Hwang, Y. Chen, F. Wang, M. F. Crommie, Z. Hussain, Z. Shen and S. Mo, Electronic Structure, Surface Doping, and Optical Response in Epitaxial WSe2 Thin Films, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2485–2491,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b00059 .
Z. G. Yu, Y. Zhang and B. I. Yakobson, Strain-Robust and Electric Field Tunable Band Alignments in van Der Waals WSe2–Graphene Heterojunctions, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 22702–22709,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b07418 .
A. Gao, E. Liu, M. Long, W. Zhou, Y. Wang, T. Xia, W. Hu, B. Wang and F. Miao, Gate-Tunable Rectification Inversion and Photovoltaic Detection in Graphene/WSe2 Heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 223501,  DOI:10.1063/1.4953152 .
J. Duan, S. Chen, B. A. Chambers, G. G. Andersson and S. Z. Qiao, 3D WS2 Nanolayers@Heteroatom-Doped Graphene Films As Hydrogen Evolution Catalyst Electrodes, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4234–4241,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201501692 .
T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, Z. Cheng, X. Zhan, Z. Wang, K. Liu, M. Safdar, L. Sun and J. He, A Vertical-Oriented WS2 Nanosheet Sensitized by Graphene: an Advanced Electrocatalyst for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14760–14765,  10.1039/c5nr03704b .
H. Wang, D. Kong, P. Johanes, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, K. Yan, N. Liu and Y. Cui, MoSe2 and WSe2 Nanofilms with Vertically Aligned Molecular Layers on Curved and Rough Surfaces, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3426–3433,  DOI:10.1021/nl401944f .
H. Lin, J. Wang, Q. Luo, H. Peng, C. Luo, R. Qi, R. Huang, J. Travas-Sejdic and C. Duan, Rapid and Highly Efficient Chemical Exfoliation of Layered MoS2 and WS2, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 699, 222–229,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.12.388 .
S. X. Leong, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, Z. Sofer, J. Luxa, S. M. Tan and M. Pumera, A Study of the Effect of Sonication Time on the Catalytic Performance of Layered WS2 from Various Sources, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 2768–2777,  10.1039/c6cp07385a .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. B. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Enhanced Catalytic Activity in Strained Chemically Exfoliated WS2 Nanosheets for Hydrogen Evolution, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855,  DOI:10.1038/nmat3700 .
X. Shang, J. Chi, S. Lu, J. Gou, B. Dong, X. Li, Y. Liu, K. Yan, Y. Chai and C. Liu, Carbon Fiber Cloth Supported Interwoven WS2 Nanosplates with Highly Enhanced Performances for Supercapacitors, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 708–714,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.09.058 .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, H. Huang, L. Gu, Y. Wang and X. Peng, The Highly Enhanced Performance of Lamellar WS2 Nanosheet Electrodes Upon Intercalation of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes for Supercapacitors and Lithium Ions Batteries, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4485–4488,  10.1039/c4cc01622j .
B. Hu, X. Qin, A. M. Asiri, K. A. Alamry, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, WS2 Nanoparticles–Encapsulated Amorphous Carbon Tubes: a Novel Electrode Material for Supercapacitors with a High Rate Capability, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 28, 75–78,  DOI:10.1016/j.elecom.2012.11.035 .
N. Choudhary, C. Li, H. Chung, J. Moore, J. Thomas and Y. Jung, High-Performance One-Body Core/Shell Nanowire Supercapacitor Enabled by Conformal Growth of Capacitive 2D WS2 Layers, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10397–10403,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b06111 .
D. Chakravarty and D. J. Late, Microwave and Hydrothermal Syntheses of WSe2 Micro/nanorods and Their Application in Supercapacitors, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21700–21709,  10.1039/c4ra12599a .
A. Khalil, Q. Liu, Q. He, T. Xiang, D. Liu, C. Wang, Q. Fang and L. Song, Metallic 1T-WS2 Nanoribbons As Highly Conductive Electrodes for Supercapacitors, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 48788–48791,  10.1039/c6ra08975e .
F. Chen, J. Wang, B. Li, C. Yao, H. Bao and Y. Shi, Nanocasting Synthesis of Ordered Mesoporous Crystalline WSe2 As Anode Material for Li-Ion Batteries, Mater. Lett., 2014, 2014, 191–194,  DOI:10.1016/j.matlet.2014.08.050 .
J. Qian, Z. Peng, P. Wang and X. Fu, Bulk Fabrication of WS2 Nanoplates: Investigation on the Morphology Evolution and Electrochemical Performance, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3780–3787,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b04601 .
L. Zhou, S. Yan, L. Pan, X. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Shi, A Scalable Sulfuration of WS2 to Improve Cyclability and Capability of Lithium-Ion Batteries, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 857–865,  DOI:10.1007/s12274-015-0966-9 .
S. Liu, B. Shen, Y. Niu and M. Xu, Fabrication of WS2-Nanoflowers@rGO Composite As an Anode Material for Enhanced Electrode Performance in Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 488, 20–25,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcis.2016.10.083 .
A. Eftekhari, Lithium-Ion Batteries with High Rate Capabilities, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2799–2816,  DOI:10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b00046 .
Z. Zhang, X. Yang and Y. Fu, Nanostructured WSe2/C Composites As Anode Materials for Sodium-Ion Batteries, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 12726–12729,  10.1039/c5ra25645c .
X. Wang, J. Huang, J. Li, L. Cao, W. Hao, Z. Xu and Q. Kang, (002)-Oriented WS2 with High Crystalline with Enhanced Capacity As Anode Material for Sodium Ion Batteries, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 696, 22–27,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.11.095 .
X. Wang, J. Huang, J. Li, L. Cao, W. Hao and Z. Xu, Improved Na Storage Performance with the Involvement of Nitrogen-Doped Conductive Carbon into WS2 Nanosheets, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6924–6927,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b06032 .
K. Share, J. Lewis, L. Oakes, R. E. Carter, A. P. Cohn and C. L. Pint, Tungsten Diselenide (WSe2) As a High Capacity, Low Overpotential Conversion Electrode for Sodium Ion Batteries, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 101262–101267,  10.1039/c5ra19717a .
J. Huang, X. Wang, J. Li, L. Cao, Z. Xu and H. Wei, WS2-Super P Nanocomposites Anode Material with Enhanced Cycling Stability for Lithium Ion Batteries, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 673, 60–66,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.02.237 .
L. Zhou, S. Yan, Z. Lin and Y. Shi, In Situ Reduction of WS2 Nanosheets for WS2/reduced Graphene Oxide Composite with Superior Li-Ion Storage, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 171, 16–21,  DOI:10.1016/j.matchemphys.2015.12.061 .
X. Zeng, Z. Ding, C. Ma, L. Wu, J. Liu, L. Chen, D. G. Ivey and W. Wei, Hierarchical Nanocomposite of Hollow N-Doped Carbon Spheres Decorated with Ultrathin WS2 Nanosheets for High-Performance Lithium-Ion Battery Anode, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4180–4190,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b04770 .
Y. V. Lim, Z. X. Huang, Y. Wang, F. H. Du, J. Zhang, T. P. Chen, L. K. Ang and H. Y. Yang, WS2–3D Graphene Nano-Architecture Networks for High Performance Anode Materials of Lithium Ion Batteries, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 107768–107775,  10.1039/c6ra21141k .
S. Lin, Z. Yang, H. Yue and D. He, Ridge-Like Ni Supported WS2 Films for Lithium Storage Application, Mater. Lett., 2015, 2015, 9–12,  DOI:10.1016/j.matlet.2015.05.051 .
A. Eftekhari, Low Voltage Anode Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Energy Storage Materials, 2017, 7, 157–180,  DOI:10.1016/j.ensm.2017.01.009 .
A. Eftekhari, From Pseudocapacitive Redox to Intermediary Adsorption in Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Mater. Today Chem., 2017, 4, 117–132,  DOI:10.1016/j.mtchem.2017.03.003 .
A. C. LaForge, M. Drabbels, N. B. Brauer, M. Coreno, M. Devetta, M. Di Fraia, P. Finetti, C. Grazioli, R. Katzy, V. Lyamayev, T. Mazza, M. Mudrich, P. O'Keeffe, Y. Ovcharenko, P. Piseri, O. Plekan, K. C. Prince, R. Richter, S. Stranges, C. Callegari, T. Möller and F. Stienkemeier, Collective Autoionization in Multiply-Excited Systems: a Novel Ionization Process Observed in Helium Nanodroplets, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3621,  DOI:10.1038/srep03621 .
X. Li, X. Li, Z. Li, J. Wang and J. Zhang, WS2 Nanoflakes Based Selective Ammonia Sensors at Room Temperature, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 273–277,  DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2016.08.163 .
Z. Qin, D. Zeng, J. Zhang, C. Wu, Y. Wen, B. Shan and C. Xie, Effect of Layer Number on Recovery Rate of WS2 Nanosheets for Ammonia Detection at Room Temperature, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 414, 244–250,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.04.063 .
F. Perrozzi, S. Emamjomeh, V. Paolucci, G. Taglieri, L. Ottaviano and C. Cantalini, Thermal Stability of WS2 Flakes and Gas Sensing Properties of WS2/WO3 Composite to H2, NH3 and NO2, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 243, 812–822,  DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2016.12.069 .
T. Lin, L. Zhong, Z. Song, L. Guo, H. Wu, Q. Guo, Y. Chen, F. Fu and G. Chen, Visual Detection of Blood Glucose Based on Peroxidase-Like Activity of WS2 Nanosheets, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 62, 302–307,  DOI:10.1016/j.bios.2014.07.001 .
Y. Qin, Y. Ma, X. Jin, L. Zhang, G. Ye and S. Zhao, A Sensitive Fluorescence Turn-On Assay of Bleomycin and Nuclease Using WS2 Nanosheet As an Effective Sensing Platform, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 866, 84–89,  DOI:10.1016/j.aca.2015.01.049 .
K. Huang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, T. Gan, Y. Liu and L. Wang, Signal Amplification for Electrochemical DNA Biosensor Based on Two-Dimensional Graphene Analogue Tungsten Sulfide−Graphene Composites and Gold Nanoparticles, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 191, 828–836,  DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2013.10.072 .
Y. Yuan, R. Li and Z. Liu, Establishing Water-Soluble Layered WS2 Nanosheet As a Platform for Biosensing, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 3610–3615,  DOI:10.1021/ac5002096 .
Q. Xi, D. Zhou, Y. Kan, J. Ge, Z. Wu, R. Yu and J. Jiang, Highly Sensitive and Selective Strategy for MicroRNA Detection Based on WS2 Nanosheet Mediated Fluorescence Quenching and Duplex-Specific Nuclease Signal Amplification, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 1361–1365,  DOI:10.1021/ac403944c .
X. Zuo, H. Zhang, Q. Zhu, W. Wang, J. Feng and X. Chen, A Dual-Color Fluorescent Biosensing Platform Based on WS2 Nanosheet for Detection of Hg2+ and Ag+, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 464–470,  DOI:10.1016/j.bios.2016.05.044 .
J. Chen, C. Gao, A. K. Mallik and H. Qiu, A WS2 Nanosheet-Based Nanosensor for the Ultrasensitive Detection of Small Molecule–protein Interaction Via Terminal Protection of Small Molecule-Linked DNA and Nt.BstNBI-Assisted Recycling Amplification, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 5161–5166,  10.1039/c6tb00881j .
A. Li, J. Zhang, J. Qiu, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, C. Zhao and H. Liu, A Novel Aptameric Biosensor Based on the Self-Assembled DNA–WS2 Nanosheet Architecture, Talanta, 2017, 163, 78–84,  DOI:10.1016/j.talanta.2016.10.088 .
A. Shadman, E. Rahman and Q. D. Khosru, Monolayer MoS2 and WSe2 Double Gate Field Effect Transistor As Super Nernst PH Sensor and Nanobiosensor, Sens Biosensing Res., 2016, 11, 45–51,  DOI:10.1016/j.sbsr.2016.08.005 .
P. Karfa, R. Madhuri and P. K. Sharma, Multifunctional Fluorescent Chalcogenide Hybrid Nanodots (MoSe2:CdS and WSe2:CdS) As Electro Catalyst (for Oxygen Reduction/oxygen Evolution Reactions) and Sensing Probe for Lead, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1495–1508,  10.1039/c6ta08172j .
H. Nam, S. Nam, S. Oh, B. Oh, C. Chen, M. Chen, S. Wi, S. Wi, L. Li, D. Li, K. Kurabayashi, L. Liang and X. Liang, Fabrication and Comparison of MoS2 and WSe2 Field-Effect Transistor Biosensors, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2015, 33, 06FG01,  DOI:10.1116/1.4930040 .
M. Hosseini, M. Hosseini, M. Elahi, M. Elahi, M. Pourfath, M. Pourfath, D. Esseni and D. Esseni, Very Large Strain Gauges Based on Single Layer MoSe2 and WSe2 for Sensing Applications, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 253503,  DOI:10.1063/1.4937438 .
X. Zong, J. Han, G. Ma, H. Yan, G. Wu and C. Li, Photocatalytic H2 Evolution on CdS Loaded with WS2 As Cocatalyst Under Visible Light Irradiation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12202–12208,  DOI:10.1021/jp2006777 .
Y. Zhong, G. Zhao, F. Ma, Y. Wu and X. Hao, Utilizing Photocorrosion-Recrystallization to Prepare a Highly Stable and Efficient CdS/WS2 Nanocomposite Photocatalyst for Hydrogen Evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 466–472,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2016.06.065 .
W. Yu, X. Chen, W. Mei, C. Chen and Y. Tsang, Photocatalytic and Electrochemical Performance of Three-Dimensional Reduced Graphene Oxide/WS2/Mg-Doped ZnO Composites, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 400, 129–138,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.12.138 .
C. Chen, W. Yu, T. Liu, S. Cao and Y. Tsang, Graphene Oxide/WS2/Mg-Doped ZnO Nanocomposites for Solar-Light Catalytic and Anti-Bacterial Applications, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 43–53,  DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2016.10.020 .
Y. Zhong, Y. Shao, F. Ma, Y. Wu, B. Huang and X. Hao, Band-Gap-Matched CdSe QD/WS2 Nanosheet Composite: Size-Controlled Photocatalyst for High-Efficiency Water Splitting, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 84–89,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2016.11.011 .
S. P. Vattikuti, I. Ngo and C. Byon, Physicochemcial Characteristic of CdS-Anchored Porous WS2 Hybrid in the Photocatalytic Degradation of Crystal Violet Under UV and Visible Light Irradiation, Solid State Sci., 2016, 61, 121–130,  DOI:10.1016/j.solidstatesciences.2016.09.015 .
Y. Wu, Z. Liu, J. Chen, X. Cai and P. Na, Hydrothermal Fabrication of Hyacinth Flower-Like WS2 Nanorods and Their Photocatalytic Properties, Mater. Lett., 2017, 189, 282–285,  DOI:10.1016/j.matlet.2016.11.024 .
S. Cao, Preparation of Embedded Circular Disk and Balls-Like WS2 Nano/microstructures, Photocatalytic Properties and Exposure to Ethanol Gas, Mater. Lett., 2016, 185, 460–463,  DOI:10.1016/j.matlet.2016.09.055 .
H. Lee, J. H. Park, F. Raza, D. Yim, S. Jeon, H. Kim, K. W. Bong and J. Kim, Photoactive WS2 Nanosheets Bearing Plasmonic Nanoparticles for Visible Light-Driven Reduction of Nitrophenol, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6150–6153,  10.1039/c6cc00708b .
B. Yu, B. Zheng, X. Wang, F. Qi, J. He, W. Zhang and Y. Chen, Enhanced Photocatalytic Properties of Graphene Modified Few-Layered WSe2 Nanosheets, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 400, 420–425,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.12.015 .
J. M. Velazquez, J. John, D. V. Esposito, A. Pieterick, R. Pala, G. Sun, X. Zhou, Z. Huang, S. Ardo, M. P. Soriaga, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, A Scanning Probe Investigation of the Role of Surface Motifs in the Behavior of P-WSe2 Photocathodes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 164–175,  10.1039/c5ee02530c .
R. Bourezg, G. Couturier, J. Salardenne, J. P. Doumerc and F. Lévy, Interface of -type Photoanodes in Aqueous Solution. II. Photoelectrochemical Properties, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 15411–15415,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.46.15411 .
R. Tenne and A. Wold, Passivation of Recombination Centers in N-WSe2 Yields High Efficiency (>14%) Photoelectrochemical Cell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1985, 47, 707,  DOI:10.1063/1.96066 .
N. Choudhary, J. Park, J. Y. Hwang, H. Chung, K. H. Dumas, S. I. Khondaker, W. Choi and Y. Jung, Centimeter Scale Patterned Growth of Vertically Stacked Few Layer Only 2D MoS2/WS2 van Der Waals Heterostructure, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25456,  DOI:10.1038/srep25456 .
R. Dong, L. Moore, N. Aripova, C. Williamson, R. Schurz, Y. Liu, L. E. Ocola and I. Kuljanishvili, Bottom-Up Direct Writing Approach for Controlled Fabrication of WS2/MoS2 Heterostructure Systems, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 66589–66594,  10.1039/c6ra12576j .
B. Amin, T. P. Kaloni, G. Schreckenbach and M. S. Freund, Materials Properties of Out-Of-Plane Heterostructures of MoS2-WSe2 and WS2-MoSe2, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 063105,  DOI:10.1063/1.4941755 .
B. Amin, N. Singh and U. Schwingenschlögl, Heterostructures of Transition Metal Dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 075439,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.92.075439 .
W. Wei, Y. Dai and B. Huang, Straintronics in Two-Dimensional In-Plane Heterostructures of Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 663–672,  10.1039/c6cp07823k .
A. Nourbakhsh, A. Zubair, M. S. Dresselhaus and T. Palacios, Transport Properties of a MoS2/WSe2 Heterojunction Transistor and Its Potential for Application, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1359–1366,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b04791 .
G. Cao, A. Shang, C. Zhang, Y. Gong, S. Li, Q. Bao and X. Li, Optoelectronic Investigation of Monolayer MoS2/WSe2 Vertical Heterojunction Photoconversion Devices, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 260–266,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2016.10.022 .
X. Hu, L. Kou and L. Sun, Stacking Orders Induced Direct Band Gap in Bilayer MoSe2-WSe2 Lateral Heterostructures, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31122,  DOI:10.1038/srep31122 .
B. Peng, G. Yu, X. Liu, B. Liu, X. Liang, L. Bi, L. Deng, T. C. Sum and K. P. Loh, Ultrafast Charge Transfer in MoS2/WSe2 P–N Heterojunction, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 025020,  DOI:10.1088/2053-1583/3/2/025020 .
S. Yi, J. H. Kim, J. K. Min, M. J. Park, Y. W. Chang and K. Yoo, Optoelectric Properties of Gate-Tunable MoS2/WSe2 Heterojunction, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2016, 15, 499–505,  DOI:10.1109/tnano.2016.2547183 .
A. Eftekhari, V. J. Babu and S. Ramakrishna, Photoelectrode Nanomaterials for Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 11078–11109,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.03.029 .
N. Huo, J. Yang, L. Huang, Z. Wei, S. Li, S. Wei and J. Li, Tunable Polarity Behavior and Self-Driven Photoswitching in P-WSe2/n-WS2 Heterojunctions, Small, 2015, 11, 5430–5438,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201501206 .
J. Chen, W. Zhou, W. Tang, B. Tian, X. Zhao, H. Xu, Y. Liu, D. Geng, S. J. R. Tan, W. Fu and K. P. Loh, Lateral Epitaxy of Atomically Sharp WSe2/WS2 Heterojunctions on Silicon Dioxide Substrates, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7194–7197,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b03639 .
Y. Hongjian, Y. Yong, L. Jianghao, M. Peiyan, W. Yucheng, Z. Fan and F. Zhengyi, Space-Confined Growth of Ag3PO4 Nanoparticles Within WS2 Sheets: Ag3PO4/WS2 Composites As Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalysts for Decomposing Dyes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19439–19444,  10.1039/c5ta04422g .
L. Gan, Q. Zhang, Y. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlögl, Photovoltaic
Heterojunctions of Fullerenes with MoS2 and WS2 Monolayers, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1445–1449,  DOI:10.1021/jz500344s .
F. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Ma, Y. Tang and X. Dai, Tuning the Schottky Contacts at the Graphene/WS Interface by Electric Field, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 29350–29356,  10.1039/c7ra00589j .
A. N. Gandi and U. Schwingenschlögl, WS2 As an Excellent High-Temperature Thermoelectric Material, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6628–6637,  DOI:10.1021/cm503487n .
S. Kumar and U. Schwingenschlögl, Thermoelectric Response of Bulk and Monolayer MoSe2 and WSe2, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1278–1284,  DOI:10.1021/cm504244b .
D. Ghosh, K. Ghosh, U. Singisetti and U. Singisetti, Thermoelectric Transport Coefficients in Mono-Layer MoS2 and WSe2: Role of Substrate, Interface Phonons, Plasmon, and Dynamic Screening, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 135711,  DOI:10.1063/1.4932140 .
X. Yu, M. S. Prévot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Self-Assembled 2D WSe2 Thin Films for Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7596,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms8596 .
Z. Lin, J. Li, Z. Zheng, L. Li, L. Yu, C. Wang and G. Yang, A Floating Sheet for Efficient Photocatalytic Water Splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600510,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201600510 .
W. Ho, J. C. Yu, J. Lin, J. Yu and P. Li, Preparation and Photocatalytic Behavior of MoS2 and WS2 Nanocluster Sensitized TiO2, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5865–5869,  DOI:10.1021/la049838g .
Y. Sang, S. Yuanhua, Z. Zhao, Z. Zhenhuan, M. Zhao, Z. Mingwen, P. Hao, H. Pin, Y. Leng, L. Yanhua, H. Liu and L. Hong, From UV to Near-Infrared, WS Nanosheet: a Novel Photocatalyst for Full Solar Light Spectrum Photodegradation, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 363–369,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201403264 .
T. P. Kaloni, T. P. Kaloni, L. Kou, X. Kou, T. Frauenheim, T. Frauenheim, U. Schwingenschlögl and U. Schwingenschlögl, Quantum Spin Hall States in Graphene Interacting with WS2 or WSe2, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 233112,  DOI:10.1063/1.4903895 .
A. Imamoğlu, D. D. Awschalom, G. Burkard, D. P. DiVincenzo, D. Loss, M. Sherwin and A. Small, Quantum Information Processing Using Quantum Dot Spins and Cavity QED, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 4204–4207,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.83.4204 .
R. Hanson and D. D. Awschalom, Coherent Manipulation of Single Spins in Semiconductors, Nature, 2008, 453, 1043–1049,  DOI:10.1038/nature07129 .
A. Kormányos, V. Zólyomi, N. D. Drummond and G. Burkard, Spin-Orbit Coupling, Quantum Dots, and Qubits in Monolayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. X, 2014, 4, 011034,  DOI:10.1103/physrevx.4.011034 .
C. Chakraborty, L. Kinnischtzke, K. M. Goodfellow, R. Beams and A. N. Vamivakas, Voltage-Controlled Quantum Light from an Atomically Thin Semiconductor, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 507–511,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2015.79 .
Y. He, G. Clark, J. R. Schaibley, Y. He, M. Chen, Y. Wei, X. Ding, Q. Zhang, W. Yao, X. Xu, C. Lu and J. Pan, Single Quantum Emitters in Monolayer Semiconductors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 497–502,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2015.75 .
M. Koperski, K. Nogajewski, A. Arora, V. Cherkez, P. Mallet, J. Veuillen, J. Marcus, P. Kossacki and M. Potemski, Single Photon Emitters in Exfoliated WSe2 Structures, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 503–506,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2015.67 .
A. M. Jones, H. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, S. Wu, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, B. Zhao, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. Xiao, W. Yao and X. Xu, Optical Generation of Excitonic Valley Coherence in Monolayer WSe2, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 634–638,  DOI:10.1038/nnano.2013.151 .
A. Bayat and E. Saievar-Iranizad, Synthesis of Blue Photoluminescent WS2 Quantum Dots Via Ultrasonic Cavitation, J. Lumin., 2017, 185, 236–240,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2017.01.024 .
A. Ghorai, S. Bayan, N. Gogurla, A. Midya and S. K. Ray, Highly Luminescent WS2 Quantum Dots/ZnO Heterojunctions for Light Emitting Devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 558–565,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b12859 .
M. N. Ali, J. Xiong, S. Flynn, J. Tao, Q. D. Gibson, L. M. Schoop, T. Liang, N. Haldolaarachchige, M. Hirschberger, N. P. Ong and R. J. Cava, Large, Non-Saturating Magnetoresistance in WTe2, Nature, 2014, 514, 205–208,  DOI:10.1038/nature13763 .
E. Torun, H. Sahin, S. Cahangirov, A. Rubio and F. M. Peeters, Anisotropic Electronic, Mechanical, and Optical Properties of Monolayer WTe2, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 074307,  DOI:10.1063/1.4942162 .
J. Na, A. Hoyer, L. Schoop, D. Weber, B. V. Lotsch, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Tuning the Magnetoresistance of Ultrathin WTe2 Sheets by Electrostatic Gating, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18703–18709,  10.1039/c6nr06327f .
Q. Song, H. Wang, X. Xu, X. Pan, Y. Wang, F. Song, X. Wan and L. Dai, The Polarization-Dependent Anisotropic Raman Response of Few-Layer and Bulk WTe2 Under Different Excitation Wavelengths, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 103830–103837,  10.1039/c6ra23687a .
Y. Song, W. Mi and X. Wang, Biaxial Strain and Electric Field Dependent Conductivity of Monolayer WTe2 on Top of Fe3O4(111), Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 201600581,  DOI:10.1002/admi.201600581 .
A. Gharleghi, Y. Liu, M. Zhou, J. He, T. M. Tritt and C. Liu, Enhancing the Thermoelectric Performance of Nanosized CoSb3via Short-Range Percolation of Electrically Conductive WTe2 Inclusions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13874–13880,  10.1039/c6ta04011j .
M. J. Mleczko, R. L. Xu, K. Okabe, H. Kuo, I. R. Fisher, H. P. Wong, Y. Nishi and E. Pop, High Current Density and Low Thermal Conductivity of Atomically Thin Semimetallic WTe2, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4297–4304,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b02368 .
Y. Lv, B. ZhaCng, X. Li, B. Pang, F. Zhang, D. Lin, J. Zhou, S. Yao, Y. B. Chen, S. Zhang, M. Lu, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and Y. Chen, Dramatically Decreased Magnetoresistance in Non-Stoichiometric WTe2 Crystals, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 26903,  DOI:10.1038/srep26903 .
Y. C. Jiang, J. Gao and L. Wang, Ultrafast Charge Transfer in MoS2/WSe2 P–n Heterojunction, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19624,  DOI:10.1038/srep19624 .
P. O'Hare and G. Hope, Thermodynamic Properties of Tungsten Ditelluride (WTe2) II. Standard Molar Enthalpy of Formation at the Temperature 298.15 K, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 1992, 24, 639–647,  DOI:10.1016/S0021-9614(05)80035-7 .
J. E. Callanan, G. Hope, R. D. Weir and E. F. Westrum, Thermodynamic Properties of Tungsten Ditelluride (WTe2) I. the Preparation and Lowtemperature Heat Capacity at Temperatures from 6 K to 326 K, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 1992, 24, 627–638,  DOI:10.1016/s0021-9614(05)80034-5 .
E. Revolinsky and D. Beerntsen, Electrical Properties of the MoTe2–WTe2 and MoSe2–WSe2 Systems, J. Appl. Phys., 1964, 35, 2086,  DOI:10.1063/1.1702795 .
P. K. Das, D. Di Sante, I. Vobornik, J. Fujii, T. Okuda, E. Bruyer, Á. Gyenis, B. E. Feldman, J. Tao, R. Ciancio, G. Rossi, M. N. Ali, S. Picozzi, A. Yadzani, G. Panaccione and R. J. Cava, Layer-Dependent Quantum Cooperation of Electron and Hole States in the Anomalous Semimetal WTe2, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10847,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms10847 .
A. Mar, S. Jobic and J. A. Ibers, Metal-Metal Vs Tellurium-Tellurium Bonding in WTe2 and Its Ternary Variants TaIrTe4 and NbIrTe4, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 8963–8971,  DOI:10.1021/ja00049a029 .
J. Crossley, C. Sofield and S. Myhra, WTe2 Surfaces in UHV-STM Image Formation and Analysis of Point Defect Structures, Surf. Sci., 1997, 380, 568–575,  DOI:10.1016/s0039-6028(97)00046-0 .
S. Hla, V. Marinković, A. Prodan and I. Muševič, STM/AFM Investigations of β-MoTe2, α-MoTe2 and WTe2, Surf. Sci., 1996, 352–354, 105–111,  DOI:10.1016/0039-6028(95)01106-4 .
M. Bortz, F. Ohuchi and B. Parkinson, An Investigation of the Growth of Au and Cu on the van Der Waals Surfaces of MoTe2 and WTe2, Surf. Sci. Lett., 1989, 223, A585,  DOI:10.1016/0167-2584(89)90678-6 .
A. Crossley, S. Myhra and C. Sofield, STM Analysis of WTe2 Surfaces — Correlation with Crystal and Electronic Structures, Surf. Sci., 1994, 318, 39–45,  DOI:10.1016/0039-6028(94)90339-5 .
S. Hla, V. Marinković and A. Prodan, Anisotropic Growth of Au and Ag on (001) WTe2 and β-MoTe2 Surfaces Between 350 and 700 K, Thin Solid Films, 1998, 317, 14–16,  DOI:10.1016/S0040-6090(97)00654-8 .
S. Tang, R. Kasowski, A. Suna and B. Parkinson, Surface Valence Charge Distributions and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy of WTe2, Surf. Sci., 1990, 238, 280–288,  DOI:10.1016/0039-6028(90)90086-N .
M. Bortz, F. Ohuchi and B. Parkinson, An Investigation of the Growth of Au and Cu on the Van Der Waals Surfaces of MoTe2 and WTe2, Surf. Sci., 1989, 223, 285–298,  DOI:10.1016/0039-6028(89)90738-3 .
Y. Wang, E. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Pan, L. Zhang, J. Zeng, Y. Fu, M. Wang, K. Xu, Z. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Lu, D. Xing, B. Wang, X. Wan and F. Miao, Gate-Tunable Negative Longitudinal Magnetoresistance in the Predicted Type-II Weyl Semimetal WTe2, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13142,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms13142 .
B. He, C. Zhang, W. Zhu, Y. Li, S. Liu, X. Zhu, X. Wu, X. Wang, H. Wen and M. Xiao, Coherent Optical Phonon Oscillation and Possible Electronic Softening in WTe2 Crystals, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30487,  DOI:10.1038/srep30487 .
Q. Song, X. Pan, H. Wang, K. Zhang, Q. Tan, P. Li, Y. Wan, Y. Wang, X. Xu, M. Lin, X. Wan, F. Song and L. Dai, The In-Plane Anisotropy of WTe2 Investigated by Angle-Dependent and Polarized Raman Spectroscopy, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29254,  DOI:10.1038/srep29254 .
J. Lee, F. Ye, Z. Wang, R. Yang, J. Hu, Z. Mao, J. Wei and P. X. Feng, Single- and Few-Layer WTe2 and Their Suspended Nanostructures: Raman Signatures and Nanomechanical Resonances, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7854–7860,  10.1039/c6nr00492j .
Y. Kim, Y. I. Jhon, J. Park, J. H. Kim, S. Lee and Y. Min Jhon, Anomalous Raman Scattering and Lattice Dynamics in Mono- and Few-Layer WTe2, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2309–2316,  10.1039/c5nr06098b .
Y. Song, Q. Zhang, W. Mi and X. Wang, Valley Polarization and P-/n-Type Doping of Monolayer WTe2 on Top of Fe3O4(111), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15039–15045,  10.1039/c6cp01986b .
P. K. Das, D. Di Sante, I. Vobornik, J. Fujii, T. Okuda, E. Bruyer, Á. Gyenis, B. E. Feldman, J. Tao, R. Ciancio, G. Rossi, M. N. Ali, S. Picozzi, A. Yadzani, G. Panaccione and R. J. Cava, Erratum: Layer-Dependent Quantum Cooperation of Electron and Hole States in the Anomalous Semimetal WTe2, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11355,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms11355 .
N. Lu, C. Zhang, C. Lee, J. P. Oviedo, M. A. T. Nguyen, X. Peng, R. M. Wallace, T. E. Mallouk, J. A. Robinson, J. Wang, K. Cho and M. J. Kim, Atomic and Electronic Structures of WTe Probed by High Resolution Electron Microscopy and Ab Initio Calculations, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8364–8369,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b01044 .
S. Kim and S. Jhi, Stabilization of 1T′ Phase WTe by Scalar Relativistic Effect, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 263104,  DOI:10.1063/1.4989997 .
I. Pletikosić, M. N. Ali, A. Fedorov, R. Cava and T. Valla, Electronic Structure Basis for the Extraordinary Magnetoresistance in WTe2, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 216601,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.216601 .
P. Cai, J. Hu, L. He, J. Pan, X. Hong, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Wei, Z. Mao and S. Li, Drastic Pressure Effect on the Extremely Large Magnetoresistance in WTe2: Quantum Oscillation Study, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 057202,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevLett.115.057202 .

          Y. Yi, C. Wu, H. Wang, H. Liu, H. Li, H. Zhang, H. He and J. Wang, Thickness Dependent Magneto Transport Properties of WTe2 Thin Films, Solid State Commun.,  2017, 260, 45–49,  DOI:10.1016/j.ssc.2017.05.017.
H. Y. Lv, W. J. Lü, D. F. Shao, Y. Liu, S. G. Tan and Y. P. Sun, Perfect Charge Compensation in WTe for the Extraordinary Magnetoresistance: from Bulk to Monolayer, EPL, 2015, 110, 37004,  DOI:10.1209/0295-5075/110/37004 .
E. Zhang, R. Chen, C. Huang, J. Yu, K. Zhang, W. Wang, S. Liu, J. Ling, X. Wan, H. Lu and F. Xiu, Tunable Positive to Negative Magnetoresistance in Atomically Thin WTe2, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 878–885,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b04194 .
J. M. Woods, J. Shen, P. Kumaravadivel, Y. Pang, Y. Xie, G. A. Pan, M. Li, E. I. Altman, L. Lu and J. J. Cha, Suppression of Magnetoresistance in Thin WTe2 Flakes by Surface Oxidation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23175–23180,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.7b04934 .
Y. Song, X. Wang and W. Mi, Spin Splitting and Reemergence of Charge Compensation in Monolayer WTe2 by 3d Transition-Metal Adsorption, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 7721–7727,  10.1039/c7cp00723j .
D. Kang, Y. Zhou, W. Yi, C. Yang, J. Guo, Y. Shi, S. Zhang, Z. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Jiang, A. Li, K. Yang, Q. Wu, G. Zhang, L. Sun and Z. Zhao, Superconductivity Emerging from a Suppressed Large Magnetoresistant State in Tungsten Ditelluride, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7804,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms8804 .
X. Pan, X. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Feng, Z. Wei, Y. Zhou, Z. Chi, L. Pi, F. Yen, F. Song, X. Wan, Z. Yang, B. Wang, G. Wang and Y. Zhang, Pressure-Driven Dome-Shaped Superconductivity and Electronic Structural Evolution in Tungsten Ditelluride, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7805,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms8805 .
P. Lu, J. Kim, J. Yang, H. Gao, J. Wu, D. Shao, B. Li, D. Zhou, J. Sun, D. Akinwande, D. Xing and J. Lin, Origin of Superconductivity in the Weyl Semimetal Under Pressure, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 224512,  DOI:10.1103/physrevb.94.224512 .
H. Xiang, B. Xu, J. Liu, Y. Xia, H. Lu, J. Yin and Z. Liu, Quantum Spin Hall Insulator Phase in Monolayer WTe2 by Uniaxial Strain, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 095005,  DOI:10.1063/1.4962662 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Ali Eftekhari	Ali Eftekhari is a professor of chemistry temporarily with the University of Ulster and Queen's University Belfast. He has worked in different capacities in various universities across 4 continents and has founded two internationally recognized academic schools from scratch, which were considered as exceptional success stories by major media such as the British newspaper, The Guardian. His research interest is focused on the material design for electrochemical systems and has worked on energy storage systems for 20 years. He is the principal author of over 100 papers published in leading scholarly journals and has supervised over 110 postdoctoral researchers and graduate students. He is the President of the American Nano Society.

 	Fig. 1  Simple band structure scheme in the K+ valley (at the K point of the Brillouin zone) to indicate the different signs and magnitudes of the valence DVB SO and conduction band spin splittings DCB SO when going from MoSe2 to WSe2 monolayers. Optically bright (red arrows) and dark (gray arrows) A-exciton transitions are indicated. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optical contrast of 3L (a1) WS2 and (a2) WSe2 flakes. The grey dashed arrows indicate the wavelength of the excitation lasers used for Raman measurements. (b) Schematics showing atomic displacement of four Raman active modes in WS2 and WSe2. (c and d) Unpolarized Raman spectra of bulk (c) WS2and (d) WSe2 obtained with 473 and 633 nm laser excitation, respectively. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of 1 to 5L and bulk WX2 flakes. The spectra are normalized and vertically offset for clarity. (b)Position of the A1g and E2g1 modes (right vertical axis) and their difference (left vertical axis) as a function of the number of layers (n). (c) Intensity ratio (left vertical axis) and FWHM (right vertical axis) of A1g and E2g1 modes as a function of the number of layers. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of (a) Raman and (b and c) PL spectra of different monolayered WS2 samples. Laser wavelength is 514.5 nm for Raman and 488 nm for PL measurements. For (b), the PL intensity is normalized to 1 whereas in (c), the PL intensity is normalized to the A′1 Raman intensity. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2016, Materials Research Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a, b) SEM, (c, d) TEM, and (e, f) HRTEM images of graphene-like WSe2. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Morphological characterization: SEM images of WS2 and WSe2 (bulk) and after Li ion intercalation using methyllithium (Me–Li), n-butyllithium (n-Bu–Li) and tert-butyllithium (t-Bu–Li). The scale bars are 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  HR-TEM analysis of the WSe2 nanotube and core–shell structure. (a–c) TEM images of a WSe2 nanotube. The red arrows in (b) indicate the reduced number of walls near the WSe2 tip. The inset of (c) presents the FFT pattern of the whole region depicted in (c). (d, e) TEM images of core–shell structure; red and white arrows indicate broken regions in the outermost and innermost WSe2 layers, respectively. The inset of (e) presents the FFT pattern of the whole region depicted in (e). The interlayer distance of WSe2 for the nanotube and core–shell structures is 6.5 Å, as indicated in (c) and (e). (f) EDX spectra of WSe2 nanotube and core–shell structure, respectively. The oxygen peak is clearly observed in the core–shell structure, whereas no oxygen peak is detected in the WSe2 nanotube. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) SEM, (B) HR-SEM, (C) TEM and (D) HR-TEM images of the mesoporous (a) MoS2, (b) MoSe2, (c) WS2, and (d) WSe2. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images (a and b) and TEM images (c and d) of the WSe2 microspheres. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of the first three cycles a WSe2 electrode in sodium-battery performance, and (b) and comparison of WSe2 and WS2 during the 3rd cycle. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) EDS composite map of a WSe2 electrode before cycling, scale bar ¼ 100 nm (b) EDS composite map of a WSe2 battery electrode after the 5th discharge showing W and Se, scale bar ¼ 100 nm (c) the same EDS spectrum as (b) but with the Na added (d) schematic illustrating the storage mechanism of Na in WSe2. Upon Na+ insertion segregated domains of NaxSe and W form. After the Na+ has been removed, WSe2 is reformed but it is less crystalline than in its original state. (e) XRD pattern of the initial WSe2, the NaxSe product formed after the 5th discharge, and the less crystalline WSe2 formed after the 5th charge (f) zoomed XRD patterns displayed in (e). Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of charge separation and transfer in the CdS/WS2 nanocomposites under visible light. (b) H2 evolution of different samples with varying weight amounts of WS2 nanosheets and cycling behavior in 5 h. (c) The concentration of S2−, Cd2+, and W4+ decomposed from CdS/WS2 nanocomposites during the irradiation. (ICP-AES Condition: sampling at different times and centrifuged to remove the photocatalyst powder). Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
