Improvement in photovoltaic performance for hybrid P3HT/elongated CdS nanocrystals solar cells with F-doped SnO 2 arrays  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM00385A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM00385A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5429-5435Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsImprovement in photovoltaic performance for hybrid P3HT/elongated CdS nanocrystals solar cells with F-doped SnO2 arrays

        
          
            Hung-Chou 
            Liao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chin-Ching 
            Lin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Wei 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ta-Chung 
            Liu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            San-Yuan 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, 1001 Ta-Hsueh Rd., Hsinchu, 30010, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: sanyuanchen@mail.nctu.edu.tw
bMaterials and Chemical Research Laboratories, Industrial Technology Research Institute, 310 Chutung, Taiwan
Received 
      11th February 2010
    , Accepted 31st March 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      28th May 2010
    AbstractHybrid CdS/P3HT photovoltaic devices using F-doped SnO2 (FTO)-coated ZnO nanorod arrays as electrodes were studied in this work. The crystalline FTO, made using low-cost spray pyrolysis deposition (SPD), displayed a nominally complete and uniform coating over the entire outer surface of the ZnO nanorods. The photovoltaic performance of the CdS/P3HT photovoltaic devices increased with the FTO-coated ZnO nanorod length and thickness of the FTO layer, due to improvement in collecting photogenerated electrons, which results in the increased short circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) of the devices. The incorporation of CdS into the P3HT greatly enhanced the JSC of the devices with a nanorod FTO electrode. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device with a ZnO nanorod length of 320 nm was increased from 0.37% for P3HT without CdS to 1.8% with CdS of AR = 1 (spherical shape). With a further increase of the AR of the CdS nanocrystal to 4, the PCE was further increased up to 2.6%. However, longer CdS nanocrystals conversely caused deterioration in PCE as a result of the nanorod array morphology. These results indicate that, although increased nanorod length could improve the photocurrent and efficiency, other factors, such as P3HT infiltration, nanorod array morphology and CdS nanocrystal length are required for obtaining the optimal performance of these devices.
I. Introduction
Organic photovoltaic devices are drawing attention because of their potential for production of flexible and large-area solar cells at very low cost. Furthermore, polymer-inorganic hybrid solar cells are of particular interest because they combine the solution processability of polymers with the high electron mobility of inorganic semiconductors.1 Recently, hole-conducting polymers have been combined with a wide range of inorganic nanomaterials, including CdSe quantum dots, rods, tetrapods, hyper-branched colloids,2–5 PbS, PbSe, CuInS2 and CuInSe2 nanoparticles.6–10 In general, the optimal device thickness of a bulk heterojunction solar cell is typically 100–200 nm, depending on the combination of materials. The optimal thickness is determined by the equilibrium between absorption of the films and charge carrier transport in the device. The amount of exciton generation increases with thickness because of a greater total absorption of light. However, the extent of recombination may also increase for very thick films due to the increased distance required for the charges to reach the electrodes, resulting in a decrease of the overall power conversion efficiency. Therefore, a continuous ordered inorganic nanostructure that may help charge carrier collection and transport can potentially address this issue.11–14 For example, nanorod arrays not only solve the above-mentioned problem, but also provide far greater surface area (over 100 times more) than thin films, which thus offer great advantages in applications where surface area plays a critical role in improving charge collection. As a result, it might be possible to achieve both large absorption and an efficient charge transport with thicker film devices. Therefore, the possibility of utilizing one-dimensional nanorods in both dye-sensitized solar cells and organic solar cells may help to boost device performance. This concept has already been attempted with ZnO and TiO2 nanorods and nanotubes.15–19 For instance, Olson et al. reported a P3HT/ZnO nanorod cell exhibiting a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 2.2 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.44 V, a fill factor (FF) of 0.56 and an efficiency of 0.53% using nanorods grown in basic conditions.17 They also reported that the introduction of phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) into the hybrid devices could significantly improve the efficiency of the devices by up to 2.03%. Nelson and co-workers also reported hybrid photovoltaic devices using polymer/ZnO nanorod combinations.18,19 These reports revealed the importance of using nanorod array electrodes to improve the photovoltaic performance. However, up to now, very little work has been published regarding the fabrication of transparent conductive nanorods in solar cells.20,21 It is expected that increasing the interface area between the electrode and metal oxide will improve device performance by increasing charge capture. At present, indium tin oxide (ITO) has been the most commonly used plane anode in thin-film solar cells. Recently, Wang et al. produced ITO nanowires by electrophoretic deposition and demonstrated that nanowire electrodes could enhance the device performance of dye-sensitized solar cells.21 We believe in the possibility of creating a nanostructured electrode to improve hybrid cell performance, especially if it can be achieved via simple and low-cost processes for the fabrication of oxide nanostructures.
Tin oxide, SnO2, is an insulator and an important, colorless, low-cost, large-bandgap (n-type) semiconductor material. When doped with Sb or F ions, F-doped SnO2 (FTO) is an ideal candidate for applications requiring a transparent conductive oxide due to its ability to adhere strongly to glass, resistance to physical abrasion, chemical stability, high optical visible transparency and electrical conductivity, such that FTO is widely used as a transparent conducting oxide substrate,22 as well as an electrode material for energy conversion.23 Recently, FTO nanorod electrodes developed by template-filling methods have also been demonstrated by Russo et al.20 However, this method needs complex processes to remove the anodic alumina template. Therefore, in this study, a spray pyrolysis deposition process (SPD) was developed to obtain a good distribution of FTO film on ZnO nanorods grown using the aqueous solution method. This method not only makes it possible to coat ZnO nanorods with a thin, nominally uniform layer of FTO, but also controls the FTO thickness. In this study, it has been demonstrated that the efficiency of the P3HT/CdS/ZnO nanorod solar cell can be improved by nearly 2 fold by coating the nanorod arrays in an FTO layer using SPD. Both ZnO nanorod length and FTO layer thickness had a crucial effect on the cell output characteristics. Moreover, we investigated the effect of elongated CdS nanocrystals on the performance of FTO-coated ZnO nanorod polymer solar cells with a thick hybrid layer of CdS/P3HT.
II. Experimental section
Materials: Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, 99.9%), hexamethylenetetramine (C6H12N4, HMT, 99.0%), stannous chloride (SnCl2, 99.9%) and ammonium fluoride (NH4F, 98.0%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Cadmium acetate dihydrate (Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Sigma-Aldrich, analytic grade) and sulfur (Fluka, analytical grade) were employed as the precursors for CdS formation. Dichlorobenzene (DCB, Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich, analytical grade) were used as the solvents for CdS formation. Poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT, Sigma-Aldrich) was electronic grade and regioregular (>98% head-to-tail).
The ZnO nanorods reported here were grown using a low-temperature method.24 A ZnO seed layer was deposited on an ITO glass substrate (10 Ω) by radio frequency magnetron sputtering using 99.99% ZnO as the target. The ZnO nanorods were then grown on the ZnO-coated ITO glass substrate from an equimolar (0.02 M) aqueous solution of zinc nitrate hexahydrate and HMT at 75 °C. After aging in the oven for 90–180 min, the substrates were removed from the aqueous solutions, rinsed in distilled water and dried overnight at 60 °C. To deposit the FTO films on ZnO nanorods by ultrasonic spray pyrolysis, the initial solution was prepared from 0.5 moles of stannous chloride in 1.0 L of deionized water. In order to promote solubility, 5% HCl was added into the stannous chloride precursor solution. Upon stirring, the solution immediately became transparent, indicating its solubilization. Finally, a 50% ammonium fluoride precursor was mixed at room temperature and stirred for 5 min. The deposition temperature was set at 400 °C for all of the depositions, and the deposition time was 0.5–3 min. The carrier gas flow rate was maintained at 20 L min−1 in air.
The CdS/P3HT composite was synthesized by an in situ method, as in our previous work.25 In a three-neck, round bottom flask equipped with a magnetic stirring bar and condenser, 8 ml of dichlorobenzene, 4 ml of dimethylsulfoxide, 0.01 g cadmium acetate and 0.01 g of P3HT were heated to 100 °C and degassed with nitrogen for 30 min. In a second vial, 0.002 g of sulfur was dissolved in 1 mL of anhydrous dichlorobenzene. Both solutions were then heated to 120 °C. Then, 1 ml of the sulfur solution was injected into the cadmium precursor solution and the solution was allowed to react for 30 min. The mixture of CdS and conducting polymer was cleaned to remove any lead, sulfur ions and dimethylsulfoxide by adding anhydrous methanol to cause precipitation of the composite material. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed and the composite was dissolved in dichlorobenzene.
For photovoltaic device fabrication, a thin active layer consisting of P3HT was deposited onto ZnO nanorods using spin-coating. The CdS/P3HT layers were spin-coated from their corresponding dichlorobenzene solutions (30 mg mL−1) at 800 rpm and annealed at 150 °C for 60 min to facilitate infiltration of the CdS/P3HT. The thickness of the hybrid layer was about 450 nm. The poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer was spin-coated on the active layer and annealed at 120 °C for 10 min, followed by thermal evaporation of the Au electrode.
To demonstrate uniform coverage of the FTO film on the ZnO nanorods, field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; JEOL, JSM-6500F) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEOL, JEM-2100F, field emission transmission electron microscope) were employed. The crystal structure was determined by X-ray diffraction with Cu Kα radiation and a Ni filter (Siemens D5000). Photocurrent action spectra and solar cell J-V characteristics were recorded using a Keithley 2400 electrometer while illuminating the solar cells with light from a Xenon lamp with an AM1.5 filter. The reported efficiencies were obtained from an average value of four measurements from a set of four regions on each substrate.
III. Results and discussion
3-1 Microstructure

Fig. 1(a) shows an FE-SEM image of the as-synthesized ZnO nanorods. The ZnO nanorods had a diameter that ranged from 80 to 90 nm and lengths of up to 380 nm depending on the growth conditions. The length of the ZnO nanorod increased with the growth time, where the average length of the nanorods was estimated from the cross-sectional FE-SEM images (Fig. 1(b)). The average length increased from ca. 140 to 380 nm by prolonging the growth reaction time from 90 to 180 min. Fig. 1(c) shows an image of ZnO nanorods coated with a 10 nm FTO layer by the spray pyrolysis deposition process (SPD). After the SPD process, the nanorods, as shown in the inset of Fig. 1(c), exhibited increased diameters and rough surfaces as compared to those in Fig. 1(a). This result indicates that FTO was successfully deposited on the ZnO nanorods. Fig. 1(d) shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the FTO-coated ZnO nanorods and template ZnO nanorods. The distinct peaks corresponding to ZnO and SnO2 were also observed, and the major diffraction peaks of the coating specimen were consistent with the known tetragonal SnO2 structure with lattice constants given in the literature of a = 4.755 Å and c = 3.199 Å (JCPDS 41- 1445). Furthermore, it was noted that the peak of tetragonal SnO2 (101) almost overlapped with the main peaks of ZnO (002). It was concluded that the coated FTO layers retained their perfect crystalline phase and physical structure, which further confirmed that an FTO layer rather than an alloy was formed. The broad peaks of SnO2 in the XRD spectrum indicated that the nanoparticles were small. The average size of the nanoparticles, as calculated by the Scherrer equation, was about 9 nm. In addition, no obvious peaks corresponding to SnCl2, Sn or other tin oxides were observed in the pattern.
 Fig. 1  FE-SEM images of (a) ZnO nanorods micrographs, (b) cross-sectional ZnO nanorods with various lengths, (c) ZnO nanorods coated with a 10 nm FTO layer. (d) XRD patterns of ZnO nanorods and ZnO nanorods coated with a 10 nm FTO layer. The scale bar in (b) is 300 nm. 

Fig. 2(a) shows a typical low-resolution TEM image of the FTO-coated ZnO nanorods. It was observed that almost all ZnO nanorods had been fully coated with thin and uniform layers. The thickness of the coating was estimated to be about 10 nm. The corresponding high-magnification TEM image in Fig. 2(b) clearly shows that the FTO nanoparticles were crystalline and well-distributed on the nanorods. The inset of Fig. 2(b) is the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) diffraction pattern, which can be indexed to tetragonal SnO2. The two clear polycrystalline rings correspond to crystal faces of (110) and (101) of tetragonal SnO2.
 Fig. 2  (a) A TEM image and (b) a HRTEM micrograph of ZnO nanorods coated with a 10 nm FTO layer. The inset is the corresponding FFT diffraction pattern. 
In order to optimize the FTO-coated ZnO nanorods for organic solar cells, ZnO nanorod arrays were grown for different periods of time by controlling the growth time. As demonstrated in Fig. 1(b), the average length increased from 140 to 380 nm and the diameter of the nanorods was in the range of 80–90 nm for all cases, and almost independent of the reaction time. Fig. 3(a) shows the TEM image of CdS/P3HT samples prepared at cadmium acetate concentrations of 0.83 mg mL−1 at 120 °C with a DCB-to-DMSO ratio of 8:4 that demonstrated the size of CdS nanocrystals to be 2–3 nm. The structural morphologies of the CdS nanorods synthesized from the DCB-to-DMSO volume ratios of 7:5, 8:4 and 9:3 at a lower cadmium acetate concentration of 8.3 mg mL−1 for 30 min are shown in Fig. 3(b), 3(c), and 3(d), respectively. It was found that a variation of the DCB-to-DMSO volume ratio from 7:5 to 8:4 to 9:3 at a lower cadmium acetate concentration of 8.3 mg mL−1 gave CdSe nanocrystals with aspect ratios increasing from ∼4 to ∼8 to ∼16 for the samples with the same concentration under similar reaction conditions, which is corresponds to a CdSlength of about 9 nm, 18 nm, and 39 nm, respectively. The role of the structural direction of the P3HT template was demonstrated in our previous work.25 An elongated P3HT chain can be developed by increasing the DCB-to-DMSO ratio, resulting in CdS nanocrystals with a higher aspect ratio.
 Fig. 3  (a) A TEM image of CdS nanocrystals/P3HT composites synthesized at 120 °C. TEM images of CdS nanocrystals synthesized in P3HT with volume ratios of DCB-to-DMSO of (b) 7:3, (c) 8:4 and (d) 9:3 at 180 °C. 
3-2 ZnO nanorod length
To investigate the dependence of the device performance on the length of the FTO-coated ZnO nanorods, power conversion efficiency (PCE), fill factor (FF), short circuit current density (JSC) and open-circuit voltage (VOC), a series of devices with 25 nm thickness FTO were prepared where the P3HT/CdSe had an aspect ratio of 1. Fig. 4(a) and 4(b) illustrate the device performance as a function of the length of the FTO-coated ZnO nanorods. We observed that the device without nanorods showed a JSC of 3.8 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.56 V and a FF of 34%, resulting in a PCE of 0.70%. With the array with 320 nm FTO-coated ZnO nanorods, the PCE was improved to 1.8% under the same conditions as a result of the increased values for JSC of 6.8 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.62 V and FF of 44%. The JSC strongly increased with the lengths of the nanorods. In addition, the FF was improved from 34% to 44% by introducing the FTO-coated ZnO arrays, although the improvement in VOC was small. The improvement in both JSC and FF mainly contributed to the increase of PCE from 0.70% to 1.8% as a result of the increase in the FTO-coated ZnO nanorod length. In our devices, the absorption layer was very thick (up to 450 nm), which improved the light absorption. However, when the nanorod was short, the probability of exciton recombination was higher with a thicker active layer due to the small carrier mobility. As the nanorod length increased, the average distance from the generation point of the charge carriers to the FTO electrode decreased, resulting in an increase in the number of charge carriers collected by the FTO-coated ZnO nanorods, which leads to an improvement of FF and JSC. However, an increase in the nanorod length from 320 to 380 nm resulted in a decreased JSC, which may be due to the annealing treatment being insufficient to drive P3HT to completely fill the volume between the longer nanorods.26 Therefore, the ability to improve performance by efficient electron collection using longer nanorods may eventually be limited by issues with P3HT infiltration.
 Fig. 4  The hybrid solar cell characteristics. (a) VOC and JSC (b) the fill factor and PCE plotted as a function of nanorod length. The inset is JSC plotted as a function of nanorod length (without CdS nanocrystals). 
To further clarify the role of the CdS nanocrystals, a system without CdS in the P3HT layer was compared. As shown the inset of Fig. 4(a), it was found that the incorporation of CdS into P3HT resulted in a large increase in JSC, as compared with the device without CdS. This result demonstrates that the interface between the P3HT and FTO-coated ZnO nanorods makes a small contribution to the charge separation, and the charge separation mainly occurs at the P3HT/CdS interface. The reason for the more efficient charge separation at the P3HT/CdS interface could be attributed to the much larger interface area and large energy difference between P3HT and FTO. From the results above, we can conclude that these excitons are mainly dissociated to electrons and holes at the interface between P3HT and CdS, and that the FTO-coated ZnO nanorod array structure permits vertical charge transport from the active layer. Therefore, it is believed that the role of FTO-coated ZnO nanorod arrays in this study can be considered as an electron collector that collects the electrons more efficiently than a planar cathode structure.
After charge separation at the CdS/P3HT interface, the electrons generated at the conduction band of CdS (−4.0 eV)27 can be transferred to the conduction band of SnO2 (−4.4 eV),27 which has a high electron mobility that helps charge-carrier collection and transport. Moreover, the conduction band of ZnO is slightly higher in energy than that of SnO2, so the FTO layer dominates electron transport. Furthermore, because the SnO2 has high electron mobility compared to most organic semiconducting materials, the electrons can be quickly collected by the FTO layer. Consequently, the FTO-coated ZnO nanorods work as electron collectors by shortening the average electron diffusion distance in the CdS network of the bulk heterojunction, resulting in a reduction in charge recombination.
3-3 FTO layer thickness
To better understand the function of the FTO layer, we tested several devices with different thicknesses of FTO layer. A nanorod length of 320 nm was used in all devices. Because the FTO layer dominates electron transport, the effect of the FTO thickness on the performance of the bulk heterojunction solar cells needed to be further clarified in this system. Fig. 5 shows the current density (J) versus applied voltage (V) characteristics for several devices fabricated on FTO-coated ZnO nanorods with varying FTO thicknesses. It was found that the ZnO nanorod devices coated with 10, 25 and 40 nm exhibited an enhanced J–V response compared with the bare ZnO nanorod device. The FTO-coated ZnO nanorod devices showed significantly higher JSC values but little change in the VOC. It is well known that the JSC and the resultant resistances of the devices are obviously related to the FTO thickness. Table 1 summarizes the J–V characteristics and series resistance (RS) of these devices as a function of FTO thickness. The devices with FTO layers show overall improvements in RS compared to those without the FTO layer. The RS was calculated from the inverse gradient of the J–V curve at 1 V under illumination. The RS reflects the ohmic loss in the entire device, which results from a combination of the contact resistance and charge transfer rate at the interface. The RS of the device varied with the FTO thickness, which implies that the measurement of series resistance supports the earlier inference. In the present case, the decrease in the RS should be related to the reduction in contact resistance between the FTO layer and the active organic layer, which provides a better conduction path to the electrons between the active organic layer and the cathode. Moreover, as reported previously in the literature, the mobility of the SnO2 nanostructure (125 cm2 s−1 V−1) 28 was orders of magnitude higher than that of single crystal ZnO (1–5 cm2 s−1 V−1) 29. This result implies that the photoinjected electrons in the FTO-coated ZnO nanorod cells will tend to travel in the thin FTO shells. In other words, the fastest pathway in these cells is mostly along the pathway of the FTO layer. The transport of electrons through SnO2 is more energetically favorable than through ZnO, resulting in a decreased series resistance with increasing FTO thickness. Therefore, for the device with 25 nm FTO, the PCE was improved to 1.8% as a result of the increased values for the JSC of 6.8 mA cm−2, VOC of 0.62 V and FF of 44%. However, as the FTO thickness increased to 40 nm, the JSC decreased to 5.4 mA cm−2. Fig. 5(b) shows normalized absorption spectra of ZnO nanorods coated with varying thicknesses of FTO layers. Compared with the absorption spectrum of the bare ZnO nanorod sample, the absorption spectrum of ZnO coated with a 40 nm FTO layer exhibited a blue shift. The blue shift suggested that some P3HT chain segments remain locked in a coiled configuration and are unable to be crystallized, resulting in a lower hole mobility of P3HT.30,31 A similar observation was also reported by Coakley et al., who demonstrated poorly ordered P3HT infiltration deep in the mesoporous structure due to the filtering effect.12 This caused the photocurrent of this device to be limited by the transport of holes to the top electrode. Thus, holes undergo back recombination easier with an electron in the TiO2 before escaping the polymer-TiO2 region.12
 Fig. 5  (a) Current J–V curves of the photovoltaic devices with and without an FTO layer under 100 mW cm−2 of AM1.5 irradiation. (b) CdS/P3HT absorption spectra following infiltration into the ZnO nanorods and FTO-coated ZnO nanorods. 
Table 1 The photovoltaic characteristics of devices fabricated on FTO-coated ZnO nanorods of various thicknesses. The series resistance (RS) was extracted from the slopes of the J–V curves at 1 V




FTO thickness/nm

V
OC/V

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
RS (Ω cm)




0
0.58
4.6
36
0.96
41


10
0.60
5.7
37
1.3
18


25
0.62
6.8
44
1.8
11


40
0.61
5.4
38
1.2
13




3-4 CdS nanocrystal effect
To investigate the role of the elongated CdS nanocrystals in the nanostructured electrode, we measured devices with various aspect ratios (AR) of CdS nanocrystals, where different nanorod lengths and FTO thicknesses were prepared for the study, as shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6(a) shows the PCE of the devices fabricated with different FTO thicknesses plotted as a function of the AR of the CdS nanocrystals. It was noted that although the thickness of the FTO varied, the trends of the PCE were very similar. Compared to that of the devices without CdS, the incorporation of CdS into the P3HT enhanced the JSC and PCE. As shown in Fig. 6(a), for the devices with an FTO thickness of 25 nm, the PCE was increased from 0.37% for P3HT without CdS to 1.8% with CdS of AR = 1 (spherical shape). This result indicates that the addition of CdS plays a very important role in the enhancement of the JSC. With a further increase in the AR of CdS to 4, the PCE was further increased up to 2.6%. A maximum PCE value appeared in the device with AR = 4 for a ZnO nanorod length of 320 nm. When the AR exceeded 4, the PCE started to decrease due to the decreased JSC. In addition, Fig. 6(a) also demonstrates that the improvement in the performance of the devices also depended on the FTO thickness, which was explained above. On the other hand, according to our previous study,25 it was demonstrated that the efficiency (and JSC) of a P3HT/CdS nanocrystal device on a planar electrode can be increased by nearly two times at most by using elongated CdS nanocrystals (squares, Fig. 6(b)). However, for the device with a nanorod length of 320 nm (circles, Fig. 6(b)), upon increasing the aspect ratio of CdS nanocrystals from 1 to 4, the elongated CdS nanocrystals also contributed to the improved efficiency, resulting in the highest efficiency of 2.6%, but further increasing the AR to 8 and 16 caused a deterioration in efficiency. This phenomenon (or trend) is inconsistent with that of a planar electrode in our previous study.25 We believe the nanorod array morphology limited it due to the incomplete penetration of elongated nanocrystals. The average nanorod density was estimated to be about 6 × 109 cm−2 by FE-SEM images so the average distance between nanorods was ∼80 nm. As the FTO thickness is 25 nm, the average distance between the nanorods decreased to ∼30 nm, indicating it is difficult for longer nanocrystals to penetrate in between nanorods. Therefore, the maximum efficiency of the device appeared at the AR = 4 (length ≈ 9 nm) for the 320 nm ZnO nanorods. As a short length of 230 nm was used, it was found that the maximum efficiency of the device occurs at the CdS nanocrystals with an AR of 8 (length ≈ 18 nm) (triangles, Fig. 6(b)). Furthermore, when the AR is above 8, the efficiency slowly decreased with increasing aspect ratio, as compared to that with a nanorod length of 320 nm. Although the average distances between the nanorods were equal in calculation, the nanorods were not well-defined, vertically; thus, the possibility of interlacing nanorods increases with nanorod length, resulting in more inaccessible internal space to the elongated CdS nanocrystals (not to the polymer). It can be supposed that the efficiency (or JSC) is related to the penetration of elongated CdS nanocrystals among nanorods because the VOC of these devices remained almost constant when the AR was varied from 1 to 16. Here, for the devices with a nanorod length of 320 nm, the best efficiency of 2.7% was obtained. It was concluded that the deeper space among nanorods was more inaccessible to the longer nanocrystals (e.g., AR = 16). These results suggest that the maximum efficiency changes with not only the AR of the elongated nanocrystals, but also the nanorod array morphology.
 Fig. 6  (a) The efficiency of the devices with different FTO thicknesses plotted as a function of the aspect ratio of CdS nanocrystals. (b) The efficiency of the devices with different nanorod lengths plotted as a function of the aspect ratio of CdS nanocrystals. 
In conclusion, hybrid P3HT/elongated CdS nanocrystal photovoltaic devices using FTO-coated ZnO nanorod arrays as electrodes as a function of nanorod length, FTO thickness, and CdS aspect ratio have been well studied in this work. The performance of the hybrid photovoltaic devices was improved as the nanorod length was increased, suggesting that the introduction of the direct carrier transport electrode could enhance the performance of the photovoltaic devices. The FTO layer provided a better conduction path for electrons As a result, in the case of spherical CdS (AR = 1), the device fabricated from 320 nm ZnO nanorods with a 25 nm FTO layer showed the best efficiency of 1.8%. The use of elongated CdS nanocrystals with an AR of 4 made a large contribution to the improvement in PCE up to 2.6% but the PCE started to decrease with a further increase in the AR, indicating the nanorod array morphology limited it due to the incomplete penetration of elongated nanocrystals. We believe that the use of current device architecture with nanorod array electrode provides a feasible way to enhance photovoltaic performance.
References
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1112 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Sun and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3557 RSC .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C. P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 233101 CrossRef .
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. G. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cui, J. Xu, T. Zhu, G. Paradee, S. Ashok and M. Gerhold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183111 CrossRef .
E. Arici, N. S. Sariciftci and D. Meissner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 165 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arici, H. Hoppe, F. Schaffler, D. Meissner, M. A. Malik and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 59 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Oey, A. B. Djurisic, H. Wang, K. K. Y. Man, W. K. Chan, M. H. Xie, Y. H. Leung, A. Pandey, J. M. Nunzi and P. C. Chui, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 706 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3380 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Kang, N. G. Park and D. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 113101 CrossRef .
B. Kannan, K. Castelino and A. Majumdar, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1729 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
P. Charoensirithavorn and S. Yoshikawa, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2007, 974E, CC07 .
D. C. Olson, J. Piris, R. T. Collins, S. E. Shaheen and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 26 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ravirajan, A. M. Peiro, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel, D. D. C. Bradley, J. R. Durrant and J. J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7635 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Peiro, P. Ravirajan, K. Govender, D. S. Boyle, P. O'Brien, D. D. C. Bradley, J. Nelson and J. R. J. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2088 RSC .
B. Russo and G. Z. Cao, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 90, 311 CAS .
Hong-Wen Wang, Chi-Feng Ting1, Miao-Ken Hung, Chwei-Huann Chiou, Ying-Ling Liu, Zongwen Liu, Kyle R. Ratinac and Simon P. Ringer, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 055601 CrossRef .
E. Elangovan and K. Ramamurthi, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2003, 5, 45 Search PubMed .
N. Park, M. G. Kang, K. S. Ryu, K. M. Kim and S. H. Chang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 161, 105 CrossRef .
L. Vayssieres, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 464 CrossRef CAS .
Hung-Chou Liao, San-Yuan Chen and Dean-Mo Liu, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6558 CrossRef CAS .
Yun-Ju Lee, Matthew T. Lloyd, Dana C. Olson, Robert K. Grubbs, Ping Lu, Robert J. Davis, James A. Voigt and Julia W. P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15778 CrossRef CAS .
Jung-Chul Lee, Wonjoo Lee, Sung-Hwan Han, Tae Geun Kim and Yun-Mo Sung, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 231 CrossRef CAS .
M.S. Arnold, P. Avouris, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 659 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Seager and S. M. Myers, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 2888 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, F. P. Orfino and S. Holdcroft, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 6510 CrossRef CAS .
C. Roux and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 2141 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  FE-SEM images of (a) ZnO nanorods micrographs, (b) cross-sectional ZnO nanorods with various lengths, (c) ZnO nanorods coated with a 10 nm FTO layer. (d) XRD patterns of ZnO nanorods and ZnO nanorods coated with a 10 nm FTO layer. The scale bar in (b) is 300 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A TEM image and (b) a HRTEM micrograph of ZnO nanorods coated with a 10 nm FTO layer. The inset is the corresponding FFT diffraction pattern.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A TEM image of CdS nanocrystals/P3HT composites synthesized at 120 °C. TEM images of CdS nanocrystals synthesized in P3HT with volume ratios of DCB-to-DMSO of (b) 7:3, (c) 8:4 and (d) 9:3 at 180 °C.	 

 	Fig. 4  The hybrid solar cell characteristics. (a) VOC and JSC (b) the fill factor and PCE plotted as a function of nanorod length. The inset is JSC plotted as a function of nanorod length (without CdS nanocrystals).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Current J–V curves of the photovoltaic devices with and without an FTO layer under 100 mW cm−2 of AM1.5 irradiation. (b) CdS/P3HT absorption spectra following infiltration into the ZnO nanorods and FTO-coated ZnO nanorods.	 

0	0.58	4.6	36	0.96	41
10	0.60	5.7	37	1.3	18
25	0.62	6.8	44	1.8	11
40	0.61	5.4	38	1.2	13

 	Fig. 6  (a) The efficiency of the devices with different FTO thicknesses plotted as a function of the aspect ratio of CdS nanocrystals. (b) The efficiency of the devices with different nanorod lengths plotted as a function of the aspect ratio of CdS nanocrystals.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
