Recent advances in cellulose-based piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators for energy harvesting: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08642H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08642H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1910-1937Recent advances in cellulose-based piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators for energy harvesting: a review

        
          
            Yiheng 
            Song
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuqun 
            Shi
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Guo-Hua 
            Hu
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chuanxi 
            Xiong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Akira 
            Isogai
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Quanling 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Luoshi Road 122, Wuhan 430070, China. E-mail: yangql@whut.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life Sciences, Wuhan University of Technology, Luoshi Road 122, Wuhan 430070, China
cLaboratory of Reactions and Process Engineering (LRGP, CNRS UMR 7274), CNRS-University of Lorraine, ENSIC, 1 rue Grandville, BP 20451, 54001 Nancy, France
dDepartment of Biomaterials Science, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan
Received 
      2nd September 2020
    , Accepted 9th November 2020First published on 9th November 2020AbstractCellulose is the most earth-abundant natural polymer resource, which with combined eco-friendly and extraordinary sustainable properties such as renewability, biodegradability, low cost and excellent biocompatibility has been widely used by humans for thousands of years. In the past few years, many novel cellulosic materials and their unique applications have been developed including the recent research focus on energy harvesting. The high crystallization and plentiful polar hydroxyl groups endow cellulose with a large number of dipoles and strong electron donating capacity, resulting in a promising potential of piezoelectric and triboelectric effects. However, there is no review about cellulose-based nanogenerators until now. In this paper, the most recent developments of designing, modification, processing and integration of cellulose-based piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs), triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) and hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerators (PTENGs) for energy harvesting and other applications are reviewed in detail. For cellulose-based PENGs, representative basic piezoelectric cellulose and recent research on PENG devices are discussed. For cellulose-based TENGs, several effective strategies including rough modification of contact surface, addition of electronic functional fillers and chemical modification for improving the output performance are further summarized. Meanwhile, the latest cellulose-based hybrid PTENG is also introduced from the fundamental design to the investigations on enhanced strategies. The opportunities and challenges of these cellulose-based nanogenerator devices are put forward in the final part, which could enable this up-to-date and state-of-the-art review to be an effective guidance for the future research on cellulose-based nanogenerators in energy harvesting.Yiheng SongYiheng Song was born in Jiangxi, China, in 1991. He received his bachelor's degree (2014) from Shenyang University of Chemical Technology and his master's degree in Polymer Chemistry and Physics (2019) from Guilin University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Li Zhou. He is currently a PhD student with Assoc. Prof. Zhuqun Shi as his supervisor at Wuhan University of Technology, China. His research interests include biomass materials, electronic functional materials, and sulfur materials.Zhuqun ShiZhuqun Shi received a master's degree in Chemical Engineering from Wuhan University under the supervision of Prof. Jie Cai in 2011. After three years of doctoral course in Biomaterials Science of The University of Tokyo under the supervision of Prof. Yuji Matsumoto, she received a PhD degree in Sep. 2014. From Oct. 2014, she worked as a postdoctoral researcher with Prof. Akira Isogai in The University of Tokyo. Then, she joined Wuhan University of Technology as Associate Professor in the School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life Sciences from Jul. 2016. Her main research interests focus on biomaterials, e-skin, nanomaterials, etc.Guo-Hua HuGuo-Hua Hu is a full Professor at the University of Lorraine and a member of the Institut Universitaire de France. He received his PhD degree from the University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, in 1990. He worked as a post doc at the University of Pittsburgh from 1990 to 1992. He received the Bronze Medal of the CNRS in 1996 and Morand Lambla award of Polymer Processing Society in 2001. His current research involves reactive polymer processing, polymer blending, supercritical fluid assisted polymer foaming, bio-based polymers and composites.Chuanxi XiongChuanxi Xiong received his master's degree in polymer materials from Sichuan University under the supervision of Prof. Xi Xu in 1986. Then, he joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Wuhan University of Technology as an Assistant Professor, got a PhD degree in 1997 under the supervision of Prof. Dijiang Wen, promoted to Associate Professor in 1994 and full Professor in 1999. He spent 2004–2005 as a visiting scientist at Cornell University, USA. Now he is the dean of Department of Polymer Materials. His research interests include processing in polymer materials, nanomaterials, organic/inorganic composite materials, and solvent-free fluids.Akira IsogaiAkira Isogai received his PhD in 1985 from The University of Tokyo. As a postdoc, he joined the Institute of Paper Chemistry, Appleton, USA. In 1986, he returned to The University of Tokyo as an Assistant Professor. He spent 1989 at Forest Products Lab, USDA, Madison, USA, as a visiting scientist. He was promoted to Associate and full Professors in 1994 and 2003, respectively. He received Anselme Payen Award of ACS and Marcus Wallenberg Prize of Sweden in 2015. Since 1996, he has worked on TEMPO-mediated oxidation of cellulose and other polysaccharides as the regioselective and effective chemical modification.Quanling YangQuanling Yang received bachelor's and master's degree from Wuhan University under the supervision of Prof. Lina Zhang in 2008 and 2010, respectively. He got a PhD degree in Biomaterials Science of The University of Tokyo under the supervision of Prof. Akira Isogai in 2013. He received a Research Fellowship for Young Scientists from JSPS in 2012. From 2013, he worked as JSPS Postdoctoral Fellow in The University of Tokyo. Then, he joined Wuhan University of Technology as Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering from 2015. His research interests focus on biomass materials, nanomaterials, energy storage and conversion materials, etc.
1. Introduction
With the rapid increase in the consumption of traditional fossil energy, the development of alternative renewable energy has become one of the most important topics drawing human attention.1–5 After decades of search for renewable resources, the wind power,6 hydropower,7 ocean energy,8 solar energy9,10 and so on are constantly being developed, which greatly supplement the human demand for energy. However, conventional renewable energy usually require huge infrastructure, high-mass turbines and electromagnetic generators, and is expensive, which makes it difficult to collect and utilize small mechanical energy such as the breeze, water flow and movement of human limbs. Meanwhile, miniaturized portable electronic devices and microsensors usually require very low power supply, and their size is much smaller than that of batteries. Therefore, an excellent class of devices, named nanogenerators, have been developed, which can efficiently collect micromechanical energy and convert it into electricity. The concept of the nanogenerator was first proposed by Prof. Zhonglin Wang.11,12 Unlike the electromagnetic induction process, the nanogenerator is usually a device that converts small amounts of mechanical energy into electrical energy through the piezoelectric effect or the triboelectric effect. These two devices are commonly referred to as the piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs)13–16 and the triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs).17–20
The piezoelectric nanogenerator is mainly assembled from the high-piezoelectric effect materials, such as piezoelectric ceramics (e.g. lead zirconate titanate (PZT)21,22 and barium titanate (BT)23,24) and piezoelectric polymers (e.g. polyvinylidenefluoride (PVDF)25,26 and polyamide (PA)27,28). In addition, for the triboelectric nanogenerator, the current generated by the charge transfer between different electrical materials during friction or contact can also be used to achieve energy conversion and collection. Study on TENGs has also become one of the hottest fields today. The commonly used tribological materials are polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS),28–31 PVDF,32–34 polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE),35,36 polyamide,37,38etc. The devices are made of traditional materials that exhibit excellent performance, but still have some drawbacks such as environmental unfriendliness (piezoelectric PZT contains heavy metal lead), poor biocompatibility, high price, and non-renewability, which also limit their application in certain fields. Thus, the development of high-performance, renewable and inexpensive biomass-based energy harvesting materials39–41 has aroused widespread enthusiasm among many researchers. After in situ modification, compositing, processing and structural design, the biomass material has the same excellent piezoelectric and tribological properties as the traditional polymer materials. Up to now, many smart biomass-based nanogenerators with high performance and sustainability have been reported. Among them, cellulose-based energy-harvesting devices are the most representative results.
Cellulose is the most abundant natural polymer on the earth, with more than 180 billion tons of natural production every year.42,43 Cellulose is a linear-chain polysaccharide with glucose as the repeat unit.44 The repeat units are linked together via β-1,4-glucosidic bonds and each one contains three hydroxyl groups.45 The strong hydrogen bonds of the numerous hydroxyl groups allow the cellulose molecules to form highly ordered crystalline structures.46 At the same time, the lone electron team of oxygen atoms on the multihydroxyl groups endows cellulose with a very high electron donating effect and a tendency to lose electrons, which results in a tremendous frictional electrical activity. According to the previous reports, cellulose has 4 crystal structures: Cellulose I, II, III, and IV, and the first two are common types.47,48 Cellulose I crystal is usually derived from natural cellulose, which is in a thermodynamically metastable state and can be converted into Cellulose II under certain conditions. Depending on the source of cellulose, there are two polymorphs of Cellulose I:49,50 triclinic type Iα and monocline type Iβ. Cellulose II is the steadiest state in thermodynamics.51 It is monoclinic and usually converted from Cellulose I via dissolution and regeneration or alkali treatment. At present, the common regenerated cellulose is Cellulose II. The monoclinic and triclinic syngonies do not have symmetrical centers, and the hydroxyl group is of high polarity, which makes all kinds of cellulose crystals have asymmetric dipoles, thus leading to the necessary structural conditions as piezoelectric materials of the cellulose crystals.
At the beginning (shown in Fig. 1), the most commonly used cellulose (i.e. natural cellulose) is directly taken from plants, and the length of the natural cellulose fiber is generally greater than 2 mm with a diameter of 20–50 μm. The natural cellulose fiber contains wood fiber, cotton fiber, hemp fiber, flax fiber, etc. Natural cellulose has a series of outstanding advantages such as abundance, cheapness, renewability, biodegradability, and environmentally friendly nature, and it has been used for more than thousands of years. However, natural cellulose with poor solubility cannot be melted and processed like traditional polymers, which leads to poor processability and limits the further application in the cutting-edge technology. To overcome the shortcomings, a series of new types of cellulose nanofibers were developed by various methods such as mechanical methods, chemical methods and biological methods; meanwhile, another category of unique regenerated cellulose was developed by various cellulose solution systems and regeneration processes. They have different lengths and diameter sizes, exceptional processability, and easy modification, and they can be effectively applied in new fields such as energy storage,52–57 adhesion,58 biological field59,60 and functional film.61
 Fig. 1  Schematic of several common cellulosic materials. 
Natural cellulose with a stronger stripping method can strip to the cellulose nanofiber (CNF) with a length of 0.5–2 μm and a diameter of 3–20 nm,62 which contains highly crystalline regions and a small number of amorphous regions. It has a larger aspect ratio, stronger mechanical properties, good water dispersion and excellent processability,63–65 so that it can be used in various new fields. The common preparation methods of CNF are mechanical methods (ultrasonic crushing, mechanical stirring, and high-pressure homogenization), chemical methods, biological methods, etc. The mechanical method often results in high energy consumption, low efficiency and uneven cellulose size. For the chemical preparation process, the 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) oxidation method is the most representative one, reported by Prof. Isogai et al.66,67 In this facile method, the TEMPO system was used as a selective oxidant to oxidize the C6 hydroxyl group on the surface of cellulose microfibrils into a carboxyl group in water. The negative repulsion between carboxyl groups of cellulose causes the microfibrils to be separated from each other; that is, to form TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibrils (TOCNs) with a ultra-high aspect ratio, a high specific surface area,68–70 high strength,71,72 high tensile strength73–75 and low coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE),76,77 which has been widely studied and applied in many fields.78,79 In terms of biological methods, the bacterial cellulose (BC) can be obtained from the bottom up through bacterial culture and secretion.80–82 Generally, the length of BC is greater than 1 μm, the diameter is about 6–10 nm, and the aspect ratio is greater than 50.83 It belongs to the grade of nanocellulose in size, and the specific size depends on the bacteria and culture environment, also as a new cellulose material has been widely used.84–86 In addition, the other common chemical method is using acid hydrolysis to directly destroy the cellulose amorphous area, causing complete crystallization of cellulose,87,88 with 50 nm length and 3–5 nm theoretical diameter,89 which are called cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs). It retains the high crystallinity and the corresponding chemical properties of cellulose, but loses some characteristics such as high aspect ratio. Normally, CNC acted as a kind of smart nanometer additive added to other materials for application.90,91
Furthermore, a series of novel solvents such as N-methylmorpholine-N-oxide (NMMO),92 LiCl/DMAc systems,93 ionic liquids,94–96 and alkali/urea aqueous solutions97–99 have been developed to successfully dissolve cellulose. In this way, the cellulose molecular chain is successfully de-crystallized and dissolved in the cellulose solvent, and then recrystallized and precipitated to form the regenerated cellulose (RC) by regeneration. The crystal structure of RC is Cellulose II in a thermodynamic stability state;100 on the contrary, the aforementioned natural cellulose fiber, CNF, BC, and CNC are all Cellulose I structure. The advent of RC is another breakthrough that greatly improved the processability of cellulose. To sum up, constant innovation development in new cellulosic materials regularly results in numerous breakthroughs in many cutting-edge applications.
In short, cellulose has high crystallinity, abundant hydroxyl polar groups along the cellulose asymmetric monoclinic and triclinic crystal area arrangement, and easy-to-form asymmetric dipole with piezoelectric activity. The hydroxyl groups also provide many lone electrons, which make cellulose a high electron-donating material and easy to lose electrons in contact with other materials, so that it shows excellent frictional electrical performance. In addition, driven by the necessity for “environmentally friendly” materials, cellulose and cellulose derivatives with a series of advantages of abundance, renewability, sustainability and cheapness are the most promising natural materials for energy harvesting in piezoelectric, triboelectric and other fields. As shown in Fig. 2a, 67 articles on “Cellulose Nanogenerator” have been reported, and it shows an increasing trend year by year. According to the word frequency statistics presented in Fig. 2b, the researchers' concerns about “Cellulose Nanogenerator” were mainly focused on power generating mechanism (piezoelectric, triboelectric, and nanogenerator), the structural design of materials (film, films, paper, and fibers) and their application fields (energy harvesting, sensor, and energy). This paper will provide a detailed review of the recently reported work on cellulose-based PENGs, TENGs and P-T hybrid generators, and introduce their material selection, modification, design and achievements. It further summarizes how to improve the electric properties of cellulose-based devices.
 Fig. 2  Circulation (a) and word frequency statistics (b) of “Cellulose Nanogenerator”. 
2. Cellulose-based piezoelectric nanogenerators
2.1 Basic piezoelectric properties of cellulose
The piezoelectric effect of cellulose was first reported by Fukako101 in 1955. The shear piezoelectric effect d25 = −d14 of wood cellulose fiber was measured in 10−9 orders of magnitude, which confirmed that cellulose possessed piezoelectric activity. In addition, it is speculated that the piezoelectric properties of wood fiber are the result of the orderly arrangement in the polar hydroxyl in the cellulose crystal. After many further research studies, a net dipole moment formed by hydroxyl groups arranged in a noncentrosymmetric order is believed to be the origin of piezoelectricity in cellulose.102 As mentioned above, the crystal structure of naturally produced cellulose is Cellulose I type. Depending on the different sources of extraction, two polymorphs exist in the Cellulose I crystal: a triclinic structure (Iα) and a monoclinic structure (Iβ), which do not have a center of symmetry (Fig. 3a). In each cell, there are three kinds of hydrogen bonding interactions between O2–H and O6, O3–H and O5, and O3–H and O6, respectively.62 All of them are strong dipoles with the DFT-calculated piezoelectric responses of 36.4 pm V−1, 10 pm V−1 and 4.3 pm V−1, respectively102 (Fig. 3b1). Cellulose molecular chains are linked by inter-chain hydrogen bonding within the (110)t and (200)m planes to form two coexisting hydrogen bonding networks (Fig. 3b2),62 which cause polar hydrogen bonds in a noncentrosymmetric order to be a net dipole moment and show piezoelectric activities. However, the piezoelectric effects of natural cellulose are very low. The piezoelectric constants are critical parameters that characterize the strength of the piezoelectric effect. Depending on the direction of the external force and the charge, as shown in Fig. 3c, they can be divided into three types: the transverse piezoelectric constant (d31), the longitudinal piezoelectric constant (d33) and the shear piezoelectric constant (d14). It is reported that102 the longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient d33 of natural cellulose is only 0.4 pC N−1, which is far lower than the common commercial piezoelectric polymer PVDF film (d33 = 21 pC N−1). In recent years, the work mainly focuses on the basic research of improving the piezoelectric properties of cellulose by advanced processing technology and adding piezoelectric fillers homogeneously distributed in the cellulose film matrix. Mahadeva et al.103 used common lignocellulose as a raw material, alternately assembled layer by layer with poly(diallyl dimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA), poly(sodium styrenesulfonate) (PSS) and square-phase barium titanate (BT) nanoparticles (average particle size ≈ 300 nm). The composite piezoelectric paper was obtained by a facile, cost-effective and scalable paper-making process. Tetragonal barium titanate is uniformly attached to the surface of the wood fiber. Its piezoelectric property was further improved by Corona polarization at 17 kV needle tip voltage. As a blank control group, the pure wood cellulose film showed a very low piezoelectric active d33 = 0.4 pC N−1. With the increase in BT content, the piezoelectric coefficient of the composite film significantly increased, and when the BT content reached 48 wt%, the longitudinal piezoelectric constant d33 of the piezoelectric film reached 4.8 pC N−1, which shows that adding high piezoelectric fillers to cellulose is an effective strategy to improve the overall piezoelectric performance of the cellulose composite film. Similarly, Sriplai et al.104 took the bacterial cellulose (BC) hydrogel as the substrate and prepared MnFe2O4 (MFO) nanoparticles by in situ growth in their gel network to obtain the composite piezoelectric film by a hot-pressing process at 60 °C for 8 h. The MnFe2O4 NPs with a small particle size of 3.6 ± 0.6 nm were attached to BC nanofibers, which can significantly improve piezoelectric properties. As a comparison, the longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient d33 of the blank BC film was tested to be 4–5 pC N−1. When the amount of MFO in the composite film reached 27 wt%, the piezoelectric coefficient increased to be 20–23 pC N−1, which is close to the commercially available PVDF piezoelectric film. Besides adding piezoelectric fillers, changing the process such as traction orientation is a good strategy to improve the piezoelectric properties of the cellulose film. Yoon et al.105 reported a stretching-enhanced strategy to improve the piezoelectric properties of the RC film. First, cellulose was dissolved in LiCl/DMSO to form a solution, which is then stretched at different angles and ratios to form a RC film. The stretching causes the dipoles to be arranged in order, which helps improve the piezoelectric properties. The highest piezoelectric performance of the RC film (d31 = 12 pC N−1) was obtained when the tensile ratio is 1.6 times and the tensile angle is 45 degrees. The piezoelectric properties of cellulose films can be effectively improved by processing technology and adding piezoelectric fillers, which lays a foundation for the application of cellulose piezoelectric films in the energy harvesting field. The values of piezoelectricity of cellulose-based materials mentioned above are summarized in Fig. 3d.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of cellulose crystal structure: projection along the cellulose chain with the asymmetrical triclinic Iα and monoclinic Iβ structure, reprinted with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b1) The reported DFT-calculated piezoelectric responses of hydrogen bonds of cellulose in the literature, reprinted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2018 The American Chemical Society. (b2) Schematics of two networks A and B within the hydrogen-bonded plane, (110)t and (200)m, reprinted with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagrams of 3 types of piezoelectric constants. (d) Values of piezoelectric constants of cellulose-based materials in the literature. (e) Working mechanism diagram of a typical PENG device. 
2.2 Cellulose-based PENGs
To achieve more efficient energy harvesting by the piezoelectric effect, a smart, flexible device was assembled, i.e. piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs). A typical cellulose-based PENG usually consists of three parts: an intermediate piezoelectric active layer, two layers of conducting electrodes and an external packaging layer. The external packaging layer provides PENGs with sufficient mechanical strength and recoverability. The external forces collected by the PENG are mainly direct impact, bending, vibration, human motion, and even sound. The output performance is mainly characterized by open circuit voltage, short circuit current and power density. The intensity and frequency of external forces directly affect the output performance of the PENG, so they should be indicated when discussing the output performance. In addition, since the PENG is not an ideal power source, and the external output will vary with the load, so the load resistance should be indicated when emphasizing the power density. The mechanism of a typical piezoelectric generator106 is shown Fig. 3e. Excellent piezoelectric performance can be obtained through the directional arrangement of dipoles in the polarized piezoelectric layer. Under the action of external force, compression and recovery will cause the change in dipole moment and change the charge density of the two poles, and electrons will be transferred through the external circuit to achieve charge balance, which create a piezoelectric current output that converts external forces into electricity for harvesting. Zheng et al.107 used TOCNs as the raw material to prepare aerogel, and then poured the PDMS solution containing a curing agent into the TOCN aerogel. After desolvent compression, the porous TOCN-PDMS film was obtained under a pressure of 0.5 MPa. Two Al conductive layers were encapsulated at both ends of this film to produce a PENG with the size 1 cm × 2 cm × 0.48 μm. The external force test condition was 0.05 MPa and 10 Hz. The blank porous TOCN PENG outputted an open circuit voltage of 9.7 V. Currently, piezoelectricity is all derived from the displacement and reposition of the electric domains in the Cellulose I crystal. When subjected to vibration mechanical forces, PDMS could generate –SiO˙, Si˙ free radicals and generate more dipoles to improve the piezoelectric performance of the composite piezoelectric film.108,109 This TOCN-PDMS PENG device could generate 60 V open circuit voltage and 10.1 μA short circuit current and reach the maximum output power density of 6.3 mW cm−3 at a load of 1 MΩ. The longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient d33 of the TOCN–PDMS film can reach 19 pC N−1 without polarization treatment. Moreover, the TOCN–PDMS PENG could achieve voltage and current superposition in a series or parallel model with small energy loss. After 3600 cycles, the output showed no attenuation, with good cyclic stability. Alam et al.110 added PDMS and SWCNT to the cellulose microcrystalline (CMC) with a length of 10 μm and a crystallinity of 75%. Among them, the MWCNT was used as a conductive and supporting agent. Under the mechanical force of vibration, PDMS will also produce the Si–O–Si fracture and generate free radicals. Free radicals and hydroxyl groups of microcrystalline cellulose jointly form the active electric domains of the CMC–PDMS–MWCNT film. This film also produces obvious piezoelectric activities (longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient d33 = 8–15 pC N−1) without high voltage polarization, and it was made into a PENG with a size of 33 mm × 25 mm × 2 mm. By the external force test condition of 40 kPa, this PENG device outputted 30 V open circuit voltage, 500 nA short-circuit current, and the maximum output power density of 9 μW cm−3 under 30 MΩ load. Pusty et al.111 added Au nanoparticles (NPs) (diameter of ∼50 nm) into the cellulose/PDMS (C/PDMS) composite film to prepare a piezoelectric paper without high voltage polarization. Two layers of polypropylene tape were coated onto a composite film to eliminate the triboelectric interference. It was further assembled into an enhanced PENG device with a size of 3.5 cm × 8.5 cm (Fig. 4a). Cellulose microfibers and gold nanoparticles were completely encapsulated by PDMS. The authors found that the optimal amount of the Au solution was 20 μL (25 mM) into 10.5 g cellulose/PDMS piezoelectric paper (named 20 μL-Au C/PDMS sample), which was consistent with the piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) test results: the amplitude response and phase response of the 20 μL-Au C/PDMS paper were better than those of another sample. As a corollary of comparison, under the external force condition of 3 N, the blank C/PDMS PENG device without any addition of Au NPs outputted 1 V open circuit voltage and 0.2 μA short-circuit current, and the 20 μL-Au C/PDMS PENG device outputted 6 V open circuit voltage, 0.7 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 0.0083 W m−2 under 2.2 MΩ load (Fig. 4c and d). The energy conversion efficiency was calculated as 1.8%, and this device could charge a 10 μF capacitor to 6.3 V in 677 seconds. The authors suggest that more dipoles were formed via electrostatic interactions between Au NPs and cellulose (Fig. 4b). These dipoles were aligned along the regular cellulose chain, and they provided additional electrical signal output under external mechanical forces, which mean that increasing dipoles was an effective strategy to improve the performance of PENGs.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the Au-Cellulose/PDMS PENG device (a). The formation of new dipoles between the cellulose and Au NPs (b), the short circuit current of the blank Cellulose/PDMS PENG (c) and the 20 μL Au-Cellulose/PDMS PENG (d), reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, adding high piezoelectric activity materials to cellulose can directly improve the piezoelectric performance of cellulose composite films and the overall output performance of the cellulose-based PENG. Szperlich et al.112 homogeneously added high-piezoelectric activity (d33 = 1000 pC N−1) antimony sulfoiodide (SbSI) nanowires as piezoelectric fillers into ordinary cellulose fibers (10–25 μm in diameter and several millimeters in length) by ultrasonic treatment, and the mass ratio of SbSI was 20%. The cellulose–SbSI film was obtained by a vacuum desolvation process at room temperature for 72 h and finally assembled into a PENG with a size of 10 mm × 10 mm × 0.05 mm. This PENG can first produce an open circuit voltage of 2.5 V under an external force of 3 MPa and respond to mechanical sound waves. Under a sound source condition of 90 dB and 175 Hz, this PENG can absorb the tiny mechanical vibration energy of sound waves and output 24 mV open circuit voltage, 20 nA short-circuit current, and the maximum output power density of 41.5 nW cm−3 under 2.9 MΩ load. Choi et al.113 used a commercial cellulose nanofiber (CNF) as the substrate and 50 nm barium titanate (BT) as the piezoelectric filler to prepare the CNF–BT composite films, and they explored the piezoelectric properties of CNF–BT films with different BT contents. The nanofibrils were randomly oriented and the BaTiO3 NPs were uniformly distributed over the CNF matrix. Before compositing, the BT was treated at a high temperature of 1000 °C for 10 h in order to obtain more tetragonal BT with high piezoelectric activity. The CNF–BT film with different components was prepared and polarized at 100 °C for 12 h under the electric field of 120 kV mm−1. Polarization makes the domain alignment in BT further improve the piezoelectric performance. Eventually, the CNF–BT film was assembled into a PENG device. The external force test condition was 5 kPa. For comparison, the pure cellulose film PENG device without any BT addition produced 0.45 V open-circuit voltage and 32.48 nA short-circuit current. After the incorporation of BT, the output performance of the PENG was continuously improved and reached the maximum value when the BT content was 40 wt%. Under the same test condition, the CNF-40% BT PENG device outputted 2.86 V open circuit voltage, 262 nA short circuit current, and 373 nW output power. Moreover, a 1 μF capacitor can be charged to 0.58 V voltage by this CNF-based PENG within 22 s to achieve mechanical energy harvesting.
Crystallinity of cellulose is generally higher than that of conventional polymers. The hydroxyl groups on the cellulose surface can form ordered hydrogen bonds with other polymer substrates, increasing the directional dipole and improving the piezoelectric performance. Therefore, cellulose especially cellulose nanocrystals (CNC) can be used as piezoelectric fillers to improve the piezoelectric performance of other polymers. Ponnamma114 used the common piezoelectric polymer PVDF–HEP as the substrate and added 2 wt% CNC or 2 wt% iron-doped nano zinc oxide by electrospinning to form PVDF–HEP/CNC and PVDF–HEP/ZnO composite films, both of which could effectively improve the piezoelectric output performance. A large number of hydroxyl groups on the high crystallization orientation of the CNC surface can form ordered hydrogen bonds with F groups in PVDF, and the electrostatic field further facilitates the directional arrangement of more dipoles. The authors made the piezoelectric film into a PENG device. The external force test condition was 2.5 N and 45 Hz. As a comparison, a pure PVDF–HEP PENG without any CNC addition generated an open circuit voltage of 0.4 V, a short-circuit current density of 0.8 μA cm−2, and a power density of 0.85 μW cm−3. When 2 wt% CNC was added, more electric domains were formed, resulting in huge output improvement. Under the same conditions, the current voltage was increased to 6 V, the short-circuit current was 1.4 μA cm−2, and the power density was 430 μW cm−3. The authors further used two superimposed layers of composite films (PVDF–HEP–CNC and PVDF–HEP–Fe doped ZnO films) to form a series PENG device. The open circuit voltage and short circuit current density were further increased to 12 V and 1.9 μA cm−2, respectively. In addition, when the load was 1 MΩ, the max power density reached 480 μW cm−3, which has exceeded the level of work reported at the same time. This smart PENG can be flexibly used for mobile phones and body movements, integrated into the clothing for energy collection. Ram et al.115 took polyamide 11 (PA11) as the main substrate material and homogeneously compounded 5 wt% TOCN as the piezoelectric filler in a formic acid solution by ultrasound and stirring. The high crystallinity of TOCN and many hydroxyl groups can produce strong ordered hydrogen bonds with the amide bonds in PA11 and induce the transformation of PA11 from the α-phase to the high piezoelectric activity γ-phase, thus enhancing the piezoelectric activity of the PA11–TOCN composite film. This crystal transformation process can be directly and clearly confirmed by XRD analysis. After 18 kV electric field polarization, the composite film was prepared into a PENG device. The external force test condition was 23 N. Pure PA11 mainly contained α-phase-type crystalline cellulose with weak piezoelectric performance, thus the PA11–PENG outputted just 2.68 V open-circuit voltage. Under the same conditions, the PA11–TOCN–PENG outputted an open-circuit voltage of 6.95 V and a maximal power density of 0.5 mW cm−3 at 820 kΩ. Such improvement of the piezoelectric nanogenerator was benefited by more dipoles and the transformation of the crystal shape. After 800 cycles and after 3 months of storage, there was almost no attenuation in the output performance. Moreover, a 10 μF capacitor could be charged to 3.78 V voltage by this TOCN-enhanced PENG within 90 s to collect and store the energy.
2.3 Summary of PENG enhancement methods
All the crucial parameters of the cellulose-based PENG devices mentioned before are recorded in detail in Table 1. As a short summary, polarization, increasing the directional dipoles and adding the high piezoelectric filler are the effective enhancement strategies of the cellulose-based PENGs for efficient energy harvesting.
Table 1 Summary of cellulose-based PENG devices in the literature




Sample
Size
External force

U
oc


I
sc

Power density
Lord
Ref.




TOCN/PDMS
1 cm × 2 cm × 0.48 μm
0.05 MPa, 10 Hz
60 V
10.1 μA
6.3 mW cm−3
1 MΩ

107



CMC/PDMS/CNT
33 mm × 25 mm × 2 mm
40 kPa
30 V
0.5 μA
9.0 nW cm−3
30 MΩ

110



C/PDMS/AuNPs
3.5 cm × 8.5 cm
3 N
6 V
0.7 μA
8.3 mW cm−2
2.2 MΩ

111



Cellulose/SbSI
10 mm × 10 mm × 0.05 mm
90 dB, 175 Hz
24 mV
20 nA
41.5 nW cm−3
—

112



CNF/BaTiO3
—
5 kPa
2.86 V
0.26 μA
373 nW
—

113



CNC/PVDF–HEP
—
2.5 N, 45 Hz
12 V
1.9 μA cm−2
0.49 mW cm−3
1 MΩ

114



CNC/PA11
—
23 N
6.95 V
—
0.5 mW cm−3
820 kΩ

115





3. Cellulose-based triboelectric nanogenerators
3.1 Basic triboelectric properties of cellulose
Triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) was first proposed by Prof. Zhonglin Wang in 2012.12 It can efficiently convert mechanical energy into electrical energy by triboelectric effect. Until now, four TENG fundamental working modes (the vertical contact-separation mode, single electrode mode, in-plane sliding mode and free-standing layer mode) have been systematically reported and developed. Among them, the vertical contact-separation mode is the most common one and can be used to briefly explain the origin of triboelectric nanogenerators.18 It has been previously demonstrated that the mechanism of TENG was derived from the triboelectric coupling effect and external electron flow driven by a time-varying electric field. As shown in Fig. 5, at the very beginning, in a typical contact-separation TENG device, two uncharged electrodes with different triboelectric sequences are separated from each other. They can be considered as dielectric layers with different dielectric constants. Under a mechanical force, two electrodes are brought into contact, and the electrons transfer from one layer to another by the contact electrification effect, resulting in positive charge and negative charge surfaces with equivalent heterogeneous charges; the charged layers are defined as positive electrodes and negative electrodes, respectively.116 The larger the triboelectric sequence difference between the two electrode materials is, the larger the triboelectric charge generated when they come into contact will be. It is worth noting that cellulose has been reported to be in a very high triboelectric sequence, exceeding most common polymers, which makes it very suitable for use in the positive electrode materials of triboelectric generators. When the two layers begin to separate, the electrostatic charges on the two electrodes create a strong electrostatic field (a process also simulated by the COMSOL software in the reported literature) and change over time, driving electrons to flow through a peripheral circuit to achieve electric potential equilibrium and produce the output of a triboelectric nanogenerator. When the two layers are pressed again and vice versa, a reverse electrical signal appears. The detailed theoretical calculation and derivation process have been discussed in the previous literature.116 The current movement in the external circuit is the converted energy that is to be collected and utilized. Meanwhile, this is the origin of cellulose-based TENGs. Under definite test conditions, the open circuit voltage, short circuit current and power density are the main output performance parameters of TENG. In general, a positive electrode material with a tendency to lose electrons usually contains oxygen-rich or amino-rich groups. Due to this, cellulose-based materials show great potential in the triboelectric positive electrode. On the contrary, the negative electrode is usually composed of a material with a strong electricity-withdrawing functional group, and the most commonly used materials are PTFE,117 PDMS,118 and PI.119 As a result of the promising triboelectric potential and many other advantages of cellulose, numerous cellulose-based TENGs have been developed for energy harvesting.
 Fig. 5  Left: triboelectric series of cellulose over 50 common materials, reprinted with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Ltd; Upper right: a COMSOL simulated potential distribution of a typical reported Cellulose–PDMS TENG reprinted with permission from ref. 146 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. Lower right: the working mechanism diagram of a typical TENG device. 
3.2 Simple “A-B” type cellulose-based TENGs
Research on the basic triboelectric properties of cellulose began in 2004. Diaz et al.120 conducted a semi-quantitative triboelectric performance study on common polymers, summarized the triboelectric sequence published earlier, and obtained the sequence table of contact electrification of common polymers. Among them, cellulose and their common products containing wood, cotton, paper, etc., are in the positive electric sequence; that is, they usually lose electrons in a positive state when they contact with most other polymers to generate electricity. At the same time, Wang et al.121 reported that pure cellulose has a very high frictional contact charge transfer density of about −130 μC m−2, which exceeds that of most common polymer materials. The positive electric sequence and the frictional contact charge transfer density make cellulose have excited potential applications in contact electrification. In the field of drug packaging, Muhammad reported122 that cellulose-based drug carriers (methyl cellulose and hydroxypropyl cellulose) and drug (flurbiprofen powder) generated triboelectricity by rubbing against each other during production, thus leading to electrostatic attraction. This led to a series of problems of flow, compaction and dispersion uniformity, so it is necessary to add an electrostatic eliminator to eliminate the adverse effect, which also indicated that cellulose and cellulose-based materials are a class of materials with high triboelectric activity. The simplest design of the cellulose-based TENG simply requires cellulose and another material. It can be called A-B-type TENG device because it is simply made of two materials. The first work of the cellulose-based TENG was reported by Yao et al.123 in 2016. They selected a TOCN film as the positive electrode and fluorinated ethylene propylene copolymer (FEP) as the negative electrode to prepare a vertical contact-separated friction generator with different active layer areas ranging from 1 cm2 to 40 cm2. The huge polarity difference between TOCN and FEP makes it possible for them to produce a significant triboelectric output without adding additional materials for direct contact separation. At the same time, the pure TOCN active layer maintains its inherent high transparency. The external force frequency test condition was 10 Hz. They found that the increase in the active layer area will directly lead to the rise in the output performance. Finally, when the active layer area was 40 cm2, the TOCN–FEP TENG outputted 32.8 V open circuit voltage, 35 μA short circuit current, and a maximum output power density of 0.014 mW cm−2. Due to its simple structure and ease of manufacture, it can be processed into a sole that effectively collects walking energy. Ccorahua124 used a common cellulose filter film (bore diameter, 0.45 μm) used in the laboratory as the positive electrode and alkali-treated starch as the negative electrode to prepare a fully renewable vertical contact-separation TENG with low cost without the need for complex equipment. This device has an active layer area of 4 cm2. The external force test condition is 6 N. They found that the thickness of the starch film affected the output performance. When the device thickness is 30 μm, it can generate a maximal 0.3 V open circuit voltage and maintain an excellent cyclic output stability at 500 cycles. The positive and negative electrodes of this TENG device are renewable materials, but its output performance still needs to be improved. Kim et al.125 used copper sheet and regenerated bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) as the frictional active layers to prepare a vertical contact-separation TENG with an active layer area of 25 cm2. The BNC was obtained and purified by dissolving and regenerating bacterial cellulose by a nitration method proposed by Alexander and Mitchell. The contact potential difference (CPD) test between materials and a gold plate indicated that copper was more likely to lose electrons, and bacterial cellulose was used as the negative material in this device. Under an external force condition of 16.8 N and 10 Hz, this BNC-Cu TENG produced the highest open circuit voltage of 13 V and the maximum power density of 0.0048 W m−2 at a load of 1 MΩ. Satturappa126 employed several common renewable polymers including cellulose acetate (CA) assembled with PTFE into vertical contact-separation TENG devices with an active layer area of 8 cm−2. Under the external force, the test condition was 0.33 N, the CA–PTFE outputted 4.5 V open circuit voltage, and 9.1 μA short circuit current, without decay performance after 300 cycles. Parandeh127 used an ordinary cellulose paper as the positive electrode and a polycaprolactone (PCL) composite film with different amounts of graphene oxide (GO) addition as the negative electrode to prepare a vertical contact-separation TENG with an active layer area of 16 cm−2. Their main work was to prepare a series of PCL composite films with different GO additions through electrostatic spinning, and a cellulose paper was selected as the positive electrode material without any treatment or modification, which also indicated that cellulose is very suitable for the field of triboelectricity. By comparison, they found that the TENG device had the best performance when the GO content was 4 wt%. Under the external force condition of 8 N and 2 Hz, this C-PCL/GO TENG produced the highest open circuit voltage of 120 V, a short circuit current of 4 μA and the maximum power density of 72.5 mW m−2 at a load of 30 MΩ. The output performance was not attenuated after 500 cycles. Kim et al.128 used microwave welding techniques to weld single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) onto PC to make a smart, transparent and conductive electrode. This PC–SWCNT electrode was used as the negative electrode and the common cellulose paper was used as the positive electrode to form a contact-separation TENG for the energy harvesting. The external force condition was 40 N and 0.8 Hz. This device generated 45 V open circuit voltage, 0.75 μA short circuit current and the maximum power of 0.34 μW at a load of 50 MΩ. Its performance was slightly higher than that of the friction between an indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode and common cellulose. Singh et al.129 employed an animal resource of dog hair (DH) as an active electrode to assemble a TENG with a variety of other materials including paper cellulose. The active layer area was 12 cm−2. Many amino groups were determined in DH by IR analysis, which were identified as the electron-donating groups. Based on the previous discussion, cellulose also contains electron-donating groups, so that there were few polarity differences between them. As an inevitable result, the DH–Cellulose TENG only outputted 4 V open circuit voltage. On the contrary, the DH–PTFE TENG device with a large polarity difference outputted 200 V open circuit voltage, which again showed that the polarity of the triboelectric layers can seriously affect the outputted performance of the TENG. All the above works were directly using cellulose or cellulose derivatives and other component materials to prepare cellulose-based TENG devices. Their advantages are renewability, simple construction, environmentally friendly nature and low cost. However, all of them are early tentative work and their triboelectric properties remain to be improved. The simple “A-B”-type cellulose-based TENG devices mentioned before are recorded in detail in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the simple “A-B”-type cellulose-based TENG in the literature




Sample
Type
Positive electrode
Negative electrode
Contact area, cm−2
Force, N
Frequency, Hz

U
oc, V

I
sc, μA
Power density, W m−2
Lord, MΩ
Ref.




TOCN–FEP
Contact-separation
TOCN
FEP
40
—
10
32.8
35
0.14
1

123



Cellulose-starch
Contact-separation
Cellulose filter
Alkali treated starch
20
6
—
0.3
—
—
—

124



BC–Cu
Contact-separation
Cu
BC
25
16.8
1
13
—
0.048
1

125



CA–PTFE
Contact-separation
Cellulose acetate
PTFE
8
0.33
—
4.5
9.1
—
—

126



C–PCL/GO
Contact-separation
Cellulose
Polycaprolactone/4% GO
16
8
2
120
4
0.0725
30

127



C–PC/SWCNT
Contact-separation
Cellulose
Microwave-welded SWCNT on PC
—
40
0.8
45
0.75
—
50

128



C–DH
Contact-separation
Dog hair
Cellulose
12
—
—
4
—
—
—

129





3.3 Rough enhanced cellulose-based TENGs
Many works have reported that increasing the contact area of the active layer can improve the output performance of TENGs. However, conventional cellulose films are usually smooth and flat, which is not conducive to triboelectrification. Therefore, in order to increase the contact area, many methods such as etching, 3D printing, template backprinting, plasma treatment, laser treatment, electrostatic spinning, and freeze drying have been developed to increase the roughness of the triboelectric active layer interface. After increasing the interface roughness, the performance of the TENG can be significantly improved. This strategy was also applicable to the cellulose-based TENG. Šutka et al.130 proposed a very simple and rapid method for the preparation of rough ethyl cellulose (EC) films by means of wetting and precipitation. The ethyl cellulose solution was spun onto an ITO substrate and then immediately immersed into EC's anti-solvent n-hexane for treatment of 30 seconds. During this process, ethyl cellulose was precipitated and attached to the ITO surface. It can be seen from SEM observation (Fig. 6a) that EC on the ITO surface was very rough and porous. Then the rough film was assembled with PDMS into a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer of 2.25 cm−2. Under an external stress of 10 N at 1 Hz, the open circuit voltage of 45 V can be produced. When the load was 1000 MΩ, it outputted a maximal power density of 1.2 mW m−2. Furthermore, this rough EC–PDMS TENG device showed good stability after the cycle of 1000 times. Wang et al.131 reported the use of ethyl cellulose and 317SS stainless steel as active triboelectric layers to assemble a TENG with a contact area of 6 cm−2. Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching and lithography technology were used to increase the roughness of the interface between the active layer of ethyl cellulose (EC) and 317 stainless steel (317SS), respectively. For the ICP etching process, SEM analysis showed that the ethyl cellulose film without ICP was smooth and flat (Fig. 6c). With the increase in ICP power, the rough pattern on the surface of EC kept rising; the surface roughness maximized at 275 W power (Fig. 6d) and then decreased. Correspondingly, with the increase in EC roughness caused by the ICP process, the performance of TENG was continuously improved. The open circuit voltage increased from 120 V to 176 V and short circuit current increased from 16 μA to 31.5 μA. For the positive electrode, the authors used lithography technology to modify the surface of another active layer of 317SS. It can be observed that when the number of micro-pores on the surface reached 4 × 104 mm−2 (Fig. 6b), the roughness achieved the optimal value. Similarly, as a corresponding result, TENGs with two rough-enhanced active layers exhibited superior output performance, with an open circuit voltage raised from 188 V to 245 V and a short-circuit current raised from 35 μA to 50 μA (Fig. 8a). It is worth reminding that transient ICP and photolithography will reduce the roughness of the layers resulting in performance degradation. However, EC and 317ss are both biocompatible materials. After soaking them in biological fluids for 30 days, the EC-317SS TENG device output performance was found to be maintained at 61% of the original one, which provided a possibility for the application of TENGs in living organisms.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of roughened ethyl cellulose (a), reprinted with permission from ref. 130 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. Light etched 317 stainless steel (b), flat (c) and ICP-roughened (d) ethyl cellulose, reprinted with permission from ref. 131 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zheng et al.132 reported a series of contact-separation TENGs composed of porous natural polymers and porous PDMS, with an active layer area of 2 cm−2. The negative electrode was a porous PDMS film synthesized by evaporation-induced phase separation, with a BET specific surface area of 8.8 m2 g−1 and a porosity of 32%. The positive electrode was the CNF aerogel prepared by freeze-drying with ice-acetone with a BET specific surface area of 68 m2 g−1 and a porosity of 84%. Then, it was further pressed at 1 MPa to prepare the CNF porous film for the triboelectric positive electrode. In addition, the flat CNF film was prepared by a conventional film casting method in a ventilated and dry environment. As a contrast, under an external force condition of 6 N and 10 Hz, the perfectly flat CNF–PDMS TENG outputted 7.6 V open circuit voltage, 0.8 μA short circuit current and 0.03 W m−2 power density. Under the same conditions, 22.3 V open circuit voltage, 2.2 μA short circuit current, and 0.25 W m−2 output power density were obtained after using the porous active layers instead of the flat layers. Obviously, the porosity of the active layers can significantly improve the performance of TENGs (Fig. 8b), especially the improvement of an output power density of more than 8.3 times, which was attributed to the increase in the interface contact area and electrostatic response in the holes after porosity. Meanwhile, the porous CNF aerogel electrode had a very good recoverability, which makes the pCNF–pPDMS TENG device kept in 10000 cycles for two months, and the output performance was still basically unchanged. Graham133 extracted microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) from waste cotton by alkali hydrolysis methods, which could transform the macroscopic cotton cellulose fiber (length > 100 μm) into the MCC with a microrod-like morphology (length 5–20 μm). The MCC particles were further dissolved in a PVA solution. Then, the mixed solution was coated onto a silicon template substrate with a pyramidal microstructure to form a film (Fig. 7c). The MCC/PVA film prepared by this reverse printing method had an inverted pyramid structure on its surface (Fig. 7a, b and d). Finally, the composite film and polyimide (PI) were prepared into a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 4 cm−2. The external force condition is 4–5 N at 5 Hz. After the reverse printing, the surface of composite film became rougher, resulting in a larger contact with active area. Two TENGs were made using smooth and reverse-printed MCC/PVA films. As an inevitable result, the open-circuit voltage was increased from 400 V to 600 V, and the short-circuit current was increased from 25 μA to 40 μA. When the load was 200 MΩ, the maximum output power density of reverse printed MCC/PVA–PI TENG reached an astonishing value of 84 W m−2, which was increased by 1.4 times than that of the flat MCC/PVA–PI TENG (Fig. 8c). In addition, this TENG also had good cyclic stability, and its output performance was basically not attenuated after 9000 cycles of repeated compression. Mule et al.134in situ polymerized polypyrrole on the surface of common cotton fiber to prepare a CF/PPy film as the positive electrode. The roughened PDMS that had been reverse-printed using a sandpaper was used as the negative electrode to form a single-electrode TENG device with an effective area of 6 cm−2. The external force condition is 1 N at 5 Hz. The flat PDMS–CF/PPy TENG outputted 34 V open circuit voltage and 1 μA short circuit current. After sandpaper reverse-printing, the interface of PDMS was obviously roughened, which increased the area of interaction with CF/PPy. Under the same conditions, the rough PDMS–CF/PPy TENG outputted 60 V open circuit voltage and 2.3 μA short circuit current. The maximum open circuit voltage of 200 V, the maximum short circuit current of 6 μA and the maximum output power density of 82 μW cm−2 at 70 MΩ load can be obtained by increasing the external applied force to 10 N at 5 Hz. Because it is a flexible single-electrode TENG device, it can effectively collect a variety of mechanical form (such as folding, bending, rolling and twisting) into electricity. Moreover, there was no degradation after 1000 cycles.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of flat (a) and microarchitectured (b) CMC/PVA films, schematic diagram of reverse-printing method (c), and SEM Image of microarchitectured surface morphology of MACPF (d), reprinted with permission from ref. 133 Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
 Fig. 8  Schematic of performance improvements for the rough enhanced EC-317SS TENG (a), CNF aerogel-pPDMS TENG (b), CMC/PVA–PI TENG (c), and 3D-printed TOCN–PDMS TENG (d) mentioned above. 
In addition to the common surface roughening methods, 3D printing technology is a rapidly developing technology in recent years. It can also be used to directly design and prepare specific morphologies of triboelectric active interfaces to increase the contact area. Qian et al.135 used 3D printing technology to print TOCN and PDMS on a PET substrate with conductive electrodes, respectively. The CNF ink for 3D printing, 10 wt% cellulose powder, was homogeneously added to the prepared 1.25 wt% TOCN with uniform dispersion. The printed pattern was parallel line type with a diameter of 1 mm. After 3D printing, the parallel line TOCN electrode was further subjected to freeze-drying for hole roughness, and then assembled into a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 9 cm−2. The external force condition was 4 N at 4 Hz. First of all, compared with the traditional film-forming method, the 3D printing technology can produce a rougher contact interface. The contact area of 3D method was 1.75 times larger than that of the traditional method with the same dosage. The open circuit voltage and the short-circuit current of the 3D printed TENG device were 1.83 times and 1.63 times higher than that of the traditional one. Furthermore, the influence of the included angle between the positive and negative parallel lines on the TENG output performance was studied. The working mode of the included angle between the parallel lines of 0°, 45°, and 90° was adopted respectively. Because of the different amounts of the contact points, namely, the contact area, the theoretical calculation shows that the contact area ratio of the three cases is 1:0.707:0.5. The corresponding three TENG devices were tested under the same conditions. Their open circuit voltages were 55.8 V, 47.6 V, and 27.7 V, and short circuit currents were 0.94 μA, 0.66 μA, and 0.55 μA, respectively (Fig. 8d). In addition, the output power density reached a maximum of 0.029 W m−2 with a load of 10 MΩ and an angle of 0°. Obviously, the difference in the angle led to a difference in the contact area and then a difference in the output performance of the TENG, which further indicated that the effective area of the contact interface of the TENG directly affects the output performance. In terms of stability, it has been tested for a week without performance degradation. In addition, the rise of humidity will cause a triboelectricity decline. The regularity brought by 3D printing makes the TENG capable of performing sensitive linear detection of humidity. The author used this TENG to detect 30–90% humidity, and its output voltage was reduced from 50 V to 5 V linearly. When the humidity was restored to a lower value, the output voltage was restored to 50 V again, which indicated that such a TENG device could be used as a high-sensitivity humidity sensor. Using surface roughness to increase the cellulose-based TENG output performance was also applicable to other natural polymer films. Yu et al.136 encapsulated lignin biomass and PDMS into PA and PE tubes respectively, and also used 3D printing technology to print them into triboelectric active layers with a rough surface and porous structure. Benefitting from the convenience of 3D printing technology, the active layer area can easily reach 16 cm−2 and assemble into vertical contact-separation TENG device. Under the external force condition of 10 N and 30 Hz, it outputted 308 V open circuit voltage, 61.6 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 5.93 W m−2 under 1 MΩ load and it can maintain steady output after 20000 cycles. The excellent output performance also benefited from the large rough contact area of the interface and the porous electrostatic response of the surface prepared by 3D printing technology. Uddin137 reported a TENG device with a double-plate and mid-wave sandwich structure. The plates at both ends were cellulose microcrystals (CMC) as the positive electrodes, the wavy negatively active layer in the middle was polyimide (PI), and the structure skeleton was PET with excited structural retention. This design eliminated the need for complex separate structure, and only changed the contact area between the wave-layer and the plate-layers by applying pressure to induce electron transfer. The device was 4 cm long and 2.5 cm wide. When the external force condition was 3 N at 5 Hz, the maximum output voltage could reach 142 V, the short-circuit current was 9.3 μA, and the output had no attenuation after 3000 cycles, which showed the stability and reliability of the structure. The authors further coated the PI wave-layer with a 10–15 nm–thick palladium (Pd) layer. The hydrogen and palladium layers can form various physical and chemical interactions such as Pd–H bonds. They can increase the free electrons on the surface and shield the triboelectric effects, which enabled this TENG to be further made into a self-powered hydrogen sensor. The voltage output of this TENG sensor will decrease with the increase in hydrogen concentration, and it can effectively detect 0.0001–1 vol% and show a very high detection accuracy and detection range, which further extends the application field of the cellulose-based TENGs. The rough enhanced cellulose-based TENG devices mentioned before are recorded in detail in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of the rough enhanced cellulose-based TENG in the literature




Sample
Type
Positive electrode
Negative electrode
Contact area, cm−2
Force, N
Frequency, Hz

U
oc, V

I
sc, μA
Power density, W m−2
Lord, MΩ
Ref.




EC–PDMS
Contact-separation
Rough ethyl cellulose
PDMS
2.25
10
1
45
—
0.0012
1000

130



EC–317SS
Contact-separation
ICP-etched EC
Porous 317 stainless steel
6
—
—
245
50
—
—

131



CNF–PDMS
Contact-separation
CNF aerogel
Porous PDMS
2
6
10
22.3
2.2
0.25
—

132



MCC/PVA–PI
Contact-separation
Reverse printed MCC/PVA
PI
4
4–5
5
600
40
84
200

133



CF/Ppy–PDMS
Single electrode
Cotton fiber and polypyrrole
Reverse printed PDMS
6
10
5
200
6
0.85
70

134



TOCN–PDMS
Contact-separation
3D printed TOCN
3D printed PDMS
9
4
4
55.8
0.94
0.029
10

135



Lignin–PDMS
Contact-separation
3D printed lignin
3D printed PDMS
16
10
30
308
61.6
5.93
1

136



CMC–PI
Sandwich structure
CMC
Wave-like PI
—
3
5
142
9.3
—
—

137





3.4 Electron transfer filler-enhanced cellulose-based TENGs
In order to further enhance cellulose-based TENG performance, various kinds of additives were added to the cellulose film to improve electron transfer and electron supply abilities of the active layer. The electron transport capacity can be improved by adding conductive materials such as Ag nanowires (AgNWs) and conductive polymers (e.g. polyaniline and polypyrrole). Yang et al.138 used 3.7 wt% aluminium-doped zinc oxide (AZO) as a transparent conductive oxide additive, and used low-temperature atomic deposition technology to load a CNF film (thickness of 50 μm) with an AZO thickness of 285 nm. The as-prepared AZO/CNF electrode showed low sheet resistivity Rs (135–180 Ω sq−1) and excellent transparency (>84%), which was close to that of the commercial ITO electrode and graphene PET electrode. Because the supporting material of the AZO/CNF electrode was cellulose, it has the advantages of biodegradation and low cost and can be completely dispersed in warm water after stirring for 60 min. Furthermore, the authors used the AZO/CNF film as the positive electrode and the CNF/titanium tetrachloride composite film as the negative electrode to prepare a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 12 cm−2. AZO/CNF can lose electrons and directly export them during frictional contact, which does not require additional conductive layers compared with other TENGs (Fig. 9a). With the addition of electricity-absorbing halogens in titanium tetrachloride, the CNF/TCl4 film tended to absorb electrons as the negative electrode. Under the external force condition of 17 N at 10 Hz, it outputted 7 V open circuit voltage, 0.7 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 0.42 W m−2 under 1 MΩ load. There was no attenuation after cycling for 90 minutes and it exhibited a good stability (Fig. 9b). He et al.139 added Ag nanowire (AgNW) additives to the 1D CNF and 2D CMF flexible hierarchical nanostructure and used them as positive electrodes. CNFs were constructed on the side of the 2D CMF skeleton to form a nanopore-on-micropore structure, which facilitated the removal of particulate matters. A fluorinated ethylene propylene copolymer (FEP) film was used as the negative electrode to construct a contact-separation TENG (Fig. 9c). Under an external force condition of 3 mm displacement and 5 Hz, it outputted 21.9 V open circuit voltage, 0.73 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 7.68 μW cm−2 under 20 MΩ load. Among them, AgNWs transferred out the electrons generated by contact in CNF, and provided excellent antibacterial performance. After 1 h of incubation, the AgNWs/CMF/CNF composite film can effectively kill Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus with high killing efficiencies of 6 × 107, 6 × 107 and 2.4 × 107 CFU cm−2, respectively. It is precisely because of the porous nature of the cellulose film that AgNWs/CMF/CNF–FEP TENG had good air permeability, and it can produce electricity by friction during inhalation and exhalation, the presence of electric charge greatly enhanced the adsorption of particulate matter, so that this TENG device can be used as a mask active layer for the efficient removal of PM2.5. In 60 s, PM2.5 856 could be reduced to PM2.5 10 with a removal efficiency as high as 98.83%, while the removal efficiency of the ordinary cotton fiber as a comparison was only 66.01% under the same conditions (Fig. 9d). In addition, the output voltage of TENG corresponded to the frequency and intensity of breathing, so that it can also be used as a self-powered sensor for breath detection. TENGs prepared by adding AgNW electronic additives showed a series of multifunctional activities, such as anti-bacterial and anti-PM2.5 respiratory detection, and brought infinite possibilities.
 Fig. 9  Schematic (a) and stability test (b) of the AZO/CNF TENG, reprinted with permission from ref. 138 Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. Schematic (c) and comparative PM2.5 removal effect (d) of the AgNWs/CMF/CNF–FEP TENG, reprinted with permission from ref. 139 Copyright 2018 Wiley Periodicals. 
Cui et al.140 prepared a new electrode film by compounding a 2D phosphorene sheets (P) with TOCN. The TOCN/P composite film was obtained by a vacuum-assisted filtration process. The phosphorene sheets had a very high carrier mobility (286 cm2 V−1 s−1), which can improve the electron transfer capacity of the TOCN/P composite film. This film and the gold-sprayed PET (Au/PET) were assembled into a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 1 cm−2. Under the external force condition of 70 N at 5 Hz, the pure TOCN TENG without phosphorenes outputted just an open-circuit voltage of about 1 V, a short-circuit current of 0.2 μA and a maximum power density of 0.2 μW cm−2. In contrast, the TOCN/P–Au/PET generated 2 V open circuit voltage, 0.3 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 0.6 μW cm−2 under 1 MΩ load, which showed that the addition of phosphorene greatly improved the output performance of the TENG (Fig. 10a). When further elevating the active layer to four layers, it generated 5.2 V open circuit voltage, 1.8 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 9.36 μW cm−2 under 1 MΩ load under the same conditions. Meanwhile, the TOCN substrate can effectively protect the phosphorene sheet from oxidation. Even though kept in a 70% humidity environment for more than 6 months, the output attenuation of the P–TOCN TENG device was only 20%, which indicated that TOCN can act synergistically with phosphoalene. Mi et al.141 used three kinds of natural materials: human hair (HH), rabbit hair (RH) and silica fiber (SF) as electron-donating fillers and added into CNF at a concentration of 1 wt% to improve electron transfer. These cellulose-based composite film and porous polyimide (PI) film were used as the positive and negative electrodes to prepare a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 2 cm−2. The external force condition was 6 N at 10 Hz. The blank CNF–PI TENG device generated 44 V open circuit voltage, 4 μA short circuit current and a maximum output power density of 0.5 W m−2. These three fillers all contained a large number of electron-donating groups such as hydroxyl groups and amino groups, which can effectively improve the output performance of the TENG device. Among them, rabbit hair had the most obvious effect at the same amount (1 wt%) of addition. Under the same external force condition, the RH/CNF–PI TENG outputted 110 V open circuit voltage, 11.3 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 3.4 W m−2 under 4.7 MΩ load, which was significantly higher than that of the other two devices (0.6 W m−2 for the HH/CNF–PI TENG device and 1.3 W m−2 for the SR/CNF–PI TENG device) (Fig. 10b). Owing to its excellent generation performance, this TENG can also be used in wearable electronic devices, self-powered sensors and other fields. Moreover, after 18000 cycles, it showed excellent stability without attenuation.
 Fig. 10  Schematic of the performance improvements for the electron transfer filler-enhanced TOCN/P–Au/PET TENG (a), TOCN/SF, HH, RH–PI TENG (b), PDMS/CNC–Al TENG (c), and PDMS/CMC–Al TENG (d) mentioned above. 
In a word, it is an effective and low-cost strategy to improve the output performance of the cellulose-based TENGs by adding a conductive material and an electronic material into the cellulose substrate. Similarly, cellulose can also be used as an additive to enhance electron transfer. A small amount of cellulose filling into other material substrates can provide a tendency to lose electrons, increase contact area and improve TENG performance. Peng et al.142 added cellulose nanocrystalline (CNC) at a ratio of 2.5 wt% into PDMS and prepared the CNC/PDMS composite film by spin coating. They constructed a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 2.25 cm−2 using Al as the positive electrode and a CNC/PDMS film as the negative electrode. Under an external force condition of 40 N at 10 Hz, the CNC/PDMS–Al TENG outputted 320 V open circuit voltage and 11.25 μA short-circuit current, which increased 2 times and 4 times respectively than that of the blank PDMS–Al TENG without any addition of CNC. In addition, the maximum output power of 0.042 W m−2 was obtained under 1 MΩ load. Obviously, the addition of cellulose significantly improved the TENG output performance (Fig. 10c). The authors believed that the addition of positively charged cellulose to PDMS can generate additional electric fields to induce more electron transfer from the Al interface to PDMS, thereby improved the interface charge density to achieve the increase in TENG performance. As a similar work, Chandrasekhar et al.143 reported that microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) was also used as an additive and added to the PDMS at a concentration of 5 wt% to form MCC/PDMS composite films by a gel-casting technique. They employed this film and Al to prepare the MCC/PDMS–Al TENG device with an active layer area of 9 cm−2. The external force condition was 32 N and 1 Hz. As a comparison, pure PDMS–Al TENG without addition of cellulose generated 9 V open circuit voltage and 0.8 μA short circuit current, which can reach 28 V and 2.8 μA after adding 5 wt% MCC to the PDMS electrode (Fig. 10d). The reason for the performance improvement was the same as that discussed previously. In addition, the author further placed TENG on the sole for walking energy harvesting. The electron transfer filler-enhanced cellulose-based TENG devices mentioned before are recorded in detail in Table 4.
Table 4 Summary of the electron transfer filler–enhanced cellulose-based TENG in the literature




Sample
Type
Positive electrode
Negative electrode
Contact area, cm−2
Force, N
Frequency, Hz

U
oc, V

I
sc, μA
Power density, W m−2
Lord, MΩ
Ref.




AZO/CNC–TiCl4/CNC
Contact-separation
Aluminum doped zinc Oxide/CNF
Titanium Tetrachloride/CNC
12
17
10
7
0.7
0.42
1

138



CNC/CMC/Ag–FEP
Contact-separation
CNC/CMC/AgNWs
FEP
—
—
5
21.9
0.73
0.0768
20

139



TOCN/P–PET/Au
Contact-separation
TOCN/phosphorenes sheets
Au-sprayed PET
1
70
5
5.2
1.8
0.0936
1

140



CNF/RH–PI
Contact-separation
CNF/1% Habbit hair
PI
2
6
10
110
11.3
3.4
4.7

141



CNF/HH–PI
Contact-separation
CNF/1% human hair
PI
2
6
10
70.8
8.4
1.3
—

141



CNF/SF–PI
Contact-separation
CNF/1% silica fiber
PI
2
6
10
52.8
6.3
0.6
—

141



PDMS/CNC–Al
Contact-separation
Al
PDMS/2.5 wt% CNC
2.25
40
10
320
11.25
0.042
1

142



PDMS/CMC–Al
Contact-separation
Al
PDMS/5 wt% CMC
9
32
1
28
2.8
0.64
100

143





3.5 Dielectric and ferroelectric filler–enhanced cellulose-based TENGs
Among these fillers, dielectric and ferroelectric materials can also be added to cellulose to improve the output performance of the TENG through their unique properties. The addition of dielectric ceramics can effectively improve the electron capture capacity of the composite film.144,145 The polarized electric field of ferroelectric ceramics can induce charge transfer. These materials are also commonly referred to as electronic functional fillers and barium titanate (BT) is the most typical example that attracted much attention. Shi et al.146 mixed barium titanate (BT) nanoparticles with a grain diameter of 200 nm into the regenerated cellulose (RC) solution, used epichlorohydrin (ECH) as a cross-linking agent to cross-link the gel, and further prepared the porous RC/BT film by freeze-drying and pressing processes. The hydrogen bonding interaction between cellulose and barium titanate makes it difficult for BT nanoparticles to be aggregated. When the addition amount of BT was 300 wt%, the dielectric constant of the C/BT composite film under the 1 kHz increased from 3.06 to 5.7 and the dielectric loss was less than 0.06. The C/BT composite film was used as the triboelectric positive electrode. Common PDMS was used as the negative electrode. The author added 1% silver nanoparticles to PDMS to improve its dielectric performance. At 1 kHz, the dielectric constant of PDMS/Ag increased from 2.45 to 2.95, and the dielectric loss was less than 0.0004. These two dielectric films were further assembled into a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 4 cm−2, and this TENG device can be regarded as three parallel capacitors. The author carried on the equivalent numerical simulation and believed that the addition of dielectric filler can induce more charge transfer and increase the charge density on the electrode surface (Fig. 11a). The dielectric constant, surface charge and induced charge can significantly affect the performance output of TENGs. As a verification comparison, other TENG devices without any dielectric filler were prepared and tested under the same external force condition of 12 N and 2 Hz. The completely blank RC–PDMS TENG device outputted 30 V open circuit voltage and 3 μA short-circuit current. When the positive electrode was converted into a RC/BT film, the RC/BT–PDMS TENG device outputted 50 V open circuit voltage and 5.1 μA short-circuit current and showed an obvious and corresponding improvement. After PDMS/Ag was replaced by PDMS as the negative electrode, the complete dielectric enhanced RC/BT–PDMS/Ag TENG device outputted 65 V open circuit voltage and 8.3 μA short-circuit current. The author further raised the external force frequency from 2 Hz to 3 Hz, the open circuit voltage and short circuit current were increased to 88 V and 0.83 μA, and a maximum output power of 35.25 μW cm−2 was obtained under 15 MΩ load (Fig. 12a). Moreover, there is no attenuation after 5000 cycles. Shao et al.147 selected barium titanate particles with a large grain diameter of 2–3 μm as high-dielectric fillers, mixed them with bacterial cellulose (BC) in water by ultra-sonication, and prepared BC/BT composite films by a simple vacuum filtration process. Due to the large grain diameter of barium titanate, cellulose fibers that are deposited irregularly around large particles formed a rough interface under vacuum in a negative pressure flow direction (Fig. 11b). The SEM and AFM results showed that the surface roughness of BC/BT films prepared by this method was more than 4 times than that of conventional films, which was consistent with the previously discussed TENG performance enhancement by increment of contact area. After the comparison experiment, the authors believed that the optimal addition amount of barium titanate was 13.5 wt%, the dielectric constant of the composite film increased from 4.5 to 5.7 at 1 kHz, and the dielectric loss was less than 0.3. Then, this BC/BT film and a blank pure BC film were employed as positive electrodes and the PDMS as the negative electrode to prepare two contact-separation TENG devices. The external force condition was 42 N and 2 Hz. The blank BC–PDMS TENG device outputted 120 V open circuit voltage and 9.7 μA short-circuit current, and the dielectric enhanced BC/BT–PDMS TENG device outputted 181 V open circuit voltage, 21 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 4.8 W m−2 under 80 MΩ load (Fig. 12b) and did not exhibit any attenuation after 3000 cycles. Excellent performance of this device also indicated that adding dielectric materials is an effective strategy to improve the performance of TENGs.
 Fig. 11  Schematic and an equivalent circuit model of RC/BT–PDMS/Ag TENG (a), reprinted with permission from ref. 146 Copyright 2019 Elsevier; the fabrication diagram of the BC/BT composite film by a filtration process (b), reprinted with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2019 Elsevier; the mechanism, KPFM images and measured surface potentials of BC/BT paper obtained under different poling conditions (c), reprinted with permission from ref. 148 Copyright 2019 Wiley Periodicals. 
 Fig. 12  Schematic of the performance improvements for the dielectric and ferroelectric filler-enhanced cellulose-based RC/BT–PDMS/Ag TENG (a), BC/BT–PDMS TENG (b), and BC/BT/Ag–PTFE TENG (c) mentioned above. 
Oh et al.148 prepared the high conductivity ferroelectric composite BC/BT/Ag film by adding 3.3 wt% barium titanate (BT) particles with a large grain diameter of 2–3 μm and 2.5 wt% AgNPs to the bacterial cellulose (BC). After the polarization for 2 h with 7.5 kV, the internal electric field in the dipole of the BT was aligned. When the internal electric field of BT was in the same direction as the electric field between the triboelectric layers, it can enhance electron transfer. In addition, when they were in the opposite direction, the electron transfer will be suppressed. This can be verified by scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM). The surface potentials of the isodirectional polarized film, unpolarized film and reverse polarized film were measured to be 230 mV, 170 mV and 160 mV, respectively (Fig. 11c). Furthermore, the addition of AgNWs promoted the conductivity of the BC/BT/Ag composite film to 1.3 Ω sq−1, which can facilitate electron transfer. Then, a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 4 cm−2 was prepared using the BC/BT/Ag composite film as the positive electrode and PTFE as the negative electrode. The external compressive force condition was 49 N. As a contrast, the unpolarized BC/BT/Ag–PTFE TENG device outputted 44 V open circuit voltage and 1.6 μA short-circuit current, and the isodirectional polarized BC/BT/Ag–PTFE TENG device outputted 170 V open circuit voltage, 9.8 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 1.8 W m−2 under 50 MΩ load (Fig. 12c) and did not exhibit any attenuation after 10000 cycles. It distinctly exhibited that the isodirectional polarization and the forward arrangement of the dipoles greatly promoted the charge transfer and improved the TENG performance. The dielectric and ferroelectric filler-enhanced cellulose-based TENG devices mentioned before are recorded in detail in Table 5.
Table 5 Summary of the dielectric and ferroelectric filler-enhanced cellulose-based TENGs in the literature




Sample
Type
Positive electrode
Negative electrode
Contact area, cm−2
Force, N
Frequency, Hz

U
oc, V

I
sc, μA
Power density, W m−2
Lord, MΩ
Ref.




RC/BT–PDMS
Contact-separation
RC/300% BaTiO3
PDMS/1% AgNPs
4
12
3
88
8.3
0.352
15

146



BC/BT–PDMS
Contact-separation
BC/13.5% BaTiO3
PDMS
—
42
2
181
21
4.8
80

147



BC/BT/Ag–PTFE
Contact-separation
Polarized BC/BaTiO3/AgNPs
PTFE
4
49
—
170
9.8
1.8
50

148





3.6 Chemically modified cellulose-based TENGs
Adding enhanced electron transfer fillers to cellulose by physical mixing can effectively increase the TENG output performance, but there is still an inevitable problem of component compatibility. Therefore, the direct chemical modification of cellulose for performance improvement strategy emerged. There are large numbers of hydroxyl groups on the surface of cellulose and carboxyl groups on the surface of TOCN, which provide the necessary foundation for the chemical modification of cellulose. In recent years, many researchers have used chemical methods to modify various groups that promote electron transfer to cellulose, which can improve the surface polarity, electron donating capacity, and surface roughness, or change the electronic orientation of cellulose to improve the triboelectric properties. Roy et al.149 modified TOCN with 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxylsilane (MPTMS) to prepare TOCN–SH containing sulfhydryl groups, and further treated it with allicin (Alc). The terminal alkene groups of allicin can react with SH groups of TOCN completely and gently through a thiol–ene click reaction at 80 °C to prepare an allicin-modified TOCN (Alc/TOCN) film with a rougher surface (Fig. 13a). The SO bond in allicin can greatly improve the electron donating capacity of the Alc/TOCN film. The author used this modified film as the positive electrode and PVDF as the negative electrode to prepare a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 4 cm−2. The external force condition was 12 N and 20 Hz. As a comparison, the unmodified TOCN–PVDF TENG outputted 1.23 V open circuit voltage, 0.8 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 0.25 μW cm−2. When the modified Alc/TOCN film was used to replace the pure cellulose film as the positive active layer, the corresponding Alc/TOCN–PVDF TENG generated 7.9 V open circuit voltage, 5.13 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 10.12 μW cm−2. In particular, the core parameter output power density increased by nearly 41 times (Fig. 15a). The polar oxygen atom of allicin can significantly improve the surface polarity and electron donor capacity of cellulose, and the surface roughness, which were the reasons for the improvement of TENG performance. At the same time, the reaction between the two-functionality degree of allicin and the multi-functionality degree of TOCN–SH resulted in a completely cross-linked Alc/TOCN film. The deep cross-linking gave this composite film excellent mechanical strength and weather resistance, and improved the water resistance. The authors studied the effect of relative humidity (R.H.) from 25% to 60% on TENG output performance. The output of blank TOCN–PVDF TENG was attenuated by 33%, while the attenuation value of Alc/TOCN–PVDF TENG was only 3–4%, indicating that the modification process can improve water resistance. Meanwhile, this TENG device can be kept for 6 months after 7000 cycles without damage, and its output performance without attenuation and excellent stability were brought about by chemical bonding.
 Fig. 13  Schematic of allicin grafting the CNF (a), reprinted with permission from ref. 149 Copyright 2020 Elsevier; the gear-like structural PEI-modified CNF TENG (b); reprinted with permission from ref. 150 Copyright 2019 Elsevier; the reaction mechanism between TOCN and PEI (c) and the continuous output performance of the TOCN/10% PEI–PVDF TENG (d), reprinted with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Zhang150 used CNF and polyethylenimine (PEI) as raw materials and glutaraldehyde as a crosslinking agent, CNF and PEI were crosslinked together to form a CNF/PEI film by the Schiff base reaction and acetal reaction. During this process, a large number of polar amino groups were successfully modified into CNF. Meanwhile, the cellulose surface became roughened by random reactions. Furthermore, a layer of silver nanoparticles was loaded onto the surface to prepare the CNF/PEI/Ag film as the positive electrode, and FEP was used as the negative electrode. Finally, the sawtooth-type (Fig. 13b) contact-separation TENG with an active area of 6 cm−2 was obtained. The external force condition was 10 N at 2 Hz. The CNF–FEP TENG device without any modification outputted 68 V open circuit voltage and 0.6 μA short-circuit current. However, the modified CNF/PEI/Ag–FEP TENG device outputted 100 V open circuit voltage and 1.1 μA short-circuit current, which benefited to the improvement of the polarity, electron donating capacity and roughness caused by multi-amino modification and AgNP deposition. The sawtooth-type contact structure used in the work can effectively increase the contact area under the fixed volume. An 18 cm−2 TENG with a triple-active layer area was obtained by changing the number of sawtooth, which outputted 286 V open circuit voltage, 4 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 0.43 W m−2 under 507 MΩ load. It also maintained good stability, circulated 10000 times without attenuation, and showed excellent comprehensive performance for energy harvesting. Mi et al.151 used TOCN as the raw material, and TOCN molecules contained carboxyl groups, which could undergo a one-step amidation reaction with amino groups of polyethylenimine (PEI) under the EDC–NHS catalysis system to directly complete amino modification of cellulose in water (Fig. 13c). They further prepared a high BET-specific-surface-area (44.3 m2 g−1) TOCN/PEI aerogel composite film by freeze-drying for use as the positive electrode. The ultra-high specific surface area was beneficial to increase the contact area, and PVDF was employed as the negative electrode to prepare a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 2 cm−2. The external force condition was 6 N at 10 Hz. As a contrast, the blank and unmodified TOCN–PVDF TENG device generated 5.8 V open circuit voltage, 1.7 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 0.05 W m−2. After modification, similarly, a large number of amino groups enhanced the electron donating capacity and increased the outputted performance of TENGs. The optimal addition amount for PEI was 10 wt%. The TOCN/10% PEI–PVDF TENG device generated 26 V open circuit voltage, 2.6 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 0.34 W m−2 (Fig. 15b). The author further increased the number of active contact layers to four layers by simple series stacking with the same cross-sectional area of 2 cm−2. The final 4-layer TENG generated 106 V open circuit voltage, 9.2 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 13.3 W m−2 under 1 MΩ load. Moreover, there was no attenuation after 10000 cycles and storage for 3 months (Fig. 13d), showing very excellent performance, which also indicated that the grafting of strong electron-donating groups via chemical modification was a very effective method to improve the performance of cellulose-based TENGs.
Cellulose is known to have a strong tendency to lose electrons that can be used as the positive electrode material in most TENG devices. In addition, it is rarely used as a negative electrode material. Nitrocellulose is prepared by nitrification of cellulose with nitric acid, which is widely used in the energetic material fabrication, film manufacturing, plastic industry and other fields. The nitro group is a particularly strong electricity-withdrawing group, and the presence of abundant nitro groups converts nitrocellulose into a renewable, inexpensive and promising triboelectric negative electrode material to replace commonly used PDMS, PVDF, PTFE, etc. For the first time, Yao et al.152 systematically studied the tribopolarities between pure CNF, methyl modified cellulose (MethylC) and nitro cellulose (NitroC), and made a corresponding comparison with the common negative material fluorinated ethylene propylene copolymer (FEP). Both methyl cellulose and nitrocellulose can be obtained via chemical modification of cellulose. The reaction conditions are described in the literature. First, the author quantitatively tested the contact–separate cycle of Ga–In eutectic liquid metal with CNF, methyl-C, nitro-C and FEP. The surface charge density was measured and calculated to be −13.3, −62.5, 85.8, and 120.9 μC m−2, respectively. Furthermore, the average surface potential of these four materials was measured by noncontact scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) to be 0.3 V for CNF, 1.1 V for methyl-C, −1.3 V for nitro-C and −2.2 V for FEP (Fig. 14a). The data of two groups fully showed that the unmodified CNF showed a tendency to lose electrons. After methylation, the addition of methyl, methoxyl and other electron-donating groups will greatly improve the electron donating capacity of methyl-C, so that it gains a greater tendency to lose electrons than pure CNF. After nitrification, the abundant nitro groups made NitroC with a strong tendency to gain electrons close to that of FEP, and they can be used as a triboelectric electrode material to replace other nonrenewable materials. After completing the accurate electrical performance analysis of the four materials, the author further combined the four materials with Cu or in pairs to produce the TENG devices (Fig. 14b). Obviously, the greater the polarity difference of the triboelectric active layers, the higher the output performance. MethylC and NitroC can be used as a positive electrode and a negative electrode in one TENG device. The external force condition was 17 N at 20 Hz. It was worth noting that the MethylC–NitroC TENG device with an area of 1 cm−2 generated 8 V open circuit voltage and 9 μA short circuit current, which was similar to the output performance of MethylC–FEP TENG device under the same conditions (Fig. 14c). It showed excellent stability without attenuation after 50000 cycles. Nitrification of cellulose provided a new option of renewability, low cost and high performance for triboelectric negative electrodes, which will be of great importance.
 Fig. 14  SKPM surface potential mapping of pristine CNF, nitro-CNF and methyl-CNF (a), the open circuit voltage of TENG made from Cu electrode and various chemically modified cellulose film (b), and the open circuit voltage of TENG made from two various chemically modified cellulose film (c), reprinted with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2017 Wiley Periodicals. 
 Fig. 15  Main chemical modification routes and methods of cellulose (a), reprinted with permission from ref. 155 Copyright 2020 Wiley Periodicals; schematic of the performance improvements of the chemically modified cellulose-based Alc/TOCN–PVDF TENG (b) and TOCN/PEI–PVDF TENG (c) mentioned above. 
Shi et al.153 used nitrocellulose (NitroC) as the negative electrode and in situ polymerized polypyrrole-coated cellulose paper (PPy/C) as the positive electrode to prepare a contact-separation TENG device with an active layer area of 2 cm−2. The negative nitrocellulose has a rough surface structure and strong electron withdrawing capacity. Polypyrrole can effectively enhance the positive composite film conductivity (7.8 Ω sq−1), and promote electron transfer performance. Under an external force condition of 6 N at 10 Hz, it outputted 60 V open circuit voltage, 8.8 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 0.83 W m−2 under 5 MΩ load. In addition, there was no attenuation after 10000 cycles. The main materials of the positive and negative electrodes were cellulose or modified cellulose material, which endowed this TENG device with full renewability and excellent performance for energy harvesting. Chen et al.154 also chose nitrocellulose as the negative material with strong polarity and roughness, and commercial corrugated cellulose paper was used as the positive material, which can be produced cheaply and efficiently in large quantities by simply controlling the rolling speed. The TENG device made by them had the advantages of large contact area and large polarity difference. When the active layer area was 6.25 cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 144 V and a short-circuit current of 19.4 μA can be generated under the external force condition of 6 N at 10 Hz. In addition, it can be prepared into a multi-layer series superposition structure, when the triboelectric layer was increased to three layers, the triple-layer TENG device outputted 196 V open circuit voltage, 31.5 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 16.1 W m−2 under 1 MΩ load. Moreover, there is no attenuation after 10000 cycles. This is the best performance currently demonstrated for cellulose-based TENGs, which shows super simple processing and low cost. It can be used as a benchmark for future research. Nitrification of modified cellulose has made remarkable progress and makes the cellulose-based material promising to be successfully applied as the negative electrode for TENGs. However, it is worth noting that nitrocellulose still has a huge hidden danger that cannot be ignored. Nitrocellulose is a kind of smokeless powder, which very easily burns and even explodes after being heated. Therefore, fire and explosion safety should be fully paid attention to when using nitrocellulose.
According to the existing literature reports, we can draw the conclusion that chemical modification of cellulose by accessing polar groups (such as amino, methoxy and other groups with a strong electron donating capacity) can significantly change the polarity difference between cellulose and other electrode materials, and then improve the triboelectric output performance. Meanwhile, the modification of strong electron-withdrawing groups (e.g., nitro groups) on the cellulose surface makes it possible for nitrocellulose to be used as a negative electrode material in TENG devices. Up to now, there have been few reports on the chemical modification of cellulose to enhance triboelectricity, but there have been a lot of reports on the chemical modification of cellulose for other applications. Recently, Yang et al.155 have systematically summarized the modification engineering of cellulose surface and interface, and reviewed in detail the chemical modification strategies and conditions of cellulose materials that have been reported in most cases. As shown in Fig. 15a, such available chemical reaction routes also demonstrate once again the easy modification ability of cellulose, which provides infinite possibilities for the subsequent research on chemical modification to enhance cellulose-based nanogenerators. We predict several possible directions for chemically modified cellulose to achieve higher triboelectric output. First, through more environmentally friendly and low-cost chemical reactions, stronger electron-donating groups (e.g., methoxy, dimethylamine, etc.) could be modified on cellulose to improve the polarity difference with conventional negative materials. Second, via chemical reactions, strong electron-withdrawing groups (e.g., –F, –Cl, etc.) could be modified on cellulose to replace nitro groups of nitrocellulose, so that the modified cellulose has strong electron withdrawing property and higher safety, and can be used for negative electrode materials to replace other traditional non-renewable materials (PTFE, PDMS, etc.). Third, on the basis of the above two modification strategies, other functional substances can be further accessed. For example, a certain number of hydrophobic groups (e.g., long chain alkyl group) can be added to improve the humidity sensitivity of cellulose materials and enhance the use environment range of cellulose-based nanogenerator. Therefore, we believe that the clever chemical modification of cellulose is a very important strategy to improve the output performance and comprehensive performance, which is well worthy of further study. The chemically modified cellulose-based TENG devices mentioned before are recorded in detail in Table 6.
Table 6 Summary of the chemically modified cellulose-based TENG in the literature




Sample
Type
Positive electrode
Negative electrode
Contact area, cm−2
Force, N
Frequency, Hz

U
oc, V

I
sc, μA
Power density, W m−2
Lord, MΩ
Ref.




Alc/TOCN–PVDF
Contact-separation
Allicin grafted TOCN
PVDF
4
12
20
7.9
5.13
0.101
—

149



CNF/PEI/Ag–FEP
Contact-separation
PEI grafted CNF/Ag
FEP
18
10
2
286
4
0.43
507

150



TOCN/PEI–PVDF
Contact-separation
PEI grafted TOCN
PVDF
2
6
10
106
9.2
13.3
1

151



MethylC–NitroC
Contact-separation
Methylated cellulose
Nitrocellulose
1
17
20
8
9
—
—

152



PPy/C–NitroC
Contact-separation
Polypyrrole coated cellulose paper
Nitrocellulose
2
6
10
60
8.8
0.83
5

153



C–NitroC
Contact-separation
Corrugated cellulose paper
Nitrocellulose
6.25
6
10
196
31.5
16.1
1

154





3.7 Summary of TENG enhancement methods
In a short conclusion, many effective enhancement strategies for cellulose-based TENGs have been developed, such as the rough modification of contact surface, inducing the electron transfer, improving the electron capture capacity, increasing the polarity, and increasing the charge density on the electrode surface by unique methods: surface treatment, addition of electronic functional fillers and chemical modification. The output performance of cellulose-based TENG improved significantly by these strategies. Besides, it is worth noting that the test conditions of different devices were not the same, so when comparing the performance parameters of devices, it is necessary to specify the respective test conditions in detail.
4 Cellulose-based hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerators
According to existing reports, cellulose is usually made into piezoelectric or triboelectric generators for energy collection. Until now, two papers reported cellulosed-based hybrid nanogenerators via co-generation by piezoelectric and triboelectric effects in one device for energy harvesting. It was also called “All-in-one hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerator” (PTENG). At present, the common structure design was to construct the cellulose-based piezoelectric layer by combining the high-piezoelectric material into cellulose, and then assemble it with another triboelectric layer to form hybrid piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators. As a representative work, Shi et al.156 took regenerated cellulose (RC) as the matrix and 200 nm barium titanate (BT) as the piezoelectric filler. After mixing RC and BT at a mass ratio of 1:5, a RC/BT aerogel was prepared. The RC/BT piezoelectric film was obtained by compression at 10 MPa and polarization at 150 kV cm−1 at 100 °C for 12 h. Then, the as-prepared PDMS solution containing a curing agent was injected into the RC/BT piezoelectric film via vacuum-assisted injection to prepare a hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerator device with an active layer area of 4 cm−2 (Fig. 16a). The external force condition was 80 kPa at 3 Hz. The pure RC film without any BT addition showed a very low piezoelectric output performance, and the blank RC PENG generated 2 V open-circuit voltage and 0.5 μA short-circuit current. When adding 5 times the mass of barium titanate, the piezoelectric output performance was significantly improved. Under the same conditions, the RC/BT PENG device generated 15.5 V open-circuit voltage, 3.3 μA short-circuit current, and the maximum output power of 2.95 μW m−2. When PDMS was further assembled with RC/BT into a hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerator, the open-circuit voltage of this RC/BT–PDMS PTENG device was increased to 48 V and a maximum output power of 21.2 μW m−2 was obtained under 10 MΩ load. Similarly, in a PTENG system, the polarization direction of the piezoelectric layer was of vital importance. The isodirectional polarization is conducive to electron transfer and the output of the PTENG; on the contrary, the opposite polarization direction will lead to the inhibition of the electron movement and reduce the output performance (Fig. 16b). Li et al.157 used bacterial cellulose (BC), barium titanate (BT) and carbon nanotubes (CNT) as raw materials at a mass ratio of 2:7:1 to prepare a BC/BT/CNT piezoelectric composite film. This film was polarized under 200 kV cm−1, and a primary BC/BT/CNT PENG was assembled with a residual polarization value of 0.13 μC cm−2. Under an external force condition of 3 N at 5 Hz, it outputted 22 V open circuit voltage, 0.33 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 1.21 μW cm−2 under 60 MΩ load, which were much higher than that of unpolarized BC/BT/CNT PENG devices with 14 V open circuit voltage and 0.28 μA short-circuit current. Furthermore, this piezoelectric film was used as the positive electrode and the nitrocellulose (NitroC) as the negative electrode to assemble a hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerator (Fig. 16c and d). The tribogenerator part was tested separately under the same conditions and outputted 37 V open circuit voltage, 1.85 μA short-circuit current, and a maximum output power of 10.6 μW cm−2 under 80 MΩ load. When the PENG and TENG operated in coordination at the same time in one device, after full bridge rectification, the final BC/BT/CNT–NitroC P/TENG outputted 18 V open circuit voltage and 2.4 μA short-circuit current. In addition, it can charge a commercial capacity of 1 μF up to 2.5 V in 80 s, exhibiting excellent performance. Piezo/triboelectric nanogenerators that integrate piezoelectric and triboelectric energy conversion processes in the same device provide a new design strategy of the next-generation cellulose-based device for efficient energy harvesting.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of the fabrication process (a) and the coupling effects (b) in different directions of the RC/BT–PDMS hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerator, reprinted with permission from ref. 156 Copyright 2019 Elsevier; schematic of the fabrication process (c) and the structural design (d) of the C/BT/CNT–NitroC hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerator, reprinted with permission from ref. 157 Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
5 Conclusion and remarks
In summary, in this paper, we systematically reviewed the most recent advances and developments of cellulose-based PENGs, TENGs and hybrid PTENGs in energy harvesting areas. Various cellulose-based materials, including natural cellulose fiber, CNC, CNF (MFC, TOCN, BC) and cellulose derivatives have been effectively employed for the preparation of nanogenerators. We further summarize various performance improvement strategies of cellulose-based nanogenerators, which can shed substantial light on the design and manufacture of high-performance cellulose-based nanogenerators. Numerous advanced cellulose-based NG devices possess excellent output performance and outstanding sustainable advantages over other devices of traditional materials, and show great potential in energy harvesting, self-powered sensing, gas sensing and other applications. The significance of choosing cellulose as the material of nanogenerators is not limited to its wide sources, renewability, biodegradability and other advantages. As discussed above, cellulose is not only a simple dispersed matrix, but also a functional matrix with high crystallinity, and intrinsic piezoelectric and triboelectric activities, which has been widely concerned and studied. In addition, cellulose can be added to other substrates as a performance-enhancing filler to improve the output performance of other PENGs and TENGs. At the same time, the chemical modification can make cellulose-based nanogenerators achieve greater performance in the future. Considering the unique properties of cellulose, we believe that the cellulose-based nanogenerators are very suitable for the production of large-size energy-harvesting devices (abundant sources and easy to process), biological and wearable power sensors (non-toxicity, excellent biocompatibility, etc.) and other fields. Although many advanced developments have been achieved for the past few years, some challenges still exist.
First, piezoelectric properties of most cellulose-based PENGs are still not as good as those of traditional materials. The further improvements for the piezoelectric properties of cellulose-based PENGs are essential to expand their application in energy harvesting areas. In addition, the composite structure of piezoelectric fillers and cellulose is only the common homogeneous dispersion type, and more possible composite structures (e.g. “1–3” piezo-composite structure) with high piezoelectric properties need to be developed and studied.
Second, the unified performance evaluation standard is necessary for cellulose-based TENGs. TENGs in different articles are tested under different conditions (varied contact area, external force, frequency, and computation rules). Therefore, they cannot be compared directly, making it difficult to quickly and conveniently determine whether a new device exhibits performance breakthrough. Therefore, we emphasize that when discussing the output performance of the cellulose-based triboelectric generator, the test conditions should be indicated, or the same test conditions should be maintained for other work to make a lateral performance comparison.
Third, in addition to the contact-separation mode, three other working modes of cellulose-based TENGs have rarely been reported. In particular, the single-electrode mode device with a simple structure can collect various forms of mechanical energy. According to the existing reports, how to reasonably design the contact interface of the single-electrode mode devices to enhance the output performance and reduce the complex requirements of external forces and device structure is still a challenge to overcome.
Finally, more effective designs, devices, and different working models of hybrid nanogenerators need to be developed to achieve higher efficiency of energy harvesting and flexible application. The performance of the existing hybrid nanogenerators lags behind that of some excellent TENGs and needs to be further improved.
In closing, as more state-of-the-art technologies are applied to the design and preparation of the cellulose-based nanogenerator device, it will surely show more extraordinary potential in energy harvesting applications and change our portable energy structure.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51703177 and 21704079), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WUT: 2020IB030) and Key laboratory of Processing and Quality Evaluation Technology of Green Plastics of China National Light Industry council, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing 100048, China (No. PQETGP2019007).
References
T. Wu, Y. Song, Z. Shi, D. Liu, S. Chen, C. Xiong and Q. Yang, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105541 CrossRef CAS .
W. Grossmann, I. Grossmann and K. Indicators, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 4849–4855 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, Z. Hao and M. Lu, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 3713–3714 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Sanchez-Bautista, J. E. Santibanez-Aguilar, L. F. Fuentes-Cortes, A. Flores-Tlacuahuac and J. M. Ponce-Ortega, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9451–9460 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, G. Liu, Y. Li, D. Yu and W. Teoh, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8082–8118 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Vijay, B. Singh and G. Bhuvaneswari, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2020, 67, 7529–7539 Search PubMed .
M. Yin, Y. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Lu, T. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, Extreme Mechanics Letters, 2019, 33, 100576 CrossRef .
J. Feng, M. Graf, K. Liu, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Dumcenco, M. Heiranian, V. Nandigana, N. Aluru, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nature, 2016, 536, 197–200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, I. Mora-Sero, F. Angelis, J. Bisquert and P. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10095–10130 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hedley, A. Ruseckas and I. Samuel, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 796–837 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fan, Z. Tian and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2008, 451, 809–813 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, C. Chen, S. Wang, S. Cha, Y. Park, J. Kim, L. Chou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1759–1764 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nilsson, A. Lund, C. Jonasson, C. Johansson and B. Hagström, Sens. Actuators, A, 2013, 201, 477–486 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim and K. Yun, Micromachines, 2017, 8, 115 CrossRef .
X. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Feng, X. Zhang, D. Wang and F. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903587 CrossRef .
K. Dong, X. Peng and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902549 CrossRef .
X. Lu, Y. Xu, G. Qiao, Q. Gao, X. Zhang, T. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104726 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yin, Y. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Lu, T. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, Extreme Mechanics Letters, 2019, 33, 100576 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, P. Zhao, X. Zhang, K. Han, T. Zhao, Y. Zhang, C. Jeong, S. Jiang, S. Zhang and Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2046–2056 RSC .
F. Eichhorn, K. Kakimoto, P. L. Grei and T. Fey, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2019, 21, 1900390 CrossRef .
W. Kang, Y. Li, Z. Zheng and R. Zhao, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 18089–18095 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, K. Parida, O. Halevi, Y. Liu, J. Xiong, S. Magdassi and P. Lee, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104676 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan and C. Bowen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3091 RSC .
X. Liu, J. Ma, X. Wu, L. Lin and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1901–1910 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, L. Yang, S. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Hu and W. Song, Sensors, 2020, 20, 506 CrossRef CAS .
R. Farhan, M. Rguiti, A. Eddiai, M. Mazroui, M. Meddad and C. Courtois, J. Compos. Mater., 2019, 53, 345–352 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, J. Koh, M. Liu, P. Li, X. Fan, S. Liu, J. Yeo, Y. Tan, B. Tee and C. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 31975–31983 CrossRef CAS .
D. Anaya, T. He, C. Lee and M. Yuce, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104675 CrossRef .
F. Fan, L. Lin, G. Zhu, W. Wu, R. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3109–3114 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, S. Zhang and S. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8997–9005 RSC .
Y. Shin, S. Sohn, H. Han, Y. Park, H. Shin and H. Ko, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104671 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, C. Pan, Y. Chen and X. Pu, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 17752–17759 RSC .
Y. Han, Y. Han, X. Zhang, L. Li, C. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Lu, H. Yu and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 16442–16450 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yan, K. Dong, J. Lu, W. Song and R. Xiao, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4527–4536 RSC .
J. Wu, X. Wang, H. Li, F. Wang and Y. Hu, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103864 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Jung, T. Lee, J. Jo, H. Chae, K. Choi, J. Kim, J. Lee, C. Yang and J. Baik, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901987 CrossRef .
J. Kaura, R. Sawhneya, H. Singhb and M. Sing, Int. J. Green Energy, 2020, 17, 309–318 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, X. Gu, R. Cao and S. Cui, Journal of Neural Engineering, 2019, 16, 036030 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, W. Zhao, C. Niu, Y. Zhou, H. Shi, Y. Wang, Y. Yang and X. Tang, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2018, 46, 1013–1025 CrossRef .
M. Sticken, Nat. Rev. Genet., 2008, 9, 433–443 CrossRef .
J. Zeng, R. Li, S. Liu and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2074–2079 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lindman, G. Karlström and L. Stigsson, J. Mol. Liq., 2010, 156, 76–81 CrossRef CAS .
B. Medronho, A. Romano, M. G. Miguel, L. Stigsson and B. Lindman, Cellulose, 2012, 19, 581–587 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J. Baker, M. Himmel, P. Parilla and D. Johnson, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2010, 3, 10 CrossRef .
A. O'Sullivan, Cellulose, 1997, 4, 173–207 CrossRef .

          P. Zugenmaier, Crystalline Cellulose and Derivatives: Characterization and Structures, Springer Berlin Herdelberg,  2008 Search PubMed .

          R. H. Atalla and A. Isogai, in Polysaccharide, ed. S. Dumitriu, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2nd edn,  2005, pp. 123–157 Search PubMed .
D. VanderHart and R. Atalla, Macromolecules, 1984, 17, 1465–1472 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamanaka, K. Watanabe, N. Kitamura, M. Iguchi, D. Klemm, B. Heublein, H. Fink and A. Bohn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3358–3393 CrossRef .
Y. Yin, C. Zhang, W. Yu, G. Kang, Q. Yang, Z. Shi and C. Xiong, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 26, 105–111 CrossRef .
J. Yang, H. Xie, H. Chen, Z. Shi, T. Wu, Q. Yang and C. Xiong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1403–1411 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Chen, X. Li, C. Zhang, C. Yu, L. Zhou, Q. Yang, Z. Shi and C. Xiong, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123147 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Yin, Q. Yang, Z. Shi, G. Hu and C. Xiong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10641–10648 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lao, H. Xie, Z. Shi, G. Li, B. Li, G. Hu, Q. Yang and C. Xiong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7151–7158 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, J. Yang, Z. Shi, S. Xiang and C. Xiong, Journal of Forestry Engineering, 2018, 3, 1–11 CrossRef .
D. Davidson, E. Ban, A. Schoonen, M. Lee, M. D'Este, V. Shenoy and J. Burdick, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1905719 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, G. Liu, L. Peng, J. Guo, L. Tao, J. Yuan, C. Chang, Y. Wei and L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703174 CrossRef .
Z. Shi, H. Gao, J. Feng, B. Ding, X. Cao, S. Kuga, Y. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Cai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5380–5384 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mukhopadhyay, Z. Cheng, A. Natan, Y. Ma, Y. Yang, D. Cao, W. Wang and H. Zhu, ACS Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8979–8989 CrossRef CAS .
R. Moon, A. Nairn, J. Simonsen and J. Youngblood, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3941–3994 RSC .
S. Elazzouzi-Hafraoui, Y. Nishiyama, J. Putaux, L. Heux, F. Dubreuil and C. Rochas, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saito, Y. Nishiyama, J. Putaux, M. Vignon and A. Isogai, Biomacromolecules, 2006, 7, 1687–1691 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Habibi and A. Dufresne, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 1974–1980 CrossRef CAS .
A. Isogai, T. Saito and H. Fukuzumi, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 71 RSC .
A. Isogai, T. Hänninen, S. Fujisawa and T. Saito, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 86, 122–148 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamaguchi, H. Sakamoto, T. Kitamura, M. Hashimoto and S. Suye, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 183, 110392 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, C. Tu, R. Lee, C. Yang, W. Hung and K. Lin, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2019, 161, 206–212 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nemoto, T. Saito and A. Isogai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19809–19815 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saito, R. Kuramae, J. Wohlert, L. A. Berglund and A. Isogai, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 248–253 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iwamoto, W. Kai, A. Isogai and T. Iwata, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 2571–2576 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yue, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Han and J. Jiang, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 2020, 564, 99–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wakabayashi, S. Fujisawa, T. Saito and A. Isogai, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 8, 37 CAS .
T. Noguchi, M. Endo, K. Niihara, H. Jinnai and A. Isogai, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 188, 108005 CrossRef CAS .
H. Soeta, S. Fujisawa, T. Saito, L. Berglund and A. Isogai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11041–11046 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukui, T. Ito, T. Saito, T. Noguchi and A. Isogai, Cellulose, 2019, 26, 463–473 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, Y. Xie, E. Zhu, Y. Liu, Z. Shi, C. Xiong and Q. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6311–6318 RSC .
H. Kim, B. Endrodi, G. Salazar-Alvarez and A. Cornell, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19415–19425 CrossRef CAS .
D. Klemm, D. Shumann, U. Udhardt and S. Marsch, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 1561–1603 CrossRef CAS .
C. Molina-Ramirez, A. Canas-Gutierrez, C. Castro, R. Zuluaga and P. Ganan, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 240, 116341 CrossRef CAS .
P. Paraskevi, K. Eugenia and M. Ioanna, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 241, 116319 CrossRef .
C. Tokoh, K. Takabe, M. Fujita and H. Saiki, Cellulose, 1998, 5, 249–261 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, X. Xu, L. Yang, C. Chen, J. Qian, X. Chen and D. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125174 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and X. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 519, 146252 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kousheh, M. Moradi, H. Tajik and R. Molaei, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 115, 216–225 CrossRef .
L. Thompson, M. Nikzad, I. Sbarski, J. Azadmanjiri, J. Ren and A. Yu, Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 2020, 20, 5642–5647 CrossRef .
T. Zhong, R. Dhandapani, D. Liang, J. Wang, M. Wolcott, D. Fossen Van and H. Liu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 240, 116283 CrossRef CAS .
S. Elazzouzi-Hafraoui, Y. Nishiyama, J. Putaux, L. Heux, F. Dubreuil and C. Rochas, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Y. Li, Y. Song, X. Wu, G. Yu and K. Tam, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 244, 116512 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Le, S. Loveday, H. Singh and A. Sarkar, Food Chem., 2020, 320, 126650 CrossRef .
T. Rosenau, A. Potthast, H. Sixta and P. Kosma, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 1839–1919 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, R. Liu, J. Xiang, H. Kang, Z. Liu and Y. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 9507–9514 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gupta and J. Jiang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 121, 180–189 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wahlström and A. Suurnäkki, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 694–714 RSC .
L. Hauru, M. Hummel, A. King, I. Kilpelainen and H. Sixta, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 2896–2905 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai and L. Zhang, Macromol. Biosci., 2005, 5, 539–548 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, H. Qi, A. Lue, K. Hu, G. Cheng and L. Zhang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2011, 83, 1185–1191 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, X. Qin and L. Zhang, Cellulose, 2011, 18, 681–688 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, A. Lu and L. Zhang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 53, 169–206 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fukako, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1955, 10, 149–154 CrossRef .
I. Chae, C. Jeong, Z. Ounaies and S. Kim, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 936–953 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mahadeva, K. Walus and B. Stoeber, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7547–7553 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sriplai, R. Mangayil, A. Pammo, V. Santala and S. Tuukkanen, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 231, 115730 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoon, J. Kim, H. Kim and J. Kim, Materials, 2020, 13, 204 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan and C. Bowen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3091 RSC .
Q. Zheng, H. Zhang, H. Mi, Z. Cai, Z. Ma and S. Gong, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 504–512 CrossRef CAS .
H. Baytekin, B. Baytekin and B. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3596–3600 CrossRef CAS .
B. Baytekin, H. Baytekin and B. Grzybowski, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3467–3482 RSC .
M. Alam and D. Mandal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pusty and P. Shirage, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 10097 RSC .
B. Szperlich and M. Rzychon, Cellulose, 2018, 25, 7–15 CrossRef .
H. Choi and Y. Jeong, Composites, Part B, 2019, 168, 58–65 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ponnamma, H. Parangusan, A. Tanvir and M. AlMa'adeed, Mater. Des., 2019, 184, 108176 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ram, S. Radhakrishnan, T. Ambone and K. Shanmuganathan, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 1998–2005 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 74 CrossRef .
N. Zaw, H. Roh, I. Kim, T. Goh and D. Kim, Micromachines, 2020, 11, 414 CrossRef .
V. Trinh and C. Chung, Appl. Energy, 2018, 213, 353–365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, X. Wu and J. Oh, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 2742 CrossRef CAS .
A. Diaz and R. Felix-Navarro, J. Electrost., 2004, 62, 277–290 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and A. Wang, Mater. Today, 2019, 30, 34–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghori, E. Šupuk and B. Conway, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., 2014, 65, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yao, A. Hernandez, Y. Yu, Z. Cai and X. Wamg, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ccorahua, A. Cordero, C. Luyo, M. Quintana and E. Vela, MRS Adv., 2019, 4, 1315–1320 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, E. Yim, J. Kim, S. Kim, J. Park and I. Oh, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Srither, D. Rao and K. Prasad, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 5055–5061 CrossRef CAS .
S. Parandeh, M. Kharaziha and F. Karimzadeh, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 412–421 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, D. Kim, J. Kwak, M. Choi, D. Kim, D. Lee, D. Kong, J. Park, S. Jung, G. Lee and J. Jung, Nano Energy, 2018, 56, 338–346 CrossRef .
M. Singh, A. Sheetal, H. Singh, R. Sawhney and J. Kaur, J. Electron. Mater., 2020, 49, 3409–3416 CrossRef CAS .
A. Šutka, J. Ruža, M. Järvekülg, A. Linarts, K. Mālnieks, V. Jurķāns, I. Gorņevs, J. Blūms, K. Rubenis and M. Knite, J. Electrost., 2018, 92, 1–5 CrossRef .
M. Wang, W. Li, C. You, Q. Wang, X. Zeng and M. Chen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 6772 RSC .
Q. Zheng, L. Fang, H. Guo, K. Yang, Z. Cai, M. Meador and S. Gong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1706365 CrossRef .
S. Graham, B. Dudem, A. Mule, H. Patnam and J. Yu, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 505–516 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mule, B. Dudem, H. Patnam, S. Graham and J. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16450–16458 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qian, L. Li, M. Gao, H. Yang, Z. Cai, B. Chen, Z. Xiang, Z. Zhang and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103885 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, Y. Wang, J. Zheng, Y. Xiang, P. Zhao, J. Cui, H. Zhou and D. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104382 CrossRef CAS .
A. Uddin and G. Chung, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 245, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, C. Yao, Y. Yu, Z. Li and X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4936 CrossRef .
X. He, H. Zou, Z. Geng, X. Wang, W. Ding, F. Hu, Y. Zi, C. Xu, S. Zhang, H. Yu, M. Xu, W. Zhang, C. Lu and Z. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1805540 CrossRef .
P. Cui, K. Parida, M. Lin, J. Xiong, G. Cai and P. Lee, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 1700651 CrossRef .
H. Mi, X. Jing, Z. Cai, Y. Liu, L. Turng and S. Gong, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 23131 RSC .
J. Peng, H. Zhang, Q. Zheng, C. Clemons, R. Sabo, S. Gong, Z. Ma and L. Turng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1428–1433 RSC .
A. Chandrasekhar, N. Alluri, B. Saravanakumar, S. Selvarajan and S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1810–1815 RSC .
G. Gu, C. Han, J. Tian, C. Lu, C. He, T. Jiang, Z. Li and Z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11882–11888 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Cho, J. Chun, K. Kim, S. Kim, C. Ahn, I. Kim, J. Kim, S. Kim, C. Yang and J. Baik, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602902 CrossRef .
K. Shi, H. Zou, B. Sun, P. Jiang, J. He and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1904536 Search PubMed .
Y. Shao, C. Feng, B. Deng, B. Yin and M. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 620–627 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oh, S. Kwak, B. Kim, E. Han, G. Lim, S. Kim and B. Lim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1904066 CrossRef .
S. Roy, H. Ko, P. Maji, L. Hai and J. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123723 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, X. Lin, N. Zhang, Y. Lu, Z. Wu, G. Liu and S. Nie, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104126 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mi, X. Jing, Q. Zheng, L. Fang, H. Huang, L. Turng and S. Gong, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yao, X. Yin, Y. Yu, Z. Cai and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 1700794 CrossRef .
X. Shi, S. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Jiang, Z. Ma and S. Gong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18657–18666 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Jiang, F. Xu and S. Gong, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, S. K. Biswas, J. Han, S. Tanpichai, M. Li, C. Chen, S. Zhu, A. K. r. Das and H. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2002264 CrossRef .
K. Shi, X. Huang, B. Sun, Z. Wu, J. He and P. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 450–458 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Jie, L. Shao, Y. Guo, X. Cao, N. Wang and Z. Wang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1831–1835 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Yiheng Song	Yiheng Song was born in Jiangxi, China, in 1991. He received his bachelor's degree (2014) from Shenyang University of Chemical Technology and his master's degree in Polymer Chemistry and Physics (2019) from Guilin University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Li Zhou. He is currently a PhD student with Assoc. Prof. Zhuqun Shi as his supervisor at Wuhan University of Technology, China. His research interests include biomass materials, electronic functional materials, and sulfur materials.
Zhuqun Shi	Zhuqun Shi received a master's degree in Chemical Engineering from Wuhan University under the supervision of Prof. Jie Cai in 2011. After three years of doctoral course in Biomaterials Science of The University of Tokyo under the supervision of Prof. Yuji Matsumoto, she received a PhD degree in Sep. 2014. From Oct. 2014, she worked as a postdoctoral researcher with Prof. Akira Isogai in The University of Tokyo. Then, she joined Wuhan University of Technology as Associate Professor in the School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Life Sciences from Jul. 2016. Her main research interests focus on biomaterials, e-skin, nanomaterials, etc.
Guo-Hua Hu	Guo-Hua Hu is a full Professor at the University of Lorraine and a member of the Institut Universitaire de France. He received his PhD degree from the University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, in 1990. He worked as a post doc at the University of Pittsburgh from 1990 to 1992. He received the Bronze Medal of the CNRS in 1996 and Morand Lambla award of Polymer Processing Society in 2001. His current research involves reactive polymer processing, polymer blending, supercritical fluid assisted polymer foaming, bio-based polymers and composites.
Chuanxi Xiong	Chuanxi Xiong received his master's degree in polymer materials from Sichuan University under the supervision of Prof. Xi Xu in 1986. Then, he joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Wuhan University of Technology as an Assistant Professor, got a PhD degree in 1997 under the supervision of Prof. Dijiang Wen, promoted to Associate Professor in 1994 and full Professor in 1999. He spent 2004–2005 as a visiting scientist at Cornell University, USA. Now he is the dean of Department of Polymer Materials. His research interests include processing in polymer materials, nanomaterials, organic/inorganic composite materials, and solvent-free fluids.
Akira Isogai	Akira Isogai received his PhD in 1985 from The University of Tokyo. As a postdoc, he joined the Institute of Paper Chemistry, Appleton, USA. In 1986, he returned to The University of Tokyo as an Assistant Professor. He spent 1989 at Forest Products Lab, USDA, Madison, USA, as a visiting scientist. He was promoted to Associate and full Professors in 1994 and 2003, respectively. He received Anselme Payen Award of ACS and Marcus Wallenberg Prize of Sweden in 2015. Since 1996, he has worked on TEMPO-mediated oxidation of cellulose and other polysaccharides as the regioselective and effective chemical modification.
Quanling Yang	Quanling Yang received bachelor's and master's degree from Wuhan University under the supervision of Prof. Lina Zhang in 2008 and 2010, respectively. He got a PhD degree in Biomaterials Science of The University of Tokyo under the supervision of Prof. Akira Isogai in 2013. He received a Research Fellowship for Young Scientists from JSPS in 2012. From 2013, he worked as JSPS Postdoctoral Fellow in The University of Tokyo. Then, he joined Wuhan University of Technology as Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering from 2015. His research interests focus on biomass materials, nanomaterials, energy storage and conversion materials, etc.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of several common cellulosic materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  Circulation (a) and word frequency statistics (b) of “Cellulose Nanogenerator”.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of cellulose crystal structure: projection along the cellulose chain with the asymmetrical triclinic Iα and monoclinic Iβ structure, reprinted with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b1) The reported DFT-calculated piezoelectric responses of hydrogen bonds of cellulose in the literature, reprinted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2018 The American Chemical Society. (b2) Schematics of two networks A and B within the hydrogen-bonded plane, (110)t and (200)m, reprinted with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagrams of 3 types of piezoelectric constants. (d) Values of piezoelectric constants of cellulose-based materials in the literature. (e) Working mechanism diagram of a typical PENG device.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the Au-Cellulose/PDMS PENG device (a). The formation of new dipoles between the cellulose and Au NPs (b), the short circuit current of the blank Cellulose/PDMS PENG (c) and the 20 μL Au-Cellulose/PDMS PENG (d), reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

TOCN/PDMS	1 cm × 2 cm × 0.48 μm	0.05 MPa, 10 Hz	60 V	10.1 μA	6.3 mW cm−3	1 MΩ	
107

CMC/PDMS/CNT	33 mm × 25 mm × 2 mm	40 kPa	30 V	0.5 μA	9.0 nW cm−3	30 MΩ	
110

C/PDMS/AuNPs	3.5 cm × 8.5 cm	3 N	6 V	0.7 μA	8.3 mW cm−2	2.2 MΩ	
111

Cellulose/SbSI	10 mm × 10 mm × 0.05 mm	90 dB, 175 Hz	24 mV	20 nA	41.5 nW cm−3	—	
112

CNF/BaTiO3	—	5 kPa	2.86 V	0.26 μA	373 nW	—	
113

CNC/PVDF–HEP	—	2.5 N, 45 Hz	12 V	1.9 μA cm−2	0.49 mW cm−3	1 MΩ	
114

CNC/PA11	—	23 N	6.95 V	—	0.5 mW cm−3	820 kΩ	
115


 	Fig. 5  Left: triboelectric series of cellulose over 50 common materials, reprinted with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Ltd; Upper right: a COMSOL simulated potential distribution of a typical reported Cellulose–PDMS TENG reprinted with permission from ref. 146 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. Lower right: the working mechanism diagram of a typical TENG device.	 

TOCN–FEP	Contact-separation	TOCN	FEP	40	—	10	32.8	35	0.14	1	
123

Cellulose-starch	Contact-separation	Cellulose filter	Alkali treated starch	20	6	—	0.3	—	—	—	
124

BC–Cu	Contact-separation	Cu	BC	25	16.8	1	13	—	0.048	1	
125

CA–PTFE	Contact-separation	Cellulose acetate	PTFE	8	0.33	—	4.5	9.1	—	—	
126

C–PCL/GO	Contact-separation	Cellulose	Polycaprolactone/4% GO	16	8	2	120	4	0.0725	30	
127

C–PC/SWCNT	Contact-separation	Cellulose	Microwave-welded SWCNT on PC	—	40	0.8	45	0.75	—	50	
128

C–DH	Contact-separation	Dog hair	Cellulose	12	—	—	4	—	—	—	
129


 	Fig. 6  SEM images of roughened ethyl cellulose (a), reprinted with permission from ref. 130 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. Light etched 317 stainless steel (b), flat (c) and ICP-roughened (d) ethyl cellulose, reprinted with permission from ref. 131 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of flat (a) and microarchitectured (b) CMC/PVA films, schematic diagram of reverse-printing method (c), and SEM Image of microarchitectured surface morphology of MACPF (d), reprinted with permission from ref. 133 Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of performance improvements for the rough enhanced EC-317SS TENG (a), CNF aerogel-pPDMS TENG (b), CMC/PVA–PI TENG (c), and 3D-printed TOCN–PDMS TENG (d) mentioned above.	 

EC–PDMS	Contact-separation	Rough ethyl cellulose	PDMS	2.25	10	1	45	—	0.0012	1000	
130

EC–317SS	Contact-separation	ICP-etched EC	Porous 317 stainless steel	6	—	—	245	50	—	—	
131

CNF–PDMS	Contact-separation	CNF aerogel	Porous PDMS	2	6	10	22.3	2.2	0.25	—	
132

MCC/PVA–PI	Contact-separation	Reverse printed MCC/PVA	PI	4	4–5	5	600	40	84	200	
133

CF/Ppy–PDMS	Single electrode	Cotton fiber and polypyrrole	Reverse printed PDMS	6	10	5	200	6	0.85	70	
134

TOCN–PDMS	Contact-separation	3D printed TOCN	3D printed PDMS	9	4	4	55.8	0.94	0.029	10	
135

Lignin–PDMS	Contact-separation	3D printed lignin	3D printed PDMS	16	10	30	308	61.6	5.93	1	
136

CMC–PI	Sandwich structure	CMC	Wave-like PI	—	3	5	142	9.3	—	—	
137


 	Fig. 9  Schematic (a) and stability test (b) of the AZO/CNF TENG, reprinted with permission from ref. 138 Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. Schematic (c) and comparative PM2.5 removal effect (d) of the AgNWs/CMF/CNF–FEP TENG, reprinted with permission from ref. 139 Copyright 2018 Wiley Periodicals.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of the performance improvements for the electron transfer filler-enhanced TOCN/P–Au/PET TENG (a), TOCN/SF, HH, RH–PI TENG (b), PDMS/CNC–Al TENG (c), and PDMS/CMC–Al TENG (d) mentioned above.	 

AZO/CNC–TiCl4/CNC	Contact-separation	Aluminum doped zinc Oxide/CNF	Titanium Tetrachloride/CNC	12	17	10	7	0.7	0.42	1	
138

CNC/CMC/Ag–FEP	Contact-separation	CNC/CMC/AgNWs	FEP	—	—	5	21.9	0.73	0.0768	20	
139

TOCN/P–PET/Au	Contact-separation	TOCN/phosphorenes sheets	Au-sprayed PET	1	70	5	5.2	1.8	0.0936	1	
140

CNF/RH–PI	Contact-separation	CNF/1% Habbit hair	PI	2	6	10	110	11.3	3.4	4.7	
141

CNF/HH–PI	Contact-separation	CNF/1% human hair	PI	2	6	10	70.8	8.4	1.3	—	
141

CNF/SF–PI	Contact-separation	CNF/1% silica fiber	PI	2	6	10	52.8	6.3	0.6	—	
141

PDMS/CNC–Al	Contact-separation	Al	PDMS/2.5 wt% CNC	2.25	40	10	320	11.25	0.042	1	
142

PDMS/CMC–Al	Contact-separation	Al	PDMS/5 wt% CMC	9	32	1	28	2.8	0.64	100	
143


 	Fig. 11  Schematic and an equivalent circuit model of RC/BT–PDMS/Ag TENG (a), reprinted with permission from ref. 146 Copyright 2019 Elsevier; the fabrication diagram of the BC/BT composite film by a filtration process (b), reprinted with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2019 Elsevier; the mechanism, KPFM images and measured surface potentials of BC/BT paper obtained under different poling conditions (c), reprinted with permission from ref. 148 Copyright 2019 Wiley Periodicals.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of the performance improvements for the dielectric and ferroelectric filler-enhanced cellulose-based RC/BT–PDMS/Ag TENG (a), BC/BT–PDMS TENG (b), and BC/BT/Ag–PTFE TENG (c) mentioned above.	 

RC/BT–PDMS	Contact-separation	RC/300% BaTiO3	PDMS/1% AgNPs	4	12	3	88	8.3	0.352	15	
146

BC/BT–PDMS	Contact-separation	BC/13.5% BaTiO3	PDMS	—	42	2	181	21	4.8	80	
147

BC/BT/Ag–PTFE	Contact-separation	Polarized BC/BaTiO3/AgNPs	PTFE	4	49	—	170	9.8	1.8	50	
148


 	Fig. 13  Schematic of allicin grafting the CNF (a), reprinted with permission from ref. 149 Copyright 2020 Elsevier; the gear-like structural PEI-modified CNF TENG (b); reprinted with permission from ref. 150 Copyright 2019 Elsevier; the reaction mechanism between TOCN and PEI (c) and the continuous output performance of the TOCN/10% PEI–PVDF TENG (d), reprinted with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  SKPM surface potential mapping of pristine CNF, nitro-CNF and methyl-CNF (a), the open circuit voltage of TENG made from Cu electrode and various chemically modified cellulose film (b), and the open circuit voltage of TENG made from two various chemically modified cellulose film (c), reprinted with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2017 Wiley Periodicals.	 

 	Fig. 15  Main chemical modification routes and methods of cellulose (a), reprinted with permission from ref. 155 Copyright 2020 Wiley Periodicals; schematic of the performance improvements of the chemically modified cellulose-based Alc/TOCN–PVDF TENG (b) and TOCN/PEI–PVDF TENG (c) mentioned above.	 

Alc/TOCN–PVDF	Contact-separation	Allicin grafted TOCN	PVDF	4	12	20	7.9	5.13	0.101	—	
149

CNF/PEI/Ag–FEP	Contact-separation	PEI grafted CNF/Ag	FEP	18	10	2	286	4	0.43	507	
150

TOCN/PEI–PVDF	Contact-separation	PEI grafted TOCN	PVDF	2	6	10	106	9.2	13.3	1	
151

MethylC–NitroC	Contact-separation	Methylated cellulose	Nitrocellulose	1	17	20	8	9	—	—	
152

PPy/C–NitroC	Contact-separation	Polypyrrole coated cellulose paper	Nitrocellulose	2	6	10	60	8.8	0.83	5	
153

C–NitroC	Contact-separation	Corrugated cellulose paper	Nitrocellulose	6.25	6	10	196	31.5	16.1	1	
154


 	Fig. 16  Schematic of the fabrication process (a) and the coupling effects (b) in different directions of the RC/BT–PDMS hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerator, reprinted with permission from ref. 156 Copyright 2019 Elsevier; schematic of the fabrication process (c) and the structural design (d) of the C/BT/CNT–NitroC hybrid piezo/triboelectric nanogenerator, reprinted with permission from ref. 157 Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
