Environmentally friendly natural materials for triboelectric nanogenerators: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA10024J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA10024J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 9270-9299Environmentally friendly natural materials for triboelectric nanogenerators: a review

        
          
            Songling 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wangshu 
            Tong
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Caixia 
            Gao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yulun 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xinnan 
            Li
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yihe 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: tong@cugb.edu.cn; zyh@cugb.edu.cn
Received 
      27th December 2022
    , Accepted 24th March 2023First published on 27th March 2023AbstractSignificant progress has been made in using triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) to harvest sustainable energy from wind, waves, human activities, and water droplets. Natural materials, which are non-synthetic and have the advantages of being low-cost, environmentally friendly, biodegradable, and partially biocompatible, can be used to prepare green TENGs. In this review, the latest advances made in natural-materials-based TENGs are summarized. The triboelectric mechanisms and properties of natural-materials-based TENGs derived from animals, plants, humans, microorganisms, and minerals are discussed. The output performance, features, and applications of the natural materials used to construct the tribopositive and tribonegative layers of TENGs are discussed. Moreover, the triboelectric sequence of the natural materials is summarized to compare their ability to gain or lose charge in the process of friction. Finally, the challenges facing natural-materials-based TENGs, such as complex processing, short service life, lack of stability, few tribonegative materials, and low power density, are listed. It is thus anticipated that this review will encourage the use of natural materials to manufacture eco-friendly TENGs that have broad application prospects in the field of energy conversion.Songling LiuSongling Liu is currently a master's student at the School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences. His research focuses on natural materials for triboelectric generators.Wangshu TongWangshu Tong received her PhD in 2016 from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Currently, she is a lecturer at Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her current research mainly focuses on flexible functional films and their energy conversion.Caixia GaoCaixia Gao is currently a PhD candidate in Prof. Yihe Zhang's group in Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, National Laboratory of Mineral Materials, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her research focuses on degradable polymer materials for triboelectric generators.Yulun LiuYulun Liu is currently a master's student of Prof. Yihe Zhang in Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, National Laboratory of Mineral Materials, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). His research focuses on self-polarizing piezoelectric materials.Xinnan LiXinnan Li is currently a master's student at the School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). His research focuses on tribocatalysis.Yihe ZhangYihe Zhang is a Professor at the School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and leads the Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Zhang received his PhD from the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2005, and was a Visiting Scholar, Postdoctoral Fellow and Research Fellow in City University of Hong Kong and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University from 2003 to 2009. His current research focuses on nanomaterials, composites and their applications for the environment and energy.
1. Introduction
The development of human society and the economy requires energy, the demand for which is soaring on a daily basis.1,2 To meet this demand, traditional energy resources such as petroleum, coal, and natural gas have been over-exploited and utilized3,4 for the progress of human civilization. However, these energy sources are not renewable on an immediate timescale and their use causes great harm to the environment and ecology.5,6 Therefore, it is essential to generate and use green renewable energy to meet global energy demands and sustain the environment.7 The natural environment provides many potential sources of energy, such as wind, tidal, solar, and geothermal energy.8–11 In particular, the mechanical energy generated by natural phenomena or human activities is not only produced in large quantities but is also sustainable.12,13 A decade ago, Wang et al. first proposed the concept of a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG), a new type of self-powered energy harvesting device that converts harvested mechanical energy into electricity.14,15 TENGs have the advantages of dexterity, portability, high unit output power, and relatively low manufacturing costs.16–20 Moreover, TENGs have four operating modes: vertical contact separation, single electrode, sliding, and independent friction electrode modes,21–25 and have been shown to make great progress in harvesting energy from wind, waves, human activity, water droplets, etc.26–32
Over the past decade, various studies have been conducted to develop and optimize TENGs,33–40 showing that their surface morphology, dielectric properties, device structure, and friction layer materials play important roles in determining their performance.41–46 Most of the friction layer materials used to prepare TENGs are synthetic polymers, such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS),47 polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF),48 polyethylene terephthalate (PET),49 polyurethane (PU),50 polyimide (PI),51 fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP),52 and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE),53 or metals materials such as aluminum (Al)54 and copper (Cu).55 However, these materials are associated with disadvantages, such as being high cost, difficult to decompose, requiring complex manufacturing processes, and exhibiting non-biological compatibility.56–59 TENGs assembled from these materials thus have limitations in wearable, biomedical, and implantable applications.60–62 Therefore, to develop TENGs for use in a wide range of applications, it is essential to develop new friction materials to satisfy the target requirements.
Natural materials, as the name implies, exist naturally in the natural world, including materials from living things such as animals, plants, and microorganisms, as well as non-living things such as minerals.63,64 Most of these materials have coexisted with humans as nature has evolved and are very environmentally friendly and associated with almost no recycling problems.65 Natural materials can be used as the friction layer in TENGs,66–68 with most of them being directly usable without the need for any modification.69 Besides the superior generation performance, various advantages such as stable output, high sensitivity, light weight, operability under high humidity conditions, simple equipment, environmental friendliness, degradability, invisibility and low cost can be exhibited by TENGs based on natural materials. However, there is still a lack of systematic discussion on the generation performances of different natural materials in TENGs and summary of the prospects of using natural materials to develop green TENGs for energy conversion.
Therefore, this review summarizes the features of different natural materials used as the tribopositive or tribonegative layers in TENGs (Fig. 1). According to the source and type of the natural friction materials they are classified in the discussion as materials from animals, plants, the human body, microorganisms, and minerals. The surface morphology, internal materials, and structure of natural materials all affect the generation of triboelectric charge. Most of the triboelectric properties of materials derived from animals can mainly be attributed to their internal chemical substances and physiological characteristics, and those of materials from plants are mainly due to their natural surface structure and internal cells. Materials from the human body combine both the characteristics of materials from animals and plants, due to their natural surface textures and internal chemicals. In terms of materials from microorganisms and minerals, their functional groups and dielectric properties have a significant influence on their triboelectric properties. Therefore, the output performances, features, and applications of different natural materials as tribopositive and tribonegative layers for TENGs are classified and summarized herein. Moreover, the triboelectric sequence of some natural materials is summarized to compare their ability to gain or lose charge in the process of friction. Finally, some challenges associated with using TENGs based on various natural materials are discussed, as they have the potential for use in large-scale practical applications, such as wearable, implantable and biomedical applications. The ready availability, low cost, and universality of natural materials expand the portfolio of the choice of triboelectric materials that can be used in TENGs. It is hoped that this review will help researchers to further explore the triboelectric effects of new natural materials and expand their use in TENGs. Moreover, it is also hoped that this review will inspire further development of green, economical, and biocompatible energy harvesting systems incorporating natural-materials-based TENGs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the diversity of natural materials that can be used in TENGs. 
2. Natural materials
There is an enormous number of natural materials and available species from which to derive them.70 Animals and plants are two types of primary organisms in the natural world.71 For use in TENG applications, these natural biomaterials and their derivatives are economical and environmentally friendly as they are abundant and readily available.71 Due to the large human population on Earth, materials from humans, such as skin, nails, and hair, are also readily available and environmentally friendly. In addition, the number of microorganisms and minerals is also high, and their related materials can be used to prepare the friction layer of TENGs to harvest mechanical energy. They almost always use a vertical separation mode (VCS) or single electrode mode (SE). Vertical contact-separation (VCS) is the earliest working mode of TENGs, and it is also the most used in current research. TENGs based on VCS consist of friction layers, electrodes, and encapsulation layers. The triboelectric mechanism can be described as follows. In the initial phase (before contact), electrons cannot be transferred due to the local trapping effect of the potential well. The two friction materials will generate different friction charges (due to the different abilities to gain and lose electrons) on the surface of the two friction layers after being brought into contact by external forces as friction layer pairs, resulting in contact charging. Among them, the friction layer with a strong ability to lose electrons has a positive charge, and the friction layer with a strong ability to gain electrons has a negative charge.72 They act as the tribo-positive and tribo-negative layers, respectively. Then, an equal amount of induced charge is generated on the back of the two friction layers. When the external force is subtracted, the induced charge flows along the outer circuit from one electrode to another, creating a current when the load is connected. When the two friction layers come into contact again under external force, the current flows back in the opposite direction. A continuous alternating-current output is obtained through repeated cycles. Most of the current TENGs based on natural materials also use VCS. However, it is difficult to attach electrodes to living plants, walking human beings, or other moving bodies when the natural materials act as the friction layer for the TENG in VCS mode. The single-electrode model (SE) can solve this problem by harvesting energy from moving objects. In single-electrode mode, only the fixed friction layer is connected to the electrode and ground, and the moved object serves as the opposite friction layer without the electrode. Based on the same triboelectric principle of VCS, the contact change of the friction layer pair results in charge transfer between the electrode and the ground. In this section, different types of natural materials used to prepare TENGs are discussed, including materials from animals, plants, the human body, microorganisms, and minerals.
2.1 Materials from animals
Many animal materials taken from organisms directly, such as crab shells, hair, fish bladders, silkworm silk, spider silk, and eggshell films, are economical and readily available biowaste generated in daily life.73,74 TENGs based on typical animal materials, such as animal fur, fish scales, crab shells, silk, and egg film, are introduced in the following section.

2.1.1 Animal fur. 
Animal furs, such as those from pigeons and rabbits, exhibit good durability when used directly as friction layers in TENGs.75,76 Such materials can be used to capture wind energy and convert it into electricity. Zhu et al.76 prepared a TENG with a single electrode using pigeon feathers as the tribopositive layer (F-STENG, Fig. 2a). FEP was used as a tribonegative layer, employing the magnetron sputtering technique to plate Cu on the surface of the feathers as an electrode. The output voltage of the F-STENG was as high as 90 V, and the output current reached 5 μA. Pigeon feather exhibits a hook-like structure, and after friction damage, pigeon feather self-restores its original shape by the reconnection of its hook-like structure (Fig. 2b). The output voltage and current of the self-healing feathers were reduced by only 8.9% and 11.4%, respectively. Moreover, the self-healing/initial voltage of the F-STENG was 0.8 after 200 self-healing cycles, proving that pigeon feather is durable and can be used in harsh working environments. Dog fur can also be used as a friction layer. The triboelectric properties of dog fur can be mainly attributed to its natural macromolecular proteins.77 Proteins contain amino groups, which are strong electron-donating groups. This is the main reason for the positive triboelectricity of fur.77 Singh et al.77 prepared a TENG using naturally shed dog fur as a tribopositive layer. PTFE and Cu were used as a tribonegative layer and electrode, respectively. During contact separation, the dog fur-based TENG generated an output voltage of 200 V, which lit 124 light-emitting diodes (LEDs). In addition, the study found that dog fur was more suitable than human hair for the tribopositive layer as the small diameter of dog fur increases the active layer surface area. Moreover, dog fur has a large medulla, which contains the same collagen as skin. From the triboelectric sequence table,68 skin is more tribopositive than keratin-based human hair, therefore dog fur is more tribopositive than human hair.77 In addition, human hair-based TENG studies will be discussed in the section on materials from the human body. Rabbit fur as the friction layer can be used under humid conditions in more complex environments, and exhibits a better output performance than dog hair. Chen et al.75 prepared fur-based TENGs (FB-TENGs) using rabbit fur, wool, dog fur, and Cu as tribopositive layers, and PTFE and Cu as the tribonegative layer and electrode, respectively, which were used to harness wind energy (Fig. 2c). The subtlety of the TENG was that the gear sets formed a counter-rotating structure (Fig. 2d), which doubled the relative speed to increase the output performance of the device further when driven by wind. The FB-TENG with its counter-rotating structure can also be used as a water wheel (Fig. 2e), which can harvest water flow energy. Meanwhile, rabbit fur has the highest fur density, and at a torque of 1.0 Nm, the output voltage, current, and charge of a rabbit fur-based TENG reached 3750 V, 28 μA, and 1260 C, respectively. Over 300000 consecutive runs at 0.1 Nm, the device exhibited good charge retention ability. Under the same conditions, the output voltage and transfer charge of dog fur are only about 2000 V and 470 nC. This is because rabbit fur has a higher fur density than dog fur resulting in a larger relative contact area during friction. Hence, rabbit fur has a better output voltage and transfer charge than dog fur. Moreover, the FB-TENG based on rabbit fur also showed stable output performance even after the ambient relative humidity (RH) changed sharply from 40 to 90%. The FB-TENG was used to capture wind and water flow energy to construct automatic irrigation and weather warning systems, exhibiting potential to be used in smart agriculture.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the working principles of a pigeon feather-based TENG.76 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (b) Photographs of damaged and self-healed pigeon feathers and an SEM image of the hook-like structure of pigeon feathers.76 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of an FB-TENG installation and the harnessing of natural wind energy.75 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Diagram of the working principles of an FB-TENG.75 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (e) Photo of a water wheel device.75 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 


2.1.2 Fish scales and crab shells. 
Fish scales, fish bladders, and crab shells are biowaste.78 These materials have the advantages of being low-cost, readily available, and biodegradable.78 Fish scales mainly contain gelatin, which is rich in electron-donating amino groups and has a strong tendency to lose electrons during friction.79 Han et al.79 prepared a TENG (FG-TENG, Fig. 3a and b) using fish scales to synthesize a fish gelatin (FG) film as a tribopositive layer, with a PTFE/PDMS composite film used as a tribonegative layer. The open circuit voltage, short-circuit current, and output power density of the contact-separation mode TENG (5 cm × 5 cm) were up to 130 V, 0.35 μA, and 45.8 μW cm−2, respectively. The prepared FG films could also be used as both tribopositive and tribonegative layers after modification. Sun et al.80 prepared a high-performance FG-based TENG (FSFG-TENG, Fig. 3c), with dopamine–FG (D–FG) and fluorinated silane–fish gelatin (F–FG) films used as tribopositive and tribonegative layers, respectively. The open circuit voltage, current, and power density of the FG-based films were 500 V, 4 μA, and 100 μW cm−2, respectively. The triboelectric properties of D–FG were found to be better than those of cotton, Al, cellulose, and Cu as tribopositive layers under the same conditions. Moreover, when paper, PET, FEP, and PI were used instead of F–FG as the tribonegative layer, the triboelectric properties were worse than those of an F–FG film.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram and overview of the application of an FG-TENG.79 (b) Schematic diagram and preparation process of an FG-TENG.79 (c) Schematic diagram and overview of the performance of an FSFG-TENG.80 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram and preparation process of a CD-TENG.83 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In addition to fish scales, the tissue of fish bladder also contains protein that can be used as a friction layer. Ma et al.81 prepared a TENG (FBF-TENG) using fish bladder film (FBF) as the tribopositive layer. FEP was used as a tribonegative layer, and deposited Cu nanoparticles on the surface of FBF were used as electrodes. The permittivity of the FBF was 23 at 1 kHz at room temperature, and its surface was found to be composed of tightly ordered collagen nanofibers. The open circuit voltage and short-circuit current of the FBF-TENG were 106 V and 7.3 μA at 3 Hz and 5 N, respectively. At 1 Hz, the output current of the FBF-TENG tended to be stable after 850 cycles. The high dielectric constant of the FBF and the ordered collagen fibers on its surface endowed it with good triboelectric properties.46,82 Furthermore, when the RH went from 66% to 94%, the short-circuit current of the TENG decreased from 7.30 μA to 5.89 μA, showing the good stability of the material to humidity. Kim et al.83 prepared a chitosan-based TENG (CD-TENG, Fig. 3d) using chitosan, a natural polymer with tribopositive properties, extracted from discarded crab shells. The main component of crab shells is chitosan. Chitosan contains hydroxyl and amino groups, which have electron-donating properties.84 Hence, it shows positive triboelectricity. They increased the performance of the TENG by adding diatoms. The diatoms have the characteristics of high porosity, which increases the charge of the chitosan surface after diatom addition. The average power density of the CD-TENG (VCS) was 15.7 mW m−2, 3.7 times higher than that of the pure chitosan TENG.


2.1.3 Silk and egg film. 
Silk is found in the glands of some arthropods, such as pupae, scorpions, and spiders.85 Silk is formed by the solidification of liquid silk secreted during the cocoon process, and it has high mechanical strength, good biocompatibility, and degradability.86,87 Moreover, the main component of silk is silk protein, and silk-based TENGs can be used as power supplies for implantable medical devices or wearable devices.74,88,89 Silk is a tribopositive material due to silk protein having the ability to lose electrons.85 Zhang et al.90 used silk film and PET as the tribopositive and tribonegative layers of a TENG, respectively (Fig. 4a). The maximum voltage, current, and power density of the silk/PET-based TENG were 268 V, 5.78 μA, and 193.6 μW cm−2 at a 40 MΩ load, respectively. This TENG can be used as a wearable device to monitor human motion. Silk can be used as a tribonegative layer when matched with a material that is more tribopositive. Gogurla et al.91 used silk film and human finger skin as a pair of friction layers to construct a TENG (Bio-TENG), which was used as a strain sensor worn on the human body to sense human movement and generate electrical energy. A silver nanowire was embedded in a silk protein film from a silkworm and the embedded silver nanowire electrode on the surface of the silk protein film was patterned. After direct contact with human fingers, the highly tribopositive human skin produced many tribonegative charges on the silk surface. When the finger touch pressure was 10 kPa, the output voltage and current reached up to 90 V and 0.06 μA, four times higher than those upon contact with glass. Moreover, the output voltage of the Bio-TENG was around six times higher than that of a two-electrode TENG previously reported by Kim et al.92 The output of this TENG stabilized after 2500 cycles, reaching a maximum output power density of 2 mW m−2 with a load resistance of 1 MΩ. Moreover, the mass of the Bio-TENG was only 0.027 g, which was only 27.22% the mass of a carbon sponge TENG reported by Tao Li et al.93 The device also exhibited stable performance at 50% RH. Silk can also be used as both tribopositive and tribonegative layers. Niu et al.94 designed an all-silk TENG, which has been shown to be suitable for application in various biodegradable and implantable bioelectronic devices. A 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) radical oxidation system (0.02 g of TEMPO, 0.1 g of NaBr, 0.012 mol of NaClO) was used to peel silk nanoribbons (SNR) from silk, which produced nanoscale protrusions on the surface of the silk nanoribbon film (SNRF), thus increasing its roughness. SNRF and regenerated silk fibroin film (RSFF) were used as the tribopositive and tribonegative layers, respectively, and Mg was sputtered on the two films as electrodes. The maximum output voltage and current of this TENG were 41.64 V and 0.5 μA, respectively. After 3000 cycles, the output performance was stable. Schwann cells showed better uniform growth on the surface of SNRF, demonstrating the good biocompatibility of the device. The TENG showed a fast degradation rate in vitro, and the biodegradation products of the silk fibroin protein material were peptides and amino acids, which pose no threat to humans.
 Fig. 4  (a) Photograph and working principles of a silk/PET-based TENG.90 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Diagram of an egg-based TENG's preparation process, including the process of hydrothermal peeling of the eggshell film and the process of ZnO modification of the eggshell film.95 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Photographs of BN-TENG implantation and wound healing in mice and electrical output in vivo.74 (d) A BN-TENG based stimulation system and a microscopy image of cardiomyocytes.74 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Egg film is a thin film attached to the inner surface of an eggshell that is everyday food waste and has the advantages of being edible, abundant, degradable, and low-cost.95 Egg film contains collagen (types I, V, and X) and glycosaminoglycans, all of which contain amino groups.95 Kaur et al.95 prepared an egg film-based TENG using egg film as the tribopositive layer and Teflon as the tribonegative layer. Due to the surface of egg film containing amino functional groups, its ability to lose electrons is much higher than that of PTFE, so tribo-positive charges are generated when it contacts PTFE. Thus, the charges create currents in the external circuit. The output current of this TENG reached around 1.2 μA and stabilized over 3400 cycles. At the same time, they used ZnO to modify egg film (Fig. 4b) and brought it into contact with PTFE. The ZnO–egg film generates tribopositive charges in the process of pressing contact. The output voltage of the ZnO–egg film-based TENG (VCS) is ∼225.5 V, while that of the pure egg film is only 107.3 V. This is due to the higher surface roughness of the modified eggshell film. Hence, the surface tribo-positive charges are more than that of the pure egg film. Jiang et al.74 found that any two of five natural bioresorbable polymers, egg film, chitin, rice paper, silk film, and cellulose, could be used for the friction layers of the TENG (BN-TENG). In addition, it was reported that these five types of films are non-toxic, as they were tested against L929 cells. When silk protein film and rice paper were selected as tribopositive and tribonegative layers, respectively, the maximum output voltage and current of the BN-TENG were 34 V and 0.32 μA, respectively. Moreover, the optimal power density of this TENG was 21.6 mW m−2 at a load resistance of 67 MΩ. In addition, it was found that the use of methanol-treated silk fibroin membrane as the encapsulation layer in the BN-TENG enhanced its tolerance to bodily fluids and significantly enhanced its ability to avoid hydrolysis. The BN-TENG implanted in mice allowed full healing of their wounds and the electrical output of the device could be monitored in vivo (Fig. 4c). The excellent biocompatibility and bioabsorbability of BN-TENG endow it with great potential to serve as a bioabsorbable power source for use in implantable medical devices in the future. In addition, a BN-TENG-based self-powered stimulation system was shown to regulate cardiomyocyte cluster pacing and was directly used to coordinate and repair abnormal cardiomyocytes (Fig. 4d), which provides a new and effective solution for the treatment of heart conditions such as bradycardia and arrhythmia.

2.2 Materials from plants
As a type of natural organism, plants are green and environmentally friendly natural materials which have the characteristics of complete biological compatibility and ecological friendliness.96–98 Plant materials provide a wide range of natural surfaces, both in the form of marine plants and land plants, including plant seeds and products, and even plant wastes such as peanut shells, allowing them to be applied as a friction body in TENGs.99–101 This section therefore introduces TENGs based on different species of plants and their derivatives, including wood, leaves, cotton, and plant products paper, cellulose, and starch.

2.2.1 Wood. 
Wood is a common natural material that is renewable, rich in resources, and biodegradable.97,98 However, as the lignin and hemicellulose of wood make it hard and center it in the triboelectric sequence table,66 it is difficult to use this material directly in TENGs. Therefore, natural wood-based TENGs usually require chemical treatment to remove their lignin and hemicelluloses (Fig. 5a),96 with sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and sodium sulfite (Na2SO3) being the most commonly used chemical reagents for this purpose. Luo et al.96 were the first to report the treatment of balsa wood using a mixed solution of NaOH and Na2SO3 for TENGs. The lignin and hemicellulose content of the wood was substantially reduced, and its weight changed from 100% to 58%, revealing a more porous structure (Fig. 5b and c). The surface roughness of the wood-based material increased, and cellulose was exposed on the wood surface, which is more positive in the triboelectric series than other wood components. Then, the wood was treated via hot pressing to prepare a tribopositive layer material with a weight of 0.19 g and a thickness of 0.15 mm. This wood-based single-electrode mode W-TENG device (3 cm × 3 cm) was lightweight, thin, and exhibited moisture and wear resistance characteristics. At a stress and frequency of 20 N and 1 Hz, the open circuit voltage of the W-TENG reached 81 V, the short-circuit current was 1.8 μA, and the transferred charge density was 36 μC m−2. An output voltage enhancement of ∼70% was attained after treatment. The tensile strength of the device was better after the treatment, being 7.5 times higher than before and showed only a slight change after 1000 bending cycles. Interestingly, a smart table tennis table (Fig. 5d) prepared from the wood-based TENG was used to monitor edge balls to determine if they were out of bounds. This wood treatment was used for other types of wood, and the enhancements proved the universality of this wood treatment method. Shi et al.102 used the same chemical treatment with a mixed solution of NaOH and Na2SO3, and proposed a smart home system design (Fig. 5e) based on a wood-based TENG. It was reported that the structure of the balsa wood used in the device changed from a 3D porous structure with irregular hexagonal cell cavities to a structure with folded cell cavities with a smaller diameter and irregular shape. Moreover, the wood became porous and relatively soft due to the removal of its lignin and hemicellulose content. A TENG (2 cm × 2 cm) was prepared using the treated wood as the tribopositive layer and PTFE as the tribonegative layer. The open circuit voltage and short-circuit current of the TENG reached 38 V and 0.37 μA, respectively, at a pressure of 2.5 kPa and frequency of 1 Hz. After 100000 cycles, the output voltage of the TENG was almost unchanged. This wood-based TENG was shown to be useful as a smart appliance control system for home (Fig. 5f). The self-powered intelligent door lock system (Fig. 5g) developed based on this TENG unlocks doors and controls an alarm according to the finger pressure that is applied on the wooden door, enhancing security. An output voltage signal was generated when a human finger was pressed on the wooden door. Through multichannel data acquisition and signal processing, touching a password sequence and personal characteristics can be recognized (Fig. 5h).
 Fig. 5  (a) Diagram of the processes involved in preparing a wood-based TENG.96 (b) Schematic diagram of the structural changes in the wood after chemical treatment.96 (c) FTIR spectra of the wood before and after treatment.96 (d) Schematic diagram of an intelligent table tennis table constructed using the wood-based TENG.96 (e) Schematic diagram of a smart home design system.102 (f–h) Schematic diagram of smart home devices based on the wood-based TENG.102 
Although wood can be chemically treated to improve its properties for use in TENGs, the treated wood (main ingredient: cellulose) still sits in the middle of the turboelectric series, which limits its generation performance. Therefore, decoration with tribopositive or tribonegative modifiers is another common method by which to improve wood for use in TENGs. After treatment with NaOH and Na2SO3, wood becomes soft and porous, and can then be used as the primary material to prepare modified wood with other modifiers. Bang et al.103 used N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (AEAP-Si) with –NH2 as a tribopositive modifier (N-wood) and trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)silane (PFOT-Si) with –CF2 and –CF3 as a tribonegative modifier (F-wood) to modify balsa wood to prepare an all-wood TENG. An extremely high voltage of 90.1 V and a current density of 114.4 nA cm−2 under 2 Hz were attained using PFOT-Si-modified wood as the tribonegative layer and untreated wood as the tribopositive layer. The polar Si–OH and Si–O–Si bonding, as well as decreased roughness induced by the AEAP-Si suppressed the tribopositive improvement via the –NH2 groups of the AEAP-Si. Thus, the untreated wood exhibited better tribopositive properties than the AEAP-Si-modified wood. Sun et al.104 used zeolite imidazolium framework-8 (ZIF-8) (a subclass of MOFs with a sodalite topology) as a tribopositive modifier to prepare tribopositive ZIF-8@balsa-wood. Moreover, ZIF-8 improved the friction surface roughness of the wood. PDMS was coated on the wood to prepare tribonegative PDMS@wood. Compared with native wood, the ZIF-8@wood was 20 times more tribopositive, while PDMS@wood was around 60 times more tribonegative. This functionalized wood-based triboelectric nanogenerator (FW-TENG) generated an open circuit voltage of 24.3 V and a short-circuit current of 0.32 μA at 50 N, which was 80 times higher than that of pure native wood. The work of Hao et al.99 confirmed that the output performance of wood-based TENGs is related to the wood species. TENGs were prepared using six wood species as different tribopositive layers, PTFE as a tribonegative layer, and copper as an electrode. Among them, the single-electrode TENG based on New Zealand pine exhibited an open circuit voltage of 220 V. As it was very porous, the surface of the TENG thus exhibited good conditions for electron generation and storage.
The removal of lignin and hemicellulose from wood via treatment with NaOH and Na2SO3 is a common means by which to increase the output of wood-based TENGs. However, after treatment of wood there is no change in its position in the triboelectric sequence table. Thus, significant progress has been made on research into wood modification using modifying agents. The selection of suitable modifying agents to remove the lignin and hemicellulose content of wood is beneficial for improving the properties of wood-based TENGs. Moreover, selecting wood species with more stomatal structures is another strategy by which to enhance the output of wood-based TENGs.


2.2.2 Leaves. 
Leaves have the characteristics of a rich surface texture, good roughness, and softness.105 Unlike wood, leaves do not have to undergo complex processes to strip lignin and hemicellulose from them. Thus, leaves can usually be used directly in TENGs. Zhang et al.106 used scallions, onions, and leeks as triboelectric layers for TENGs. These vegetable leaves have different textures on their inner and outer skins (the inner skin is the skin exposed after the outer skin is removed). These outer surfaces of vegetable skins were found to have –OH groups, and were therefore used as tribonegative layers. Moreover, the inner surfaces of the vegetables were used as tribopositive layers as they contain –NH2 groups. Cu strips were attached to the inner and outer surfaces of the vegetable-based TENG as electrodes. Among them, leek had the highest content of –OH groups in the outer skin, so it shows the best performance. At a motor speed of 0.3 m s−1 and a contact separation frequency of 7 Hz, the open circuit voltage of the leek-based TENG was 182 V, the current density was 0.83 mA m−2, and the power density was 35.1 W m−2. Moreover, the device lit 48 LEDs and charged a 0.47 μF capacitor to 8.91 V. The output performance of the TENG was stable after 5400 cycles of testing. Chen et al.107 prepared a rose-based TENG using fresh rose petals as a tribopositive layer (Fig. 6a). The micro–nanostructure on the petal surface exhibited a certain roughness, which provided the most extensive contact area for triboelectric charging. This TENG (3 cm × 3 cm) reached a maximum open circuit voltage of 30.6 V and a short-circuit current of 0.78 μA under a constant-period compressive force (100 N). With a 50 MΩ resistor and 2 Hz frequency, its maximum output power density was as high as 27.2 mW m−2.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of a rose-based TENG; inset is a photograph of a rose surface texture.107 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Leaf-TENG simulation; inset is a photograph of the surface of a hosta leaf.108 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Cross-sectional microscopy images of a hosta leaf and an SEM image of its surface.108 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) The working mechanism of a leaf-TENG.108 (e) Diagram of a sandwich TENG, showing a photograph of the bread and SEM images of the four plants.69 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (f) Photograph of a sandwich TENG and the successful lighting of a siren.69 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (g) Comparison diagram of the output current between the FBD-TENG and two types of single-electrode TENGs.109 
In addition, some leaves not only have a rich surface texture, but their interior is rich in porous mesophyll cells full of electrolytes, which have good conductivity and can act as both friction and conductive layers. Yang et al.108 reported a leaf-TENG based on hosta leaves (Fig. 6b), where the hosta leaves served as both the triboelectric layer and electrode. This type of leaf has a rich outer surface texture with dense cuticles and epidermal cells, making it a good candidate for use as a triboelectric layer (Fig. 6c). Mesophyll cells can be found in the leaves, filled with water and electrolytes that can be used as a conductive liquid (Fig. 6d). A hosta leaf was used as the tribopositive layer and PMMA was chosen as the tribonegative layer. The open circuit voltage of the leaf-TENG (8 cm × 8 cm) was 230 V, and the short-circuit current was 9.5 μA when the frequency and peak velocity reached 2 Hz and 0.333 m s−1. When the load resistance was 107 Ω, the maximum output power of the leaf-TENG reached 45 mW m−2. This study demonstrated the feasibility of the direct use of leaves for constructing TENGs, wherein they act as both the friction layer and electrode. Jiao et al.69 directly used vegetable leaves to prepare a sandwich TENG (Fig. 6e). Chinese cabbage, celery cabbage, leaf mustard, and lettuce were respectively selected as tribopositive layers. The inner cells of the four types of leaves contain electrolyte, so they can also function as electrodes simultaneously. Bread, with a loose porous structure, was used as a tribonegative layer. Among the different types of leaves, celery cabbage exhibited the best output performance due to its good surface roughness and large single cells, meaning that it contained more electrolyte. Its maximum voltage and current in single-electrode mode reached 15 V and 3 μA, respectively. A sandwich TENG disguised as an alarm (Fig. 6f) was successfully demonstrated in the study. Wu et al.109 used five different living leaves as different tribopositive layers for a TENG (FBD-TENG), namely Cerbera manghas, Michelia champaca Linn., Mytilaria laosensis Lec., Ervatamia divaricata (L.) Burk. cv. Gouyahua and Bryophyllum pinnatum (Lam.) Oken, which have different surface textures and roughness. Since the tissue layers of these living plants are filled with electrolytes, electric charges can be transported throughout the plant via ionic conduction. The cuticle covering the epidermis is a naturally hydrophobic and dielectric material. Plant cuticle contains two main components, polymer keratin and keratin wax, which protect leaves from drying out and external environmental stress. The surface of the leaves acted as a tribopositive layer, and conductive leaf tissue served as the bottom electrode. Water droplets (33 μL, 100 mM NaCl solution) served as the tribonegative layer and top electrode. Among them, the water shock exhibited the best electrical performance on Mytilaria laosensis Lec., with the voltage and current exceeding 1 V and 4 μA, respectively, due to the better surface roughness of the Mytilaria laosensis Lec. leading to a larger effective contact area. FBD-TENG exhibited a higher output current than the conventional single electrodes of leaf-based and Teflon-based TENGs (Fig. 6g). Hence, living plants can be used in TENGs to harvest natural energy and convert it into electrical energy.
Overall, TENGs based on various plant leaves have proven to be successful in harvesting energy using natural friction. Leaves can be used as a friction layer and electrode due to their natural surface texture and abundant electrolytes in their internal cells. Moreover, the FBD-TENG shows the ability to harvest energy from falling raindrops in the natural environment. This device will enable more natural energy to be utilized, and presents a novel and environmentally friendly method of energy harvesting.


2.2.3 Cotton. 
Cotton has a fluffy, porous, and deformable structure due to its many micropores formed by interlaced cellulose fibers.110 Moreover, it is suitable for use as a tribopositive material as it contains –OH groups and has a strong tendency to lose electrons.66 In addition, the output of the TENG was found to be closely related to the surface area of the friction layer, and the effective contact area of the cotton increased when subjected to pressure.111 Xia et al.112 prepared a wheel-disk-shaped TENG (C-TENG) using cotton as a tribopositive layer and FEP as a tribonegative layer (Fig. 7a). When the cotton cloth was aligned with the left electrode, the FEP surface acquired negative charge, and the cotton acquired positive charge through the triboelectric effect (Fig. 7b). At a speed of 210 rpm, the open-circuit voltage reached 782 V and the short-circuit current reached 8.9 μA. At a load resistance of 330 MΩ, the maximum peak power of the device reached 1.89 mW, with its performance tending to be stable at 100 min. Moreover, the output performance increased as the number of rotator blades increased (Fig. 7c). As cotton deforms under minimal force, the TENG is highly responsive to wind energy and acts as a wind speed sensor. Cotton can also be chemically treated to change its interface polarity and be used as a relatively tribonegative material. Sangkhun et al.113 used trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)silane (PFTS) and 3-cyanopropyltriethoxysilane (CTES) to modify silk and cottton respectively. PFTS has –F groups and therefore exhibits a strong tendency to gain electrons (Fig. 7d). The modified cotton and modified silk served as tribonegative and tribopositive layers, respectively, in a TENG. At the same time, the surface roughness of cotton increases after fluoride modification (Fig. 7e). As a result, the contact area increases during friction, and the negative charge accumulates more on the surface. Under manual tapping of 2 N, the modified cotton-based TENG (VCS) exhibits an output voltage of 216.82 V and an output current of 50.33 μA. For comparison, the output voltage and current of a TENG based on unmodified cotton are only 39.23 V and 0.2 μA, respectively. Under an external load resistance of 0.42 MΩ, a maximum output power density of the device of 0.345 mW cm−2 was observed. The TENG was operated continuously for 14 days, over which time its voltage and current were stable, demonstrating the good stability and durability of the device.
 Fig. 7  (a) Structural design of a C-TENG.112 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (b) Working principles of a C-TENG.112 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (c) Effect of the number of blades on the TENG output.112 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of the surface chemical modification of cotton and silk.113 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Atomic force microscopy topology and 3D images (5 × 5 μm) of pristine cotton and F-cotton.113 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.4 Paper. 
Paper is made from wood pulp, therefore making it a plant-based product.114 Paper is not only economical and flexible, it also has the advantages of being biodegradable and recyclable.114,115 Mao et al.116 used printing paper as a tribopositive layer to assemble a contact separation mode TENG (P-TENG, Fig. 8a). Many cellulose fibers are located on the paper surface. PTFE was used as the tribonegative layer of the P-TENG. At 30 Hz, the peak voltage and current reached 400 V and 0.17 mA, respectively. Under a load resistance of 8 MΩ, the maximum power density of the device was 53 W m−2. After being tested for over 200000 cycles, the output voltage of the device was almost unchanged, showing its good stability. The P-TENG was placed inside a book to convert the mechanical energy associated with the turning of pages into electrical energy that was capable of lighting 80 LEDs. Parandeh et al.117 prepared a paper-based TENG (Fig. 8b) using cellulose paper as a tribopositive layer and poly(caprolactone) (PCL)-modified graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets as the tribonegative layer. The addition of GO nanosheets increased the surface charge and dielectric constant of the paper-based TENG, thus enhancing its output performance. Cellulose paper and 4% GO/PCL as a friction layer pair exhibited a maximum voltage of 120 V and output current of 4 μA. Moreover, the power density of the paper-based TENG reached 72.5 mW m−2 and it was capable of lighting 21 blue LEDs. After 500 cycles, the output performance of the cellulose paper-based TENG was still stable. Zhang et al.118 prepared a cellophane-based TENG using commercial cellophane, a type of natural fiber made from cotton or wood pulp, as a tribonegative layer. A fully green TENG (FG-TENG) was prepared using regenerated cellulose (R-cellulose) and graphite foil as the tribopositive layer and electrode, respectively. When the contact frequency was 7 Hz, the maximum open-circuit voltage of the FG-TENG (5 cm × 5 cm) was 300 V, the maximum short-circuit current was 2.6 mA, and its maximum output power density was 307 mW m−2 at a load resistance of 5 MΩ. Moreover, the output performance of the FG-TENG did not change significantly after 30900 cycles. Recycled cellulose film is a high-density non-porous film formed from dissolved cellulose polymers which inhibit the diffusion of water in the film (Fig. 8c), thus leading to the material exhibiting high triboelectric effects and stability. When Cu was used to replace cellophane, the voltage and current of the TENG were 47 V and 17 μA, respectively. When PTFE was used to replace cellophane, the voltage and current of the TENG were 383 V and 50.1 μA, respectively. However, under the same optimal conditions, the voltage and current of the cellophane-based TENG were 736 V and 66.5 μA, respectively, higher than those of the Cu and PTFE-based TENGs, thus demonstrating the potential of cellophane to replace non-degradable polymers and metals. Rice paper has the advantages of being cheap, soft, and biodegradable.119 Moreover, rice paper can be used as a friction layer and is recyclable. Chi et al.119 prepared a rice paper-based single-electrode TENG (3 cm × 3 cm, RP-TENG) using rice paper as a tribopositive layer, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) as a tribonegative material, and conductive ink as electrodes (Fig. 8d). At 5 Hz, the RP-TENG exhibited an output voltage of 244 V, an output current of 6 μA, and an output power density of 37.64 μW cm−2. The output was almost constant after 10000 cycles. After recycling, the output voltage and current of the rice paper reached 194 V and 3.8 μA, respectively, and the recycled RP-TENG was shown to light 45 LEDs, indicating the good output performance and sustainability of rice paper.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of a P-TENG, incorporating an SEM image of the surface of the cellulose in the paper and commercial white LEDs lit by the P-TENG when turning book pages.116 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic diagram of the TENG structure, showing a diagram of a PCL/GO fiber and an SEM image.117 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematic drawing showing the difference in water diffusion in cellulose fiber-based and R-cellulose films.118 (d) Working mechanism of an RP-TENG.119 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Overall, remarkable progress has been made with paper-based TENGs, as they exhibit good output performance and stability. Paper is mainly used as a tribopositive layer in TENGs, where the modification of the tribonegative layer can improve the output performance of paper-based TENGs. Paper-based TENGs thus have good application prospects for use in portable equipment. Moreover, recycled paper can be reused in a TENG, with only a slightly reduced output performance observed. Meanwhile, cellulose, a derivative of paper, plays an important role in paper-based TENGs, and cellulose-based TENGs are introduced in the next subsection.


2.2.5 Cellulose. 
As seen in the previous sections on wood, cotton, and paper, cellulose plays an important role in the triboelectric properties of these materials. Cellulose, the main component of plant cell walls, is the most abundant natural macromolecular material in the world.120 Almost all the cellulose used in daily life is derived from plants, such as cotton (about 90%), wood (about 50%), and vegetables (about 40%).121,122 Cellulose has the advantages of biodegradability, biocompatibility, and processability, and also exhibits unique mechanical, dielectric, chemical, and structural integration.123–127 Cellulose tends to lose electrons and is positively charged as it contains an abundance of oxygen atoms.128 Yao et al. prepared a TENG using a pure cellulose film as a tribopositive layer, and its average peak voltage and current reached only 5 V and 5 μA, respectively.129 The pure cellulose-based TENG exhibited a weak performance due to the weak surface polarity of cellulose. Graham et al.110 demonstrated that the weak polarization of cellulose could be overcome by using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) in combination with cellulose, thereby improving the ability of the surface to generate positive charges. Kim et al.130 demonstrated that cellulose can be used as both the tribonegative layer and substrate of a TENG. Using silver nanowires as both a tribopositive layer and electrode, the power density of the cellulose-based TENG reached 693 mW m−2. Ba et al.131 prepared a single-electrode TENG based on a carrot cellulose hydrogel, which generated a maximum voltage and current of 254 V and 11.52 μA, respectively. As carrot tissue as a plant hydrogel exhibits natural conductivity, carrot cellulose film can be used as both a tribopositive layer and an electrode. These studies thus show that cellulose can be used as different components of TENGs.
Its wide range of uses in TENGs also makes cellulose the most studied material for use in natural materials-based TENGs. At present, the main research on cellulose is based on improving the performance of cellulose-based TENGs by improving its weak surface polarity and hydrophobicity, as well as its functionalization.132 Chemical modification of the cellulose surface changes the polarity of cellulose and effectively improves the output performance of cellulose-based TENGs. Nie et al.133 used triethoxy-1H,1H,2H,2H-tridecafluoro-n-octylsilane (PFOTES) to modify a cellulose surface (Fig. 9a). The perfluorohydrocarbon chain grafting of PFOTES on the surface of cellulose increased its tribonegative charge density and improved its hydrophobicity. Cellulose@PFOTES was used as the tribonegative layer in a TENG, with its output current reaching 9.3 μA, which was around 1.8 times better than before modification with the cellulose. At 70% ambient humidity, the cellulose@PFOTES-based TENG still retained 70% of its initial output performance. Cui et al.134 designed a cellulose–phosphorene-based TENG. The addition of phosphorene enhanced the tribopositive properties and stability of the cellulose. PET was used as the tribonegative layer and gold was used as the electrode. The current density, open-circuit voltage, and power density of the TENG reached 1.8 μA cm−2, 5.2 V, and 9.36 μW cm−2, respectively, which were around 4.4 and 9.36 times higher than those of pure cellulose. Moreover, a TENG based on cellulose@4-fold phosphorene retained good performance after six months of exposure to ambient conditions. Chemical modification can also improve the output performance of cellulose as a tribopositive layer. Cai et al.135 prepared a cellulose-based TENG using 3-(2-aminoethylamino)-propyldimethoxymethylsilane (AEAPDMS) to modify the cellulose (Fig. 9b) to make it more tribopositive than before modification. The open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current of the TENG were 195 V and 13.4 μA, respectively, which were 36 V and 6.4 μA higher than those of the unmodified TENG.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of PFOTES-modified cellulose.133 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of the AEAPDMS modification of cellulose.135 (c) Schematic diagram of natural-allicin-modified cellulose.136 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of the source and physical modification of cellulose.137 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (e) 3D printed multilayered structure of the friction layer and a diagram of the AP-TENG.138 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Schematic of the gear-shaped cellulose-based TENG.140 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Chemical modification improves the performance of cellulose-based-TENGs; however, the use of chemical reagents is not conducive to environmental protection. Natural materials can be used to modify cellulose to improve its output performance when used in TENGs. Roy et al.136 used natural allicin, which was extracted from garlic juice, to modify cellulose (Fig. 9c). Being sulfur-rich due to the presence of highly dipolar sulfoxide groups (–SO) with a negative charge centered on the oxygen, allicin enhanced the tribopositive polarity of cellulose. Cellulose–allicin film was used as a tribopositive layer and PVDF as a tribonegative layer. The peak output voltage and current of the allicin–cellulose TENG were 7.9 V and 5.13 μA, respectively, around 6.5 times higher than those of pure cellulose. The power density increased from 0.25 μW cm−2 to 10.13 μW cm−2. Physical modification is also an effective means by which to improve the output performance of cellulose-based TENGs. Lin et al.137 were inspired by cockscomb seeds, and physically cut cellulose fibers (CF) to form a coronal structure with many longitudinal sections (Fig. 9d). The tiny fibers increased the number of –OH groups and the surface area of the CF. Moreover, this led to more binding sites between the silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) and fibers to improve the surface tribopositive charge. In the studied cellulose-based TENG, the CF@AgNPs were used as a tribopositive layer, PTFE was used as a tribonegative layer, and silver was plated as an electrode. The open circuit voltage and current of the CF@AgNP-based TENG were 110 V and 14.8 μA, respectively, which were 35 V and 3.6 μA higher than those of the untreated TENG. Designing a TENG friction layer with a multilayered structure has been proved to be a feasible method by which to increase the contact area, thus helping to improve the triboelectric effect of the device.138 Qian et al.139 assembled a TENG (AP-TENG) using cellulose as a tribopositive layer using 3D printing technology to endow the friction layer with a 3D multilayered structure (Fig. 9e). The multilayer structure effectively improved the output performance of the TENG by increasing the electron transport efficiency and the actual contact area within the friction layer. The output voltage of the AP-TENG reached 55.8 V, 1.75 times higher than that of a traditional flat TENG. Zhang et al.140 designed a gear-shaped cellulose-based TENG (Fig. 9f) using cellulose@polyvinylimin@nano-silver film as the tribopositive layer and FEP film as the tribonegative layer. The contact area of the gear-shaped cellulose-based TENG friction layer was around four times higher than that of a traditional flat TENG. The open-circuit voltage and current were 7.6 and 3.6 times higher than those of a traditional flat TENG, respectively. Moreover, with an increase in the number of gears (1 to 6 cm2, 2 to 12 cm2, 3 to 18 cm2), the open-circuit voltage increased from 122 V to 286.5 V (an increase of around 135.8%), and the short-circuit current increased from 1.5 μA to 4.0 μA (an increase of around 166.7%).


2.2.6 Starch. 
Starch is a natural macromolecular material derived mainly from corn, wheat, potatoes, and cassava,84 and has the advantages of flexibility, low cost, and degradability.141 However, the poor hydrophobicity of starch has been shown to hinder the long-term stability of biodegradable TENGs prepared from starch.142 To resolve this issue, Khandelwal et al.143 added laver to starch and enhanced the output performance of the resulting starch-based TENG (SL-TENG). Starch@laver (1 wt%) was used as the tribopositive layer and edible gold leaf served as the electrode. Polycaprolactone (PCL) was used as both tribonegative and packaging layers. Under a contact force of 8 N, the output voltage of the SL-TENG reached 50 V, five times higher than that of pure starch. At a load resistance of 500 MΩ, the maximum power of the TENG reached 4.05 μW, and the maximum power density was 6.48 mW m−2. The SL-TENG was used to successfully power a stopwatch and thermometer. A study by Prasanna et al.144 compared the properties of TENGs (EM-TENG) based on four different types of starch (Fig. 10a and b), rice flour (RF), wheat flour (WF), gram flour (GF), and coarse flour (SM), where 5 wt% RF, WF, GF, and SM were added to PVA as different tribopositive layers and FEP was used as the tribonegative layer. The RF particle size was found to be more suitable and well distributed in PVA than the other types of starch, creating multiple charge transport paths to enhance the charge transport of the resulting TENG (Fig. 10c). Moreover, RF features –NH2 and –OH functional groups, which enhance the tribopositive properties of the RF. Hence, RF showed the best output performance among the different types of starch, with the output voltage and current reaching 25.5 V and 115 nA, respectively. At a load resistance of 70 MΩ, the EM-TENG exhibited a maximum power density of 334 μW cm−2. In addition, the stability of output voltage of the device was verified as it could continuously run for 2000 s without performance degradation. Moreover, the RF–PVA film only decomposed after 16 days (Fig. 10d), showing excellent degradation performance. A sensor based on the EM-TENG was used to collect different output signals for various joint movements of the human body according to the exertion of different pressures (Fig. 10e), representing an idea for smart healthcare and future internet of things wearables. Peng et al.145 prepared a TENG (CS-F-TENG) using an all-natural starch–chitosan tribopositive layer. The addition of chitosan increased the surface roughness and positive triboelectric properties of the film. The output voltage, current, and power density of the resulting CS-F-TENG were 1080 V, 16.9 mA m−2, and 5.07 W m−2, respectively. Compared with the output performance of pure chitosan film, these values represent increases of around 54.3%, 45.9%, and 635.8%, respectively. The CS-F-TENG was used to test the human throat swallowing behavior and has great potential to be used in human flexible wearable devices. At the same time, it can also monitor the relatively slow, medium and high speed of a car (Fig. 10f). This is because it can produce a high output under a small force, including a voltage sensitivity of 73.65 ± 8.10 V N−1 (46.03 ± 0.51 V kPa−1) and current sensitivity of 2.53 ± 0.16 μA N−1 (1.58 ± 0.01 μA kPa−1) in the force range of 2 to 10 N (1.25–6.25 kPa). Their research indicates that the TENG has great application potential in transportation.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the EM-TENG.144 (b) Photographs of four starchy foods and a comparison of their output voltage and current.144 (c) Charge transport pathways of the pure PVA and RF-incorporated PVA.144 (d) Photograph of RF–PVA film degradation over 16 days.144 (e) Use of the EM-TENG to monitor human joint motion in real time.144 (f) The CS-F-TENG can monitor the speed of a car.145 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 

2.3 Materials from the human body
Human skin and hair tend to lose electrons and generate static electricity when rubbed against other materials,105 meaning that they are placed high in the friction sequence.68,85 The reason for this tribopositive electricity is mainly the lipid layer on the surface of these tissues.105 Moreover, the skin of a human finger even has a natural texture, a fingerprint, which is an ideal friction layer with a rough surface, and fingernail clippings also have fine lines that enable them to be directly used as a friction layer.146,147 In this section, the use of human hair, skin, and fingerprints in TENGs is discussed.

2.3.1 Skin. 
TENGs typically require the deposition of metal electrodes on triboelectric materials for efficient electrical output, which is impossible on human skin.76,81 However, the development of single-electrode-based TENGs could solve this issue.148 The charges on the skin are not efficiently collected, and the skin is only used as the friction layer. Wang et al.148 prepared a TENG using finger skin as a tribopositive layer (Fig. 11a). The open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current density of the TENG were 1000 V and 8 mA m−2, respectively, using indium tin oxide (ITO) as the electrode and PDMS as a tribonegative layer. At a load resistance of 100 MΩ, the output voltage and current density were 180 V and 2.8 mA m−2, respectively, and the output power density was 500 mW m−2. The TENG was designed as an independent tracking matrix that monitored human skin contact and pressure. Similarly, finger skin and PDMS were used as a pair of friction layers in a single-electrode model TENG prepared by Sun et al.,149 which also had the advantage of being highly transparent (88% transparency). In this single-electrode model TENG, finger skin was used as a tribopositive layer and a tribonegative layer with a micro–nanostructure was constructed on PDMS using a natural leaf mold. Silver nanowires were used as electrodes, with 97% light transmission, and the transparency of the TENG reached 88%. This TENG exhibited an open circuit voltage of 56 V and a short-circuit current of 3.1 μA. On this basis, a flexible electrochromic device was constructed, which displayed different colors upon the generation of different forms of friction. Wen et al.150 prepared a PDMS-skin-based TENG (PS-TENG), which showed good output performance and flexibility. The finger acted as a tribopositive layer, and the PDMS acted as a tribonegative layer. When human skin was placed in contact with PDMS, the skin and PDMS carried equal amounts of positive and negative charges, respectively. Graphite deposited on PDMS was used as an electrode and silk fibroin solution was dropped onto the graphite electrode to form a silk fibroin membrane coating. This silk printed graphite electrode exhibited enhanced electrical conductivity with improved flexibility for wearable applications. The output voltage and current of PS-TENG were as high as 666 V and 174.6 μA, respectively, and its maximum power reached 4.121 mW. When attached to the wrist, the PS-TENG was used to monitor large wrist flexures, demonstrating its excellent wearable flexibility.
 Fig. 11  (a) Photographs and schematic diagram of a TENG based on skin and output voltage map of a human finger touch matrix.148 (b) Schematic diagram based on an energy harvesting system for the human body, including schematic illustration of the working principles and photographs of lighting of LEDs.151 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
In addition to being used as a friction layer, the human body can also be used as an electrode in triboelectric systems. Xing et al.151 proposed a simple TENG that could be used to harvest energy from the motion of human walking (Fig. 11b). The rubber of the soles of the shoes of the researcher and the ground acted as friction layers, and the human body and the ground acted as electrodes. When the rubber sole of a shoe was pressed and released during walking, electrons were transferred from the ground to the rubber. Then, the human body acted as the conductor of the electrodes, lighting an LED as a volunteer walked. The average open circuit voltage and current of the rubber sole (200 cm2) were around 400 V and 12 μA, respectively. At a load resistance of 150 MΩ, the maximum output power was around 377.8 μW.


2.3.2 Hair and nails. 
Human hair and nails are disposed of as biowaste, and have the advantages of being readily available, economical, and harmless.146,147 Human hair is positive in the triboelectric sequence table, and its main components are keratinized proteins, lipids, and water.152 Jayaweera et al.146 assembled a TENG based on human hair as a high-friction positive triboelectric material, using ethanol and NaOH to dissolve the hair, and prepared a hair-based film on the electrode substrate. Human hair and PI were used as tribopositive and tribonegative layers, respectively. At an external load resistance of 1.2 MΩ, the maximum power density of the TENG was 60 mW m−2. Moreover, the maximum output voltage and current of the TENG were 103 V and 10.9 μA, respectively. Chomjun et al.153 reported that human hair generated a high output (the power density is 242 mW m−2) due to it containing activated carbon that exhibits high porosity and surface area. The porous structure of hair increases the charge of its internal structure, promoting the generation and accumulation of frictional charge and improving the performance of the resulting TENG.154,155 Natural rubber (NR) with varying human hair (ACH) content was used as a tribopositive layer. PTFE and ITO were used as the tribonegative layer and the electrode, respectively. The resulting single-electrode TENG exhibited the best output performance with 0.6 wt% ACH content, and the maximum output voltage and output current of the device were 89.6 V and 6.9 μA, respectively. Moreover, the power density of the TENG reached 242 mW m−2, 2.7 times higher than that of pure NR. Furthermore, the power density of the ACH@NR-TENG was higher than those of other TENGs based on natural materials, such as a bacterial nanocellulosic TENG (4.8 mW m−2),156 a crab shell-based TENG (15.7 mW m−2),83 and a wood-based TENG (57 mW m−2).96 Chakraborty et al.157 used hair and PDMS as tribopositive and tribonegative layers, respectively, to construct a TENG (Fig. 12a and b). Moreover, the PDMS was doped with hematite nanoparticles (α-Fe2O3 NPs) to improve the dielectric properties of the film, thus producing a higher output voltage compared with that of PDMS (an increase of around 900%). Aside from hair, fingernails can also be used as the friction layer in a TENG. Fu et al.147 used human fingernails as a tribopositive layer in a TENG (Fig. 12c). The composition of fingernails is mainly protein, which endows them with positive triboelectric properties. The output voltage and current of a fingernail-based TENG were shown to be 87.3 V and 3.2 μA, respectively. Moreover, the maximum power density of the TENG with a 23 MΩ resistor was 122 mW m−2.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of a hair-PDMS@α-Fe2O3-based TENG that exhibits high output performance.157 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Working principles of a hair-PDMS@α-Fe2O3-based TENG.157 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of a fingernail-based TENG.147 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 

2.4 Materials from microorganisms
Microorganisms include bacteria, viruses, fungi, actinomycetes, rickettsia, mycoplasma, spirochetes, and so on.158,159 At present, only the use of bacteria and fungi in TENGs has been reported. In this section, TENG studies based on materials from bacteria and fungi are summarized.

2.4.1 Materials from bacteria. 
Bacteria are a type of prokaryotic microorganism, with a thin shape and simple structure, as well as cell-wall prokaryotes.160,161 Bacterial cellulose (BC) can be extracted from bacteria, and has a unique 3D porous network and crystalline nanofibers with a diameter of 10–100 nm.160,161 BC has high purity, crystallinity, porosity, liquid and gas permeability, good biocompatibility, and mechanical stability.161–163 Moreover, BC is an environmentally friendly natural material that can be completely decomposed within 30 days.162 Kim et al.156 prepared a TENG (BNC-TENG, Fig. 13a) based on bacterial nanocellulose (BNC). The BNC film, derived from Acetobacter xylostella, was used as the tribonegative layer and exhibited good transparency, flexibility, and biocompatibility, with Cu foil attached to it as the top electrode (Fig. 13b). Another Cu foil was used in a dual role as the bottom electrode and the tribopositive layer. At 16.8 N and 1 Hz, the output voltage of the BNC-TENG reached 13 V, and the accumulated charge reached 8.1 μC m−2. At a load resistance of 1 MΩ, the maximum power density of the BNC-TENG was 4.8 mW m−2. BC can be used as both a friction layer and a TENG electrode after modification. Zhang et al.164 prepared an all-BC-based TENG using a BC film derived from Staphylococcus hansenii as a tribonegative layer. CNTs@polypyrrole (PPy) were introduced into another BC film to be used as both an electrode and a tribopositive layer. The addition of CNT@PPy improved the ion diffusion performance of the BC film (Fig. 13c), and resulted in a significant decrease in its resistance. Moreover, the aromatic ring on the PPy chain formed strong CH–π interactions with the CNTs, and had a tribopositive effect on the nanocomposite film and made it more likely to generate tribopositive charges when it came into contact with the BC (Fig. 13c). The output voltage, current, and power of the all-BC-TENG reached 29 V, 0.6 μA, and 3 mW, respectively. Interestingly, eight all-BC-TENGs were successfully connected to a microcontroller to transmit signals and play music. The all-BC-based TENGs could be degraded within 8 h, showing their good potential for use in implantable medical applications.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the BNC-TENG, where the inset shows the process of BC membrane preparation.156 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) The working principles of a BNC-TENG.156 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the contact electrification mechanism between pure BC and a BC@CNT@PPy film.164 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of a pullulan-based TENG.165 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic diagram of the recovery process of a pullulan film and the recovered pullulan-based TENG.165 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


2.4.2 Materials from fungi. 
Pullulan, a microbial polysaccharide produced by yeast-like fungi that has the advantages of biodegradability, non-toxicity, and water solubility,165 has been used to prepare a TENG. Lu et al.165 added glycerol, NaF, trehalose, bovine serum albumin, and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) separately to pullulan. Different pullulan composite films were prepared as the tribopositive layer, PI film was employed as the tribonegative layer, and silver and aluminum foil served as electrodes (Fig. 13d). Among them, the TENG based on the NaF–pullulan assembly showed the best performance at 10 Hz. Its open circuit voltage reached 79 V, around 1.7 times that of pure pullulan. In addition, the pullulan film was shown to be recoverable (Fig. 13e). The output performance of the recovered-pullulan-based TENG remained unchanged after being reused five times, exhibiting its excellent recyclability.

2.5 Materials from minerals
There are many natural minerals in nature having different structures and internal chemicals.166 Mica has been reported as being the most positive material in the triboelectric sequence table.67 Moreover, mica is a very abundant layered silicate mineral with a structure comprising two silicon–oxygen tetrahedra for every aluminum–oxygen octahedral sheet.167 The substitution of Si for Al endows the tetrahedra with an extra negative charge, making it easy for them to lose electrons (Fig. 14a).167 In addition, the good dielectric properties of mica have a positive effect on their triboelectric properties.167 Hence, mica is tribopositive and can be used directly as a tribopositive layer in a TENG.67,168 Wang et al.167 prepared a mica-based TENG using a mica layer as a tribopositive layer and PTFE film as a tribonegative layer (Fig. 14b). In contact separation mode, the open circuit voltage of the mica-based TENG reached 27.3 V, and the short-circuit current reached 1.68 μA. The relatively high dielectric constant of mica (40 Hz, 8.12) endows it with good output performance, and its output voltage and power density can reach 147 V and 62.82 mW m−2, respectively. When this TENG was applied to the sole of a shoe, it harvested energy from the motion of walking when it made contact with a PTFE floor (Fig. 14c). Moreover, sepiolite has been reported as a friction enhancer to improve the performance of TENGs. Sepiolite has a structure comprising fibers (Fig. 14d) that have a typical length of around 1–5 μm and a diameter close to 50–100 nm.169,170 Ozen et al.170 added sepiolite to polyacrylonitrile nanofibers (PAN), and used PAN/sepiolite as a tribonegative layer. Sepiolite reduced the nanofiber diameter from around 640 nm to 250 nm on average, enhancing the specific surface area and roughness. Meanwhile, the addition of sepiolite increased the dielectric constant of the tribonegative layer, which also improved the output performance of the resulting TENG. The open circuit voltage and maximum power density of PAN/sepiolite (3 wt%) reached 486 V (1.6 times that of pure PAN) and 28.125 W m−2 (2.5 times that of pure PAN), respectively. The TENG was used to light 16 LEDs while powering a watch (Fig. 14e). Recent research indicates that the use of natural minerals as friction layers has opened up a new avenue, indicating the possibility of using more natural materials for constructing TENGs.
 Fig. 14  (a) Structural diagram of mica.167 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of the working principles of a mica-based TENG, showing a photograph of the lighting of 19 LEDs.167 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) An energy harvesting system based on a mica-based TENG, showing photographs of the self-powered device, monitored walking signal, output voltage, and current.167 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) XRD image of the fibrous structure of sepiolite, where the inset shows a schematic diagram of the 3D crystal structure of sepiolite.170 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Photograph of the TENG powering a watch and LEDs.170 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
3. Challenges and perspectives
The use of natural materials has driven significant advances in TENG research. Various natural-materials-based TENGs exhibit impressive properties, such as the durability of animal fur,75,76 the biocompatibility of silk,74 the biodegradation of cellulose,131 and the simplicity of using finger skin as a friction layer.148Tables 1 and 2 summarize the output performance, features, and applications of natural materials as tribopositive and tribonegative layers for TENGs. As is shown in Table 1, the output voltage of TENGs based on most natural materials ranges from tens to hundreds of volts, while a few, such as rabbit fur75 and finger skin,148 can reach thousands of volts. In addition, most natural materials are low in cost and biodegradable.
Table 1 Research progress of natural materials as tribopositive layers for TENGs




Tribopositive material
Tribonegative material

V
oc/Isc
Power density
Features
Application
Ref.




Pigeon fur
FEP
72 V/2.7 μA
0.62 mW g−1
200 cycles of self-healing and low cost
Flexible sensor

76



Rabbit fur
PTFE
3750 V/28 μA
5.02 W m−2
Durability over 300000 cycles and stability at 90% RH
Wind and water flow energy harvesting

75



Dog fur
PTFE
200 V/—
—
Low-cost
Powering device

77



Fish scales
PDMS
130 V/0.35 μA
45.8 μW cm−2
Low-cost
Self-powered sensing

79



Dopamine–fish scales
Fluorinated silane–fish scales
500 V/4 μA
100 μW cm−2
30 day degradation
Wearable movement sensing

80



Fish bladders
FEP
106 V/7.3 μA
200 μW cm−2
Stable within six months and low-cost
Electronic skin

81



Chitosan–diatom
FEP
150 V/1.02 μA
15.7 μW cm−2
Biological safety
Skin attachable motion sensor

83



Silk
PET
268 V/5.78 μA
193.6 μW cm−2
Biodegradable
Powering a micro-sensor

90



Human skin
Silk
90 V/00.06 μA
2 μW cm−2
Transparent, low mass, and biodegradable
Bioelectrical sensing devices

91



SNRF
RSFF
41.64 V/0.5 μA
86.7 μW cm−2
Completely biodegradable in vitro
Implantable self-powered devices

94



Egg film
PTFE
101.5 V/—
—
Biodegradable and low-cost
Powering digital watch

95



Egg film–ZnO
PTFE
213.4 V/1.2 μA
—
Biodegradable and low-cost
Powering digital watch

95



Balsa wood
PTFE
81 V/1.2 μA
57 μW cm−2
Biodegradable
Self-powered sensing

96



Balsa wood
PTFE
38 V/0.37 μA
—
Biodegradable and durability over 100000 cycles
Self-powered system

102



Pullulan–NaF
PI
79 V/—
41.7 mW m−2
Recyclable five times
Human motions monitoring

165



New Zealand pine
PTFE
220 V/5.8 μA
158.2 mW m−2
Low-cost and biodegradable
Self-powered sensor

99



Inner surface of onion
Outer surface of onion
32 V/37 μA
1.27 W m−2
Biodegradable, low-cost and simple process
Energy harvesting, gas and humidity sensors

106



Inner surface of scallion
Outer surface of scallion
60 V/89 μA
4.1 W m−2
Biodegradable, low-cost and simple process
Energy harvesting, gas and humidity sensors

106



Rose petal
PMMA
30.6 V/0.78 μA
27.2 mW m−2
Water contact angle: 149.8°
Energy harvesting

107



Hosta
PMMA
230 V/9.5 μA
45 mW m−2
Low-cost, simple process
Energy harvesting

108



Celery cabbage
Bread
15 V/3 μA
1.0 mW m−2
All-natural materials, simple process and biodegradable
Energy harvesting

69




Mytilaria laosensis Lec.
NaCl droplets
1 V/4 μA
10 mW m−2
Simple process and biodegradable
Natural energy harvesting

109



Cotton
FEP
782 V/8.9 μA
—
Output stability of 100 min
Self-powering wind sensor

112



Cellulose
FEP
5 V/5 μA
—
Renewable and biodegradable
Energy harvesting

129



Cellulose–PVA
PI
600 V/50 μA
84.5 W m−2
Low-cost
Mechanical energy harvesting

110



Cellulose
PDMS
254 V/11.52 μA
—
Biodegradable
Self-powering device

131



Cellulose–phosphorene
PET
5.2 V/1.8 μA
9.36 μW cm−2
Stable within six months
Energy harvesting

134



Inner surface of leek
Outer surface of leek
182 V/340 μA
35.1 W m−2
Biodegradable, low-cost and simple process
Energy harvesting, gas and humidity sensors

106



Silk
Rice paper
34 V/0.32 μA
21.6 mW m−2
Biocompatible
Implantable self-powering supply

74



Human fingernail
PTFE
87.3 V/3.2 μA
122 mW m−2
Simple process, low-cost
Human body energy harvesting

147



Cellulose–AEAPDMS
FEP
195 V/13.4 μA
—
90% RH hydrophobic
Mechanical energy harvesting

135



Cellulose–allicin
PVDF
7.9 V/5.13 μA
10.13 μW cm−2
Biodegradable, 60% RH hydrophobic
Energy harvesting

136



Cellulose–AgNPs
PTFE
110 V/14.8 μA
8.73 mW cm−2
10000 cycle durability
Wearable sensing devices

137



Cellulose
PET
55.8 V/0.94 μA
29 mW cm−2
Biodegradable
Self-power sensing

139



Cellulose–PEI–Ag
FEP
286 V/1.1 μA
0.43 W cm−2
10000 cycles of stable output
Self-powered sensing

140



Starch–laver
PCL
50 V/1 μA
6.48 mW cm−2
Output stability for 2000 s, biodegradable
Biomechanical energy harvesting

143



RF–PVA
FEP
96 V/0.6 μA
334 μW cm−2
Degradability in 16 days
Self-powered joint motion monitoring system

144



Starch–chitosan
FEP
108 V/27 μA
5.07 W cm−2
Transparent, degradable
Human motion self-powered sensing

145



Human skin
PDMS
1000 V/—
500 mW cm−2
Simple process, flexible
Biomechanical energy harvesting, self-powered tactile sensor

148



Human skin
Structured-PDMS
56 V/3.1 μA
—
Transparency of ∼88%, flexible
Self-powered user-interactive wearable device

149



Human skin
Structured-PDMS
666 V/174.6 μA
412 μW cm−2
Flexible, recognizing water molecules
Wearable sensing electronics

150



Human hair
PI
103 V/10.9 μA
60 mW cm−2
Low-cost, degradable, output stable over 3 months
Self-powered device, energy harvesting

146



Mica
PTFE
147 V/0.3 μA
62.82 mW cm−2
Durability over 5000 cycles, high dielectric constant
Energy harvesting

167



Human hair–NR
PTFE
89.6 V/6.9 μA
242 mW m−2
Biodegradable
Energy harvesting, motion sensor

153



Human hair
PDMS–α-Fe2O3 NPs
370.8 V/3.1 μA
274.2 mW cm−2
Facile, cost-effective
Self-powered smart portable electronics

157



Printing paper
PTFE
400 V/0.17 mA
53 W cm−2
Output voltage stable for 200000 cycles
Mechanical energy harvesting

116



Cellulose paper
PCL–GO
120 V/4 μA
72.5 mW m−2
Low-cost, easy fabrication process
Energy harvesting

117



Rice paper
PVC
244 V/6 μA
37.64 μW cm−2
Output voltage stable for 10000 cycles, recyclable
Energy harvesting

119



R-cellulose
Cellophane
300 V/2.6 mA
307 mW m−2
Output voltage stability of 30900 cycles, recyclable
Energy harvesting

118





Table 2 Research progress of natural materials as tribonegative layers for TENGs




Tribopositive material
Tribonegative material

V
oc/Isc
Power density
Features
Application
Ref.




Balsa wood–AEAP-Si
Balsa wood–PFOT-Si
90.1 V/0.46 μA
13.63 μW cm−2
Biodegradable
—

103



ZIF–balsa wood
PDMS–balsa wood
24.3 V/0.32 μA
10.4 μW cm−2
Biodegradable
Self-powered device

104



Silk–CTES
Cotton–PFTS
216.82 V/50.3 μA
0.345 mW cm−2
Output performance stable over 14 days
Energy harvesting

109



Cu
BC
13 V/—
4.8 mW cm−2
Decomposed within 30 days
Energy harvesting

156



BC–CNTs–PPy
BC
29 V/0.6 μA
—
Output voltage of 10000 cycles, biodegradation in 8 h
Powering commercial electronic devices

164



PVP–ethyl cellulose
PAN–sepiolite
486 V/—
28.125 W cm−2
High dielectric constant and rough surface
Energy harvesting

170





Moreover, some materials also exhibit unique features, such as the stable output of paper that can be repeated thousands of times,116,119 the simple processing of leaves,69,108 the hydrophobicity of modified cellulose,135,136 the biocompatibility of silk,74 and the dielectric properties of minerals.167,170 From Table 2, it can be seen that the voltage of modified cotton105 can reach hundreds of volts. Moreover, sepiolite mineral170 as a tribonegative layer also has a performance of hundreds of volts due to its high dielectric properties. Moreover, bacterial cellulose156,164 shows impressive output stability and degradability.
In addition, as shown in Fig. 15, the triboelectric sequence table of natural materials is summarized according to the existing triboelectric sequence table66–68 and comparison tests conducted under the same conditions.74,75,77,80,83,106,117,137,157,171,172 Firstly, according to the literature, we divided the materials into tribo-positive and tribo-negative materials. There are many citations in the reported manuscript for contrasting with natural materials. For example, the commonly used tribo-positive materials (Cu55) and tribo-negative materials (PI51 and PTFE53) can be used as references for comparison with natural materials. The rough triboelectricity of natural materials such as positive electricity and negative electricity can be figured out. Then, for the specific ranking, some natural materials, such as hair, skin, paper, wood, cotton, and wool, have been specified in the triboelectric sequence table by Wang et al.68 Moreover, according to the comparative test of friction materials in the literature,74,75,77 natural materials can be sorted more accurately. For example, according to the charge transfer test of triboelectric materials by Jiang et al.,74 the tribo-positive rank of egg film, silk, crab shell, cellulose, and paper can be listed. Based on Singh et al.'s test77 of the output voltage of triboelectric materials, the tribo-positive comparison between dog hair and human hair can be obtained. Based on the output voltage test conducted by Chen et al.,75 the tribo-positive comparison between rabbit fur and dog hair can be obtained. Finally, for some natural materials, which are not compared directly in the reported references, we rank them according to the indirect comparison of the output performances reported in different articles with similar conditions. For example, fish scales80 and bladder81 contain proteins that exhibit tribo-positive properties. The output voltages of fish scale/silk90 and fish bladder/silk90 are compared to rank the fish scales and fish bladder in the tribo-positive sequence. Thus, the various comparisons in the reported articles can help to list the triboelectric sequence. Natural materials such as rabbit fur, dog fur, finger skin, silk, and FBF exhibit higher positive triboelectricity than the traditional Cu friction layer. The modified cellulose and cotton show higher negative triboelectricity than PI. However, the LCNF reported by Tanguy et al.171 is a naturally negative triboelectric material, and its output performance in a comparison experiment even exceeded that of an artificially synthesized highly negative triboelectric material, PTFE. Although many research studies related to TENGs based on natural materials have been reported, there are various challenges remaining in this arena in terms of materials selection and generation performance improvement.
 Fig. 15  The triboelectric sequence table of some natural materials (Cu, PI, and PTFE are common triboelectric layers used for comparison). 
3.1 The complex preparation of natural friction materials
Some natural materials, such as cellulose and wood, need to be extracted and modified for the preparation of a friction layer. Their preparation process is complicated, not very environmentally friendly, and takes a long time, which is not conducive to their large-scale practical production.103,137 For example, wood requires the removal of lignin and hemicellulose using NaOH and Na2SO3 before it can be used as a friction layer.96 Therefore, it is necessary to optimize the extraction scheme and preparation process, such as using a physical modification process to change its morphology137 to increase the surface area of the friction layer of natural materials. It is also a viable strategy to find natural materials with an abundant natural porous structure, surface texture, or abundant functional properties that do not need to be modified by chemical reagents to be used as friction layers. In addition, natural-materials-based TENGs are mainly manufactured by hand, and thus the costs in terms of labor and time associated with their preparation are high. Therefore, it is challenging to use these for large-scale industrial production.
3.2 The lack of natural tribonegative materials
Comparing Tables 1 and 2, most natural materials such as fish scales,79 leaves,108,109 human skin,148,150 and mica167 can be used as the tribopositive layer in TENGs. However, only a few natural materials exhibit tribonegative properties. BC exhibits weak positive friction, and can be used as the tribonegative layer only when it matches a strong tribopositive material.156 Sepiolite can only be used as a tribonegative layer due to its dielectric properties.170 Only modified cellulose and modified cotton exhibit tribonegative properties.113,133 Hence, few natural materials show strong tribonegative properties and can be used directly as tribonegative layers. A recent study by Tanguy et al. confirmed that natural materials from bark could be used in a tribonegative layer without modification.171 More exploration is thus needed to develop natural materials that can be directly used as a tribonegative layer in TENGs. Meanwhile, natural materials with strong electron-withdrawing functional groups (–NO2, –CN, –F, etc.)103,120,173 or weak electron-donating functional groups (–OR, –NHCOR, –CH3, etc.)120,136,174 might have potential applications in tribonegative layers.
3.3 The lifespan of natural materials
Some natural materials used in TENGs exhibit good properties, such as the low cost and good degradability of FG film79,80 and the simple processing of leaves.106,108 However, most of these materials have a short lifespan. Animal materials, such as fur,77 fish bladder,81 and egg film,95 may be associated with rapid aging and decomposition, which affect the output performance of TENGs. Plant materials, such as petals107 and vegetable leaves,107 are associated with issues like gradual drying and surface texture fading, which may significantly impact the performance of the TENG.105 Therefore, it is necessary to find ways to extend the useful life of these materials. For example, an encapsulation layer can be selected to protect animal-derived materials to avoid microbial corrosion, and for plants, living leaves can be directly used for energy harvesting.
3.4 The stability of natural materials in a humid environment
Natural materials, such as paper and cotton, maintain a high output stability under low humidity112,119 and can be recycled.119 However, they have the disadvantage of poor hydrophobicity, which limits their application in wearables and complex environments. As the RH increases, the output performance of these materials gradually deteriorates. Moreover, paper may even lose its frictional effect in high humidity.117 Hence, it is significant for these natural materials to be treated like cellulose and starch,133,143 such as the addition of hydrophobic functional groups, which can enhance their hydrophobicity so that they can function in a highly humid environment.
3.5 The low output power of natural-materials-based TENGs
The power output of TENGs based on natural materials is generally low. The power densities of TENGs based on bacteria,156 crab shell, and wood are only 4.8 mW m−2, 15.7 mW m−2, and 57 mW m−2, respectively.83,96,156 As such, they can only be used to power low-power devices; they cannot be used as power supply devices for large equipment or industrial production. Table 3 lists the synthetic materials and metals that have been researched as friction layers for TENGs. The output power of some TENGs based on synthetic materials and metals can reach hundreds or even tens of thousands of milliwatts.175,176 Comparing Tables 1 and 3, only a small number of natural-materials-based TENGs exhibit better output performance than their synthetically derived counterparts.14,178–180 Therefore, at present, natural-materials-based TENGs generally have low output performance and their generation performance needs to be improved further. The selection of appropriate materials, modification of the friction layer, and structural design of the device may improve the output performance of TENGs based on natural materials.
Table 3 Research progress of synthetic materials and metals as friction layers for TENGs




TENG friction layers

V/I
Output power
Ref.




PET/PI
3.3 V/0.6 μA
10.4 mW cm−2

14



PDMS/PVDF–TrFE
25 V/—
1.98 mW cm−2

181



PEI–CNF/PVDF
106.2 V/46 mA m−2
13300 mW m−2

175



Al/PTFE
470 V/90.6 mA m−2
42600 mW m−2

177



PDMS/PVDF
31 V/1.7 mA m−2
900 mW m−2

176



PA66/PI
12000 V/1.2 μA
884 mW m−2

51



PU/PTFE
183.5 V/1.35 μA
40 mW m−2

180



Al/PDMS
12 V/0.25 μA
8.44 mW m−2

178



PVA–Ag/FEP
530 V/5.6 μA
359 mW m−2

182



Cu/FEP
5 V/2.3 mA
6 μW m−2

179





3.6 The practical application of natural-materials-based TENGs
Natural materials-based devices can be used to harvest wind and mechanical energy.75,112,135 In addition, they can also be used as monitors of the environment,109 human motion,144,145 and sweat,150 as well as for powering small devices such as calculators and watches.95,164 Moreover, progress has been made in developing natural-materials-based TENGs for use in wearable and implantable biomedical devices. For example, silk-based TENGs can act as a power source to accelerate the beating speed of dysfunctional cardiomyocyte clusters and improve the consistency of cell contraction,74 which provides a new practical solution for the treatment of bradycardia and arrhythmia. However, there is still a need for more research related to the use of natural-materials-based TENGs as implantable medical devices for the treatment of diseases in the human body, as such TENGs exhibit huge advantages compared with other systems in terms of their biocompatibility and degradability. Hence, the biocompatibility, power density, and durability of natural materials require further improvement to enable them to be used as cost-effective TENGs for human wearable monitoring devices and implantable medical power supplies.
The above challenges represent the future development trend of natural-materials-based TENGs. High-performance, green, low-cost natural-materials-based TENGs will definitely boost the development of better energy harvesting devices, toward the harvesting and use of energy in a cleaner, convenient, and efficient manner.
4. Conclusions
In this review, the developments made in using natural materials to prepare TENGs for energy harvesting have been systematically summarized. Using various natural materials enables the preparation of environmentally friendly and biocompatible TENGs, the various mechanisms and properties of which were discussed. The surface structure of plant-based materials, the physicochemical properties of animal-derived materials, the functional groups of microorganisms, and the dielectric properties of minerals are all significant factors that play roles in promoting the triboelectric properties of these materials. Finally, natural materials in terms of their use as the tribopositive and tribonegative layers of TENGs and their output properties, features, and applications were listed. In addition, the triboelectric sequence of natural materials was summarized according to the existing triboelectric sequence table and the reported comparison experiments that have been conducted under the same conditions. In the Challenges and perspectives section, the low stability, poor durability, lack of tribonegative materials, and low power density were discussed and the related enhancement methods were introduced. It is hoped that this review will help the reader to further improve their understanding of the performances and friction charge generation mechanism of natural-materials-based TENGs. It is also hoped that this information will encourage the use of more natural materials to develop new green, economical, and biocompatible TENGs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NSFC (52173088, 52072347), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (265QZ201908, 2652019029) and Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST (2021QNRC001).
References
F. Chien, M. Sadiq, M. A. Nawaz, M. S. Hussain, T. D. Tran and T. Le Thanh, A step toward reducing air pollution in top Asian economies: The role of green energy, eco-innovation, and environmental taxes, J. Environ. Manage., 2021, 297, 113420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, Q. Li and K. Wang, Waste Plastic Triboelectric Nanogenerators Using Recycled Plastic Bags for Power Generation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(1), 400–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rodriguez-Alvarez, Air pollution and life expectancy in Europe: Does investment in renewable energy matter?, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 792, 148480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, S. Chen, J. Wang and B. Lu, Carbon foam with microporous structure for high performance symmetric potassium dual-ion capacitor, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 43, 129–138 CrossRef .
A. R. Adedeji, F. Zaini, S. Mathew, L. Dagar, M. I. Petra and L. C. De Silva, Sustainable energy towards air pollution and climate change mitigation, J. Environ. Manage., 2020, 260, 109978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Meyar-Naimi and S. Vaez-Zadeh, Sustainable development based energy policy making frameworks, a critical review, Energy Policy, 2012, 43, 351–361 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, T. Jiang and L. Xu, Toward the blue energy dream by triboelectric nanogenerator networks, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 9–23 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Microfibre-nanowire hybrid structure for energy scavenging, Nature, 2008, 451(7180), 809–813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, L. Huang, W. C. Tan, X. Feng, L. Chen, X. Huang and K.-W. Ang, 2D Photovoltaic Devices: Progress and Prospects, Small Methods, 2018, 2(3), 1700294 CrossRef .
E. Zhang, X. Jia, B. Wang, J. Wang, X. Yu and B. Lu, Carbon Dots@rGO Paper as Freestanding and Flexible Potassium-Ion Batteries Anode, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7(15), 2000470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, C. Xu, J. Zhang, N. Xu, Y. Xiong, X. Cao, Y. Liang, L. Zheng, J. Sun, J. Zhai, Q. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Multifunctional Coaxial Energy Fiber toward Energy Harvesting, Storage, and Utilization, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(1), 1597–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Alluri, V. Vivekananthan, A. Chandrasekhar and S. J. Kim, Adaptable piezoelectric hemispherical composite strips using a scalable groove technique for a self-powered muscle monitoring system, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(3), 907–913 RSC .
M. He, W. Du, Y. Feng, S. Li, W. Wang, X. Zhang, A. Yu, L. Wan and J. Zhai, Flexible and stretchable triboelectric nanogenerator fabric for biomechanical energy harvesting and self-powered dual-mode human motion monitoring, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106058 CrossRef CAS .
F.-R. Fan, Z.-Q. Tian and Z. Lin Wang, Flexible triboelectric generator, Nano Energy, 2012, 1(2), 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and W. Wu, Nanotechnology-enabled energy harvesting for self-powered micro-/nanosystems, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2012, 51(47), 11700–11721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zi, J. Wang, S. Wang, S. Li, Z. Wen, H. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Effective energy storage from a triboelectric nanogenerator, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, Z. H. Lin, Q. Jing, P. Bai, C. Pan, Y. Yang, Y. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Toward large-scale energy harvesting by a nanoparticle-enhanced triboelectric nanogenerator, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(2), 847–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Entropy theory of distributed energy for internet of things, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 669–672 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, K. Parida, J. Wang, J. Xiong, M. F. Lin, J. Shao and P. S. Lee, A Stretchable and Transparent Nanocomposite Nanogenerator for Self-Powered Physiological Monitoring, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(48), 42200–42209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Chougale, Q. M. Saqib, M. U. Khan, R. A. Shaukat, J. Kim and J. Bae, Novel Recycled Triboelectric Nanogenerator Based on Polymer-Coated Trash Soda Can for Clean Energy Harvesting, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2021, 5(10), 2100161 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, G. Gu, W. Shang, H. Luo, T. Wang, B. Zhang, P. Cui, J. Guo, F. Yang, G. Cheng and Z. Du, A general charge compensation strategy for calibrating the voltage of a triboelectric nanogenerator measured by a capacitive circuit, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106056 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, H. Gu, K. Lu, S. Ye, W. Xu, H. Zheng, Y. Song, C. Liu, J. Jiao, Z. Wang and X. Zhou, A universal single electrode droplet-based electricity generator (SE-DEG) for water kinetic energy harvesting, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105735 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shan, W. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Pu, W. He, Q. Tang, S. Fu, G. Li, L. Long, H. Guo, J. Sun, A. Liu and C. Hu, An inverting TENG to realize the AC mode based on the coupling of triboelectrification and air-breakdown, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14(10), 5395–5405 RSC .
Z. Qu, M. Huang, R. Dai, Y. An, C. Chen, G. Nie, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and W. Yin, Using non-contact eccentric nanogenerator to collect energy continuously under periodic vibration, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106159 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nanoscale triboelectric-effect-enabled energy conversion for sustainably powering portable electronics, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(12), 6339–6346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Islam, A. M. Abdullah, A. R. Chowdhury, F. Tasnim, M. Martinez, C. Olivares, K. Lozano and M. J. Uddin, Electromagnetic-triboelectric-hybrid energy tile for biomechanical green energy harvesting, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105250 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, J. Chen and L. Lin, Progress in triboelectric nanogenerators as a new energy technology and self-powered sensors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(8), 2250–2282 RSC .
Q. Shi, H. Wang, H. Wu and C. Lee, Self-powered triboelectric nanogenerator buoy ball for applications ranging from environment monitoring to water wave energy farm, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Jiang, H. Bukhari, Z. Zhang, W. Han and E. Xie, Simple and efficient pressure sensor based on PDMS wrapped CNT arrays, Carbon, 2019, 155, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, T. Jing and B. Xu, Self-Assembly of Porous Microstructured Polydimethylsiloxane Films for Wearable Triboelectric Nanogenerators, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2020, 305(9), 2000276 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, G. Liu, H. Guo, Q. Tang, X. Pu, J. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Xi and C. Hu, Hybridized nanogenerator based on honeycomb-like three electrodes for efficient ocean wave energy harvesting, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 217–223 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, L. Zhang, Y. Zheng, D. Wang, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Leaves based triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) and TENG tree for wind energy harvesting, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 260–268 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, A. Yu, J. Zhai and Z. L. Wang, Recent Progress of Functional Fiber and Textile Triboelectric Nanogenerators: Towards Electricity Power Generation and Intelligent Sensing, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2021, 3(6), 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Kim, D. W. Kim, I. W. Tcho, J. K. Kim, M. S. Kim and Y. K. Choi, Triboelectric Nanogenerator: Structure, Mechanism, and Applications, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(1), 258–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Huynh, Z.-H. Lin and D. Choi, Dynamic balanced hybridization of TENG and EMG via Tesla turbine for effectively harvesting broadband mechanical pressure, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105983 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, C. Chen, L. Jin, H. Guo, A. C. Wang, F. Ning, Q. Xu, Z. Du, F. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Stretchable negative Poisson's ratio yarn for triboelectric nanogenerator for environmental energy harvesting and self-powered sensor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14(2), 955–964 RSC .
J. Shao, Y. Yang, O. Yang, J. Wang, M. Willatzen and Z. L. Wang, Designing Rules and Optimization of Triboelectric Nanogenerator Arrays, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(16), 2100065 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, F. Xue, W. Du, C. Han, C. Zhang and Z. Wang, Transparent paper-based triboelectric nanogenerator as a page mark and anti-theft sensor, Nano Res., 2014, 7(8), 1215–1223 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, S. L. Zhang, S. Xu, H. Guo, W. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Free-fixed rotational triboelectric nanogenerator for self-powered real-time wheel monitoring, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6(3), 2000918 CrossRef .
L. Jin, B. Zhang, L. Zhang and W. Yang, Nanogenerator as new energy technology for self-powered intelligent transportation system, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104086 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, Z. Zheng, Y. Yin, X. Wang and Z. You, Numerical analysis and structural optimization of cylindrical grating-structured triboelectric nanogenerator, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106570 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. S. Rana, M. T. Rahman, M. Salauddin, S. Sharma, P. Maharjan, T. Bhatta, H. Cho, C. Park and J. Y. Park, Electrospun PVDF-TrFE/MXene Nanofiber Mat-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Smart Home Appliances, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(4), 4955–4967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jing, B. Xu, Y. Yang, C. Jiang and M. Wu, Interfacial modification boosted permittivity and triboelectric performance of liquid doping composites for high-performance flexible triboelectric nanogenerators, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105374 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, W. Wu, R. Zhang, G. Lu, B. Chen, Z. Chen and C. Gui, Novel electrode material using electroless nickel plating for triboelectric nanogenerator: Study of the relationship between electrostatic-charge density and strain in dielectric material, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106734 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, L. Xu, S. Lin, J. Luo, H. Qin, K. Han and Z. L. Wang, Charge Pumping Strategy for Rotation and Sliding Type Triboelectric Nanogenerators, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(21), 2000605 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, X. Xiao, W. Deng, A. Nashalian, D. He, V. Raveendran, C. Yan, H. Su, X. Chu, T. Yang, W. Li, W. Yang and J. Chen, Manipulating Relative Permittivity for High-Performance Wearable Triboelectric Nanogenerators, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(9), 6404–6411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, X. Yang, Y. Wang, W. Xu, J. Duan and Q. Tang, Dielectric Hole Collector toward Boosting Charge Transfer of CsPbBr3 Hybrid Nanogenerator by Coupling Triboelectric and Photovoltaic Effects, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(32), 2101348 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tayyab, J. Wang, J. Wang, M. Maksutoglu, H. Yu, G. Sun, F. Yildiz, M. Eginligil and W. Huang, Enhanced output in polyvinylidene fluoride nanofibers based triboelectric nanogenerator by using printer ink as nano-fillers, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105178 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, G. Liu, W. He, L. Long, B. Li, Z. Wang, Q. Tang, W. Liu and C. Hu, Miura folding based charge-excitation triboelectric nanogenerator for portable power supply, Nano Res., 2021, 14(11), 4204–4210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, M. Qin, Y. Li, S. Gu, Q. Guan and Z. You, Highly efficient self-healable and robust fluorinated polyurethane elastomer for wearable electronics, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 133081 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Niu, Y. Yin, F. Yi, Z. You and Z. L. Wang, Triboelectric Nanogenerator Based on Fully Enclosed Rolling Spherical Structure for Harvesting Low-Frequency Water Wave Energy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(24), 1501467 CrossRef .
C. Wu, A. C. Wang, W. Ding, H. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Triboelectric Nanogenerator: A Foundation of the Energy for the New Era, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(1), 1802906 CrossRef .
Y. Mao, Y. Li, J. Xie, H. Liu, C. Guo and W. Hu, Triboelectric nanogenerator/supercapacitor in-one self-powered textile based on PTFE yarn wrapped PDMS/MnO2NW hybrid elastomer, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105918 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, W. Sun, X. Zhang, J. Meng, M. Zhong, L. Qiang, M.-J. Liu, B.-N. Gu, C.-C. Chung, M. Liu, F. Yu and Y.-L. Chueh, High-performance and long-cycle life of triboelectric nanogenerator using PVC/MoS2 composite membranes for wind energy scavenging application, Nano Energy, 2022, 91, 106649 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, C. Qin, T. Feng, J. Li, Z. Yang, X. Sun, E. Liang, Y. Mao and X. Wang, Non-contact cylindrical rotating triboelectric nanogenerator for harvesting kinetic energy from hydraulics, Nano Res., 2020, 13(7), 1903–1907 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. Kim, I. J. Park, S. Kang, T. S. Kim and S. Y. Choi, Enhanced Triboelectric Nanogenerator Based on Tungsten Disulfide via Thiolated Ligand Conjugation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(18), 21299–21309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Park, D.-M. Lee, C. W. Kang, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim, Y.-J. Ko, S.-W. Kim and S. U. Son, Triboelectric energy harvesting using conjugated microporous polymer nanoparticles in polyurethane films, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(21), 12560–12565 RSC .
R. Zhang, M. Hummelgård, J. Örtegren, M. Olsen, H. Andersson, Y. Yang, Z.-L. Wang, H. Olin, P. Sutar and D. Mihailovic, All-inorganic triboelectric nanogenerators based on Mo6S3I6 and indium tin oxide, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106363 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Li and L. Li, Electromechanical
modeling for triboelectric nanogenerators considering the distribution of polymer transfer film, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106895 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Ping and Y. Ying, Recent Progress in 2D-Nanomaterial-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerators, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(17), 2009994 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Y. Pei, C. Zhang and A. G. P. Kottapalli, Bioinspired designs and biomimetic applications of triboelectric nanogenerators, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105865 CrossRef CAS .
G. Khandelwal, N. P. Maria Joseph Raj and S. J. Kim, Materials Beyond Conventional Triboelectric Series for Fabrication and Applications of Triboelectric Nanogenerators, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(33), 2101170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pradhan, A. K. Brooks and V. K. Yadavalli, Nature-derived materials for the fabrication of functional biodevices, Mater. Today Bio, 2020, 7, 100065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun and Z. Guo, Recent advances of bioinspired functional materials with specific wettability: from nature and beyond nature, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4(1), 52–76 RSC .
V. Slabov, S. Kopyl, M. P. Soares Dos Santos and A. L. Kholkin, Natural and Eco-Friendly Materials for Triboelectric Energy Harvesting, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12(1), 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zou, Y. Zhang, L. Guo, P. Wang, X. He, G. Dai, H. Zheng, C. Chen, A. C. Wang, C. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Quantifying the triboelectric series, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1427 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zou, L. Guo, H. Xue, Y. Zhang, X. Shen, X. Liu, P. Wang, X. He, G. Dai, P. Jiang, H. Zheng, B. Zhang, C. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Quantifying and understanding the triboelectric series of inorganic non-metallic materials, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 2093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Reviving Vibration Energy Harvesting and Self-Powered Sensing by a Triboelectric Nanogenerator, Joule, 2017, 1(3), 480–521 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiao, Q. Lu, Z. Wang, Y. Qin and X. Cao, Sandwich as a triboelectric nanogenerator, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, W. Zhang, H. Su, T. Fan, S. Zhu, Q. Liu and D. Zhang, Morphology genetic materials templated from natural species, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(3), 464–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Gering, D. Incorvaia, R. Henriksen, J. Conner, T. Getty and D. Wright, Getting Back to Nature: Feralization in Animals and Plants, Trends Ecol. Evol., 2019, 34(12), 1137–1151 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jin, J. Chen, B. Zhang, W. Deng, L. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Self-Powered Safety Helmet Based on Hybridized Nanogenerator for Emergency, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(8), 7874–7881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Zhang, Y. Cao, B. Marelli, X. Xia and T. H. Tao, Engineering the Future of Silk Materials through Advanced Manufacturing, Adv. Mater., 2018, e1706983 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Jiang, H. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Li, J. Tian, B. Shi, Y. Zou, H. Ouyang, C. Zhao, L. Zhao, R. Sun, H. Zheng, Y. Fan, Z. L. Wang and Z. Li, Fully Bioabsorbable Natural-Materials-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerators, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(32), e1801895 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chen, J. An, S. Shu, R. Cheng, J. Nie, T. Jiang and Z. L. Wang, Super-Durable, Low-Wear, and High-Performance Fur-Brush Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Wind and Water Energy Harvesting for Smart Agriculture, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(9), 2003066 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Y. Cheng, S. Hao, Z. L. Wang, N. Wang and X. Cao, A Self-Healing Triboelectric Nanogenerator Based on Feathers for Sensing and Energy Harvesting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(34), 2100039 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, A. Sheetal, H. Singh, R. S. Sawhney and J. Kaur, Animal Hair-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerator (TENG): A Substitute for the Positive Polymer Layer in TENG, J. Electron. Mater., 2020, 49(5), 3409–3416 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ling, W. Chen, Y. Fan, K. Zheng, K. Jin, H. Yu, M. J. Buehler and D. L. Kaplan, Biopolymer nanofibrils: structure, modeling, preparation, and applications, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 85, 1–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, Y. Han, X. Zhang, L. Li, C. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Lu, H. D. Yu and W. Huang, Fish Gelatin Based Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Harvesting Biomechanical Energy and Self-Powered Sensing of Human Physiological Signals, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(14), 16442–16450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, L. Wang, X. Yue, L. Zhang, G. Ren, D. Li, H. Wang, Y. Han, L. Xiao, G. Lu, H.-D. Yu and W. Huang, Fully sustainable and high-performance fish gelatin-based triboelectric nanogenerator for wearable movement sensing and human-machine interaction, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106329 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, J. Zhu, P. Ma, Y. Jie, Z. L. Wang and X. Cao, Fish Bladder Film-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Noncontact Position Monitoring, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(9), 3005–3011 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, On the first principle theory of nanogenerators from Maxwell’s equations, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104272 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Kim, J. Lee, T. W. Go, A. Rajabi-Abhari, M. Mahato, J. Y. Park, H. Lee and I.-K. Oh, Skin-attachable and biofriendly chitosan-diatom triboelectric nanogenerator, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104904 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Torres and G. E. De-la-Torre, Polysaccharide-based triboelectric nanogenerators: A review, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 251, 117055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, L. Sun, Z. Liu, X. Xia and T. H. Tao, "Genetically Engineered" Biofunctional Triboelectric Nanogenerators Using Recombinant Spider Silk, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(50), e1805722 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Guo, C. Li, H. V. Vu, P. Hanna, A. Lechtig, Y. Qiu, X. Mu, S. Ling, A. Nazarian, S. J. Lin and D. L. Kaplan, Thermoplastic moulding of regenerated silk, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19(1), 102–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Silk materials—a road to sustainable high technology, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(21), 2824–2837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, Z. Zhou, X. Chen, N. Qin, J. Jiang, K. Liu, M. Liu, T. H. Tao and W. Li, A rewritable optical storage medium of silk proteins using near-field nano-optics, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15(11), 941–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Seo, H. Kim, K. Kim, S. Q. Choi and H. J. Lee, Calcium-Modified Silk as a Biocompatible and Strong Adhesive for Epidermal Electronics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(36), 1800802 CrossRef .
X.-S. Zhang, J. Brugger and B. Kim, A silk-fibroin-based transparent triboelectric generator suitable for autonomous sensor network, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 37–47 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gogurla, B. Roy, J.-Y. Park and S. Kim, Skin-contact actuated single-electrode protein triboelectric nanogenerator and strain sensor for biomechanical energy harvesting and motion sensing, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 674–681 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Kim, J.-H. Kim, K.-W. Jun, J.-H. Kim, W.-C. Seung, O. H. Kwon, J.-Y. Park, S.-W. Kim and I.-K. Oh, Silk Nanofiber-Networked Bio-Triboelectric Generator: Silk Bio-TEG, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(8), 1502329 CrossRef .
T. Li, Y. Xu, M. Willander, F. Xing, X. Cao, N. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Lightweight Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Energy Harvesting and Sensing Tiny Mechanical Motion, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26(24), 4370–4376 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Niu, L. Huang, S. Lv, H. Shao, S. Fan and Y. Zhang, Pulse-driven bio-triboelectric nanogenerator based on silk nanoribbons, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104837 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kaur and H. Singh, Fabrication of composite material based nanogenerator for electricity generation enhancement of food waste by-product, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 256, 123331 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Z. Wang, L. Xu, A. C. Wang, K. Han, T. Jiang, Q. Lai, Y. Bai, W. Tang, F. R. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Flexible and durable wood-based triboelectric nanogenerators for self-powered sensing in athletic big data analytics, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 5147 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, C. Chen, S. Zhu, M. Zhu, J. Dai, U. Ray, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, N. Quispe, Y. Yao, A. Gong, U. H. Leiste, H. A. Bruck, J. Y. Zhu, A. Vellore, H. Li, M. L. Minus, Z. Jia, A. Martini, T. Li and L. Hu, Processing bulk natural wood into a high-performance structural material, Nature, 2018, 554(7691), 224–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, J. Song, T. Li, A. Gong, Y. Wang, J. Dai, Y. Yao, W. Luo, D. Henderson and L. Hu, Highly Anisotropic, Highly Transparent Wood Composites, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(26), 5181–5187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hao, J. Jiao, Y. Chen, Z. L. Wang and X. Cao, Natural wood-based triboelectric nanogenerator as self-powered sensing for smart homes and floors, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104957 CrossRef CAS .
Q. M. Saqib, M. Y. Chougale, M. U. Khan, R. A. Shaukat, J. Kim, J. Bae, H. W. Lee, J.-I. Park, M. S. Kim and B. G. Lee, Natural seagrass tribopositive material based spray coatable triboelectric nanogenerator, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106458 CrossRef CAS .
Q. M. Saqib, R. A. Shaukat, M. U. Khan, M. Chougale and J. Bae, Biowaste Peanut Shell Powder-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Biomechanical Energy Scavenging and Sustainably Powering Electronic Supplies, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2(12), 3953–3963 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, J. Luo, J. Luo, X. Li, K. Han, D. Li, X. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Flexible Wood-Based Triboelectric Self-Powered Smart Home System, ACS Nano, 2022, 16(2), 3341–3350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bang, I. K. Moon, Y. P. Jeon, B. Ki and J. Oh, Fully wood-based green triboelectric nanogenerators, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 567, 150806 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, K. Tu, S. Büchele, S. M. Koch, Y. Ding, S. N. Ramakrishna, S. Stucki, H. Guo, C. Wu, T. Keplinger, J. Pérez-Ramírez, I. Burgert and G. Panzarasa, Functionalized wood with tunable tribopolarity for efficient triboelectric nanogenerators, Matter, 2021, 4(9), 3049–3066 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kim, S. W. Kim and U. Jeong, Lipids: Source of Static Electricity of Regenerative Natural Substances and Nondestructive Energy Harvesting, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(52), e1804949 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, M. Hummelgård, J. Örtegren, M. Song, M. Olsen, H. Andersson, N. Blomquist and H. Olin, High performance single material-based triboelectric nanogenerators made of hetero-triboelectric half-cell plant skins, Nano Energy, 2022, 94, 106959 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Jie, J. Wang, J. Ma, X. Jia, W. Dou and X. Cao, Triboelectrification on natural rose petal for harvesting environmental mechanical energy, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 441–447 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jie, X. Jia, J. Zou, Y. Chen, N. Wang, Z. L. Wang and X. Cao, Natural Leaf Made Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Harvesting Environmental Mechanical Energy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(12), 1703133 CrossRef .
H. Wu, Z. Chen, G. Xu, J. Xu, Z. Wang and Y. Zi, Fully Biodegradable Water Droplet Energy Harvester Based on Leaves of Living Plants, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(50), 56060–56067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Adonijah Graham, B. Dudem, H. Patnam, A. R. Mule and J. S. Yu, Integrated Design of Highly Porous Cellulose-Loaded Polymer-Based Triboelectric Films toward Flexible, Humidity-Resistant, and Sustainable Mechanical Energy Harvesters, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(7), 2140–2148 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and J. Cai, High output triboelectric nanogenerator based on PTFE and cotton for energy harvester and human motion sensor, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2021, 22, 1–5 CrossRef .
R. Xia, R. Zhang, Y. Jie, W. Zhao, X. Cao and Z. Wang, Natural cotton-based triboelectric nanogenerator as a self-powered system for efficient use of water and wind energy, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106685 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sangkhun and S. Wanwong, Natural textile based triboelectric nanogenerators for efficient energy harvesting applications, Nanoscale, 2021, 13(4), 2420–2428 RSC .
H. Tai, Z. Duan, Y. Wang, S. Wang and Y. Jiang, Paper-Based Sensors for Gas, Humidity, and Strain Detections: A Review, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(28), 31037–31053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Martins, A. Nathan, R. Barros, L. Pereira, P. Barquinha, N. Correia, R. Costa, A. Ahnood, I. Ferreira and E. Fortunato, Complementary metal oxide semiconductor technology with and on paper, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(39), 4491–4496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, N. Zhang, Y. Tang, M. Wang, M. Chao and E. Liang, A paper triboelectric nanogenerator for self-powered electronic systems, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(38), 14499–14505 RSC .
S. Parandeh, M. Kharaziha and F. Karimzadeh, An eco-friendly triboelectric hybrid nanogenerators based on graphene
oxide incorporated polycaprolactone fibers and cellulose paper, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 412–421 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, C. Dahlstrom, H. Zou, J. Jonzon, M. Hummelgard, J. Ortegren, N. Blomquist, Y. Yang, H. Andersson, M. Olsen, M. Norgren, H. Olin and Z. L. Wang, Cellulose-Based Fully Green Triboelectric Nanogenerators with Output Power Density of 300 W m(-2), Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(38), e2002824 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chi, K. Xia, Z. Zhu, J. Fu, H. Zhang, C. Du and Z. Xu, Rice paper-based biodegradable triboelectric nanogenerator, Microelectron. Eng., 2019, 216, 111059 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yao, X. Yin, Y. Yu, Z. Cai and X. Wang, Chemically Functionalized Natural Cellulose Materials for Effective Triboelectric Nanogenerator Development, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(30), 1700794 CrossRef .
L. Yao, Z. Zhou, Z. Zhang, X. Du, Q.-L. Zhang and H. Yang, Dyeing-Inspired Sustainable and Low-Cost Modified Cellulose-Based TENG for Energy Harvesting and Sensing, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10(12), 3909–3919 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, G. Li, W. Liu, D. Yu, G. Li, X. Liu, Z. Song, H. Wang and H. Liu, Fabrication of polyethyleneimine-paper composites with improved tribopositivity for triboelectric nanogenerators, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106859 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie, K. Zhang, X. Lin, C. Zhang, D. Yan, H. Liang and S. Wang, Enzymatic pretreatment for the improvement of dispersion and film properties of cellulose nanofibrils, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 181, 1136–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, Y. Zhu, W. Cheng, W. Chen, Y. Wu and H. Yu, Cellulose-Based Flexible Functional Materials for Emerging Intelligent Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33(28), e2000619 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, P. Tao, Y. Lu and S. Nie, Effect of lignin on the thermal stability of cellulose nanofibrils produced from bagasse pulp, Cellulose, 2019, 26(13–14), 7823–7835 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu and Y. Cui, Energy and environmental nanotechnology in conductive paper and textiles, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(4), 6423–6435 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Liao, Y. C. Wang, S. Zhang, W. Yang, X. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Cellulose II Aerogel-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerator, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(28), 2001763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tao, Y. Zhang, Z. Wu, X. Liao and S. Nie, Enzymatic pretreatment for cellulose nanofibrils isolation from bagasse pulp: Transition of cellulose crystal structure, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 214, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yao, A. Hernandez, Y. Yu, Z. Cai and X. Wang, Triboelectric nanogenerators and power-boards from cellulose nanofibrils and recycled materials, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kim, H. Jeon, D. Kim, J. You and D. Kim, All-in-one cellulose based triboelectric nanogenerator for electronic paper using simple filtration process, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 975–981 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Ba, J. F. Bao, H. T. Deng, Z. Y. Wang, X. W. Li, T. Gong, W. Huang and X. S. Zhang, Single-Layer Triboelectric Nanogenerators Based on Ion-Doped Natural Nanofibrils, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(38), 42859–42867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Jiang, F. Xu and S. Gong, Crepe cellulose paper and nitrocellulose
membrane-based triboelectric nanogenerators for energy harvesting and self-powered human-machine interaction, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie, Q. Fu, X. Lin, C. Zhang, Y. Lu and S. Wang, Enhanced performance of a cellulose nanofibrils-based triboelectric nanogenerator by tuning the surface polarizability and hydrophobicity, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126512 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cui, K. Parida, M.-F. Lin, J. Xiong, G. Cai and P. S. Lee, Transparent, Flexible Cellulose Nanofibril-Phosphorene Hybrid Paper as Triboelectric Nanogenerator, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4(22), 1700651 CrossRef .
S. Nie, C. Cai, X. Lin, C. Zhang, Y. Lu, J. Mo and S. Wang, Chemically Functionalized Cellulose Nanofibrils for Improving Triboelectric Charge Density of a Triboelectric Nanogenerator, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(50), 18678–18685 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, H.-U. Ko, P. K. Maji, L. Van Hai and J. Kim, Large amplification of triboelectric property by allicin to develop high performance cellulosic triboelectric nanogenerator, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123723 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lin, J. Lan, J. Yu, Z. Hua, H. Huang, X. Ma and S. Cao, Cocklebur-structured design of plant fibers for high-performance triboelectric nanogenerators and pressure sensors, Mater. Today Commun., 2022, 30, 103208 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, M. Zhu, Q. Qiu, J. Yu and B. Ding, Multilayered fiber-based triboelectric nanogenerator with high performance for biomechanical energy harvesting, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 726–733 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qian, L. Li, M. Gao, H. Yang, Z. Cai, B. Chen, Z. Xiang, Z. Zhang and Y. Song, All-printed 3D hierarchically structured cellulose aerogel based triboelectric nanogenerator for multi-functional sensors, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103885 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, X. Lin, N. Zhang, Y. Lu, Z. Wu, G. Liu and S. Nie, Chemically functionalized cellulose nanofibrils-based gear-like triboelectric nanogenerator for energy harvesting and sensing, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mali, L. S. Sakanaka, F. Yamashita and M. V. E. Grossmann, Water sorption and mechanical properties of cassava starch films and their relation to plasticizing effect, Carbohydr. Polym., 2005, 60(3), 283–289 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zheng, J. Xue, Y. Jie, X. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Wearable and humidity-resistant biomaterials-based triboelectric nanogenerator for high entropy energy harvesting and self-powered sensing, Nano Res., 2022, 15(7), 6213–6219 CrossRef CAS .
G. Khandelwal, N. P. M. Joseph Raj, N. R. Alluri and S.-J. Kim, Enhancing Hydrophobicity of Starch for Biodegradable Material-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerators, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9(27), 9011–9017 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Sathya Prasanna, V. Vivekananthan, G. Khandelwal, N. R. Alluri, N. P. Maria Joseph Raj, M. Anithkumar and S.-J. Kim, Green Energy from Edible Materials: Triboelectrification-Enabled Sustainable Self-Powered Human Joint Movement Monitoring, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10(20), 6549–6558 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, D. Yu, B. Wang and Y. Guo, Ultrahigh sensitive, eco-friendly, transparent triboelectric nanogenerator for monitoring human motion and vehicle movement, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 137393 CrossRef .
E. N. Jayaweera, K. R. Wijewardhana, T. K. Ekanayaka, A. Shahzad and J.-K. Song, Triboelectric Nanogenerator Based on Human Hair, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(5), 6321–6327 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, K. Xia and Z. Xu, A triboelectric nanogenerator based on human fingernail to harvest and sense body energy, Microelectron. Eng., 2020, 232, 111408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. L. Zhang, Z. H. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, Q. S. Jing, Y. J. Su, J. Yang, J. Chen, C. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Human Skin Based Triboelectric Nanogenerators for Harvesting Biomechanical Energy and as Self-Powered Active Tactile Sensor System, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(10), 9213–9222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Sun, T. N. Yang, I. S. Kuo, J.-M. Wu, C.-Y. Wang and L.-J. Chen, A leaf-molded transparent triboelectric nanogenerator for smart multifunctional applications, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 180–186 CrossRef CAS .
D.-L. Wen, X. Liu, H.-T. Deng, D.-H. Sun, H.-Y. Qian, J. Brugger and X.-S. Zhang, Printed silk-fibroin-based triboelectric nanogenerators for multi-functional wearable sensing, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104123 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xing, Y. Jie, X. Cao, T. Li and N. Wang, Natural triboelectric nanogenerator based on soles for harvesting low-frequency walking energy, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 138–142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Song, H. Chen, J. Zhang and H. Zhang, An ultrathin stretchable triboelectric nanogenerator with coplanar electrode for energy harvesting and gesture sensing, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(24), 12361–12368 RSC .
T. Chomjun, I. Appamato, V. Harnchana and V. Amornkitbamrung, Eco-Friendly Triboelectric Material Based on Natural Rubber and Activated Carbon from Human Hair, Polymers, 2022, 14(6), 1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bai, Y. Xu, J. Li, J. Zhu, C. Gao, Y. Zhang, J. Wang and J. Guo, An Eco-friendly Porous Nanocomposite Fabric-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Efficient Energy Harvesting and Motion Sensing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(38), 42880–42890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Ahmad, M. Al-Raggad and N. Shareef, Production of activated carbon derived from agricultural by-products via microwave-induced chemical activation: a review, Carbon Lett., 2021, 31(5), 957–971 CrossRef .
H.-J. Kim, E.-C. Yim, J.-H. Kim, S.-J. Kim, J.-Y. Park and I.-K. Oh, Bacterial Nano-Cellulose Triboelectric Nanogenerator, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chakraborty, S. N. Lai, M. C. Wu, H. Y. Lin, C. Li, J. M. Wu and C. S. Lai, Charge trapping with alpha-Fe2O3 nanoparticles accompanied by human hair towards an enriched triboelectric series and a sustainable circular bioeconomy, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8(11), 3149–3162 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Ouyang, J. Lei, Q. Tan, L. Xie, Z. Li, T. Liu, Y. Xiao, T. H. Farooq, X. Wu, L. Chen and W. Yan, Systematical review of interactions between microplastics and microorganisms in the soil environment, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 418, 126288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Beule, A. Vaupel and V. E. Moran-Rodas, Abundance, Diversity, and Function of Soil Microorganisms in Temperate Alley-Cropping Agroforestry Systems: A Review, Microorganisms, 2022, 10(3), 616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Jeon, I.-K. Oh, C.-D. Kee and S.-J. Kim, Bacterial cellulose actuator with electrically driven bending deformation in hydrated condition, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 146(1), 307–313 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, H.-J. Kim, S. Park, C.-D. Kee, S.-J. Kim and I.-K. Oh, Bendable and flexible supercapacitor based on polypyrrole-coated bacterial cellulose core-shell composite network, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 128, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Wan, H. Luo, F. He, H. Liang, Y. Huang and X. L. Li, Mechanical, moisture absorption, and biodegradation behaviours of bacterial cellulose fibre-reinforced starch biocomposites, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2009, 69(7–8), 1212–1217 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. AM, Y. Liu, C. Liu, K. H. Schafer, M. Saumer and G. Yang, Carbon Nanotube-Reinforced Poly(4-vinylaniline)/Polyaniline Bilayer-Grafted Bacterial Cellulose for Bioelectronic Applications, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5(5), 2160–2172 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Hu, Z. Shi, Y. Wang, Y. Lei, J. Han, Y. Xiong, J. Sun, L. Zheng, Q. Sun, G. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Eco-friendly and recyclable all cellulose triboelectric nanogenerator and self-powered interactive interface, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, X. Li, J. Ping, J. s. He and J. Wu, A Flexible, Recyclable, and High-Performance Pullulan-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerator (TENG), Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 5(2), 1900905 CrossRef .
W. Zhuang, M. Liu, J. Song and S. C. Ying, Retention of thallium by natural minerals: A review, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 777, 146074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Tong, Y. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Wang and Y. Zhang, Mica-based triboelectric nanogenerators for energy harvesting, Appl. Clay Sci., 2021, 215, 106330 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shahriari, A. Amiri and M. H. Sadeghi, Study on Hot Ring Compression Test of Nimonic 115 Superalloy Using Experimental Observations and 3D FEM Simulation, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2009, 19(5), 633–642 CrossRef .
C. Wan and B. Chen, Synthesis and characterization of biomimetic hydroxyapatite/sepiolite nanocomposites, Nanoscale, 2011, 3(2), 693–700 RSC .
A. Ozen, F. Ozel, Z. Kınas, A. Karabiber and S. Polat, Spring assisted triboelectric nanogenerator based on sepiolite doped polyacrylonitrile nanofibers, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assessments, 2021, 47, 101492 CrossRef .
N. R. Tanguy, M. Rana, A. A. Khan, X. Zhang, N. Tratnik, H. Chen, D. Ban and N. Yan, Natural lignocellulosic nanofibrils as tribonegative materials for self-powered wireless electronics, Nano Energy, 2022, 98, 107337 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babu, I. Aazem, R. Walden, S. Bairagi, D. M. Mulvihill and S. C. Pillai, Electrospun nanofiber based TENGs for wearable electronics and self-powered sensing, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 452, 139060 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Mo, Q. Fu, Y. Liu, S. Wang and S. Nie, Wood-cellulose-fiber-based functional materials for triboelectric nanogenerators, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105637 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu, W. Cheng, M. Cao, D. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Han, Y. Long and G. Han, Recent advances in cellulose-based flexible triboelectric nanogenerators, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106175 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Mi, X. Jing, Q. Zheng, L. Fang, H.-X. Huang, L.-S. Turng and S. Gong, High-performance flexible triboelectric nanogenerator based on porous aerogels and electrospun nanofibers for energy harvesting and sensitive self-powered sensing, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .
M.-F. Lin, J. Xiong, J. Wang, K. Parida and P. S. Lee, Core-shell nanofiber mats for tactile pressure sensor and nanogenerator applications, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 248–255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, S. Wang, S. Niu, L. Lin, Q. Jing, Y. Su, Z. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Multi-layered disk triboelectric nanogenerator for harvesting hydropower, Nano Energy, 2014, 6, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zheng, B. Shi, F. Fan, X. Wang, L. Yan, W. Yuan, S. Wang, H. Liu, Z. Li and Z. L. Wang, In vivo powering of pacemaker by breathing-driven implanted triboelectric nanogenerator, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(33), 5851–5856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, Z. Wen, Y. Zi, M.-H. Yeh, J. Wang, L. Zhu, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, A Water-Proof Triboelectric-Electromagnetic Hybrid Generator for Energy Harvesting in Harsh Environments, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(6), 1501593 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, J. Chen, D. W. Boukhvalov, Z. Luo, L. Zhu and Y. Shi, A new triboelectric nanogenerator with excellent electric breakdown self-healing performance, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105990 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, B. Yang, J. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Yang and Q. He, A flexible triboelectric-piezoelectric hybrid nanogenerator based on P(VDF-TrFE) nanofibers and PDMS/MWCNT for wearable devices, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Guo, Y. Hu, Y. Yang, T. Sun, H. Zhang and X. Liu, Multifunctional poly(vinyl alcohol)/Ag nanofibers-based triboelectric nanogenerator for self-powered MXene/tungsten oxide nanohybrid NO2 gas sensor, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106410 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Songling Liu	Songling Liu is currently a master's student at the School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences. His research focuses on natural materials for triboelectric generators.
Wangshu Tong	Wangshu Tong received her PhD in 2016 from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Currently, she is a lecturer at Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her current research mainly focuses on flexible functional films and their energy conversion.
Caixia Gao	Caixia Gao is currently a PhD candidate in Prof. Yihe Zhang's group in Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, National Laboratory of Mineral Materials, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Her research focuses on degradable polymer materials for triboelectric generators.
Yulun Liu	Yulun Liu is currently a master's student of Prof. Yihe Zhang in Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, National Laboratory of Mineral Materials, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). His research focuses on self-polarizing piezoelectric materials.
Xinnan Li	Xinnan Li is currently a master's student at the School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). His research focuses on tribocatalysis.
Yihe Zhang	Yihe Zhang is a Professor at the School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing) and leads the Beijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). Zhang received his PhD from the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2005, and was a Visiting Scholar, Postdoctoral Fellow and Research Fellow in City University of Hong Kong and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University from 2003 to 2009. His current research focuses on nanomaterials, composites and their applications for the environment and energy.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the diversity of natural materials that can be used in TENGs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the working principles of a pigeon feather-based TENG.76 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (b) Photographs of damaged and self-healed pigeon feathers and an SEM image of the hook-like structure of pigeon feathers.76 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of an FB-TENG installation and the harnessing of natural wind energy.75 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Diagram of the working principles of an FB-TENG.75 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (e) Photo of a water wheel device.75 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram and overview of the application of an FG-TENG.79 (b) Schematic diagram and preparation process of an FG-TENG.79 (c) Schematic diagram and overview of the performance of an FSFG-TENG.80 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram and preparation process of a CD-TENG.83 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photograph and working principles of a silk/PET-based TENG.90 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Diagram of an egg-based TENG's preparation process, including the process of hydrothermal peeling of the eggshell film and the process of ZnO modification of the eggshell film.95 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Photographs of BN-TENG implantation and wound healing in mice and electrical output in vivo.74 (d) A BN-TENG based stimulation system and a microscopy image of cardiomyocytes.74 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Diagram of the processes involved in preparing a wood-based TENG.96 (b) Schematic diagram of the structural changes in the wood after chemical treatment.96 (c) FTIR spectra of the wood before and after treatment.96 (d) Schematic diagram of an intelligent table tennis table constructed using the wood-based TENG.96 (e) Schematic diagram of a smart home design system.102 (f–h) Schematic diagram of smart home devices based on the wood-based TENG.102	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of a rose-based TENG; inset is a photograph of a rose surface texture.107 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Leaf-TENG simulation; inset is a photograph of the surface of a hosta leaf.108 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Cross-sectional microscopy images of a hosta leaf and an SEM image of its surface.108 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) The working mechanism of a leaf-TENG.108 (e) Diagram of a sandwich TENG, showing a photograph of the bread and SEM images of the four plants.69 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (f) Photograph of a sandwich TENG and the successful lighting of a siren.69 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (g) Comparison diagram of the output current between the FBD-TENG and two types of single-electrode TENGs.109	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Structural design of a C-TENG.112 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (b) Working principles of a C-TENG.112 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (c) Effect of the number of blades on the TENG output.112 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of the surface chemical modification of cotton and silk.113 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Atomic force microscopy topology and 3D images (5 × 5 μm) of pristine cotton and F-cotton.113 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of a P-TENG, incorporating an SEM image of the surface of the cellulose in the paper and commercial white LEDs lit by the P-TENG when turning book pages.116 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic diagram of the TENG structure, showing a diagram of a PCL/GO fiber and an SEM image.117 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematic drawing showing the difference in water diffusion in cellulose fiber-based and R-cellulose films.118 (d) Working mechanism of an RP-TENG.119 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of PFOTES-modified cellulose.133 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of the AEAPDMS modification of cellulose.135 (c) Schematic diagram of natural-allicin-modified cellulose.136 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of the source and physical modification of cellulose.137 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (e) 3D printed multilayered structure of the friction layer and a diagram of the AP-TENG.138 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Schematic of the gear-shaped cellulose-based TENG.140 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the EM-TENG.144 (b) Photographs of four starchy foods and a comparison of their output voltage and current.144 (c) Charge transport pathways of the pure PVA and RF-incorporated PVA.144 (d) Photograph of RF–PVA film degradation over 16 days.144 (e) Use of the EM-TENG to monitor human joint motion in real time.144 (f) The CS-F-TENG can monitor the speed of a car.145 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photographs and schematic diagram of a TENG based on skin and output voltage map of a human finger touch matrix.148 (b) Schematic diagram based on an energy harvesting system for the human body, including schematic illustration of the working principles and photographs of lighting of LEDs.151 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of a hair-PDMS@α-Fe2O3-based TENG that exhibits high output performance.157 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Working principles of a hair-PDMS@α-Fe2O3-based TENG.157 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of a fingernail-based TENG.147 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the BNC-TENG, where the inset shows the process of BC membrane preparation.156 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) The working principles of a BNC-TENG.156 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the contact electrification mechanism between pure BC and a BC@CNT@PPy film.164 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of a pullulan-based TENG.165 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic diagram of the recovery process of a pullulan film and the recovered pullulan-based TENG.165 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Structural diagram of mica.167 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of the working principles of a mica-based TENG, showing a photograph of the lighting of 19 LEDs.167 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) An energy harvesting system based on a mica-based TENG, showing photographs of the self-powered device, monitored walking signal, output voltage, and current.167 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (d) XRD image of the fibrous structure of sepiolite, where the inset shows a schematic diagram of the 3D crystal structure of sepiolite.170 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Photograph of the TENG powering a watch and LEDs.170 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

Pigeon fur	FEP	72 V/2.7 μA	0.62 mW g−1	200 cycles of self-healing and low cost	Flexible sensor	
76

Rabbit fur	PTFE	3750 V/28 μA	5.02 W m−2	Durability over 300000 cycles and stability at 90% RH	Wind and water flow energy harvesting	
75

Dog fur	PTFE	200 V/—	—	Low-cost	Powering device	
77

Fish scales	PDMS	130 V/0.35 μA	45.8 μW cm−2	Low-cost	Self-powered sensing	
79

Dopamine–fish scales	Fluorinated silane–fish scales	500 V/4 μA	100 μW cm−2	30 day degradation	Wearable movement sensing	
80

Fish bladders	FEP	106 V/7.3 μA	200 μW cm−2	Stable within six months and low-cost	Electronic skin	
81

Chitosan–diatom	FEP	150 V/1.02 μA	15.7 μW cm−2	Biological safety	Skin attachable motion sensor	
83

Silk	PET	268 V/5.78 μA	193.6 μW cm−2	Biodegradable	Powering a micro-sensor	
90

Human skin	Silk	90 V/00.06 μA	2 μW cm−2	Transparent, low mass, and biodegradable	Bioelectrical sensing devices	
91

SNRF	RSFF	41.64 V/0.5 μA	86.7 μW cm−2	Completely biodegradable in vitro	Implantable self-powered devices	
94

Egg film	PTFE	101.5 V/—	—	Biodegradable and low-cost	Powering digital watch	
95

Egg film–ZnO	PTFE	213.4 V/1.2 μA	—	Biodegradable and low-cost	Powering digital watch	
95

Balsa wood	PTFE	81 V/1.2 μA	57 μW cm−2	Biodegradable	Self-powered sensing	
96

Balsa wood	PTFE	38 V/0.37 μA	—	Biodegradable and durability over 100000 cycles	Self-powered system	
102

Pullulan–NaF	PI	79 V/—	41.7 mW m−2	Recyclable five times	Human motions monitoring	
165

New Zealand pine	PTFE	220 V/5.8 μA	158.2 mW m−2	Low-cost and biodegradable	Self-powered sensor	
99

Inner surface of onion	Outer surface of onion	32 V/37 μA	1.27 W m−2	Biodegradable, low-cost and simple process	Energy harvesting, gas and humidity sensors	
106

Inner surface of scallion	Outer surface of scallion	60 V/89 μA	4.1 W m−2	Biodegradable, low-cost and simple process	Energy harvesting, gas and humidity sensors	
106

Rose petal	PMMA	30.6 V/0.78 μA	27.2 mW m−2	Water contact angle: 149.8°	Energy harvesting	
107

Hosta	PMMA	230 V/9.5 μA	45 mW m−2	Low-cost, simple process	Energy harvesting	
108

Celery cabbage	Bread	15 V/3 μA	1.0 mW m−2	All-natural materials, simple process and biodegradable	Energy harvesting	
69


Mytilaria laosensis Lec.	NaCl droplets	1 V/4 μA	10 mW m−2	Simple process and biodegradable	Natural energy harvesting	
109

Cotton	FEP	782 V/8.9 μA	—	Output stability of 100 min	Self-powering wind sensor	
112

Cellulose	FEP	5 V/5 μA	—	Renewable and biodegradable	Energy harvesting	
129

Cellulose–PVA	PI	600 V/50 μA	84.5 W m−2	Low-cost	Mechanical energy harvesting	
110

Cellulose	PDMS	254 V/11.52 μA	—	Biodegradable	Self-powering device	
131

Cellulose–phosphorene	PET	5.2 V/1.8 μA	9.36 μW cm−2	Stable within six months	Energy harvesting	
134

Inner surface of leek	Outer surface of leek	182 V/340 μA	35.1 W m−2	Biodegradable, low-cost and simple process	Energy harvesting, gas and humidity sensors	
106

Silk	Rice paper	34 V/0.32 μA	21.6 mW m−2	Biocompatible	Implantable self-powering supply	
74

Human fingernail	PTFE	87.3 V/3.2 μA	122 mW m−2	Simple process, low-cost	Human body energy harvesting	
147

Cellulose–AEAPDMS	FEP	195 V/13.4 μA	—	90% RH hydrophobic	Mechanical energy harvesting	
135

Cellulose–allicin	PVDF	7.9 V/5.13 μA	10.13 μW cm−2	Biodegradable, 60% RH hydrophobic	Energy harvesting	
136

Cellulose–AgNPs	PTFE	110 V/14.8 μA	8.73 mW cm−2	10000 cycle durability	Wearable sensing devices	
137

Cellulose	PET	55.8 V/0.94 μA	29 mW cm−2	Biodegradable	Self-power sensing	
139

Cellulose–PEI–Ag	FEP	286 V/1.1 μA	0.43 W cm−2	10000 cycles of stable output	Self-powered sensing	
140

Starch–laver	PCL	50 V/1 μA	6.48 mW cm−2	Output stability for 2000 s, biodegradable	Biomechanical energy harvesting	
143

RF–PVA	FEP	96 V/0.6 μA	334 μW cm−2	Degradability in 16 days	Self-powered joint motion monitoring system	
144

Starch–chitosan	FEP	108 V/27 μA	5.07 W cm−2	Transparent, degradable	Human motion self-powered sensing	
145

Human skin	PDMS	1000 V/—	500 mW cm−2	Simple process, flexible	Biomechanical energy harvesting, self-powered tactile sensor	
148

Human skin	Structured-PDMS	56 V/3.1 μA	—	Transparency of ∼88%, flexible	Self-powered user-interactive wearable device	
149

Human skin	Structured-PDMS	666 V/174.6 μA	412 μW cm−2	Flexible, recognizing water molecules	Wearable sensing electronics	
150

Human hair	PI	103 V/10.9 μA	60 mW cm−2	Low-cost, degradable, output stable over 3 months	Self-powered device, energy harvesting	
146

Mica	PTFE	147 V/0.3 μA	62.82 mW cm−2	Durability over 5000 cycles, high dielectric constant	Energy harvesting	
167

Human hair–NR	PTFE	89.6 V/6.9 μA	242 mW m−2	Biodegradable	Energy harvesting, motion sensor	
153

Human hair	PDMS–α-Fe2O3 NPs	370.8 V/3.1 μA	274.2 mW cm−2	Facile, cost-effective	Self-powered smart portable electronics	
157

Printing paper	PTFE	400 V/0.17 mA	53 W cm−2	Output voltage stable for 200000 cycles	Mechanical energy harvesting	
116

Cellulose paper	PCL–GO	120 V/4 μA	72.5 mW m−2	Low-cost, easy fabrication process	Energy harvesting	
117

Rice paper	PVC	244 V/6 μA	37.64 μW cm−2	Output voltage stable for 10000 cycles, recyclable	Energy harvesting	
119

R-cellulose	Cellophane	300 V/2.6 mA	307 mW m−2	Output voltage stability of 30900 cycles, recyclable	Energy harvesting	
118


Balsa wood–AEAP-Si	Balsa wood–PFOT-Si	90.1 V/0.46 μA	13.63 μW cm−2	Biodegradable	—	
103

ZIF–balsa wood	PDMS–balsa wood	24.3 V/0.32 μA	10.4 μW cm−2	Biodegradable	Self-powered device	
104

Silk–CTES	Cotton–PFTS	216.82 V/50.3 μA	0.345 mW cm−2	Output performance stable over 14 days	Energy harvesting	
109

Cu	BC	13 V/—	4.8 mW cm−2	Decomposed within 30 days	Energy harvesting	
156

BC–CNTs–PPy	BC	29 V/0.6 μA	—	Output voltage of 10000 cycles, biodegradation in 8 h	Powering commercial electronic devices	
164

PVP–ethyl cellulose	PAN–sepiolite	486 V/—	28.125 W cm−2	High dielectric constant and rough surface	Energy harvesting	
170


 	Fig. 15  The triboelectric sequence table of some natural materials (Cu, PI, and PTFE are common triboelectric layers used for comparison).	 

PET/PI	3.3 V/0.6 μA	10.4 mW cm−2	
14

PDMS/PVDF–TrFE	25 V/—	1.98 mW cm−2	
181

PEI–CNF/PVDF	106.2 V/46 mA m−2	13300 mW m−2	
175

Al/PTFE	470 V/90.6 mA m−2	42600 mW m−2	
177

PDMS/PVDF	31 V/1.7 mA m−2	900 mW m−2	
176

PA66/PI	12000 V/1.2 μA	884 mW m−2	
51

PU/PTFE	183.5 V/1.35 μA	40 mW m−2	
180

Al/PDMS	12 V/0.25 μA	8.44 mW m−2	
178

PVA–Ag/FEP	530 V/5.6 μA	359 mW m−2	
182

Cu/FEP	5 V/2.3 mA	6 μW m−2	
179


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
