Magnesium: properties and rich chemistry for new material synthesis and energy applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00810F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00810F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 2145-2192Magnesium: properties and rich chemistry for new material synthesis and energy applications

        
          
            Cheol-Hwan 
            Shin†
, 
      
        
          
            Ha-Young 
            Lee†
, 
      
        
          
            Caleb 
            Gyan-Barimah†
, 
      
        
          
            Jeong-Hoon 
            Yu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jong-Sung 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Energy Science and Engineering, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu, 42988, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jsyu@dgist.ac.kr
Received 
      25th December 2022
    First published on 17th February 2023AbstractMagnesium (Mg) has many unique properties suitable for applications in the fields of energy conversion and storage. These fields presently rely on noble metals for efficient performance. However, among other challenges, noble metals have low natural abundance, which undermines their sustainability. Mg has a high negative standard reduction potential and a unique crystal structure, and its low melting point at 650 °C makes it a good candidate to replace or supplement numerous other metals in various energy applications. These attractive features are particularly helpful for improving the properties and limits of materials in energy systems. However, knowledge of Mg and its practical uses is still limited, despite recent studies which have reported Mg's key roles in synthesizing new structures and modifying the chemical properties of materials. At present, information about Mg chemistry has been rather scattered without any organized report. The present review highlights the chemistry of Mg and its uses in energy applications such as electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and secondary batteries, among others. Future perspectives on the development of Mg-based materials are further discussed to identify the challenges that need to be addressed.
Cheol-Hwan Shin
Cheol-Hwan Shin is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Jong-Sung Yu in the Department of Energy Science and Engineering of Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST). He received his BSc. degree in Chemical Engineering and Bio-technology from Tech University of Korea (TUK) (2017). His research focuses on the synthesis and analysis of photo and electrocatalysts for diverse energy applications.
Ha-Young Lee
Ha-Young Lee received her BSc degree in chemistry from Yonsei University in 2016. In the same year, she joined the Department of Energy Science and Engineering of DGIST. She is a PhD candidate under the guidance of Prof. Jong-Sung Yu and is working on the development of novel nanomaterials and electrocatalysts for fuel cell and water splitting.
Caleb Gyan-Barimah
Gyan-Barimah Caleb Studied Petrochemical Engineering at the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), where he completed his undergraduate degree with honors in 2015. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jong-Sung Yu in the Department of Energy Science and Engineering of DGIST. His research encompasses electrochemical analyses and the preparation of materials for water electrolyzer, fuel cells, and rechargeable metal–air batteries.
Jeong-Hoon Yu
Jeong-Hoon Yu is currently a PhD candidate under the guidance of Prof. Jong-Sung Yu at the Department of Energy Science and Engineering of DGIST. Before joining DGIST in 2018, He received his BSc degree in Polymer Nanoscience and Technology from Jeonbuk National University (JBNU) in the same year. His research focuses on carbon and metal oxide-based materials for energy storage applications.
Jong-Sung Yu
Jong-Sung Yu earned his BSc. in Chemistry from Sogang University in Seoul, South Korea and Ph. D from the University of Houston in 1990 before Postdoctoral works at Ohio State University, Univ. of Houston, Penn State Univ., and Northwestern Univ. He was a Professor at Korea University (2008–2015) and then joined Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), South Korea. Currently, he is a supervisor for the graduate students of Light, Salts and Water Research Lab (LSWRG, https://jsylab.wixsite.com/jsylab) at the Energy Science and Engineering Department of DGIST, where his research focuses on nanostructured materials, including nanoscale 0-3D materials and their composites and their energy applications for fuel cells, batteries, water splitting electrolyzer, CO2 conversion and other catalytic systems.
1. Introduction
The extensive use of fossil fuels as the world's primary energy resource has led to the extensive release of air pollutants such as carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrogen oxide (NOx), sulfur oxide (SOx), and fine dust. One prominent consequence of the production of these pollutants is global warming, mainly induced by increasing atmospheric concentrations of CO2 gas, which now threatens sustainable human society.1 To address this problem, many eco-friendly methods of sustainable energy production have been proposed by scientists and engineers in various fields.2 Chemistry in particular has played a key role in efforts to develop significant and inspirational progress, not only in identifying pollutant-free and sustainable chemical processes, but also in designing new energy-efficient materials.
Magnesium (Mg), one of the alkaline earth metals, is very abundant and affordable, being the fourth most common element on the earth after iron, oxygen, and silicon.3 Mg is also the eleventh most abundant element by mass in the human body and is essential to biological systems.4 Mg ions interact with polyphosphate compounds such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP), deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), and ribonucleic acid (RNA). Hundreds of enzymes in the human body require Mg ions to properly function.5 Furthermore, seawater contains approximately 1.23 g L−1 of Mg2+ ions, making it the third most abundant dissolved element after sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl). In chemical industry, metallic Mg can be easily acquired through the hydration, chlorination, and electrolysis of various Mg compounds.6
Because Mg has low density (only two-thirds that of aluminum) and high natural abundance, it has been employed in airplane and rocket parts in aeronautics.7 However, because the pure metal has low structural strength, Mg is mainly used in the form of alloys, principally with 10 percent or less of aluminum, zinc, and manganese, to improve its hardness, tensile strength, and ability to be cast, welded, and machined. Mg is the easiest structural metal to machine and has often been used when a large number of machining operations are required. Mg also finds many other uses, such as an agent to remove sulfur from iron and steel,8 for photogenerated plates in the printing industry,9 a reducing agent for the production of uranium,10 and flashlight photography.11
In green energy heat pumps and transportation applications, Mg has also been widely studied in metal hydrides as an excellent solid-state hydrogen storage agent to replace conventionally compressed hydrogen.12 Its utility for this purpose is related to the fact that Mg has a high hydrogen capacity of 7.6 wt%, and it is lightweight, cheap in cost, and environmentally friendly with a relatively low production cost.
More recent interest has occurred in the field of Mg-based nanomaterials. Mg alloys have attracted attention as electrocatalytic materials for fuel cells and water electrolyzers, because of their ability to form robust intermetallic compounds.13,14 In particular, Mg has been found to have a high affinity for forming alloys with platinum group metals (PGMs) such as Pt,1 Rh,15 Ir,16 and Pd.17 These alloys can greatly decrease the reaction barriers typically encountered in the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), formic acid oxidation (FAO), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR). The key desired features in most electrocatalysts include individual active nanoparticles (NPs) with a high surface-to-volume ratio, facile electron transfer, moderate chemisorption, and high electrochemical stability.
Despite its promising features, synthesizing Mg alloys in nanoparticulate form, 3–10 nm in size with uniform morphology and dispersion, remains a formidable challenge. Most of the previously reported alloys have all been synthesized using top-down approaches, which inevitably lead to large particle formation.
Similarly, in photovoltaics, controlling the band gaps of semiconductors is a significant factor for improving the performance of photocatalysts, solar cells, and various gas sensors. The band gap energy (Eg) of nanomaterials depends on their size and shape. Large particles usually have a smaller band gap while smaller particles have a larger band gap.18 In energy storage materials, rechargeable magnesium batteries (RMBs) have been identified as a potential replacement for lithium metal batteries considering their inherent safety and large volumetric capacities. Therefore, a critical understanding and a rational control of the physical and chemical properties of Mg are essential points that need to be addressed in order to enhance performances in various applications.
Data gathered from literature searches using the keyword “magnesium” shows that the number of publications on Mg-based materials keeps increasing each year, as seen in Fig. 1. Even with this progress, the knowledge and effective use of Mg remains limited. The recent emerging reports have been rather scattered, and there is now a need for them to be collected in a review-type article. Based on the exciting properties listed, we are highly convinced this is the perfect time to survey opportunities of Mg in material science and energy applications, in a review article of the work of various researchers across the globe.
 Fig. 1  The number of published papers on Mg per year (source: Web of Science). 
In this review, we will comprehensively outline the physicochemical properties of Mg and developments in its material synthesis and modification, and further summarize the significant properties and implications involved in chemical interactions, particularly in energy applications. The goal and scope of this review are to lay out the unique features of Mg and how these features can be beneficially utilized in material synthesis and applications. Through this review, we aim to create a milestone for the further development of Mg chemistry. We envisage that this review will lay the foundation in Mg chemistry for researchers seeking to design new nanoscale materials with unique properties. The present review is highly important and timely, since it compiles the works performed on Mg to date in one comprehensive article, to pave the way for new developments in Mg chemistry.
2. History and properties of Mg
2.1. History of Mg
The name magnesium comes from Magnesia, a district of Thessaly (Greece) where the mineral magnesia (MgO) was first found. The silvery white elemental Mg itself does not occur free in nature. Historically, Mg was known in compounds such as sulfate (Epsom salts), oxide (magnesia), and carbonate (magnesite). Metallic Mg was first isolated in 1808 by Sir Humphry Davy, who evaporated mercury from a magnesium amalgam made by electrolyzing a mixture of moist magnesia (the oxide) and mercuric oxide.19
The stock of metallic magnesium increased significantly during World Wars I and II when it was employed as an alloying component for military aircraft and in the manufacture of explosives. A few years later, it was employed in automobiles for the manufacture of Volkswagen Beetles but soon was replaced when higher performance was required. Mg was once employed as a photographic flash ribbon and powder because it radiated intense white light when burned in the air.
In fine chemical industry, Mg has gained great popularity for the production and utilization of organomagnesium halides (R–Mg–X, where R is the organic group such as alkyl or allyl, and X is the halogen) called Grignard reagents. French chemist Victor Grignard discovered this reaction in 1900, and he was rewarded for his effort with the Nobel Prize in 1912. Ever since this discovery, it has been studied and used extensively for the production of many other organic and organometallic compounds. The Grignard reaction is an organometallic chemical reaction in which a Grignard reagent is added to a carbonyl group in an aldehyde or ketone (Fig. 2).20 This reaction is important for the formation of carbon–carbon bonds, which is not that simple to achieve it via other synthetic methods.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of a Grignard reaction. 
Over the last two decades, research on Mg-based materials has gradually shifted from its use in the bulk phase to energy applications which will be explored in the subsequent sections.
2.2. Elemental and physicochemical properties of Mg
Magnesium is the 12th chemical element with the symbol Mg, belonging to group IIa, known as alkaline earth metals, in the periodic table. Mg is one of the lightest elements with an atomic weight of 24.312 g mol−1 and a density of 1.740 g cm−3. It is a solid with a silvery white color and has a hexagonal closed-packed (HCP) crystal structure along with an ionic radius of 72 pm for Mg2+ (Fig. 3 and 4). An understanding of the periodic trends and crystal structures of elements is necessary when analysing and predicting the interactions of Mg with other elements and their molecular properties. The ionic radii values provide a good estimate of the size of other alloyed and doped elements by Mg (Fig. 4). However, the values exhibited here are not fixed but can vary depending on the coordination number and the spin state of the ion under study.
 Fig. 3  Chemical properties of Mg. 
 Fig. 4  Periodic table indicating the crystal structure and ionic radii (pm) of various elements. 
Mg occurs naturally in the form of stable compounds with other elements, where mostly exhibits a +2-oxidation state as can be expected from its electronic orbital structure of [Ne]3s2 (Fig. 3). Furthermore, the element has a high negative standard reduction potential of ΔE° = −2.37 V vs. SHE (standard hydrogen electrode) for the reaction: Mg2+ + 2e− ↔ Mg(s), and accordingly it requires very high energy to generate metallic Mg from Mg2+ ions.21 In other words, the Mg2+ ion is more stable than metallic Mg and thus is the preferred form of Mg in terms of thermodynamical energy. In a way, this property allows metallic Mg to have an excellent reducing ability, owing to its ease of oxidation to form oxides, nitrides, halides, and other salts.22,23 It also grants a strong thermodynamic driving force for reactions such as galvanic replacement. For example, Niu et al. demonstrated a galvanic replacement reaction on a Mg particle surface with Au3+ ions.24 The ionic Au3+ was reduced to metallic Au, while the metallic Mg was oxidized to Mg2+. This is ascribed to the difference in their standard reduction potentials (Mg: −2.37 and Au: 1.50 V vs. SHE).
Mg can react with almost all non-metals and acids but rarely reacts with bases and organic solvents. It is soluble in hot water but insoluble in cold water. The thermal and electrical conductivities of Mg are very similar to those of aluminum (Al).7 However, while Al is attacked by alkalis but is resistant to most acids, Mg is resistant to most alkalis but is readily attacked by most acids to liberate hydrogen. Mg can serve as a base material for the extrusion of many metals (e.g., titanium, zirconium, and hafnium) from their salts because of its high negative standard reduction potential, which allows it to act as a powerful reducing agent.23
In chemical bond formation with organics, Mg can establish non-covalent interactions, known as magnesium bonds in literature.25 These bonds have features similar to beryllium bonds with closed-shell interactions (Δ2ρ > 0). Mg is known to form stable bonds with a +2 oxidation state. However, rarely, some compounds exhibit a +1-oxidation state for Mg.26 These various interesting features make Mg unique and promising in the field of nanomaterials.
In addition, Mg metal is light weight and has relatively low melting point (MP) and boiling point (BP) of 650 and 1090 °C, respectively. These properties offer the unique advantage of low-temperature synthesis of new nanoscale materials using melted Mg.27
Another great advantage of Mg is its convenience of use. Although Mg is highly reactive, when exposed to the atmosphere its surface is readily coated with a thin layer of oxide, which partly inhibits its reactivity. Thus, it is very convenient to handle and store metallic Mg in ambient conditions unlike other alkali and alkaline earth metals, which are sensitive to environmental conditions such as moisture, oxygen, and temperature. Recent emerging research has shown that Mg can play a pivotal role in the synthesis of novel nanoscale materials thanks to the aforementioned appealing and promising characteristics.
The unique physiochemical properties enable Mg to be readily used as a catalyst, dopant, and alloying material in most electrochemical systems.
2.3. Preparation of new materials

2.3.1. Magnesiothermic reaction. 
A magnesiothermic reaction is simply the calcination of a reactant in the presence of Mg usually at a temperature higher than Mg's melting point (MP) of 650 °C under an inert gas flow (Ar or He). In this process, the reactant is reduced while Mg is oxidized in return. Hence, the metal oxide or organic precursor, for instance, can be easily reduced to metal, oxygen-deficient metal oxide, or carbon according to eqn (1).28,29 This reaction presents a simple, low cost, and scalable approach for such reduced products.
For example, silicon (Si) can be prepared from silica by reacting with Mg at elevated temperatures (700–900 °C).30 High quality graphene was also produced by burning Mg in a CO2 atmosphere following the equation, 2Mg + CO2(g) → 2MgO + C(s).31 For the above reactions, Mg easily takes oxygen from the reactants to generate reduced products while Mg is oxidized to MgO in return. In general, magnesiothermic reactions for oxides and heteroatom-containing carbon molecules or organics can be expressed as shown in eqn (1). (1)where 0 < β ≤ α, M stands for metal and metalloid, and X represents a heteroatom (O, N, S, P, B, and halogens) embedded in the organics.
In addition, the method often generates a variety of pores in the reduced products after the MgXδ phase has been etched out. These generated pores are highly beneficial for use in catalysis and electrochemistry. Some research groups have effectively employed this unique approach to create porous structures in carbon,32 silica,30 and metal oxides.33 For example, in two separate reports, Sinhamahapatra et al. prepared a surface-defected TiO2−x, from the calcination of anatase TiO2 in the presence of Mg, while Kang et al. also adopted a similar synthesis process to develop a porous cubic TiO phase.33,34
In detail, Sinhamahapatra et. al. successfully prepared the surface-defected TiO2−x with surface oxygen deficiency through calcination at the melting point of Mg (650 °C) by varying the mole ratio of the anatase TiO2 and Mg (RT-y, where RT indicates reduced TiO2 and y is the mole ratio of Mg to TiO2).33 Key observations here showed that when the mole ratio was below the threshold value of 0.75 mole ratio, Mg only reacted at the surface of TiO2 to generate a superficial TiO2−x and MgO, leaving behind a core of unreacted TiO2 (TiO2@TiO2−x–MgO). The reaction follows; TiO2 + Mg → TiO2−x + xMgO (0 < x < 1). After acid etching, the Mg species on the TiO2 surface was removed, and a TiO2@TiO2−x core–shell structure was formed (Fig. 5a). In this case, while the core still maintained the anatase TiO2 phase, the surface was enriched with oxygen-defects, as shown Fig. 5d and e. It is also quite interesting to notice the colour changes from white for pristine anatase TiO2 to light yellow for RT-0.3, yellow for RT-0.5 and dark grey for RT-0.75. The more Mg was used to reduce TiO2, the darker colour emerged for the reduced samples as indicated in Fig. 5a.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of magnesiothermic reduction of TiO2 with different mole ratios of Mg to TiO2. (b) UV-vis-IR spectra, (c) XRD patterns of RT samples. (d) HR-TEM images of RT-0.5 with corresponding FFT pattern and (e) specific line profile. (f–i) HAADF-STEM image with corresponding EDS mapping images of TiO–MgO composite and (j) HAADF-STEM image of TiO after acid etching of the TiO–MgO composite. Copyright 2018, Elsevier34 and Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.33 
The UV-vis spectra showed an increase in absorption in the surface-defected reduced TiO2 (RT) samples as compared to the bare TiO2 (Fig. 5b). In particular, the RT-0.3 and RT-0.5 samples displayed an absorption peak at ∼400 nm with the formation of a new peak in the visible light region (400–700 nm). This indicated that a new energy level was generated with decreasing band gap. In contrast, the RT-0.75 showed an absorption peak at 400 nm coupled with a continuously strong absorption from the visible and infrared (IR) regions. The presence of the sharp absorption at ∼400 nm in both the bare TiO2 and the RT-y samples indicated that the RT samples prepared with 0.3–0.75 mole of Mg still maintained the anatase phase in the core, while the reduced TiO2−x shell resulted in absorption peaks >400 nm. On the other hand, RT-1 sample exhibited incessant absorption of light in the UV-vis-IR region, including an absorbance at ∼400 nm, indicating its crystal structure was fully converted to cubic TiO phase from anatase.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns supported the structural changes, showing that the mildly reduced samples (RT-0.3–0.75) had an anatase phase (Fig. 5c). Meanwhile, the RT-1 only possessed a cubic TiO crystal structure, suggesting the crystal structure of anatase TiO2 was totally transformed to the cubic TiO. The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image exhibited numerous defects in the RT-0.5 (Fig. 5d). The corresponding specific line profile further confirmed the lattice disorders formed by Mg reduction (Fig. 5e). In addition, the fast Fourier transform (FFT) image corresponding to RT-0.5 showed anatase TiO2, indicating the main crystal structure did not change in the mildly reduced sample.
Porous TiO synthesized by Kang et. al.34 through the same magnesiothermic reduction of TiO2 is also indicated in Fig. 5f–j. The differences between these two studies are related to the Mg mole ratio towards a-TiO2. When an excessive amount of Mg (>1 mole ratio) was used, melted Mg caused smaller anatase TiO2 (a-TiO2) NPs (30–40 nm) to be fused together to grow into a big micron-sized particle through the reductive phase transformation of a-TiO2 to the cubic crystalline TiO phase with a blackish colour. Mg, as a strong reductant, takes oxygen from the nearby TiO2 framework, resulting in big micron-sized particles of the intergrown TiO and MgO heterostructure according to the reaction, TiO2 +Mg → TiO + MgO (usually with a Mg/TiO mole ratio >1 at 650 °C and higher for 8 h) as illustrated in Fig. 5a.
The high angle annular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) images revealed an intergrown TiO and MgO heterostructure (Fig. 5f–i). Subsequent HCl etching dissolved the embedded intergrown MgO from the TiO phase in the composite, leaving highly porous MgO-free TiO with macropores in a size range of 60–200 nm (Fig. 5j). The high negative Gibbs free energy of formation (solid, −596.4 kJ mol−1) of the MgO product is a strong driving force for the magnesiothermic reactions.
Mg also shows a very high reactivity with nitrogen and other heteroatoms as well as oxygen. The magnesiothermic carbonization of heteroatom-containing carbon sources can achieve an excellent balance between three incompatible properties of carbon mainly; its graphiticity, porosity, and heteroatom doping, using a simple one-step heat treatment at the relatively low temperature of less than 1000 °C.
To attain the desired properties in the resulting carbon structure, the synthesis conditions should be designed with the following considerations: (1) the chemical composition of the heteroatom-containing carbon precursor, (2) the amount of Mg relative to carbon precursor, (3) heating temperature, and (4) heating time.
In a recent report, a highly graphitized N-doped carbon (HGNC) was prepared from the Mg-aided carbonization of g-C3N4 as demonstrated in Fig. 6a.32 The g-C3N4 prepared from the polymerization of urea had abundant N atoms (50.9 at%) which could react with the molten Mg to generate strong Mg–N bonds for the Mg3N2 composite. The interaction between Mg and N suppressed the thermal decomposition of g-C3N4, which otherwise could be easily decomposed during the high temperature calcination. Subsequently, the N-deficient g-C3N4 parts cross-linked with each other to form a highly graphitized carbon, and the residual N atoms were doped on the carbon structure.
 Fig. 6  (a) Scheme for synthesis of HGNC-X through the magnesiothermic reduction. SEM and HR-TEM images for (b) g-C3N4 and (c) HGNC-75. (d) Raman spectroscopy profiles of HGNC-X samples and (e) High-resolution XPS spectrum of N 1s for HGNC-65. Copyright 2023, Elsevier.32 
For g-C3N4 as a precursor with high N content, most of the C atoms are sp2 hybridized and easily converted to graphitic carbon. In addition, the N atoms remained as dopants, thus minimizing the defects in the resulting carbon structure dramatically, as well as increasing the graphiticity. However, without Mg, thermally unstable g-C3N4 decomposes into small cyano fragments at temperatures above 650 °C. Therefore, the amount of Mg should balance the amount of heteroatoms (e.g., 1:1 atomic ratio) to prevent thermal decomposition and achieve a high graphiticity in the resultant carbon framework (Fig. 6c).
The interaction between Mg and N produces Mg3N2 particles embedded between carbon layers (HGNC-X-BE in Fig. 6a, where X is the carbonization temperature), which can act as a pore-generating template (porogen). The Mg3N2 particles are removed through an acid-etching step, leaving a unique honeycomb-like porous structure as seen in Fig. 6c. The g-C3N4 has a randomly oriented sheet-like morphology and amorphous structure (Fig. 6b). However, upon Mg treatment at 750 °C, the HGNC-75 in Fig. 6c displays an ordered honeycomb-like meso and macroporous structure, due to the removal of the embedded Mg3N2 templates. This indicates that the magnesiothermic reaction provides another advantage in providing a simple and efficient pore-creating self-template by the formation of MgO (Fig. 5j) or Mg3N2 (Fig. 6c) as a reaction product, without the troublesome addition of an external pore-generating template.
All of the HGNC-X samples exhibit high graphiticity in the Raman spectroscopy presented in Fig. 6d. The intensity of the G and 2D bands increased with increasing treatment temperature from 650 to 850 °C. In particular, since 2D Raman signal was observed only in the low lattice-defected carbons, it's appearance clearly indicates all the HGNC samples are highly graphitized. High graphiticity leads to chemical stability and contributes to the electrical conductivity of carbon. On the other hand, without Mg, temperatures above 1000 °C are necessary to achieve high graphiticity in a general carbon synthesis.
In addition to the pore-generation and high degree of graphiticity, this magnesiothermic carbonization occurs at temperatures lower than 1000 °C, thereby providing a high concentration of N doping (Fig. 6e). The low-temperature carbonization also allows the N doping characteristics to be controllable depending on the application. Interestingly, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) indicated that a thermally unstable pyrrolic-N configuration was predominant in the HGNC-65 and HGNC-75 (Fig. 6e), while pyridinic-N became major component in the HGNC-85. After all, Mg-assisted carbonization provides an effective synthesis process to obtain desired properties in a carbon material for various reactions.22,32
Magnesiothermic reactions have also been employed to reduce metal salts to generate various metals from their salts. For instance, titanium (Ti) was produced from titanium chloride in the presence of Mg at high temperatures according to the reaction, TiCl4 + 2Mg → Ti + 2MgCl2.35
Although Mg is commercially available in particle form, molten Mg leads to more homogenous reactions at a temperature higher than its MP. The only challenge associated with magnesiothermic reactions is their highly exothermic nature. The reaction temperature may be higher than the set temperature. This increase above the set temperature could lead to the loss of structure, and hence, efficient temperature control is essential.


2.3.2. Alloying or doping of Mg. 
Mg can not only form alloys with several elements but also serve as a dopant for different materials. Bulk Mg alloys are divided into two categories, (1) cast alloys and (2) wrought alloys. The compositions and formation of these alloys have been extensively investigated in a review article published by Song et al.36 In this section, we focus only on various Mg alloys and Mg-doped materials in energy applications.
Mg readily forms alloys with most transition metals (TMs) as well as group I and group II metals depending on the composition ratio between the constituent elements.37 At the bulk scale, Mg alloys are obtained by mixing a quantified amount of desired metal ingots followed by heating at a specified temperature under an inert atmosphere. However, these bulk materials exhibit limited surface areas, which is not desirable for electrochemical applications. Chemical methods of synthesizing other TM-based alloys have not been efficiently employed for Mg alloys, because of the high negative standard reduction potential difference between the Mg and alloying metal. In a protonic solution, the solvent will be reduced ahead of the Mg atoms, making the synthesis a big challenge. Despite this drawback, several groups have recently employed different methods to realize Mg-alloyed NPs. Tetteh et al. synthesized homogenous PtMg NP alloys by combining Pt NPs with melted Mg for fuel cell application.1 For the same application, Itahara et al. utilized a eutectic salt mixture to reduce various Pt-alkaline earth metals.38 Other methods such as electrodeposition have also been employed for various Mg-based alloys.39 In these cases, particle sizes are relatively large (>5 nm) with inhomogeneous size distribution. For better catalytic performance, efficient chemical synthesis approaches are needed that can obtain small sized-NPs (3–10 nm) with uniform morphology and dispersion.
Doping as opposed to alloying is a simple yet unique strategy for tuning the properties of materials, and has been employed for numerous energy applications. Several strategies including spray pyrolysis,40 drop casting technique,41 metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD),42 hydrothermal syntheses,43 and spin coating.44 have been explored for doping Mg into different classes of materials. In metal oxides, the addition of Mg2+ can also replace some base metal atoms or form a secondary MgO phase.
Depending on the degree of doping, Mg2+ in metal oxides can further aid in the decrease or increase of crystallite size. Mg2+ has an ionic radius of 0.72 Å (Fig. 4). Hence, when it is doped into metal oxides whose base metals have a larger atomic radius (e.g., 0.74 Å for Zn2+ and 0.73 Å for Cu2+), substitution of the base metal ions with Mg2+ will result in a decrease in crystallite size.40 In contrast, with Ti3+–4+ (0.67 Å), which has a smaller ionic radius, Mg doping would result in increased crystallite size. However, this linear relation is not always assured depending on the chemical interaction between the constituent elements. For instance, Sharkir et al. reported Mg-doped TiO2 for photosynthesized dyes, where the crystallite size decreased from 19 nm to 16 nm for 2 mol% Mg2+ doping.45 The decreased crystallite size was ascribed to a result of the increased lattice distortion and the creation of grain boundaries, which suppressed the growth of the crystallite.


2.3.3. Mg composite as a pore generator. 
In addition to high surface area, porosity provides important deposition sites for active metals and mass transfer channels which are highly necessary for catalysis.33 Highly porous and shape-dependent materials have been successfully prepared for numerous energy applications by employing hard templates such as zeolites,46 mesoporous silicas,47 and some metal oxides.48 However, the preparation processes associated with these hard templates are complicated and environmentally unfriendly, especially for the removal of silica, which requires corrosive HF or NaOH. MgO, among various metal oxides, has been recognized as an eco-friendly template for the synthesis of highly porous carbon materials, thanks to its unique chemical, thermal and compositional stability.48 In addition, when MgO is employed as a template, it can be easily etched out with dilute non-corrosive acids.
Geng et al. prepared highly porous carbon sheets (FHPCs) with a specific surface area of 1454–1604 m2 g−1 using a nano-MgO sheet as a template and coal tar pitch as the carbon source.48 In a similar manner Lu et al. prepared Fe–N–C for a Zinc–Air battery (ZAB) by heating the composite Zn–Fe/PVP@MgO followed by acidic etching of the MgO template. The obtained Fe–N–C sample showed high ZAB performance because of the porosity that resulted from etching out the MgO phase.49 Other Mg derivatives such as Mg(OH)2 have been also employed in graphene-based materials, as spacers to prevent the restacking of graphene layers by the strong interlayer van der Waals force.50 A detailed review on the control of pores of carbon materials using Mg species as templates has been published by Morishita et al.51

3. Safety issues of Mg
Safety issues associated with the use of Mg can be grouped under processing, storage, and usage categories. Mg metal and its alloys can be explosive hazards; they are highly flammable in their pure form when molten or in powder or ribbon form. Despite the high reactivity of Mg, its surface is readily coated with a thin layer of oxide under standard conditions of temperature and pressure, which partly inhibits its reactivity. Thus, Mg does not ignite in the air until it reaches a temperature close to its melting point. Despite that fact, most of the safety concerns are associated with Mg when it is (1) in a molten state, (2) in finely divided form such as chips and powders (because in the nano-regime, melting points of materials are lower than the bulk), and (3) involved in a general conflagration.52
In terms of environmental safety, Ar/SO2 and Ar/SF6 blankets have been used over the years in the casting and melting of Mg ingots to prevent burning during the solidification process, since molten Mg will ignite and burn when exposed to air. However, SF6 in particular has a global warming impact 23900 times that of CO2.53 Molten Mg can react with iron oxides in a thermite reaction, which can increase reaction temperatures over 2473 K.54 Furthermore, molten Mg has a high affinity for water (H2O). In the event where it is exposed to H2O, it can expand to about 1000 times its original volume. Mg is capable of reducing water, releasing highly flammable and explosive H2 gas according to the equation below.55Mg(s) + 2H2O(l) → Mg(OH)2(s) + H2(g)Therefore, water does not extinguish magnesium fires. The hydrogen gas produced intensifies the fire. Dry sand is an effective smothering agent, but it only works efficiently on a relatively uniform level or flat surfaces.
In terms of storage, the self-heating of Mg powders may be responsible for causing fire and explosion hazards when the powders reach their ignition temperature. The ignition hazard depends on the form in which Mg is present. For instance, Mg ingots are difficult to ignite as compared to thin Mg ribbons. Plate heating experiments conducted by Chunmiao et al. found that the ignition temperature depends on the particulate size.56 Ignition temperatures recorded for 6 and 173 μm particles were 437 and 487 °C, respectively. Moreover, dry Mg powders can be charged electrostatically by swirling, pneumatic transport, and pouring, which can lead to ignition and subsequent explosion.
Regarding personal safety, overexposure to Mg may irritate the upper respiratory tract, while biologically, excess intake of Mg may lead to muscle weakness, lethargy, and confusion.
For the above-stated safety concerns, when working with powdered magnesium, safety glasses with eye protection and UV filters (such as welders use) are employed, because burning magnesium produces ultraviolet light that can permanently damage the retina of a human eye.57 Researchers employing molten magnesium need to ensure that all reaction vessels are devoid of moisture and metal oxides. Reaction environments using Mg should also be devoid of sprinklers, because the release of water during such processes may lead to an explosion, as stated above.
4. Energy conversion
TM-based catalysts are known to improve the reaction kinetics and efficiency of many electrocatalytic reactions. In contrast, alkali and alkaline earth metals such as Na and Mg are less active but much more electropositive than these TMs. Therefore, when Mg bonds with high-valence TMs, electron transfer occurs in the direction from the Mg to the TMs. The resulting electron-rich TMs can have different surface electronic properties which offer more favorable crystal lattice strain and reactant adsorption/desorption behavior, leading to improved catalytic performance. The charge transfer results in a strong and stable interaction between the Mg and TM elements. Therefore, Mg is widely applied as an alloying element and a dopant to modify the electrochemical activity and durability of TM electrocatalysts.
In addition, Mg species on their own are active in certain reactions or function as additive materials to improve chemisorption. Fig. 7 shows various electrocatalytic reactions for energy applications where Mg and its derivative materials can be employed.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of various electrochemical reactions occurring on Mg-induced materials for energy conversion. 
Photocatalysis is considered the most eco-friendly method for many applications, including water splitting, CO2 conversion, and N2 fixation because it requires only solar light as the conversion energy source.58 Semiconductors are generally used for photocatalysis because their band structure can be readily tuned by changing valence and conduction band (VB and CB, respectively) positions relative to the Fermi-level, unlike insulators and conductors.59
The basic mechanism is to excite electrons from the VB to the CB by irradiating the photocatalyst with light energy of a suitable wavelength. When exciting the electrons from VB to CB, holes (h+) are generated as an oxidation reaction site in the VB, while the excited electrons (e−) in the CB act as reduction reaction sites. This h+ and e− charge separation in the photocatalyst is a key phenomenon for several useful redox reactions (Fig. 8).60–62
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram showing the mechanism of charge separation for various photocatalytic reactions. 
Factors that influence photocatalytic activity are morphology, crystallinity, co-catalyst, heterojunctions, and band structure.63–65 Among these properties, the band structure of the photocatalyst is the most influential parameter. For photocatalysis, each semiconductor has an intrinsic band structure related to the VB and CB energy positions and the band gap, which further determines the selectivity and reactivity of the photocatalysts. For instance, TiO2 has a wide band gap of 3.2 eV, which limits it to light absorption in the UV region (∼4% of the total solar spectrum).66 In addition, the fast recombination of the photogenerated h+ and e− usually limits photocatalytic performance.67
To address these issues, many researchers across the globe have resorted to semiconductor band gap engineering, to optimize the band structure for a wide range of light absorption and to slow down charge recombination. Regulation of the band structure has been accomplished by inducing oxygen vacancies in the semiconductor framework or doping the semi-conducting photocatalyst with other elements. Because of Mg's highly electropositive nature and thus the easy formation of MgO products, Mg can create oxygen vacancies in metal oxides by withdrawing O atoms, as illustrated with TiO2 or ZrO2 below.TiO2(s) + Mg(l) → TiO2−x(s) + xMgO(s)ZrO2(s) + Mg(l) → ZrO2−x(s) + xMgO(s) (0 < x < 1)The formation of Ti3+ or Zr3+ species in the semiconductors with oxygen defects can hugely improve their light absorption and electron conductivity, due to a new energy band located between the VB and CB.
In addition, Mg can serve as a dopant, which can increase the conductivity of semiconductors, thanks to the ease of electron transfer from Mg to substrates and surrounding atoms.36,73,74 Mg doping of semiconductors can cause band gap narrowing and the absorption of a wider range of light, compared to the bare semiconductors.68
4.1. Oxygen reduction reaction
The efficiency of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is directly correlated with the performance of promising energy applications such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries. The mechanism for ORR can be postulated to go through a direct 4-electron or a partial 2-electron pathway (eqn (2) and (3)).
In the 4-electron pathway (2)In the 2-electron pathway and further reduction of peroxide (3)In the 2-electron pathway, an additional 2-electron pathway is required in order to reduce the H2O2 and HOO− produced in eqn (3) to H2O and 3OH−, respectively.69 The 4-electron pathway is more favorable in terms of reaction kinetics, and it is highly desirable because the products of the 2-electron pathway, H2O2 and HOO−, are easily converted to free radicals, which attack polymer membranes and binders in the electrochemical cells, eventually degrading the fuel cell performance.70
In proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), PGMs have been used as ORR catalysts to enhance activity. However, the sluggish ORR kinetics coupled with the high cost and relative instability of Pt are still major drawbacks, limiting their commercialization. Alloying Pt with late TMs has been studied to reduce Pt contents without performance loss. However, the TMs leach out during the harsh operating conditions in the fuel cell, resulting in a dramatic decrease in fuel cell performance.71
ORR in an alkaline medium is also a key reaction in anion exchange membrane fuel cells (AEMFCs) and metal–air batteries (MABs). Alkaline media facilitate more rapid ORR kinetics and is less corrosive to catalysts, compared to the acidic media in PEMFCs. Numerous catalysts including non-PGMs, heteroatom-doped carbon, and metal oxides can be utilized.72
As described by Sabatier's principle, an ideal catalyst should not bind too strongly or weakly to reaction intermediates.73 Hence, the activity of ORR catalysts is greatly influenced by the adsorption and desorption behavior of the oxygen intermediates on the catalyst surface.74,75 Platinum (Pt) as a model catalyst bonds too strongly to the reaction intermediates. Hence, developing an ideal catalyst that binds to oxygen 0.1 eV more weakly than Pt is highly desired.
In this respect, highly electropositive Mg can modify the surface electronic properties of active metal catalysts through direct electron transfer, leading to a strong interaction between the Mg and nearby metals. The electron-rich surface results in weaker affinity with oxygen, which will then enhance ORR activity, while the strong interaction between Mg and metal will improve the electrochemical stability of the active electrocatalysts.76,77

4.1.1. Mg as ORR active material. 
Theoretical studies using density functional theory (DFT) calculations have shown that MgO favorably adsorbs oxygen on its surfaces.78 Kantorovich et al. through their calculations derived the adsorption energies of atomic and molecular oxygen at different sites on an MgO (001) surface.78 It was found that oxygen easily bonds with an MgO surface that is endowed with O and Mg vacancies, while the oxygen adsorption strength on defect-free MgO (001) is very weak.79 Bajdich et al. also demonstrated that the bridge sites of (100) and (110) MgO surfaces conveniently adsorbed H2O.80 Based on this understanding, a MgO NPs-decorated multi-layered reduced graphene oxide (MLGO) composite was suggested as an electrocatalyst for ORR in alkaline media (0.1 M KOH).81 The MgO/MLGO was prepared through a simple combustion reaction of Mg and dry ice. MgO was encapsulated by MLGO, and it showed comparable activity and durability to commercial Pt/C and Pt/rGO (reduced graphene oxide).
The onset potentials (Eonset) from the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves were 0.131, 0.138, and 0.174 V vs. Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl) for Pt/C, Pt/rGO, and MgO/MLGO, respectively. The MgO/MLGO exhibited the highest diffusion-limited current density of 6.63 mA cm−2, while Pt/rGO and Pt/C showed lower values of 5.96 and 5.02 mA cm−2, respectively. The high ORR activity recorded for this non-PGM catalyst was attributed to the favorable chemisorption property of MgO with oxygenated species, as well as the close chemical interaction between MgO and MLGO.82,83
TM-coordinated N-doped carbons such as Fe–N–C are considered some of the most promising non-PGM catalysts for ORR.84 Mg also forms a stable bond with N-containing compounds such as porphyrins because of its electropositive nature. An approach developed by Liu et al. indicated the Mg cofactor could modify its p-band property favourably, and thus improve the ORR performance.85–87 N-Coordinated Mg, Ca and Al cofactors based on graphene were evaluated for their potential as ORR catalyst using both theoretical and experimental studies. In the DFT calculation, the free energy diagram for Mg, Ca, and Al coordinated with N revealed that the OH adsorption on Ca and Al sites was much stronger than on Mg sites, which induced larger energy barriers during the ORR process. The p-band center (εp) of Mg shifted upward by coordinating with two N atoms (MN2C) as illustrated in Fig. 9a. Subsequently, a decrease in its adsorption strength with oxygen intermediates was observed, leading to near-optimum adsorption and enhanced ORR activity.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the change in local electronic structure at OH molecular orbitals upon adsorption on the surface of p-band metal with different N-coordination. (b) Onset potential versus ΔGOH* in the region close to the performance ceiling of models and transition metal cofactors (TM-N4-C). (c) HR-TEM of Mg–N–C. Scale bar: 5 nm (d) XPS result of the N 1s spectra for Mg–N–C and MgPc. (e) Mg K-edge XANES spectra of Mg powder, Mg–N–C, Mg–Pc, and MgO. (f) ORR LSV curves of Mg–N–C, Pt/C, and N-C in O2-saturated 0.1M aqueous KOH electrolyte solutions at a sweep rate of 5mVs−1. (g) Half-wave potential (E1/2) for different catalysts in both alkaline and acidic solutions. (h) Mg–N–C before and after accelerated durability test (ADT) with 5000 cycles from 0.8 to 1.1V (vs. RHE) at a sweep rate of 100mVs−1. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.85 
The MN2C was predicted to have an ORR activity similar to Fe–N4–C (Fig. 9b). Mg–N–C was synthesized by the pyrolysis of a Mg-based metal–organic framework. Bright spots (Fig. 9c) corresponding to Mg–Nx species with a loading amount of 1.32 wt% were observed in electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) spectra. Fig. 9d shows that the N 1s XPS in the Mg–N–C was composed of graphitic-N, Mg–N, pyrrolic-N, and pyridinic-N. The Mg–N peak in the Mg–N–C illustrates that the N atom is directly coordinated to the Mg, as in the Nα bond in Mg phthalocyanine (Mg–Pc) (Fig. 9d). X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) of the Mg K-edge of the Mg–N–C (Fig. 9e) found no metallic Mg signal at 1304 eV, and the obtained adsorption curve was similar to that recorded for Mg–Pc.
The catalytic activity of Mg–N–C was measured in both acidic and alkaline media (Fig. 9f and g). In a 0.1 M KOH solution, LSV curves, presented in Fig. 9f, confirmed the outstanding ORR performance of Mg–N–C. The half-wave potential (E1/2) from the LSV curve of Mg–N–C (910 mV vs. RHE, reversible hydrogen electrode) was higher than that of commercial Pt/C (860 mV). The improved ORR kinetics were also verified using the Tafel slope; values of 62 mV dec−1 and 91 mV dec−1 were recorded for Mg–N–C and Pt/C, respectively. The reaction pathway was confirmed using a rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) test, where the ORR on Mg–N–C mostly occurred through a 4-electron pathway. In addition, the Mg–N–C retained its initial activity after 5000 potential cycles (Fig. 9h).
In another study, Mg–N–C was prepared by a simple metal–organic framework (MOF)-free process using dicyandiamide (DCDA) as an N-doped carbon precursor.88 The as-prepared catalyst (Mg–N–C/800) had mononuclear Mg atoms embedded in a nitrogen-doped carbon matrix. XPS analysis revealed ∼15 at% of N and ∼0.4 at% of Mg in the Mg–N–C/800 sample, which suggested a MgN4 coordination in the catalyst. The high-resolution Mg 1s XPS spectra of Mg–N–C/800 displayed a binding energy usually associated with Mg2+ in the Mg–N bond without any evidence of metallic Mg. The Mg–N–C/800 exhibited a high Eonset of 908 mV vs. RHE in 0.1 M NaOH. Interestingly, the diffusion-limited current (5.42 mA cm−2) and E1/2 (800 mV) for Mg–N–C were similar to the 5.22 mA cm−2 and 791 mV values, respectively, recorded for Pt/C. The enhanced catalytic activity of Mg–N–C/800 was ascribed to the dense and uniform distribution of active Mg–Nx moieties with high contents of pyridinic-N and pyrrolic-N in the carbon nanostructure. In addition to this activity, Mg–N–C/800 demonstrated excellent stability during the 10000 cycles, where the E1/2 only dropped by 16 mV, while the Pt/C lost 40 mV of its initial value after 7000 cycles.


4.1.2. Mg as a dopant for ORR catalysts. 
TM oxides have been considered highly efficient ORR catalysts. For example, MnOx with different morphologies and oxidation states has been studied for ORR in alkaline media.83,89 Roche et al. demonstrated that Mg doping on an MnOx carbon composite (Mg–MnOx/C) enhanced the selectivity of material for ORR.90 The electron transfer number recorded 3.54 for MnOx/C and 3.75 for Mg–MnOx/C, indicating Mg doping improved the ORR selectivity. They postulated that Mg dopants stabilized the Mn3+/Mn4+ in MnOx which facilitated the charge transfer to the adsorbed oxygen species during the electrocatalytic reaction. In addition, there are several reported works that emphasize that Mg doping helps suppress H2O2 formation in MnOx catalysts.91,92
Catalysts which show good activity for both the ORR and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in alkaline media have also been applied in metal–air batteries MABs, to examine their practicality. In MABs, the ORR and OER occur in an alternating manner during discharge and charge cycles, respectively, at the cathode electrode. Similar to fuel cell catalysts, Mg doping is frequently applied to TM oxide catalysts to improve the charge and discharge performance of MABs. Zhang et al. introduced Mg dopants into a three-dimensionally ordered mesoporous Co3O4 (3DOM-Co3O4) synthesized with a polystyrene sphere template (Fig. 10a).93 TEM image (Fig. 10b) showed its well-developed honeycomb-like porous structure with high crystallinity. HR-TEM images (Fig. 10c and d) demonstrated that the 3DOM-MgxCo3−xO4 had d-spacing values of 0.48 and 0.26 nm for the Co3O4 (111) and MgCo2O4 (311) planes, respectively. In the Co 2p in the XPS spectra (Fig. 10e and f), the area under the peak for Co3+ in 3DOM-MgxCo3−xO4 was much larger than that of 3DOM-Co3O4. This means that the Mg2+ was replaced by Co2+ in the tetrahedral sites to form more active Co3+ octahedral sites. As a result, the electronic structure of the Co sites changed and shifted the d-band center (εd) of Co downward from −1.11 to −1.88 eV as shown in Fig. 10g and h. The downshifted εd reduced the binding strength towards oxygen intermediates which enhanced the ORR activity. Fig. 10i shows the energy barrier for ORR (*OH to *OOH) which suggests that 3DOM-MgxCo3−xO4 requires a lower potential for the reaction compared to 3DOM-Co3O4. As a result, 3DOM-MgxCo3−xO4 showed a higher Eonset than 3DOM-Co3O4 in the half-cell ORR test (Fig. 10j).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4. (b–d) TEM and HR-TEM images for 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4. High-resolution XPS spectra of Co 2p of (e) 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4 and (f) 3DOM Co3O4. Calculated density of states (DOS) of d-orbitals of surface-active sites in (g) 3DOM Co3O4 (two Co sites) and (h) 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4 (one Mg site and one Co site). (i) Calculated energy barriers of *OH transformation to *OOH at active sites of 3DOM Co3O4 and 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4. (j) ORR polarization curves for as-prepared samples and Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH at 1600 rpm. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.93 
Mg doping can also provide facile ORR kinetics for other TM-based catalysts. For instance, an Mg-doped CoS2@CNTs composite ((Co,Mg)S2@CNTs) was developed as a bifunctional catalyst for zinc–air batteries. The composite displayed ORR activity similar to the reference Pt/C–RuO2 catalyst.94 The ORR polarization curve recorded in 0.1 M KOH showed an E1/2 of 0.79 V vs. RHE for (Co,Mg)S2@CNTs, while the Pt/C–RuO2 catalyst exhibited 0.8 V vs. RHE. Here, the high activity was attributed to the low hydroxyl coordination capability of Mg2+ which enabled the easy dissociation of OH− during the ORR and improved the rate-limiting step of the reaction. Furthermore, Mg2+ doping tuned the crystal structure and morphology of (Co,Mg)S2@CNTs, which led to an increase in the number of active sites and improved mass transfer in the catalyst.


4.1.3. Alloying Mg with Pt group metals. 
Low-cost PGM catalysts have attracted significant interest in efforts to decrease overall catalyst costs in PEMFC without compromising catalytic performance. Many studies on the PGM catalysts have focused on Pt-TM alloys to achieve high activity for ORR in acidic conditions. However, reducing PGM contents in these catalysts accelerates performance degradation by increasing local oxygen transfer resistance, which causes dealloying of TMs from the alloyed NPs.84,95 In general, alloys of Pt with TMs exhibit better activity but lower stability because of the leaching of the alloyed TMs. Accordingly, Mg is a good substitute alloying metal for TMs because of its electropositive nature, and high heat of alloy formation energy. The ligand effect arising from the difference in electronegativity between Mg and Pt can modify the electronic properties of Pt, while the high alloy formation energy could facilitate the stability of the alloy against dissolution.96,97 However, as stated earlier, the standard reduction potential of Mg is highly negative (−2.37 V vs. SHE) compared to Pt (1.18 V vs. SHE), making homogeneous Pt–Mg alloy in NP form extremely difficult.
Mg2+ is barely reduced using general reducing agents such as NaBH4, ethylene glycol, or citrate because of its thermodynamically low reduction capability. In addition, Pt2+ will be reduced much faster than Mg2+ during the synthesis procedure, leading to the nonhomogeneous formation of Pt–Mg alloy NPs. Thus, only polycrystalline disk-type electrodes have been reported for alloys of Pt and metals (Mg, Ca, Sr, Gd, and La).105,106 In addition, compressive and tensile strains may be developed in the host metal lattice because of the large difference in atomic radius between Mg (160 pm) and PGMs (Pt: 139 pm). Such strains are beneficial toward enhancing the activity and stabilities of Mg-based alloys. However, the remaining challenge is the synthesis of alloy in the form of NPs which can be utilized in fuel cells to achieve higher performances than the benchmark Pt NPs on carbon.
The promising properties listed above motivated Tetteh et al. in 2020 to prepare a PtMg alloy for the first time as a PEMFC electrocatalyst in the form of NPs.1 In their preparation process, Pt ions deposited on carbon were heated with Mg powder at 700 °C, 50 °C above the melting point of Mg (650 °C). The molten Mg was successfully alloyed with Pt, after which acid treatment was performed to remove the excess and unreacted Mg, leaving behind a pure PtMg alloy deposited on carbon. The as-prepared PtxMg NPs, with an approximately 3:1 atomic ratio of Pt to Mg, are shown in Fig. 11a. The average particle size of the PtxMg sample was 5.22 nm with irregular size distribution and morphology, due to heat treatment at the high temperature of 650 °C. In the XRD patterns illustrated in (Fig. 11b), the PtxMg/C showed a highly crystalline face-centered cubic (FCC) Pt without Mg-related signals. Compared to XRD peaks of pure Pt, there was a positive shift in the diffraction peak of the (111) plane as shown in the enlarged spectrum of Fig. 11b, implying that Mg was successfully alloyed with Pt, resulting in a Pt lattice compression. The XPS spectra presented in Fig. 11c showed that the peaks corresponding to Pt0 and Pt2+ doublets in the PtxMg/C shifted to higher binding energies, signifying that the d-band center of Pt shifted downward relative to the Fermi level. Experimentally, the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve recorded for the PtxMg/C showed a positively shifted Pt-oxide reduction peak in the CV (Fig. 11d), about 33 mV higher compared to commercial Pt/C, implying weakening of the binding energy of Pt to oxygenated species in the PtxMg/C. Furthermore, lattice strains and ligand effects induced by the insertion of the Mg atoms contributed to the downshifted d-band center in the PtxMg alloy due to the filling of electrons in an anti-bonding orbital. As a result, the binding energy of PtxMg would be weaker for adsorbing oxygenated intermediates compared with the bare Pt.
 Fig. 11  (a) HAADF-STEM image of PtxMg/C nanoparticle and corresponding EDS line-scans. (b) XRD patterns for the synthesized PtxMg/C-BA (before acid treatment) and PtxMg/C catalysts, respectively. Enlarged Pt (111) XRD peak for PtxMg/C. (c) High-resolution Pt 4f XPS profiles of PtxMg/C and commercial Pt/C. (d) CVs for PtxMg/C and Pt/C in N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution. (e) Pt mass activity at 0.8 V after each 10k cycles from 0.6 to 0.95V. Cohesive energy and oxygen binding energy of (f) pure Pt (111) and (g) Pt/Pt3Mg (111) (lower row) from DFT calculation. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.1 
PtxMg/C showed a higher kinetic current density of 1.74 mV cm−2 at 0.9 V vs. RHE, indicating the enhanced kinetics resulting from the incorporation of Mg. The PtxMg/C also displayed excellent durability in a single cell test in an actual PEMFC application. After 30000 potential cycles between 0.6 and 0.95 V, Pt/C retained only 40% of its initial mass activity at 0.8 V. In contrast, the initial mass activity of PtxMg/C only decreased by 13% after 30000 cycles (Fig. 11e).
The DFT calculation revealed that the oxygen adsorption energy, Eads(O), decreased from −4.54 eV to −4.30 eV when Mg was added, emphasizing the improved ORR performance (Fig. 11f and g). This indicates that the surface coverage of oxygenated species on PtxMg/C was reduced because of its weaker adsorption energy, contributing to both the activity and durability of the catalyst. The cohesive energy (Ecoh) of the surface Pt atom from Pt and its alloy is a measure of Pt dissolution in the catalyst. The higher Ecoh enhances the resistance of Pt against dissolution. The Ecoh (Fig. 11f and g) was 0.98 eV from the pure Pt (111) surface and 1.08 eV from Pt/Pt3Mg (111), respectively. This confirms the high durability of PtxMg/C during the fuel cell test. The electronic structure of Pt was changed by the introduction of the electropositive Mg, thus, inducing ligand and strain effects on the surface Pt atoms.101Table 1 summarizes the ORR performances of some common Mg and non-Mg-based electrocatalysts.
Table 1 Comparison of ORR activity in the alkaline and acidic media between Mg-included catalysts and other catalysts




Catalyst
Electrolyte condition
Onset potential (V vs. RHE)
Half-wave potential (V vs. RHE)
Ref.




Pt/C
0.1 M KOH


0.86

85



Mg–N–C
0.1 M KOH


0.91


0.1 M HClO4


0.79


Mg–N–C/800
0.1 M NaOH
0.908
0.80

88



3DOM MgxCo3−xO4
0.1 M KOH
0.95
0.839

93



(Co,Mg)S2@CNTs
0.1 M KOH
0.88
0.79

94



Co–CoO–Co3O4/NC
0.1 M KOH


0.80

98



SCoNC
0.1 M KOH


0.91

99



Fe-NCNWs
0.1 M KOH


0.91

100



0.1 M HClO4


0.82


Pt/C
0.1 M HClO4


0.837

1



PtMg/C
0.1 M HClO4


0.861

1






4.2. Water splitting

4.2.1. Electrochemical water splitting. 
Electrocatalytic water splitting is considered one of the most promising energy processes for sustainable hydrogen production. The water-splitting reaction (2H2O → 2H2 + O2) consists of a hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at the cathode and an oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the anode (eqn (4) and (5)).102
In alkaline media, (4)In acid media, (5)
The water splitting thermodynamically occurs at 1.23 V vs. RHE, but in general, it requires a higher potential than its thermodynamic value due to the sluggish kinetics, particularly in the anodic OER part. Precious metal-based catalysts (Pt, Ir, and Ru) are largely employed for the HER, while noble metal oxides (RuO2 and IrO2) are used as the OER catalysts. In an effort to avoid the high cost associated with PGM group catalysts, much research has focused on developing highly durable and active nonprecious metal-based catalysts. The electronic property of the catalyst surfaces controls their chemisorption strength. The optimum chemisorption helps to reduce overpotentials in the aforementioned half-reactions. The efficiency of the OER is decided by the interaction between the catalyst surface and the oxygenated intermediates, while that of the HER is decided by the interaction of the catalyst with hydrogen intermediates. As stated in Section 4.1.3, the electropositive Mg can play a key role in modifying the electronic structure of numerous catalysts for water splitting.
The hydrogen adsorption energy serves as a descriptor of HER activity on the catalyst's surface. Depending on the surface composition, the reaction mechanism follows two different HER pathways, (1) the Volmer–Heyrovsky and (2) the Volmer–Tafel mechanisms.103 Noble Pt exhibits the highest activity in HER catalysis with a small Tafel slope (120 mV dec−1 for the Volmer step, 40 mV dec−1 for the Heyrovsky step, and 30 mV dec−1 for the Tafel step).
TM alloys used for hydrogen storage have been employed as HER catalysts based on their hydrogen adsorption and desorption properties.104,105 For instance, Lui et al. synthesized a Ni–Mg–La alloy composite on porous Ni foam using an electrodeposition method. The intermetallic LaNi5 alloy exhibited outstanding properties for hydrogen storage, confirming that Mg-based alloys were promising candidates as hydrogen storage materials.106 Hydrogen adsorption ability plays a key role in HER. The large number of H atoms adsorbed on the catalyst surface can not only improve performance, but also prevent the dissolution of metal components during HER.104,107 When the Ni–Mg–La electrode was employed at the cathode side for water splitting in 1.0 M KOH, it achieved a small overpotential of 70 mV at 10 mA cm−2.
TM-based borides have also been studied as promising HER catalysts because of their thermal and chemical stability, along with their high electrocatalytic activity.108,109 In addition, TM-borides with the right elemental compositions have their Fermi level positioned in a balanced state, which provides an efficient electron pathway, resulting in enhanced HER kinetics. Generally, since boron (B) is more electronegative than most TMs, the electron cloud of TMs coordinated with B is pulled towards the B, producing a partially charged surface for the adsorption of reaction intermediates. In the HER process, OH− binds to the positively charged TM atoms, while H+ binds to the negatively charged B atoms.110 In a recent report by Sadeghi et al., TM-doped MgB2 (Mg1−xTMXB2, TM = Co and Fe; x = 0.025, 0.05, and 0.1) were prepared and explored as catalysts for HER.111 MgB2 exhibits unique properties stemming from the Mg–B bonds. The Mg layers were placed between honeycomb layers of B, as shown in Fig. 12a. SEM images (Fig. 12b and c) show the morphologies of Mg0.95Co0.05B2, which grew randomly during the synthesis. Electropositive Mg was considerably ionized following the electron transfer to the B-originated conduction band.112 The electronic structure of the MgB2 surface was modulated by doping with a TM with a higher electronegativity than Mg. The XPS results presented in Fig. 12d show the Mg 1s peak is shifted to a higher binding energy as a result of the Co and Fe doping. The binding energy of B 1s also shifted to higher binding energies because of its partial electron transfer to the empty d-orbital of Co and Fe. This adjusted the extent of the interaction between Mg and B, with facile electron transfers for HER. Furthermore, TM doping suppressed the deformation of MgB2 to Mg(OH)2 which blocks the catalytic active sites and hinders mass diffusion. As a result, Mg0.95Co0.05B2 exhibited the smallest overpotential (470 mV at 10 mA cm−2) and Tafel slope (80 mV dec−1) among the as-prepared catalysts (Fig. 12e and f).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic design of layered MgB2 structure along the a-axis. SEM images (b) pure MgB2 and (c) Mg0.95Co0.05B2. (d) XPS spectra of Mg 1s, B 1s, O 1s, Co 2p, and Fe 2p in MgB2, Mg0.9Co0.1B2, and Mg0.9Fe0.1B2. (e) HER polarization curves of pure and doped MgB2 and (f) the corresponding Tafel plots. The colors indicate the same samples pictured in (e). Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.111 
OER in water splitting proceeds at a much higher overpotential compared to the HER.102 Thus, the performance of OER catalysts generally determines the overall water-splitting efficiency. Noble metal-based catalysts (RuO2 and IrO2) have been utilized as the benchmark OER catalysts with overpotentials in the region of 200–300 mV in acidic and alkaline media, respectively.113 As stated in our previous sections, the need for non-noble metals to replace these PGMs is of prime concern.
Li et al. reported Mg-doped RuO2 as a highly active and durable OER catalyst in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte.114 The synthesis procedure is illustrated in Fig. 13a. The resulting Mg–RuO2 has a rough surface consisting of different lattice fringes, as demonstrated in Fig. 13b and c. All the Mg–RuO2 samples prepared at different temperatures exhibited higher electrocatalytic activities than the RuO2 reference catalyst (Fig. 13d). The most active sample showed an overpotential of 228 mV at 10 mA cm−2, while the undoped RuO2 showed a 308 mV overpotential. Fig. 13e confirms that the Mg–RuO2 has a smaller Tafel slope (48.66 mV dec−1) and the smallest semicircle diameter in the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectrum, indicating enhanced charge transfer for OER. After 10000 potential cycles, the overpotential recorded for Mg–RuO2 increased by only 43 mV, while the undoped RuO2 was severely degraded. The origin of the excellent activity of Mg–RuO2 was verified using theoretical DFT calculations (Fig. 13f). Replacing Ru4+ with Mg2+ introduced oxygen vacancies in the RuO2 structure, to satisfy the total charge equilibrium. The introduction of electropositive Mg dopants led to a decrease in the energy barrier for the rate-determining step (M–O* + H2O → M–OOH* + H+ + e−), from 0.81 eV for RuO2 to 0.67 eV for Mg–RuO2. As a result, the OER activity was significantly enhanced. After 10000 durability test cycles, most of the Mg remained in Mg–RuO2 as shown in Fig. 13g–j. Other cases of Mg-substitutions, with TM catalysts such as Mg–Co3(PO4)2,115 MgCo2O4,116 and NiMg-LDHs117 have been studied and their enhanced OER activities have been reported in the referenced literature accordingly.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of Mg–RuO2 synthesis. (b) SEM image and (c) HRTEM image of Mg–RuO2 (d) LSV curves for OER of Mg–RuO2(300), Mg–RuO2 (350), Mg–RuO2 (400) and commercial RuO2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 (e) Tafel plots of Mg–RuO2 (350) and commercial RuO2. (f) Comparison of OER free energy profiles of Mg–RuO2 on (110) and clean RuO2 (110). The HAADF-STEM image and EDS of Mg–RuO2 (350) for Mg (g and h) before and (i and j) after 10000 cycles. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.114 
MgO is inactive for OER. However, it can be employed to reinforce the activity of TM-based OER catalysts. He et al. reported that MgO in Co hybrid NPs with N-doped carbon shells (Co/NC) enhanced the OER and ORR activities of Co/NC.120 The introduction of a moderate amount of MgO facilitated the oxidation of Co2+ to Co3+ with the formation of oxygen vacancies on the surface of the Co/NC. Such oxygen vacancies in TM-oxides have been reported to reduce the adsorption energy of water molecules, and this step is highly beneficial for OER. These features facilitated the OER kinetics and improved the OER activity of the Co/NC with an overpotential of 330 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 84.8 mV dec−1 as compared with benchmark IrO2 (420 mV). Tables 2 and 3 summarize the HER and OER performances of other literature-reported samples.
Table 2 OER overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 in acidic or alkaline media for Mg and non-Mg included catalysts




Catalyst
Electrolyte condition
Overpotential (mV vs. RHE)
Ref.




RuO2
0.5 M H2SO4
308

114



Mg–RuO2 (350)
228


Cr0.6Ru0.4O2
0.5 M H2SO4
178

118



Cu-doped RuO2
0.5 M H2SO4
188

119



Ni-LDHs
1.0 M KOH
332

117



NiMg-LDHs
321


ELCMO (LiCo0.95Mg0.05O2)
0.1 M KOH
329

94



(Co,Mg)S2@CNTs
0.1 M KOH
360

94



Co/NC
0.1 M KOH
460

120



1Mg10Co/NC
330


IrO2
420


NiCo-LDH/GO-CNTs
0.1 M KOH
290

121



Co@N-CNTF
1.0 M KOH
350

122



Co@N-SG
1.0 M KOH
316

123





Table 3 HER overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH for Mg and non-Mg included catalysts




Catalyst
Electrolyte condition
Overpotential (mV vs. RHE)
Ref.




Ni-Mg
1.0 M KOH
73

39



Ni–Mg–La
70


Mg0.95Co0.05B2
1.0 M KOH
470

111



Ni–P/Ni/NF
1.0 M KOH
129

124



Ni/Co/Fe
1.0 M KOH
50

125



Ni@SNG
1.0 M KOH
99.8

126



Urchin-like Ni–Fe
1.0 M KOH
124

127



FeB2
1.0 M KOH
61

128



α-MoB2
1.0 M KOH
124

129



Pt/C
1.0 M KOH
20

130







4.2.2. Photocatalytic water splitting. 
The mechanism of photocatalytic water splitting consists of proton reduction and water oxidation in the CB and VB of a semiconductor, respectively (eqn (6)). (6)The current goal in photocatalytic water splitting is to achieve a solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of up to ∼10%. However, the most recently reported STH efficiencies have barely reached ∼1% even at the laboratory scale. In terms of Gibbs free energy for water splitting, the decomposition of H2O to H2 and O2 is unfavorable because it demands a high energy input of 237.13 kJ mol−1.131 Among the various methods explored to improve photocatalytic water splitting, the magnesiothermic reduction of semiconductors has proven to be one of the simplest and most cost-effective methods to engineer their band gaps. Sinhamahapatra et al. synthesized black titania (BT) for photocatalytic water splitting.28 In the synthesis method, a mixture of commercial anatase TiO2 (CT) and Mg powder was heated at 650 °C for 5 h under 5% H2/Ar gas flow in a tube furnace. After the heat treatment, the sample was stirred in 1.0 M HCl for 24 h to remove MgO and residual Mg species. Subsequently, the obtained sample was washed with a copious amount of water by centrifugation. The washed sample was dried in an oven at 80 °C. The as-prepared sample was noted as BT-x, where x represents the molar ratio of Mg with respect to TiO2.
XRD patterns specified that the anatase crystal phase in all samples was maintained during the magnesiothermic reduction (Fig. 14a). As illustrated in Fig. 14b, the absorbance range of BT-0.5 was highly improved compared to the bare CT. In the visible light region, a new tail was formed, which is ascribed to the oxygen vacancies and surface defects. The formation of oxygen vacancies was proven by high-resolution XPS in Fig. 14c. The BT-0.5 had a larger area at 531.5 eV than the CT, which is associated with oxygen defects. As shown in Fig. 14d–g, the CT and BT-0.5 samples had a particle size distribution of 10–20 nm. The crystal lattice with a d-spacing of 0.35 nm indicated the (101) plane of anatase TiO2. Here, the (101) facet of anatase TiO2 with a Pt co-catalyst showed the most active performance for photocatalytic water splitting.132Fig. 14h displays the Tauc plot obtained from UV-DRS spectra to calculate the band gap energy. The CT showed a band gap value of 3.14 eV, while the BT-0.5 had two band gap values of 2.92 and 2.02 eV. This suggested that the lower band gap in BT-0.5 was newly generated as a tail on top of the VB (Fig. 14i and j).
 Fig. 14  (a) XRD patterns, (b) UV-vis DRS (insert is the enlarged area in visible light region), and (c) XPS spectra of different samples. HR-TEM images of (d and e) CT and (f and g) BT-0.5. (h) Tauc plot for band gap determination, (i) VB XPS of the samples, (j) band energy diagram. (k) H2 generation profile, (l) rate of hydrogen generation (rH2) for different samples, and (m) the stability study of the sample BT-0.5 under the full solar wavelength range of light. (n) H2 generation profile and (o) rH2 for different samples under visible light. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.28 

Fig. 14k and l exhibit hydrogen production profiles and production rates under a full solar range of light, respectively. The BT-0.5 showed a hydrogen production rate of 43.2 mmol h−1 g−1, which was 4.2 times higher than that of CT (1 wt% Pt was loaded as a co-catalyst). Notably, the hydrogen production rate gradually increased with increasing amounts of Mg, up to 0.5 (TiO2:Mg = 1:0.5 molar ratio). Afterwards, it started to decrease at BT-0.6, 0.75, and 1. This implies that the use of an excessive amount of Mg (over 0.75) generated new recombination centers, originating from oxygen defects and Mg2+ dopants in the reduced TiO2. Stability test reveals that the BT-0.5 maintained the initial photocatalytic activity for 30 days without any degradation (Fig. 14m). Fig. 14n and o show photocatalytic hydrogen production profiles and production rates under visible light. The BT-0.5 displayed a hydrogen production rate of 440 μmol h−1 g−1, while the CT did not produce any hydrogen. This was ascribed to the fact that the newly generated tail in the VB by the Mg reduction expanded the light absorption range from UV to the visible region.
Sinhamahapatra et al. also prepared ZrO2−x (BZ)133 and H-doped TiO2−x (RT-MH-x, where x is the molar ratio of MgH2 to TiO2)34 by the Mg reduction of ZrO2 and the MgH2 reduction of TiO2, respectively, for photocatalytic hydrogen production. The BZ showed an excellent performance of 505 μmol h−1 g−1 for BZ with 1 wt% Pt co-catalyst (0 μmol h−1 g−1 for ZrO2 with 1 wt% Pt loading) under simulated sunlight. This improvement was attributed to prominent surface defects or disorders correlated to the oxygen vacancies in the BZ. In the case of RT-MH-x, MgH2 was employed to reduce TiO2 rather than Mg. This approach additionally played a role in doping H, as well as forming Ti3+ and oxygen vacancies in the reduced TiO2. The recorded photocatalytic performance was 16.1 mmol h−1 g−1 for RT-MH-0.5 with 1 wt% Pt co-catalyst (4.39 mmol h−1 g−1 for bare TiO2) under simulated solar light.
Sun et al. also synthesized porous silicon (PSi) using the magnesiothermic reduction of mesoporous SiO2 (MCM-41).134 SiO2 + Mg → Si + MgO. Here, the SiO2 was perfectly reduced to Si, before it was employed for photocatalytic water splitting. The PSi showed a hydrogen production rate of 604.7 μmol h−1 g−1 without the aid of any co-catalyst under visible light irradiation. In another study, Li et al. reported B–N co-doped black TiO2 (MT-x, where x is the molar ratio of Mg to B and N co-doped TiO2) prepared by the magnesiothermic reduction of B and N co-doped TiO2.135 The hydrogen production rate of MT-2 was 18.8 mmol h−1 g−1 with 1 wt% Pt co-catalyst compared to the bare B and N co-doped TiO2 (4.5 mmol h−1 g−1) under the full solar range of light. The photocatalytic hydrogen production activities of bandgap-engineered photocatalysts are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 Summary of photocatalytic hydrogen production activity of bare and Mg bandgap-engineered samples. MeOH: methyl alcohol, TEOA: triethanolamine, TDBTNs: Ti3+ self-doped black TiO2 nanotubes




Photocatalyst
Synthesis conditions
Reaction solution
Co-Catalyst
Light source
Hydrogen production rate (mmol h−1 g−1)
Ref.




BT-0.5
TiO2 + Mg (650 °C, H2Ar)
20% MeOH
1 wt% Pt
Xe lamp, 400 W
43.2

28



RT-MH-0.5
TiO2 + MgH2 (500 °C, Ar)
20% MeOH
1 wt% Pt
AM 1.5G, 1 SUN
16.1

34



BZ
ZrO2 + Mg (650 °C, H2Ar)
20% MeOH
1 wt% Pt
AM 1.5G, 1 SUN
0.505

133



PSi
Porous SiO2 + Mg (800 °C, Ar)
10% TEOA
No co-catalyst
Xe lamp, 300 W
0.604

134



MT-2
B, N co-doped TiO2 + Mg (580 °C, N2)
20% MeOH
1 wt% Pt
Xe lamp, 300 W
18.8

135



Black TiO2
TiO2 (200 °C, 20 bar H2)
50% MeOH
0.6 wt% Pt
AM 1.5G, 1 SUN
10

136



black TiO2−x
TiO2 + Al (500 °C, vacuum)
25% MeOH
0.5 wt% Pt
Hg lamp, 300 W
6.4

137



TDBTNs
TiO2 NT (600 °C, H2)
20% MeOH
0.5 wt% Pt
Xe lamp, 300 W
3.95

138



3% Li-reduced TiO2
TiO2 + Li (milling)
20% MeOH
1 wt% Pt
Xe lamp, 300 W
41.8

139



H-F/TiO2
F-doped TiO2 (350 °C, 45 psi H2)
20% MeOH
0.6 wt% Pt
AM 1.5G system
3.76

140



Ordered mesoporous black TiO2
Mesoporous TiO2 (500 °C, H2)
20% MeOH
1 wt% Pt
Visible light of AM 1.5G system
0.0136

141






4.3. CO2 reduction reaction

4.3.1. Electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction. 
The increasing concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2), released from fossil fuels into the air, has hindered sustainable and clean energy development.142–144 To solve this issue, many researchers have explored processes such as adsorption,145 dissolution,146 and reduction of CO2 to decrease in its concentration in the environment.147 The thermochemical,148 electrochemical,149 and photo(electro)chemical methods150,151 of CO2 reduction are very useful because valuable chemicals such as methane (CH4), ethane (C2H4), formic acid, (HCOOH), and acetic acid (CH3COOH) can also be obtained.
Electrochemical CO2 reduction to valuable chemicals can help greatly contribute to a carbon-neutral economy. The product selectivity of the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) mainly depends on the electrode's composition. Typically, Cu-based electrodes are good for producing valuable hydrocarbons and alcohols. Electrodes composed of Pb, Hg, In, Sn, Cd, and Bi mainly form formates (HCOO−), whereas electrocatalysts such as Au, Ag, Zn, Pd, and Ga favor the production of carbon monoxide (CO).152,153 Numerous reports have highlighted that the process of CO2 adsorption and activation is the key step for efficient CO2RR and additionally determines the selectivity of products.152,154 Furthermore, several works have reported that MgO has excellent chemisorption for CO2 which can facilitate the CO2 activation process.155–157 Li et al. prepared MgO anchored on a hollow carbon sphere (HCS) for CO2RR with highly selective CO production (81.7%).158 In the volumetric CO2 adsorption measurement, HCS with a 5 wt% MgO doping (5% MgO/HCS) attained a 1.2 times higher capacity (54.26 cm3 g−1) than bare HCS (45.87 cm3 g−1) for chemical CO2 adsorption. The synergetic interaction between MgO and HCS led to an efficient activation process. In the DFT calculation, it was observed that MgO deposited on graphene decreased the formation energy for adsorbed COOH from CO2, thus promoting efficient CO2 activation.
In a recent work, Wang et al. reported atomically dispersed Mg in graphitic C3N4 (Mg–C3N4) on CNT for the reduction of CO2 to CO.159 This sample showed the highest turnover frequency (TOF) of 18000 per hour among the Fe and Co coordinated C3N4. Fig. 15a shows that the Mg was atomically dispersed on the C3N4 nanosheet. The XPS spectra of N 1s (Fig. 15b) disclosed that the binding energy and intensity of C3N4 changed after introducing Mg. This measurement was used to substantiate the coordination of the Mg with N. Furthermore, the Mg K-edge XANES spectrum (Fig. 15c) showed that no obvious signals associated with metallic Mg or MgO were detected in the Mg–C3N4, since the absorption edge was similar to that recorded for Mg–Pc. TMs have a strong affinity for CO due to the stable hybridization of its directionally localized 3d orbitals (Fig. 15d).160 In Fig. 15e, the energy barrier of CO desorption from Mg–C3N4 was 0.13 eV, which is much lower than Fe (1.37 eV) and Co (1.52 eV) coordinated C3N4. The outermost orbital of Mg is the nondirectional 3s orbital (Fig. 15d). In situ attenuated total reflection infrared spectroscopy (ATR-IR) spectra (Fig. 15f) revealed that Mg–C3N4 had no obvious adsorbed CO peak in the spectrum during CO2RR, confirming the produced CO was well released. However, Fe–C3N4 (Fig. 15g) and Co–C3N4 showed strong CO peaks in the range of 1820 to 1910 cm−1. In addition, Mg sites facilitated CO2 adsorption and activation as evidenced by the emergence of the CO2 peak at 2340 cm−1 in the in situ ATR-IR. The ideal interaction between the Mg sites and reaction intermediates resulted in excellent CO2RR activity with a very high TOF under a faradaic efficiency (FE) ≥90%. Table 5 summarizes the electrochemical CO2RR performances of Mg-related samples reported in literature.
 Fig. 15  (a) HRTEM image of Mg–C3N4 and aberration-corrected (AC) HAADF-STEM image of Mg–C3N4. (b) High-resolution XPS for N 1s for C3N4, Mg–C3N4 and Mg Pc. (c) XANES of Mg K-edge for Mg samples. (d) Comparison of schematic diagram for CO adsorbed on 3dz2 and 3s orbits. (e) Free energy diagram for CO2RR. In situ ATR-IR spectra of (f) Mg–C3N4 and (g) Fe–C3N4. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.159 
Table 5 Comparison of electrochemical CO2 reduction performance for different samples




Catalyst
Electrolyte condition

E (V vs. RHE)

J
CO (mA cm−2)
FECO (%)
Ref.




MgO/HCS
0.5 M KHCO3
−1.0
16.7
81.7

158



Mg–C3N4
0.5 M KHCO3
−1.178
32
≥90

159



SnO/C
0.5 M KHCO3
−0.66
4.7
37

164



FNC–SnOF
1.0 M KHCO3
−0.7
150
93.8

165



Au–CeOx/C
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.89
12.9
89.1

166



Co–N–Ni/NPCNSs
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.48
3.2
96.4

167



Fe1NC/S1-1000
0.1 M KHCO3
−0.5
4.45
96

168



Vo-rich ZnO
0.1 M KHCO3
−1.1
16
83

169







4.3.2. Photocatalytic CO2 conversion. 
In particular, photocatalytic CO2 conversion is a promising and efficient way of lowering CO2 concentration in the earth's atmosphere. The mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 conversion involves the oxidation of water to oxygen in the VB and the reduction of CO2 to valuable chemicals in the CB (eqn (7)).161 (7)In line with other photocatalytic applications, reducing the band gap of semiconductors to absorb a wider range of light is fundamental to improving their CO2 conversion efficiency.
Razzaq et al. prepared reduced a TiO2−x (RT) photocatalyst from commercial anatase TiO2 (CT) with Mg powder (TiO2:Mg = 1:0.5 molar ratio) by heating at 650 °C for 5 h under 5% H2/Ar flow to convert CO2 to CH4.162 The heat-treated sample was etched with HCl solution to produce Mg-free RT. In addition, Pt NPs were loaded on the as-prepared RT as a co-catalyst for CO2 conversion. The samples were named Pt-x-RT, where x is the theoretically calculated wt% of Pt loaded during photodeposition.
XRD patterns indicated that all the prepared samples were dominated by the anatase crystal phase (Fig. 16a), implying there was no change in crystal structure during the synthesis procedure. The absence of Pt diffraction signals was attributed to the low concentration of Pt. The light absorbance trends (Fig. 16b) indicated the RT samples experienced a weak positive shift with increasing amounts of Mg. Clearly, the more Mg used, the narrower the band gap gradually became. This was ascribed to the increase in oxygen vacancies or surface defects. Fig. 16c displays the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the Pt-x-RT. While the CT showed a higher PL intensity at 390 nm owing to band gap transition, the RT samples exhibited much lower PL intensities. These lower PL intensities suggest there was decreased recombination of the photogenerated e− and h+. Interestingly, the RT had a new PL peak at 620 nm, which is ascribed to the formation of surface defects. The bandgaps of CT and RT were calculated from the Tauc plot corresponding to the UV-vis DRS spectra. As illustrated in Fig. 16d, the CT and the RT showed bandgaps of 3.15 eV and 2.85 eV, respectively. The VB XPS spectra indicated the position of VB for the CT was 2.05 eV (Fig. 16e), while the position of VB in RT was 1.95 eV with a tail up to 0.76 eV (Fig. 16f and g). This suggests that the band gap of RT was narrowed, and the new tail was formed because of the oxygen vacancies, Ti3+ formation, and surface defects. High-resolution XPS spectra supported earlier claims that the RT sample had more Ti3+ species (Fig. 16h and i). Fig. 16j and k exhibit the TEM and HR-TEM images of the Pt-0.5-RT samples which showed an interplanar (111) spacing of 0.22 nm for Pt NPs with a size of 2–3 nm.
 Fig. 16  (a) XRD pattern, (b) UV-vis DRS, and (c) PL spectra for various Pt-x-RT samples. (d) Band gap estimation using Tauc plot, (e–g) valence band XPS, and XPS spectra of regions: (h) Ti 2p, and (i) enlarged view of Ti 2p3/2 of CT and RT. (j) HR-TEM image for Pt-1.0-RT sample with selected region (red square) showing (k) corresponding enlarged area. (l) Methane production rate of P25 (Degussa), Pt-1.0-P25, pure CT, Pt-1.0-CT, RT, and various Pt-x-RT samples. Control test employing Pt-1.0-RT sample under Ar/H2O(g) atmosphere suggests negligible CH4. (m) Methane production rate from Pt-1.0-RT sample for seven test cycles of CO2 photoreduction. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.162 
The photocatalytic CO2 conversion was performed under solar simulated light (AM 1.5 G, 1 SUN). As shown in Fig. 16l, the CH4 production rate of Pt-1.0-RT was 1640.58 ppm g−1 h−1 which is 3 times higher than that of Pt-1.0-CT (546.98 ppm g−1 h−1). In addition, the stability of Pt-1.0-RT was assessed by repeated photocatalytic tests. Results show that at the 3rd cycle, the photocatalytic activity dramatically decreased, but after reactivating the exhausted catalyst at 90 °C under vacuum for 3 h, the photocatalytic activity was recovered (Fig. 16m).
In other reports, Liu et al. synthesized a Si/TiO2 composite for photocatalytic CO2 conversion.163 Si nanospheres were prepared by the magnesiothermic reduction of SiO2 nanospheres according to the reaction, SiO2 + 2Mg → Si + 2MgO. Subsequently, titanium butoxide was added to the obtained Si-sphere to obtain the Si/TiO2 composite. The maximum conversion efficiency from CO2 to methanol was 1.71% (197 μM/100 mL) under 40 mJ per pulse at 355 nm radiation. Manzanares et al. reported Mg-doped TiO2 for photocatalytic CO2 conversion.170 The catalyst was prepared by a hydrothermal reaction of TiO2 gel and magnesium nitrate hexahydrate before calcination at 600 °C. The 0.2 wt% Mg-doped TiO2 sample exhibited a CH4 production rate of ∼1.00 μmol h−1 g−1 after 3 h of illumination. The doped Mg induced surface modifications with the generation of Ti3+ and oxygen vacancies, leading to the outstanding photocatalytic activity of the Mg-doped TiO2. Table 6 summarizes the photocatalytic CO2 conversion performances of different Mg and non-Mg-related samples.
Table 6 Summary of photocatalytic CO2 conversion performances of different samples




Photocatalyst
Synthesis condition
Co-catalyst
Light source (condition)
Performance
Ref.




TTIP*: titanium isopropoxide, HCP-TiO2-FG*: hyper-crosslinked polymer-TiO2-graphene, TBOT*: titanium butoxide, TOSA*: titanium oxysulfate-sulfuric acid hydrate.




Pt-1.0-RT
TiO2 + Mg (650 °C, H2/Ar)
1.2 wt% Pt
AM 1.5G, 1 SUN (CO2/H2O(g))
1.13 μmol g−1 h−1 of CH4

162



Si/TiO2
SiO2 + Mg (750 °C, N2)


355 nm Pulse laser (CO2/H2O(l))
1.97 μM mL−1 of CH4

163



0.2 wt% Mg-doped TiO2
TTIP* + Mg(NO3)2


AM 1.5G, 1 SUN (CO2/H2O(g))
∼ 1 μmol g−1 h−1 of CH4

170



Cu1/TiO2
TBOT* + CuCl2


AM 1.5G, 1 SUN (CO2/H2O(g))
1416.9 ppm g−1 h−1 of CH4

171



Porous HCP-TiO2-FG*
TBOT* + Graphene + polymer


visible-light <420nm, 433mWcm−2 (CO2/H2O(g))
27.62μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4

172



Hydrogenated TiO2
TOSA* (650 °C, H2)


300 W Xe lamp (CO2/H2O(l) + IPA*)
1126.6 μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4

173



H-TiO2−x
TiO2 + Li (180 °C, high pressure)


AM 1.5G, 1 SUN (CO2/H2O(l))
16.2 μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4

174



Hollow TiO2@PDA
SiO2 template and TiO2 +polydopamine (PAD)


350 W Xenon lamp
1.14 μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4

175



AuCu−TiO2−x
TiO2 + CuCl2 + HAuCl4 (200 °C, H2/N2)
5.09 wt% AuCu
300 W Xe lamp (CO2/H2O(v))
22.47 μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4

176



Ni/TiO2[Vo]
TTIP* + Ni(NO3)2 (300 °C, H2)


300 W halogen lamp (CO2/H2O(g))
10 μmol g−1 cat−1 of CH3CHO

98






4.4. Nitrogen reduction reaction
Nitrogen reduction has attracted significant attention as an alternative method to the Haber–Bosch process for sustainable NH3 synthesis from N2 and H2O. NH3 is very useful and important for the chemical industries, and it is particularly used to synthesize tons of N-containing organics.177 For example, around 70% of NH3 is used to make various forms of fertilizers and other key compounds, such as urea and diammonium phosphate. It is also, either directly or indirectly, a building block for the synthesis of many pharmaceutical products. In terms of energy, NH3, with characteristics of zero-carbon and a high hydrogen content has been increasingly identified as an efficient hydrogen carrier, as well as a clean fuel alternative.178
Ileperuma et al. reported the photocatalytic fixation of N2 to NH3 using Mg-doped TiO2.179 In their catalyst preparation, TiO2 powder was suspended in DI–water and a designated amount of MgSO4·7H2O was added to it. After stirring for 24 h, the sample was collected and heated at the desired temperature to dope Mg into the TiO2 crystal structure. The maximum NH3 production yield of the as-prepared sample was ∼12 μmol L−1. Conclusions drawn from this remarkable result illustrated that TiO2 with surface defects can accommodate Mg, leading to enhanced water dissociation under UV light irradiation. The doping of Mg2+ into TiO2 generated a narrower depletion layer, inducing band bending. Subsequently, electrons could easily pass through the interphase, leading to improved electron transfer.
Hu et al. suggested a molten MgCl2 cycle (MCC) for electrochemical NH3 synthesis from unpressured N2 with a Coulombic efficiency >92%.180 The electropositive Mg favorably fixes N2 into the Mg3N2, which was only a nonspontaneous reaction in the MCC process. Electrolysis of MgCl2 was performed at 700 °C with a molten mixture of MgCl2, NaCl, and KCl. MgCl2 decomposed at ∼2.6 V, which was a lower voltage than those recorded for other alkali or alkaline earth metals such as Na, K, Li, and Ca. The liquid phase Mg led to the rapid and complete nitration of the metal underneath. Cl2 reacted with H2O to produce HCl, which was further converted to NH4Cl with NH3. Mg3N2 with 6 moles of HCl generated 2 moles of NH3 with 3 moles of regenerated MgCl2 (Mg3N2 + 6HCl(g) → 3MgCl2 + 2NH3(g)). The method employed here for NH3 production consumed less energy (∼14.1 kW h kg−1-NH3) than the Haber–Bosch process (15.0 kW h kg−1-NH3).
4.5. Organic oxidation reaction

4.5.1. Photocatalytic degradation of organics. 
Rapid industrialization in the past led to the release of many organic pollutants including dyes, pharmaceuticals, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and pesticides. Those organic pollutants remaining in water or air pose a severe threat to life on earth.181–183 Even though the earth can self-purify much of these pollutants through environmental circulation, the elimination of the excess pollutant concentration remains a big challenge owing to the externally required treatment. Although several methods such as membrane separation,184 coagulation,185 and sorption186 have been employed for purification, no single method has been effective enough to control all pollutants. Furthermore, these methods are expensive and complicated to apply.
As described in our previous sections highlighting the band gap engineering in photocatalysis, photocatalytic degradation is a cost-effective and eco-friendly way to deal with the aforementioned pollutant issues.187,188 Photocatalysts can produce a hydroxyl radical (˙OH) and a superoxide radical anion (˙O2−) in the VB and CB, respectively. The aforementioned species have strong abilities to oxidize or decompose organic pollutants to H2O and CO2. However, the major challenge here is the conversion efficiency. To improve their conversion efficiencies, it is important to reduce the band gap and the hole–electron recombination rate. The photocatalytic mechanism for the generation of ˙OH and ˙O2− is illustrated in eqn (8) below. (8)
Kim et al. reported a Pt/reduced TiO2−x-loaded filter paper carbon (FPC) to degrade gas-phase acetaldehyde (CH3CHO).189 First, FPC was prepared by the carbonization of a filter paper at 400–1000 °C under Ar gas flow (FPC-y, where y is the carbonization temperature). Next, reduced TiO2−x (rT-z, where z is the molar amount of Mg) was synthesized through a magnesiothermic reduction of commercial anatase TiO2 (CT) at 500 °C for 8 h under 5% H2/Ar gas flow. Subsequently, Pt was loaded on reduced TiO2−x by photodeposition (Pt/rT-z). The as-prepared Pt/rT-z dispersed in water was loaded onto the FPC (Pt/rT-z-FPC) through a filtration process and was dried in an oven.
HR-TEM images of Pt loaded on Degussa TiO2 P25 (Pt/P25) and Pt/rT-0.5 in Fig. 17a–d show that the Pt NPs were uniformly deposited with similar particle sizes. The cross-sectional SEM image with X-ray spectroscopy mapping (Fig. 17e and f) displays the Pt/rT-0.5 loaded on the FPC-600 (Pt/rT-FPC-600). It was confirmed that the Pt/rT-0.5 was well-loaded and easily distinguishable on the FPC-600. The rT-z samples clearly had a wider range of light absorption in the visible region as well as the UV region, compared to the CT, which showed only UV-region absorption (Fig. 17g). The light absorbance of the samples increased with increasing Mg in the magnesiothermic reduction. This effect was attributed to the number of oxygen vacancy sites and the conversion of Ti4+ to Ti3+. Despite the changes in light absorbance, the rT-z samples predominantly consisted of the anatase TiO2 crystal phase (Fig. 17h). This strongly indicates that Mg reduction probably modifies the surface of the rT-z, as reflected in the enhanced light absorption. Fig. 17i shows the photocatalytic oxidation of CH3CHO on Pt/rT-z and Pt/P25 loaded on FPC-600 in a closed-circulation mode. Before irradiating with visible light, all of the samples exhibited strong dark adsorption of CH3CHO. During visible irradiation, the Pt/rT-0.5-FPC-600 exhibited a rapid degradation of CH3CHO and a simultaneous generation of CO2.
 Fig. 17  HR-TEM images of (a and b) Pt/P25, and (c and d) Pt/rT-0.5. Cross-sectional SEM images of (e and f) Pt/rT-0.5 loaded on FPC-600. (g) DRS absorbance and (h) XRD patterns of CT, rT-0.5, and rT-0.75. (i) Dark adsorption and photocatalytic oxidation of CH3CHO on the Pt/P25-FPC-600, Pt/rT-0.5-FPC-600, and Pt/rT-0.75-FPC-600 under visible irradiation in closed-circulation mode. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.189 
In other reports, Wang et al. prepared Mg-induced reduced black TiO2 from pure anatase TiO2, and the as-prepared sample was composed of a disordered and oxygen-deficient shell with an anatase TiO2 core.190 The visible light photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB) was evaluated over reduced black TiO2 samples. The as-prepared sample showed a degradation rate of 46.3 × 10−2 h−1, which was much higher than that of bare TiO2 (2.0 × 10−2 h−1). This photocatalytic enhancement was ascribed to the disordered and oxygen-deficient shell induced by Mg reduction. Sun et al. synthesized surface-disordered Zn2SnO4/SnO2 (R-ZTO/SnO2) using a magnesiothermic reduction method.191 The R-ZTO/SnO2 exhibited a higher photocatalytic activity than the pristine ZTO/SnO2, removing over 90% of Rhodamine B (RhB) dye within 45 min. Moreover, the R-ZTO/SnO2 sample possessed excellent photostability, even after five photodegradation cycles. The enhanced photo-activity was attributed to the formation of oxygen vacancies and the effective separation of electron–hole pairs. Behnajady et al. prepared Mg-doped TiO2 NPs by the sol-gel method.192 The Mg-doped TiO2 NPs showed a 95% degradation ability for Acid Red 27 (AR27) under 522 nm wavelength light. The Mg doping contributed to the increased speed of e− and h+ separation in the semiconductor, compared with an undoped sample.


4.5.2. Electrochemical alcohol oxidation. 
Alcohols such as methanol and ethanol with high energy densities are easy to store and transport, and thus have been considered as a replacement for the highly explosive H2. However, the electrochemical alcohol oxidation reaction (AOR) is more sluggish than the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR), leading to lower efficiency in direct alcohol fuel cells (DAFCs) than in H2-fueled PEMFCs. Although pure Pt suffers from sluggish kinetics and CO poisoning during AOR, Pt-based catalysts still achieve the highest performance in DAFCs.193,194
Recently, MgO has been reported as a complementary catalyst to promote Pt and Pd catalysts for enhanced methanol and ethanol oxidation activities.195–197 It is thought that MgO will play a role similar to the way Ru functions in the bench-mark PtRu alloy for AOR. Oxophilic metals like Ru synergistically provide adsorbed OH to react with CO on the Pt surface, leading to the exposure of more active sites for further reaction. As discussed in the previous sections, MgO easily adsorbs oxygenated species. This unique feature makes MgO one of the best candidates to reduce the quantity of precious metals used in AOR. Xu et al. reported a Pt–MgO/C catalyst for electrochemical ethanol oxidation.195 First, MgO/C was prepared by oxidizing Mg(CH3COO)2 in a microwave oven. Pt NPs were then loaded on the MgO/C (Pt–MgO/C). The Pt–MgO/C showed a current density of 10.2 mA cm−2 at −0.4 V vs. Hg/HgO, which was higher than that of Pt/C (1.4 mA cm−2 at −0.4 V vs. Hg/HgO).

5. Mg chemistry in energy storage materials
The electrification of various industries has motivated advanced battery research. Over the last few decades, rechargeable lithium–ion batteries (LIBs) have been extensively used for mobile energy storage, electric vehicles, and grid energy storage.198–200 However, present LIBs are still unable to satisfy the rising demand for high energy density and safety.201 Furthermore, due to the uneven and constrained distribution of lithium resources in the earth's crust (∼0.002 wt%), their large-scale adoption is still beyond reach.202 By using a non-Li metallic anode, multivalent-ion batteries may theoretically offer higher energy densities than monovalent LIBs and further avoid the aforementioned issues.203 Among various viable candidates, rechargeable magnesium batteries (RMBs) have emerged as one of the most attractive energy storage technologies. RMBs offer many benefits over LIBs, including the large abundance of Mg resources, high theoretical volumetric capacity (3833 mA h cm−3), low standard reduction potential (−2.37 V vs. SHE), and small ionic radius (0.72 Å) as shown in Fig. 4 and 18.204,205 In particular, RMBs are fundamentally safer than LIBs because Mg metal anodes have a low tendency to form dendrites upon cycling.206,207
 Fig. 18  (a) The theoretical capacity and (b) standard reduction potential of various metal anodes. (c) The elemental abundance in the crust.204,205 
As early as 1990, Gregory et al. reported the first magnesium battery consisting of Mg//0.25 mol L−1 Mg[B(Bu2Ph2)]2/tetrahydrofuran (THF)-N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)//Co3O4.208 In 2000, the first prototype RMB comprised of a MgxMo6S8 cathode and a Mg metal anode was proposed by Aurbach et al.209 Since then, enormous progress has been made optimizing the essential components (electrolytes and electrode materials).204,210 However, there are still several obstacles that need to be addressed in RMBs. Specifically, metallic Mg anodes have a strong tendency to create insulating and passivating layers, which kinetically inhibit electrochemical reactions.211,212 For this reason, it has been challenging to select compatible electrodes and electrolytes for sustainable energy storage.213 Furthermore, numerous RMB electrolytes are air-sensitive, highly corrosive, and volatile, which limits their potential use in practical applications. In addition, given the complex reaction mechanisms involved in Mg-based electrochemistry, it is difficult to find a suitable cathode material capable of providing rapid intercalation/deintercalation of Mg2+ at room temperature.
In this section, the composition and working principle of Mg–ion batteries will be introduced first, followed by the challenges associated with Mg metal anodes. In addition, we will summarize recently developed anode materials for rechargeable Mg–ion batteries and explore other Mg-based energy storage technologies.
5.1. Mg electrochemical cell

5.1.1. Composition and working principle of the Mg electrochemical cell. 
The core composition of RMBs is similar to those of LIBs, consisting of a cathode, anode, and electrolyte. The electrochemical performance of RMBs is greatly influenced by the physical and chemical characteristics of the aforementioned components. The ideal cathode material for RMBs should have a high operating voltage, good reversibility for the intercalation/deintercalation of Mg ions, and good cycling stability.
The electrolyte performs the function of transporting ions between the cathode and the anode. Conventional electrolytes form a passivation layer on the surface of the Mg anode, which makes the diffusion of Mg2+ ions difficult, leading to reduced battery system stability.214 Considerable efforts have been expended to develop suitable electrolytes with high ionic conductivity, wide electrochemical operating windows, and good compatibility with the two electrodes. However, the development of an ideal electrode like those developed for LIBs remains a challenge.
The best way to avoid the formation of a passivation surface layer is to search for alternate anode materials which are compatible with conventional electrolytes. Good RMB anode materials should have the following characteristics: (1) high energy density, (2) a low operating voltage, (3) high chemical interaction with the electrolyte, and (4) high resistance against dissolution.
The working principle of RMBs is similar to that of LIBs, which primarily depends on the reversible intercalation/deintercalation of magnesium ions in the cathode. During the charge/discharge process, the Mg metal anode operates based on a plating/stripping mechanism. Fig. 19 shows a typical configuration and the working principle of RMBs. Intercalation-type compounds such as materials with chevrel phase are the most widely used cathode materials. In the discharge process, the Mg anode oxidizes due to the potential difference between the anode and cathode, which is followed by the stripping of Mg ions. The released Mg ions are transferred to the cathode via the electrolyte and then incorporated into the active materials at the cathode.
 Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the working principle of rechargeable Mg–ion battery. 


5.1.2. Challenges of Mg metal anode. 
Mg metal anodes have a lot of problems. The interfacial passivation and corrosion of Mg in liquid electrolytes are considered the most serious ones.215 When a Mg metal anode is exposed in most organic liquid electrolytes, a passivation layer will be formed because of the low reduction potential of metallic Mg. This passive layer on Mg metal anodes is different from those detected on Li, Na, and K metal anodes. Unfortunately, while the passivation layers generated on Li, Na, and K metal anodes are capable of conducting ions, the passivation layers generated on Mg have a great propensity to completely terminate further electrochemical reactions by hindering the reversible plating and stripping of Mg2+.
Early studies reported that Mg anodes do not form dendrites.216,217 However, some researchers performing in-depth studies have recently discovered Mg dendrites on Mg anodes.218,219 Just as with Li dendrites, Mg dendrites may puncture the porous separator, resulting in the short-circuiting of the batteries. Another problem associated with RMBs is the significant volume change in the Mg anode during the plating/stripping process.220,221 Since the Mg anode has no hosts, its relative volume change during cycling is practically unlimited. Therefore, during the cycling process, the volume of the Mg anode fluctuates significantly. Additionally, uneven Mg deposition and Mg dendrite growth could contribute to change in the volume of the Mg electrode.

5.2. Anodes in Mg–ion battery

5.2.1. Constructing artificial SEI on Mg anodes. 
Over the past several years, numerous modification strategies have been proposed to address the problems related to Mg metal anodes. Currently, the main modification strategies for the Mg anode of RMBs involve (1) designing an artificial solid electrolyte interface (SEI) on the surface of the Mg anode and (2) the use of alloyed anodes. The passive layer on the Mg anode created in typical liquid electrolytes has a weak Mg2+ conductivity, which prevents the plating/stripping process of Mg, and subsequently leads to a significant overpotential in the battery. Designing an artificial SEI on the Mg anode surface can solve this problem.222,223 In general, an artificial SEI can be created on the Mg anode by mixing additives with the liquid electrolyte, soaking Mg electrodes in multifunctional solutions, or applying specific processes to decorate the Mg electrodes. The artificial SEIs have good ionic conductivity but poor electronic conductivity. This characteristic can prevent the decomposition of the electrolyte on the electrode surface. Furthermore, the poor electrical conductivity allows Mg2+ to migrate through the SEI rather than depositing on it. The SEI also functions as a passivation layer to protect the Mg anode beneath from persistent corrosion by liquid electrolytes. Thus, designing an artificial SEI is a useful way to enhance the stability and electrochemical performance of Mg anodes.
Regarding the discussion above, many groups have developed artificial SEIs to improve the electrochemical performance of Mg anodes. In 2018, Son et al. prepared a slurry to create SEI by dispersing Mg powders, PAN, carbon black, and Mg(CF2SO3)2 in DMF. The prepared slurry was then coated onto a stainless steel (SS) foil.224 The obtained electrode was subsequently annealed for 1 h at 300 °C under Ar atmosphere to construct an artificial SEI on the Mg metal anode. A Mg electrode with the artificial SEI could function in organic electrolytes of acetonitrile (ACN) or propylene carbonate (PC) because this artificial SEI could sufficiently suppress the passivation of the Mg anode by ACN or PC. In contrast, the bare Mg electrode displayed irreversible Mg plating/stripping behavior in both electrolytes due to the generation of a passive layer on the Mg electrode, which hindered the transfer of Mg2+.
The artificial SEI on the Mg anode can also be prepared simply by applying multifunctional solutions on Mg anodes. For instance, Lv et al. developed a modified Mg anode with a Sn-based artificial SEI by coating a SnCl2/1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) solution on a polished Mg foil.225 In the artificial SEI, the Mg2Sn alloy anode provided a fast ion conduit, while the insulating MgCl2/SnCl2 prevented Mg deposition on the anode surface. In Mg(bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide, TFSI)2/DME electrolyte, Mg anode with Sn-based artificial SEI showed a low overpotential and maintained a stable plating/stripping process for over 4000 cycles at 6 mA cm−2. Zhang et al. prepared an amorphous MgCl2@polymer artificial SEI on a Mg metal anode.226 First, the amorphous Mg3(PO4)2 layer was coated on the polished Mg foil, and then a SiCl4/DME solution was drop-cast on the Mg3(PO4)2 layer to construct an inorganic/organic hybrid SEI. The SiCl4 acts as an electrophilic reagent that reacts with the amorphous Mg3(PO4)2, and also forms amorphous MgCl2. Additionally, SiCl4 possibly functioned as a cross-linking agent for the construction of the organic component in the artificial SEI. The organic component increased the flexibility of the artificial SEI while the inorganic amorphous MgCl2 facilitated Mg2+ transfer. As a result, the modified Mg metal anode exhibited a much lower Mg plating/stripping overpotential in Mg(TFSI)2-based electrolytes.
In another study, an artificial SEI was built on the Mg metal anode by soaking it in a multifunctional solution. Zhao et al. designed a Bi-based artificial SEI on a Mg metal anode.227 The Bi-based artificial SEI was obtained via ion exchange and alloying reaction by soaking polished Mg foil in a solution of BiCl3/DME. The Bi-based artificial SEI mainly consisted of Mg2+ conductive Bi/MgxBiy and insulating MgCl2. The Bi-based artificial SEI could efficiently inhibit the growth of passivation layer and enable uniform electric field distribution on the electrode. Consequently, a highly uniform and reversible Mg plating/stripping process was achieved. Li et al. constructed an ionically conductive and electronically insulating MgF2-based SEI on a Mg metal anode by simply immersing a fresh Mg foil into a hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution.228 The MgF2-based SEI was mechanically stiff and porous, which allowed efficient Mg2+ transport and also inhibited the decomposition of the organic electrolytes on the Mg metal electrode. If the liquid electrolyte was decomposed, the Mg metal anodes would form a faulty and uneven passive layer on their surfaces, which would ultimately lead to a sluggish and nonuniform Mg plating/stripping process with an increased overpotential.
Recently, other novel strategies have been proposed in addition to the dropping and immersion strategies. Wang et al. constructed a soft-rigid and Mg2+-conductive artificial SEI on a Mg metal anode via an electrochemical pre-treatment strategy.229 The artificial SEI was mainly composed of poly1,3-dioxolane (poly-DOL), which suppressed the formation of Mg dendrites during cycling. Zhang et al. fabricated a defect-free and large-area MOF membrane on the surface of a Mg anode using an electrochemical deposition method.230 In order to increase the Mg2+ conductivity of the MOF layer, a Mg(TFSI)2/1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide (EMITFSI) ionic liquid was injected into the micropores of the MOF. The ionic liquid-filled MOF film served as an artificial SEI for the Mg metal anode.
Park et al. converted the Mg2+-blocking passive layer on a Mg metal anode into a Mg2+-conductive artificial SEI through the use of a gas-doping process.231 A passive layer with low Mg2+ conductivity was immediately created on the surface after assembling the battery. Using a specialized device to introduce SO2 gas into the liquid electrolytes of batteries, the generated passive layer would change into a MgSO3-based Mg2+-conductive layer, due to the chemisorption of SO2. The artificial SEI showed low Mg2+ migration and dissociation energies, which could significantly improve the transport of Mg2+. Consequently, a highly reversible Mg metal anode was obtained in a common ether-based electrolyte (0.5 M Mg(TFSI)2/diethylene glycol dimethyl ether, DEGDME) by generating Mg2+-conductive layer.
The performance of the Mg metal anode can be significantly enhanced by creating an artificial SEI using electrochemical pretreatment, electrochemical deposition, and electrochemical conversion methods. Despite the impressive results, these methods are more expensive and complex than the addition of additives, dropping, and immersing methods. As a result, artificial SEI methods are currently unsuitable for large-scale production.
The practical application of Mg–ion batteries has been hampered by the interfacial passivation problems of the Mg metal anode in the commonly employed Mg(TFSI)2/DME electrolyte. To address this issue, Li et al. designed a durable and heterogeneous SEI with a low surface diffusion potential barrier on a Mg metal anode, composed of a MgCl2-rich top layer and organosilicon-based bottom layer.232Fig. 20a and b illustrate the cycling-induced SEI evolution on the surface of the Mg anode with and without the artificial SEI. The bare metallic Mg reacted with the electrolyte to form a passivation layer, resulting in sluggish interfacial kinetics. The Si-based artificial SEI was synthesized by dropping a SiCl4/DME solution on the Mg anode. The upper portion of the Si-based artificial SEI was rich in robust MgCl4, while the lower region was rich in flexible organosilicon. An SEI structure was formed on the organosilicon-containing matrix embedded with MgCl2 nanodomains due to the partial outward dissolution and inward fusion of MgCl2, coupled with the condensation of –Si–O– during the continuous cycling process. Fig. 20c illustrates the top layer of the artificial SEI, which was stacked with a block-like inorganic MgCl2 component. A cross-section SEM image and corresponding EDS mapping of the Mg and Si elements are shown in Fig. 20d–f. This SEI endured long-term anode cycling and effectively protected the Mg anode from passivation in electrolytes. As a result, the Mg/Mg symmetric cells assembled using the modified Mg electrode with Si-based artificial SEI exhibited a reduced overpotential over 600 h, confirming the Si-based protective layer enabled the Mg2+ to diffuse quickly (Fig. 20g).
 Fig. 20  Schematic diagrams of SEI evolution and Mg deposition manner based on (a) bare Mg electrode and (b) Mg–Si electrode in conventional electrolyte. (c) Top view SEM image of Mg–Si electrode. (d) Cross-section SEM image of Mg–Si electrode and corresponding EDS mapping images of (e) Mg and (f) Si elements. (g) Mg plating/stripping performance of Mg/Mg symmetric cells based on bare Mg electrodes and Mg–Si electrodes at 0.1 mA cm−2 with an aerial capacity of 0.05 mA h cm−2. Copyright 2021 to Elsevier.232 


5.2.2. Mg-Based alloy anodes. 
Alloys of Mg and other metals have been studied to replace single Mg electrodes, since alloys can offer many structurally and electrochemically beneficial properties, different from those of their isolated elements. In fact, an alloying reaction mechanism has been developed for LIBs to boost their performance.233 If this mechanism can be successfully adopted in RMBs, the issues associated with the passivation of Mg anodes may be solved. Furthermore, conventional electrolyte solutions with a high voltage window could be utilized. Theoretically, elements (M) from Group IIIa, IVa, and Va can form alloys with Mg to generate MgxM with high theoretical specific capacities. Moreover, the derivative alloys can impart additional properties, producing synergistic effects to enhance their Mg storage capabilities.
Mg alloys as anodes exhibit appealing benefits such as high voltage and high storage capacity due to their compact and relatively high redox potential, compared to the Mg metal. However, this system also has significant challenges. Research to identify an ideal alloy as a RMB anode has proven futile so far. The alloying/dealloying reaction of prospective alloying elements such as Si, Ge, and Sb has proven to be very difficult, due to their low electrochemical activity.234–236 The sluggish kinetics caused by the high diffusion barrier restrict the ability of Mg2+ ions to move through working elements such as Sn, Pb, and In at real charge/discharge rates.237 The large volume fluctuations of these alloyed anodes during cycling may lead to structural collapse and capacity loss. Nevertheless, this problem can be solved by increasing the mass ratio of Mg in the said alloys. Additionally, a good combination of alloy, electrolyte, and electrode design can be used to alleviate the significant volume variation concerns.
Bi has received a lot of attention, since it is the most desirable element for Mg alloy anodes in RMBs.238 Bi–Mg alloy anodes can provide a theoretical specific capacity greater than that of commercial graphite in LIBs, based on the Bi–Mg alloying reactions. Despite the poor gravimetric capacity of Bi–Mg alloys, their theoretical volumetric capacity (3783 mA h cm−3) is approximately similar to that of Mg metal (3833 mA h cm−3).239 Additionally, a key advantage of Bi alloy anodes over other alloy electrodes for Mg–ion batteries (MIBs) is the quick mobility of Mg2+. Since the diffusion of divalent Mg2+ is substantially slower than that of monovalent cations, the fast Mg2+ kinetics of Bi alloy anodes can be remarkable.
The first Mg–Bi alloy obtained through the electrodeposition technique for Mg ion battery anodes was reported by Arthur et al.240 An electrodeposited Bi alloy anode demonstrated good cycling performance at 1C by maintaining a high specific capacity of 222 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Shao et al. prepared high-performance Bi nanotubes (bi-NT) using a hydrothermal reaction method.241 They obtained uniform Bi nanotubes with diameters of around 8 nm and a wall thickness of about 2 nm. The Bi-NTs electrodes demonstrated excellent rate performance (216 mA h g−1 at 5C), and outstanding cycling stability (303 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles) as shown in Fig. 21a and b. In contrast, the rate performance of electrodes containing micrometric Bi particles was poor (51 mA h g−1 at 5C), with a rapid capacity loss (188 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles).
 Fig. 21  (a) Rate-performance and (b) cycling stability of Bi-NTs and micron-sized Bi. (c) Schematic illustration of the structural transformation of Bi during the discharge/charge process. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.241 
The marked difference was ascribed to a distinct structural variation which was generated during the alloying/dealloying processes. The Bi-NTs changed into networked NPs during the first discharge, and maintained the overall morphologies of nanotubes (Fig. 21c). However, the micro Bi electrodes simply crumbled and lost their electronic connection because of the significant volume fluctuations. Therefore, the superior electrochemical performance of Bi-NTs was attributed to the unique characteristics of the in situ-produced interconnected nanoporous Bi, which can efficiently tolerate significant volume changes and decrease the Mg2+ diffusion lengths.
Other metals besides Bi have also been explored for Mg alloys. Gallium (Ga), with its low melting point (29.8 °C), readily forms alloys with varying compositions with Mg. For instance different moieties of MgxGay mainly; Mg2Ga5, MgGa2, MgGa, Mg2Ga, and Mg5Ga2, have been explored with theoretical specific capacities of 307, 384, 768, 1536, and 1920 mA h g−1, respectively.242 Recently, Wang et al. reported the development of a high performance Mg2Ga5 alloy anode with an outstanding long-cycle life of 1000 cycles and a relatively high rate performance at 3C.243 The Mg2Ga5 alloy was synthesized by simply pyrolyzing Ga and Mg chips at a given stoichiometric ratio under argon atmosphere. The Mg2Ga5 electrode was assembled into a battery with 0.4 M phenyl-MgCl, AlCl3, and LiCl in THF. The cells with Mg2Ga5 electrodes failed at 20 °C, which was below the melting point of Ga. However, the Mg2Ga5 cell delivered a specific capacity of 290 mA h g−1 after 680 cycles at 2C and 40 °C (213 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 3C). The self-healing ability of the Ga/Mg2Ga5 system contributed to the exceptionally extended cycle life and high rate capability.
Mg alloys made up of two or more secondary metals can be excellent hosts for Mg ions with new properties which are non-existent in the individual metallic host components. Depending on the target property, the metal inserted in a multi-component system could either be an electrochemically active or inactive element.244 Although integrating an inactive element into the Mg structure can reduce overall specific capacity, they provide the additional benefit of enhanced electrochemical characteristics, by improving electrical conductivity, as well as serving as a buffer to mitigate major volume changes. On the other hand, active components can significantly increase the overall capacity of electrode materials.
Multicomponent alloys based on Bi and Sn have received a lot of interest for Mg–ion batteries. Song et al. developed a eutectic-like biphase Bi–Sn film to create interdigitated Bi/Sn phases. The Bi–Sn film electrodes displayed high discharge capacity (538 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1), good rate performance (417 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1), and improved cycling stability (233 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1) after 200 cycles. The excellent rate performance was mainly due to the rational design of the interdigitated Bi/Sn phases. The biphase interface is expected to facilitate charge transfer kinetics in Mg ion batteries, since similar observations have been documented in LIB electrodes.245


5.2.3. Recent anode modification strategies. 
Besides the SEI and alloying strategies discussed in the previous section, other methods involving the modification of certain physical properties have been recently explored to overcome the drawbacks associated with Mg metal anodes, since the physical nature of these anodes mostly influences the electrode processes. One such strategy is the use of Mg NPs rather than bulk Mg metal to reduce the thickness of the passivating surface films and to increase ion transport in the Mg anode. Liang et al. prepared ultrasmall Mg NPs (N-Mg) with an average diameter of 2.5 nm as an anode material.246 Subsequently, the N-Mg NP anode was combined with a graphene-like MoS2 cathode to complete the full cell assembly. Compared to a cell comprising a bulk Mg anode (B-Mg), N-Mg anode cell showed much improved cycle performance, which was attributed to the greater surface area of the NP anode than the bulk anode. To truly assess the impact of the NPs, the same quantity of surface passivating species was deposited on both anodes (N-Mg and B-Mg), and the thickness of each film was measured. The surface passivating film on N-Mg anode was thinner than B-Mg, which led to an enhanced Mg ion diffusion during the cell operation. The N-Mg//graphene-like MoS2 cell showed a much higher initial discharge capacity of 170 mA h g−1 at an operating voltage of 1.8 V as compared to the control B-Mg//graphene-like MoS2 cell.
Thinner Mg metal anodes are desired in RMBs in order to achieve high energy densities. However, the poor ductility of the pure Mg metal makes it challenging to produce very thin Mg electrodes.247,248 Maddegalla et al. demonstrated the viability of manufacturing ultrathin Mg anodes (∼25 μm thickness) in electrochemical cells by using AZ31 Mg alloys (3 wt% for Al, 1 wt% for Zn, and 96 wt% for Mg).249 Despite the use of the alloyed anode, the AZ31 Mg alloy thin foil anodes exhibited electrochemical behaviours comparable to pure Mg foil anode (∼100 μm thickness) during the Mg stripping and deposition process. After the process, the surface morphology and topography were found to be significantly more uniform for the AZ31 Mg alloy than the pure Mg anode. The excellent compatibility of the thin AZ31 Mg foil as an anode was also demonstrated in full-cell tests that utilized Mo6S8 as a cathode material.
Furthermore, microstructures such as grain orientation and grain boundaries (GBs) appear to have significant impacts on the dissolution/deposition performances of pure or alloyed Mg electrodes.250–252 Mandai et al. reported an enhancement in the electrochemical performance of Mg anodes by controlling the crystal orientation and grain sizes of various Mg alloys.253 They synthesized ten different types of Mg–X binary alloys, where X represents a solute element X with 0.3 at%. Fig. 22a shows electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) maps of the Mg–X anodes. The electrochemical activity was significantly influenced by the type of the solute elements. The corresponding electrochemical dissolution/deposition (Mg2+/Mg0) behaviours tested by CV are shown in Fig. 22b and c. Among them, galvanostatic cycling measurements were performed using symmetric cells for the alloys with the lowest overpotential (Mg–Ca, Mg–Ag) and the highest overpotential (Mg–Zn, Mg–Bi) at the 10th cycle, and compared to that of pure Mg electrode (Fig. 22d). The Mg–Ca exhibited the lowest overpotential, whereas the Mg–Bi and the Mg–Zn showed relatively higher overpotentials over the entire cycling periods.
 Fig. 22  (a) EBSD maps of Mg–X. A color indicator for mirror indices is also shown. (b) Initial and (c) 10th cycle CV curves, and (d) galvanostatic magnesium dissolution/deposition (Mg2+/Mg0) cycling behaviour of pMgfine and selected Mg–X. For galvanostatic cycling tests, two-electrode symmetric cells were fabricated and a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 was applied for each Mg2+/Mg0 process. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.253 
In another report, Tian et al. proposed a mechanism through DFT calculations to explain how alloying-induced GBs influence the Mg electrode kinetics.254 Based on the DFT calculations of vacancy formation energy, it was deduced that the Mg atoms at (1) the [0001](1010) tilt GB and (2) the side surfaces (1010) and (1120) are easily stripped during discharge in comparison to the stable (0001) surface, thus increasing the current density. Furthermore, it was stipulated that the inherent dissolution tendency of Mg atoms at the tilt GB would not be affected by alloying Mg with other elements such as Li, Na, Al, Ca, and Zn. On the other hand, Mg alloyed with Na and Ca could produce more tilt GBs than alloys with Li, Al, or Zn. Hence, improved discharge performances were observed for the alloys with Na and Ca. Even though most of the alloying elements preferentially occupy the tilt GB rather than remain in bulk, Ca in particular was relatively stable compared to all the other elements. It was hypothesized that the presence of tilt GBs at the Mg surface effectively lowers the reaction energy barriers for the symmetric cell processes and increases the exchange current density. On the contrary, an increase in GBs typically results in a reduction in the mechanical strength of the electrode.

5.3. Mg–S battery

5.3.1. Reaction mechanism of Mg–S batteries. 
LIBs have been unable to keep up with the constantly increasing safety and energy density requirements of future mobility applications, such as electric vehicles and unmanned aerial vehicles.255–257 The advent of lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries has opened up possibilities for greatly increased energy density.258–261 However, the practical applications of a Li–S battery are severely limited by major obstacles, such as low sulfur loading, the intermediate polysulfide shuttle effect, sluggish kinetics, and unsafe lithium dendrite formation.262,263
An Mg–S battery, in which magnesium functions as the anode and sulfur as the cathode, is energy-dense, safe, and economical.264 Mg and sulfur are abundant in the earth's crust and easily accessible in a variety of mineral byproducts. The two-electron transfer between the magnesium anode and sulfur cathode produces a theoretical voltage of 1.77 V, leading to an outstanding theoretical energy density of 3221 W h L−1, surpassing Li–S batteries (2856 W h L−1). Here, the reaction mechanisms taking place in the Mg–S batteries will be discussed, as well as recently reported anode materials.
A typical Mg–S cell consists of a Mg metal anode, an organic electrolyte, and a sulfur-based cathode. During the discharge reaction, the Mg metal is oxidized to form Mg2+ which migrates to the sulfur cathode through the organic electrolyte and separator, while electrons are delivered to the same cathode material via an external electrical circuit to maintain the electric neutrality of the sulfur cathode. Magnesium polysulfides (MgPSs), similar to lithium polysulfides, are created when sulfur is reduced during the discharge process. Specifically, during the reduction process, elemental sulfur is first converted to a long-chain polysulfide (MgS8), which gradually decomposes into an MgS molecule.265 The intermediate MgPSs easily dissolve in the organic electrolyte, generating a shuttle effect, which results in low coulombic efficiency. The end-products (MgS2 and MgS) are insoluble in organic electrolytes and thus are redistributed onto the conductive substrate.266 In an ideal reverse reaction, MgS2/MgS is expected to go to S. However, other alternative reaction pathways have been postulated to take place, despite the lack of significant evidence to back them. The working mechanism of the Mg–S battery is expressed by eqn (9) below. (9)
In Mg–S batteries, a high theoretical volumetric energy density can be achieved because of the higher volumetric capacity of the Mg anode.267 However, Mg–S batteries also have to overcome several obstacles before they can be commercially accepted. First, to produce reversible Mg plating/stripping, it is necessary to use electrolytes that are compatible with the Mg anode, similar to conventional RMBs. Furthermore, Mg–S batteries suffer from serious shuttle effects originating from the production of soluble polysulfide intermediates, which result in capacity fading and poor cycle performance. To mitigate the above challenges, many researchers have developed a new sulfur cathode host material and electrolytes compatible with the Mg anode.213,266,268,269 The Mg anode has received less attention in Mg–S battery research so far because the focus has been on finding effective electrolytes. The current objective requires finding a high-performance Mg–S battery with reversible plating/striping of Mg2+ at the Mg anode.


5.3.2. Mg-based materials for Mg–S batteries. 
Porous electrodes are known to have enhanced charge transport properties due to their interconnecting channels and scaffolds which permit the quick diffusion of ions and electrons in batteries. Sievert et al. proposed a powder Mg anode and demonstrated the importance of structural design to enhance the performance of Mg–S batteries.270 However, there is still much to learn about the interface and structural layout of the Mg anode, and electrolyte developments may make it easier to undertake this type of research.
Recently, Wei et al. coated liquid Ga metal over the surface of a Mg metal anode to create a Ga5Mg2 alloy layer.271 The obtained alloy was magnesiophilic due to the presence of magnesiophilic Ga sites, which can lower the nucleation barrier for the deposition of magnesium. The alloy layer withstood liquid electrolyte corrosion because the exposed reactive Mg sites were significantly decreased compared to the pure Mg metal anode. Zhang et al. constructed an artificial interphase involving Zn/ZnCl2/MgZn2/MgCl2 through a galvanic replacement reaction between ZnCl2 and Mg metal. This alloy was observed to lower the overpotential for Mg plating/striping to 0.2 V at 0.1 mA cm−2.272

5.4. Capacitors
Supercapacitors have the benefits of being able to charge and discharge quickly, with a high power density, outstanding cyclic performance, and high reliability.273,274 However, because of their poor energy density, large-scale applications have been severely hampered. In response, hybrid supercapacitors have been developed as unique electrochemical energy storage devices. In hybrid supercapacitors, one electrode, used as an energy source, is a battery-type faradaic electrode, and the other is a capacitive electrode, for a power source.275,276 The multivalent cation-based electrolyte offers a viable way to enhance supercapacitor performance because it can transfer more electrons to the electrode material. As a multivalent metal, magnesium ion hybrid capacitors (MIHCs) deliver high electrochemical performance among the currently available energy storage technologies.277
Yoo et al. developed a prototype cell of MIHC using Mg foil and activated carbon as the anode and cathode, respectively.278 By adding Li ions with tiny ion size to a Mg complex ethereal electrolyte solution, the performance of these systems was greatly improved, resulting in a higher specific capacitance of 90 F g−1 and a wider operational voltage window, from 0.5 to 2.4 V. Tian et al. demonstrated a printable Mg ion quasi-solid-state hybrid capacitor. The capacitor was assembled using nanowire-shaped vanadium nitride (VN) as a cathode, nanoflower-like MnO2 as an anode, and MgSO4–polyacrylamide (PAM) gel as an electrolyte. VN nanowires with numerous linked open pores gave them outstanding rate performance for the transfer and interaction of Mg2+. The VN nanowire in MIHC cell demonstrated a high energy density of 13.1 mW h cm−3 at a power output of 72 mW cm−3 and a broad potential range from 0 to 2.2 V.
6. Other applications using Mg
Over the past few decades, nanotechnology research has shown that in the nano regime, the shape, size, optical, magnetic, chemical, and electronic properties of materials can be tuned differently than their bulk scale properties. Many of these fascinating properties have been explained and attributed to existing phenomena and hypothesized mechanisms. As discussed in the previous sections, Mg has demonstrated good catalytic activity, energy conversion and storage properties, and among others. In this section, we intend to describe some energy systems that employ Mg as a catalyst, dopant, alloy and composite, as well as discuss how the fascinating properties emphasized earlier influence these systems (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  Schematic representation of various applications that utilizes Mg chemistry. 
6.1. Solar cell
Solar cells are photovoltaic devices that produce electricity from absorbed sunlight. They can be grouped into many categories according to the type of base semi-conducting material employed, such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs), organic solar cells (OSCs), silicon solar cells and perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Current data shows that silicon solar cells, Cu (In,Ga)Se2 (GIGS), and cadmium telluride (CdTe) dominate the photovoltaic market with power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) above 22%.279 Key indicators used to measure the performance of solar cells include short circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit photovoltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and PCE. In this section, our scope is to describe some Mg-doped materials employed as electron and hole-selective layers (HSLs) in solar cells.

6.1.1. Mg doped oxides as charge selective layers (CSL) in solar cells. 
Several metal oxides have gained wide attention as either electron transport layer (ESL/ESTL) or hole transport layer (HSL/HSTL) materials.280 P-type semiconductors are employed as a HSL, while N-type semiconductors serve as an electron-selective layer (ESL). Intrinsic electronic properties such as ambipolar charge mobility, and the long carrier diffusion length of these metal oxides are two of the major attributes needed for high PCE.281 Doping ESLs with substitutional cations whose ionic radius is similar to the base metal of the metal oxides is a unique approach to enhance their electronic conductivities, without lattice distortions.
In HSLs, dopants with a closed shell or a d5 electron configuration are not likely to form trap sites on metal oxides such as Cu2O.40 ESLs employing metal oxides in association with different metals such as TiOx/Al,282 TiOx/Ca,283 and TaOx/Mg,284 among others, have shown promising efficiencies of 18 to 22% in silicon solar cells.
Inducing and doping Mg2+ in ESL materials is an exciting prospect because photon-generated electrons can easily tunnel through Mg and MgO doped films, which helps to suppress recombination. Also doping Mg2+ into metal oxides tend to shift the conduction band (CB) minimum and Fermi energy upwards closer to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the underlying substrate. This favors a higher driving force for electron injection from the underlying photoanode materials.41
The degree of Mg doping significantly affects the band gap tuning and hence the CSL in solar cells (Table 7). Since different metal oxides have different band gaps, crystallite sizes and optical properties, the optimum doping concentration of Mg2+ is not a fixed parameter. One would expect that as the Mg2+ doping increases, the CB minimum would continue to shift towards the LUMO of the photoanode, which would inevitably lead to a higher electron transfer. However, as has been observed experimentally in many studies and illustrated in Fig. 24a, the relationship between the Mg2+ doping and the overall performance indicators is not a linear one. Increasing Mg2+ doping beyond a certain concentration limit leads to an increase in grain boundaries caused by lattice distortions as the Mg is inserted into the interstitial sites of these electron-conducting layers.45 These grain boundaries can act as trap sites and barriers to carrier transport. Additionally, continuous doping of Mg2+ above the optimum concentration limits can lead to the formation of a stronger MgO phase which would certainly increase the insulating property of the base materials and reduce the rate of electron transfer to the underlying substrate.
Table 7 Summary of J–V characteristics of various Mg-doped samples as charge-selective layers CSL in solar cells




Samples

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




0.5% MgLa
14.2
0.743
68.7
8.00

287



Mg-doped SnO2
13.86
0.742
61.4
6.310

279



5% ZnMgO
9.98
0.710
58.0
4.110

41



10% MgxZn1−xOCu2O
3.00
0.575
42.0
0.710

42



2% Mg-doped TiO2
11.99
0.740
67.0
6.100

45



CuCr0.9Mg0.1O2
1.51
0.201
44.9
0.132

294



CuGaO2:1% Mg
0.415
0.305
35.0
0.045

43



a-Si:H(i)/SiOx/SnO2/Mg (8 min)
37.45
0.685
71.52
18.350

291



Cell/EVA/MgO-TiO2(0.3 mg mL−1)
47.49
0.561
72.2
19.030

295



Ni0.92Mg0.08Ox
21.3
1.078
79.0
18.200

289





 Fig. 24  (a) Energy levels diagram, showing the influence of Mg doping on ESL materials for solar cells. Eg0 represents the band gap of the pure ESL material, Eg1–6 are the band gaps for the Mg-doped ESLs and Eg represents the band gap of the photoanode. Molecular structure of (b) Cu-centered view of bulk Cu2O section and schematic structure of Cu2O (c) normal, (d) split vacancy configurations; (e) split-vacancy configurations of Cu2O doped with Mg. (f) Estimated crystallite size and internal strain for illustrating the effect of Mg-doping on Cu2O films. (g) UPS spectra and (h) Energy-levels diagrams investigated for NiOx and NiMgOx in PSCs. (i) Comparison of the transmittance of NiOx and NiMgOx. Copyright 2016,40 Elsevier and 2017,289 Wiley-VCH. 
Song et al. determined the charge transporting abilities of ZnO films doped with different ratios of Mg atoms through the space-charge limited current (SCLC) approach, and concluded that 10 mol% doping resulted in the optimum charge transfer capabilities, while increased doping above the optimum concentration resulted in lower charge transport.285 Similarly, Kardarian et al. doped various mol% of Mg2+ on Cu2O and found the optimum doping concentration at which all the electrical properties (carrier mobility and concentration) of the Cu2O were significantly improved, 0.5 mol% (Table 7).40 They also described the origin of the increase in photoconductivity observed on the Cu2O surface upon doping with Mg. As illustrated in Fig. 24, two types of vacancies, a simple (VCu) and a split (VsplitCu) vacancy, were created when a single Cu atom was taken, and subsequently a nearby Cu atom moved towards the vacancy site, respectively (Fig. 24c). As a result, the VsplitCu achieved a tetrahedral coordination with four O atoms (Fig. 24d). The hole in the split vacancy was mainly confined on the Cu atom central to the defect, while there was almost a negligible confinement of holes on the atoms surrounding the simple vacancy. The two vacancies were expected to exist in undoped samples because of their similar formation energies. The doped and undoped samples would then exhibit electronic conductivities via different mechanisms.
A general way to mitigate the formation of split vacancies (Fig. 24e) is to dope with Mg. This doping has the unique advantage of eliminating the trap states in the band gap. Furthermore, the replacement of the larger Cu nuclei by Mg helps to reduce the crystallite size (Fig. 24f), and its induced strain.
In conclusion, they noted that the addition of Mg affects hole localization, as the additional hole from a single vacancy is delocalized in Mg-doped Cu2O films, resulting in improved photoconductivity.
In DSSCs, numerous studies have shown that TiO2 is the most suitable material for the anode.286 However, TiO2 in DSSCs has not reached full realization because of its weak electron absorption in the visible region and high recombination rate. The band gap of MgO is relatively larger than TiO2, and hence doping TiO2 with Mg2+ could decrease its band gap as well as prevent recombination without significant lattice mismatch. Tanyi et al. co-doped Mg and La onto TiO2 through the sol-gel technique.287 Recorded UV-visible spectroscopy measurements showed that the absorption edges of the doped samples shifted to lower wavelengths, compared to the pure TiO2, due to the smaller crystallite size of the Mg-doped samples. The reduction in key parameters upon further doping was attributed to excess electrons that were trapped in the empty f-suborbital, leading to increased recombination.
Apart from TiO2, other metal oxides have attracted attention for application in DSSCs. Raj et al. synthesized Mg-Doped ZnO photo DSSCs, among which the 5 mol% Mg-doped sample exhibited the best performance in terms of PCE, FF, VOC, and JSC.41 In PSCs, electron-selective contact layers (ESL) help prevent charge recombination.44,285 Mg-doped TiO2 for ESL in PSC exhibited a FF of 66.32 as well as significantly enhanced VOC and JSC, compared to the bare TiO2. In quantum-dot (QD) solar cells, lead sulfide (PbS) quantum dots exhibited a promising efficiency (PCE) of 13% in an optimal device configuration. Ren et al. synthesized PbS QD solar cells which used magnesium zinc oxide/zinc oxide (MZO/ZnO) nanocrystal (NC) thin films as double ESLs.288 The MZO in particular was good as an ESL because of its high transparency and high CB energy. A high PCE of 7.06% was recorded for QD-based solar cells. Furthermore, Xing et al. reported that Mg doping enhanced the ESL through fewer surface defects and low recombination. Data extracted from their J–V curves showed a high PCE of 9.46% with a JSC and an FF of 30.6 mA cm−2 and 57%, respectively.68
Similar to ESLs, HSLs are highly significant in PSCs. Popular materials such as Cu2O, CuO, CuI, CuSCN, and NiOx have shown unique promise. However, many of these oxides have poor FF and JSC which would need to be improved. Li et al. demonstrated that the aforementioned parameters in NiOx can be enhanced by doping with Mg (Table 7).289 Using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, the group determined the energy bond diagrams of intrinsic NiOx and doped NiMgOx. As shown in Fig. 24g, an increase in the Mg doping led to a subsequent downshift of the valence band minimum (VBM). Fig. 24h shows that the downshift of the NiMgOx VBM brings it closer to the VBM of the perovskite (MAPbl3) making the injection of holes much easier. This reduced band offset accounted for the flourishing PV parameters. Using photoluminescence measurements, they studied the charge transfer process at the perovskite/HSL interface (Fig. 24i). The NiMgOx samples exhibited higher quenching compared to the NiOx, indicating effective hole transfer from the perovskite to the NiMgOx HSL.


6.1.2. Mg oxides as substrates in silicon solar cells. 
Among the various solar cells that have been explored, silicon solar cells have dominated photovoltaics for a very long time. They come with numerous advantages including high efficiencies, simple structure, and low operating temperatures. The maximum theoretical energy conversion efficiency for a crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cell with a band gap energy of 1.12 eV is 30%.290 This limit in efficiency is associated with black body radiation, radiative recombination, and spectral losses. To improve the performance of high efficiency silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cells, highly efficient charge carrier-selective contacts are critically important.291 In all cases the strategy is to use either doped or undoped (intrinsic) silicon.
Wan et al. investigated the electronic band structures and conduction properties of thermally evaporated MgOx/Al electron-selective contacts and applied them to the full rear surface of an n-type silicon solar cell for the first time.292 To test the practicability of their measurement, the group assembled a solar cell with a full-area MgOx/Al stack on the bottom side of an n-type silicon wafer. The schematic representation and TEM image are shown in Fig. 25a. Fig. 25b and c illustrate the resulting J–V photovoltaic curves. From their obtained results, all parameters (VOC, FF, PCE, and JSC) were significantly enhanced, and in particular, a high PCE of 20% was recorded for the cell with 1 nm MgOx compared to the control cell without MgOx. The corresponding spectral response analysis in Fig. 25c further revealed that the reflectance of the two cells was similar. However, the introduction of the MgOx interlayer significantly boosted quantum efficiency (QE) at long wavelengths.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic representation of MgOx/Al Si-based solar cell and the corresponding TEM image of the rare layer of the cell. (b) J–V plot recorded for 1 nm MgO and MgO-free interlayer measured under one sun condition and (c) The resulting internal and external quantum efficiencies associated with the two cells. (d) The schematic diagrams of the reaction kinetics with different Mg deposition rate where step A represents a high Mg deposition rate and step B low Mg deposition rate. (e) and (g) Schematic illustration of dopant-free monofacial and bifacial solar cells, respectively. (f) and (h) the corresponding J–V curves of monofacial and bifacial device with active areas of 3.52 cm2, respectively. Copyright 2017292 and 2022,293 Wiley-VCH. 
Li et al. designed a transparent hybrid film denoted as MgFxOy with mixed phases of Mg, MgFx, and MgOy for monofacial and bifacial dopant-free silicon solar cells.293 The Sandwiched LiFx/MgFxOy had a high transmittance of 80.5% and low work function (WF) of 2.92 eV. The contact resistance (ρc) was also investigated, and the results showed that the ρc between the LiFx/MgFxOy stack and the hydrogenated amorphous silicon (i-a-Si:H) exhibited the highest average value of 600 mΩ cm−2 when the decomposition rate RMg< 0.1 Å s−1. They investigated the interaction between the constituent elements (Mg, O, F), and the mechanisms are described in Fig. 25d. Results indicated that at a high RMg, the Mg phase was dominant in the material, which resulted in low transmittance but high conductivity. However, at a low RMg, the reverse happens, leading to low conductivity and a higher transmittance. The practicability of this material was also tested by fabricating both dopant-free monofacial and bifacial silicon solar cells with full-area LiFx/MgFxOy transparent electron selective contacts. A schematic representation and the J–V curves are shown in (Fig. 25e–h). For the monofacial structure, the LiFx/MgFxOy achieved a PCE of 21.3% along with a VOC of 712.8 mV, JSC of 38.93 mA cm−2 with a FF of 76.6%. When the LiFx/MgFxOy was integrated with ITO for a bifacial solar cell, it showed a PCE of 16.9%, VOC of 691.6 mV, JSC of 37.4 mA cm−2 and FF of 65.3%. This means that the interaction between Mg, F, and O leads to a metal phase transition that translates to enhanced transparency in the MgFxOY film. This transparent film resulted in one of the highest efficiencies recorded for bifacial solar cells to date.
Liu et al. prepared low work function Mg doped SnO2 and applied it to n-type c-Si based heterojunction solar cells as the ESL. By carefully oxidizing the hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) surface to create a thin SiOx layer between the a-Si:H layer and the SnO2–Mg layer (a-Si:H(i)/SiOx/SnO2/Mg), significant improvements in key parameters such as an open circuit current density (Joc) of 2.4 fA (femtoampere: 10−15A) cm−2, VOC of 685 mV and ρc of 0.035 Ω cm−2 were achieved. They showed that because of its low work function, the use of Mg was necessary for efficient electron transfer.291 Meng et al. reported an effective MgO-doped TiO2 nano aerogel coating for crystalline solar cells, with an optimum relative enhancement of 4.6% compared to cells fabricated with bare TiO2.295
In all, the addition of Mg and MgO into silicon solar cells enhances parameters such as PCE and JSC due to the enhanced electron transfer. Various J–V parameters of Mg-doped CSL are illustrated in Table 7.

6.2. Hydrogen storage
Hydrogen is a green energy source with a large combustion value, and is often seen as a long-term substitute for the conventional crude oil utilized in many energy systems.296 Hydrogen can be stored as a pressurized gas, cryogenic liquid or as a solid fuel. However, there are major problems associated with the first two, the high cost of hydrogen transportation and storage. Solid-state metal hydrides are considered to be the ultimate hydrogen source for the foreseeable future. These metal hydrides have a higher hydrogen-storage density (0.11 g cm−3 for MgH2) than hydrogen gas (0.09 × 10−3 g cm−3) or liquid hydrogen (0.07 g cm−3). For commercial hydrogen applications, the metal hydrides should exhibit unique properties including high hydrogen capacity per unit mass and unit volume, low dissociation temperature, moderate dissociation pressure, low heat of formation, low heat dissipation during exothermic hydride formation, reversibility, limited energy loss during the charge and discharge of hydrogen, fast kinetics, high stability against O2 and moisture for long cycle life, cyclability, and high safety.296 Among all the reversible metallic hydrides, MgH2 has the highest energy density (9 MJ kg−1Mg), making it highly appropriate for energy storage applications.

6.2.1. Mg hydride for efficient hydrogen storage. 
MgH2 is a transparent and color-neutral dielectric material with a band gap of 5.6 ± 0.1 eV. Ever since the first reported synthesis of MgH2 in 1951 by Bogdanovic et al.,297 over 60 bulk and molecular magnesium hydrides (MgH2) have been studied as a promising hydrogen source because of its high volumetric capacity, 110 g L−1, hydrogen storage gravimetric capacity (7.66 wt%), cheap price, heat-resistance, vibration absorption and reversible uptake and release processes.298–300 Two main types of magnesium hydrides are formed when H2 combines with Mg; i.e. α-MgH2 and β-MgH2. When hydrogen is just adsorbed on the Mg surface, α-MgH2 phase is obtained (interstitial solid solution of H in Mg) and it has a hexagonal crystal structure. On the other hand, β-MgH2 is formed when the hydrogenation proceeds to the end, with a change in crystal structure from the hexagonal system to the tetragonal crystal rutile system with a = b = 4.52 Å and c = 3.02 Å (Fig. 26a).301
 Fig. 26  (a) Crystallographic transformations between Mg and MgH2 and the accompanying hydrogenation and dihydrogen processes when Pd is employed as a catalyst or capping layer. Non-isothermal (b) hydrogenation and (c) dehydrogenation curves of MgH2, and various modified MgH2. Long term 100-cycle life for (d) MgH2-(Ni-V2O3)@C and (e) MgH2. (f) MgH2 monomer and its stable adsorption configurations on MgO and Mg(TM)O surfaces. (g) calculated hydrogen desorption energies and average bond lengths between Mg and H of MgH2 monomer within the various systems. Copyright 2019,318 American chemical society and Copyright 2021309 and 2022,298 Elsevier. 
Three major challenges associated with MgH2 systems are (1) their thermodynamic instability, (2) the slow kinetics associated with the required temperatures for both hydrogenation/dehydrogenation, and the (3) their high reactivity with oxygen.302 Hence, for MgH2 to be employed as hydrogen storage media, for instance, the issues of temperature (H2-released temperature above 300 °C) and conductivity should be solved.
Among several proposed methods, the addition of additives has gained greater attention than other approaches. Since many additives do not react with Mg/MgH2, they are usually considered catalysts for hydrogenation/dehydrogenation, while the addition of an excess number of additives leads to alloy formation. A list of materials including transition metals,303 transition metal oxides,304 and intermetallic compounds305 have been reported over the years as effective catalysts.
Despite all these recent modifications, the strategy of ball milling these materials with MgH2 remains one of the most effective methods of promoting dehydrogenation/dehydrogenation kinetics, and lowering their associated reaction temperature. Ball milling of excess amounts of V-based oxides with MgH2 led to the formation of VyTxCrz–MgH2-based alloys. The dehydrogenation temperature of MgH2-mol% V75Ti5Cr2O was lowered to 217 °C, below the theoretical 300 °C.302 Zhu et al. suggested that doping MgH2 with transition based-carbon coated metal oxides could lower the hydrogenation and dehydrogenation properties of MgH2 by elongating the Mg–H bond, making it weaker.306 Motivated by this phenomenon, Lan et al. incorporated (Ni–V2O3)@C nanocomposites in MgH2 to improve the hydrogen storage and release mechanism.298 Their results confirmed that hydrogenation could effectively take place at room temperature, while dehydrogenation could be achieved at temperatures as low as 190 °C (Fig. 26b and c). In long-term tests, the hydrogen in their doped samples showed no decay even after 100 dehydrogenation cycles (Fig. 26d and e).


6.2.2. Mg-Based hydrogen storage materials. 
Several methods were proposed in Section 6.2.1 to enhance the properties of Mg-based materials for hydrogen storage.298 For instance, in a Mg–Pd alloy, MgH2 was found to be growing at the Mg–Pd interface during hydrogenation, while metallic Mg grew near the interface during dehydrogenation.307 This phenomenon, also known as the blocking effect, kinetically limits the diffusion of H2 in the MgH2 layer during dehydrogenation, preventing the hydrogenation of Mg and also limiting the desorption of H2 during hydrogenation, thus leading to highly efficient hydrogenation and dehydrogenation cycles.
As indicated in Section 6.2.1, catalysts also play key roles in enhancing the hydrogen storage kinetics of Mg/MgH2 systems. Among various metals employed as catalysts, Chen et al. reported that the catalytic activity follows the order Ti > Nb > Ni > V > Co > Mo for MgH2 dehydrogenation.308 Based on the reported catalytic trends, they tested the catalytic effect of MoNi alloy NPs on hydrogen storage in the Mg/MgH2 system. Isothermal hydrogenation and dehydrogenation measurements at 573 K showed that MgH2−xNiMoO4 could significantly enhance the hydrogenation process, by about 7.1 wt% H2, compared to the catalyst-free MgH2, which absorbed only 1.0 wt% H2 in a time of 25 min.
Compared to alloying, MgH2 doping yields improved results. Various strategies are being explored to weaken the strength of the Mg–H bond. Zhang et al. using both theoretical and experimental methods, demonstrated that doping of low valence transition metals (TMs) into MgO could effectively weaken the Mg–H bonds, which would subsequently decrease the energy required for hydrogen desorption from MgH2.309 As indicated in Fig. 26f, in typical pristine MgH2, the bond lengths of the two Mg–H are the same (1.712 Å). when the MgH2 is deposited on the MgO support, the bond lengths increase slightly to 1.776 Å and 1.765 Å respectively. Upon further doping with some low valence transition metals, mainly Ti, V, and Nb, there was a further stretching of the bond lengths with certain degrees of distortion.
Most importantly the Mg–H bond length in the sample doped with Nb increased to a high value of 1.912 Å. When other dopants such as Fe, Co, and Ni were doped into the samples, only a slight increase in bond length was observed, signifying the importance of using low valence TMs. In any system, a short bond length is more difficult to disintegrate than a longer bond length. The hydrogen desorption energies (ΔEdes) of the various doped samples were calculated and are illustrated in Fig. 26g, further confirming the inverse relationship predicted earlier between Mg–H bond length and hydrogen desorption energy.

6.3. Thermal catalyst for CO2 conversion
In thermal catalysis, Mg and MgO-doped compounds have shown high reactivity and stability. In the next section, we focus on Mg oxides in CO2 conversion. As indicated in the introduction, the ongoing release of CO2 into the atmosphere is a menace that needs to be curbed for a sustainable human society.310 Alkaline earth metal oxides such as MgO and CaO offer good sorption and conversion properties for CO2 conversion.311–314 Among these alkaline-earth oxides MgO has exhibited lower energy regeneration with good CO2 sorption, making it highly desirable for CO2 conversion. Guo et al. investigated the structure-performance relationship of different magnesium-based CO2 adsorbents and found that MgO–Sr prepared by the solid-state chemical reaction method showed a very high CO2 uptake.315
In energy applications, carbon dioxide-methane reforming has been significant over the years in efforts to convert CO2 and CH4 to green hydrogen and valuable CO, respectively. Xu et al. prepared Ni/MgO with MgO particle sizes ranging from 10 to 12 nm. The obtained sample was applied for CO2 methane reforming, and a high syngas selectivity of 95% was achieved.316 Most significantly, the Ni/MgO catalyst was tested for over 100 hours and found to be resistant to carbon poisoning. Taherian et al. fabricated yttria-promoted Ni catalysts supported on MgO-MCM-41 (a mobile composition of matter No. 41, a type of mesoporous silica material) for syngas production.317 Temperature-programmed reduction (TPR) measurements determined that the insertion of Mg2+ into MCM-41 helped reduce acidity, thereby enhancing CO2 absorption. The catalyst presented an H2/CO ratio of 0.85 and was highly stable against coking.
6.4. Mg plasmonics
Elements that show strong plasmonic behaviors possess dielectric properties capable of sustaining strong resonances. At a specific wavelength, which depends on the size, shape, and environment of the nanoparticle, collective oscillations of the conduction electrons known as localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs) can take place. LSPRs have attracted much attention because of their ability to enhance light-matter interactions and manipulate light at the subwavelength level.318 LSPRs of various materials make them potentially viable for application in areas such as chemical and biological sensing, surface-enhanced spectroscopies, photothermal cancer therapy, and photocatalysis.319–322
Over the years Au, Al, and Ag have gained wide attention as metals for plasmonics in the visible region. However, losses emanating from the interaction of free electrons with other electrons, phonons, lattice defects, and grain boundaries, as well as the interband transitions, limit the usage of these metals in the UV range.323,324 Gutierrez et al. stated that the Faraday number (FN: field enhancement factor) or Figure of merit (the quality factor of a localized surface plasmon, QLSP) provides fair ground for comparing different materials’ ability to accelerate an electromagnetic field in the proximity of its surface.325
The dielectric function (ε) is a complex equation, denoted by ε = ε1 + iε2 (where ε1 is the real component and ε2 the imaginary component) and is associated with the electric polarization induced in a material by incident radiation.326 The QLSP or FN is a statistical tool for measuring the quality of the excited LSPR, and it is defined according to the equation, QLSP = f/Δf (where f is the FrÖhlich frequency, the frequency at which the LSPR can be excited in a metal sphere). As reported by Duan et al., the Frohlich condition, i.e., the condition for resonance to be established, is when ε1 = −2 for a metal sphere located in the air.318
As shown in Fig. 27a, Mg, Al, Ga and Rh exhibited the highest values of FN while having LSPRs in the UV region, indicating that Mg has excellent plasmonic properties.325 Furthermore, unlike the other plasmonic elements which have an FCC structure, Mg has a HCP crystal structure which is likely to unlock a variety of potential thermodynamic and kinetic shapes for both single crystals and twinned structures. In this section, our emphasis will be on the use of Mg-based materials for plasmonics without focusing on the other elements.
 Fig. 27  (a) Faraday number (FN) for different metals. (b) HAADF-STEM and EDS mapping images of nanodisk. (c) Experimental dark-field scattering spectra for seven single NPs immobilized on glass. (d) Numerical scattering spectra for three diameters of Mg NPs. (e) Resonance wavelength of nanodisks tuned throughout the visible wavelength range by varying the diameter. (f) FDTD simulations on cylindrical Mg particles with different diameters encapsulated in a 5 nm thick layer of MgO on a SiO2 substrate. Copyright 2015307 and 2018,328 American chemical society and Copyright 2018,325 Elsevier. 
The electronic configuration of Mg; [Ne]3s2 presents no d-shell electrons. This means that the interband transitions associated with the d-block elements can be eliminated, leading to the prevention of the losses discussed earlier. In addition, per several reports, Mg shows a very strong plasmonic response in the UV-vis-NIR wavelength ranges (3.8 to 1.3 eV).327 As discussed in section 6.2, the high affinity of Mg towards hydrogen to form MgH2 gives it the unique ability to switch from a plasmonic state to a non-plasmonic state, thus making it a very good candidate for hydrogen sensing. This property also makes it suitable for other sensing applications, chemical synthesis, photochemical processes, and energy harvesting applications.
Biggins et al. synthesized Mg and MgO NPs using a mixture of lithium naphthalide and di n-butyl magnesium in anhydrous THF.328 Here, the butyl groups were transferred to the Li resulting in Mg–naphthalene and BuLi, with a single-crystalline hexagonal Mg nanoparticle, as shown in Fig. 27b. Both the far-field scattering spectra (Fig. 27c) and numerical scattering spectra (Fig. 27d) of single NPs obtained within the 450–850 nm wavelength range showed dominant peaks at 600 and 800 nm with lower wavelength peaks within 450–800 nm. This emphasizes the strong plasmonic Mg response in the UV-vis-NIR wavelengths.
A major advantage derived from the high negative standard reduction potential for plasmonics is that a strong thermodynamic force exists for reactions such as galvanic replacement, where the more electronegative element takes electrons from Mg to generate Mg ions, with the corresponding metal being replaced or deposited on the Mg ion. Sterl et al. fabricated Mg nanodisks of different sizes using a colloidal hole-mask lithography approach and investigated the various plasmonic properties.307 The nano disk sizes were 80–220 nm with an average thickness of 80 nm. The extinction spectra in Fig. 27e show that the resonance wavelength of the nanodisks could be effectively tuned from the UV (below 500 nm) to the IR (above 800 nm) region by varying the diameter of the disk. To theoretically validate the experimental observations, finite difference time domain (FDTD)-base theoretical simulations on a single Mg particle on a glass substrate were modeled and the extinction spectra are presented in Fig. 27f. The results showed that the experimental values were in line with the simulated values, with the experimental wavelength range being a little narrower than the simulated one.
6.5. Mg sensors
Nanosized sensors, whose mechanical, thermal, electrical, or even optical properties depend on their size within the nanometer regime, have attracted significant attention. These properties can be attributed to the scaling effect and quantum confinement of energy in nanostructures. Mg and its compounds have been employed as sensors or components of sensors for humidity, alcohol, gas, trinitrotoluene (TNT), hydrogen sulphide (H2S), hydrogen (H2) and carbon monoxide (CO) detection as well as sensors in aluminum processing, due to its diverse interaction chemistry. For every sensor, certain basic requirements such as high selectivity, rapid recovery time, long term stability, high response, and low working temperature coupled with low cost are highly desired.329
In H2S sensing, for instance, the mechanism for H2S is described as follows (Fig. 28a). MgO is said to increase in barrier height because in the presence of air, oxygen splits from molecular oxygen to atomic oxygen. Per the octet rule, as each oxygen atom wants to satisfy its double bond, it withdraws an O atom from the surface of the MgO, leading to the formation of a depletion layer. The depletion layer leads to undesirable parameters such as high barrier height, and increased MgO resistance, which produces a low current in the air environment. In contrast, in an H2S environment, the H2S covers the surface of the MgO particles. This leads to a strong interaction between the applied H2S and the surface O in MgO. Consequently, the H2S takes oxygen from the MgO surface and concurrently donates an electron back to the MgO, which opens conduction path channels of electrons, causing a decrease in the barrier height and resistance and subsequently an increase in current in the H2S environment.
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram showing the energy band diagram and interfacial potential barrier height for H2S sensing. (b) TEM image of the CDots@MgO with insert; histogram of the particle size distribution. (c) Current response of the MgO and CDots@MgO sensors under 120 ppm of H2S gas at Vbaising = −0.7 V @ 30 °C. (d) Switching of magnesium hydride and vice versa with the aid of a 10 nm catalytic Pd layer and a 5 nm Ti buffer. (e) Extinction spectra of 160 nm Mg/Ti/Pd particles. (f) Coorddiantion environment of Mg(II) with each COO-linked Mg(II) generating a 2D sheet (Right) and a three dimensional framework constructed by ATDC2− linking the adjacent sheets. (g) Fluorescence intensities of compound 1 dispersed in different NEs solutions. (h) Fluorescence spectra of 1 with different amounts of TNT. (i) Quenching percentages of 1 upon addition of different volumes of 1 × 10−2 M Cr3+ ions. Copyright 2019331 and 2021,329 Elsevier. 
El-shamy et al. reported carbon dots-decorated magnesium oxide (CDots@MgO) particles for H2S detection with high sensitivity, and high response under low operating temperatures.329 In this method, either an n-type or P-type metal oxide is deposited on a substrate such as a silicon wafer to produce a Schottky diode. The group decorated the MgO substrate with carbon dots mainly to improve the conductivity, increase structural stability and enhance the device response. The CDots@MgO was prepared by first synthesizing spherical MgO particles using a hydrothermal approach followed by depositing carbon nanodots through microwave irradiation of glucose and KOH. The corresponding images are shown in Fig. 28b. The current response (JH2S–Jair) for an MgO and CDots@MgO under air and 120 ppm H2S atmospheres with an applied voltage (Vbiasing = −0.7 V) are illustrated in Fig. 28c. Even though the MgO sensor showed a significant current of 2.1 mA cm−2 at the specified voltage for (JH2S–Jair), the value recorded for CDots@MgO was 10-fold greater, with a JH2S–Jair value of 20.1 mA cm−2. Their results definitively confirmed the role of MgO in effective H2S sensing.
As discussed in Section 2, Mg has a very high negative standard reduction potential, making it comparatively reactive. The formation of MgH2, a dielectric material may cause the extinction spectra in plasmonics to diminish. This characteristic can be exploited for hydrogen sensing. The compounds formed when Mg reacts with other elements are often highly stable with strong bonding energies. However, any functional sensor should be responsive to a change in environmental conditions. Because of the stable nature of these compounds, reversibility to a pure Mg nanoparticle remains a challenge, thereby limiting their use for sensing purposes. Furthermore, as discussed in Section 6.2, the hydrogenation of Mg takes place at higher temperatures, which threatens the stability of the Mg nanostructure. To mitigate this problem, extensive research has been conducted to obtain an appropriate catalyst, among which palladium has gained significant attention.330 Palladium easily dissociates molecular hydrogen to atomic hydrogen, which can be used to hydrogenate Mg. For this reason, Sterl et al. coated the fabricated nanodisks in Fig. 26 with a 10 nm thick Pd layer on top and 5 nm Ti sandwiched between the two layers.307 The Ti serves as a buffer that prevents the formation of an MgPd alloy at the interface of the two metals, since the resulting interface would prevent atomic hydrogen from diffusing to the Mg surface. The results of their modification are reported in Fig. 28d. The overall sensing process involves four steps. In step one, the PdTiMg-coated nanodisks are subjected to 4% H2/96% N2 gas, where the Pd catalyzes molecular hydrogen to atomic hydrogen, which easily diffuses through the Ti buffer layer to the Mg core. As shown in Fig. 28e, the formation of dielectric MgH2 causes the extinction spectra to reduce completely. In step two, the hydrogen stream is removed, leaving only the N2 stream. This causes the extinction spectra to increase slightly because the palladium releases its stored hydrogen. In step three, when oxygen gas is mixed with the N2 and exposed to the nano disks, the resonance is fully restored so that the entire cycle can start over.
Industrial explosives make use of hazardous nitroaromatic explosives (NAEs), in particular TNT, which is of high concern. These explosive hazards have the potential to cause severe damage and pollute aquatic habitats when exposed to the environment. Hu et al. designed multifunctional Mg2+-based luminescent sensors using a combination of Mg2+ and a rigid rich electronic ligand H2ATDC (2′-amino-1,1′:4′,1′′′-terphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate) with abundant –NH2 groups (Fig. 28f).331 The Mg2+ center here exhibits an octahedral coordination geometry, made up of four oxygen atoms contributing four different ATDC2− in the equatorial plane, and two O atoms of H2O in the axis. With this group, when the ligand H2ATDC is coordinated with Mg2+, there is conjugation in the pi bond of H2ATDC, leading to enhanced fluorescence intensity.
To test the sensing abilities of the Mg-MOF, fluorescence titration experiments were carried out with the gradual addition of a 1 mM solution of TNT and other NAEs (Fig. 28g–i). As shown in the figures, the emission intensity of DMF was quenched significantly with the addition of TNT, while the other NAEs showed intermediate quenching. DFT calculations revealed that the quenching by TNT and NAEs emanates from the photoinduced electron transfer (PET), from the CB of Mg-MOF to the LUMO of TNT.
7. Concluding remarks and perspectives
In this article we provide comprehensive review of Mg chemistry and its applications to various energy fields. Mg has many distinctive properties, which can be utilized for nanomaterial syntheses and modification in numerous applications. Because of its unique and distinctive nature, the current review of Mg chemistry is highly desired and timely. We have reviewed the basic properties of Mg and its application in energy processes such as photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, energy storage, solar harvesting, hydrogen storage, plasmonic, and sensing.
We highlight magnesiothermic reduction, where the strong reducing ability of Mg creates oxygen vacancies on the surface of metal oxides. These generated vacancies are particularly suitable for altering the bandgaps in various photovoltaic applications. Numerous strategies have been also studied to optimize the band structure of photocatalysts to absorb a wider range of light. Mg-induced band gap engineering has been observed to enhance photocatalytic activity in organic degradation, water splitting, CO2 conversion, and N2 fixation. Additionally, Mg doping on photocatalysts provides efficient electron tunnelling as well as optimum band gap energy and conductivity. In electrocatalysts, the introduction of Mg as a dopant into transition metal-based catalysts and as an alloying component was successfully explored. Discussions reviewed here showed that electropositive Mg tunes the electronic structure of catalysts, modifying the adsorption strength of these materials to reaction intermediates and facilitating reaction kinetics and selectivity in ORR, HER, OER, and CO2RR.
In the case of RMBs, divalent Mg offers higher energy density and more abundant resources than monovalent Li. By using artificial SEI and alloying strategies, the challenge associated with Mg anodes could be greatly overcome. Furthermore, Mg could successfully substitute Li–ion in Li–S batteries and supercapacitors to improve their energy density. Mg-doped materials for solar cells could be employed as ESLs and HSLs to suppress carrier recombination. The doping of Mg2+ on CSLs modifies their band structure, which leads to a higher driving force for enhanced power conversion efficiencies.
In hydrogen storage, Mg has shown higher hydrogen storage density and gravimetric capacity, making it highly suitable for transport applications. Its plasmonic behavior coupled with its reversibility in MgH2 for hydrogen storage also makes it attractive for use in sensors.
The properties of Mg described in this review can be used in many fields, including catalysis, nanoscience, green chemistry, crystal engineering, coordination chemistry, synthetic methodology, and theoretical-computational chemistry as well as electrochemical energy conversion and storage. The features of Mg explored here would open new opportunities to discover not only unique properties but also to facilitate material preparation and further applications.
Herein, we suggest some perspectives below for the further development of Mg-based materials in energy applications.
(1) In photocatalysis, Mg has been employed to generate oxygen-defect sites, which reduces the bandgap energy of metal oxides to absorb a wide range of light wavelengths. Even though the reduced metal oxides show excellent photocatalytic activity compared with the bare ones, it is urgently necessary that diverse semiconductors such as metal nitrides, sulfides, phosphides, and selenides are explored to find new active photocatalysts. In addition, the reduction of metal oxides with Mg often demages the initial morphology. To mitigate this problem, reaction conditions involving the use of Mg vapor reduction or plasma-induced Mg reduction should be sufficiently explored.
(2) In electrocatalysis, Mg as an active material, dopant, and alloying element in TM-based catalysts can be utilized for various electrochemical reactions. However, the potential of Mg as the main active component has not been fully explored due to the instability of Mg moieties in practical electrochemical environments. In addition, early reports on the PGM-Mg alloys show that they hold great promise to overcome the reaction barriers encountered in numerous electrochemical reactions. This requires the development of an effective synthesis strategy to achieve atomically dispersed Mg–N–C catalysts and PGM-Mg alloys with small nanoparticle form.
(3) In rechargeable magnesium batteries (RMBs), the passivation, corrosion, and dendrite formation observed at the anode can be combatted by employing the use of functional materials such as MXene and covalent organic frameworks (COFs), while the volume fluctuation of the Mg anode can be mitigated by developing porous 3D host materials. In this respect, the development of highly graphitic and porous materials derived from Mg and Mg porogens would be good candidates as anode host materials. In addition, developing electrolytes with high ionic stability and compatibility in the operating electrochemical window is of prime importance for the future development of RMBs.
(4) In photovoltaic application, although Mg has been used to tune the band gaps of many semiconductors per our summarized reports, attempts to explain the origin of the decrease or increase in band gaps upon doping are quite conflicting. A detailed theoretical study addressing the influence of Mg doping, optimum doping concentration, and material compatibility with Mg for photovoltaics would go a long way to help the scientific community at large.
(5) In hydrogen storage, the use of hydrolysis of MgH2 to obtain H2 rather than the thermal dehydrogenation process is a future direction that needs to be explored as the former provides the unique advantage of obtaining H2 at mild temperatures as opposed to the latter. Current bottlenecks such as the passivation of the MgH2 site by Mg(OH)2 formed during the hydrolysis process can be eliminated through the use of Mg alloys and the development of acids to neutralize the Mg(OH)2. Furthermore, since most catalysts employed in hydrogen evolution reactions are highly active for H2 sorption, the use of such materials as catalyst in hydrogenation and dehydrogenation process is expected to reduce the high temperature requirements in this system.
The future perspectives outlined in the proceeding paragraphs show that Mg chemistry is in the early stages of development, and has not received much attention. Further progress is needed to maximize its full potential and to expand the spectrum of Mg knowledge. We believe that this review will serve as a foundation of Mg chemistry for various syntheses and applications and establishes an important milestone for new directions and future developments for the scientific community.
List of abbreviations

ACAberration-corrected
ACNAcetonitrile
AEMFCsAnion exchange membrane fuel cells
AORAlcohol oxidation reaction
AR27Acid Red 27
ATPAdenosine triphosphate
ATR-IRAttenuated total reflection infrared spectroscopy
bi-NTBi nanotube
BPBoiling point
BTBlack titania
BZBlack zirconia
CBConduction band
CDotsCarbon dots
ClChlorine
COCarbon monoxide
CO2Carbon dioxide
CO2RRCO2 reduction reaction
COFCovalent organic framework
c-SiCrystalline silicon
CTCommercial anatase TiO2
CVCyclic voltammetry
DAFCDirect alcohol fuel cell
DCDADicyandiamide
DEGDMEDiethylene glycol dimethyl ether
DFTDensity functional theory
DME1,2-Dimethoxyethane
DMF
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DNADeoxyribonucleic acid
DOSDensity of state
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cell

E
1/2
Half-wave potential

E
ads(O)Oxygen adsorption energy
EBSDElectron backscattered diffraction

E
coh
Cohesive energy
EDSEnergy dispersive spectroscopy
EELSElectron energy loss spectroscopy

E
g
Band gap energy
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EMITFSI1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazoliumbis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide

E
onset
Onset potentials
EOREthanol oxidation reaction
ESL/ESTLElectron transport layer
ESLElectron-selective layer
FAOFormic acid oxidation
FCCFace-centered cubic
FDTDFinite difference time domain
FEfaradaic efficiency
FFFill factor
FFTFast Fourier transform
FHPCHighly porous carbon sheet

F
N
Faraday number (field enhancement factor)
FPCFilter paper carbon
GBGrain boundary
HAADF-STEMHigh angle annular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy
HCPHexagonal closed-packed
HCP-TiO2-FGHyper-crosslinked polymer-TiO2-graphene
HCSHollow carbon sphere
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HFHydrofluoric acid
HGNCHighly graphitized N-doped carbon
HORHydrogen oxidation reaction
HR-TEMHigh-resolution transmission electron microscopy
HSL/HSTLHole transport layer
HSLHole-selective layer
i-a-Si:HHydrogenated intrinsic amorphous silicon
IRInfrared

J
oc
Open circuit current density

J
SC
Short circuit current density
LIBLithium–ion batterie
Li–SLithium–sulfur
LSPRLocalized surface plasmon resonance
LSVLinear sweep voltammetry
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MABMetal–air batterie
MBMethylene blue
MCCMgCl2 cycle
MCM-41Mobile composition of the matter No. 41
MeOHMethyl alcohol
MgH2Magnesium hydride
Mg–PcMg phthalocyanine
MgPSMagnesium polysulfide
MgS8Long-chain polysulfide
MIBMg–ion battery
MIHCsMagnesium ion hybrid capacitors
MLGOMulti-layered reduced graphene oxide
MOCVDMetal–organic chemical vapor deposition
MOFMetal–organic framework
MPMelting point
MZO/ZnOMagnesium zinc oxide/zinc oxide
NAENitroaromatic explosive
NCNanocrystal
NHENormal hydrogen electrode
NPNanoparticle
OEROxygen evolution reaction
ORROxygen reduction reaction
OSCOrganic solar cell
PADPolydopamine
PAMPolyacrylamide
PANPolyacrylonitrile
PCPropylene carbonate
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PEMFCProton exchange membrane fuel cell
PETPhotoinduced electron transfer
PGMPlatinum group metal
PLPhotoluminescence
PorogenPore generator
PSCPerovskite solar cell
PsiPorous silicon
QDQuantum-dot
QDSCQuantum dot solar cell
QEQuantum efficiency
QLSPQuality factor of a localized surface plasmon
rGOReduced graphene oxide
RhBRhodamine B
RMBRechargeable magnesium battery
RNARibonucleic acid
RRDERotating ring disk electrode
RTReduced TiO2
R-ZTO/SnO2Reduced Zn2SnO4/SnO2
SCLCSpace-charge limited current
SEISolid-electrolyte interface
SHEStandard hydrogen electrode
SHJSilicon heterojunction
SSStainless steel
STHSolar-to-hydrogen
TBOTTitanium butoxide
TDBTNTi3+ self-doped black TiO2 nanotube
TEOATriethanolamine
TFSIBis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide
THFTetrahydrofuran
TMTransition metals
TNTTrinitrotoluene
TOSATitanium oxysulfate-sulfuric acid hydrate
TPRTemperature-programmed reduction
TTIPTitanium isopropoxide
VBValence band

V
biasing
Applied voltage
VBMValence band minimum

V
Cu
Simple vacancy of Cu

V
splitCu
Split vacancy of Cu

V
OC
Open-circuit photovoltage
VOCVolatile organic compound
XANESX-ray absorption near-edge structure
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
ZABZinc–air battery

ε
d
d-Band center

ε
p
p-Band center

ρ
c
Contact resistance

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was generously supported by NRF grants (NRF-2019R1A2C2086770 and NRF-2023K2A9A2A23000259) funded by the Korean government. The authors also would like to thank the Korean Basic Science Institute (KBSI) at Jeonju and Daejeon, and the Center for Core Research Facilities (CCRF) in DGIST.
References
E. B. Tetteh, H.-Y. Lee, C.-H. Shin, S. Kim, H. C. Ham, T.-N. Tran, J.-H. Jang, S. J. Yoo and J.-S. Yu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1601–1609 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Jacobson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 148–173 RSC .
R. Schoenberg and F. von Blanckenburg, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2006, 252, 342–359 CrossRef CAS .
F.-Y. Li, B. Chaigne-Delalande, C. Kanellopoulou, J. C. Davis, H. F. Matthews, D. C. Douek, J. I. Cohen, G. Uzel, H. C. Su and M. J. Lenardo, Nature, 2011, 475, 471–476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schauss, F. Dahms, B. P. Fingerhut and T. Elsaesser, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 238–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Anthoni, Magnesium, 2006, 2701, e9062 Search PubMed .
I. N. Fridlyander, Met. Sci. Heat Treat., 2003, 45, 246–253 CrossRef .
D. Lindström, P. Nortier, D. Sichen, J. B. Knighton, R. K. Steunenberg, K. Flint, J. Emsley, J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov, R. Ferro, G. Rambaldi, H. H. Zhang, S. Shang, J. E. Saal, A. Saengdeejing, Y. Wang, L.-Q. Chen, Z.-K. Liu, S. Zhang, S. E. Saji, Z. Yin, H. H. Zhang, Y. Du and C. Yan, Nat. Chem., 2009, 2, 2005988 Search PubMed .
J. Mi, L. Guo, Y. Liu, W. Liu, G. You and S. Qian, Phys. Lett. A, 2003, 310, 486–492 CrossRef CAS .
M. Durazzo, A. M. Saliba-Silva, I. C. Martins, E. F. U. de Carvalho and H. G. Riella, Ann. Nucl. Energy, 2017, 110, 874–885 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Flint, Flash!: Photography, Writing, and Surprising Illumination, Oxford University Press,  2017 Search PubMed .
T. Hiraki, S. Hiroi, T. Akashi, N. Okinaka and T. Akiyama, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 12114–12119 CrossRef CAS .
L. Agnarelli, Y. Prots, U. Burkhardt, M. Schmidt, P. Koželj, A. Leithe-Jasper and Y. Grin, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 13681–13690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Boom and F. R. de Boer, Calphad, 2020, 68, 101647 CrossRef CAS .
V. Hlukhyy, U. C. Rodewald, R.-D. Hoffmann and R. Pöttgen, Zeitschrift für Naturforsch. B, 2004, 59, 251–255 CrossRef CAS .
L. Westin, L.-E. Edshammar, J. Krogh-Moe, J. Songstad and Å. Pilotti, Acta Chem. Scand., 1972, 26, 3619–3626 CrossRef CAS .
S. Delsante, R. Novakovic, A. Gagliolo and G. Borzone, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2019, 139, 105890 CrossRef CAS .
S. Javaid, M. A. Farrukh, I. Muneer, M. Shahid, M. Khaleeq-ur-Rahman and A. A. Umar, Superlattices Microstruct., 2015, 82, 234–247 CrossRef CAS .
F. Witte, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 1680–1692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Aluri, Synlett, 2008, 1579–1580 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vanýsek, Handb. Chem. Phys., 2012, 93, 5–80 Search PubMed .
Y. Ding, C. Yu, J. Chang, C. Yao, J. Yu, W. Guo and J. Qiu, Small, 2020, 16, 1907164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Z. Mao, L. Zhang, D. Wang, R. Xu, L. Bie and B. D. Fahlman, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12650–12657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Niu, S. A. Kulinich, J. Yang, A. L. Zhu and X. Du, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4234–4241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tama, O. Mó, M. Yáñez and M. M. Montero-Campillo, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2017, 136, 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Petrie, Aust. J. Chem., 2003, 56, 259–262 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kamiyama, K. Kubota, D. Igarashi, Y. Youn, Y. Tateyama, H. Ando, K. Gotoh and S. Komaba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 5114–5120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sinhamahapatra, J. P. Jeon and J.-S. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3539–3544 RSC .
Y. Tan, T. Jiang and G. Z. Chen, Front. Energy Res., 2021, 9, 651386 CrossRef .
X. Li, P. Yan, B. W. Arey, W. Luo, X. Ji, C. Wang, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Zhang, K. Wang, X. Sun, G. Liu, J. Li, H. Tian, J. Li and Y. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604690 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Y. Lee, T. H. Yu, C.-H. Shin, A. Fortunelli, S. G. Ji, Y. Kim, T.-H. Kang, B.-J. Lee, B. V. Merinov, W. A. Goddard, C. H. Choi, J.-S. Yu, H. Y. Ted, C.-H. Shin, A. Fortunelli, S. G. Ji, Y. Kim, T.-H. Kang, B.-J. Lee, B. V. Merinov and W. A. Goddard III, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 323, 122179 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Kang, B.-J. Lee, C. Lim, H.-Y. Lee, J. W. Han and J.-S. Yu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 5691–5703 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinhamahapatra, H. Y. Lee, S. Shen, S. S. Mao and J.-S. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 613–621 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Z. Fang, Y. Xia, P. Sun, B. Van Devener, M. Free, H. Lefler and S. Zheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 308, 299–310 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, J. She, D. Chen and F. Pan, J. Magnesium Alloys, 2020, 8, 1–41 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, S. Shang, J. E. Saal, A. Saengdeejing, Y. Wang, L.-Q. Chen and Z.-K. Liu, Intermetallics, 2009, 17, 878–885 CrossRef CAS .
H. Itahara, N. Takahashi, S. Kosaka, Y. Takatani, M. Inaba and Y. Kamitaka, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 4279–4282 RSC .
W. Liu, W. Tan, H. He and Y. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 411, 140058 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kardarian, D. Nunes, P. M. Sberna, A. Ginsburg, D. A. Keller, J. V. Pinto, J. Deuermeier, A. Y. Anderson, A. Zaban and R. Martins, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Raj, K. Prabakar, S. N. Karthick, K. V. Hemalatha, M.-K. Son and H.-J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2600–2607 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Raj, K. Prabakar, S. N. Karthick, K. V. Hemalatha, M.-K. Son, H.-J. Kim, Z. Duan, A. Du Pasquier, Y. Lu, Y. Xu and E. Garfunkel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 96, 292–297 CrossRef .
A. Renaud, L. Cario, P. Deniard, E. Gautron, X. Rocquefelte, Y. Pellegrin, E. Blart, F. Odobel and S. Jobic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 54–59 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Arshad, A. H. Khoja, S. Shakir, A. Afzal, M. A. Mujtaba, M. E. M. Soudagar, H. Fayaz, S. Farukh and M. Saeed, Case Stud. Therm. Eng., 2021, 26, 101101 CrossRef .
S. Shakir, H. M. Abd-ur-Rehman, K. Yunus, M. Iwamoto and V. Periasamy, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 737, 740–747 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Ania, V. Khomenko, E. Raymundo-Piñero, J. B. Parra and F. Beguin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1828–1836 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Yoon, K. Sohn, J. Y. Kim, C. Shin, J. Yu and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 19–21 CrossRef CAS .
W. Geng, F. Ma, G. Wu, S. Song, J. Wan and D. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 854–863 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, H. Xu, P. Yang, L. Xiao, Y. Li, J. Ma, R. Li, L. Liu, A. Liu and V. Kondratiev, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 313, 121454 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Sun, Z. Liu and Z. Lei, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6577–6584 RSC .
T. Morishita, T. Tsumura, M. Toyoda, J. Przepiórski, A. W. Morawski, H. Konno and M. Inagaki, Carbon N. Y., 2010, 48, 2690–2707 CrossRef CAS .
F. Czerwinski, Corros. Sci., 2014, 86, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Brown, Magnes. Technol. 2011, 2011, 7–11 Search PubMed .
A. Delgado, S. Cordova and E. Shafirovich, Combust. Flame, 2015, 162, 3333–3340 CrossRef CAS .
L. Garcia, A. Benedicto, E. Romeo, M. L. Salvador, J. Arauzo and R. Bilbao, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 1222–1230 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chunmiao, H. Dezheng, L. Chang and L. Gang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 246, 283–290 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Sliney, Photochem. Photobiol., 2005, 81, 483–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
L. Zhang, J. Ran, S.-Z. Qiao and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5184–5206 RSC .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, B. Peng and T. Peng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7485–7527 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guan, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, W. Xu, J. Wang, Z. Zhao, M. Feng, Q. Shang and Z. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119580 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rahman, H. Tian and T. Edvinsson, Angew. Chemie, 2020, 132, 16418–16433 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Sun, K. Maeda, K. Domen, P. Liu, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 675–678 RSC .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 169–189 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, X. Wu, H. Wang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2295–2301 RSC .
M. Xing, Y. Wei, D. Wang, Q. Shen and R. Wang, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2021, 21, 14–19 CrossRef .
D. Tian, S. R. Denny, K. Li, H. Wang, S. Kattel and J. G. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12338–12376 RSC .
C. Chen, G. Levitin, D. W. Hess and T. F. Fuller, J. Power Sources, 2007, 169, 288–295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Singh, E. B. Tetteh, H.-Y. Lee, T.-H. Kang and J.-S. Yu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8622–8645 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge, A. Sumboja, D. Wuu, T. An, B. Li, F. W. T. Goh, T. S. A. Hor, Y. Zong and Z. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4643–4667 CrossRef CAS .
E. Roduner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8226–8239 RSC .
T. H. Yu, T. Hofmann, Y. Sha, B. V. Merinov, D. J. Myers, C. Heske and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26598–26607 CrossRef CAS .
P. Strasser, S. Koh, T. Anniyev, J. Greeley, K. More, C. Yu, Z. Liu, S. Kaya, D. Nordlund, H. Ogasawara, M. F. Toney and A. Nilsson, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Chung, S. Park, H. Lee, H. Kim, Y.-H. Chung, J. M. Yoo, D. Ahn, S.-H. Yu, K.-S. Lee, M. Ahmadi, H. Ju, H. D. Abruña, S. J. Yoo, B. S. Mun and Y.-E. Sung, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2827–2834 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kitchin, J. K. Nørskov, M. A. Barteau and J. G. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 156801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Kantorovich and M. J. Gillan, Surf. Sci., 1997, 374, 373–386 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yanagisawa, R. Huzimura, K. Matsumura and S. Yamabe, Surf. Sci., 1991, 242, 513–517 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bajdich, J. K. Nørskov and A. Vojvodic, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 155401 CrossRef .
B. Sravani, H. Maseed, Y. Chandrasekhar, V. Srikanth and G. Madhavi, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13300–13308 RSC .
W. J. Basirun, M. Sookhakian, S. Baradaran, Z. Endut, M. R. Mahmoudian, M. Ebadi, R. Yousefi, H. Ghadimi and S. Ahmed, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Brenet, J. Power Sources, 1979, 4, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, V. Prabhakaran, X. Xie, S. Park, Y. Wang and Y. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 1908232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Z. Li, C. Wang, W. Tao, M. Huang, M. Zuo, Y. Yang, K. Yang, L. Zhang and S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Cowan, Biometals, 2002, 15, 225–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Yean, G. Wuenschell, J. Termini and R.-J. Lin, Nature, 2000, 408, 881–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Y. Bisen and K. K. Nanda, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 21, 100846 CrossRef .
Y. Xue, S. Sun, Q. Wang, Z. Dong and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10595–10626 RSC .
I. Roche, E. Chaînet, M. Chatenet and J. Vondrák, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1434–1443 CrossRef CAS .
I. Roche and K. Scott, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bezdička, T. Grygar, B. Klápště and J. Vondrák, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 913–920 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, G. Jiang, A. H. Mamaghani, S. Sy, R. Gao, Y. Jiang, Y. Deng, Z. Bai, L. Yang, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2022, 100, 107425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, N. Xu, Y. Wang, X. Wang, H. Huang and J. Qiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37164–37172 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kongkanand and M. F. Mathias, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1127–1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Jacob and Y. Waseda, Thermochim. Acta, 1990, 165, 223–233 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jinnouchi, E. Toyoda, T. Hatanaka and Y. Morimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17557–17568 CrossRef CAS .
T. Billo, F. Fu, P. Raghunath, I. Shown, W. Chen, H. Lien, T. Shen, J. Lee, T. Chan and K. Huang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702928 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, H. Zhou, Q. Li, M. Chen, J. Wan, N. Zhang, L. Xiong, S. Li, B. Y. Xia, G. Feng, M. Liu and L. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900149 CrossRef .
J.-C. Li, F. Xiao, H. Zhong, T. Li, M. Xu, L. Ma, M. Cheng, D. Liu, S. Feng, Q. Shi, H.-M. Cheng, C. Liu, D. Du, S. P. Beckman, X. Pan, Y. Lin and M. Shao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5929–5934 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Hyman and J. W. Medlin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17052–17060 CrossRef CAS .
B. You and Y. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, G. He and X. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 961–965 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Y. Peng, H. He, W. Tan, Y. Chen and X. Dai, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 10289–10297 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Joubert, V. Paul-Boncour, F. Cuevas, J. Zhang and M. Latroche, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 862, 158163 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, J. Chen, K. Liu and X. Wei, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 468, 333–337 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, A. Encinas, J. P. Scheifers, Y. Zhang and B. P. T. Fokwa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5575–5578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, X. Duan, W. Wei, S. Wang, Z. Zhang and B.-J. Ni, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 293–314 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. V. Nsanzimana, Y. Peng, Y. Y. Xu, L. Thia, C. Wang, B. Y. Xia and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701475 CrossRef .
E. Sadeghi, N. S. Peighambardoust, M. Khatamian, U. Unal and U. Aydemir, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 3337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kortus, I. I. Mazin, K. D. Belashchenko, V. P. Antropov and L. L. Boyer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 4656–4659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song, L. Bai, A. Moysiadou, S. Lee, C. Hu, L. Liardet and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7748–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, S. Wang, Y. Tian, B. Li, H. Jun Yan, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin and L. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1749–1752 RSC .
J. Qi, X. Shen, M. Chen, E. Shangguan, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 10801–10804 RSC .
E. Ekebas, A. Cetin, A. M. Önal and E. Nalbant Esenturk, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2019, 49, 315–325 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Zhang, D. Li, Y. Wang and C. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18378–18383 RSC .
Y. Lin, Z. Tian, L. Zhang, J. Ma, Z. Jiang, B. J. Deibert, R. Ge and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 162 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Su, R. Ge, K. Jiang, Y. Dong, F. Hao, Z. Tian, G. Chen and L. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801351 CrossRef PubMed .
X. He, J. Tan, J. Wei, F. Yin, B. Chen, X. Liang and G. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 508, 144758 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yin, G. Wu, X. Wang, S. Liu, F. Zhou, L. Dai, X. Wang, B. Yang and Z.-Q. Yu, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 4783–4788 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, Q. Feng, J. Zhu, J. Xu, Q. Li, S. Liu, K. Xu, C. Zhang and T. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3664–3672 RSC .
G. Park, C.-H. Shin, J. Kang, K.-S. Lee, C. Zhang, B. Lim, C. Kim and J.-S. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12060–12073 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Ji, J. Yang, K. Fan, X. Ma, C. Wang, R. Shu and Y. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119609 CrossRef CAS .
I. O. Baibars, M. G. Abd El-Moghny, A. S. Mogoda and M. S. El-Deab, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 54509 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Ju, T.-H. Kang, G. Park, B.-J. Lee, H. Miao, Y. Wu, J. Yuan and J.-S. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 4294–4304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hatami, A. Toghraei and G. B. Darband, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 9394–9405 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, P. Wen, Q. Li, C. Dun, J. Xing, C. Lu, S. Adhikari, L. Jiang, D. L. Carroll and S. M. Geyer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700513 CrossRef .
X. Liu and Y. Gong, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 10183–10191 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and S. Bhattacharyya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41906–41915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, T. Hisatomi, R. Li, K. Sayama, G. Liu, K. Domen, C. Li and L. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 344–359 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Gordon, M. Cargnello, T. Paik, F. Mangolini, R. T. Weber, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6751–6761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sinhamahapatra, J. P. Jeon, J. Kang, B. Han and J.-S. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, J. Chen, S. Liu, D. K. Agrawal, Y. Zhao, D. Wang and Z. Mao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 7216–7221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, R. Fu, M. Gao and X. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 28629–28637 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Yang, T. Lin, H. Yin, P. Chen, D. Wan, F. Xu, F. Huang, J. Lin, X. Xie and M. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3007–3014 RSC .
X. Zhang, W. Hu, K. Zhang, J. Wang, B. Sun, H. Li, P. Qiao, L. Wang and W. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6894–6901 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ou, Y. Xu, B. Wen, R. Lin, B. Ge, Y. Tang, Y. Liang, C. Yang, K. Huang and D. Zu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1302 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Gao, F. Si, S. Zhang, Y. Fang, X. Chen and S. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 8011–8019 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, W. Li, J.-Q. Wang, Y. Qu, Y. Yang, Y. Xie, K. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Fu and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9280–9283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Wallington, J. Srinivasan, O. J. Nielsen and E. J. Highwood, Environ. Ecol. Chem., 2009, 1, 36 Search PubMed .
K. Trenberth, Science, 2005, 308, 1753–1754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. B. Tett, P. A. Stott, M. R. Allen, W. J. Ingram and J. F. B. Mitchell, Nature, 1999, 399, 569–572 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kolle, M. Fayaz and A. Sayari, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 7280–7345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Teng, S. M. Masutani, C. M. Kinoshita and G. C. Nihous, Energy Convers. Manage., 1996, 37, 1029–1038 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, N. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, A. Cherevotan and S. C. Peter, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1938–1966 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu and F. Jiao, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 439–456 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang, P. Yang, G. Zhang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804710 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hussain, H. Jónsson and E. Skúlason, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5240–5249 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Tomboc, S. Choi, T. Kwon, Y. J. Hwang and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, M.-R. Gao, N. Duan, J. Zhang, Y.-Q. Zhang, T. Fan, J. Zhang, Y. Dong, J. Li, Q. Liu, X. Yi and J.-L. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119252 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Chowdhury, P. Bhanja, N. Salam, A. Bhaumik and S. M. Islam, Mol. Catal., 2018, 450, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, X. Guo, Q. Guo, D. Mao, J. Yu and G. Lu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 425, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .
G. Song, X. Zhu, R. Chen, Q. Liao, Y.-D. Ding and L. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 283, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, W. Ni, X. Zang, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Yang and Y.-M. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6062–6065 RSC .
Q. Wang, K. Liu, J. Fu, C. Cai, H. Li, Y. Long, S. Chen, B. Liu, H. Li and W. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 25241–25245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Leon, Q. Liu and S. T. Ceyer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 9041–9058 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gong, S. Ali, C. B. Hiragond, H. S. Kim, N. S. Powar, D. Kim, H. Kim and S.-I. In, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 880–937 RSC .
A. Razzaq, A. Sinhamahapatra, T.-H. Kang, C. A. Grimes, J.-S. Yu and S.-I. In, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 215, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, G. Ji, M. A. Dastageer, L. Zhu, J. Wang, B. Zhang, X. Chang and M. A. Gondal, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 56961–56969 RSC .
J. Gu, F. Héroguel, J. Luterbacher and X. Hu, Angew. Chemie, 2018, 130, 2993–2997 CrossRef .
W. Ni, Y. Gao, Y. Lin, C. Ma, X. Guo, S. Wang and S. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 5212–5221 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pei, T. Wang, R. Sui, X. Zhang, D. Zhou, F. Qin, X. Zhao, Q. Liu, W. Yan and J. Dong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3019–3028 RSC .
T. Wang, X. Sang, W. Zheng, B. Yang, S. Yao, C. Lei, Z. Li, Q. He, J. Lu and L. Lei, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Geng, X. Kong, W. Chen, H. Su, Y. Liu, F. Cai, G. Wang and J. Zeng, Angew. Chemie, 2018, 130, 6162–6167 CrossRef .
M. Manzanares, C. Fàbrega, J. O. Ossó, L. F. Vega, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150, 57–62 CrossRef .
B.-H. Lee, E. Gong, M. Kim, S. Park, H. R. Kim, J. Lee, E. Jung, C. W. Lee, J. Bok and Y. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 601–609 RSC .
S. Wang, M. Xu, T. Peng, C. Zhang, T. Li, I. Hussain, J. Wang and B. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, B. Liu, Y. Ren, Y. Yuan, H. Zhao, H. Yang and S. F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14761–14775 RSC .
G. Yin, X. Huang, T. Chen, W. Zhao, Q. Bi, J. Xu, Y. Han and F. Huang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1009–1017 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meng, B. Cheng, H. Tan, J. Fan, C. Su and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 289, 120039 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiang, Y. Zhou, Q. Zhang, Q. Song, C. Zhou, X. Shi and D. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 46772–46782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2014, 35, 1619–1640 CrossRef CAS .
A. Klerke, C. H. Christensen, J. K. Nørskov and T. Vegge, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2304–2310 RSC .
O. A. Ileperuma, K. Tennakone and W. Dissanayake, Appl. Catal., 1990, 62, L1–L5 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, G. Z. Chen, L. Zhuang, Z. Wang and X. Jin, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100425 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Jones, P. De Voogt, O. M. L. Alharbi, R. A. Khattab, I. Ali, K. Kaur, R. Badru, P. P. Singh and S. Kaushal, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 1999, 8, 442–453 Search PubMed .
K. C. Jones and P. De Voogt, Environ. Pollut., 1999, 100, 209–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. L. Alharbi, R. A. Khattab and I. Ali, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 263, 442–453 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–15 Search PubMed .
G. R. Bochkarev, P. V. Kurbatov and S. A. Kondrat’ev, J. Min. Sci., 2003, 39, 94–101 CrossRef .
A. Garcıa-Sánchez and E. Alvarez-Ayuso, Miner. Eng., 2002, 15, 539–547 CrossRef .
C.-C. Wang, J.-R. Li, X.-L. Lv, Y.-Q. Zhang and G. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2831–2867 RSC .
D. Friedmann, A. Hakki, H. Kim, W. Choi and D. Bahnemann, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5391–5411 RSC .
S. Kim, M. Kim, H.-Y. Lee and J.-S. Yu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 50693–50700 RSC .
X. Wang, R. Fu, Q. Yin, H. Wu, X. Guo, R. Xu and Q. Zhong, J. Nanoparticle Res., 2018, 20, 1–10 CrossRef .
L. Sun, S. Li, Y. Su, D. He and Z. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 463, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Behnajady, B. Alizade and N. Modirshahla, Photochem. Photobiol., 2011, 87, 1308–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Z. Zhao, W. Zhang, M. Luo, L. Tao, Y. Sun, Z. Xia, Y. Chao, K. Yin, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, W. Yang, Y. Yu, G. Lu and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2103762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bianchini and P. K. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 4183–4206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, P. K. Shen, X. Ji, R. Zeng and Y. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1305–1308 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. H. Chen, C. H. Xiao, K. Z. Cui, L. Yang, H. L. Pang and Y. F. Kuang, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 1365–1369 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Y.-X. Zeng, S. Chen, C.-W. Xu and P.-K. Shen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 16015–16019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, W. Li, B. Ma and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5926–5940 RSC .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11433–11456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Crabtree, Nature, 2015, 526, S92–S92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 RSC .
C. Wei, Y. Tao, H. Fei, Y. An, Y. Tian, J. Feng and Y. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 206–227 CrossRef .
A. Ponrouch, J. Bitenc, R. Dominko, N. Lindahl, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacín, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 253–262 CrossRef .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur and T. Gregory, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11683–11720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wei, L. Tan, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Feng and Y. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 52, 299–319 CrossRef .
M. Mao, T. Gao, S. Hou and C. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8804–8841 RSC .
F. Liu, T. Wang, X. Liu and L. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2000787 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Gregory, R. J. Hoffman and R. C. Winterton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 775 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Z. Lu, A. Schechter, Y. Gofer, H. Gizbar, R. Turgeman, Y. Cohen, M. Moshkovich and E. Levi, Nature, 2000, 407, 724–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, S. Zhao, T. Li, D. Su, S. Guo and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903591 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Yoo, I. Shterenberg, Y. Gofer, G. Gershinsky, N. Pour and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2265–2279 RSC .
Y.-H. Tan, W.-T. Yao, T. Zhang, T. Ma, L.-L. Lu, F. Zhou, H.-B. Yao and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5856–5865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur, A. G. Oliver, T. Sugimoto, M. Matsui, H. S. Kim, G. D. Allred, J. Zajicek and Y. Kotani, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5941–5950 RSC .
D. J. Wetzel, M. A. Malone, R. T. Haasch, Y. Meng, H. Vieker, N. T. Hahn, A. Gölzhäuser, J.-M. Zuo, K. R. Zavadil and A. A. Gewirth, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18406–18414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur and T. Gregory, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12064–12084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ling, D. Banerjee and M. Matsui, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 76, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jäckle and A. Groß, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 141, 174710 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Davidson, A. Verma, D. Santos, F. Hao, C. Fincher, S. Xiang, J. Van Buskirk, K. Xie, M. Pharr and P. P. Mukherjee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 375–376 CrossRef .
R. Davidson, A. Verma, D. Santos, F. Hao, C. D. Fincher, D. Zhao, V. Attari, P. Schofield, J. Van Buskirk and A. Fraticelli-Cartagena, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 843–854 RSC .
X. Zhang, R. Lv, W. Tang, G. Li, A. Wang, A. Dong, X. Liu and J. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004187 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, Y. Tao, Y. An, Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, J. Feng and Y. Qian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004613 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, S. Stalin and L. A. Archer, Joule, 2021, 5, 1119–1142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Popovic, Energy Technol., 2021, 9, 2001056 CrossRef CAS .
S. Son, T. Gao, S. Harvey, K. X. Steirer, A. Stokes, A. Norman, C. Wang, A. Cresce, K. Xu and C. Ban, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 532–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lv, X. Guan, J. Zhang, Y. Xia and J. Luo, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 333–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, C. Cui, R. Li, Y. Li, C. Du, Y. Gao, H. Huo, Y. Ma, P. Zuo and G. Yin, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 130751 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, A. Du, S. Dong, F. Jiang, Z. Guo, X. Ge, X. Qu, X. Zhou and G. Cui, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2594–2601 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, R. Masse, C. Liu, Y. Hu, W. Li, G. Zhang and G. Cao, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 22, 96–104 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, E. Sahadeo and S. B. Lee, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 2613–2620 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Li, W. Zhao, H. Dou, X. Zhao, Y. Liu, B. Zhang and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2108114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, H.-K. Lim, S. H. Oh, J. Park, H.-D. Lim and K. Kang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3733–3740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Zhou, J. Hu, Y. Zheng, M. Huang, K. Guo and C. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 46, 1–9 CrossRef .
M. N. Obrovac and V. L. Chevrier, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11444–11502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Singh, T. S. Arthur, C. Ling, M. Matsui and F. Mizuno, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 149–151 RSC .
K. Periyapperuma, T. T. Tran, M. I. Purcell and M. N. Obrovac, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 162–165 CrossRef CAS .
F. Murgia, E. T. Weldekidan, L. Stievano, L. Monconduit and R. Berthelot, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 56–59 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-J. Han, N. Yabuuchi, K. Shimomura, M. Murase, H. Yui and S. Komaba, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9014–9020 RSC .
J. Niu, Z. Zhang and D. Aurbach, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000697 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Kravchyk, L. Piveteau, R. Caputo, M. He, N. P. Stadie, M. I. Bodnarchuk, R. T. Lechner and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8297–8307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Arthur, N. Singh and M. Matsui, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 103–106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, M. Gu, X. Li, Z. Nie, P. Zuo, G. Li, T. Liu, J. Xiao, Y. Cheng and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 255–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Song, Y. Yuan, D. Gu, T. Chen, Y. Liu, A. Tang, L. Wu, D. Li and F. Pan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 110539 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. S. Welborn, H. Kumar, M. Li, Z. Wang, V. B. Shenoy and E. Detsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902086 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, W. K. Pang, V. Sencadas and Z. Guo, Joule, 2018, 2, 1534–1547 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shin, D. Samuelis and J. Maier, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3464–3472 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, R. Feng, S. Yang, H. Ma, J. Liang and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 640–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vincent, J. H. Chang and J. M. Garcia Lastra, Batteries Supercaps, 2021, 4, 522–528 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mandai and H. Somekawa, Batteries Supercaps, 2022, 5, e202200153 CAS .
A. Maddegalla, A. Mukherjee, J. A. Blázquez, E. Azaceta, O. Leonet, A. R. Mainar, A. Kovalevsky, D. Sharon, J. Martin and D. Sotta, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4690–4696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, Y. Mu, W. Xiong, J. Zhang, Q. Li and Z. Shi, Corros. Sci., 2018, 144, 107–126 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, Y. Hu and S. Yang, J. Magnesium Alloys, 2017, 5, 404–411 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsukeda, T. Nakagawa, M. Moriwaki, K. Kikura, R. Sakurae, T. Aida, H. Tabata, H. Kurihara and M. Suzuki, Mater. Trans., 2022, 63, 408–414 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mandai and H. Somekawa, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 12122–12125 RSC .
H.-K. Tian, R. Jalem, M. Matsui, T. Mandai, H. Somekawa and Y. Tateyama, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15207–15216 RSC .
F. Wu and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 435–459 RSC .
Y. Wang, R. Chen, T. Chen, H. Lv, G. Zhu, L. Ma, C. Wang, Z. Jin and J. Liu, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 4, 103–129 CrossRef .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5237–5288 RSC .
Y. Yin, S. Xin, Y. Guo and L. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13186–13200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, Y.-X. Yuan, X.-B. Cheng, Y. Bai, Y. Li, C. Wu and Q. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 148–170 CrossRef .
X.-B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C.-Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, X. Ji, S. Hou, X. Fan, X. Li, C. Yang, F. Han, F. Wang, J. Jiang and K. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704313 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao-Karger, X. Zhao, D. Wang, T. Diemant, R. J. Behm and M. Fichtner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401155 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, S. Liu, G. Li, T. Yan and X. Gao, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Muthuraj, A. Ghosh, A. Kumar and S. Mitra, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 684–689 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, T. S. Arthur, G. D. Allred, J. Zajicek, J. G. Newman, A. E. Rodnyansky, A. G. Oliver, W. C. Boggess and J. Muldoon, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 427 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Sievert, J. Häcker, F. Bienen, N. Wagner and K. A. Friedrich, ECS Trans., 2017, 77, 413 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, L. Tan, Y. Zhang, B. Xi, S. Xiong, J. Feng and Y. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 48, 447–457 CrossRef .
R. Zhang, C. Cui, R. Xiao, R. Li, T. Mu, H. Huo, Y. Ma, G. Yin and P. Zuo, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 451, 138663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, S. Li, B. Lan, Y. Wu and P. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1902564 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Q. Liu, J. Wang, K. Chen, D. Xue, J. Liu and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22079–22083 RSC .
A. Muzaffar, M. B. Ahamed, K. Deshmukh and J. Thirumalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 123–145 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, X. Ma, Y. Li, L. Zhao, W. Liu, J. Cheng, C. Xu, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 96–102 CrossRef .
M. M. Huie, D. C. Bock, E. S. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok and K. J. Takeuchi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 287, 15–27 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tian, X. Tong, G. Sheng, Y. Shao, L. Yu, V. Tung, J. Sun, R. B. Kaner and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4913 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, L. Xiong, X. Hu, J. Liang, C. Chen, F. Ye, J. Li, Y. Liu, W. Shao and T. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 66, 374–381 CrossRef CAS .
F. Odobel, Y. Pellegrin, E. A. Gibson, A. Hagfeldt, A. L. Smeigh and L. Hammarström, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2414–2423 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kulkarni, A. K. Jena, H.-W. Chen, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Sol. Energy, 2016, 136, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Q. Bi, H. Ali, K. Davis, W. V. Schoenfeld and K. Weber, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5891–5897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cho, J. Melskens, M. Debucquoy, M. Recamán Payo, S. Jambaldinni, T. Bearda, I. Gordon, J. Szlufcik, W. M. M. Kessels and J. Poortmans, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2018, 26, 835–845 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, S. K. Karuturi, C. Samundsett, J. Bullock, M. Hettick, D. Yan, J. Peng, P. R. Narangari, S. Mokkapati and H. H. Tan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 125–131 CrossRef .
J. Song, E. Zheng, L. Liu, X. Wang, G. Chen, W. Tian and T. Miyasaka, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2640–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Tanyi, A. I. Rafieh, P. Ekaneyaka, A. L. Tan, D. J. Young, Z. Zheng, V. Chellappan, G. S. Subramanian and R. L. N. Chandrakanthi, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 240–248 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, A. Xu, Y. Pan, D. Qin, L. Hou and D. Wang, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Jiang, S. Deng, A. Tam, P. Xu, M. Wong and H. Kwok, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700463 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Y. Zhou, G. Dong, W. Wang, J. Wang, C. Liu, F. Liu and D. Yu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109996 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, C. Samundsett, J. Bullock, M. Hettick, T. Allen, D. Yan, J. Peng, Y. Wu, J. Cui and A. Javey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601863 CrossRef .
J. Li, C. Guo, Y. Bai, W. Liu, Y. Chen, J. He, D. Li, X. Yang, Q. Qiu and T. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2202400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiong, W. Zhang, X. Zeng, Z. Xu, W. Chen, J. Cui, M. Wang, L. Sun and Y. Cheng, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1432–1437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meng, Z. Dehouche, A. Nutasarin and G. R. Fern, Int. J. Energy Res., 2018, 42, 3915–3927 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sakintuna, F. Lamari-Darkrim and M. Hirscher, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 1121–1140 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bogdanović, A. Ritter and B. Spliethoff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1990, 29, 223–234 CrossRef .
Z. Lan, X. Wen, L. Zeng, Z. Luo, H. Liang, W. Shi, F. Hong, H. Liu, H. Ning and W. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 137261 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paskevicius, D. A. Sheppard and C. E. Buckley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5077–5083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Jiao and H. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11038–11046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and L. Andrews, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 11511–11520 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ren, Z. Z. Fang, C. Zhou, J. Lu, Y. Ren and X. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21778–21784 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hanada, T. Ichikawa and H. Fujii, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7188–7194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Milošević, Ž. Rašković-Lovre, S. Kurko, R. Vujasin, N. Cvjetićanin, L. Matović and J. G. Novaković, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 51–56 CrossRef .
L. Guoxian, W. Erde and F. Shoushi, J. Alloys Compd., 1995, 223, 111–114 CrossRef .
W. Zhu, S. Panda, C. Lu, Z. Ma, D. Khan, J. Dong, F. Sun, H. Xu, Q. Zhang and J. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 50333–50343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sterl, N. Strohfeldt, R. Walter, R. Griessen, A. Tittl and H. Giessen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7949–7955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, Y. Pu, Z. Li, G. Huang, X. Liu, Y. Lu, W. Tang, L. Xu, S. Liu and R. Yu, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2063–2071 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. Yan, G. Xia, X. Zhou, X. Lu, L. Yu, X. Yu and P. Peng, J. Magnesium Alloys, 2021, 9, 647–657 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Alsarhan, A. S. Alayyar, N. B. Alqahtani and N. H. Khdary, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 11625 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Azmi, A. H. Ruhaimi and M. A. A. Aziz, Mater. Today Chem., 2020, 16, 100273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, C. Tan, P. Wang, J. Sun, W. Li, C. Zhao and P. Lu, Fuel, 2019, 243, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dal Pozzo, A. Armutlulu, M. Rekhtina, P. M. Abdala and C. R. Müller, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1295–1307 CrossRef .
A. Al-Mamoori, A. Krishnamurthy, A. A. Rownaghi and F. Rezaei, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 834–849 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, C. Tan, P. Wang, J. Sun, W. Li, C. Zhao and P. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122277 CrossRef CAS .
B.-Q. Xu, J.-M. Wei, H.-Y. Wang, K.-Q. Sun and Q.-M. Zhu, Catal. Today, 2001, 68, 217–225 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Taherian, A. Khataee and Y. Orooji, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 134, 110130 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan and N. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 1979–1989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sepúlveda, P. C. Angelomé, L. M. Lechuga and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 244–251 CrossRef .
J. Langer, D. Jimenez de Aberasturi, J. Aizpurua, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, B. Auguié, J. J. Baumberg, G. C. Bazan, S. E. J. Bell, A. Boisen and A. G. Brolo, ACS Nano, 2019, 14, 28–117 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Loo, A. Lin, L. Hirsch, M.-H. Lee, J. Barton, N. Halas, J. West and R. Drezek, Technol. Cancer Res. Treat., 2004, 3, 33–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Blaber, M. D. Arnold and M. J. Ford, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 143201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gutiérrez, R. Alcaraz de la Osa, D. Ortiz, J. M. Saiz, F. González and F. Moreno, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 64 CrossRef .
K. Appusamy, S. Blair, A. Nahata and S. Guruswamy, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2014, 181, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Hopper, T. M. R. Wayman, J. Asselin, B. Pinho, C. Boukouvala, L. Torrente-Murciano and E. Ringe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 126, 563–577 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Biggins, S. Yazdi and E. Ringe, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3752–3758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. El-Shamy, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 329, 129154 CrossRef CAS .
J. Isidorsson, I. Giebels, H. Arwin and R. P. Griessen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 115112 CrossRef .
J.-S. Hu, S.-J. Dong, K. Wu, X.-L. Zhang, J. Jiang, J. Yuan and M.-D. Zheng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 283, 255–261 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Cheol-Hwan Shin
	Cheol-Hwan Shin is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Jong-Sung Yu in the Department of Energy Science and Engineering of Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST). He received his BSc. degree in Chemical Engineering and Bio-technology from Tech University of Korea (TUK) (2017). His research focuses on the synthesis and analysis of photo and electrocatalysts for diverse energy applications.

Ha-Young Lee
	Ha-Young Lee received her BSc degree in chemistry from Yonsei University in 2016. In the same year, she joined the Department of Energy Science and Engineering of DGIST. She is a PhD candidate under the guidance of Prof. Jong-Sung Yu and is working on the development of novel nanomaterials and electrocatalysts for fuel cell and water splitting.

Caleb Gyan-Barimah
	Gyan-Barimah Caleb Studied Petrochemical Engineering at the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), where he completed his undergraduate degree with honors in 2015. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jong-Sung Yu in the Department of Energy Science and Engineering of DGIST. His research encompasses electrochemical analyses and the preparation of materials for water electrolyzer, fuel cells, and rechargeable metal–air batteries.

Jeong-Hoon Yu
	Jeong-Hoon Yu is currently a PhD candidate under the guidance of Prof. Jong-Sung Yu at the Department of Energy Science and Engineering of DGIST. Before joining DGIST in 2018, He received his BSc degree in Polymer Nanoscience and Technology from Jeonbuk National University (JBNU) in the same year. His research focuses on carbon and metal oxide-based materials for energy storage applications.

Jong-Sung Yu
	Jong-Sung Yu earned his BSc. in Chemistry from Sogang University in Seoul, South Korea and Ph. D from the University of Houston in 1990 before Postdoctoral works at Ohio State University, Univ. of Houston, Penn State Univ., and Northwestern Univ. He was a Professor at Korea University (2008–2015) and then joined Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), South Korea. Currently, he is a supervisor for the graduate students of Light, Salts and Water Research Lab (LSWRG, https://jsylab.wixsite.com/jsylab) at the Energy Science and Engineering Department of DGIST, where his research focuses on nanostructured materials, including nanoscale 0-3D materials and their composites and their energy applications for fuel cells, batteries, water splitting electrolyzer, CO2 conversion and other catalytic systems.

 	Fig. 1  The number of published papers on Mg per year (source: Web of Science).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of a Grignard reaction.	 

 	Fig. 3  Chemical properties of Mg.	 

 	Fig. 4  Periodic table indicating the crystal structure and ionic radii (pm) of various elements.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of magnesiothermic reduction of TiO2 with different mole ratios of Mg to TiO2. (b) UV-vis-IR spectra, (c) XRD patterns of RT samples. (d) HR-TEM images of RT-0.5 with corresponding FFT pattern and (e) specific line profile. (f–i) HAADF-STEM image with corresponding EDS mapping images of TiO–MgO composite and (j) HAADF-STEM image of TiO after acid etching of the TiO–MgO composite. Copyright 2018, Elsevier34 and Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.33	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Scheme for synthesis of HGNC-X through the magnesiothermic reduction. SEM and HR-TEM images for (b) g-C3N4 and (c) HGNC-75. (d) Raman spectroscopy profiles of HGNC-X samples and (e) High-resolution XPS spectrum of N 1s for HGNC-65. Copyright 2023, Elsevier.32	 
Mg(s) + 2H2O(l) → Mg(OH)2(s) + H2(g)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of various electrochemical reactions occurring on Mg-induced materials for energy conversion.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram showing the mechanism of charge separation for various photocatalytic reactions.	 
TiO2(s) + Mg(l) → TiO2−x(s) + xMgO(s)
ZrO2(s) + Mg(l) → ZrO2−x(s) + xMgO(s) (0 < x < 1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the change in local electronic structure at OH molecular orbitals upon adsorption on the surface of p-band metal with different N-coordination. (b) Onset potential versus ΔGOH* in the region close to the performance ceiling of models and transition metal cofactors (TM-N4-C). (c) HR-TEM of Mg–N–C. Scale bar: 5 nm (d) XPS result of the N 1s spectra for Mg–N–C and MgPc. (e) Mg K-edge XANES spectra of Mg powder, Mg–N–C, Mg–Pc, and MgO. (f) ORR LSV curves of Mg–N–C, Pt/C, and N-C in O2-saturated 0.1M aqueous KOH electrolyte solutions at a sweep rate of 5mVs−1. (g) Half-wave potential (E1/2) for different catalysts in both alkaline and acidic solutions. (h) Mg–N–C before and after accelerated durability test (ADT) with 5000 cycles from 0.8 to 1.1V (vs. RHE) at a sweep rate of 100mVs−1. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.85	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4. (b–d) TEM and HR-TEM images for 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4. High-resolution XPS spectra of Co 2p of (e) 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4 and (f) 3DOM Co3O4. Calculated density of states (DOS) of d-orbitals of surface-active sites in (g) 3DOM Co3O4 (two Co sites) and (h) 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4 (one Mg site and one Co site). (i) Calculated energy barriers of *OH transformation to *OOH at active sites of 3DOM Co3O4 and 3DOM MgxCo3−xO4. (j) ORR polarization curves for as-prepared samples and Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH at 1600 rpm. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.93	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) HAADF-STEM image of PtxMg/C nanoparticle and corresponding EDS line-scans. (b) XRD patterns for the synthesized PtxMg/C-BA (before acid treatment) and PtxMg/C catalysts, respectively. Enlarged Pt (111) XRD peak for PtxMg/C. (c) High-resolution Pt 4f XPS profiles of PtxMg/C and commercial Pt/C. (d) CVs for PtxMg/C and Pt/C in N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution. (e) Pt mass activity at 0.8 V after each 10k cycles from 0.6 to 0.95V. Cohesive energy and oxygen binding energy of (f) pure Pt (111) and (g) Pt/Pt3Mg (111) (lower row) from DFT calculation. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.1	 

Pt/C	0.1 M KOH	
	0.86	
85

Mg–N–C	0.1 M KOH	
	0.91
0.1 M HClO4	
	0.79
Mg–N–C/800	0.1 M NaOH	0.908	0.80	
88

3DOM MgxCo3−xO4	0.1 M KOH	0.95	0.839	
93

(Co,Mg)S2@CNTs	0.1 M KOH	0.88	0.79	
94

Co–CoO–Co3O4/NC	0.1 M KOH	
	0.80	
98

SCoNC	0.1 M KOH	
	0.91	
99

Fe-NCNWs	0.1 M KOH	
	0.91	
100

0.1 M HClO4	
	0.82
Pt/C	0.1 M HClO4	
	0.837	
1

PtMg/C	0.1 M HClO4	
	0.861	
1

	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic design of layered MgB2 structure along the a-axis. SEM images (b) pure MgB2 and (c) Mg0.95Co0.05B2. (d) XPS spectra of Mg 1s, B 1s, O 1s, Co 2p, and Fe 2p in MgB2, Mg0.9Co0.1B2, and Mg0.9Fe0.1B2. (e) HER polarization curves of pure and doped MgB2 and (f) the corresponding Tafel plots. The colors indicate the same samples pictured in (e). Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.111	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of Mg–RuO2 synthesis. (b) SEM image and (c) HRTEM image of Mg–RuO2 (d) LSV curves for OER of Mg–RuO2(300), Mg–RuO2 (350), Mg–RuO2 (400) and commercial RuO2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 (e) Tafel plots of Mg–RuO2 (350) and commercial RuO2. (f) Comparison of OER free energy profiles of Mg–RuO2 on (110) and clean RuO2 (110). The HAADF-STEM image and EDS of Mg–RuO2 (350) for Mg (g and h) before and (i and j) after 10000 cycles. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.114	 

RuO2	0.5 M H2SO4	308	
114

Mg–RuO2 (350)	228
Cr0.6Ru0.4O2	0.5 M H2SO4	178	
118

Cu-doped RuO2	0.5 M H2SO4	188	
119

Ni-LDHs	1.0 M KOH	332	
117

NiMg-LDHs	321
ELCMO (LiCo0.95Mg0.05O2)	0.1 M KOH	329	
94

(Co,Mg)S2@CNTs	0.1 M KOH	360	
94

Co/NC	0.1 M KOH	460	
120

1Mg10Co/NC	330
IrO2	420
NiCo-LDH/GO-CNTs	0.1 M KOH	290	
121

Co@N-CNTF	1.0 M KOH	350	
122

Co@N-SG	1.0 M KOH	316	
123


Ni-Mg	1.0 M KOH	73	
39

Ni–Mg–La	70
Mg0.95Co0.05B2	1.0 M KOH	470	
111

Ni–P/Ni/NF	1.0 M KOH	129	
124

Ni/Co/Fe	1.0 M KOH	50	
125

Ni@SNG	1.0 M KOH	99.8	
126

Urchin-like Ni–Fe	1.0 M KOH	124	
127

FeB2	1.0 M KOH	61	
128

α-MoB2	1.0 M KOH	124	
129

Pt/C	1.0 M KOH	20	
130

	(6)

 	Fig. 14  (a) XRD patterns, (b) UV-vis DRS (insert is the enlarged area in visible light region), and (c) XPS spectra of different samples. HR-TEM images of (d and e) CT and (f and g) BT-0.5. (h) Tauc plot for band gap determination, (i) VB XPS of the samples, (j) band energy diagram. (k) H2 generation profile, (l) rate of hydrogen generation (rH2) for different samples, and (m) the stability study of the sample BT-0.5 under the full solar wavelength range of light. (n) H2 generation profile and (o) rH2 for different samples under visible light. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.28	 

BT-0.5	TiO2 + Mg (650 °C, H2Ar)	20% MeOH	1 wt% Pt	Xe lamp, 400 W	43.2	
28

RT-MH-0.5	TiO2 + MgH2 (500 °C, Ar)	20% MeOH	1 wt% Pt	AM 1.5G, 1 SUN	16.1	
34

BZ	ZrO2 + Mg (650 °C, H2Ar)	20% MeOH	1 wt% Pt	AM 1.5G, 1 SUN	0.505	
133

PSi	Porous SiO2 + Mg (800 °C, Ar)	10% TEOA	No co-catalyst	Xe lamp, 300 W	0.604	
134

MT-2	B, N co-doped TiO2 + Mg (580 °C, N2)	20% MeOH	1 wt% Pt	Xe lamp, 300 W	18.8	
135

Black TiO2	TiO2 (200 °C, 20 bar H2)	50% MeOH	0.6 wt% Pt	AM 1.5G, 1 SUN	10	
136

black TiO2−x	TiO2 + Al (500 °C, vacuum)	25% MeOH	0.5 wt% Pt	Hg lamp, 300 W	6.4	
137

TDBTNs	TiO2 NT (600 °C, H2)	20% MeOH	0.5 wt% Pt	Xe lamp, 300 W	3.95	
138

3% Li-reduced TiO2	TiO2 + Li (milling)	20% MeOH	1 wt% Pt	Xe lamp, 300 W	41.8	
139

H-F/TiO2	F-doped TiO2 (350 °C, 45 psi H2)	20% MeOH	0.6 wt% Pt	AM 1.5G system	3.76	
140

Ordered mesoporous black TiO2	Mesoporous TiO2 (500 °C, H2)	20% MeOH	1 wt% Pt	Visible light of AM 1.5G system	0.0136	
141


 	Fig. 15  (a) HRTEM image of Mg–C3N4 and aberration-corrected (AC) HAADF-STEM image of Mg–C3N4. (b) High-resolution XPS for N 1s for C3N4, Mg–C3N4 and Mg Pc. (c) XANES of Mg K-edge for Mg samples. (d) Comparison of schematic diagram for CO adsorbed on 3dz2 and 3s orbits. (e) Free energy diagram for CO2RR. In situ ATR-IR spectra of (f) Mg–C3N4 and (g) Fe–C3N4. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.159	 

MgO/HCS	0.5 M KHCO3	−1.0	16.7	81.7	
158

Mg–C3N4	0.5 M KHCO3	−1.178	32	≥90	
159

SnO/C	0.5 M KHCO3	−0.66	4.7	37	
164

FNC–SnOF	1.0 M KHCO3	−0.7	150	93.8	
165

Au–CeOx/C	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.89	12.9	89.1	
166

Co–N–Ni/NPCNSs	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.48	3.2	96.4	
167

Fe1NC/S1-1000	0.1 M KHCO3	−0.5	4.45	96	
168

Vo-rich ZnO	0.1 M KHCO3	−1.1	16	83	
169

	(7)

 	Fig. 16  (a) XRD pattern, (b) UV-vis DRS, and (c) PL spectra for various Pt-x-RT samples. (d) Band gap estimation using Tauc plot, (e–g) valence band XPS, and XPS spectra of regions: (h) Ti 2p, and (i) enlarged view of Ti 2p3/2 of CT and RT. (j) HR-TEM image for Pt-1.0-RT sample with selected region (red square) showing (k) corresponding enlarged area. (l) Methane production rate of P25 (Degussa), Pt-1.0-P25, pure CT, Pt-1.0-CT, RT, and various Pt-x-RT samples. Control test employing Pt-1.0-RT sample under Ar/H2O(g) atmosphere suggests negligible CH4. (m) Methane production rate from Pt-1.0-RT sample for seven test cycles of CO2 photoreduction. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.162	 


Pt-1.0-RT	TiO2 + Mg (650 °C, H2/Ar)	1.2 wt% Pt	AM 1.5G, 1 SUN (CO2/H2O(g))	1.13 μmol g−1 h−1 of CH4	
162

Si/TiO2	SiO2 + Mg (750 °C, N2)	
	355 nm Pulse laser (CO2/H2O(l))	1.97 μM mL−1 of CH4	
163

0.2 wt% Mg-doped TiO2	TTIP* + Mg(NO3)2	
	AM 1.5G, 1 SUN (CO2/H2O(g))	∼ 1 μmol g−1 h−1 of CH4	
170

Cu1/TiO2	TBOT* + CuCl2	
	AM 1.5G, 1 SUN (CO2/H2O(g))	1416.9 ppm g−1 h−1 of CH4	
171

Porous HCP-TiO2-FG*	TBOT* + Graphene + polymer	
	visible-light <420nm, 433mWcm−2 (CO2/H2O(g))	27.62μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4	
172

Hydrogenated TiO2	TOSA* (650 °C, H2)	
	300 W Xe lamp (CO2/H2O(l) + IPA*)	1126.6 μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4	
173

H-TiO2−x	TiO2 + Li (180 °C, high pressure)	
	AM 1.5G, 1 SUN (CO2/H2O(l))	16.2 μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4	
174

Hollow TiO2@PDA	SiO2 template and TiO2 +polydopamine (PAD)	
	350 W Xenon lamp	1.14 μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4	
175

AuCu−TiO2−x	TiO2 + CuCl2 + HAuCl4 (200 °C, H2/N2)	5.09 wt% AuCu	300 W Xe lamp (CO2/H2O(v))	22.47 μmolg−1 h−1 of CH4	
176

Ni/TiO2[Vo]	TTIP* + Ni(NO3)2 (300 °C, H2)	
	300 W halogen lamp (CO2/H2O(g))	10 μmol g−1 cat−1 of CH3CHO	
98

	(8)

 	Fig. 17  HR-TEM images of (a and b) Pt/P25, and (c and d) Pt/rT-0.5. Cross-sectional SEM images of (e and f) Pt/rT-0.5 loaded on FPC-600. (g) DRS absorbance and (h) XRD patterns of CT, rT-0.5, and rT-0.75. (i) Dark adsorption and photocatalytic oxidation of CH3CHO on the Pt/P25-FPC-600, Pt/rT-0.5-FPC-600, and Pt/rT-0.75-FPC-600 under visible irradiation in closed-circulation mode. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.189	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The theoretical capacity and (b) standard reduction potential of various metal anodes. (c) The elemental abundance in the crust.204,205	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the working principle of rechargeable Mg–ion battery.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic diagrams of SEI evolution and Mg deposition manner based on (a) bare Mg electrode and (b) Mg–Si electrode in conventional electrolyte. (c) Top view SEM image of Mg–Si electrode. (d) Cross-section SEM image of Mg–Si electrode and corresponding EDS mapping images of (e) Mg and (f) Si elements. (g) Mg plating/stripping performance of Mg/Mg symmetric cells based on bare Mg electrodes and Mg–Si electrodes at 0.1 mA cm−2 with an aerial capacity of 0.05 mA h cm−2. Copyright 2021 to Elsevier.232	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Rate-performance and (b) cycling stability of Bi-NTs and micron-sized Bi. (c) Schematic illustration of the structural transformation of Bi during the discharge/charge process. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.241	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) EBSD maps of Mg–X. A color indicator for mirror indices is also shown. (b) Initial and (c) 10th cycle CV curves, and (d) galvanostatic magnesium dissolution/deposition (Mg2+/Mg0) cycling behaviour of pMgfine and selected Mg–X. For galvanostatic cycling tests, two-electrode symmetric cells were fabricated and a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 was applied for each Mg2+/Mg0 process. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.253	 
	(9)

 	Fig. 23  Schematic representation of various applications that utilizes Mg chemistry.	 

0.5% MgLa	14.2	0.743	68.7	8.00	
287

Mg-doped SnO2	13.86	0.742	61.4	6.310	
279

5% ZnMgO	9.98	0.710	58.0	4.110	
41

10% MgxZn1−xOCu2O	3.00	0.575	42.0	0.710	
42

2% Mg-doped TiO2	11.99	0.740	67.0	6.100	
45

CuCr0.9Mg0.1O2	1.51	0.201	44.9	0.132	
294

CuGaO2:1% Mg	0.415	0.305	35.0	0.045	
43

a-Si:H(i)/SiOx/SnO2/Mg (8 min)	37.45	0.685	71.52	18.350	
291

Cell/EVA/MgO-TiO2(0.3 mg mL−1)	47.49	0.561	72.2	19.030	
295

Ni0.92Mg0.08Ox	21.3	1.078	79.0	18.200	
289


 	Fig. 24  (a) Energy levels diagram, showing the influence of Mg doping on ESL materials for solar cells. Eg0 represents the band gap of the pure ESL material, Eg1–6 are the band gaps for the Mg-doped ESLs and Eg represents the band gap of the photoanode. Molecular structure of (b) Cu-centered view of bulk Cu2O section and schematic structure of Cu2O (c) normal, (d) split vacancy configurations; (e) split-vacancy configurations of Cu2O doped with Mg. (f) Estimated crystallite size and internal strain for illustrating the effect of Mg-doping on Cu2O films. (g) UPS spectra and (h) Energy-levels diagrams investigated for NiOx and NiMgOx in PSCs. (i) Comparison of the transmittance of NiOx and NiMgOx. Copyright 2016,40 Elsevier and 2017,289 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic representation of MgOx/Al Si-based solar cell and the corresponding TEM image of the rare layer of the cell. (b) J–V plot recorded for 1 nm MgO and MgO-free interlayer measured under one sun condition and (c) The resulting internal and external quantum efficiencies associated with the two cells. (d) The schematic diagrams of the reaction kinetics with different Mg deposition rate where step A represents a high Mg deposition rate and step B low Mg deposition rate. (e) and (g) Schematic illustration of dopant-free monofacial and bifacial solar cells, respectively. (f) and (h) the corresponding J–V curves of monofacial and bifacial device with active areas of 3.52 cm2, respectively. Copyright 2017292 and 2022,293 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Crystallographic transformations between Mg and MgH2 and the accompanying hydrogenation and dihydrogen processes when Pd is employed as a catalyst or capping layer. Non-isothermal (b) hydrogenation and (c) dehydrogenation curves of MgH2, and various modified MgH2. Long term 100-cycle life for (d) MgH2-(Ni-V2O3)@C and (e) MgH2. (f) MgH2 monomer and its stable adsorption configurations on MgO and Mg(TM)O surfaces. (g) calculated hydrogen desorption energies and average bond lengths between Mg and H of MgH2 monomer within the various systems. Copyright 2019,318 American chemical society and Copyright 2021309 and 2022,298 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Faraday number (FN) for different metals. (b) HAADF-STEM and EDS mapping images of nanodisk. (c) Experimental dark-field scattering spectra for seven single NPs immobilized on glass. (d) Numerical scattering spectra for three diameters of Mg NPs. (e) Resonance wavelength of nanodisks tuned throughout the visible wavelength range by varying the diameter. (f) FDTD simulations on cylindrical Mg particles with different diameters encapsulated in a 5 nm thick layer of MgO on a SiO2 substrate. Copyright 2015307 and 2018,328 American chemical society and Copyright 2018,325 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram showing the energy band diagram and interfacial potential barrier height for H2S sensing. (b) TEM image of the CDots@MgO with insert; histogram of the particle size distribution. (c) Current response of the MgO and CDots@MgO sensors under 120 ppm of H2S gas at Vbaising = −0.7 V @ 30 °C. (d) Switching of magnesium hydride and vice versa with the aid of a 10 nm catalytic Pd layer and a 5 nm Ti buffer. (e) Extinction spectra of 160 nm Mg/Ti/Pd particles. (f) Coorddiantion environment of Mg(II) with each COO-linked Mg(II) generating a 2D sheet (Right) and a three dimensional framework constructed by ATDC2− linking the adjacent sheets. (g) Fluorescence intensities of compound 1 dispersed in different NEs solutions. (h) Fluorescence spectra of 1 with different amounts of TNT. (i) Quenching percentages of 1 upon addition of different volumes of 1 × 10−2 M Cr3+ ions. Copyright 2019331 and 2021,329 Elsevier.	 
AC	Aberration-corrected
ACN	Acetonitrile
AEMFCs	Anion exchange membrane fuel cells
AOR	Alcohol oxidation reaction
AR27	Acid Red 27
ATP	Adenosine triphosphate
ATR-IR	Attenuated total reflection infrared spectroscopy
bi-NT	Bi nanotube
BP	Boiling point
BT	Black titania
BZ	Black zirconia
CB	Conduction band
CDots	Carbon dots
Cl	Chlorine
CO	Carbon monoxide
CO2	Carbon dioxide
CO2RR	CO2 reduction reaction
COF	Covalent organic framework
c-Si	Crystalline silicon
CT	Commercial anatase TiO2
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
DAFC	Direct alcohol fuel cell
DCDA	Dicyandiamide
DEGDME	Diethylene glycol dimethyl ether
DFT	Density functional theory
DME	1,2-Dimethoxyethane
DMF	
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic acid
DOS	Density of state
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cell

E
1/2
	Half-wave potential

E
ads(O)	Oxygen adsorption energy
EBSD	Electron backscattered diffraction

E
coh
	Cohesive energy
EDS	Energy dispersive spectroscopy
EELS	Electron energy loss spectroscopy

E
g
	Band gap energy
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EMITFSI	1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazoliumbis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide

E
onset
	Onset potentials
EOR	Ethanol oxidation reaction
ESL/ESTL	Electron transport layer
ESL	Electron-selective layer
FAO	Formic acid oxidation
FCC	Face-centered cubic
FDTD	Finite difference time domain
FE	faradaic efficiency
FF	Fill factor
FFT	Fast Fourier transform
FHPC	Highly porous carbon sheet

F
N
	Faraday number (field enhancement factor)
FPC	Filter paper carbon
GB	Grain boundary
HAADF-STEM	High angle annular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy
HCP	Hexagonal closed-packed
HCP-TiO2-FG	Hyper-crosslinked polymer-TiO2-graphene
HCS	Hollow carbon sphere
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HF	Hydrofluoric acid
HGNC	Highly graphitized N-doped carbon
HOR	Hydrogen oxidation reaction
HR-TEM	High-resolution transmission electron microscopy
HSL/HSTL	Hole transport layer
HSL	Hole-selective layer
i-a-Si:H	Hydrogenated intrinsic amorphous silicon
IR	Infrared

J
oc
	Open circuit current density

J
SC
	Short circuit current density
LIB	Lithium–ion batterie
Li–S	Lithium–sulfur
LSPR	Localized surface plasmon resonance
LSV	Linear sweep voltammetry
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MAB	Metal–air batterie
MB	Methylene blue
MCC	MgCl2 cycle
MCM-41	Mobile composition of the matter No. 41
MeOH	Methyl alcohol
MgH2	Magnesium hydride
Mg–Pc	Mg phthalocyanine
MgPS	Magnesium polysulfide
MgS8	Long-chain polysulfide
MIB	Mg–ion battery
MIHCs	Magnesium ion hybrid capacitors
MLGO	Multi-layered reduced graphene oxide
MOCVD	Metal–organic chemical vapor deposition
MOF	Metal–organic framework
MP	Melting point
MZO/ZnO	Magnesium zinc oxide/zinc oxide
NAE	Nitroaromatic explosive
NC	Nanocrystal
NHE	Normal hydrogen electrode
NP	Nanoparticle
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
OSC	Organic solar cell
PAD	Polydopamine
PAM	Polyacrylamide
PAN	Polyacrylonitrile
PC	Propylene carbonate
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PEMFC	Proton exchange membrane fuel cell
PET	Photoinduced electron transfer
PGM	Platinum group metal
PL	Photoluminescence
Porogen	Pore generator
PSC	Perovskite solar cell
Psi	Porous silicon
QD	Quantum-dot
QDSC	Quantum dot solar cell
QE	Quantum efficiency
QLSP	Quality factor of a localized surface plasmon
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
RhB	Rhodamine B
RMB	Rechargeable magnesium battery
RNA	Ribonucleic acid
RRDE	Rotating ring disk electrode
RT	Reduced TiO2
R-ZTO/SnO2	Reduced Zn2SnO4/SnO2
SCLC	Space-charge limited current
SEI	Solid-electrolyte interface
SHE	Standard hydrogen electrode
SHJ	Silicon heterojunction
SS	Stainless steel
STH	Solar-to-hydrogen
TBOT	Titanium butoxide
TDBTN	Ti3+ self-doped black TiO2 nanotube
TEOA	Triethanolamine
TFSI	Bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide
THF	Tetrahydrofuran
TM	Transition metals
TNT	Trinitrotoluene
TOSA	Titanium oxysulfate-sulfuric acid hydrate
TPR	Temperature-programmed reduction
TTIP	Titanium isopropoxide
VB	Valence band

V
biasing
	Applied voltage
VBM	Valence band minimum

V
Cu
	Simple vacancy of Cu

V
splitCu
	Split vacancy of Cu

V
OC
	Open-circuit photovoltage
VOC	Volatile organic compound
XANES	X-ray absorption near-edge structure
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
ZAB	Zinc–air battery

ε
d
	d-Band center

ε
p
	p-Band center

ρ
c
	Contact resistance
Footnote
† Equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
