Surface modeling of photocatalytic materials for water splitting  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP04352H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP04352H
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 1237-1261Surface modeling of photocatalytic materials for water splitting

        
          
            Chunyang 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guijun 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yitao 
            Si
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Maochang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ab
aInternational Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, P. R. China. E-mail: maochangliu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
bSuzhou Academy of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, P. R. China
Received 
      23rd September 2021
    , Accepted 3rd December 2021First published on 8th December 2021AbstractThe photocatalyst surface is central to photocatalytic reactions. However, it has been a challenge to explicitly understand both the surface configuration and the structure-dependent photocatalytic properties at the atomic level. First-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations provide a versatile method that makes up for the lack of experimental surface studies. In DFT calculations, the initial surface model greatly affects the accuracy of the calculation results. Consequently, establishing a more realistic and more reliable material surface models is undoubtedly the first step and the most important link in theoretical calculations. The aim of this Perspective is to provide a general understanding of the methods for the surface modeling of photocatalytic materials in recent years. We begin with a discussion of the basic theories applied in photocatalytic surface research, followed by an explanation of the importance of surface modeling in photocatalysis. We then elaborate on the advantages and disadvantages of the basic surface model and briefly describe the latest surface modeling methods. Finally, we evaluate the rationality of current surface modeling methods. We summarize this Perspective by prospecting the developing directions of photocatalytic surface research in the future. It is believed that a reasonable surface model should be verified by both experimental characterization and theoretical computation with negative feedback.
Chunyang Zhang
Chunyang Zhang is currently a PhD student in the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University under the supervision of Prof. Maochang Liu. He received his BE degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Xi'an University of Technology in 2019. His current research focuses on excited-state non-adiabatic molecular dynamics calculations.
Guijun Chen
Guijun Chen is a currently an MASc student in the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University under the supervision of Prof. Maochang Liu. He received his BE degree from the School of Energy and Power Engineering at Xi'an Jiaotong University in 2020. His current research focuses on first-principles calculations.
Yitao Si
Yitao Si is currently a PhD student in the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University under the supervision of Prof. Maochang Liu. He received his BE degree from the School of Energy and Power Engineering at Xi'an Jiaotong University in 2017. His research interests mainly focus on first-principles calculations.
Maochang Liu
Dr Maochang Liu is currently a Full Professor in the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, China. He received his PhD degree in Power Engineering and Engineering Thermal Physics in 2014 from Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. From Sep. 2011 to Sep. 2013, he worked as a Visiting Scholar at the Georgia Institute of Technology with Prof. Younan Xia. His research interest is focused on the controlled synthesis of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles and their related application in photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.
1. Introduction
In the past few decades, great achievements have been made in semiconductor heterogeneous photocatalysis.1 In this field, the most prominent problem is the molecular reaction mechanism of surface photocatalysis. Experimental approaches are usually limited to the measurement of macroscopic equilibrium parameters due to the fact that few instruments can accurately clarify the atomic-level details of the photocatalytic process, and even the simple water splitting on the surface of the catalyst is difficult to monitor experimentally.2 This has left researchers with only speculation or hypotheses to explain some of the phenomena discovered in experiments. Hence, it is difficult to gain insight at the atomic level using available technologies. Fortunately, the improvement of computational power and the reduction of computational costs have promoted the development of computational materials science, which has provided new technical means for the study of material surfaces. The joint development of surface science and density functional theory (DFT) provides the possibility to understand the reaction mechanism of molecules on the surface of photocatalysts.

Fig. 1 shows a flow chart for the study of the surface photocatalytic process. Generally, the research can be divided into three steps: experimental characterization, mathematical modeling, and theoretical calculation. Experimental characterization aims to understand the real surface conditions of a material. Mathematical modeling involves building a material surface model that is closest to the real situation according to the experimental characterization results. Theoretical calculation is based on mathematical models using DFT to calculate and analyze the reaction mechanism of molecules on the surface. On the one hand, experimental characterization can provide evidence for mathematical modeling. Moreover, the correctness of theoretical calculation results can be used to check the rationality of the constructed mathematical model with negative feedback. In general, experimental characterization is the first step. Recently, a series of ultra-vacuum surface technologies have been applied to surface photocatalysis, such as programmed temperature resolution (TPD) high sensitivity mass spectrometry, two-photon photoemission spectroscopy (2PPE),3 and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). However, it is still extremely hard to in situ investigate a reaction at the atomic level using these experimental techniques. Therefore, it is quite necessary to have the structures transformed into a mathematical model for theoretical calculation, aiding the understanding of the photocatalytic reaction mechanism.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the flow chart for the study of the surface photocatalytic process. 
In the past few decades, DFT has been combined with computer programs to develop a system for calculating surface properties. In this system, the biggest difficulty is surface mathematical modeling, which combines experimental results with theoretical calculation and determines the validity of the calculation. Specifically, the reliability of the mathematical model directly determines the accuracy for uncovering the photocatalytic reaction mechanism. Due to the complexity of the surface of materials, it is difficult to show a real surface structure clearly in most experiments, such as the reconstruction of the TiO2(001) surface, Fe2O3(0001) surface, and Fe2O3(102) surface. DFT is a good method to deal with a dispute of a surface structure. Through the study of the adsorption of each molecule (reactant, transition product, and product) on the crystal plane, it can establish the understanding of the basic reaction process, but a prerequisite is the accurate description of the surface configuration at the atomic scale.
Herein, we focus on the surface modeling methods of photocatalytic materials, which can be divided into four parts. In the first part, the significance and methods of surface modeling are introduced. Secondly, surface theory, photocatalytic development, and basic surface models are described. Thirdly, some typical surface models in photocatalysis are analyzed with examples. Particularly, the problems that need attention in the process of surface model construction are described. Finally, the methods of photocatalytic surface modeling are summarized and prospected.
2. Theoretical knowledge
2.1 Surface and surface states
In the steady state, substances in nature usually exist in the form of a gas, liquid, or solid. When a reaction contains substances (reactants or products) with different phases, multiphase interfaces, i.e., gas–liquid, gas-solid, liquid–liquid, liquid–solid, solid–solid, and even gas–liquid-solid interfaces, will be generated. There are different divisions and understandings of material surfaces in different disciplines. In terms of crystallography and solid-state physics, a surface refers to the transition zone between the three-dimensional periodic structure of a crystal and vacuum. It consists of the outermost atomic layers (approximately 1 to 10 single atomic layers) that do not have the characteristics of a three-dimensional structure. The atoms on the surface lose the equilibrium between the atoms in the three-dimensional structure. Compared with the bulk atoms, the coordination number of the surface atoms decreases. The atoms at the surface must relax or reconstruct to reduce their surface energy. Simultaneously, a reduction in the coordination number will result in the existence of residual valence bonds on the surface atoms, namely dangling bonds. These bonds are called surface electronic states in solid-state physics, which have the ability to donate or accept electrons, and thus tend to interact with the environment. This is the solid surface, which is chemically more active and has special reaction ability of a physical origin.4 Specifically, the surface state is the electronic energy state, which is different from the bulk electronic structure after the surface atomic structure changes. In 1932, Tamm5 coined the concept of surface state. He believed that at the surface the periodic potential field is interrupted. Theoretically, there is still a two-dimensional translational periodicity (may be the same as the original cycle of the crystal or in the form of a larger cycle reconstruction caused by surface distortion) parallel to the plane of the surface. Consequently, the surface electron energy spectrum of the wave vector is restricted in the two-dimensional Brillouin zone and parallel to the surface of the two-dimensional wave vector. Moreover, the interaction between the surface atoms is different from that of the interior atoms, thus leading to various physical properties. The wavefunction of an electron is concentrated in the surface region, for example, within one or two atomic layers. The energy of the electron falls in the energy gap of the solid (internal) band (the so-called projection of the three-dimensional band into the two-dimensional Brillouin region) with the same two-dimensional wave vector and the same symmetry of the wavefunction. Therefore, the wavefunction of this electronic state cannot extend into the solid but gradually decreases into the bulk until it reaches zero. Theoretical analysis shows that the electron-wave function decays exponentially on the outer and inner sides of the surface, leading to the possible formation of surface states. Thus, the presence of these surface states makes the density of local states near the surface different from the bulk. Especially, the surface properties of a solid can be significantly affected when the energy of these surface states is close to the Fermi energy (Fermi surface). The wavefunction between the surface state (compared with the Bloch state, which extends throughout the solid interior) and the valence electron state of a foreign adsorbed atom overlap greatly. In the work of Hellman et al.,6 as shown in Fig. 2, they found that the OH-terminated and the O-terminated surface are associated with a wide range of bandgap states appearing between the VBM and the CBM. The difference between the surface state and bulk state greatly affects the photocatalytic performance of materials.7–9 Simultaneously, the existence of a special electronic structure on the surface will affect the light absorption and emission on the surface, as well as the transmission of electrons on the surface or interface. For different materials and different surfaces, due to the distinct density of dangling bonds, their physical properties and chemical reaction capacity are not equal.
 Fig. 2  The schematic diagram of the surface state of hematite. The density of states for bulk, OH-terminated, and O-terminated Fe2O3 from top to bottom, respectively.6 
Since completing the first self-consistent calculation of electronic energy bands on the surface of simple metals (Na) in 1972,10 it has been extended to the situation of transition metals, and further study more complex surface and interface problems including restructuring, adsorption, and other atomic coverage.
2.2 Surface relaxation and surface reconstruction
The atoms near the surface tend to relax when a new surface is formed, and the layers of atoms on the surface may adjust their spatial position to minimize the total energy. Surface relaxation and surface reconstruction play typical roles to achieve a stable surface structure for reducing the surface energy. The creation of a surface by relaxation or reconstruction can significantly alter the electronic states in the outermost surface layers. The surface states may have quite a difference from the bulk states. This may have a great impact on the physical and chemical properties of a material. Consequently, the study of the surface relaxation and surface reconstruction phenomena is helpful in the development of catalytic theory.
Surface relaxation refers to the deviation of atoms at the clean surface layer from their original ideal position, mostly perpendicular (inward or outward), such as inward relaxation of the SrTiO3(001)11 surface, inward relaxation of the β-Ga2O3(010)12 surface, inward relaxations of the Au(100) and (110) surface and outward relaxation of Au(111).13 The outermost six atomic layers of the surface contract by 0.11–0.14 Å towards the bulk vector in the β-Ga2O3(010) surface relaxation.12 The different relaxation directions of Au surfaces are quite interesting. They are caused by the interaction between the superficial atomic layer and the sub-superficial atomic layer on the Au(111) surface after relaxation, which is almost the same as before relaxation.13 The charge density between the two superficial layers decreases after relaxation, while the electrons tend to spread towards the vacuum region near the surface. Surface reconstruction means the rearrangement of atoms at the clean surface layer into a structure different from the substrate lattice period. Surface reconstruction involves a surface relaxation process, such as rutile TiO2(011)-(2 × 1) surface reconstruction.14 This is more complicated and may have a greater impact on the photocatalytic performance of materials than surface relaxation. We describe the surface reconstruction in the typical modelling in Chapter 3. Understanding the relaxation and reconstruction mechanism of various crystal clean surfaces is crucial to establish the surface structure model and uncover further the relationship between the surface structure and its physicochemical properties.
2.3 Surface energy and Wulff shape
In materials science, a surface can be treated as a defect. The energy required to produce a surface is often called the surface energy. Surface energy is the determinant of surface stability. It is generally believed that the higher the catalytic activity, the worse the surface stability due to the larger surface energy.15 The energy can be reduced by subtle changes in the atomic arrangement on the surface. Basically, the surface energy is defined as the energy required to split a crystal into two parts to form a surface. There are three factors influencing its value,16 as follows: (i) the breaking of chemical bonds; (ii) surface reconstruction (surface atom relaxation); and (iii) vibrational entropy17 and the formation18 of atomic steps and kinks. Generally, the vibration entropy can be ignored at low temperature. Thus, the influence of vibration entropy on surface stability is usually not considered in the DFT calculation of the ground state. Only the first two factors are considered in the general surface calculation, while the difficulty is surface reconstruction (surface relaxation). In a typical calculation, the value of the surface energy is the total energy Etot(n) of the atoms in the slab model minus the total energy Ebulk(n) of the atoms in the bulk phase. This formula is shown in eqn (1): (1)where n is the number of atoms, A is the area of the slab model, and factor 2 represents the two surfaces of the slab model. This formula is often used to calculate the single-element surface model and the multiple-element slab model of a stoichiometric ratio, but is more complicated for a non-stoichiometric surface.
Bendavid et al.19 proposed an alternative method for estimating the surface energies of non-stoichiometric surfaces. Specifically, using two separately calculated averages, the sum of the atomic compositions of a non-stoichiometric slab (scaled per surface area) would be a stoichiometric ratio. The approximate surface energy can be expressed as eqn (2): (2)where subscripts 1 and 2 are two non-stoichiometric slabs with different surface terminations. The model is valid only if  results in the stoichiometric ratio of the atoms. Therefore, a suitable surface termination must be selected to balance the surface non-stoichiometric ratio. In addition, the surface energy of stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric plates can also be defined according to ab initio atomic thermodynamics by considering the influence of the surrounding gas environment on surface stability.20,21
Currently, there is a big disagreement between surface scientists and most catalysis researchers (making and testing new materials) on microscopic and macroscopic structures due to the limitation of existing experimental and theoretical techniques in dealing with real-world nanoforms. Thus, bridging this gap would make the entire surface science community more effective.22 The shape of a crystal at equilibrium is determined by surface thermodynamics. Based on the Wulff shape, we can roughly calculate the shape of a crystal at equilibrium from the surface energy of each closed facet.23,24 The minimum surface energy can be achieved because the resulting simple shape has a well-defined section. Tran et al.25 calculated the surface energies of about 70 elements with more than 100 crystal forms and established the corresponding database. They also established the Wulff shape model according to the Wulff shape formula. Fig. 3 shows an example of the calculated Wulff shape of Fe.
 Fig. 3  The Wulff shape of α-Fe generated with different surface energy values. (a) The max Miller index is 3. (b) The max Miller index is 1.25 
Wulff's theorem states that the distance from the center of mass to the crystal surface, Di, is proportional to the surface energy, i.e., . Here, λ is a constant and is equal to the energy required to form a particle per unit volume. In addition, Gao et al.26 also proposed the breaking bond (dangling bond) density (Db) index, as shown in eqn (3): Db = Nb/A(3)where A is the surface cell specific surface area and Nb is the number of broken bonds on the surface of a single cell. Based on this model, they found that the breaking bond density plays a critical role in determining the surface energy for some minerals.26 Simultaneously, the surface breaking bond can be used to predict the stability and reactivity of the surface. The Wulff model connects the experimental morphology synthesis with the theoretical surface calculation. Similarly, the Wulff shapes of semiconductors can also be predicted. For example, Ferrer et al.27 successfully calculated the Wulff shapes of Co3O4, α-Fe2O3, and In2O3. These predictions not only help researchers to analyze electron microscopy images, but also assist the understanding towards crystal shape control by adjusting the synthesis chemistry.
α-Fe2O3 is a common photoanode material with a corundum structure and belongs to the RC space group in the tripartite crystal system. α-Fe2O3 is an environmentally friendly, thermodynamically stable, and low-cost material with a suitable band gap of 2.1 eV, which is widely used in photocatalytic degradation, hydrogen production, gas sensors, etc.28 The surface energy of each surface of α-Fe2O3 has been calculated. As shown in Fig. 4, Ferrer et al.27 predicted the Wulff shape of α-Fe2O3. The Wulff shape in the middle of the figure is the crystal shape in the natural equilibrium state, which is roughly consistent with the scanning electron microscopy image of α-Fe2O3 particles formed in 5 mol% octadecylamine (ODA) reported by Liu et al.29 However, despite this success, one problem is how to ensure the accuracy of the calculation. The surface energy is a sensitive parameter, and thus requires a more accurate surface model for its calculation. Significantly, the surface energy can also be computed by an obtained Wulff shape. Recently, Guo et al.30 developed an inverse Wulff shape program to calculate the surface energy, through which, in the case of a known Wulff shape, the surface energy of each surface can be calculated in reverse.
 Fig. 4  The Wulff shape and morphologies of α-Fe2O3 by theoretical calculation prediction with different crystal surface exposure ratios for (001), (012), (100), (101) and (110).27 
In addition, the crystal growth environment can affect the surface structure. During the growth of a material, material exchange occurs between the material surface and the growing environment. Under certain reaction conditions, the chemical reaction proceeds in the direction of decreasing Gibbs free energy. The atom goes from a high chemical potential phase to a low chemical potential phase. The chemical potential of each component in the reaction system is different in different growth environments, and the growth behavior of materials is also different. To avoid the formation of a second phase, the chemical potential of each component in the reaction system must be controlled within a reasonable range. Benefitting from first-principles calculation, Chen et al.31 analyzed Mg doping, oxygen impurity and formation of nitrogen-vacancy on the surface of Ta3N5(110) from thermodynamics. As shown in Fig. 5, Mg can hardly enter the surface of Ta3N5(110) under nitrogen-poor conditions, and nitrogen vacancies and oxygen impurities are mainly formed on its surface. In the nitrogen-rich condition, i.e., the Mg-doped Ta3N5(110) surface, the nitrogen-vacancy and oxygen impurities form co-defects. The nitrogen-poor condition corresponds to the state of a low nitrogen chemical potential, and the nitrogen-rich condition corresponds to a high nitrogen chemical potential. The chemical potential of nitrogen changes with the temperature, pressure and ammonia concentration of the environment, and then regulates the surface defect structure of Ta3N5.
 Fig. 5  Formation energies of different defects on the Ta3N5(110) surface in (a) N-poor and (b) N-rich conditions. The position of the dashed line is the maximum ΔμO. The position of the dotted line in the N-rich condition is the maximum ΔμO in the region where ΔμMg is not relative to ΔμO.31 
Wulff shape growth for thermodynamic equilibrium is hard to achieve unless matter is artificially transported to minimize the surface-orientation energy.32 Nanocrystals can reach thermodynamic equilibrium only with sufficient time and energy. Therefore, many synthetic products have nonequilibrium shapes due to kinetic action. Accordingly, it is of great significance to discuss the kinetic Wulff shape. The kinetic Wulff shape model can consider the influence of non-equilibrium conditions on the structure of nanocrystals.33 For a single crystal, a difference in this model is that growth velocities (vi) are used rather than the surface energy (γi) from its thermodynamic equivalent to determine the crystal shape.33 The kinetic Wulff shape allows shapes beyond thermodynamic equilibrium by considering the guiding effects of the external growth environment. A series of kinetic Wulff shape prediction works has made great progress in recent years.34–36 The kinetic Wulff theoretical model predicted by theory explains the formation process of the nanocrystals prepared experimentally. Punjani et al.37 developed a kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) model to simulate the atomic growth behavior of metal nanoparticles in their ionic solutions and understand their growth patterns. This KMC model provides a simple understanding of the mechanisms and progression of the shapes that may be seen during the growth of nanoparticles. These works can further guide the design of growth experiments to obtain specific shapes of materials and related crystals.
2.4 Overview of photocatalytic hydrogen production
Hydrogen production by water splitting is the holy grail of energy science. Photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production is considered to be the most ideal way.38,39 The term “photocatalysis” first appeared in the scientific literature in 1911.40 However, it was only in the 1970s that photocatalysis attracted significant attention. In 1972, Fujishima and Honda41 found that water splitting could be achieved in an electrochemical cell containing a Pt electrode and a UV-light-irradiated TiO2 electrode. Fig. 6a shows the schematic diagram of photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production using a particulate photocatalyst.42 When the photon energy (E = hν) is larger than the semiconductor band gap, Eg, the electrons will be excited to the conduction band and leave a hole in the valence band. Electrons and holes are separated and migrated to the surface to produce hydrogen and oxygen, respectively, through redox reactions. Basically, as shown in Fig. 6b, photocatalytic water splitting in a semiconductor photocatalyst involves three steps,43 as follows: (i) photoexcitation; (ii) charge separation and transfer, in which, some photogenerated electrons and holes are usually captured by defect states in the bulk phase or on the surface of the photocatalyst; and (iii) surface redox reaction, where surface-adsorbed species are reduced and oxidized by holes and electrons, respectively. Particularly, the surface redox reaction for hydrogen and oxygen production usually occurs with the help of a co-catalyst.40 In addition, there are demands for water splitting. Thermodynamically, H2O splitting is an uphill process. An external energy input is needed to overcome a certain potential barrier, which is about 1.23 eV (or ΔG0 = 237 kJ mol−1, eqn (4)). Therefore, the semiconductor gap should be greater than 1.23 eV. The formula is as follows: (4)
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of photocatalytic water splitting.42 (b) Water splitting reaction diagram on a semiconductor photocatalyst.43 (c) The band edge positions of some photocatalysts.44 
In terms of dynamics, the position of the valence band maximum (VBM) and the conduction band minimum (CBM) of the catalyst must satisfy both the O2/H2O and H2/H+ potentials, where eqn (5) and (6) present the requirements. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that appropriate positions of the valence band and conduction band determine the catalytic behavior. Although a semiconductor with a narrowed bandgap can utilize more sunlight, the redox potentials also need to be satisfied. Fig. 6c shows the band edge positions of some typical semiconductors that can be employed for photocatalytic water splitting.44 It is worth noting that among the mentioned steps, all surface reaction is the most complex process. Understanding the surface and interface of photocatalytic materials is an important basis for a deep understanding of all photocatalytic mechanism, utilization, and control of photocatalytic reactions. ECBM > Ered(5) EVBM > Eox(6)
In the past few decades, great progress has been made in the study of photocatalytic science.45–48 Generally, semiconductor-based photocatalysis provides a promising way to store solar energy as H2 by water splitting. In 2014, Liao et al.49 prepared cobalt(II) oxide (CoO) nanoparticles that were capable of overall water splitting with a solar to hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of about 5%. In 2016, Liu et al.50 reported the combination of a highly efficient Cd0.5Zn0.5S (CZS) nano-twin photocatalyst with an NiSx co-catalyst for the photogeneration of hydrogen. The photocatalyst, using Na2S/Na2SO3 as a hole scavenger, had an internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of nearly 100% at 425 nm. The US Department of Energy (DOE) estimates that an STH conversion efficiency of 10% will ensure the industrialization of photocatalytic water splitting to complete hydrogen production from fossil fuels.51 Wang et al. reported in 2019 a quadruple-band InGaN nanowire photocatalyst with a relatively stable performance, which exhibited an STH conversion efficiency of about 5.2%.52 However, there is still a lot of work to be done on photocatalytic water splitting. Most photocatalysts currently require the presence of hole sacrificial agents and noble metal loading for rapid hydrogen evolution. This greatly increases the cost of hydrogen production. Zhang et al.53 reported a photocatalyst in which ultrathin NiOOH is coated on CdS nanorods. This material can achieve efficient and stable hydrogen production without a noble metal cocatalyst and sacrificial agent. Shen et al.54 prepared a modified g-C3N4 2D/2D polymeric heterostructure via an electrostatic self-assembly strategy. The photocatalyst could split pure water, and the STH reached 1.1%, which is the highest efficiency of total water splitting at present. In addition, the low quantum efficiency limits the large-scale application of photocatalytic water splitting. Domen et al.55 modified SrTiO3 by doping Al, leading to an increase in the quantum efficiency to 96% at 350–360 nm. Based on this material, they demonstrated a 100 m2 plate reactor array that could operate safely for several months,56 where the STH reached 0.76%. The elevation of efficiency is still focused on water oxidation photocatalysts in the present research. Simultaneously, there are few studies on the reaction dynamics of excited states, and most of the theoretical calculation work is focused on the ground state calculation. In addition, more attention should be paid to the reverse reaction process of water splitting.57
2.5 Surface photocatalysis research method
Surface structure and active sites are significant in surface photocatalysis. Experimental instruments can identify the surface atomic arrangement, and thus be employed for surface modeling. The reaction barrier and active sites can be calculated by using the model. The premise of total surface research works is to accurately describe the surface atomic structure. Therefore, surface imaging technology is essential. Besides, identifying the active site is critical in understanding the catalytic reaction process. Both experiments and calculations are required to identify the active sites. Since the 1960s, surface science and technology have been greatly developed.58 The invention of STM and atomic force microscopy (AFM) opened the era of surface imaging. In 1989, the scanning electrochemical microscope (SECM) was invented,59 which can be employed to map surface catalytic reactions. Catalytic products can be sensed by electrochemical reactions on designed small metal electrodes scanning on the surface of s catalyst. However, the resolution of SECM is about 10 nm, and its electrical signal is affected by noise.60 Therefore, its limited resolution is insufficient to truly detect the real active sites. Accordingly, in 2017, Pfisterer et al.61 reported a technique that combines the advantages of STM and SECM. As shown in Fig. 7, this method has a very high resolution (about 1–2 nm). When scanning the surface, the probe will generate a very high signal at the active site. The level of the signals is related to the relative activity of different types of active sites. However, using this technique successfully is still very limited.62
 Fig. 7  (a) Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy for scanning the active site on the surface step. (b) Post-processing images of electrical signals.62 
Moreover, with the improvement in computational power, reduction in computational cost, and the development of density functional theory, researchers can realize the prediction of surface and explain the surface reaction mechanism. In the past few decades, with the simultaneous development of ab initio computing techniques, computer hardware, and numerical analysis, first principles modeling has made significant advances in simulating photocatalytic reactions on solid surfaces. It has become a valuable experimental complementary tool given that it provides a description at the molecular level of the transfer of binding electrons and ions from one reactant to another. Due to the development of quantum theory, modeling of photocatalytic phenomena in full detail has become more accurate. In addition to geometrical structures and electronic properties, which are difficult to measure, the outputs of the simulation include reaction paths and free energy profiles. Moreover, the simulation can be used to predict the catalytic reaction trends, which reveal the basic and practical obstacles to overcome and provide the parameters for catalyst design. Theoretical simulation has two main advantages. Firstly, it can study and isolate specific physical phenomena of entanglement in experimental measurements. Secondly, theoretical research is much more cost-effective for material screening, which is well suited for finding appropriate photocatalysts. These screening studies can put forward the most promising candidate materials, thus drawing conclusions on the practical suitability of the selected candidate materials. Undoubtedly, computational modeling is the most critical part of theoretical simulation. The quality of the initial model determines whether the results are correct or not. The same is true for surface calculations. Due to the problem of surface dangling bonds, it is quite complicated to consider the initial surface model in combination with experiments. Surface relaxation, surface reconstruction, surface termination, etc. make surface studies challenging.
2.6 Overview of (time-dependent) density functional theory
Quantum mechanics is the theoretical basis of density functional theory. To date, theoretical simulation calculation based on quantum mechanics has become an increasingly important means in studying atomic and electronic structures. The most basic equation of quantum mechanics is Schrodinger equation,63 which reveals the basic law of matter movement in the microscopic world. However, “for most areas of physics and chemistry, in general the laws of physics required are known, but the difficulty is that the equations produced by the strict application of these laws are too complex to be solved”, according to Dirac.64 Therefore, in practice, people need to use various approximations to simplify calculations.
In computational materials science, DFT is one of the most widely used methods for modeling. DFT, within the framework of Kohn–Sham, simplifies the multi-body problem into a problem of non-interacting electrons moving in the effective potential field, which includes the impact of the external potential field and the Coulomb interaction between electrons. DFT has been extensively reviewed to date.65 DFT can handle even large molecules or complex systems compared to the wave function theory (WFT). However, DFT also has limitations. For example, the plain DFT calculations based on local exchange–correlation potentials, such as the commonly used local density approximation (LDA) or generalized gradient approximation (GGA), cannot accurately describe the strong interaction between d-band electrons. This leads to calculations that may incorrectly predict that experimentally confirmed semiconductors have metal behavior.66 The band gap (Eg) of familiar transition metal oxides is severely underestimated, typically by 30–40%. This inaccurate behavior based on LDA and GGA is called a band gap problem.67 The band gap problem arises from the use of rough approximate potentials under the Kohn–Sham implementation, and therefore is affected by the self-interaction error (SIE). The hybrid functionals are an effective method to reduce the SIE. Becke68 was the first to propose hybrid functionals to reduce the SIE. This method mixes the LDA or GGA exchange potential with the Hartree–Fock (HF) non-local exact exchange term. Normally, in hybrid functionals, a certain percentage of semi-local exchange from 10 to 50% is replaced by an exact HF exchange, while maintaining the pure semi-local correlation potential. Some hybrid functionals have been widely used to describe the electronic structure of semiconductors, such as B3LYP68 and HSE06.69 Han et al.70 calculated the band gaps for 10481 semiconductor materials by applying a hybrid functional. Compared with the previous database, this method can describe the band gaps more accurately. The root-mean-square error relative to the experimental data is 0.36 eV, which is significantly smaller than the error of 0.75–1.05 eV of the previous band gap database. Many works demonstrated that the hybrid functional method is successful in describing bandgap problems.71–73 However, the semi-local property of coulomb operators in hybrid functional exchange leads to technical difficulties of a slow convergence rate and higher computational cost. In addition, the range separated function introduces a second parameter that defines short-range or long-range domains. This introduces an additional degree of empiricism, which may cause bias or artificial factors in calculations.72 Illas et al.72 discussed the influence of the amount of Hartree–Fock mixing parameter (a) and the screening parameter (w), defining the range separated HSE-type hybrid functionals on bandgap calculations in detail. It was found that there are almost infinite combinations of these two parameters that can reconcile with experimental band gap. Wu et al.74 found that the hybrid functional method could not effectively deal with the status material with strong quantum confinement. Because the hybrid functional performs a near-constant band gap correction, whereas the GW approximation75 correctly handles the size dependence of the wave function, they argued that the success of electronic structure calculations in simple semiconductors is largely accidental.
GW approximation is based on the framework of the many-body perturbation theory (MBPT)75 by solving the quasiparticle (QP) equation,74 in which the self-energy can be acquired from the Green function (G) and the dynamically screened Coulomb interaction (W). Despite the fact that this method can predict the band gap very well, the calculation cost is extremely high. A relatively accurate band gap prediction method of DFT+U is also attracting attention, which can be compared to the cost of standard DFT calculations. This method can correct the band gap calculated by DFT because adding the stronger localization of d-band electrons in the system makes the conduction band shrink.76 Dudarev et al.77 proposed a rotationally invariant approach, where only the difference between the Coulomb U and exchange J parameters (Ueff = U − J) is considered. The Ueff value was obtained by Timrov et al.,78 but this method is not suitable for all materials. The Ueff value is generally found by adjusting the experimental value using similar material systems in the literature. Piotrowski et al.79 studied the electronic structure of ZnX (X = O, S, Se, Te) by using PBE, PBE + U and the hybrid HSE functional. Both DFT+U and the hybrid functional are semi-empirical, where the latter is more accurate in predicting band gaps. A combination of cost and accuracy should be considered in predicting band gaps.
DFT can describe the electronic structure of materials well. Nevertheless, this theoretical approach can only help to understand the behavior of the ground state. Time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT)80 is the most efficient method to describe the excited-state dynamic information in a solid at present, which is essential to understand photocatalysis phenomena. TDDFT has been used to study an extensive range of time-dependent phenomena, such as spin dynamics in solids, charge and energy transport in nanoscale devices, and photo-induced exciton transfer in molecular aggregation.81 Particularly, the combination of TDDFT, which is used to solve electronic problems, with nuclear motion has been successful in describing trajectories that evolve or jump between coupled (electronic) potential energy surfaces. The main energy loss involved in photocatalysis is the nonadiabatic coupling between electrons and atoms. Therefore, TDDFT can well deal with the evolution process of excited state carrier energy over time. The Tully's “fewest switches” trajectory surface hopping82 and Ehrenfest83 dynamics approach to nonadiabatic coupling have evolved into a widely used and successful technique. It is costly to quantize an analogous system for TDDFT calculation. If the quantum effect of the nucleus in the system is not obvious, the motion of the nucleus can be treated using classical molecular dynamics methods. The hybrid quantum and classical dynamics approach evolves the electron wavefunction by solving the electron Schrodinger equation and describing the motion of the nucleus in Newtonian mechanics. The combination of quantum and classical dynamics reduces computational costs and allows simulations of natural materials. In recent years, the development of the TDDFT method has been reviewed.84–86 Zhao et al.86 developed a time-dependent ab initio nonadiabatic molecular dynamics (NAMD) code, Hefei-NAMD, to simulate the excited carrier dynamics by combining TDDFT with the fewest-switches surface hopping scheme. This code can investigate the interfacial charge transfer dynamics, the electron–hole recombination dynamics, and the exciting spin-polarized hole dynamics in photocatalytic semiconductor.87–89 These developments and applications are key in the calculation of time-dependent excited state dynamics from first principles and provide a theoretical basis and a new perspective for understanding dynamic photocatalytic processes.
2.7 Basic surface model
Inorganic semiconductors are the most widely studied materials in photocatalysis, which are generally composed of two or more elements. Among them, oxides are favored due to their high stability and low cost. In the case of the formation and stability of an oxide surface, there are currently two widely accepted viewpoints, where one is the ion surface stability theory based on electrostatic balance proposed by Tasker90 and the other is the compound semiconductor surface theory based on self-compensation proposed by Laemina.91 According to classical electrostatics, the stability of a surface is determined by the charge distribution along the normal direction of the surface with the smallest repeated structural unit. Based on this method, Tasker divided the surface into three structural models, as shown in Fig. 8a–c, where Q is the layer charge density and μ is the dipole moment. The first is the Tasker-type I surface. In the vertical surface direction, each atomic layer has the same number of anions and cations, and thus both the layer charge density and surface charge are zero. For the Tasker-type II surface, the smallest repeating unit along the surface direction contains three atomic layers and is centrally symmetric. Notably, for each repeating structural unit, the electrostatic potential is zero. In this case, although there is an electrostatic potential contribution at each atomic layer, there is no macroscopic dipole moment. Therefore, the surface charge is zero. For the Tasker-type III surface, the smallest repeating unit is formed by stacking atomic layers with opposite charges, while the charge density of each atomic layer is not zero.
 Fig. 8  (a) The Tasker type I surface. (b) The Tasker type II surface. (c) The Tasker type III surface. Q is the layer charge density and μ is the dipole moment in the repeat unit perpendicular to the surface.90 (d) Sequence of capacitors with surface charge density ±σ.92 (e) Spatial distribution of the electrostatic field E and potential V along a polar direction.93 
For the Tasker-type I and Tasker-type II surfaces, given that the values of the macroscopic dipole moment and surface charge are both zero, they are usually named a nonpolar surface. Nonpolar surfaces are potentially stable. Specifically, only a small ionic relaxation is required for these two types of surfaces. On the contrary, there is a non-zero macroscopic dipole moment on the Tasker-type III surface in the vertical direction. The surface energy and the dipole moment diverge with an increase in the atomic layer number, which is the primary reason for the instability of the Tasker III-type surface. This type of surface is also known as a polar surface, which usually possesses high chemical activity, which is very high for its ability for reactant activation. Consequently, a polar surface is highly valued in the field of catalysis.
The polar surface of an oxide is a very important Tasker-type III surface. According to classical electrostatic theory, each repeating unit of the polar surface of an oxide can be similar to a capacitance model,92 as shown in Fig. 8d. Each repeating unit size of the dipole moment (μ) can be defined as following equation (see eqn (7)): μ = σR1,(7)where R1 is the atomic layer spacing and σ is the charge density. The corresponding increase in the electrostatic potential energy follows (eqn (8)) ΔV = 4σR1.(8)For a surface structure with a repeating unit number of N, the total dipole moment (μtotal) can be written as eqn (9) μtotal = NσR1.(9)The contribution of an electrostatic field to the surface energy (Es) is defined by eqn (10). ES = 2πNR1σ2.(10)In a semi-infinite system, i.e., N → ∞, the total dipole moment and surface energy will generally diverge, leading to an unstable surface. Therefore, a large surface reconstruction or additional charge adsorption is needed to offset the macroscopic dipole moment on this type of surface.
Although polar surfaces have a divergent surface energy and unstable surface structures,93 these polarity terminating surfaces have been synthesized.94 In 2000, Noguera provided an explanation for why polar surfaces can stably exist by introducing positive and negative charges (+σ and −σ, respectively).93 Specifically, as shown in Fig. 8e, when stacking, a macro dipole moment can make the surface charge density with specific changes associated with the atomic layer to gain proper surface polarization compensation. According to the Noguera theory, the total dipole moment (M) can be calculated according to eqn (11). (11)Clearly, the total dipole and electrostatic potential energy of the system will not change by just increasing the number of atomic layers. When the charge density at the outside m atomic layer changes, that of the m + 1 atomic layer is still equal to the body. Specifically, when 1 ≤ j ≤ m, |σj| ≠ σ, |σm+1| = σ. The charge compensation standard of a polar surface should follow eqn (12). (12)
This equation gives the surface stability condition of polarity. It also indicates that the charge redistribution is the mechanism of polarity compensation. It is worth noting that the distinction of polarity compensation may be very large for different surfaces under different experimental conditions. Generally, there are three effective ways to realize polarity compensation.95 The first approach is by altering the surface stoichiometry. For example, we can reduce the surface atoms by half to form a semi-atomic surface or add a half monolayer of atoms with opposite charges. The second method is by appropriate adsorption of foreign ions or molecules, such as the cleavage of free water molecules to H+ adsorption on the end surface of anions and OH− adsorption on the end surface of metal ions. The last way is via electron transfer, in which some electrons from a polar surface of a slab are transferred from one surface to the opposite surface of the slab.
If the surface charge can be adequately compensated by the first and second methods, these structures are usually referred as “polarity compensation” or “electric neutrality”. Otherwise, surface charge compensation will spontaneously occur through the third way. In this case, the electrons partially occupy the surface states, which is often referred to as “intrinsic surface state compensation” or “polar surface metallization”. The third way for polarity compensation can also be regarded as a reduction in the redox state of surface ions.
2.8 Surface modeling
Modeling is the premise of calculation. The key to calculation is to establish a model that is closest to the real surface. According to the linear combination of atomic orbitals calculated in theory and the plane-wave pseudopotential method, the aperiodic cluster model and the periodic supercell model can be constructed accordingly.96 As shown in Fig. 9a and b are the slab model on the TiO2(001) plane and a water molecule model adsorbed on a (TiO2)n (n = 10) cluster, respectively.97 The slab model describes infinitely expanding surfaces by imposing periodic repeats on a finite number of explicitly processed atoms. The cluster model describes the atoms near the adsorbed location and ignores the atoms far away. Both the periodic slab model and the non-periodic cluster model have their own advantages and disadvantages. These advantages and disadvantages should be balanced for the model selection. Particularly, during the modeling calculation, a large number of experimental results should be referenced.
 Fig. 9  (a) TiO2(001) slab model and (b) (TiO2)n (n = 10) cluster adsorption model of water molecules.97 
It is also very important to select a model for studying the catalytic reaction on a solid surface based on DFT. In practice, when a large number of non-periodic systems is involved, it is impossible to solve a real surface containing tens of thousands of atoms. Therefore, we need to adopt the supercell method. Conceptually, the slab approach is easier to understand than the cluster approach. The surface is modeled by a unit that appears repeatedly in three dimensions. The main concern of the slab method is the interaction at the boundary of the cell. The periodic slab model is based on translational symmetry and uses a periodic boundary to deal with solids, which is more consistent with the actual situation. Adsorption with this method is always restricted within a certain range. For a surface with low adsorption coverage, a sufficiently large supercell must be selected. The interaction between the two periodic surfaces can be eliminated by applying a degree of vacuum, which is generally larger than 10 Å. In the slab method, this model is very suitable for adsorption with low coverage on the surface of metals and metal oxides. The outcomes can be directly compared with the research data on the experimental surface. Moreover, the slab method also easily explains the difference between the DFT results and the experimental data for the lattice constants. The cluster model cannot simulate bulk phases, and thus has to assume the experimental bond distances, which will cause strain in the cluster.98 One of the biggest advantages of the flat model is that it can be clearly compared with the experimental data. This comparison plays a decisive role in the evaluation of theoretical methods.
The aperiodic cluster model focuses on local bonding characteristics. For solid surface adsorption, a small local area that contains the adsorbed atoms or molecules and the associated surface bonding will be generated in the model. This bonding area can be considered a unit to study the interaction between the atoms or molecules and the surface. Generally, the cluster model is very small, containing s few atoms, while for the periodic slab model, the number of atoms will be much larger. The cluster model takes out a cluster from the real structure, where the place for bond breaking needs to be carefully considered. This method is also troublesome in dealing with the boundary effect, which has led to a gradual decrease in the application of clusters. However, the computational cost of the cluster model is lower than that of the slab model. The calculation result of the cluster model significantly depends on the selection of the model size.99 The surface electronic properties of many materials are often not limited to a small range. Therefore, it is always difficult to describe the entire surface properties by using large clusters. To improve the accuracy of the calculation results, we have to eliminate the influence caused by the dispersion of surface electrons and the boundary effect100 by selecting a large surface. However, this is not conducive to practical application, which is at the expense of calculation efficiency. To date, several correction methods have been proposed to reduce the errors caused by the use of cluster models. For example, the cluster model shown in Fig. 10a and the point charge embedded cluster model introduce the point charge array (as shown in Fig. 10b) around the cluster to reduce the error caused by size.101 However, the disadvantage of this method is that polarization of the charge density will be generated.102 This problem can be effectively solved by embedding atomic clusters in the polarization potential first, and then in the point charge array (as shown in Fig. 10c). This embedding model, which introduces a polarization field based on the point charge embedding model, can well simulate the surface states of complex materials.103 However, the simulation of the structural relaxation and stress by this method still has limited accuracy. The periodic supercell slab model, compared with the point charge embedding model, can simulate the real surface of the catalyst structure, as shown in Fig. 10d. It can better deal with the adsorption species and the interaction in the surface reaction. Both the field on the surface and structure state of the relaxation and stress effect in a real system can be well described. By reasonably fixing and relaxing the number of surface atomic layers, we can simulate the effective interaction between atoms, approximating the real reaction. Particularly, the use of this model can save computing resources. Consequently, it has been widely applied in the study of surface adsorption and related properties.
 Fig. 10  Four common model construction methods. (a) Cluster model. (b) Point charge embedded cluster model. (c) Point charge embedding cluster model with polarization potential. (d) Periodic slab model.98 
The biggest limitation of the non-periodic cluster model is the boundary problem, which can be well avoided in the periodic slab model. The periodic slab model is periodically extended based on the cluster model and fills the whole space. Given that the cell is the smallest unit of periodic repetition, its selection is very important. In material surface-related calculations, the coverage should be firstly confirmed. Subsequently, an appropriate size should be taken in the two-dimensional plane to include the characteristics of surface electrons as much as possible. A vacuum layer is employed to isolate the upper and lower surface effects. It has been proven by many examples that the periodic supercell model is accurate for the calculation of bulk cell parameters, bulk modulus, and surface adsorption. Overall, the periodic supercell slab model solves the boundary problem and combines well with the energy band theory.
According to the shape of the material, the slab surface model can be divided into a 2D material surface model and 3D material surface model. For an interface, it includes the 2D/2D material interface model, 2D/3D material interface model, and 3D/3D material interface model. Basically, a 3D material model refers to the three-dimensional material before cutting, such as TiO2 and α-Fe2O3. A typical example of a 2D material is g-C3N4. A slab model generally consists of two parts, i.e., an atomic layer and vacuum layer, as shown in Fig. 9a. To reduce the amount of calculation, a vacuum layer, generally greater than 10 Å, is usually added above the c-axis atomic layer. This calculation usually holds the lower layers of the c-axis in place to simulate the bulk phase atoms and releases the upper layers to simulate the surface atoms. Given that the slab model constructed is periodic, the coupling between slabs and adjacent slabs needs to be considered. A method has been developed to include a planar dipole layer between periodic slabs.104 This dipole correction is introduced to avoid coupling between vertical slabs and slabs. Occasionally, if a two-surface model is used, where there are layers of vacuum above and below, one needs to increase the number of atomic layers. In the calculation of photocatalytic surface, the slab surface model can be divided into an ideal surface, defect surface, noble metal-loaded surface, and heterojunction according to the problems studied in practice.
Given that the slab model contains an atomic layer and vacuum layer, to make it more approximate to the real situation, the following aspects should be considered: (1) thickness of the atomic layer and vacuum layer. It is worth noting that a restriction still exists in the slab model to accurately describe the structural relaxation and strain. Long-distance electrostatic interactions also pose problems unless a large vacuum layer or the atomic layers are thick enough105 to allow adsorption on both sides. Given that the thickness of the slab model (vertical to the surface) is always limited, the electrons on the slab will be confined to the plane when the number of atomic layers is small. This confinement may lead to a great deviation in the electronic structure in the slab model in comparison to the actual situation. It also means that the accuracy of simulating a semi-infinite surface with the slab method may be heavily dependent on the plate thickness.106,107 For example, Sagisaka et al.108 studied the effect of plate thickness on the electronic structure of an Si(100)-(2 × 2) surface by using DFT calculation. The result showed that the thickness of the atomic layer has a profound effect on the surface electronic structure. When the number of atomic layers is greater than 30, the dispersion characteristics of the Si(100) surface band converge. When the number of atomic layers is greater than 60, both the bulk and surface electronic structures converge. This means that some important parameters of convergent surface properties are closely related to the slab thickness,109,110 such as the work function and surface energy. The use of a thinner slab may lead to an inaccurate electronic structure of the surface.108,111 However, if the thickness of the slab is increased, the convergence speed will be greatly reduced, and thus the calculation cost will increase.112 Therefore, a reasonable surface model should be considered comprehensively, which should not only sufficiently reflect the properties of the surface and bulk phase, but also save calculation resources. Many methods have been reported to test the atomic layer number of the surface slab model.113–115 The starting point of these methods is to obtain certain surface characteristic parameters in batches by using the slab model with different layers and determine whether the surface is convergent by analyzing the degree of convergence of the parameters. However, these methods only carry out simple and accurate calculation without any improvement in the methods themselves.116,117
The accuracy of the slab model describing the surface adsorption process depends mainly on two criteria,118 the thickness of the slab and the size of the in-plane periodic repetition (i.e., the surface cell). There are methods to solve the calculation inaccuracy caused by an insufficient plate thickness.119 Based on previous work,120–124 Smidstrup et al.119 developed the efficient implementation of a surface Green's-function (SGF) method for atomistic modeling of surfaces within the framework of density functional theory using a pseudopotential localized basis set approach. In the SGF method, the semi-infinite system is divided into a finite surface region and a semi-infinite bulk region. As shown in Fig. 11a the bulk can play the role of electron storage. Electrons from the surface region can be transferred to the bulk region through self-consistent coupling. The electronic structure of the entire surface system is calculated in a self-consistent manner, including charge transfer between the bulk and the surface, and charge redistribution of across the surface. This means that the surface region becomes an open system that interacts with an infinite electron reservoir and provides a correct physical description of the semi-infinite surface structure. Compared with the traditional method, this method can accurately describe the relevant characteristics of a slab model with fewer slab layers. For example, 6 atomic layers can accurately describe the surface work function of Ag(100) by the new method. However, the work function still shows oscillating behavior in the traditional slab model even if the atomic layer is greater than 15. Atomic layer thickness solves the problem of electronic structure convergence. To simulate a real surface, vacuum is introduced to eliminate the interaction between adjacent slab models as much as possible.125 The center of the slab model should show the property of the bulk.
(2) Terminal passivation, namely bulk termination. The standard slab model method can be used to calculate the symmetrical non-polar surface. However, for an asymmetric polar surface, this method is unfavorable.126 In the semi-infinite surface model, dangling bonds should not exist in the atomic layer of the simulated bulk. Moreover, the method of pseudo hydrogen is generally adopted to passivate the conjugated surface to simulate the actual surface situation more accurately. The passivation surface energy is unknown when using this method. In addition, the pseudo hydrogen method needs to reduce the edge effect.127 Specifically, the pseudo hydrogen near the edge is unstable,128 which seriously affects the accuracy of the calculation. Recently, Zhang et al.129 proposed a pseudo-H passivation approach that is simpler and more efficient than the traditional method. The pseudo hydrogen atom keeps the bottom surface with electric neutrality by carrying a fractional charge and satisfies the electron counting rule to ensure surface stability. This passivation ensures that the state of the bottom surface is localized and there is no interaction with the top surface.
2.9 Calculation of surface parameters of a photocatalytic system
In a photocatalytic surface, various parameters (surface work function, surface energy, band edge position, energy band structure, adsorption energy of reactants, intermediates and products, etc.) need to be calculated to determine whether the surface is suitable for photocatalytic hydrogen or oxygen production, which is of great significance for experimental synthesis.
The band edge position of the photocatalyst should meet the thermodynamic requirement of water splitting. Specifically, the CBM should be not below the reduction reaction potential, while the VBM should be not above the oxidation reaction potential. There are many methods to calculate the band edge position of a certain surface. Here, two methods are introduced. The first method is based on the semiconductor work function (ϕ) by first-principles calculation. The work function can be defined as the energy that moves an electron from the Fermi level to an infinite distance in a vacuum. Specifically, the energy of the vacuum energy level (Evac) minus the Fermi energy level (EF) is the work function (see eqn (13)) Φ = Evac − EF.(13)EF can be calculated using DFT. In the bulk phase periodic calculation, the eigenvalues are arbitrarily moved because of the involvement of pseudopotentials. Consequently, the Fermi energy and eigenvalues calculated in the bulk do not refer to any absolute scale. Therefore, it is generally meaningless.130 When calculating the surface, it is necessary to connect the eigenvalue with the vacuum energy. The localized electrostatic potential in the vacuum region of the slab model is defined as the referenced vacuum energy level.
According to Janak's theorem, EVBM (with respect to Evac) is equal to the ionization potential of a material.131 Due to the discontinuous derivatives of the exchange correlation (XC) potential, ECBM will be overestimated, while EVBM will be underestimated. Thus, the EVBM and ECBM obtained directly by DFT calculation are inaccurate.132 The band gap center (BGC) could be accurately predicted via the use of DFT.133 Therefore, EBGC rather than the traditional EVBM, provides a more accurate band calculation reference. Subsequently, ECBM and EVBM can be determined by adding or subtracting half of the band gap energy (Eg, see eqn (14) and (15)). The GW method works pretty much better than a lot of commonly used DFT schemes on band gap (Eg) prediction problems.134 (14) (15)
 Fig. 11  (a) A typical semi-infinite surface configuration by the SGF method.119 HS and HB are the Hamiltonians of the surface region (HS) and the principal layer of the semi-infinite bulk region, respectively. (b) Schematic diagram of the method for determining the VBM and the CBM positions (vs. SHE) by Huang et al.135 The cyan curve denotes the in-plane averaged electrostatic potential of the slab model along the z-direction. The purple curve denotes the macro-averaged electrostatic potential (the smoothed curve). 
The second method is to obtain the absolute value of EVBM and ECBM by combining a two-step calculation.135 As shown in Fig. 11b, in the slab calculation, the atomic layer inside the slab is fixed to simulate the bulk. Both potentials can be aligned due to the fact that there is the same spatial distribution between the electrostatic potential of the bulk layers and the bulk. The difference (ΔV) between the vacuum energy level and bulk phase energy level can be determined by an adjacent average method. Subsequently, EVBM and ECBM can be determined by calculating the energy of the bulk atoms, Ebulk, as show in eqn (16) and (17): EVBMvs. vacuum = Evac − EΔV + EVBM,(16) ECBMvs. vacuum = Evac − EΔV + ECBM.(17)After that, EVBM (vs. SHE) and ECBM (vs. SHE) can be calculated according to the electron energy at the zero point of the standard hydrogen electrode (−4.5 eV) equal to 0 eV (vs. SHE). Through comparison, one can decide whether the calculated slab surface of the calculated material is suitable for photocatalytic hydrogen or oxygen production.
 Fig. 12  Snapshots for the equilibrated anatase TiO2(001)/water interface model by FPMD simulation at 350 K. (a) (4 × 2) slab. (b) (2 × 2) slab.140 Ti atoms are depicted in light blue, O atoms in red, and H atoms in white. The dashed lines represent hydrogen bonds. 
The effects of adsorbed species or reaction species on the surface are not considered in calculating the surface properties. It is well known that the work function and surface electronic structure are sensitive to surface structural changes. Any surface changes or exotic adsorbed species will change the surface properties of materials. Indeed, the adsorption effect of reactive molecules or species (e.g., H2O, H2, and O2) on semiconductor surfaces has received extensive attention in the field of photocatalytic water splitting. There have been many studies in this area.136–139 Taking the adsorption effect of water on the anatase TiO2(001) surface as an example, Han et al.140 investigated the adsorption effect of water on this surface using the first-principles molecular dynamics (FPMD) simulation method. The interface model consists of a TiO2 slab and a water layer. Fig. 12a shows the optimized interface model at 350 K, where the Ti5C–O2C bond may be broken when the dissociated water adsorbs on the surface due to the fact that the proton adsorbed on the O2c site weakens the relevant two Ti5C–O2C bonds. This further results in a larger lattice expansion and greater strain along the [100] direction. The change in the surface structure can raise or lower the band position of TiO2, whereas it influences the photocatalytic performance of the material. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 12b, the broken Ti5C–O2C bond cannot be observed with the smaller model, but the dissociated water adsorption still exists. It is considered that the smaller model size inhibits the surface Ti5C–O2C breaking, thus limiting the lattice expansion of the surface. Zhou et al.141 simulated the TiO2(001)/water interface using first-principles molecular dynamics and found that photo-induced holes on the interface increased the coverage rate of molecular and dissociated water adsorption by increasing the surface acidity, thus improving the hydrophilicity of the surface. The theoretical results are in agreement with the corresponding experimental. Therefore, understanding the adsorption effect of reactive molecules or species on the surface structures and reconstructions of photocatalysts will reveal the corresponding photocatalytic performance.
3. Surface modeling of photocatalytic materials
To date, a variety of strategies have been developed to improve the performance of photocatalysts, with notable examples including crystal facet engineering, defect engineering, precious metal loading, and heterojunction construction. The corresponding mathematical models to be constructed are a clean surface model, surface model with defect, surface model with precious metal loading, and heterojunction model. In the following section, we summarize the construction process of these models with some classical examples.
3.1 Surface problem of anatase phase TiO2 and Cu2O
TiO2 is the most classical and studied photocatalyst. Among its three crystalline forms, anatase TiO2 has been determined to possess the highest activity and stability.142 The Wulff structure and STM image of anatase is shown in Fig. 13a and b, respectively.143,144 Anatase TiO2 usually has exposed (101) and (001) crystal faces. The surface energy of the clean (001) surface is 0.93 J m−2, while that of the (101) surface is 0.39 J m−2. The two slab structures are shown in the Fig. 13c and d, respectively. Generally, the (001) surface is considered to be a highly active surface. This is because the density of the Ti atom and O atom in this unsaturated surface is larger than that in the (101) surface. Moreover, the bond angle and bond length of Ti–O–Ti is larger in the (001) surface, which leads to a higher surface energy. In this case, a (1 × 4) surface reconstruction of the (001) surface during crystal growth also occurs to reduce the surface energy.145 Afterwards, many anatase (001)-(1 × 4) surface reconstruction models were proposed.145–147 Although these models could well conform to the STM images, most of them were later proven to be inconsistent with the experimental results. This also reflects the inadequacy of STM, although STM has been successfully used to characterize the surface reconstruction with atomic resolution. In principle, STM can only provide a top view and cannot reveal underground layers to obtain critical information about surface stresses.147 At present, the “ad-molecule” model (ADM)148 is widely recognized. Gong et al.149 used first-principles calculation to show that water and formic acid can be rapidly dissociated under the ADM model. The synthesis of anatase single crystals with a higher (001) exposure ratio seems to yield better photocatalytic performances. The most representative work should be taken by Yang et al.144 in 2008, in which they synthesized single-crystal anatase TiO2 with a (001) exposure ratio of 47%.
 Fig. 13  (a) Anatase Wulff shape.143 (b) SEM image of anatase single crystal obtained by experiment.144 (c and d) Unrelaxed, clean (001) and (101) surfaces,144 respectively. 
However, some experiments have shown that the (001) surface is not the most active surface. For example, in photocatalytic reactions, the clean anatase (001) surface was found to be less active than the (101) surface.150 This casts doubt on the ADM. Generally, the surface atomic configuration and coordination of the material determine its photocatalytic activity. Therefore, it is very important to fully characterize the geometric structure of the TiO2(001) surface. To explain the abnormal activity of the TiO2(001) surface, in 2013, Xia et al.151 studied the (001) atomic structure of an anatase epitaxial film obtained via oxygenplasma-aided molecular beam epitaxy by ultra-vacuum STM. They found that the TiO2(001)-(1 × 4) bright line of the corrugated surface was uneven and further suggested a modified added molecule model (M-ADM). In the same year, Wang et al.152 systematically studied the structure and activity of the reconstructed surface of anatase TiO2(001) films epitaxially grown on SrTiO3via the collective use of STM or scanning tunneling spectroscopy, XPS/UPS, and first-principles calculations. The results showed that the surface of anatase TiO2(001)-(1 × 4) does not even exhibit water adsorption activity at room temperature. Only the defective Ti3+ site is active. In this case, they proposed an “ad-oxygen atom” model (AOM) in the original ADM, in which the terminal Ti at the ridges changed from four-fold coordinated for ADM to six-fold coordinated.
Xu et al.153 showed by DFT calculation that AOM has higher surface energy than ADM. AOM is more favorable under oxygen-rich conditions. However, ADM is more stable under most oxidation potentials. Basically, the above-mentioned models are surface structures inferred from the observed SEM images. Although the images observed by STM can be interpreted, the structure at and below the subsurface of the material surface still cannot be uncovered. Therefore, further structural information should be provided from the side view. Yuan et al.154 employed in situ spherical aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) to measure the atomic structure of the TiO2(001)-(1 × 4) surface. The observation was conducted from the side direction at high temperature (the structure is more stable at high temperature). Fig. 14 shows the characterization results by Yuan et al., which confirmed the correctness of ADM by atomic resolution high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) and bright field (BF) STEM. Simultaneously, they also studied the TiO2(001) surface at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 15. At room temperature, the surface of (001) is not very clean. Amorphous substances on the surface, which stabilized the (001) surface, could be observed. While the stability is guaranteed, the surface catalytic activity is also reduced, which also explains the low activity of the (001) surface observed in experiments. Helveg et al.155 also demonstrated that oxygen is not a necessary condition for the surface reconstruction of TiO2(001). Anatase (001)-(1 × 4) surface reconstruction was discovered twenty years ago, but the understanding towards this reconstruction is still very poor. We can recognize that the establishment of a surface model is relatively difficult. Only through repeated verification from both experimental characterization and theoretical calculation can a real and accurate surface structure model be obtained.
 Fig. 14  Atomic structure of the (1 × 4) reconstructed (001) surface of the anatase TiO2 nanocrystal. (a) The (1 × 4) reconstructed atomic structure model of the (001) surface observed along the [010] (top) and [100] (bottom) directions. (Blue spheres represent Ti atoms and red is O). (b–e) The atomic-resolution HAADF and BF STEM images of the (1 × 4) reconstructed (001) surface observed along the [010] axis and the corresponding simulated images, respectively. (f) The 3-dimensional structure of the ADM model.154 
 Fig. 15  Atomic structure of the anatase TiO2 bulk-truncated (001) surface. (a) The atomic structural models of the bulk-truncated (001) surface observed along the [010] (top) and [100] (bottom) directions. (b–e) The atomic-resolution HAADF and BF STEM images of the bulk-truncated (001) surface observed along the [010] axis and corresponding simulated images, respectively. (f) The 3-dimensional atomic model of the bulk-truncated (001) surface.154 
The surface structure is changed by the way of surface reconstruction, which affects the photocatalytic performance. Moreover, the photocatalytic performance can also be influenced by controlling the surface termination. Cuprous oxide (Cu2O) is a p-type semiconductor with excellent photoelectric properties, which is generally used as a photocathode to reduce protons.156 Due to its narrow band gap of 2.0–2.2 eV, Cu2O can absorb and use lots of visible light. The maximum STH conversion efficiency can reach 18%.157 Through theoretical prediction, Su et al.158 accurately controlled the surface termination and crystal facet orientation of Cu2O nanoparticles during the synthesis. It was shown that the (110) or (111) surface terminated by copper presented excellent photocatalytic activity, while the other exposed facets showed erratic reactivity. Prior to this, Le et al.159 found that the energy of oxygen-terminated surfaces were inferior to copper-terminated surfaces. Su et al. developed six slab models to study the (100), (110), and (111) surfaces with either oxygen or copper termination. In the models, the thickness of the atoms in each slab was greater than 15 Å. A vacuum layer of 15 Å was added to weaken the interactions induced by the periodic boundary condition. The results showed that the oxygen-terminated surface is more favorable than the copper-terminated surface in terms of surface energy, which is consistent with the reports by Le et al. Subsequently, the effect of sodium dodecyl sulfate (surfactant) on the Cu2O surface was studied. The energy of this SO4CH3-capped surface is more favorable than that of the oxygen-terminated surface. This unsaturated fatty acid inactivates the dangling bonds of the copper atoms on the surface. Therefore, the average electrostatic potentials of the three different Cu-terminated crystal facets are relatively flat, as shown in Fig. 16. However, the electrostatic potential of the Cu atom on the surface of (100) is 3.5 eV higher than the net potential of the Cu atom in the middle part. This potential difference acts as a high energy barrier, which prevents the holes moving from the bulk phase to the surface. These results explain the low catalytic activity of the Cu2O(100) surface.
 Fig. 16  Averaged electrostatic potential of the different Cu-terminated Cu2O slab models. The vacuum level shifted to zero.158 
3.2 Ti-Doped α-Fe2O3(102) surface
The ideal crystal has always been the highest pursuit for material synthesis. Due to the influence of synthetic technology, defects are inevitably introduced in materials.160 This defect may be either beneficial or harmful. For a long time in photocatalysis, the influence of defects on material properties has been a hot topic. Next, we will use Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 as a typical example to discuss this issue.
α-Fe2O3 (hematite) is another important photocatalytic material. α-Fe2O3 has a suitable band gap of 2.1 eV and a high theoretical STH conversion efficiency of 15%.161 Its band gap positions make it an ideal photoanode material. Unfortunately, some inherent properties of α-Fe2O3 restrict its performance, including short carrier lifetime, low conductivity, and poor reaction dynamics for water oxidation.162 It has been proven that doping Ti in hematite can improve its photocatalytic performance.163 Doping elements into a semiconductor can influence many of its properties, such as electrical conductivity, surface structure, morphology, and crystal orientation. Single-crystal samples with atomically defined surfaces are the most suited systems to isolate these influences. To study the doping effect of Ti, it is necessary to understand how it affects the surface and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Therefore, the first task is to accurately understand the surface structure of Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 and transform it into a mathematical model.
The α-Fe2O3(102) surface is a more appropriate model system. Compared to the (0001) surface, the α-Fe2O3(102) surface is non-polar and more stable. It is also a surface that is easier to prepare and characterize.164 Generally, α-Fe2O3(102)Fe2O3(102)-(1 × 1) and (102)-(2 × 1) surfaces could be obtained by annealing single-crystal α-Fe2O3 under O2 with a pressure of 10-6 mbar and extreme pressure, respectively.165 In 1998, Henderson et al. studied α-Fe2O3(1 × 1) and α-Fe2O3(2 × 1) using DFT. The surface structure of (1 × 1) is considered to be a surface with a stoichiometry similar to the bulk.166,167 It is worth noting that the (1 × 2) surface has always been controversial. In 1996, Gautier-Soyer et al.168 proposed an ordered anoxic layer model based on LEED and AES measurements. They believed that the depth of the reconstructed layer could be up to 30 Å. However, the proposed model was questioned by Henderson et al.169 Henderson et al. argued that reconstruction should be limited to on the surface. Consequently, a mathematical model of partial missing atoms in every two rows was proposed.169 This model is supported by molecular dynamics.170
However, in 2018, Kraushofer et al.171 successfully prepared two types of single-crystal α-Fe2O3 oriented with the (102) surface. Fig. 17 presents the LEED and STM images of the α-Fe2O3(102) (1 × 1) and (2 × 1) surfaces. Clearly, the lattice spacing is 5 Å for the (1 × 1) surface along the [102] direction. Similarly, it is 10.1 Å for the (2 × 1) surface. This is consistent with the periodicity observed by LEED. Based on the experimental results, they proposed a new α-Fe2O3(102) (2 × 1) surface model with the presence of alternating grooves, as shown in Fig. 18. Based on the proposed (2 × 1) surface model, Kraushofer et al.171 calculated the work function using DFT, and found that it was consistent with existing experimental data. They also predicted the low oxidation potential and confirmed that the α-Fe2O3(102) (2 × 1) surface is more advantageous in energy. Based on the determination of the surface structure model of α-Fe2O3(102) (2 × 1), Franceschi et al.172 prepared an atomic-planar Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 thin film with a (102) surface via the pulsed laser deposition (PLD) growth of a single crystal. Combined with DFT calculation and STM characterization, the Ti-doped α-Fe2O3(102) surface model was proposed. This work provides a new reference for the study of doping-induced defects on the photocatalytic performance. In this study, three different growth conditions were applied for the synthesis of the α-Fe2O3(102) films. As shown in Fig. 19, in the first synthetic condition, α-Fe2O3 surface reconstruction was applied for the (2 × 1) surface (Fig. 19a), while the other two were (1 × 1) surfaces (Fig. 19b and c, respectively). It is important to note that for the (1 × 1) surface, some black lines appeared along the 10 direction, and the number of black lines increased obviously under a higher doping concentration of Ti. They suggested that the presence of subsurface Ti caused these defects. The defects are formed when the iron atoms disappear. The authors calculated that the deletion ratio of iron atoms, as shown in Fig. 19b, was 2.08% ± 0.39%. To determine the model, the authors also built a (2 × 2) supercell by placing a Ti atom in five cationic surface layers (slab model with 30-atomic layers along the c axis). The calculation results showed that Ti is more favorable in energy when the subsurface Fe atoms are replaced. Fig. 20a and b show the STM characterization diagram and the simulation of the assumed trench defect model qualitatively matched with experimental observation from the STM images, respectively. Based on the calculation and the experiment phenomenon, the authors proposed the Ti-modification-induced surface atomic and electronic structures of the Ti-doped α-Fe2O3(102) surface, as shown in Fig. 20c, which is consistent with the experimental STM image.
 Fig. 17  (a and b) The LEED and STM images of the α-Fe2O3(102) (1 × 1) surface, respectively. (c and d) The LEED and STM images of the α-Fe2O3(102) (2 × 1) surface, respectively.171 
 Fig. 18  The perspective and side views of the minimum-energy configurations of α-Fe2O3(102) for (a and b) the bulk-terminated (1 × 1) surface, (c and d) the single oxygen vacancy (2 × 1) reconstruction surface and (e and f) the alternating trench (2 × 1) reconstruction surface.171 
 Fig. 19  Different Ti-modified α-Fe2O3(102) surfaces of (a–c) 40 × 40 nm2 STM images, (d–f) 9 × 4.5 nm2 STM images, and corresponding (h–g) LEED pattern172. 
 Fig. 20  (a) Ti-Modified (1 × 1) surface of Fe2O3(102) STM characterization diagram. (b) The experimental STM image qualitatively matches the simulated image assuming the trench defect model. (c) Top view and side view of the (6 × 1) supercell trench surface model.172 
3.3 Interface models on noble metal-loaded photocatalysts
Precious metal loading is also a common technique in photocatalysis. Precious metals generally have excellent catalytic performances. They can serve as co-catalysts to reduce the over-potential when loaded on the photocatalytic surface. Precious metals also exhibit the surface plasmon resonance effect,173 which can expand the light absorption of photocatalysts. However, precious metals are generally expensive, which is not favorable for large-scale application.174 Therefore, it is of great significance to study their role in photocatalysis to find substitutes. Again, due to the lack of experimental technology, it is necessary to evaluate this subject from the perspective of theoretical calculation. The first task is to establish a complete and accurate interface model that can describe the actual situation of precious metal-loaded photocatalysts.
When metal particles are deposited on the surface of a semiconductor, a strong metal–support interaction (SMSI) tends to occur,175 resulting in charge redistribution. Thus, the catalytic properties of the deposited metal will be affected. To date, Pt is the best metal co-catalyst for hydrogen evolution, which is attributed to its appropriate Fermi level for electron accumulation and inherent low over-potential for hydrogen generation. Time-resolved spectroscopy proved that electrons transfer rapidly from TiO2 to Pt within picoseconds after photoexcitation. In addition, charge recombination becomes slow when Pt is loaded on TiO2.176 In principle, Pt enhances the charge separation at the interface because of the formation of an energy barrier, i.e., the Schottky barrier,175,177 at the interface. This energy gradient prevents the reflux of photogenerated electrons from the metal back to the semiconductor. The Schottky barrier decides the main behaviors of the metal/semiconductor interface.178 For example, the Schottky barrier height (SBH) is considered to be a key factor impacting the efficiency of electron injection. Many models have been experimentally interpreted and measured for SBHs.
Theoretical calculations showed that the atomic structure and charge redistribution (the formation of chemical bonds) play important roles in influencing the interface properties. Chen et al.179 used DFT calculation to study the interface behavior of three common precious metal, i.e., Pt, Pd, and Au, loaded TiO2. In the modeling, the lattice mismatches of the Pt/TiO2, Pd/TiO2 and Au/TiO2 interfaces were 1.7%, 1% and 6.7%, respectively. The anatase TiO2(001)/Pt(001) interface used a periodic slab model. Perpendicular to the TiO2(001) surface, each slab consisted of 13-layer TiO2 and 4-layer metal anchored on both ends of the TiO2(001) surface to ensure static symmetry. There was a vacuum layer with a thickness of 15 Å on the slab. It has been proved that the work function of Pd converges under a 4-slab thickness. As shown in Fig. 21a, the authors calculated three different interface models for each metal, namely, the non-contact model, interface A model, and interface B model. The contact modes of the latter two models were confirmed by TEM images. The authors calculated the SBHs and work function for these three models, as shown in Fig. 21b. The trend of the calculated work function is consistent with that measured by experiment. The calculated differential charge density diagram shows that the charge distribution is mainly in the interface area localized at the first layer of TiO2 and the metal. There is a small contribution from the second layer of TiO2, indicating that the charge redistribution primarily occur at the interface without going deep into the inner layers.
 Fig. 21  (a) Structural models of the different types of metal/TiO2 interface. The spheres in gray, blue, and red represent the atoms of Pt, Ti, and O, respectively.179 (b) Calculated SHBs with the measured metal(100) surface work function.179 (c) Spin-density plots for both the initial state (top) and the final state (bottom) of different-sized Pt cluster models.175 
In 2018, Wang et al.175 employed ab initio molecular dynamics and DFT to study the size effect of a Pt cluster on photocatalytic hydrogen production in a Pt/TiO2 system. Their model was established as shown in Fig. 21c. Compared with the Pt/TiO2 interface model proposed by Chen et al., the main difference is the configuration of the Pt layer. Specifically, Chen et al. believed that the Pt atom layer was loaded on the surface of TiO2 in the form of a slab, while Wang et al. considered the nanoparticulate structures of Pt. As aforementioned, the difference between the cluster model and the slab model lies in the consideration of the influence taken by more distant atoms. The cluster model pays more attention to local charge changes. In general, the particle size of precious metals loaded on a photocatalyst is generally greater than 10 nm. Therefore, it is not consistent with the actual situation if the cluster model is applied. However, with the development of single-atom catalysis, increasing attention has been paid to the influence of noble metal size on the photocatalytic performance. Currently, the cluster model can more accurately reflect the interface behavior.
3.4 Heterojunction interface
Although the energy band structure of a single-phase photocatalyst may match the energy requirement for water splitting, the undesirable recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes would largely restrict the quantum efficiency in the photocatalytic process. It is expected that the separation efficiency of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs will be improved via the combination of two semiconductor materials, i.e., heterojunction, with proper band matching. The principle and development of heterojunctions from the perspective of experimental research have been extensively reviewed. In this section, we emphasize the details and methods of heterojunction modeling.
In general, the two semiconductors that make up a heterojunction have different band gaps and Fermi energy levels. During the formation of a heterojunction, electrons are transferred from the semiconductor with a high Fermi energy level to that with a low Fermi energy level. This transformation leads to the formation of an internal electric field at the interface of the heterojunction and promotes charge separation. However, it is still very difficult to form a heterojunction with good performance. This difficulty is ascribed to the lack of deep understanding on the distribution of the atomic layers at the interface. At present, it is generally assumed that the heterojunction interface is a regular, rapidly changed interface consisting of two stoichiometric units. Moreover, the coupling of the two lattices has to consider the mismatch and strain. Low mismatches result in the formation of large superlattices. This is not conducive to a reduction in computing costs. Thus, to make the calculation feasible, an interface with medium strain or no strain needs to be established. The construction of the interface needs to be consistent with the experimental results to ensure that the two surfaces are stable and the strain generated is acceptable. Liberto et al.180 employed the WO3/BiVO4 interface as an example to discuss how to properly handle semiconductor heterojunctions in photocatalysis. Firstly, the bulk-phase structures of WO3 and BiVO4 were optimized. In the simulation of the WO3(001) surface, both 4 layers and 6 layers of WO3 were considered, with 64 and 96 atoms in the slab model, respectively. It was found that there was no significant difference in the surface energy between the two models. Therefore, the slab model with 4 layers of WO3(001) was used as the WO3 side of the heterojunction. Secondly, through the thickness-dependence analysis of BiVO4, it was found that 8 layers are suitable to describe the BiVO4 side. The third step is to find the interface structure of the BiVO4(010)–WO3(001) heterojunction with an acceptable lattice mismatch. If the two slab surface models are connected directly, this will not only result in large strain, but also produce poor anion–cation matching. Then, the authors rotated the BiVO4(010) plane by about 45° and contacted it with the WO3(001) plane. Consequently, the strain was greatly reduced and the anion–cation matching was more favorable. The generated interface showed medium charge transfer and small interface dipoles. Finally, the heterojunction interface model consisted of 160 atoms. After structural optimization, the interface model of the semiconductor heterojunction composed of a BiVO4(010) surface and WO3(001) surface evolved, as shown in Fig. 22a and b.
 Fig. 22  (a) The side view of the BiVO4(010)–WO3(001) heterojunction system.180 (b) A magnified view of the interfacial contact region at BiVO4(010)–WO3(001), where new Bi–O bonds are formed. The spheres in pink, dark green, purple and red represent the atoms of Bi, V, W, and O, respectively.180 (c–e) Top view, side view, and three-dimensional structure of the g-C3N4/SnS2 heterostructure after geometry optimization, respectively.186 
For two three-dimensional materials, not only the atomic matching at the interface but also the thickness of the slab model needs to be considered. 2D/2D semiconductor heterojunctions are a new class of composite materials developed in recent years. 2D/2D heterojunctions connected by chemical bonds or weak van der Waals force181 can effectively change the electronic structure and surface chemistry of semiconductors. For example, 2D/2D-Fe2O3/g-C3N4,182,183 2D/2D-TiO2/g-C3N4184 and other 2D/2D semiconductor heterojunctions have been successfully prepared, showing excellent performances in photocatalytic water splitting. Zhao et al.185 used DFT to study the nature of chemical bond relaxation and electronic structure of WS2-based and MoS2-based 2D heterojunctions. Liu et al.186 studied a 2D/2D-g-C3N4/SnS2 heterojunction using mixed DFT. The van der Waals force correction was considered in the calculation because the interface is formed by van der Waals force. As shown in Fig. 22c, d and e, an explicit structural model of the 2D/2D-g-C3N4/SnS2 heterojunction was obtained, which consists of a 1 × 1 monolayer g-C3N4 supercell and 2 × 2 monolayer SnS2 supercell. The lattice mismatch was less than 3%. The vacuum layer was set at 15 Å to isolate the influence of the periodic boundary condition. Compared to 3D heterojunctions, it is obvious that the number of atoms required for modeling 2D/2D semiconductor heterojunctions is much smaller. The actual 2D/2D semiconductor heterojunction material is composed of two or several layers. Accordingly, the model established in this way is more consistent with the actual situation. The 3D/3D semiconductor heterojunction model is actually more like a “pseudo-2D/2D” semiconductor heterojunction model.
Thus far, only a sandwich structure is used to represent the actual heterojunction model. As for its physical significance, it needs more efforts and exploration from scientists. Naturally, having an experimental device that can actually distinguish the atomic structure of interfaces is the first step.
4. Conclusions and prospective
The extensive research into first-principles calculations has proven it to be an effective and powerful platform for the theoretical study and design of photocatalytic semiconductor materials. In this Perspective, we communicated our understanding and the current progress of computational surface modeling methods for surface and interface research of photocatalysis. The essence of these modeling methods is to compensate the weaknesses of experimental approaches in surface characterization, which greatly hinder the development of surface science. To date, combined with experimental characterizations (such as STM), the surface structure is initially explored, while the surface models constructed according to experiments still need to be verified. It is worth noting that most of the computational work has not been double-checked. In fact, for a surface without surface reconstruction, researchers can directly add a vacuum layer after the section of the single cell in the bulk to optimize the structure. However, this approach may result in a discrepancy between the computational model and the actual atomic structure of the surface. For photocatalytic water splitting, there are adsorbents on the surface of photocatalysts. These foreign adsorbents will also change the surface properties, affecting the photocatalytic performance. However, because of the computational cost, most of the time we have to give up something, such as foreign molecule adsorption, and just calculate the ground state at zero Kelvin, in a vacuum. Thus, hybrid functions with faster and more accurate calculation still need to be developed.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51888103, 51876173), Fok Ying-Tung Education Foundation (No. 171048), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20190054), the China Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the Shaanxi Technical Innovation Guidance Project (No. 2018HJCG-14).
References
A. Ibhadon and P. Fitzpatrick, Catalysts, 2013, 3, 189–218 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, C. Zhou, Z. Ma, Z. Ren, H. Fan and X. Yang, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2018, 69, 451–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Grad, Z. Novotny, M. Hengsberger and J. Osterwalder, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 10686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barteau, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1993, 11, 2162–2168 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tamm, Phys. Z. Sowjetunion, 1932, 1, 733–735 CAS .
B. Iandolo and A. Hellman, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 13622–13626 CrossRef .
N. Yatom, O. Neufeld and M. Caspary Toroker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24789–24795 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Wan, C. A. Triana, H. Chen, Y. Zhao, C. K. Mavrokefalos and G. R. Patzke, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tang and J. Arbiol, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 1256–1276 RSC .
J. Appelbaum and D. Hamann, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 2166–2177 CrossRef CAS .
G. Charlton, S. Brennan, C. Muryn, R. McGrath, D. Norman, T. Turner and G. Thornton, Surf. Sci., 2000, 457, L376–L380 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pancotti, T. Back, W. Hamouda, M. Lachheb, C. Lubin, P. Soukiassian, J. Boeckl, D. Dorsey, S. Mou and T. Asel, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 102, 245306 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guan, X. Li, Q. Li, J. Guo, L. Jin, Q. Zhao and B. Liu, Solid State Commun., 2009, 149, 1561–1564 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hussain, M. H. Ahmed, X. Torrelles, D. C. Grinter, G. Cabailh, O. Bikondoa, C. Nicklin, U. Aschauer, R. Lindsay and G. Thornton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 13545–13550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lazzeri and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 266105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, H. Bonzel and M. Scheffler, New J. Phys., 2006, 8, 65 CrossRef .
J. Frenken and P. Stoltze, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 3500–3503 CrossRef CAS .
P. Feibelman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 11118–11122 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bendavid and E. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 15750–15760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 046103 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 049901 CrossRef .
M. Singh-Miller and N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 235407 CrossRef .
G. Wulff, Cryst. Mater., 1901, 34, 449–530 CAS .
F. Lai, Y. Chen and H. Guo, J. Cryst. Growth, 2018, 508, 1–7 CrossRef .
R. Tran, Z. Xu, B. Radhakrishnan, D. Winston, W. Sun, K. Persson and S. Ong, Sci. Data, 2016, 3, 160080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao, W. Sun and Y. Hu, T. Nonferr. Metal. Soc., 2014, 24, 2930–2937 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferrer, A. Gouveia, L. Gracia, E. Longo and J. Andres, Model. Simul. Mater. Sci., 2016, 24, 025007 CrossRef .
Y. Geng, D. Chen, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 280, 119409 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, B. Lv, D. Wu and Y. Sun, Particuology, 2012, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lai, Y. Chen and H. Guo, J. Cryst. Growth, 2019, 508, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, Y. Si, M. Li, Z. Zhou, T. Yu, Y. Liu and M. Liu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2021, 782, 139026 CrossRef CAS .
P.-S. Wong, B. Liang, R. Molecke, J. Tatebayashi and D. L. Huffaker, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2509–2514 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boukouvala, J. Daniel and E. Ringe, Nano Convergence, 2021, 8, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, G. Ren, X. Su, J. Yao, Z. Yan, X. Gao and K. Xu, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 4874–4879 RSC .
L. Huang, Q. H. Thi, F. Zheng, X. Chen, Y. W. Chu, C.-S. Lee, J. Zhao and T. H. Ly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 13130–13135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kalb, A. Folger, C. Scheu and L. Schmidt-Mende, J. Cryst. Growth, 2019, 511, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
K. Punjani and P. Bhimalapuram, J. Chem. Sci., 2021, 133, 1–9 CrossRef .
M. Bowker, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2235–2246 RSC .
S. Ichimura, H. Ebisu and K. Kato, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 1388–1393 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone and A. Emeline, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 673–677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238(5358), 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and K. Domen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 919–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Christoforidis and P. Fornasiero, Chem. Cat. Chem., 2017, 9, 1523–1544 CAS .

          R. Krol and M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, Springer US,  2012 Search PubMed.
Q. Guo, C. Zhou, Z. Ma, Z. Ren, H. Fan and X. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3701–3730 RSC .
Q. Guo, C. Zhou, Z. Ma and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 50 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Tee, K. Y. Win, W. S. Teo, L. D. Koh, S. Liu, C. P. Teng and M. Y. Han, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600337 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liao, Q. Zhang, Z. Su, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Li, X. Lu, D. Wei, G. Feng, Q. Yu, X. Cai, J. Zhao, Z. Ren, H. Fang, F. Robles-Hernandez, S. Baldelli and J. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 69–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Su, J. Shi, X. Wang and L. Guo, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16151 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, Y. Chen, J. Su, M. Liu and Y. Liu, Energy, 2019, 172, 1079–1086 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. Wu, K. Sun and Z. Mi, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1454–1462 RSC .
W. Chen, G.-B. Huang, H. Song and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20963–20969 RSC .
D. Zhao, Y. Wang, C.-L. Dong, Y.-C. Huang, J. Chen, F. Xue, S. Shen and L. Guo, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takata, J. Jiang, Y. Sakata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, V. Nandal, K. Seki, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2020, 581, 411–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Maehara, M. Yamaguchi, Y. Kuromiya, Y. Nagatsuma, H. Tokudome, S. Akiyama and T. Watanabe, Nature, 2021, 598, 304–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, H. Huang, T. Ma and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duke, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 3858–3864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bard, F. Fan, J. Kwak and O. Lev, Anal. Chem., 1989, 61, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bard, F. Fan, D. Pierce, P. Unwin, D. Wipf and F. Zhou, Science, 1991, 254, 68–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pfisterer, Y. Liang, O. Schneider and A. Bandarenka, Nature, 2017, 549, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dette and S. Boettcher, Nature, 2017, 549, 34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Schrdinger, Ann. Phys., 1926, 384, 361–376 CrossRef .
P. Dirac, Proc. R. Soc. Lond., 1929, 123, 714–733 CAS .
P. Verma and D. G. Truhlar, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 302–318 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Staroverov, G. E. Scuseria, J. Tao and J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 075102 CrossRef .
C. Sousa, S. Tosoni and F. Illas, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4456–4495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 1372–1377 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Krukau, O. A. Vydrov, A. F. Izmaylov and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 224106 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, M. Lee, C. Hong, Y. Yoon, H. An, D. Lee, W. Jeong, D. Yoo, Y. Kang and Y. Youn, Sci. Data, 2020, 7, 1–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Zhang, L. Li, C. Zhao, J. Li and J. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 570, 151021 CrossRef CAS .
F. Viñes, O. Lamiel-García, K. Chul Ko, J. Yong Lee and F. Illas, J. Comput. Chem., 2017, 38, 781–789 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Ibrahim, A. A. Mohamed and I. A. Ibrahim, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 43092–43102 RSC .
X. Wang, M. Dvorak and Z. Wu, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 195429 CrossRef .
G. Onida, L. Reining and A. Rubio, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2002, 74, 601 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bashyal, C. K. Pyles, S. Afroosheh, A. Lamichhane and A. T. Zayak, J. Phys.: Condens. Mater., 2018, 30, 065501 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dudarev, G. Botton, S. Savrasov, C. Humphreys and A. Sutton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 1505 CrossRef CAS .
I. Timrov, N. Marzari and M. Cococcioni, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 085127 CrossRef .
E. M. Flores, M. r. L. Moreira and M. J. Piotrowski, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 3778–3785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Gross, J. Dobson and M. Petersilka, Top. Curr. Chem., 1996, 81–172 CrossRef CAS .
F. Agostini, E. Gross and B. F. Curchod, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2019, 1151, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Tully, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 93, 1061–1071 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. C. Tully, H. B. Schlegel and M. J. Frisch, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 084106 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Suellen, R. G. Freitas, P.-F. O. Loos and D. Jacquemin, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2019, 15, 4581–4590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. You, D. Chen, C. Lian, C. Zhang and S. Meng, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2021, 11, e1492 CAS .
Q. Zheng, W. Chu, C. Zhao, L. Zhang, H. Guo, Y. Wang, X. Jiang and J. Zhao, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2019, 9, e1411 CAS .
X. Niu, X. Bai, Z. Zhou and J. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1976–1983 CrossRef CAS .
X. Niu, Y. Yi, X. Bai, J. Zhang, Z. Zhou, L. Chu, J. Yang and X. A. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 4101–4107 RSC .
R. Zhang, L. Zhang, Q. Zheng, P. Gao, J. Zhao and J. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5419–5424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tasker, J. Phys. C, 1979, 12, 4977–4984 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lafemina, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1992, 16, 137–260 CrossRef .
J. Goniakowski, F. Finocchi and C. Noguera, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2007, 71, 016501 CrossRef .
C. Noguera, J. Phys.: Condens. Mater., 2000, 12, 367 CrossRef .
W. Sigmund, M. Rotov, F. Aldinger, Q. Jiang, J. Brunen and J. Zegenhagen, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1997, 64, 219–220 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ebensperger and B. Meyer, Phys. Status Solidi, 2011, 248, 2229–2241 CrossRef CAS .
V. Anisimov, J. Zaanen and O. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 943–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cakir and O. Gülseren, J. Phys.: Condens. Mater., 2012, 24, 305301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Grönbeck, Top. Catal., 2004, 28, 59–69 CrossRef .
N. Baliarsingh, L. Mohapatra and K. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4236–4243 RSC .
Y. Zhao, L. Bei, W. Qiang, W. Gao, C. J. Wang, W. Min, D. G. Evans, D. Xue and D. O'Hare, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 951–958 RSC .
M. Knickelbein, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2010, 63, 151–172 Search PubMed .
I. Panas, J. Schüle, P. Siegbahn and U. Wahlgren, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1988, 149, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pacchioni, A. Ferrari, A. Marquez and F. Illas, J. Comput. Chem., 2015, 18, 617–628 CrossRef .
L. Bengtsson, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 59, 12301–12304 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lekka, N. Bernstein, M. Mehl and D. Papaconstantopoulos, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 219, 158–166 CrossRef CAS .
M. Natalia, R. J. Daniel and T. Alessandro, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22659–22670 CrossRef .
B. Yan, C. Yam, A. Rosa and T. Frauenheim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 189701 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sagisaka, J. Nara and D. Bowler, J. Phys.: Condens. Mater., 2017, 29, 145502 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Singh-Miller and N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 235407 CrossRef .
C. Fall, N. Binggeli and A. Baldereschi, J. Phys.: Condens. Mater., 1999, 11, 2689 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shah, M. Radny, P. Smith and S. Schofield, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6615–6622 CrossRef CAS .
G. Velde and E. Baerends, Chem. Phys., 1993, 177, 399–406 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, R. Cao, C. Wang, H. Li, H. Dong, W. Wang, F. Lu, Y. Cheng, X. Xie and H. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Boettger, Phy. Rev. B, 1994, 49, 16798–16800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Fiorentini and M. Methfessel, J. Phys.: Condens. Mater., 1996, 8, 6525–6529 CrossRef CAS .
S. Waele, K. Lejaeghere, M. Sluydts and S. Cottenier, Phy. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 235418 CrossRef .
N. Singh-Miller and N. Marzari, Phy. Rev. B, 2009, 80, 235407 CrossRef .
D. Tracey, B. Delley, D. McKenzie and O. Warschkow, AIP Adv., 2013, 3, 42117 CrossRef .
S. Smidstrup, D. Stradi, J. Wellendorff, P. Khomyakov, U. Vej-Hansen, M. E. Lee, T. Ghosh, E. Jonsson, H. Jonsson and K. Stokbro, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 195309 CrossRef .
J. Inglesfield and G. Benesh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 6682–6700 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kudrnovsky, I. Turek, V. Drchal, P. Weinberger, S. K. Bose and A. Pasturel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 16525–16531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ishida, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 165409 CrossRef .
T. Ozaki, K. Nishio and H. Kino, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 81, 3243–3255 Search PubMed .
P. Chang, T. Markussen, S. Smidstrup, K. Stokbro and B. Nikolic, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 201406 CrossRef .
E. Engel, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 155112 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Zhang and S. H. Wei, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 086102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rempel and J. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(41), 19320–19328 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Dreyer, A. Janotti and C. Walle, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 163–167 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, K. Tse, C. Chan, B. De Ng and J. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. I. Bendavid and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 15750–15760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Janak, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1978, 18, 7165–7168 CrossRef CAS .
A. Teale, F. Proft and D. Tozer, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 044110 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Perdew and M. Levy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983, 51, 1884–1887 CrossRef CAS .
L. Isseroff and E. Carter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 35–40 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, F. Han, M. Li, Z. Zhou, X. Guan and L. Guo, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2019, 169, 109110 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, S. Meng, S. Jungsuttiwong, S. Namuangruk, Z.-H. Lu, L. Li, R. Zhang, G. Feng, S. Qing and Z. Gao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 507, 145162 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hussain, G. Tocci, T. Woolcot, X. Torrelles, C. Pang, D. Humphrey, C. Yim, D. Grinter, G. Cabailh and O. Bikondoa, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 461–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-T. Wang, Y.-G. Wang, R. Mu, Y. Yoon, A. Dahal, G. K. Schenter, V.-A. Glezakou, R. Rousseau, I. Lyubinetsky and Z. Dohnálek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 1801–1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zheng, C. Wu, M. Chen, Y. Zhang and P. T. Cummings, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 145, 044702 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Han, Z. Zhou, Z. Huang, M. Li and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 26965–26973 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, L. Zhu, Z. Huang and Z. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 7590–7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Barnard and L. Curtiss, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1261–1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lazzeri, A. Vittadini and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 87, 266105 CAS  erratum.
H. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Herman, M. Sievers and Y. Gao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 3354–3357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, S. Gan, S. A. Chambers and E. Altman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 235402 CrossRef .
W. Yuan, Y. Wang, H. Li, H. Wu, Z. Zhang, A. Selloni and C. Sun, Nano Lett., 2015, 16, 132–137 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lazzeri and A. Selloni, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 266105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, A. Selloni and A. Vittadini, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2804–2811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, G. Liu, G. Lu and H. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Z. Ke, T. Kaspar, Y. Du and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2958–2963 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, H. Sun, S. Tan, F. Hao, Z. Cheng, Z. Jin, A. Zhao, W. Bing, L. Yi and J. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2214 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xu, S. Wang and H. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 10, 1039 Search PubMed .
W. Yuan, H. Wu, H. Li, Z. Dai, Z. Zhang, C. Sun and Y. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3189–3194 CrossRef CAS .
M. EK, I. Lauritsen, A. Bruix and S. Wendt, Faraday Discuss., 2018, 10, 1039 Search PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Graetzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wick and S. Tilley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 47, 26243–26257 CrossRef .
Y. Su, H. Li, H. Ma, J. Robertson and A. Nathan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8100–8106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Le, S. Stolbov and T. Rahman, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 1637–1645 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, S. Hood, J. Park, L. Whalley and A. Walsh, J. Phys. Energy, 2020, 2, 036001 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jakub, F. Kraushofer, M. Bichler, J. Balajka, J. Hulva, J. Pavelec, I. Sokolović, M. Müllner, M. Setvin and M. Schmid, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 2, 390–396 CrossRef .
A. Gedamu, J. Rick, A. Dubale, W. Su and C. Pan, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 243–267 RSC .
M. Rioult, H. Magnan, D. Stanescu and A. Barbier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3007–3014 CrossRef CAS .
G. Parkinson, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2016, 71, 272–365 CrossRef CAS .
M. Henderson, Surf. Sci., 2010, 604, 1197–1201 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dzade, A. Roldan and N. Leeuw, Minerals, 2014, 4, 89–115 CrossRef .
S. Aboud, J. Wilcox and G. Brown, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 125407 CrossRef .
M. Gautier-Soyer, M. Pollak, M. Henriot and M. J. Guittet, Surf. Sci., 1996, 352–354, 112–116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Henderson, S. Joyce and J. Rustad, Surf. Sci., 1998, 417, 66–81 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and J. Rustad, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70(21), 5285–5292 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kraushofer, Z. Jakub, M. Bichler, J. Hulva and G. S. Parkinson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 1657–1669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Franceschi, F. Kraushofer, M. Meier, G. Parkinson and M. Riva, Chem. Mater., 2020, 9, 3753–3764 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kuisma, A. Sakko, T. P. Rossi, A. H. Larsen, J. Enkovaara, L. Lehtovaara and T. T. Rantala, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 115431–115438 CrossRef .
L. Wang, X. Liu, J. Luo, X. Duan, J. Crittenden, C. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Pei, Y. Zeng and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 7718–7722 CrossRef .
W. Dong, Z. P. Liu and W. Yang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7270–7278 CrossRef .
W. N. Wang, W. J. An, B. Ramalingam, S. Mukherjee and P. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11276–11281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sakata, T. Kawai and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1982, 88, 50–54 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, P. Li, N. Umezawa, H. Abe, J. Ye, K. Shiraishi, A. Ohta and S. Miyazaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 10, 5549–5556 CrossRef .
G. Liberto, S. Tosoni and G. Pacchioni, J. Phys.: Condens. Mater., 2019, 31, 434001 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, N. Lu, N. Perea-Lopez, J. Li, Z. Lin, X. Peng, C. Lee, C. Sun, L. Calderin and P. Browning, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. She, J. Wu, H. Xu, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, Y. Song, K. Nie, Y. Liu, Y. Yang and M. Rodrigues, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 17, 1700025 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, B. Zhu, C. Jiang, C. Bei and J. Yu, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800006 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Mei, S. Sarina, Z. Wu, T. Liao, C. Yan and Z. Sun, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 394, 122529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bo, Z. Huang, J. Zhou, C. Peng and L. Lei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 462, 508–516 CrossRef .
J. Liu and E. Hua, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 46, 25827–25835 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
Table Content:

Chunyang Zhang
	Chunyang Zhang is currently a PhD student in the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University under the supervision of Prof. Maochang Liu. He received his BE degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Xi'an University of Technology in 2019. His current research focuses on excited-state non-adiabatic molecular dynamics calculations.

Guijun Chen
	Guijun Chen is a currently an MASc student in the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University under the supervision of Prof. Maochang Liu. He received his BE degree from the School of Energy and Power Engineering at Xi'an Jiaotong University in 2020. His current research focuses on first-principles calculations.

Yitao Si
	Yitao Si is currently a PhD student in the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University under the supervision of Prof. Maochang Liu. He received his BE degree from the School of Energy and Power Engineering at Xi'an Jiaotong University in 2017. His research interests mainly focus on first-principles calculations.

Maochang Liu
	Dr Maochang Liu is currently a Full Professor in the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, China. He received his PhD degree in Power Engineering and Engineering Thermal Physics in 2014 from Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. From Sep. 2011 to Sep. 2013, he worked as a Visiting Scholar at the Georgia Institute of Technology with Prof. Younan Xia. His research interest is focused on the controlled synthesis of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles and their related application in photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the flow chart for the study of the surface photocatalytic process.	 

 	Fig. 2  The schematic diagram of the surface state of hematite. The density of states for bulk, OH-terminated, and O-terminated Fe2O3 from top to bottom, respectively.6	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  The Wulff shape of α-Fe generated with different surface energy values. (a) The max Miller index is 3. (b) The max Miller index is 1.25	 
Db = Nb/A	(3)

 	Fig. 4  The Wulff shape and morphologies of α-Fe2O3 by theoretical calculation prediction with different crystal surface exposure ratios for (001), (012), (100), (101) and (110).27	 

 	Fig. 5  Formation energies of different defects on the Ta3N5(110) surface in (a) N-poor and (b) N-rich conditions. The position of the dashed line is the maximum ΔμO. The position of the dotted line in the N-rich condition is the maximum ΔμO in the region where ΔμMg is not relative to ΔμO.31	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of photocatalytic water splitting.42 (b) Water splitting reaction diagram on a semiconductor photocatalyst.43 (c) The band edge positions of some photocatalysts.44	 
ECBM > Ered	(5)
EVBM > Eox	(6)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscopy for scanning the active site on the surface step. (b) Post-processing images of electrical signals.62	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The Tasker type I surface. (b) The Tasker type II surface. (c) The Tasker type III surface. Q is the layer charge density and μ is the dipole moment in the repeat unit perpendicular to the surface.90 (d) Sequence of capacitors with surface charge density ±σ.92 (e) Spatial distribution of the electrostatic field E and potential V along a polar direction.93	 
μ = σR1,	(7)
ΔV = 4σR1.	(8)
μtotal = NσR1.	(9)
ES = 2πNR1σ2.	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 9  (a) TiO2(001) slab model and (b) (TiO2)n (n = 10) cluster adsorption model of water molecules.97	 

 	Fig. 10  Four common model construction methods. (a) Cluster model. (b) Point charge embedded cluster model. (c) Point charge embedding cluster model with polarization potential. (d) Periodic slab model.98	 
Φ = Evac − EF.	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 11  (a) A typical semi-infinite surface configuration by the SGF method.119 HS and HB are the Hamiltonians of the surface region (HS) and the principal layer of the semi-infinite bulk region, respectively. (b) Schematic diagram of the method for determining the VBM and the CBM positions (vs. SHE) by Huang et al.135 The cyan curve denotes the in-plane averaged electrostatic potential of the slab model along the z-direction. The purple curve denotes the macro-averaged electrostatic potential (the smoothed curve).	 
EVBMvs. vacuum = Evac − EΔV + EVBM,	(16)
ECBMvs. vacuum = Evac − EΔV + ECBM.	(17)

 	Fig. 12  Snapshots for the equilibrated anatase TiO2(001)/water interface model by FPMD simulation at 350 K. (a) (4 × 2) slab. (b) (2 × 2) slab.140 Ti atoms are depicted in light blue, O atoms in red, and H atoms in white. The dashed lines represent hydrogen bonds.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Anatase Wulff shape.143 (b) SEM image of anatase single crystal obtained by experiment.144 (c and d) Unrelaxed, clean (001) and (101) surfaces,144 respectively.	 

 	Fig. 14  Atomic structure of the (1 × 4) reconstructed (001) surface of the anatase TiO2 nanocrystal. (a) The (1 × 4) reconstructed atomic structure model of the (001) surface observed along the [010] (top) and [100] (bottom) directions. (Blue spheres represent Ti atoms and red is O). (b–e) The atomic-resolution HAADF and BF STEM images of the (1 × 4) reconstructed (001) surface observed along the [010] axis and the corresponding simulated images, respectively. (f) The 3-dimensional structure of the ADM model.154	 

 	Fig. 15  Atomic structure of the anatase TiO2 bulk-truncated (001) surface. (a) The atomic structural models of the bulk-truncated (001) surface observed along the [010] (top) and [100] (bottom) directions. (b–e) The atomic-resolution HAADF and BF STEM images of the bulk-truncated (001) surface observed along the [010] axis and corresponding simulated images, respectively. (f) The 3-dimensional atomic model of the bulk-truncated (001) surface.154	 

 	Fig. 16  Averaged electrostatic potential of the different Cu-terminated Cu2O slab models. The vacuum level shifted to zero.158	 

 	Fig. 17  (a and b) The LEED and STM images of the α-Fe2O3(102) (1 × 1) surface, respectively. (c and d) The LEED and STM images of the α-Fe2O3(102) (2 × 1) surface, respectively.171	 

 	Fig. 18  The perspective and side views of the minimum-energy configurations of α-Fe2O3(102) for (a and b) the bulk-terminated (1 × 1) surface, (c and d) the single oxygen vacancy (2 × 1) reconstruction surface and (e and f) the alternating trench (2 × 1) reconstruction surface.171	 

 	Fig. 19  Different Ti-modified α-Fe2O3(102) surfaces of (a–c) 40 × 40 nm2 STM images, (d–f) 9 × 4.5 nm2 STM images, and corresponding (h–g) LEED pattern172.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Ti-Modified (1 × 1) surface of Fe2O3(102) STM characterization diagram. (b) The experimental STM image qualitatively matches the simulated image assuming the trench defect model. (c) Top view and side view of the (6 × 1) supercell trench surface model.172	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Structural models of the different types of metal/TiO2 interface. The spheres in gray, blue, and red represent the atoms of Pt, Ti, and O, respectively.179 (b) Calculated SHBs with the measured metal(100) surface work function.179 (c) Spin-density plots for both the initial state (top) and the final state (bottom) of different-sized Pt cluster models.175	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) The side view of the BiVO4(010)–WO3(001) heterojunction system.180 (b) A magnified view of the interfacial contact region at BiVO4(010)–WO3(001), where new Bi–O bonds are formed. The spheres in pink, dark green, purple and red represent the atoms of Bi, V, W, and O, respectively.180 (c–e) Top view, side view, and three-dimensional structure of the g-C3N4/SnS2 heterostructure after geometry optimization, respectively.186	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
