Electrosynthesis of gradient TiO 2 nanotubes and rapid screening using scanning photoelectrochemical microscopy   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE00895K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00895K
(Communication)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 1099-1104Electrosynthesis of gradient TiO2 nanotubes and rapid screening using scanning photoelectrochemical microscopy†

        
          
            Florian 
            Gelb
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Chien 
            Chueh
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Neso 
            Sojic
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Valérie 
            Keller
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dodzi 
            Zigah
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Thomas 
            Cottineau
          
        
      *a
aCNRS, Univ. Strasbourg, Institut de Chimie et Procédés pour l’Energie, l’Environnement et la Santé, UMR 7515, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg, France. E-mail: cottineau@unistra.fr
bUniv. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, Institut des Sciences Moleculaires, UMR5255, 16 Avenue Pey-Berland, 33400 Talence, France
Received 
      4th October 2019
    , Accepted 20th December 2019First published on 26th December 2019AbstractHerein, we report a new approach that allows a fast investigation of the influence of the thickness of a TiO2 photoelectrochemical film. For this we developed a simple anodization method that allows the growth of, in one step, on a single titanium electrode, aligned TiO2 nanotubes with length changing gradually between 0 and 10 μm. We were able to tune the length of the tubes by controlling the immersion time within the electrolyte during the synthesis. The change of the length of the nanotubes over the entire surface of the electrode requires local probes to measure their properties. Therefore, in order to determine the optimal length of the nanotubes for photoelectrochemical application, the response of these electrodes was locally analysed using Scanning PhotoElectroChemical Microscopy.
Introduction
Over the past few years there has been a strong interest in light energy conversion motivated by the huge potential of renewable and clean energy provided by the sun combined with the urge related to climate change and to the diminution of fossil fuel resources easily accessible at low cost.1 New concepts are investigated with the objectives to decrease the price and to improve the conversion efficiency such as dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) or more recently cells based on perovskite absorbers are promising PV systems.2 Alternatively, photo-electrochemical cells (PECs) would pave the way to the direct production of solar fuel from sunlight.3,4 Several of these new concepts rely on thick porous semiconducting films that are responsible for the charge carrier transport (for DSSCs) and also for light absorption (PECs).5,6 It is necessary to find the optimal thickness of these films in order to manage the light and charge carrier transportation in the cell.7–9 This is particularly true for the case of tandem PEC cells in which two semi-conductors absorbing in two different spectral domains would be associated.10 The large band gap semiconductor would be in that case in the front irradiation configuration and a compromise should be found on the film thickness. Indeed, if a thick layer of photoactive material maximizes the light absorption (mainly occuring at the top of the film), it can result in a reduced photo-generated charge carrier collection at the back contact due to the higher probability of charge carrier recombination for longer distance.
In this context, the development of rapid screening methods for the film performance as a function of its thickness should be developed. Achieving such measurements requires two conditions: the first requirement is to obtain electrodes with a variable and well controlled thickness of the photoactive material. The change of the thickness must not have any impact on the morphology or other properties of the material such as its conductivity or its composition. The second requirement is to have a system that can achieve local PEC analysis with the highest resolution possible which is mainly related to the irradiation area.
So far a large number of rapid screening experiments have been used to determine the optimal composition of ternary oxides.11,12 For instance, an ambitious distributed combinatorial outreach program was conducted a few years ago using inkjet printing of semi-conductors with variable composition on conductive glass substrates.13 The most relevant example we found concerning rapid PEC screening to study the influence of geometrical parameters on a single electrode was provided by Loget et al.14 They used a bipolar anodization method to grow titanium dioxide nanotubes (TiO2-NTs) with variable length on a single electrode. The bipolar anodization method was also employed to synthesize a gradient of TiO2-NTs for photo-catalytic and biomedical applications.15,16 Nevertheless, considering the formation mechanism of anodic TiO2-NTs,17 the potential variation along the Ti foil in bipolar anodization induces a change of the NT length but it also changes the diameter and the wall thickness of the tubes. Consequently, the apparent density of TiO2 in the film will change and the mean free path of light will not be homogeneous for the whole electrode. Furthermore, during the bipolar synthesis, it is not possible to determine the charge transferred at each position of the electrode. The knowledge of this value is important since it can be directly related to the quantity of TiO2 electrochemically formed during the anodization of the titanium foil. Furthermore, in all the studies mentioned above, the light source used had a spot diameter larger than 1 mm, which limits the accuracy of the local photocurrent determination.
Scanning PhotoElectroChemical Microscopy (SPECM) is a scanning probe technique that uses an optical fiber (or an optoelectrode) as a probe to analyze a surface locally.18–20 Unlike conventional photoelectrochemical measurements, which give a global response of the surface, in SPECM a local response is obtained. In this configuration the spatial resolution is determined by the illuminated area. The use of an optical fiber allows the photoelectrochemical reaction to be triggered only where the surface is illuminated.21–23 The small aperture of the optical fiber and the short distance between the fiber and the sample result in a small spot size of around 200 μm. Therefore, SPECM is a technique of choice to study an inhomogeneous surface or to screen different materials present on the same substrate. As an example, it was used to determine the optimal Zn doping of WO3 on material spots deposited on a single electrode24 and also to show that addition of Ag improves the behaviour of Fe2O3 by screening micrometer spots with different compositions.25 In our case, we were able, with the SPECM, to make a rapid screening, with a high resolution, of the nanotube properties.
In the present work, we developed a new method to synthesize anodic TiO2-NTs with a changing length on a single electrode (hereafter named VLTE for the Variable Length TiO2-NT Electrode). This simple method allows fabricating an electrode fully covered with these NTs which have an increasing length in one direction of the film. These model electrodes with variable nanotube lengths were then tested with SPECM in order to determine the optimal TiO2-NT film thickness for their use as photoanodes for water splitting.
Variable length TiO2-NT electrode synthesis
To achieve the growth of TiO2-NTs with a gradual length on a single electrode, we developed a simple method based on the control of the exposure time of the titanium to the electrolyte. Such an approach was attempted earlier but in a configuration in which both the electrolyte exposure time and the applied potential were changed.26 For this reason and also due to the use of the aqueous based electrolyte, mainly the diameter of the NTs was changed and the length only increased from 300 to 500 nm.
In our case for growing NTs with different lengths, a titanium foil and the platinum electrode are placed vertically in a Teflon cell as schematically represented in Fig. 1. At the beginning of the synthesis, both electrodes are immersed in an ethylene glycol-based electrolyte which is then slowly removed from the cell by a peristaltic pump. As the level of the electrolyte goes down progressively, an increasing part of the titanium is not anymore in contact with the electrolyte and the nanotube growth is inhibited in that area. After the synthesis, the electrode is then carefully rinsed with deionized water and dry under nitrogen flux and annealed at 500 °C under air for 4 h (detailed synthesis conditions are given in the ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Schematic principle of VLTE synthesis by electrolyte pumping. 
After the experiment, the electrode exhibits horizontal iridescences which are a first indication of the change of the thickness of the TiO2-NT film (ESI Fig. S1†). These lines arise from light interference in the porous film and as the thickness changes, different wavelengths are successively reflected.27
The whole electrode was then introduced into a SEM and observed all along the z axis. Fig. 2 shows some SEM images of the TiO2-NT films at different heights of the electrode (the whole set of images can be seen in ESI Fig. S2†). They clearly show the growth of the nanotubes from the initial state with small nanotubes of a few hundred nm at the top of the electrode to NTs with a length of several micrometers at the bottom. It should be noticed that for the shortest nanotubes, an initiation layer resulting from a pre-anodization step is still present. This first anodization and the removal of the primary nanotube layer are necessary to ensure a better adhesion of the nanotubes to the film and without this initial step, delamination of the longer NTs is observed on the VLTE.28 The length of the NTs at different positions on the electrode was measured and is plotted in Fig. 3a. It can be seen that this length increases from 780 to 5950 nm ± 200 nm and then is slightly reduced at the bottom of the nanotubes. The initial length is not zero since the electrolyte pumping starts 100 s after the beginning of the anodization. This duration is enough to form small NTs at the top of the electrode. The decrease of the length observed at the bottom of the electrode can be explained by the formation mechanism of the nanotubes which can be schematically described according to the following equations: Ti + 2H2O → TiO2 + 4e− + 4H+(1) TiO2 + 6F− + 4H+ → [TiF6]2− + 2H2O(2)
 Fig. 2  SEM images of TiO2-NTs observed at different heights (h) of the electrode (observed with a tilt angle of 45°). 
 Fig. 3  (a) Length and diameter of the nanotubes as a function of the position from the top of the electrode determined by SEM. (b) Anodization parameters: applied voltage and height of the electrolyte pumped out as a function of time. (c) Anodization current and calculated charge density evolution during the VLTE synthesis. (d) Measured TiO2-NT length as a function of the calculated charge density (Q) (correlation parameter estimated from linear regression: 865 nm C−1 cm2). 
TiO2 is formed electrochemically at the Ti surface while the nanotubular structure is achieved by its partial dissolution by the fluoride present in the electrolyte. The top of the nanotubes is then formed at the beginning of the anodization.
A too long exposure to the electrolyte results in the formation of a so-called “nanograss” layer at the top of the film.17 This phenomenon results directly from a thinning of the nanotube wall according to eqn (2) and eventually the total dissolution and collapse of the nanotube top, and consequently the length does not increase continuously. This thinning of the NT wall at the top can be observed in ESI Fig. S3:† the SEM images of the top of the NT film at different heights (or anodization times) clearly show the transition from the initiation layer to the nanograss. Fig. 3a also shows the values of the external diameter of the NTs measured at their half height (diameters at the top and bottom of the nanotubes are presented in ESI Fig. S4†). As observed under these synthesis conditions, the diameter has an average value of 102 ± 10 nm and does not change significantly depending on the position of the NTs on the electrode.
The anodization data as a function of time are presented in Fig. 3b and c. At the beginning, the applied voltage (U) increases from 0 to 45 V which is accompanied by an increase of the current (I) that reaches a maximum and slowly decreases when the potential is stabilized to 45 V. It should be noticed that the current tends to 0 in our case since a smaller surface is exposed, while for classical anodization the current reaches a plateau when an equilibrium between oxide formation and dissolution is reached (eqn (1) and (2)). According to eqn (1) the quantity of TiO2 formed during the anodization should be proportional to the charge transferred. In order to correlate this value with the length of the TiO2 nanotubes, we used the VLTE anodization data (Fig. 3b) to determine the charge density transferred at each position of the electrode: first, the height of the electrolyte pumped out as a function of time, h(t), can be calculated from the flow imposed by the pump (fp) according to: (pump starts at t = 100 s; for t < 100 s, h(t) = 0) (3)
The constant (K) depends on the geometry of the container (its horizontal section) and corresponds to the volume needed to change the height of 1 mm. In our case, the cell is a cylinder with a diameter of 7 cm and K = 3.848 mL mm−1. The value of h(t), represented in Fig. 3b (green curve), can be used to determine the surface of the electrode in contact with the electrolyte at any time. Knowing the anodization current from the synthesis data I(t) the charge used for the nanotube synthesis as a function of time and consequently each position of the electrode can be calculated by the following integral: (4)where W and L are the width and the length of the electrode. Then, the evolution between the nanotube length and the charge density can be calculated (Fig. 3c). Excluding the area where the nanograss is formed (i.e. h > 9.1 mm or Q > 7.7 C cm−2), this evolution is linear with a growth ratio of 865 nm C−1 cm2.
This confirms with a single electrode synthesis, that according to eqn (1), the NT length is proportional to the quantity of TiO2 formed electrochemically. The length of the nanotubes in the VLTE can thus be estimated by knowing the total charge transferred at each position of the electrode for a given set of synthesis conditions.
SPECM mapping
The VLTE electrode was fixed horizontally on a glass slide and then a cell made of PDMS was built around the sample. The SPECM experiment was run in a three electrode configuration. A platinum mesh was used as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl (NaCl 3 M) was used as the reference electrode. The VLTE was the working electrode and its potential was set at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The sample was irradiated through an optical fiber with a numerical aperture of 0.22 and a core diameter of 200 μm. The light source was a mercury-xenon lamp (LC8 from Hamamatsu) providing a spectrum centered at 365 nm. The optical fiber was moved along the xy axes at a scan rate of 400 μm s−1, with steps every 40 μm each 0.1 s, and z, the distance between the tip and the surface, was constant (20 μm) during the measurement. When the UV source was turned on, the optical fiber illuminated locally the TiO2-NTs, and the current was simultaneously recorded as a function of the optical fiber position. This current corresponds to the local photoelectrochemical oxidation of water, which happens only below the light spot (Fig. 4). With this system, a 2D image of TiO2 nanotube gradient was obtained in an area of 10 × 2 mm2, located in the middle of the electrode, first in the dark and then under illumination with UV light (Fig. 5a).
 Fig. 4  Scheme of the setup with the optical fiber scanning the gradient of TiO2-NTs during the SPECM experiment. 
 Fig. 5  (a) SPECM results in the dark and under illumination at λ = 365 nm, (b) Photocurrent profile at 3 positions and (c) the corresponding NT length for the same VLTE. 
In the dark, the current has a residual value below 6.5 μA. Under UV light irradiation, an increase of the current clearly appears on the sample even for short nanotubes. This current increases until a maximum located approximately in the center of the electrode. Then, for the longer nanotubes, the photocurrent decreases. Fig. 5b shows photocurrent evolutions at three positions of the electrode and their average. The photocurrent appears for short nanotubes and reaches a local maximum at 0.5 mm from the top of the electrode. This local maximum might be attributed to the partial contribution of the dense underlying TiO2 layer located at the interface between the NTs and Ti substrate.6 With longer nanotubes, the contribution of this dense layer is reduced since less light can reach it and mainly the NTs contribute to the photocurrent. After this local maximum, the photocurrent increases with the length of the NTs until a maximum of 10.1 μA at 5.5 mm from the top of the electrode; a position for which TiO2-NTs have a length of 4.3 ± 0.2 μm. The length corresponding to this maximal photocurrent is coherent with measurements performed for nanotubes of different lengths, synthesized by a classical method. As detailed in ESI† (Fig. S6†), TiO2-NT films with different lengths were tested in a normal 3 electrode PEC setup. The highest photocurrent and yield were measured for NTs with a length of approximately 4 μm. This value is also in agreement with the optimal thickness of the NT film reported by other teams, which was between 4 and 6 μm in the case of photo-(electro)catalytic applications.29,30 This maximum of efficiency for this length is explained by a balance between two properties governing the photocurrent generation: (i) a good light absorption, resulting in a high number of e−/h+ pairs generated which increases with the thickness and (ii) efficient transport of the electrons to the back contact (the Ti foil). The latter is limited by the diffusion of electrons in TiO2 and will then be reduced for thick nanotube films.6,9
To determine the reliability of our approach combining variable length nanotube synthesis and SPECM measurements, we compared our results with those of a reference TiO2-NT electrode. For this, nanotubes were grown in the same electrolyte and the charge transferred was limited to 5 C cm−2, resulting in a titanium foil covered with NTs having a length of 4050 ± 110 nm. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of this electrode was then measured (data are in Fig. S7†). EQE represents the ratio between the quantity of electrons collected and the number of incident photons at a given wavelength according to: (5)where jph(λ) and P(λ) are the measured photocurrent and the incident light power density at a given wavelength λ, respectively. For the reference electrode an EQE value of 0.15 was obtained at 365 nm which is the central wavelength of the UV light source used in the SPECM setting. The same calculation can be done for the SPECM system knowing the irradiation power at the optical fiber exit (115 ± 50 μW). For NTs having a length of 4000 nm the measured photocurrent triggered by this irradiation is 3.5 μA. By applying eqn (5), an EQE of 0.15 ± 0.06 is obtained. This value is in good agreement with the EQE obtained at 365 nm for the reference sample, confirming the good response of the VLTE electrode even with the localized spot of the SPECM system (estimated spot diameter 215 ± 50 μm). The high uncertainty is explained by the difficulty to measure the power at the fiber output.
Defect identification with SPECM

Fig. 6 shows the SPECM mapping of a part of a second VLTE electrode. For this electrode, the evolution of nanotube length as a function of the anodization charge was calculated according to the same protocol as earlier, and the growth factor of 850 nm C−1 cm2 is consistent with the first sample. The calculation and data for this sample are presented in Fig. S12.† On the photocurrent mapping, lines with lower photocurrent can be observed on the left of the image which corresponds to the bottom of the electrode. Their positions correspond to scratches that were done on one side of the electrode surface. As observed by SEM in Fig. 6b, these scratches are 10 μm in width. Even if the optical fiber aperture is larger, the good spatial and electrochemical resolution of the SPECM allows localizing these stripes. Similarly, a small round area can be observed in the center of the mapping image. Its position perfectly matches with a small puncture that was done with a needle on the VLTE sample that can be observed optically in Fig. 6c.
 Fig. 6  (a) SPECM mapping of a second VLTE sample. (b) SEM images of scratches made at the bottom of the nanotubes. (c and d) Dark field optical images of a puncture on the TiO2-NT electrode and of the side of the electrode. 
The mapping of this VLTE surface was done on the side of the titanium foil and a small strip with a low photocurrent can be observed at the top and the left of Fig. 6a. This observation can be related to the side effect phenomenon occurring during the growth of the nanotube film. This can be optically related to the observation of Fig. 6d: in this dark field image of the surface, at the top edge of the electrode, the TiO2-NT film appears in red and a strip of approximately 100 μm not covered with nanotubes appears on the side of the electrode in grey. This can be explained by a peeling of the nanotube film on the side of the electrode during the synthesis or rinsing/annealing step. This side effect was also observed for other samples (example of dark field images in Fig. S5†).
Besides confirming the reproducibility of the VLTE electrode synthesis, the observation of this second sample allows us to highlight the good resolution and the potential application of the SPECM method to detect point defects in electrodes for PEC applications.
Conclusions
In this work we report a simple and reproducible synthesis method for an aligned TiO2-NT electrode on which the length of the nanotubes can be tuned along one direction. By changing the contact time between the electrolyte and the titanium substrate, NTs having a length ranging from a few hundred nm up to a few μm can be grown on a single electrode. Furthermore, by this approach the diameter of the nanotubes does not change significantly and this type of electrode allows local studies of the influence of the NT length independently of other parameters.
In order to measure the performance of these original samples with a variable thickness of the photoactive material, we used SPECM in order to study the influence of the nanotube length on the generated photocurrent for the water splitting reaction. The mapping image revealed a significant photocurrent change in the direction of the length gradient while a good homogeneity of the photocurrent appeared in the lateral direction. The photocurrent profile indicates a maximum for nanotubes having a length of 4300 nm, a value which is consistent with previously reported studies. This approach combining gradient synthesis and SPECM measurements can be used to measure quickly the optimal value of a parameter while limiting the synthesis time by doing all the tests locally on a single electrode.
Furthermore the SPECM measurements present an excellent spatial and electrochemical resolution that could allow the detection of defects in photo-electrochemical films from the perspective of electrode diagnostics. We believe that this resolution can further be improved by optimizing electrochemical parameters and the aperture of the optical fiber.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
FG is grateful to CNRS for funding PhD research through the ANR BAGETE (ANR-16-CE05-0001-01). Thierry Dintzer and the SEM-CRO Platform are acknowledged for SEM images.
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
S. I. Seok, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Small, 2018, 14, 1704177 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Niu, D. Han, T. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700555 CrossRef .
K. Sivula and R. van de Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
P. Schmuki, K. Lee and A. Mazare, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9385–9454 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Peter, Electroanalysis, 2015, 27, 864–871 CrossRef CAS .
D. Klotz, D. A. Grave and A. Rothschild, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 20383–20392 RSC .
K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8006–8022 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi and E. A. Santori, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sliozberg, H. S. Stein, C. Khare, B. A. Parkinson, A. Ludwig and W. Schuhmann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4883–4889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sliozberg, D. Schäfer, T. Erichsen, R. Meyer, C. Khare, A. Ludwig and W. Schuhmann, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1270–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Anunson, G. R. Winkler, J. R. Winkler, B. A. Parkinson and J. D. Schuttlefield Christus, J. Chem. Educ., 2013, 90, 1333–1340 CrossRef CAS .
G. Loget, S. So, R. Hahn and P. Schmuki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17740–17745 RSC .
G. Loget and P. Schmuki, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 15356–15363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mu, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, R. Hu, X. Zhao, A. Huang, R. Zhang, X. Liu, Q. Huang and C. Lin, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 2804–2814 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy, S. Berger and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2904–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Casillas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L16 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Ye, S. Pan and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 7445–7450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gutkowski, C. Khare, F. Conzuelo, Y. U. Kayran, A. Ludwig and W. Schuhmann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1213–1221 RSC .
H. Ye, H. S. Park and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12464–12470 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wittstock, S. Rastgar and S. Scarabino, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 13, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
V. Badets, G. Loget, P. Garrigue, N. Sojic and D. Zigah, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 84–91 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Leonard, K. M. Nam, H. C. Lee, S. H. Kang, H. S. Park and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15901–15910 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Jang, K. Y. Yoon, X. Xiao, F.-R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4803–4810 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Ni, C. J. Frandsen, L.-H. Chen, Y.-Y. Zhang, J. Khamwannah, G. He, T.-T. Tang and S. Jin, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2013, 15, 464–468 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cottineau, H. Cachet, V. Keller and E. M. M. Sutter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 31469–31478 RSC .
J. M. Macak, S. P. Albu and P. Schmuki, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2007, 1, 181–183 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Marien, T. Cottineau, D. Robert and P. Drogui, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, K. Huo, L. Hu, Z. Wu and P. K. Chu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 2771–2778 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental parameters; the optical image and a full set of SEM images of the VLTE sample; CV and EQE of the reference TiO2-NT electrode; XRD and stability tests of the VLTE sample; anodization curve of the second VLTE sample. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00895kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic principle of VLTE synthesis by electrolyte pumping.	 
Ti + 2H2O → TiO2 + 4e− + 4H+	(1)
TiO2 + 6F− + 4H+ → [TiF6]2− + 2H2O	(2)

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of TiO2-NTs observed at different heights (h) of the electrode (observed with a tilt angle of 45°).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Length and diameter of the nanotubes as a function of the position from the top of the electrode determined by SEM. (b) Anodization parameters: applied voltage and height of the electrolyte pumped out as a function of time. (c) Anodization current and calculated charge density evolution during the VLTE synthesis. (d) Measured TiO2-NT length as a function of the calculated charge density (Q) (correlation parameter estimated from linear regression: 865 nm C−1 cm2).	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Scheme of the setup with the optical fiber scanning the gradient of TiO2-NTs during the SPECM experiment.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SPECM results in the dark and under illumination at λ = 365 nm, (b) Photocurrent profile at 3 positions and (c) the corresponding NT length for the same VLTE.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 6  (a) SPECM mapping of a second VLTE sample. (b) SEM images of scratches made at the bottom of the nanotubes. (c and d) Dark field optical images of a puncture on the TiO2-NT electrode and of the side of the electrode.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental parameters; the optical image and a full set of SEM images of the VLTE sample; CV and EQE of the reference TiO2-NT electrode; XRD and stability tests of the VLTE sample; anodization curve of the second VLTE sample. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00895k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
