Titanium incorporation into hematite photoelectrodes: theoretical considerations and experimental observations  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE01066C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE01066C
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3100-3121Titanium incorporation into hematite photoelectrodes: theoretical considerations and experimental observations

        
          
            C. X. 
            Kronawitter
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            I. 
            Zegkinoglou
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            S.-H. 
            Shen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Liao
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            I. S. 
            Cho
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            O. 
            Zandi
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Y.-S. 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            K. 
            Lashgari
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            G. 
            Westin
          
        
      hbk, 
      
        
          
            J.-H. 
            Guo
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            F. J. 
            Himpsel
          
        
      i, 
      
        
          
            E. A. 
            Carter
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            X. L. 
            Zheng
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            T. W. 
            Hamann
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            B. E. 
            Koel
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. S. 
            Mao
          
        
      *jk and 

        
          
            L. 
            Vayssieres
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
bInternational Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, P. R. China. E-mail: lionelv@xjtu.edu.cn
cAdvanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
dDepartment of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics, and Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
eDepartment of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
fDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
gDepartment of Chemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
hDepartment of Chemistry-Ångström, Uppsala University, Uppsala 75121, Sweden
iDepartment of Physics, University of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA
jDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. E-mail: ssmao@me.berkeley.edu
kInternational Institute of New Energy, Shenzhen 518031, P. R. China
Received 
      4th April 2014
    , Accepted 24th June 2014First published on 24th June 2014AbstractA theoretical and experimental perspective on the role of titanium impurities in hematite (α-Fe2O3) nanostructured photoelectrodes for solar fuel synthesis devices is provided. Titanium incorporation is a known correlate to efficiency enhancement in α-Fe2O3 photoanodes for solar water oxidation; here the relevant literature and the latest advances are presented and various proposed mechanisms for enhancement are contrasted. Available experimental evidence suggests that Ti incorporation increases net electron carrier concentrations in electrodes, most likely to the extent that (synthesis-dependent) charge compensating cation vacancies are not present. However, electron conductivity increases alone cannot quantitatively account for the large associated photoelectrochemical performance enhancements. The magnitudes of the effects of Ti incorporation on electronic and magnetic properties appear to be highly synthesis-dependent, which has made difficult the development of consistent and general mechanisms explaining experimental and theoretical observations. In this context, we consider how the electronic structure correlates with Ti impurity incorporation in α-Fe2O3 from the perspective of synchrotron-based soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements. Measurements are performed on sets of electrodes fabricated by five relevant and unrelated chemical and physical techniques. The effects of titanium impurities are reflected in the electronic structure through several universally observed spectral characteristics, irrespective of the synthesis techniques. Absorption spectra at the oxygen K-edge show that Ti incorporation is associated with new oxygen 2p-hybridized states, overlapping with and distorting the known unoccupied Fe 3d–O 2p band of α-Fe2O3. This is an indication of mixing of Ti s and d states in the conduction band of α-Fe2O3. A comparison of spectra obtained with electron and photon detection shows that the effects of Ti incorporation on the conduction band are more pronounced in the near-surface region. Titanium L2,3-edge absorption spectra show that titanium is incorporated into α-Fe2O3 as Ti4+ by all fabrication methods, with no long-range titania order detected. Iron L2,3-edge absorption spectra indicate that Ti incorporation is not associated with the formation of any significant concentrations of Fe2+, an observation common to many prior studies on this material system.

Broader context
Numerous designs for solar hydrogen generation devices require the use of a visible light-absorbing and chemically stable electrode material that is photoelectrochemically active for the oxidation of water. Hematite (α-Fe2O3), an earth-abundant and non-toxic oxide, enables photoelectrochemical water oxidation in these configurations, but its implementation requires engineering to reduce the required overpotential such that sufficient anodic photocurrent densities are obtained under device operating conditions. In this perspective, we consider, theoretically and experimentally, the influence of titanium impurity incorporation on the photoelectrochemical properties and electronic structures of α-Fe2O3 photoanodes for solar water splitting. In addition to the review of the current literature, the electronic structure, in the context of synchrotron-based X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements on electrodes fabricated by five different physical and chemical techniques, is discussed.

1. Introduction
This article considers the influence of titanium impurity incorporation on the photoelectrochemical performance and electronic structures of hematite (α-Fe2O3) photoanodes for solar fuel synthesis.1–9 A review of prior work on this material system is presented, drawing conclusions from photoelectrochemical experiments and theoretical predictions. We then present new synchrotron-based electronic structure measurements on Ti-modified α-Fe2O3 electrodes (referred to in this article as Ti:α-Fe2O3), fabricated by five relevant synthetic methods: physical vapor deposition by pulsed laser deposition;10 atomic layer deposition;11 sol–flame synthesis;12 all-alkoxide sol–gel synthesis, and aqueous chemical growth.13 These results are interpreted and generalized in the context of the existing literature. The comparison of the electronic states resulting from different synthesis methods is aimed at fostering a rational design of improved active oxide electrodes for photoelectrochemical cells.
Oxide photoelectrodes can be designed to enable the generation of chemical fuels because they facilitate, with high stability, light absorption, charge separation, and electrochemical reactions in solar fuel synthesis devices.14–16 For synthetic fuels, α-Fe2O3 is most importantly applied in photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells to enable the photo-oxidation of water, an anodic electrochemical reaction. That is, at minimum four electrons are injected from an aqueous electrolyte into a solid state α-Fe2O3 electrode, yielding oxygen gas as a reaction product. Driving the water oxidation reaction efficiently is a key technological hurdle impeding the development of devices enabling generation of renewable fuels, such as hydrogen from water reduction or hydrocarbons from carbon dioxide reduction.
In many cases, photoelectrochemical devices involving transition metal oxides can be made more efficient through electrode modifications that increase the mobility, concentration, and/or lifetime of charges participating in electrochemical reactions.17 For α-Fe2O3, a d5 transition metal oxide charge-transfer insulator, these quantities are orders of magnitude lower than those measured for oxides with unfilled18 or mostly-filled d orbitals.19 Incorporation of cations into α-Fe2O3 has been shown to influence PEC performance through a number of mechanisms, including for example alteration to lattice parameters (trivalent cations),20 increase of carrier concentration (tetravalent and pentavalent cations),21 and suppression of recombination through an increased electric field near the electrode–electrolyte interface.22
Titanium incorporation is a known correlate to efficiency enhancement in α-Fe2O3 photoanodes. As will be discussed here, numerous mechanisms have been proposed in the literature to explain the observed correlation. Developing a cohesive explanation for performance enhancement has been complicated by the observation that Ti incorporation strongly influences the morphology of resultant films. Morphological effects are not easily decoupled from data in PEC studies. In addition, the synthesis conditions appear to strongly influence the effect of Ti incorporation on performance and physical properties, since the growth parameters dictate the formation of non-innocent, electronically active defects. Some groups suggest that the mechanism in some way involves titanium's role in improving the collection of majority carriers (electrons) at the back contact of the electrode, thereby reducing electron–hole recombination, a process that competes directly with the surface electrochemical reaction of holes in α-Fe2O3 anodes.23
Electron conduction in hematite is known to occur via the small polaron hopping mechanism at room temperature.24 Due to significant electron–phonon coupling, conductivity involves the transport of the electron and its polarized local structure (polaron), which has a considerably higher effective mass than a free electron. The conductivity enhancement associated with Ti incorporation has often been suggested to result from substitutional Ti4+, which when introduced into the α-Fe2O3 lattice generates equivalent concentrations of Fe2+ to maintain the average charge per cation of +3. The additional electrons associated with Fe2+ ions could exist as free carriers for surrounding Fe3+ ions, or alternatively remained trapped and therefore yield no conductivity/photocurrent enhancement.25
However, there is evidence suggesting significant Fe2+ concentrations are not required for activity enhancement. These characteristics are noted in a comprehensive evaluation (discussed in more detail below) of the transport properties of Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 epitaxial films grown by molecular beam epitaxy,24 which are consistent with the room temperature small polaron hopping mechanism. Notably in this study conductivity enhancements are dependent on fabrication conditions, where slow growth rates were found to be associated with cation vacancies, inducing electron donor compensation and yielding highly resistive samples.24
However, it has been noted27 that conductivity enhancements and reduced ohmic drop across electrodes cannot alone explain the efficiency enhancement associated with Ti modification. Ref. 27 considers a hypothetical one micrometer thick, highly resistive film (ρ ∼ 105 Ω cm). If this photoelectrode was operating at the theoretical maximum efficiency, corresponding to complete absorption and conversion of light whose energy exceeds the bandgap energy, the potential drop across the film is only 100 mV.27 In contrast to this modest potential drop, in the literature the PEC performance improvement associated with Ti incorporation is much more notable. In the following sections, we discuss selected experimental work from the literature and describe major explanations given for solar device performance enhancement associated with Ti incorporation.
2. Prior experimental work
2.1 Materials synthesis and photoelectrochemistry

Table 1 provides an overview of selected studies on photoelectrochemical behavior of Ti:α-Fe2O3 photoanodes, organized by the synthesis technique. The table indicates the synthesis technique, provides a representative image of the electrode morphology on the mesoscale and lists corresponding relevant PEC performance metrics. Major conclusions from these works are summarized below. As above, we adopt the notation Ti:α-Fe2O3 to refer to all samples, regardless of whether they are doped in the sense as classically understood in the semiconductor physics terminology. For details, including the optimum dopant concentrations in some cases, readers are referred to the individual studies. Typical optima are in the range of 1–10 atomic percent Ti.11
Table 1 Literature survey of photoelectrochemical studies of Ti:α-Fe2O3 photoanodes (sorted by synthesis technique). The synthesis technique, representative scanning electron micrographs and corresponding PEC performance metrics are included




Sample
Fabrication
Thin film texture
Photoelectrochemistry
Ref.




Ti:α-Fe2O3
Pulsed laser deposition



Photocurrent density: 0.5 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 15% at 360 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH (pH = 13)

28



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Pulsed laser deposition



Photocurrent density: 2.1 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH

29



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Atomic layer deposition



Photocurrent density: 0.8 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 25% at 400 nm at 1.8 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 0.1 M phosphate buffer + 200 mM KCl (pH = 6.9)

11



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Atomic oxygen assisted molecular beam epitaxy
None
Photocurrent density: approx. 2.3 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: approx. 6.4% at 350 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH (pH = 13)

60



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Atomic oxygen assisted molecular beam epitaxy
None
Photocurrent density: 8 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 15% at 360 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH

31



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition



Photocurrent density: 1.0 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 27.2% at 400 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

37



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Radio frequency magnetron co-sputtering



Photocurrent density: 13 μA cm−2 at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 3.5% at 400 nm at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

26



Mg,Ti:α-Fe2O3
Radio frequency reactive co-sputtering



Photocurrent density: ∼20 μA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 3.2% at 400 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1 M Na2SO4

38



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Reactive DC magnetron sputtering



Photocurrent density: 0.75 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V vs. SCE; IPCE: 14% at 400 nm at 0.5 V vs. SCE; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

27



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Reactive ballistic deposition



Photocurrent density: 585 μA cm−2 at 1.4 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 31% at 360 nm and 1.4 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH (pH = 13.6)

22



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Solution growth and electrodeposition; post-growth doping



Photocurrent density: 0.67 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH (pH = 13.6)

40



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Electrodeposition; post-growth doping



Photocurrent density: 1.4 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 25% at 330 nm at 1.5 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH

41



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Spray pyrolysis deposition



Photocurrent density: 1.98 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V vs. SCE; solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency: 1.38% at 0.5 V vs. SCE; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

43



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Spray pyrolysis deposition
None
Photocurrent density: 4.05 mA cm−2 at 0.45 V vs. NHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

44



Al,Ti:α-Fe2O3
Spray pyrolysis deposition
None
Photocurrent density: 4.38 mA cm−2 at 0.45 V vs. NHE; IPCE: 25% at 400 nm at 0.7 V vs. NHE; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH

44



Zn,Ti:α-Fe2O3
Spray pyrolysis deposition
None
Photocurrent density: ∼3.8 mA cm−2 at 0.45 V vs. NHE; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH

44



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis
None
Photocurrent density: 1.06 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 22% at 365 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

45



Si,Ti:α-Fe2O3
Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis
None
Photocurrent density: 2.15 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 34% at 365 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

45



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Sol–gel method



Photocurrent density: 103 μA cm−2 at 0.2 V vs. SCE; IPCE: 32.6% at 400 nm at 0 V vs. SCE; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

46



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Deposition-annealing process



Photocurrent density: 2.80 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 22% at 350 nm at 1.02 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

47



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Hydrothermal method



Photocurrent density: 1.91 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 60% at 350 nm at 1.53 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: NaOH (pH = 13.6)

49



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Hydrothermal method



Photocurrent density: ∼0.6 mA cm−2 at 0.2 V vs. SCE; electrolyte: NaOH (pH = 13.6)

50



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Hydrothermal method



Photocurrent density: 0.15 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

52



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Hydrothermal method; in situ solid-state reaction method



Photocurrent density: 1.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)

53



Ti:α-Fe2O3
Hydrothermal method



Photocurrent density: 0.66 mA cm−2 at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 27% at 360 nm at 1.23 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 0.5 M NaCl (pH 6.7)

58





The morphological, optical, and photoelectrochemical properties of Ti:α-Fe2O3 films fabricated on fluorinated SnO2 substrates (FTO) by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) have been reported.28 The results suggested that the efficiency of electron transport to the back contact is a critical parameter influencing photoelectrochemical performance. In this study, denser electrodes deposited at 300 °C were significantly more efficient than porous electrodes deposited at 23 °C, despite their apparent increased surface area. Lee et al. used PLD to fabricate Ti-α-Fe2O3 electrodes with a column-like porous nanostructure.29 It was found that the porosity and related photoelectrochemical performance could be modified by controlling the kinetic energy of the ablated species through variation of deposition background pressure.
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) enables control of the morphology and thickness of the α-Fe2O3 films as well as the concentration and distribution of Ti atoms. Zandi et al. used ALD to deposit a uniform thin film of Ti:α-Fe2O3 as an electrode on FTO substrates and compared its PEC performance with that of an undoped α-Fe2O3 electrode. It was shown that incorporation of a relatively large percentage of Ti impurities into α-Fe2O3 electrodes dramatically enhanced the PEC water oxidation performance.11 This performance enhancement was attributed to a combination of improved bulk material properties (resulting in increased hole collection length) and surface properties (resulting in increased water oxidation efficiency). These property modifications were stated to result from resurrection of a dead layer and a dead surface, respectively, by the Ti impurity atoms. Alternate conditions for atomic layer deposition of Ti:α-Fe2O3 have been reported recently.30
It was demonstrated that molecular beam epitaxy assisted by atomic oxygen is also a suitable technique to fabricate controlled epitaxial undoped and Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 films as photoanodes for solar water splitting.31–33 For α-Fe2O3(0001) thin films grown on Pt(111) single crystalline substrates, Ti doping was shown to induce a slight modification of the oxygen octahedron by substituting for Fe3+ in the hematite lattice. Improvement of PEC properties in the Ti-doped sample was attributed to an increase of electrical conductivity, induced by a shift of the Fermi level in the doped sample.33
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) techniques, including AACVD (aerosol-assisted chemical vapor deposition) and APCVD (atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition), have been used to prepare undoped and Si- and Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 nanostructures.34–36 It was recently reported that photoelectrochemically active Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films with preferred crystallographic growth along the (110) direction were successfully synthesized by APCVD. The Ti concentration could be controlled by varying the delivery rate of Fe(CO)5 and TiCl4 precursors.37 A maximum efficiency was observed at ∼0.8 atom% Ti in hematite, with the incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) measured in an alkaline electrolyte to be a high value of 27.2% under an applied bias of 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl at 400 nm for water splitting. The PEC performance improvement associated with Ti was related to enhanced electric conductivity, beneficial feature sizes, and reduced trap state density in the lattice.
Tang et al. reported on the synthesis of pure and Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 thin films by radio frequency (RF) magnetron co-sputtering of iron oxide and titanium targets under Ar/O2 ambient conditions.26 The Ti concentration in Ti-doped films was controlled by varying the RF power to the titanium target. It was demonstrated that the photoresponse of Ti:α-Fe2O3 was improved as compared to the pure α-Fe2O3 films and the flatband potentials were negatively shifted toward more favorable potentials for water splitting. The performance improvements were attributed to enhanced conductivity due to increased donor concentrations and improved crystallinity. In a later study, using the same method they successfully prepared charge-compensated Ti and Mg co-doped α-Fe2O3 thin films.38 It was suggested that the charge-compensated donor–acceptor co-doping can lead to increased electron mobility, optimized electrical conductivity, as well as reduced carrier recombination. As a result, the Ti and Mg co-doped α-Fe2O3 thin films exhibited significantly enhanced PEC performance as compared to pure and solely Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 thin films. Co-doped systems involving Ti have also been explored by combinatorial methods.39 Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin film electrodes for PEC water splitting have been prepared by Glasscock et al. using reactive DC magnetron sputtering.27 Ti:α-Fe2O3 exhibited larger photocurrent as well as lower onset potential than the undoped material, which was explained by the improved electrical conductivity, the lowered activation energy, and the increased charge carrier density induced by Ti doping.
Hahn et al. demonstrated the preparation and optimization of nanostructured Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films using the reactive ballistic deposition (RBD) technique, and studied their physical, chemical, and PEC properties.22 They found that manipulating the deposition angle had a strong effect on the PEC water oxidation performance of the films. A nanocolumnar morphology and beneficial porosity was attained using glancing angles, which improved the relative conversion of visible-light photons when compared to dense films deposited at normal incidence. The increased PEC efficiency brought about by Ti4+ doping was attributed to both the improvement of electron transport within the bulk of the film and the suppression of recombination at the film–electrolyte interface due to an increased electric field strength near the surface.
Franking et al. reported an approach to perform post-growth doping of α-Fe2O3 nanowires by depositing a Ti precursor solution, followed by annealing in air.40 It was found that the Ti-treatment increases the donor concentration of hematite by ten-fold and generally facilitates majority carrier transport and collection, which may account for the performance enhancement. This post-growth doping method was also applied by Wang et al. to other α-Fe2O3 nanostructures, for example to electrochemically deposited nanoporous α-Fe2O3 films.41 The Ti-treated samples exhibited comparably high photoresponse, which could be attributed to a combined Ti/Sn doping effect, the latter caused by thermal diffusion of Sn from the FTO substrate during the annealing process. Hu et al. used electrochemical deposition to synthesize Ti:α-Fe2O3 by co-deposition using FeCl3 and titanium isopropoxide precursors.42 Here also a solution of CoF3 was used to modify the surface of photoanodes to negatively shift the flat-band potential.42
Ti:α-Fe2O3 films were deposited by a spray-pyrolysis deposition (SPD) method. The morphology was observed to be nanoporous and porosity increased with increasing impurity concentration.43 The significantly enhanced PEC performance was attributed to a combination of the modified nanoporous surface morphology, suitable bandgap, and increased donor density induced by Ti doping. When compared to solely Ti-modified α-Fe2O3 films, greater photocurrent enhancement was observed following the addition of either Al3+ or Zn2+ in conjunction with Ti4+ during the SPD process.44 Simultaneous doping of Ti4+ (5%) and Al3+ (1%) resulted in the largest photoactivity, with the IPCE measured to be 25% at 400 nm and 0.7 V vs. NHE. Co-doping with Zn2+ also showed promise since the onset potential was cathodically shifted by ∼0.22 V. Zhang et al. conducted a systematic study on the PEC performance of undoped, Si-doped, Ti-doped, and co-doped α-Fe2O3 films prepared by ultrasonic spray pyrolysis (USP).45 Si and Ti co-doping was found to balance the ion radius difference between Fe3+ and Si4+ or Ti4+ as well as increase the donor concentration. This resulted in a measured IPCE of 34% at 365 nm and 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl for the co-doped film, much higher than 10%, 20%, and 22% for the undoped, Si-doped, and Ti-doped films, respectively.
Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films were prepared on FTO substrates by the sol–gel route.46 Titanium in the α-Fe2O3 lattice was suggested to increase the conductivity and the carrier density of the thin film, with IPCE reaching 32.6% at 400 nm without any additional potential vs. SCE. Wang et al. reported a new deposition-annealing (DA) process for preparing highly photoactive Ti:α-Fe2O3 films by adding titanium butoxide as a Ti precursor into an iron chloride solution during synthesis.47 Compared to the un-modified sample, the photocurrent onset potential of Ti:α-Fe2O3 was shifted about 0.1–0.2 V to lower potential, and the optimized film achieved relatively high photocurrent density (1.83 mA cm−2) and IPCE values (1.02 V vs. RHE). The enhanced photocurrent was attributed here to increased donor density and reduced electron–hole recombination at a timescale beyond a few picoseconds, as a result of Ti doping. This DA process was subsequently used to examine the effect of electrochemical pretreatment on Ti:α-Fe2O3 electrodes.48
Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructures with an urchin-like morphology were synthesized by Deng et al. by adding TiCN as a Ti precursor in a hydrothermal process at 95 °C.49 The presence of Ti greatly enhanced the plateau photocurrent to a remarkable value of 3.76 mA cm−2, with a high IPCE of 60% measured at 350 nm and 1.53 V vs. RHE. The high PEC performance with Ti modification was attributed the favorable urchin-like morphology, increasing the effective surface area, reduced electron–hole recombination, and increased donor density. Recently, TiCl4 was used as the Ti precursor for the synthesis of Ti:α-Fe2O3 films in a hydrothermal process.50,51 In the study by Cao et al.50 the hydrothermal growth process, Ti4+ was found to be associated with thicker films and increased carrier concentrations. It was further suggested that the increase of carrier concentrations, rather than morphology change or surface passivation, played the primary role in the photocurrent improvement after doping. Micro-nano-structured α-Fe2O3 films were synthesized by Miao et al. through a simple hydrothermal method at 100 °C using a TiCl4 ethanol solution as the Ti precursor.52 It was believed that Ti impurities enhanced the electrical conductivity and facilitated the separation and transport of electrons and holes. Later, the same group showed results where a higher concentration of Ti ions (up to 19.7% by atomic ratio) was incorporated into hydrothermally grown Ti-doped (2.2%) films by an in situ solid-state reaction method.53 It was suggested that the higher Ti concentration led to a dramatic improvement of the electrical conductivity of the micro-nanostructured film, which enhanced the photocurrent eight-fold. High temperature solid state reactions are another avenue for synthesis: Balko and Clarkson54 fabricated Ti,Sn:α-Fe2O3 pellets using a ceramic technique involving TiO2 and SnO2 as dopant sources.
It has also been shown recently that Ti can be incorporated into α-Fe2O3 by the hydrothermal method when titanium(IV) butoxide is included in the precursor solution,55 as well as TiCl3.56 Another study57 incorporated Ti through inclusion of titanium carbonitride in the precursor solution. When annealed in an oxygen deficient environment, high photocurrents (4.56 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V vs. RHE) were achieved. A recently published study from Shen et al.58 showed photoelectrochemical performance increases significantly when Ti is incorporated through inclusion of TiCl3 in the precursor solution for hydrothermal growth. Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy measurements showed no significant change upon Ti incorporation in the 0 to 1000 ps time scale. This indicates alteration of electron–hole recombination dynamics is not a major effect, although the study does not rule out this effect on longer timescales.58
2.2 Model experimental systems
The interpretation of photoelectrochemical data from α-Fe2O3 photoanodes is facilitated by results from experiments conducted on model systems, which are typically planar epitaxial films and single crystals. These systems are structurally less complex than state-of-the-art electrodes, and can be very well characterized, allowing one to draw clear structure–function relationships. Ref. 24 and 59 provide such foundational work on the structural and electronic effects of titanium incorporation in α-Fe2O3, based on characterization of epitaxial films grown by oxygen-plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (OPAMBE).
In a study on electronic transport,24 Ti4+ was found to be substituted for Fe3+ in epitaxial Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 thin films [(TixFe1−x)2O3], for x ≤ 0.09. For low doping levels, no significant concentrations of Fe2+ were found. From X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy measurements, it was deduced that Ti substitutes for Fe in the hematite lattice and does not form anatase or rutile titania microstructural regions.
In this study24 two growth rates were examined, which yielded interesting results relevant to our understanding of conduction in Ti:α-Fe2O3. First, the transport results for semiconducting films were consistent with the small polaron hopping conduction mechanism at higher temperature, including room temperature, near which PEC cells operate. Films fabricated with a slow growth rate were highly resistive and those with a fast rate were more conductive. Resistivity and Hall measurements on films with a fast growth rate possessed carrier concentrations on the order of 1019 to 1020 cm−3 at room temperature and mobilities of 0.1 to 0.6 V cm−2. The resistivity in samples from slow growth was attributed to the formation of cation vacancies, which serve to charge compensate donor electrons.24 Based on interpretation of charge balance among the possible species in this system, the authors convincingly argue that the net carrier concentration in their system is given by (1)Here,  is the concentration of ionized substitutional Ti4+ and  is the concentration of Fe3+ vacancies. In this case, cation vacancies are more prevalent under slow growth conditions because the oxygen fugacity is higher during growth.24 This explanation appears consistent with the observation of large variations in the photoelectrochemical effects of Ti incorporation – the concentration of compensating Fe3+ vacancies will depend in large part on the fabrication conditions.
A model system aimed at elucidating the magnetic structure of Ti:α-Fe2O3 has also been considered.59 In ref. 59, the magnetic structures of (TixFe1−x)2O3 epitaxial films grown by OPAMBE were investigated in detail. Three structural motifs were considered to interpret the experimental results: α-Fe2O3 with one substitutional Ti atom, with two Ti atoms positioned across a shared octahedral face, and with two substitutional Ti atoms that straddle a vacant octahedral cavity. These structures from ref. 59 are useful for our perspective on this topic and are shown in Fig. 1. The Ti:α-Fe2O3 studied in this reference was found to possess a majority phase in which Ti is randomly dispersed throughout the two magnetic sublattices. The donor electrons associated with Ti4+ substituting for Fe3+ were localized on Fe sites. We will discuss the magnetic structure results of this study and others on Ti:α-Fe2O3 in greater detail below.
 Fig. 1  Depictions of Ti substitution scenarios in Ti:α-Fe2O3. (a) and (b) One Ti atom substituted for Fe; (c) two substitutional Ti atoms positioned across a shared octahedral face; (d) two substitutional Ti atoms that straddle a vacant octahedral cavity. Black circles represent Fe, white circles represent O, and highlighted black circles represent Ti. From ref. 59. 
The model system investigated by Rioult et al.60 consists of single crystalline Ti:α-Fe2O3 deposited epitaxially onto Pt(111) by atomic oxygen assisted molecular beam epitaxy (AO-MBE). The simple geometries of their slab structures allowed investigation of the relationship between required carrier transport lengths and Ti impurity concentrations. Ti incorporation increased the carrier concentrations in the crystals as well as increased the carrier diffusion lengths of both electrons and holes.60 As in numerous other studies, no Fe2+ species were measured by core level spectroscopies. Fig. 2 provides a schematic from ref. 60 illustrating the suggested effects of Ti incorporation on carriers' behavior. Here the arrow line thickness is used to convey the strength of the phenomena and band bending is drawn to occur at the α-Fe2O3–H2O interface.
 Fig. 2  Illustration showing the behavior of electrons and holes in α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 single crystals. From ref. 60. 
Thimsen et al.61 combined experimental synthesis and predictions by density functional theory and a mixed metal oxide band structure method to study Ti–Fe–O materials based on combinations of anatase TiO2 and α-Fe2O3. The materials were synthesized using a premixed flame aerosol reactor. The combined use of theory and experiment was used to develop a method to predict the electronic band structure of mixed metal oxides. It appeared that the positions of band extrema were governed more by atomic composition than the crystal structure. Specifically the band gap energy of the anatase-based materials decreased with Fe content, until Fe and Ti concentrations were nearly equivalent. Increasing the relative Fe concentration beyond this composition yielded materials with bandgaps equal to that of α-Fe2O3.61 The correlation between film color and DFT-calculated energy gap is shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Analyses of materials in the Fe–Ti–O system from the basis materials anatase TiO2 and α-Fe2O3. Images show color of synthesized films and plots show corresponding densities of states from density functional theory calculations, with energy gaps indicated. From ref. 61. 
3. Prior theoretical work
Theoretical calculations of the electronic and magnetic structure of Ti:α-Fe2O3 directly inform our interpretation of photoelectrochemical data.62,63 Density functional theory (DFT) is the most commonly used method in solid state physics for investigating electronic structures of materials. Applying conventional DFT approximations to α-Fe2O3 is complicated by the presence of localized Fe 3d electrons, which, when combined with the necessarily approximate electron exchange-correlation (XC) functionals, gives rise to large errors due to incomplete cancellation of Coulomb and exchange self-interaction terms.64 The DFT + U method65 replaces the inexact treatment of electron exchange with Hartree–Fock-like intra-atomic Coulomb (U) and exchange (J) interaction terms for the localized d electrons. Since Hartree–Fock theory contains exact electron exchange, the DFT + U method provides a superior description of most mid-to-late first row transition metal oxides and has been adopted for studying α-Fe2O3. The complexities are demonstrated in ref. 66 and 67, which consider the electronic and magnetic properties of Ti:α-Fe2O3 using both DFT and DFT + U (U–J = 6.1 eV for both Fe and Ti)66 with the local density approximation (LDA) as the XC functional. In their model, one Ti atom substitutes one Fe in a 30-atom or 60-atom cell. Both LDA and LDA + U predict that Ti donates one extra electron and exists as Ti4+, but they predict different states for that electron. With LDA, the additional electron donated by the Ti4+ impurity is delocalized over the Fe atoms with the moment opposite to that of the substituted Fe atom. This is associated with itinerant d electrons and a metallic band structure, a typical artifact for LDA treatment of such metal oxides. In contrast, LDA + U found that the extra d electron is localized on a single Fe atom.
Huda et al. used LDA + U (U–J = 5.5 eV for Fe) to study the electronic structure of pure and Ti-doped α-Fe2O3.68 One Ti atom substitutes for one Fe in a 30-atom cell. Ti substitution led to a decrease in unit cell volume, which might improve carrier transport by increasing the hopping probability of small polarons. The LDA + U band gap also decreases to 1.19 eV from 1.72 eV for pure α-Fe2O3. This study produced total density of state plots, which are helpful in demonstrating the modification to the α-Fe2O3 valence and conduction bands upon transition metal incorporation (Fig. 4). Here, among all 3d transition metal impurities examined in the study, Ti was highlighted to be associated with electronic bands with more dispersive character.68 These dispersive Ti bands would lead to a lower effective mass of electrons, and thus could positively influence conductivity and PEC performance.
 Fig. 4  Calculated total electronic density of states for pure α-Fe2O3 and α-Fe2O3 incorporated with Sc, Ti, Cr, Mn, and Ni at substitutional sites. The highest occupied state is indicated by the dashed vertical line in each case. From ref. 68. 
Liao et al. performed generalized gradient approximation (GGA) + U (U–J = 4.3 eV for Fe and 5.0 eV for Ti) calculations for Ti substituted α-Fe2O3(0001) slabs.69 One Ti atom substitutes one Fe atom closest to the surface on each side of the α-Fe2O3(0001) slabs. For the stable, fully-hydroxylated termination, there are 29 atoms and 104 atoms in (1 × 1) and (2 × 2) slabs, respectively. For the (1 × 1) slab, the additional electron was predicted to be on the Fe site. For the (2 × 2) slab, two eigenstates were obtained, with the Fe3+/Ti3+ case higher in energy by 0.21 eV than the Fe2+/Ti4+ case. The presence of Ti near the surface shifts the valence band maximum to be less negative, which would be desirable for water reduction on hematite if the band gap value does not change and as a result, the conduction band minimum is shifted by a similar amount. The energetics of water oxidation on pure and doped α-Fe2O3(0001) slabs were reported. Compared to other dopants (such as Mn, Co) explored, the presence of Ti near the surface does not help reduce the reaction potential required, because the presence of Ti gives rise to too strong binding of some intermediate species while destabilizing the others.
In addition to their work using periodic DFT/DFT + U, Liao et al.70 performed quantum chemistry calculations to investigate the electron transfer process in Ti-doped hematite. For pure α-Fe2O3, the electron carriers are localized Fe 3d electrons. The transport mechanism of hematite was proposed to follow the small polaron model,71 in which electron hopping is coupled to lattice distortion and results in small mobility. In Liao et al.'s study, electron transfer in doped α-Fe2O3 was modeled using electrostatically embedded clusters at the level of unrestricted Hartree–Fock (UHF) theory. Fig. 5 shows the free energy curves for electron carriers hopping between Fe and Ti sites in Ti-doped hematite. The free energy is lower when the electron is localized on the Ti site than when the electron is localized on the Fe site. This can be explained by the ionization potentials (IPs) from Ti4+ to Ti3+ (43.27 eV) and from Fe3+ to Fe2+ (30.65 eV). The much larger IP from Ti4+ to Ti3+ suggests that the electron carrier is more strongly attracted to Ti. Therefore, from this perspective Ti is not an ideal dopant for improving electron transport in α-Fe2O3.
 Fig. 5  Unrestricted Hartree–Fock (UHF) potential energy curves along the collective nuclear coordinate x for electron transfer between Fe1 and Ti. The energy for x = 0 on the left curve is set to zero. The figure within the plot is a density difference isosurface plot of the added electron localized on the Ti site (in green). Fe ions are in grey. O ions are in red. A contour value of 0.14 electrons per Å3 is used. Adapted with permission from P. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1775–1781. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
4. Magnetic structure
In this section we discuss the magnetic structures of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3. Keeping with the theme and motivation of this article, we restrict our brief discussion to those points that may be relevant to solar energy conversion devices.
α-Fe2O3 is a spin-canted antiferromagnetic oxide possessing stacked bilayers of high spin d5 Fe3+ cations. Along the [001] direction, the spin orientation follows the scheme …O3-Mα-Mα-O3-Mβ-Mβ-O3-Mα-Mα-O3-Mβ-Mβ…, where M represents a member of the cation bilayer with the α or β spin orientation.59 The anisotropic conductivity of α-Fe2O3 is typically explained by the classical model, which predicts ultra-low conductivity in the [001] direction, since a minority spin electron added to a lattice of high-spin d5 Fe3+ atoms is forbidden by the Hund's rule from moving to an adjacent spin-antiparallel Fe3+ atom. The anisotropy can be explained in detail by ab initio electronic structure calculations and electron transfer theory,72 which predict that the lower mobility in the [001] direction than within a–b planes is caused by the larger electronic coupling within the basal plane.
The complex nature of magnetism in Ti:α-Fe2O3 is evident by contrasting the magnetic structures associated with hematite (α-Fe2O3) and illmenite (FeTiO3), the two compositional extrema of the Fe–Ti–O rhombohedral oxide system. FeTiO3 has the same rhombohedral structure of α-Fe2O3 but alternating Fe bilayers are replaced with Ti4+ (a d0 cation). Remaining Fe exists in the 2+ oxidation state. Fig. 6 illustratively contrasts the magnetic structures of the two materials.73
 Fig. 6  Schematic showing the magnetic structures of α-Fe2O3 below 675 °C (left) and FeTiO3 below 55 K (right). Dark octahedra contain Fe and light octahedra contain Ti. From ref. 73. 
Under the conditions portrayed in Fig. 6, in α-Fe2O3 there is a strong antiferromagnetic superexchange between Fe3+ spins along [001]. The interaction is mediated by the oxygen layers between Fe bilayers. Antiferromagnetic ordering also exists in FeTiO3, but here the interaction between Fe2+ spins takes place between two layers of oxygen atoms, since d0 Ti4+ is not paramagnetic. In contrast to those in α-Fe2O3, the spins in FeTiO3 are oriented parallel to the hexagonal c-axis. As a result of their distinct magnetic structures, α-Fe2O3–FeTiO3 solid solutions, as can be found in nature, are known to exhibit interesting magnetic effects.73
Regarding the magnetism associated with intermediate compositions in this rhombohedral system, for example the Ti:α-Fe2O3 considered here, less is known. Butler et al. predicted by first-principles calculations that Ti4+ would preferentially substitute for Fe3+ in a single magnetic sublattice of α-Fe2O3.74 If d0 Ti4+ substitutes preferentially in a Fe bilayer of one particular spin orientation, then the spin of that layer will be reduced.75 In the context of the photoelectrode, we expect by extension that this would influence electron transport between Fe bilayers through its effect on the degree of antiferromagnetic ordering along the c-axis. Experimentally, in MBE-grown epitaxial films, a random distribution of Ti impurities was preferred; however, approximately 1/8 of the Ti was found to be ordered.59
Rivera et al.76 discussed the magnetism of Ti:α-Fe2O3 in the context of quantum chemical modeling based on Hartree–Fock theory. The results indicated two interesting phenomena relevant to magnetism in the system. The presence of Ti in the lattice was found to induce electron density population redistribution from the 3dyz atomic orbital towards the 3dx2−y2 atomic orbital. In addition, the additional carrier associated with introduction of the Ti impurity was not localized on the Ti site, nor on O atoms or Fe atoms closest to the impurity. It was suggested76 that this observation of partial delocalization can explain some differences between experimental and theoretical values for saturation magnetization in Ti:α-Fe2O3.
We note also that it is possible that introduction of Ti4+ into the α-Fe2O3 lattice reduces the overall octahedral symmetry, which has been shown to reduce the magnetic moment of the high-spin state of the Fe3+ ion.77 More generally, any disruption of magnetic anisotropy in α-Fe2O3 has significant implications for the system's magnetic properties. Above its Morin temperature (TM = 263 K) and below its Neel temperature (948 K < TN < 963 K), bulk α-Fe2O3 is a canted antiferromagnet (canting results in a small net magnetic moment and thus weak ferromagnetism),78 as discussed above. Below TM the system undergoes a spin–flip transition and becomes a pure antiferromagnet. However, as the size of α-Fe2O3 particles decreases, the Morin temperature decreases and eventually vanishes for particles smaller than 8–20 nm.78 For nanoscale systems, superparamagnetic relaxation of the spin lattice and permanent magnetic moments associated with uncompensated surface spins are commonly observed.79 Broadly speaking, the size-dependent magnetic behavior can be due to the different distributions of surface and volume spins and spin canting associated with nanoparticles.79 In fact, it is known that surface and bulk Fe3+ in nanoscale α-Fe2O3 have different magnetic structures.80 Notably, at low temperatures the coupling between magnetic domains in nanoscale α-Fe2O3 can be moderated by the interaction with light.81 It was proposed that this phenomenon is related to the relative rates of formation, trapping, and recombination of conduction band electrons.81
5. Soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy of α-Fe2O3 thin films and nanostructures
Hematite is a charge-transfer insulator possessing mixed O 2p–Fe 3d valence and conduction bands. The valence band is dominated by O 2p states and the conduction band minimum is dominated by Fe 3d states.59 Soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) probes the site- and symmetry-selected unoccupied density of states through an electronic transition from a localized core state to a valence state in a transition metal oxide system. Elemental selectivity is obtained through the large energy separation among core levels, and chemical state sensitivity is possible through chemical shifts of the core levels combined with transitions into specific bond orbitals. The dipole nature of the transitions provides symmetry information. The transition matrix element projects unoccupied electronic states onto a specific core level wave function, thereby providing a local density of states.
Oxygen K-edge XAS provides information relevant to the characterization of oxide PEC electrodes because in these materials, above the Fermi level empty bands are predominantly of metal character hybridized with O 2p character. This is certainly true for α-Fe2O3, whose O K-edge XAS has been reported extensively.82–84 In O K-edge XAS measurements, we expect that the energy separations between features are equal to corresponding level spacings in the ground state, since the oxygen-derived final states are fairly delocalized and thus not affected much by the O 1s core hole.85
The transition metal L2,3-edge X-ray spectra, on the other hand, exhibit strong interactions between the 3d valence electrons and the 2p core hole, leading to a characteristic multiplet structure. From the positions and intensities of the multiplet lines one can extract the oxidation state, the spin state, and the crystal field induced at the metal atom by the neighboring oxygens.85 That provides information relevant to the characterization of PEC photoelectrodes because of its sensitivity to the chemical state and the local environment of metal cations. Cations in 3d transition metal oxides exhibit a diversity of oxidation states, since there is often a small energy difference between the dn and dn+1 configurations.86 The metal 2p-to-3d transition probed through the L-edge is strong and the 3d electron count is directly related to the oxidation state. Since the character and occupancy of d orbitals are responsible for a large number of the chemical and physical properties of transition metal oxides, a probe of transition metal 2p absorption provides essential information for this application. This is especially true for the Ti:α-Fe2O3 system presently considered, since the composition of cations with mixed valence has long been suggested to influence conductivity in doped α-Fe2O3.25
From the investigations reviewed above, one deduces the necessity to observe the properties of metal dopants in α-Fe2O3 under conditions known to be associated with appreciable changes in photocurrent. Below we show results from soft XAS measurements conducted on α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 photoanodes synthesized by five contrasting techniques. The photoelectrochemical performance influence of Ti under these conditions is either documented here or is documented in the published literature. Characterization of this type is used as an initial measure of the rate of the electrochemical water oxidation process. In this work, these data are included to establish that the materials we investigate are photoelectrochemically active, which as discussed below is an important prerequisite for developing electronic structure–electrochemical activity relationships in materials development. Total electron yields were measured for the samples upon irradiation of the α-Fe2O3 electrodes with linearly polarized X-rays from Beamline 8.0 at the Advanced Light Source. The resolutions of the measurements were 0.2 to 0.3 eV. The incident radiation flux was monitored by the photocurrent produced in a gold mesh in the beam path. Total fluorescence yield was monitored simultaneously with total electron yield; for an efficient collection of the fluorescence yield, a channel plate detector with an Al filter was used.
5.1 Thin films fabricated by pulsed laser deposition
Here, we consider α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by pulsed laser deposition. Pulsed laser deposition is a vacuum-based thin film deposition technique whereby energetic species are deposited on a heated substrate by species liberated from the pulsed laser ablation of a target material. We first physically characterize the samples deposited by PLD and confirm the activation of Ti impurities for photoelectrochemical applications.
Thin film electrodes were fabricated as described in detail in ref. 87. The α-Fe2O3 target fabricated for deposition was modified with 1 and 2.5 wt% TiO2. The resultant film compositions were estimated using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy to be approximately 1.1 at% and 3.3 at%, respectively, for the two target compositions. The films were approximately 450 nm thick. For simplicity samples are indicated in this article by their corresponding target composition (i.e. 1% or 2.5%). X-ray diffraction patterns (not shown here) indicate the existence of crystalline hematite.
The inclusion of titanium was found to influence the morphology of the films considerably. Fig. 7 provides SEM images for the films, which were deposited under identical conditions. Top-down images (Fig. 7, top panels) show that both the shape and size of grains as well as surface morphology is altered by the inclusion of Ti. The morphology-directing properties of Si in α-Fe2O3 have been reported.88 Previous studies of magnetron-sputtered Fe2O3:Ti films showed that Ti incorporation reduced the grain size significantly.27 Cross-sectional views in Fig. 7 show the films developed by the columnar grain growth mode, which is commonly encountered through depositions of this type.89
 Fig. 7  Left: top-down (top and center panels) and cross section (bottom panels) view scanning electron microscopy images of the thin films deposited by pulsed laser deposition. White scale bars indicate 1 μm. Right: experimental IPCE spectra with +1 V applied versus a Pt counter electrode (0.1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte, 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM1.5 illumination) for un-modified (green), 1% Ti (red), and 2.5% Ti (blue) thin films deposited by pulsed laser deposition. This plot also includes the corresponding spectral transmittance curves for comparison with IPCE spectra. 

Fig. 7 (right hand side) shows the IPCE of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 fabricated by pulsed laser deposition. The effect of titanium incorporation is to increase photoanodic current at all wavelengths examined. There is no appreciable change in UV-Vis optical absorption upon Ti incorporation (see transmittance curves in Fig. 7). The transmittance curves show that the low IPCE at wavelengths greater than 550 nm is partially due to the lack of optical absorption in the spectral range. Based on our assessment of the morphologies in Fig. 7, we believe that the large photocurrent enhancement cannot be attributed to any porosity changes with Ti concentration. We observe no trend of decreasing feature size with titanium incorporation, which is the expected relationship between photoelectrochemical activity and morphology given the known short minority carrier diffusion length in α-Fe2O3.90 We therefore find it is reasonable to conclude that Ti is electronically activated in α-Fe2O3 films fabricated by PLD in a way that is beneficial to photoelectrochemical performance, consistent with other studies.

Fig. 8 shows soft X-ray absorption spectra measured on the Ti:α-Fe2O3 films fabricated by PLD. Fig. 8a (top) shows the full spectral range spanning the Fe L2,3-edge (top), as well as a panel resolving the L3 band (bottom). The Fe L2,3-edge absorption spectrum possesses four main peaks, which originate from spin–orbit and crystal field splitting, as indicated in the figure. The primary difference observed upon introduction of Ti into the α-Fe2O3 film is the reduction in intensity of the first peak (near 708 eV) with respect to the second (near 710 eV). Fig. 8b provides O K-edge absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 over a broad spectral range (top) and over the narrow range spanning the hybridized O 2p–Fe 3d band (bottom). This band is composed of two primary peaks, which originate from crystal field splitting. The crystal field of the oxygen ligands splits the Fe 3d orbitals into t2g and eg components in an octahedral geometry. The energy separation between the peaks provides a measure of the crystal field strength. The antibonding orbitals whose wave functions point toward oxygen ions (eg) lie higher in energy than those whose wave functions point between them (t2g).
 Fig. 8  Soft X-ray absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by pulsed laser deposition. (a) Fe L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the L3 band (bottom). (b) O K-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the O 2p–Fe 3d hybridized region in α-Fe2O3. (c) Ti L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range. In all panels, the total electron yield is represented by solid lines and the total fluorescence yield by dashed lines. 
With Ti incorporation, there is a higher density of states at energies overlapping with the Fe eg orbitals. This difference is observable in both electron yield (TEY) and fluorescence yield (TFY), although the difference is greater for TEY. The energy distribution of the additional intensity tends to fill the region between the peaks.

Fig. 8c shows Ti L2,3-edge X-ray absorption spectra. Within the noise level the 1% Ti and 2.5% Ti samples are identical, indicating Ti is incorporated with the same charge and with the same local environment in these cases. The energy separation and positions of the four peaks are characteristics of Ti4+, indicating that titanium is incorporated as Ti4+ in the electrodes, within the sensitivity of the measurement.
5.2 Thin films fabricated by atomic layer deposition
Next, we present analogous measurements performed on α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by atomic layer deposition (ALD).11 ALD is a gas phase synthesis technique that offers excellent control over the morphology, thickness and composition of thin film electrodes and can potentially overcome the morphology changes generally induced by doping. The α-Fe2O3 films were deposited on FTO substrates by alternating pulses of ferrocene and a combination of water and ozone. Titanium was incorporated in the films by exposing the films to a titanium isopropoxide precursor in between α-Fe2O3 ALD cycles. The concentration of Ti atoms in Ti:α-Fe2O3 could therefore be controlled by the number of ALD cycles deposited in between Ti deposition. Detailed experimental conditions are provided in ref. 11. Films fabricated in this way have been shown to contain Ti impurities that are activated in the electrode, resulting in significant performance enhancements in photoelectrochemical measurements.
While the incorporation of any concentration of Ti atoms investigated improved the performance of electrodes of any thickness, an optimal enhancement was found for the thinnest films which contain 1–10% of Ti atoms as measured by XPS depth profiling (Fig. 9b). For example, Fig. 9a shows the J–V behavior of 36 nm thick α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 films with ∼3% Ti (Fig. 9b). It was shown that incorporation of Ti has no measureable effect on light absorption, as was the case for samples in Section 5.1. It was also found that Ti incorporation has a negligible effect on the majority carrier density and band edge positions of the photoelectrodes. Through a detailed analysis of the photoelectrochemical (as in Fig. 9a) and chemical composition data (as in Fig. 9b), the performance improvement was therefore attributed to the activation of a dead layer in the α-Fe2O3 thin films by Ti atoms.11
 Fig. 9  Characterization of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by atomic layer deposition. (a) Photocurrent–potential curves. (b) Atomic concentration depth profiles based on XPS analysis. Adapted from ref. 11. 

Fig. 10 shows soft X-ray absorption spectra measured on the Ti:α-Fe2O3 films fabricated by ALD, as in Section 5.1. The same observations made above with respect to the PLD films can be made for the ALD films. The smaller thickness of the ALD films (36 nm) results in weaker fluorescence yields for the Ti 2p absorption (Fig. 10c). In addition, the difference in Fe 2p absorption resulting from Ti incorporation is negligible for these thin films. The peak near 535 eV in fluorescence yield O K-edge XAS results from additional states accessible by probing the SnO2 substrate through the 36 nm film.
 Fig. 10  Soft X-ray absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by atomic layer deposition. (a) Fe L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the L3 band (bottom). (b) O K-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the O 2p–Fe 3d hybridized region in α-Fe2O3. (c) Ti L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range. In all panels, the total electron yield is represented by solid lines and the total fluorescence yield by dashed lines. 
5.3 Nanostructure arrays fabricated by sol–flame synthesis
Here, we present analogous measurements performed on Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films fabricated by sol–flame synthesis.4 First, arrays of α-Fe2O3 nanorods (NRs) with an average length about 350 nm were synthesized on FTO (TEC-8, Pilkington) substrates by air-annealing (550 °C) of hydrothermally grown FeOOH NRs.96 Then, the α-Fe2O3 NRs were dip-coated with Ti precursor solution (10 mM TTIP in IPA) and finally annealed in a 1000 °C flame for 5 min to enable rapid thermal diffusion of Ti. Fig. 11 (left hand side) shows the top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films fabricated by the sol–flame method. After sol–flame doping, the morphology of NRs remains the same, which enables one to exclude the effect of morphology change on the photoelectrochemical activity. Fig. 11 (right hand side) compares the J–V curves of the corresponding four samples. The reference as-grown α-Fe2O3 sample does not show significant photocurrent, and the flame-annealed α-Fe2O3 sample without Ti impurities shows slightly higher photocurrent. In contrast, the two Ti:α-Fe2O3 samples show much higher photocurrent. The sample with higher Ti concentration has double the photocurrent of the sample with lower Ti concentration, which is mainly attributed to the conductivity improvement by the increase of charge carrier density.
 Fig. 11  (Left) Scanning electron microscopy images of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films fabricated by sol–flame synthesis. From left to right: reference sample, flame-annealed sample, annealed + low Ti doping, and annealed + high Ti doping. (Right) J–V curves of four samples [1.0 M NaOH electrolyte, AM1.5 G simulated solar light (100 mW cm−2)]. The sample preparation and sol–flame doping conditions are not optimized. 

Fig. 12 shows X-ray absorption measurements, as above in Sections 5.1 and 5.2. Here again we observe the characteristic modifications to X-ray absorption spectra induced by Ti incorporation. The O K-edge again shows a low-lying band of unoccupied O 2p states hybridized with Fe 3d states. In this case the changes to the Fe L2,3-edge absorption spectra are more noticeable with fluorescence yield detection.
 Fig. 12  Soft X-ray absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by sol–flame synthesis: as-grown α-Fe2O3 (reference sample), flame-annealed α-Fe2O3, and two different Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films (a) Fe L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the L3 band (bottom). (b) O K-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the O 2p–Fe 3d hybridized region in α-Fe2O3. (c) Ti L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range. In all panels, the total electron yield is represented by solid lines and the total fluorescence yield by dashed lines. 
5.4 Nanostructured films fabricated by the all-alkoxide sol–gel route
Sol–gel and related solution based processes cover a very wide spectrum of precursors and reaction mechanisms during deposition and subsequent heat-treatment to achieve the target films. Consequently the processing temperatures, film structures and qualities vary greatly between the techniques. The best structural control, lowest processing temperatures and highest quality is usually obtained with all-alkoxide based routes where all organics are removed by hydrolysis and evaporation taking place immediately during the deposition in air at room temperature. Such organic-free deposits allow for the important control of the oxidation state, crystallization and elemental homogeneity during the heat-treatment and even greatly extended doping range beyond the thermodynamic limit when the heat-treatment takes place at low temperatures.91–95
Given these advantages, we investigated the all-alkoxide based sol–gel route for preparation of Ti:α-Fe2O3. Films of 0 and 3% metal atom Ti were fabricated by spin-coating at 3000 rpm, 30 s, using 0.3 M (metal) Fe(III)-methoxy-ethoxide and Ti(OPri)4 toluene–methoxy-ethanol solutions on a variety of substrates including; Si/SiO2, Si/SiO2/Pt, α-Al2O3 (0001) and glass/FTO. The oxide films obtained by heating air to 450 and 600 °C at 20 °C min−1, were all shiny red and visually without defects. Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD) showed that the films consisted of the α-Fe2O3 phase as shown in Fig. 13. No difference in cell-dimension could be discerned between the Ti:α-Fe2O3 and α-Fe2O3 films. High resolution SEM imaging of films obtained at 450 °C showed that the films were quite smooth and homogeneous over large areas. However, there were also numerous nano-scale lines and pores, typically in sizes below 20 nm in the films consisting of approximately 5–7 nm sized crystallites. An overview of the film surface is shown in Fig. 13. The microstructural differences between the doped and non-doped films were quite small, but discernible in the lesser porosity and stronger coalescence between the crystallites in the latter. The substrate was not found to influence the film microstructure. Cross-section imaging of a cracked film heated to 450 °C on a Si/SiO2 substrate showed that the film thickness was about 35 nm, which was also corroborated by the TEM study of a film removed from the Si/SiO2/Ti substrate.
 Fig. 13  Characterization of 3% Ti:α-Fe2O3 films fabricated on Si/SiO2 by alkoxide sol–gel spin-coating and annealed at 450 °C. Electron microscopy images of the cross-section, surface of the film and fine structure (top) and grazing incidence X-ray diffraction patterns (bottom). 
TEM studies of films scraped off Si/SiO2/Ti substrates showed that films heated to 450 °C consisted of densely packed ca. 5–7 nm sized crystallites of α-Fe2O3 with no amorphous parts, as shown in Fig. 13. The Ti incorporation was homogeneous according to the EDS analyses made with a ca. 10–15 nm probing beam (the sample was damaged at the point of analysis, but it is believed that the analyses give a fair estimation of elemental homogeneity). Films heated to 600 °C showed increased crystallite sizes, of approximately 10–20 nm, but were otherwise similar to those obtained at 450 °C.
For analysis of the phase development during heating gel powders prepared in air from the same precursor solutions as the films were studied with a combination of TG–DTA, XRD and IR spectroscopy. The gel powders contained a large amount of water and hydroxo groups with no remaining organics and can be described as Fe(III)-oxo-hydroxides. The water was removed before 130 °C, and only minute amounts of hydroxyl groups remained at 280 °C, which were removed before 400 °C. No differences were observed when Ti was incorporated in the gel.

Fig. 14 shows soft X-ray absorption measurements, as above in Sections 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3. Remarkably, here again we observe the same modifications to X-ray absorption spectra induced by Ti incorporation. The O K-edge shows a low-lying band of unoccupied O 2p states hybridized with Fe 3d states. No discernible changes to the Fe L2,3-edge spectra are observed as a result of Ti incorporation.
 Fig. 14  Soft X-ray absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by an all-alkoxide sol–gel route. (a) Fe L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the L3 band (bottom). (b) O K-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the O 2p–Fe 3d hybridized region in α-Fe2O3. (c) Ti L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range. This panel also includes a reference spectrum for anatase TiO2. In all panels, the total electron yield is represented by solid lines and the total fluorescence yield by dashed lines. 
5.5 Nanostructured arrays fabricated by aqueous chemical growth
Next, we present selected measurements on Ti:α-Fe2O3 fabricated by aqueous chemical growth, using methods described in ref. 96. To produce the Ti-modified samples, the methodology was modified slightly to include a Ti precursor, as described in the Experimental section. Fig. 15a and b show the influence of the Ti precursor on the morphology of resultant films. It is clear that there is a strong influence; the α-Fe2O3 has a rod structure90 that is modified by the high temperature annealing process and the Ti:α-Fe2O3 is better characterized as a porous or nanostructured film. Fig. 15c shows the strong influence of Ti precursor concentration on photocurrent density, data which was originally reported in ref. 58. There is an optimum photocurrent value for the sample fabricated with 5 μL TiCl3 in the precursor solution, which according to the surface concentration plot in Fig. 15d corresponds to about 6 at% Ti.
 Fig. 15  SEM images and soft X-ray absorption spectra of Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films fabricated by aqueous chemical growth. (a) SEM image of α-Fe2O3 annealed at 750 °C. (b) SEM image of Ti:α-Fe2O3 annealed at 750 °C. (c) Light-chopped current–potential plots for α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 films under simulated solar light (AM1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). The inset shows the photocurrent at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl plotted as a function of the volume of TiCl3 in the precursor solution. (d) Surface concentrations of Ti and Sn in samples based on XPS analysis. Three-dimensional spectral evolution of the transient difference absorption profiles for (e) no TiCl3 and (f) 5 μL TiCl3 in precursor solution. Two-dimensional top-down views of the transient difference absorption profiles for (g) α-Fe2O3 and (h) Ti:α-Fe2O3 (5 μL TiCl3 in precursor solution) 0–10 ps windows. From ref. 58. 
To understand the mechanism by which Ti incorporation improves photoelectrochemical performance, ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy measurements were performed. This technique facilitates evaluation of the lifetime of excited carriers on ultrafast time scales. It therefore can provide information on the recombination dynamics of electrons and holes, knowledge of which is a critical aspect of photoelectrode design. Fig. 15e–h show three- (e and f) and two-dimensional (g and h) spectral evolutions of the transient difference absorption profiles for un-modified (e and g) and Ti:α-Fe2O3 (f and h) films. The change in optical density upon excitation is presented with respect to probe wavelength and time. The data, discussed in detail in ref. 58, show that there is no significant change in electron–hole recombination dynamics up to 1000 ps when Ti is incorporated during hydrothermal growth. On longer time scales, however, there is some increase in carrier lifetime, which may suggest a change in carrier dynamics. This observation warrants further investigation.58
Ti L2,3-edge X-ray absorption measurements on the sample fabricated with 20 μL TiCl3 in the precursor solution, after post-annealing at 650 and 750 °C, are shown in Fig. 16. The characteristics of the Ti L-edge XAS data are discussed in more detail below for this system.
 Fig. 16  Ti L2,3-edge absorption spectra of Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films fabricated by aqueous chemical growth. 
5.6 Discussion

5.6.1 Fe L2,3-edge XAS. 
In Fig. 8, 10, 12, and 14 above, the panels in (a) show the Fe L2,3-edge X-ray absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 photoelectrodes. This absorption channel probes the Fe 2p-to-3d transitions and provides a signature of the Fe oxidation state. Here, the line shapes of the L2,3-edge absorption spectra for all samples are dominated by the Fe3+ multiplet structure.97 The shape of the L3 absorption band (707–715 eV) results primarily from absorption into states influenced by Fe3+ ions in the Oh sites of the corundum structure.
Irrespective of the synthesis technique, in the Fe L3 absorption band we observe that Ti incorporation is associated with a reduction in the intensity of the first peak with respect to the intensity of the second. We previously observed this relationship in the Fe L3 band peak intensity in a study on the interface between α-Fe2O3 and SnO2:F.98 Prior to this, the intensity of the first peak had been assigned to reflect the density of electronic states corresponding to Oh-site occupation of Fe3+ ions,99 as well as to changes in iron–oxygen distances.97 It is possible therefore that the origin of the first peak intensity reduction is related to the influence of titanium on distorting the structure and Oh symmetry of the system.


5.6.2 O K-edge XAS. 
The intensity within the structure of the Fe 3d band of the O K-edge absorption spectrum (between about 529 and 534 eV) shows distinct variation from that of α-Fe2O3 with the inclusion of Ti for all synthesis techniques. This band of the absorption spectrum is arguably the most important for the present discussion. In the soft X-ray absorption process, a core electron is excited through an electric dipole transition to a near-threshold state. The spectra generated yield information relating to the symmetry-projected partial density-of-states of the excited state. Therefore, the O K-edge absorption spectrum provides a representation of the O 2p unoccupied density-of-states by excitation of core O ls electrons. Through the hybridization of metal states with O 2p states, we observe states most relevant to electron conduction in the oxide photoanodes.
In Ti:α-Fe2O3 we expect the conduction band minimum to be strongly modified by Ti s and d orbital character. The presence of Ti s and d states near the conduction band minimum is consistently predicted by calculations on the Ti:α-Fe2O3 system,76 and is shown in Fig. 4.68 Mixing of Ti s and d orbitals near the lowest unoccupied states of α-Fe2O3 likely influences the efficiency of electron conduction in operating PEC electrodes. These bands are more dispersive than Fe d bands, and in the band structure picture would tend to reduce the effective mass of electrons.68
It is somewhat surprising that no energetic shifts in the conduction band minima were observed to be associated with Ti incorporation, within the resolution of our measurements. Bandgap reduction has been predicted to occur with Ti doping; in ref. 59 for example, the impurity is associated with a computed band gap reduction of ∼0.2 to 0.3 eV relative to pure α-Fe2O3, due to the appearance of empty Ti 3d states below and overlapping with the conduction band minimum.


5.6.3 Ti L2,3-edge XAS. 
In Fig. 8, 10, 12, and 14 above, the panels in (c), as well as Fig. 16, show the Ti L2,3-edge X-ray absorption spectra of the α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 photoelectrodes. As at the Fe L-edge, this representation of Ti 2p to 3d transitions is closely related to the multiplet structure of the Ti cation. Here, for all synthesis techniques, the spectral line shapes originate from Ti4+.
It has previously been suggested that tetravalent Ti could be incorporated into α-Fe2O3 photoelectrodes as the rutile polymorph of TiO2.100 This model is attractive in that it avoids face sharing of TiO6 and FeO6 octahedra, which is a highly unstable configuration due to the associated high cation repulsions.101 L2,3-edge XAS can be used to probe the long-range order around the Ti site, through transitions into eg orbitals, which point in the direction of and strongly hybridize with oxygen ligands. The line shape of the L3-eg band (centered at 460 eV) is known to provide a fingerprint of the TiO2 polymorph.102 For titania compounds, the L3-eg band possesses an asymmetric doublet, which can be reproduced in simulations by inclusion of large atom clusters (on the order of 1 nm of material).103 The doublet structure is absent in disordered titania aerogels102 and at the interface between TiO2 and fluorine-doped tin dioxide, confirming its origin from long-range order.104 Here, for all synthesis methods, the line shapes of the L3-eg bands (near 463 eV) for Ti:α-Fe2O3 and in particular the absence of any characteristic doublet structure suggests a lack of long-range order around Ti4+. This result is consistent with Fe and Ti K-edge absorption spectroscopy measurements on MBE-grown Ti-doped α-Fe2O3, which show no presence of anatase or rutile TiO2.24


5.6.4 Effect of orientation and surface and grain morphology. 
The X-ray absorption spectra in Fig. 8, 10, 12, and 14 show an important difference when total electron yield and total fluorescence yield are measured. The probe depth of total electron yield is on the order of a few nanometers, due to the short inelastic mean free path of electrons in oxides. Total fluorescence yield, on the other hand, probes a physical distance on the order of one hundred nanometers due to the comparatively longer path length of X-rays in the solid. The difference in probe depth is clearly reflected for the case of the ALD sample that is 36 nm thick. Total electron yield spectra for the O K-edge (Fig. 10b, top) show only the characteristic spectrum for α-Fe2O3, whereas total fluorescence yield spectra (Fig. 10b, bottom) show spectra that are in fact a composite of α-Fe2O3 and SnO2:F, the transparent conductive oxide substrate. The peak near 534 eV originates from Sn 5s–O 2p hybridized states in SnO2.104
Comparison of these spectra for a given sample reveals that the features associated with Ti incorporation, especially those at the O K-edge, are more dramatic for total electron yield. This suggests that the electronic structure is modified more dramatically near the surface region, since the integrated volume that is sampled is smaller and closer to the surface for total electron yield.
The observation that electronic structure modifications due to Ti incorporation are weighted more heavily near the surface is significant for this material system. A recent perspective article from Sivula105 highlights the significance of surface states for the high efficiency of α-Fe2O3-based photoanodes for water oxidation. The overpotential required for water oxidation using valence band holes is currently prohibitively high for solar fuel synthesis devices. The distribution of surface electronic states and their occupancy appears to be determinative for overpotential losses when water oxidized directly on the surface of α-Fe2O3 electrodes. That the electronic structure modifications due to Ti incorporation are observed here to be more concentrated at the surface is highly relevant to this discussion. Notably, in a recent analysis of the structural and electrical properties of sintered Ti:α-Fe2O3, Nikolic et al.106 identified a dominant grain boundary contribution to electron conduction. Through analysis of neutron diffraction measurements, Curry et al.107 noted that there is an essential difference between the magnetic properties of sintered and single crystalline Ti:α-Fe2O3, leading to a suggestion that impurities in the sintered materials exist at grain boundaries.
On a related topic, the thin film textures observed in the literature for Ti:α-Fe2O3 (shown in Table 1), as well as the morphologies presented in the SEM images of this study, show that the incorporation of Ti strongly influences growth dynamics of α-Fe2O3 crystals. This is particularly clear for the films grown by PLD, whose morphologies are shown in Fig. 7, and the films fabricated by aqueous chemical growth, shown in Fig. 15. In addition to the electronic structure correlates to efficiency enhancement shown above, here we provide a short note on the possible role of titanium-influenced grain structure in photoelectrochemical performance.
The film morphology variation can be understood in terms of thermodynamic principles: the shape, size, and orientation of crystallites depends on the surface tension (or surface energy per unit volume) of the structure during growth.13 Although a detailed model for crystal growth is not possible here, one can predict that Ti is involved in the grain growth process through the minimization of surface energy, associated with the surface area and properties of grain boundaries and exposed crystal faces. Surface energy per unit area depends on chemical composition, atomic reconstruction, crystallographic orientation, and atomic scale roughness.89 Diffusion of charged Ti species to grain boundaries influences the grain structure and morphology by altering the physical properties of crystal faces and interfaces, and therefore the configuration associated with the lowest free energy. This is especially true for α-Fe2O3 crystals, which are highly polarized.
It is also possible that Ti4+ segregates at grain boundaries and suppresses electron–hole recombination by passivation of dangling bonds, or by quenching growth of interfacial sub-oxide phases. This is consistent with observations made in ref. 27, namely that conductivity enhancements alone are insufficient to explain the strong effect of Ti doping on performance.
It has been observed in structural characterization of magnetron-sputtered films26 that α-Fe2O3 tends to grow [110] textured; that is, the [110] crystallographic direction is oriented perpendicular to the substrate surface. When Ti is incorporated, the texture of the thin films tends to move away from the [110] direction. For the PLD-synthesized films presented here, a slight texturing away from [110] is also observed by X-ray diffraction (data not shown) through corresponding attenuation of the [110] diffraction peak.
It is interesting that PEC performance improves with Ti incorporation despite the tendency for the films to grow oriented away from the [110] axis, a direction of high conductivity in α-Fe2O3. As discussed above, the conductivity within a–b planes, to which [110] is parallel, is orders of magnitude higher than in the orthogonal direction [001]. As discussed above, many groups suggest that Ti incorporation enhances the efficiency of majority carrier (electron) collection at the back contact. In this context, the results seem to suggest that the conductivity enhancement associated with Ti impurities in the direction normal to the substrate surface (and/or any associated improved electron collection at the back contact interface) is large enough to counteract any negative impact associated with texturing in the lower-conductivity crystallographic direction.

6. Conclusions
In summary, the role of titanium impurities in the improved photoelectrochemical performance of hematite photoanodes has been discussed. Synchrotron-based soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements were performed on sets of electrodes fabricated by five independent physical and chemical techniques. The effect of titanium impurities on the electronic structure is reflected in several spectral characteristics. Absorption spectra at the oxygen K-edge show that irrespective of the synthesis technique, Ti incorporation is associated with new oxygen 2p-hybridized states, overlapping with and distorting the known unoccupied Fe 3d–O 2p band of α-Fe2O3. This is likely an indication of mixing of Ti s and d states in the conduction band of α-Fe2O3. Contrasting spectra from electron yields and fluorescent X-rays shows that the effects of Ti incorporation on the conduction band are more pronounced in the near-surface region. Titanium L2,3-edge absorption spectra show titanium is incorporated into α-Fe2O3 as Ti4+ by both fabrication methods, with no long-range titania order detected. Fe L2,3-edge absorption spectra indicate that Ti incorporation is not associated with the formation of any significant concentrations of Fe2+.
Based on these observations, the next steps toward a continuing understanding of hematite photoelectrode efficiency enhancement driven by Ti incorporation should be comprehensive evaluation of the magnetic structure108 and crystal growth mechanisms. It is likely that both of these features will be critical for developing a complete understanding of optimal electrode properties. In particular, understanding the role of the surface in Ti-modified electrodes should be emphasized in future work. Given the various explanations for the conductivity and PEC performance enhancement associated with Ti doping, such studies should be conducted on materials fabricated under the same conditions known to effect appreciable changes in photocurrent. Novel in situ electrical conductivity measurements provide important new insights toward our developing understanding of such systems.109,110 Finally, multiple time-scale studies of carrier dynamics by laser transient spectroscopy and/or time-resolved X-ray spectroscopy111 will also provide additional fundamental understanding (e.g. time scale and chemical nature of recombination sites, small polaron formation) crucial for performance and efficiency optimization.
7. Experimental section
7.1 Soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy
Soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements were conducted at Beamline 8.0.1 of the Advanced Light Source (ALS) at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The energy resolution was set to 0.2–0.3 eV at all investigated edges (O K, Fe L2,3, Ti L2,3). The photon energy was calibrated using the first peak of the O 1s absorption spectrum of TiO2 rutile powder (531.8 eV) for the O K-edge, the first peak of the Ti 2p absorption spectrum of TiO2 rutile powder (458.0 eV) for the Ti L-edges, and the main L3 peak of the Fe 2p absorption spectrum of reference α-Fe2O3 (709.5 eV) for the Fe L-edges. Total electron yield (TEY) and total fluorescence yield (TFY) data were collected simultaneously. For TFY, a channel plate detector with an Al filter was used. In all cases, the absorption spectra were normalized to the incident photon flux by dividing the XAS intensities by the current from a gold-coated mesh located in the X-ray beam path close to the sample position. All spectra shown were interpolated with a cubic spline function. The low-energy, pre-edge background was subtracted by a linear fit.
7.2 Pulsed laser deposition
Thin films were fabricated by deposition of species from pulsed laser ablation of rotating pressed polycrystalline targets in an O2 ambient (reactive pulsed laser deposition) using a Lambda Physik LPX 200 KrF Excimer Laser (248 nm). Films were deposited onto SnO2:F-coated glass (FTO; Pilkington TEC7). The target compositions were α-Fe2O3, α-Fe2O3 (1 wt% TiO2), and α-Fe2O3 (2.5 wt% TiO2). A stainless steel chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of about 10−4 Torr, after which O2 gas (industrial grade) was flowed through the evacuated chamber for 30 minutes at 18 sccm, as set by a mass flow controller, to replace residual gases. The FTO substrate was mounted to a substrate holder using a conductive Ag paste. Deposition occurred at a laser fluence of ∼1 J cm−2 per pulse with a pulse frequency of 9 Hz for 4 h. The O2 pressure during deposition was approximately 4 × 10−3 Torr as measured by a pirani gauge. Before deposition the target was ablated for several minutes at the deposition laser parameters to remove any contaminants from the target surface, during which the entire substrate was masked with a mechanical shutter. Throughout deposition the sample was maintained at 300 °C using a resistance heater and thermocouple embedded in the substrate holder. After deposition the chamber was sealed and the sample was allowed to cool to room temperature in the quiescent low-pressure O2 ambient.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images in Fig. 7 were obtained with a Hitachi environmental field emission scanning electron microscope (Model S-4300SE/N) with an accelerating voltage of 3–5 kV, operating in secondary electron detection mode. Energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) measurements were performed in the SEM at 15 kV. Spectral transmittance measurements were taken on the α-Fe2O3/FTO/glass samples with a Perkin Elmer Lambda Spectrophotometer fitted with an integrating sphere over the wavelength range 300 to 800 nm at a wavelength interval of 2 nm. The samples were illuminated at the α-Fe2O3 surfaces. For the photoelectrochemical measurements the electrolyte was prepared with 18.1 MΩ cm−1 water with 1 M NaOH. The measurements were conducted using standard techniques, as described in ref. 87.
7.3 Atomic layer deposition
Thin films of Ti:α-Fe2O3 were deposited on (FTO)-coated glass substrates (Hartford Glass) by atomic layer deposition (Savannah 100, Cambridge Nanotech Inc.) using a procedure described in ref. 11.
7.4 Sol–flame synthesis
Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructures were fabricated by the sol–flame technique.12 First, arrays of α-Fe2O3 nanorods (NRs) with an average length about 350 nm were synthesized on FTO (TEC-8, Pilkington) substrates by air-annealing (550 °C) of hydrothermally grown FeOOH NRs.96 Then, the α-Fe2O3 NRs were dip-coated with a Ti-precursor solution (10 mM TTIP in IPA) and finally annealed in a 1000 °C flame for 5 min to enable rapid thermal diffusion of Ti. Two different TiO2 precursor solutions were used (0.01 M and 0.05 M titanium-tetraisopropoxide in isopropyl alcohol) to vary the doping concentration.
7.5 Aqueous chemical growth
Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructures were fabricated using an aqueous chemical synthesis methodology described previously.96 The precursor solution was modified to contain 20 wt% titanium trichloride (TiCl3).
7.6 Sol–gel synthesis
Ti:α-Fe2O3 films with 0 and 3 metal atom% Ti were fabricated by the sol–gel technique using 0.3 M (metal) toluene–methoxy-ethanol solutions with Fe(III)-methoxy-ethoxide and Ti(OPri)4 as precursors. Films were deposited by spin-coating at 3000 rpm on a variety of substrates including Si/SiO2, Si/SiO2/Pt, α-Al2O3 (0001) and FTO. The obtained gel films were heated in air to 450 °C at 20 °C min−1 to yield α-Fe2O3 films. The grazing incidence (1°) X-ray diffractograms were obtained with a Siemens D5000 instrument. The SEM images were obtained with a FEI Merlin instrument and the TEM images of pieces of film scraped off the substrate were studied with a JEOL 2100F TEM, equipped with an EDS unit. The TG–DTA curves and IR spectra of gels and samples heated to 130, 280, 400 and 450 °C were made with a Netsch STA 409 Pc Luxx instrument and the IR spectra with a Perkin-Elmer Spectrum One instrument equipped with a diamond ATR (Pike GladiATR) unit. All handling of the alkoxides was carried out in an Ar filled glove-box. The titanium tetraisopropoxide (Ti(OPri)4) (Aldrich 97%) was used as received after the accurate Ti concentration had been measured gravimetrically and the Fe(III)methoxy-ethoxide was synthesised by metathesis. The alkoxides and solvents were purified and treated following a procedure given elsewhere.112
Acknowledgements
C.X.K. and B.E.K. acknowledge support from the Grand Challenges Program at Princeton University. E.A.C. acknowledges the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences. NSF/CMMI under grant #1036076; by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy; and by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences under the Contracts DE-SC0006931, DE-AC02-05CH11231 (ALS), DE-FG02-01ER45917 (end station). T.W.H. thanks the National Science Foundation (CHE-1150378) for support. G.W. thanks the Swedish Science Council (VR) for their support. S. S. and L.V. thank the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xian Jiaotong University, the Thousand Talents plan and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51121092 and 51102194).
References
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J.-W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2681 Search PubMed .
L. Vayssieres, C. Sathe, S. M. Butorin, D. K. Shuh, J. Nordgren and J.-H. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2320–2323 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Bora, A. Braun and E. C. Constable, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 407–425 CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014 10.1039/c3cs60378d  , advance article.
G. Wang, Y. Ling, H. Wang, L. Xihong and Y. Li, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2014, 19, 35–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dotan, O. Kfir, E. Sharlin, O. Blank, M. Gross, I. Dumchin, G. Ankonina and A. Rothschild, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Bassi, Gurudayal, L. H. Wong and J. Barber, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11834–11842 RSC .
D. H. Lowndes, D. B. Geohegan, A. A. Puretzky, D. P. Norton and C. M. Rouleau, Science, 1996, 273, 898–903 CAS .
O. Zandi, B. M. Klahr and T. W. Hamann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 634–642 CAS .
I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, Y. Feng, M. Logar, P. M. Rao, L. Cai, D. R. Kim, R. Sinclair and X. L. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1723 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Vayssieres, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2004, 1, 1–42 CAS .
E. L. Miller, R. E. Rocheleau and X. M. Deng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 615–623 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, J.-H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824–828 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Joya, Y. F. Joya, K. Ocakoglu and R. van de Krol, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10426–10437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Wheeler, G. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6682–6702 CAS .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Santato, M. Ulmann and J. Augustyński, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 511–514 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, M. N. Huda, A. Walsh, Y. Yan, G. D. Stucky, Y.-S. Hu, M. M. Al-Jassim and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 510–517 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Morin, Phys. Rev., 1951, 83, 1005–1010 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Hahn and C. B. Mullins, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6474–6482 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, J. Ye, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug, J. Tang and J. R. Durrant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6304–6312 CAS .
B. Zhao, T. C. Kaspar, T. C. Droubay, J. McCloy, M. E. Bowden, V. Shutthanandan, S. M. Heald and S. A. Chambers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 245325 CrossRef .
R. Shinar and J. H. Kennedy, Sol. Energy Mater., 1982, 6, 323–335 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, M. A. Martin, H. Wang, T. Deutsch, M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. Yan, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 123511 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Glasscock, P. R. F. Barnes, I. C. Plumb and N. Savvides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16477–16488 CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, S. S. Mao and B. R. Antoun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 092108 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Lee, J. H. Park, H. S. Han, H. J. Song, I. S. Cho, J. H. Noh and K. S. Hong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013 DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.10.031  , article in press.
X. Li, N. C. Fan and H. J. Fan, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2013, 19, 104–110 CrossRef .
S. A. Chambers, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 264004 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 5996–5999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Magnan, D. Stanescu, M. Rioult, E. Fonda and A. Barbier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 133908 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Tahir, K. G. U. Wijayantha, S. Saremi-Yarahmadi, M. Mazhar and V. McKee, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3763–3772 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rahman, N. Wadnerkar, N. J. English and J. M. D. MacElroy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 592, 242–246 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y. S. Hu, J. Lefton, S. Sharma, A. J. Forman and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1020–1028 CAS .
H. Tang, W.-J. Yin, M. A. Matin, H. Wang, T. Deutsch, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. A. Turner and Y. Yan, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 073502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. He and B. A. Parkinson, ACS Comb. Sci., 2011, 13, 399–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Franking, L. Li, M. A. Lukowski, F. Meng, Y. Tan, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 500–512 CAS .
L. Wang, C.-Y. Lee and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 30, 21–25 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2652–2654 RSC .
S. Kumari, A. P. Singh, Sonal, D. Deva, R. Shrivastav, S. Dass and V. R. Satsangi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Sartoretti, B. D. Alexander, R. Solarska, I. A. Rutkowska, J. Augustynski and R. Cerny, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13685–13692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, W. Luo, Z. Li, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 042105 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lian, X. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Xu, C. Jiang, J. Chen and R. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 2307–2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, Y. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shangguan, S. Tong, H. Li and W. Leng, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 10163–10167 RSC .
J. Deng, J. Zhong, A. Pu, D. Zhang, M. Li, X. Sun and S.-T. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 084312 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cao, W. Luo, M. Li, J. Feng, Z. Li and Z. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 2386–2391 RSC .
Z. Fu, T. Jiang, Z. Liu, D. Wang, L. Wang and T. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 358–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Miao, S. Ji, G. Xu, G. Liu, L. Zhang and C. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4428–4433 CAS .
C. Miao, T. Shi, G. Xu, S. Ji and C. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1310–1316 CAS .
B. A. Balko and K. M. Clarkson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, E85–E91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Y. Yang, H.-Y. Kang, K. Jin, S. Park, J.-H. Lee, U. Sim, H.-Y. Jeong, Y.-C. Joo and K. T. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2297–2305 CAS .
D. Cao, W. Luo, J. Feng, X. Zhao, Z. Lia and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 752–759 CAS .
A. Pu, J. Deng, M. Li, J. Gao, H. Zhang, Y. Hao, J. Zhong and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 2, 2491–2497 Search PubMed .
S. Shen, C. X. Kronawitter, D. A. Wheeler, P. Guo, S. A. Lindley, J. Jiang, J. Z. Zhang, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14498–14506 CAS .
T. Droubay, K. M. Rosso, S. M. Heald, D. E. McCready, C. M. Wang and S. A. Chambers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 104412 CrossRef .
M. Rioult, H. Magnan, D. Stanescu and A. Barbier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3007–3014 CAS .
E. Thimsen, S. Biswas, C. S. Lo and P. Biswas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2014–2021 Search PubMed .
J. Baltrusaitis, Y.-S. Hu, E. W. McFarland and A. Hellman, ChemSusChem, 2013, 7, 162–171 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Meng, G. W. Qin, S. Li, X. H. Wen, Y. P. Ren, W. L. Pei and L. Zuo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 112104 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sanchez and W. Yang, Science, 2008, 321, 792–794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Anisimov, J. Zaanen and O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 943–954 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bandyopadhyay, J. Velev, W. H. Butler, S. K. Sarker and O. Bengone, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 174429 CrossRef .
J. Velev, A. Bandyopadhyay, W. H. Butler and S. Sarker, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 205208 CrossRef .
M. N. Huda, A. Walsh, Y. Yan, S.-H. Wei and M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 123712 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liao, J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13296–13309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1775–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Rosso, D. M. A. Smith and M. Dupuis, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 6455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Iordanova, M. Dupuis and K. M. Rosso, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 144305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Robinson, R. J. Harrison, S. A. McEnroe and R. B. Hargraves, Am. Mineral., 2004, 89, 725–747 CAS .
W. H. Butler, A. Bandyopadhyay and R. Srinivasan, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 7882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Celik-Aktas, T. Droubay, S. A. Chambers and M. Gajdardziska-Josifovska, Microsc. Microanal., 2007, 13, 820–821 Search PubMed .
R. Rivera and A. Stashans, Solid State Sci., 2010, 12, 1409–1412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gota, M. Gautier-Soyer and M. Sacchi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 224407 CrossRef .
R. D. Zysler, D. Fiorani and A. M. Testa, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2001, 224, 5–11 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zelenak, A. Zelenakova, J. Kovac, U. Vainio and N. Murafa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13045–13050 CAS .
J. Jacob and M. A. Khadar, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2010, 322, 614–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. R. Macdonald, R. F. Howe, S. Saremi-Yarahmadi and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2488–2492 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, I. Zegkinoglou, S. Shen, J. Guo, F. J. Himpsel, S. S. Mao and L. Vayssieres, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13483–13488 RSC .
F. M. F. de Groot, M. Grioni, J. C. Fuggle, J. Ghijsen, G. A. Sawatzky and H. Petersen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 5715 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, J. R. Bakke, D. A. Wheeler, W.-C. Wang, C. Chang, B. R. Antoun, J. Z. Zhang, J. Guo, S. F. Bent, S. S. Mao and L. Vayssieres, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3855–3861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. F. de Groot, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1779–1808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Korotcenkov, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2007, 139, 1–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Kronawitter, L. Vayssieres, S. Shen, L. Guo, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang, B. R. Antoun and S. S. Mao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3889–3899 CAS .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. Gonzalez Martinez and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582–4583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. L. Smith, Thin-Film Deposition: Principles and Practice, McGraw-Hill, Boston,  1995 Search PubMed .
N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2456–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Chandler, C. Roger and M. J. Hampden-Smith, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 1205–1241 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Schwartz, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2325–2340 CrossRef CAS .
G. Westin, M. Leideborg, K. Lashgari, V. A. Coleman, K. Jansson and A. Pohl, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2009, 6, 828–849 CrossRef CAS .
R. Knut, J. M. Wickberg, K. Lashgari, V. A. Coleman, G. Westin, P. Svedlindh and O. Karis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 094438 CrossRef .
A. Pohl, G. Westin and K. Jansson, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1981–1988 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, N. Beermann, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 233–235 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Crocombette, M. Pollak, F. Jollet, N. Thromat and M. Gautier-Soyer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, 3143–3150 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, I. Zegkinoglou, C. Rogero, J.-H. Guo, S. S. Mao, F. J. Himpsel and L. Vayssieres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22780–22785 CAS .
D. H. Kim, H. J. Lee, G. Kim, Y. S. Koo, J. H. Jung, H. J. Shin, J.-Y. Kim and J.-S. Kang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 033402 CrossRef .
S. Saremi-Yarahmadi, K. G. U. Wijayantha, A. A. Tahir and B. Vaidhyanathan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4768–4778 CAS .
F. J. Berry, C. Greaves, J. G. McManus, M. Mortimer and G. Oates, J. Solid State Chem., 1997, 130, 272–276 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Kucheyev, T. van Buuren, T. F. Baumann, J. H. Satcher Jr, T. M. Willey, R. W. Meulenberg, T. E. Felter, J. F. Poco, S. A. Gammon and L. J. Terminello, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 245102 CrossRef .
P. Krüger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 125121 CrossRef .
C. X. Kronawitter, M. Kapilashrami, J. R. Bakke, S. F. Bent, C.-H. Chuang, W.-F. Pong, J.-H. Guo, L. Vayssieres and S. S. Mao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 125109 CrossRef .
K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1624–1633 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Nikolic, D. L. Sekulic, N. Nikolic, M. P. Slankamenac, O. S. Aleksic, H. Danninger, E. Halwax, V. B. Pavlovic and P. M. Nikolic, Sci. Sintering, 2013, 45, 281–292 CrossRef .
N. A. Curry, G. B. Johnston, P. J. Besser and A. H. Morrish, Philos. Mag., 1965, 12, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kuiper, B. G. Searle, P. Rudolf, L. H. Tjeng and C. T. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 70, 1549–1552 CrossRef CAS .
J. Engel, S. R. Bishop, L. Vayssieres and H. L. Tuller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201400203 .
J. Engel and H. L. Tuller, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11374–11380 RSC .
J. E. Katz, X. Zhang, K. Attenkofer, K. W. Chapman, C. Frandsen, P. Zarzycki, K. M. Rosso, R. W. Falcone, G. A. Waychunas and B. Gilbert, Science, 2012, 337, 1200–1203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. M. Pohl, L. G. Westin and M. Kritikos, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 3438–3445 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
Numerous designs for solar hydrogen generation devices require the use of a visible light-absorbing and chemically stable electrode material that is photoelectrochemically active for the oxidation of water. Hematite (α-Fe2O3), an earth-abundant and non-toxic oxide, enables photoelectrochemical water oxidation in these configurations, but its implementation requires engineering to reduce the required overpotential such that sufficient anodic photocurrent densities are obtained under device operating conditions. In this perspective, we consider, theoretically and experimentally, the influence of titanium impurity incorporation on the photoelectrochemical properties and electronic structures of α-Fe2O3 photoanodes for solar water splitting. In addition to the review of the current literature, the electronic structure, in the context of synchrotron-based X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements on electrodes fabricated by five different physical and chemical techniques, is discussed.


Ti:α-Fe2O3	Pulsed laser deposition	

	Photocurrent density: 0.5 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 15% at 360 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH (pH = 13)	
28

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Pulsed laser deposition	

	Photocurrent density: 2.1 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH	
29

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Atomic layer deposition	

	Photocurrent density: 0.8 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 25% at 400 nm at 1.8 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 0.1 M phosphate buffer + 200 mM KCl (pH = 6.9)	
11

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Atomic oxygen assisted molecular beam epitaxy	None	Photocurrent density: approx. 2.3 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: approx. 6.4% at 350 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH (pH = 13)	
60

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Atomic oxygen assisted molecular beam epitaxy	None	Photocurrent density: 8 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 15% at 360 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH	
31

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition	

	Photocurrent density: 1.0 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 27.2% at 400 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
37

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Radio frequency magnetron co-sputtering	

	Photocurrent density: 13 μA cm−2 at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 3.5% at 400 nm at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
26

Mg,Ti:α-Fe2O3	Radio frequency reactive co-sputtering	

	Photocurrent density: ∼20 μA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 3.2% at 400 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1 M Na2SO4	
38

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Reactive DC magnetron sputtering	

	Photocurrent density: 0.75 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V vs. SCE; IPCE: 14% at 400 nm at 0.5 V vs. SCE; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
27

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Reactive ballistic deposition	

	Photocurrent density: 585 μA cm−2 at 1.4 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 31% at 360 nm and 1.4 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH (pH = 13.6)	
22

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Solution growth and electrodeposition; post-growth doping	

	Photocurrent density: 0.67 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH (pH = 13.6)	
40

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Electrodeposition; post-growth doping	

	Photocurrent density: 1.4 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 25% at 330 nm at 1.5 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH	
41

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Spray pyrolysis deposition	

	Photocurrent density: 1.98 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V vs. SCE; solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency: 1.38% at 0.5 V vs. SCE; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
43

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Spray pyrolysis deposition	None	Photocurrent density: 4.05 mA cm−2 at 0.45 V vs. NHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
44

Al,Ti:α-Fe2O3	Spray pyrolysis deposition	None	Photocurrent density: 4.38 mA cm−2 at 0.45 V vs. NHE; IPCE: 25% at 400 nm at 0.7 V vs. NHE; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH	
44

Zn,Ti:α-Fe2O3	Spray pyrolysis deposition	None	Photocurrent density: ∼3.8 mA cm−2 at 0.45 V vs. NHE; electrolyte: 0.1 M NaOH	
44

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis	None	Photocurrent density: 1.06 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 22% at 365 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
45

Si,Ti:α-Fe2O3	Ultrasonic spray pyrolysis	None	Photocurrent density: 2.15 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 34% at 365 nm at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
45

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Sol–gel method	

	Photocurrent density: 103 μA cm−2 at 0.2 V vs. SCE; IPCE: 32.6% at 400 nm at 0 V vs. SCE; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
46

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Deposition-annealing process	

	Photocurrent density: 2.80 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 22% at 350 nm at 1.02 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1.0 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
47

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Hydrothermal method	

	Photocurrent density: 1.91 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; IPCE: 60% at 350 nm at 1.53 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
49

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Hydrothermal method	

	Photocurrent density: ∼0.6 mA cm−2 at 0.2 V vs. SCE; electrolyte: NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
50

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Hydrothermal method	

	Photocurrent density: 0.15 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
52

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Hydrothermal method; in situ solid-state reaction method	

	Photocurrent density: 1.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 1 M NaOH (pH = 13.6)	
53

Ti:α-Fe2O3	Hydrothermal method	

	Photocurrent density: 0.66 mA cm−2 at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl; IPCE: 27% at 360 nm at 1.23 V vs. RHE; electrolyte: 0.5 M NaCl (pH 6.7)	
58

	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Depictions of Ti substitution scenarios in Ti:α-Fe2O3. (a) and (b) One Ti atom substituted for Fe; (c) two substitutional Ti atoms positioned across a shared octahedral face; (d) two substitutional Ti atoms that straddle a vacant octahedral cavity. Black circles represent Fe, white circles represent O, and highlighted black circles represent Ti. From ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration showing the behavior of electrons and holes in α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 single crystals. From ref. 60.	 

 	Fig. 3  Analyses of materials in the Fe–Ti–O system from the basis materials anatase TiO2 and α-Fe2O3. Images show color of synthesized films and plots show corresponding densities of states from density functional theory calculations, with energy gaps indicated. From ref. 61.	 

 	Fig. 4  Calculated total electronic density of states for pure α-Fe2O3 and α-Fe2O3 incorporated with Sc, Ti, Cr, Mn, and Ni at substitutional sites. The highest occupied state is indicated by the dashed vertical line in each case. From ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 5  Unrestricted Hartree–Fock (UHF) potential energy curves along the collective nuclear coordinate x for electron transfer between Fe1 and Ti. The energy for x = 0 on the left curve is set to zero. The figure within the plot is a density difference isosurface plot of the added electron localized on the Ti site (in green). Fe ions are in grey. O ions are in red. A contour value of 0.14 electrons per Å3 is used. Adapted with permission from P. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1775–1781. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic showing the magnetic structures of α-Fe2O3 below 675 °C (left) and FeTiO3 below 55 K (right). Dark octahedra contain Fe and light octahedra contain Ti. From ref. 73.	 

 	Fig. 7  Left: top-down (top and center panels) and cross section (bottom panels) view scanning electron microscopy images of the thin films deposited by pulsed laser deposition. White scale bars indicate 1 μm. Right: experimental IPCE spectra with +1 V applied versus a Pt counter electrode (0.1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte, 100 mW cm−2 simulated AM1.5 illumination) for un-modified (green), 1% Ti (red), and 2.5% Ti (blue) thin films deposited by pulsed laser deposition. This plot also includes the corresponding spectral transmittance curves for comparison with IPCE spectra.	 

 	Fig. 8  Soft X-ray absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by pulsed laser deposition. (a) Fe L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the L3 band (bottom). (b) O K-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the O 2p–Fe 3d hybridized region in α-Fe2O3. (c) Ti L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range. In all panels, the total electron yield is represented by solid lines and the total fluorescence yield by dashed lines.	 

 	Fig. 9  Characterization of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by atomic layer deposition. (a) Photocurrent–potential curves. (b) Atomic concentration depth profiles based on XPS analysis. Adapted from ref. 11.	 

 	Fig. 10  Soft X-ray absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by atomic layer deposition. (a) Fe L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the L3 band (bottom). (b) O K-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the O 2p–Fe 3d hybridized region in α-Fe2O3. (c) Ti L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range. In all panels, the total electron yield is represented by solid lines and the total fluorescence yield by dashed lines.	 

 	Fig. 11  (Left) Scanning electron microscopy images of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films fabricated by sol–flame synthesis. From left to right: reference sample, flame-annealed sample, annealed + low Ti doping, and annealed + high Ti doping. (Right) J–V curves of four samples [1.0 M NaOH electrolyte, AM1.5 G simulated solar light (100 mW cm−2)]. The sample preparation and sol–flame doping conditions are not optimized.	 

 	Fig. 12  Soft X-ray absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by sol–flame synthesis: as-grown α-Fe2O3 (reference sample), flame-annealed α-Fe2O3, and two different Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films (a) Fe L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the L3 band (bottom). (b) O K-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the O 2p–Fe 3d hybridized region in α-Fe2O3. (c) Ti L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range. In all panels, the total electron yield is represented by solid lines and the total fluorescence yield by dashed lines.	 

 	Fig. 13  Characterization of 3% Ti:α-Fe2O3 films fabricated on Si/SiO2 by alkoxide sol–gel spin-coating and annealed at 450 °C. Electron microscopy images of the cross-section, surface of the film and fine structure (top) and grazing incidence X-ray diffraction patterns (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 14  Soft X-ray absorption spectra of α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 thin films fabricated by an all-alkoxide sol–gel route. (a) Fe L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the L3 band (bottom). (b) O K-edge XAS full spectral range (top) and expanded view of the O 2p–Fe 3d hybridized region in α-Fe2O3. (c) Ti L2,3-edge XAS full spectral range. This panel also includes a reference spectrum for anatase TiO2. In all panels, the total electron yield is represented by solid lines and the total fluorescence yield by dashed lines.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM images and soft X-ray absorption spectra of Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films fabricated by aqueous chemical growth. (a) SEM image of α-Fe2O3 annealed at 750 °C. (b) SEM image of Ti:α-Fe2O3 annealed at 750 °C. (c) Light-chopped current–potential plots for α-Fe2O3 and Ti:α-Fe2O3 films under simulated solar light (AM1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). The inset shows the photocurrent at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl plotted as a function of the volume of TiCl3 in the precursor solution. (d) Surface concentrations of Ti and Sn in samples based on XPS analysis. Three-dimensional spectral evolution of the transient difference absorption profiles for (e) no TiCl3 and (f) 5 μL TiCl3 in precursor solution. Two-dimensional top-down views of the transient difference absorption profiles for (g) α-Fe2O3 and (h) Ti:α-Fe2O3 (5 μL TiCl3 in precursor solution) 0–10 ps windows. From ref. 58.	 

 	Fig. 16  Ti L2,3-edge absorption spectra of Ti:α-Fe2O3 nanostructured films fabricated by aqueous chemical growth.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
