Transition metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41 for pollutant degradation and hydrogen energy production: a review  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5RA14555D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5RA14555D
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 83707-83724Transition metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41 for pollutant degradation and hydrogen energy production: a review
Dipti Prava Sahoo

, 
Dharitri Rath

, 
Binita Nanda

 and 
K. M. Parida

*
Department of Chemistry, Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Institute of Technical Education & Research, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, Khandagiri, Bhubaneswar-751030, OR, India. E-mail: kulamaniparida@soauniversity.ac.in;  Fax: +91-674-2351217;   Tel: +91-674-2350181
Received 
22nd July 2015
, Accepted 22nd September 2015First published on 2nd October 2015AbstractIn recent years, metal/metal oxide functionalized mesoporous materials have received increasing attention in science and technology due to their fascinating properties, such as a large surface area, mesoscopic bulky shape, and interconnected porous structures enabling them to be one of the most promising materials for catalysis and photo catalysis. This review summarizes the recent developments in design, preparation and applications of transition metal/metal oxide promoted MCM-41 for production of hydrogen energy and removal of aqueous pollutants. After a brief introduction of these materials and synthetic strategies, their characterizations and applications in aqueous pollutant degradation by photocatalysis/photo-Fenton processes and H2 energy production by photocatalytic water splitting are summarized. Finally, the future perspectives directions for this promising field are also discussed.Diptiprava SahooMs Dipti Prava Sahoo has completed her M. Sc. degree from the College Of Basic Science and Humanities, OUAT, Bhubaneswar in 2013. She is pursuing her Ph. D at the Dept. of Chemistry, Institute of Technical Education and Research, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, Odisha under the guidance of Prof. (Dr) K. M. Parida. Her research activities are mainly focused on the synthesis of metal oxide modified mesoporous materials and layered double hydroxides and their applications towards selective photocatalysis.Dharitri RathDr Dharitri Rath joined as a junior research fellow in the Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology in 2005. She completed her Ph. D in 2011 under the guidance of Dr K. M. Parida from Utkal University, Odisha. Now she is working as an Asst. Professor in the Dept. of Chemistry, Institute of Technical Education and Research, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University. She is the author of 12 international journal papers and one book chapter. Her research interests focus on metal modified mesoporous materials, functionalized mesoporous materials and their catalytic applications in catalytic and photo catalytic reactions.Binita NandaDr Binita Nanda completed her Ph. D in 2014 under the guidance of Dr K. M. Parida. She has been associated with the Dept. of Chemistry, Institute of Technical Education and Research, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University as an Asst. Prof. for six years. She is the author of 6 international research papers and one text book in Chemistry. Her research interests focus on metal modified mesoporous materials, functionalized mesoporous materials and their catalytic applications in catalytic and photo catalytic reactions.K. M. ParidaProf. K. M. Parida is currently working as professor in Chemistry and Director, Centre for Nanoscience and Nano technology, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, India. He is the author of more than 285 international journals, 18 national and international patents and also three book chapters. His research interest focuses on the design and development of materials such as metal oxides, metal phosphates, metal sulfates, cationic and anionic clays, perovskites, zeolites, graphene, C3N4 and nano metal/metal oxide/complex promoted mesoporous materials, naturally occurring materials such as manganese nodules, manganese nodules leach residue, manganese oxides of natural origin for energy and environmental application.
1. Introduction
Energy and environmental issues at a global level are important topics. It is very essential to construct clean energy system for solving these issues. These issues are among the biggest technological challenges being faced by chemists and technologists in the 21st century. In contrast, our major energy resources originate from limited and non-renewable fossil fuels such as coal, oil and natural gas. Furthermore, the combustion of these fossil fuels has caused some environmental problems, ranging from air and water contamination to global warming. Solar energy is widely accepted as a free, plentiful, innumerable renewable source of clean energy, which could meet current and future human energy demands.1 So the harvest and conversion of solar energy into a desirable energy is very significant.2–4 Hydrogen will play an important role in the system because it is an ultimate clean energy and it can be used in fuel cell.
World's most precious and important natural resource water is degrading its quality day by day by various pollutants. According to WHO5 the lack of pure water affects more than 40% of the world population. The development of an eco-friendly method for destroying these pollutants became an important task. Different conventional methods for water treatment are chemical precipitation, filtration, electro chemical deposition, ion-exchange, adsorption and membrane systems. In these processes, toxic metabolites are produced6–9 as by products, which impart adverse effect on animal and human health. Among the advanced methods, photocatalysis by heterogeneous semiconductors and photo Fenton processes are the most convenient and well accepted by the scientific community to control the organic pollutants in water.10 The side effects of the traditional methods can be overcome by these advanced oxidation processes (AOP).11 Again to find a suitable semiconducting material for the oxidation processes is the main requirement. The discovery of modified mesoporous materials is suitable for AOP process due to their surface active properties. In addition to high surface area they possess semiconducting sites (modified by transition metals/metal oxides) which are active in UV and visible light. The appropriate porous materials opened new perspectives in the catalysis for environmental pollutant and adsorption field. Porous materials are containing pores or voids. The skeletal portion of the material is often called the “matrix” or frame. The pores are typically filled with a fluid like liquid or gas and the skeletal materials are foam like structure.12
A porous medium is characterized by it's porosity. According to their pore size they are classified into three types: microporous, mesoporous and macroporous materials (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Classification of materials as per the pore size. 
Among the three ranges of porous materials, mesoporous materials have wide applications in research as well as in industries because of their potentials as catalyst, adsorbent and host materials. These applications are due to their unique structure which exhibits a regular array of uniform pore opening, large surface area (∼1000 m2 g−1), pore volume (∼1 cm3 gm−1) and tunable properties.13
Order mesoporous silica, in particular have attracted tremendous interest in the past decade owing to their broad application in photocatalytic process, heterogeneous catalysis, chemical sensor, environmental pollution. In 1992, scientists in mobil oil research and development company announced the synthesis of order mesoporous silica (OMS) materials (M41S). The three most important members of the M41S family were hexagonal MCM-41 with a one dimensional pore system, the cubic MCM-48 with a three dimensional pore system and lamellar MCM-50. The pore size of three different structural members could be controlled by altering the ratio of surfactant and inorganic phase i.e. silica source. Particularly, the hexagonal packed array of unidirectional large channels, MCM-41 offers unique opportunities to be used as “host porous structure” allowing the preparation of new nanostructure composite materials.14–16 MCM-41 has a hexagonal arrangement of one-dimensional mesopores with diameters ranging from 2 to 10 nm.17 The homogeneity of the pores, high surface area, and good thermal stability make them an attractive molecular sieve for applications in catalysis, sorption of large organic molecules, chromatographic separations etc. MCM-41 has been investigated extensively because the other members in this family are either thermally unstable or difficult to obtain.
Although MCM-41 has large pore volume, designable chemical composition and functionalizable large surface, it has no photo catalytic activity. The ‘Si’ and ‘O’ atoms of MCM-41 are not sensitive to either UV or visible light. In another way metal oxides have lower surface areas (usually in the order of 100 m2 g−1) compared to mesoporous silica. They have more diversified functionalities. Especially they may have interesting properties owing to their d-shell electrons confined to nanosized pore walls.18,19 Metal, metal oxides, semiconductor clusters and various metal complexes can be introduced into the channels of MCM-41 owing to its large pores and huge surface area. The samples were characterized by XRD, XRF, N2 adsorption–desorption, UV-vis DRS and TPR.20
The catalytic properties of MCM-41 are enhanced by incorporating additional functional groups in the silica walls or by deposition of active species on the inner surface of the material. The main advantages of using MCM-41 in catalysis are large mesopores which facilitate mass transfer and the very high surface area which allows a high concentration of active sites per mass of material. There are many possible pathways to modify mesoporous materials. Some are shown schematically in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Schematic presentation of the various methods for the modification of mesoporous materials [reproduced from ref. 21]. 
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of synthesis of ZrO2/MCM-41 by hydrothermal method. 
Metal ions substituting silicon atoms in the framework act as acid or redox active sites and can be used for different classes of catalytic reactions. The wall structure of ordered mesoporous silica resembles as that of amorphous silica. The active sites can be generated both directly and post-synthesis procedures by a multitude of pathways. It means that the properties of these active sites are variable and controllable depending on the different synthetic procedures.21
Most of the modification steps use the silanol groups present on the silica surface of the ordered mesoporous silica, because they are the anchor sites for metal species or silane coupling agents. For conventional hydroxylated silica, the density of silanol groups is remarkably constant at about 4–6 Si–OH per nm2, irrespective of the origin of the silica. From the published data, a concentration between 2 and 3 Si–OH groups per nm2 can be estimated for MCM-41 as well as MCM-48.22–25
2. Methods of synthesis of metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41
The substitution of various main group metals such as (Al, Ga, In, Zn and Cd, etc.) transition metals such as (Ti, V, Fe, Cu, Nb, Mo, Zr, etc.) and rare earth elements like La and Ce into the frame-work of the MCM-41 has received much attention.26–53 It develops more efficient and stable materials for application in adsorption, catalysis, photodegradation, separation and ion exchange in chromatography. The incorporation of a metal into the frame-work of MCM-41 seems to be easy but the retention of mesoscopic order is often difficult and the stability depends on the amount of dopant material. In case of tetravalent metals viz. Ti, Zr, Ge and Sn the grafting could be done by isomorphous substitution of tetravalent Si, into the walls of MCM-41 during in situ or liquid crystal template mechanism where the charge on the walls is balanced and neutral.
During the introduction of transition metal oxide into MCM-41 framework, metal oxides are bonded or anchored properly with support material to improve oxidizing ability, thermal stability and acid strength of the mesoporous composite materials. A number of methods have been employed to prepare mesoporous metal oxide modified MCM-41 such as hydrothermal,26–32 sol–gel,33–35 impregnation,36–40 precipitation,41–44 solid state dispersion,45 reflux,46 co-assembly,47 two step surfactant based48 and chemical vapour deposition method.49–53 A brief discussion on the methods and their utility are given below.
2.1. Hydrothermal method
Hydrothermal synthesis is a process that utilizes single or heterogeneous phase reactions in aqueous media at elevated temperature (T > 25 °C) and pressure (P > 100 kPa) to crystallize the materials directly from solution. Syntheses are usually conducted at autogenous pressure, which corresponds to the saturated vapor pressure of the solution at the specified temperature and composition of the hydrothermal solution. Possible advantages of the hydrothermal method over other types of crystal growth include the ability to create crystalline phases which are not stable at the melting point. A series of transition metal and bi metal incorporated MCM-41 is successfully synthesized by hydrothermal method.
Wang et al.26 synthesized Zr/MCM-41 in hydrothermal route in which Zr can be easily incorporated into the amorphous wall. The photocatalytic activity was checked with respect to evolution of hydrogen and it was observed that after incorporation of ZrO2 into MCM-41 show better result than pure ZrO2 and neat MCM-41. The incorporation of a series of Cr and Ti into MCM-41 was studied by Guo et al.27 A series of transition metal and bi metal (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Fe/Co and Fe/Ni) were incorporated into mesoporous silica hydrothermally by Shen et al.28 Sadjadi et al.29 prepared nanosized TiO2/MCM-41 mesoporous materials by hydrothermal method. These findings are quite similar with those reported in literature.30–32
2.2. Sol–gel method
In sol–gel process, small molecules aggregate to produce solid materials. Mainly this method is used for the fabrication of metal oxides. This method involves the conversion of monomers into a colloidal solution (sol) that acts as the precursor. Again these colloidal solutions (sol) make integrated network (gel) of either discrete particles or network polymers. In case of colloids, the volume fraction of particles may be so low that a significant amount of fluid may need to be removed initially for the reorganization of gel-like properties. Likewise a number of methods have been employed for the fabrication of mesoporous metal oxide modified MCM-41 by sol–gel method.
Li and his co-worker33 prepared TiO2/Al–MCM-41 composites with various titania content by loading titania into the mesopores of Al–MCM-41. The coal-measure kaolin is taken as the silicon and aluminum source. The results showed that the titania crystalline phase was anatase, and the particles size of TiO2 increase with TiO2 content. Awate et al.34 synthesized TiO2–SiO2 mesoporous composite photo catalysts with different proportions of TiO2 and SiO2 using sol–gel method. Chirakom et al.35 applied micro-wave assisted sol–gel technique to prepare visible light active nano composite films by doping Ag as synthesized MCM-41 into TiO2 thin film and the composite was tested for removal of MB.
2.3. Impregnation method
Impregnation is the most common preparation method for heterogeneous catalysts. The most important advantage of this method is its simplicity. The active metal precursor is dissolved in an aqueous or organic solution. Then the metal-containing solution is again added to the catalyst support material containing the same pore volume. Then the catalyst was dried and calcined to remove the volatile components within the solution. After impregnation of the support material, solvent is evaporated. As a result, the precursor of the active phase adheres to the surface of the support material. “Wet” impregnation method is the simplest method. In this method the amount of precursor added to the support material exceeds the pore volume. It results into the deposition of a vast amount of precursor material at the exterior parts of the support material. The heterogeneous catalysts obtained display an egg-shell distribution of the active component.
Eimer and his coworkers36 modified mesoporous silica (MCM-41) with different Cr contents and then Ti loaded on Cr/MCM-41 by the wet impregnation method and the Ti–Cr/MCM-41 composites shows high acid orange decolorization under visible light. Parida et al.37 studied the incorporation of iron into mesoporous Al2O3/MCM-41 nanocomposites. The composite is fabricated by sol–gel and followed by wetness impregnation method. It is found that the composite is an active photocatalyst for evolution of hydrogen energy from water in the presence of sacrificial agent under visible light illumination. Lee et al.38 synthesized a series of Ti–MCM-41 with variable Si/Ti ratios and Cr–Ti-substituted TiO2-loaded MCM-41 having different TiO2 loading by wet impregnation method. Durgakumari et al.39 prepared a series of metal oxide modified MCM-41 like Ce–Al–MCM-41, TiO2/Al–MCM-41 and TiO2/Ce–Al–MCM-41 materials with varying Ce content by wetness impregnation method and TiO2 loaded on Al–MCM-41 as support material. The Ce modified Al–MCM-41 system is used as a support material. TiO2 dispersed on the support material and the composite formed (TiO2/Ce–Al–MCM-41) is showing enhanced photocatalytic activity. Koodali et al.40 synthesized two different siliceous and titania loaded siliceous (Ti–MCM-48 and Ti–MCM-41) mesoporous material and compare the degradation of rhodamine B.
2.4. Precipitation method
2.4.1. Homogeneous deposition precipitation. Another illustrious method of catalyst preparation involves the precipitation of a precursor of the active phase onto the surface of a support material. Homogeneous deposition precipitation (HDP) also referred to as precipitation from homogeneous solution. In this method powdered support material is suspended into a solution containing precursor ions of the catalytically active phase, the pH of the thus generated suspension is homogeneously raised resulting in the precipitation of the precursor ions. The important point of this method is that precipitation of the precursor ions does not occur in the bulk of the solution, but on the surfaces of the suspended powdered support materials, in which the precursor ions precipitate once the pH has reached a critical value. This process is also known as chemical precipitation method.Wang et al. synthesized mesoporous Fe2O3–SiO2 composite by chemical precipitation method41 and studied the degradation of methylene blue.

2.4.2. Co-precipitation. The other method for the preparation of heterogeneous catalysts via precipitation involves co-precipitation of both a support material and a precursor of the active phase. Co-precipitation is sometimes used for the preparation of MCM-41 support as heterogeneous catalysts. This process is usually referred to as in situ incorporation method. In which metal ions are incorporated into the silica pore walls during the synthesis of MCM-41. Although this method is viable for the incorporation aluminum and titanium, the results for a number of other elements are rather less appreciated. The incorporation of hetero-elements inside the pore walls decreases the stability of these walls to such an extent that structural collapse of the framework occurs upon removal of template. Another reason is that the presence of metal ions during synthesis of MCM-41 changes the chemistry of the synthesis gel in such a way that the precipitation of an ordered mesoporous material is no longer kinetically favored.Koodali et al.42 successfully synthesized Ti incorporated MCM-41 and MCM-48 mesoporous materials by rapid and facile procedure for photocatalytic solar hydrogen energy production. Wang and his co-worker reported a facile chemical precipitation method for the fabrication of a highly ordered mesoporous Mn2O3/MCM-41 composite.43 Parida et al. synthesized mesoporous nanocomposite Fe@MnO2–MCM-41 by incorporating Fe into mesoporous support material MnO2–MCM-41 (Fig. 4).44
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of synthesis of metal modified metal oxide/MCM-41 composite by co-precipitation method. 

2.5. Solid state dispersion method
In solid state dispersion method two solid materials are dispersed in required amount of ethanol solution and to get a wet paste. The mixture was dried in oven at 100 °C over night followed by calcination process. S. L. Gargh et al.45 reported the synthesis and characterization of Bi2O3 loaded MCM-41 by solid state dispersion method.
2.6. Reflux method
Reflux is a distillation technique involving the condensation of vapors and this condensate return to the system from which it originated. Gao et al.46 synthesized a series of titania modified MCM-41 (MCM-41–TiO2) samples with variable Ti/Si ratios by reflux method. Although the Ti modified MCM-41 is tetrahedrally coordinated, it exhibits relatively high photocatalytic activity in oxidative decomposition of phenol.
2.7. Co-assembly method
A co-assembly method includes an aqueous polyelectrolyte composition comprising of a first polyelectrolyte dispersed in the composition (having a net electric charge of a first polarity), a second polyelectrolyte dispersed in the composition (having a net electric charge of a second polarity, where in the second polarity is opposite to that of the first polarity) and an electrolyte dissolved in the composition in a concentration effective to prevent co-assembly of the polyelectrolyte. Klabunde et al.47 reported the synthesis of transition metal alumino silicates (M–Al–MCM-41) with high surface area and analyzed for photocatalytic degradation of acetaldehyde in the gas phase. The uniform pore size of MCM-41 is retained after introduction of transition metal ion into MCM-41 which enhances photocatalytic activity. Among other transition metals (Cr3+ and Mn2+) Co–Al–MCM-41 shows the highest activity towards the degradation of acetaldehyde and production of CO2 under visible light irradiation.
2.8. Two step surfactant based method
Two-step method is widely used method for preparing nano fluids. In the first step the nanoparticles, nanofibers, nanotubes, or other nanomaterials are produced as dry powders by chemical or physical methods. Then, in the second step these nanosized powders will be dispersed into a fluid with the help of magnetic force agitation, ultrasonic agitation, high-shear mixing, homogenizing, and ball milling. It is the most economic method to produce nanofluids in large scale. Due to the high surface area and surface activity, nanoparticles have the affinity to aggregate. So, the surfactants are used to enhance the stability of nanoparticles in fluids. For high-temperature applications, the functionality of the surfactants under high temperature is also a big concern.
Madras et al.48 reported the transition metal oxide (TiO2, Fe2O3, CoO) loaded MCM-41 and MCM-48 by a two-step surfactant-based process. Nanoporous, high surface area compounds were obtained after calcinations used for photocatalytic activity.
2.9. Chemical vapour deposition method
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a chemical process used to produce high quality, high-performance, solid materials. The process is often used in the semiconductor industry to produce thin films. In typical CVD, the substrate (wafer) is exposed to one or more volatile precursors, which react and/or decompose on the substrate surface to produce the desired deposit. Frequently volatile by-products are also produced, which are removed by gas flow through the reaction chamber.
Hu et al.49 synthesized a highly stable and pH insensitive heterogeneous Cu/MCM-41 material by CVD method. The usage of oxygen as a carrier gas and oxidizing agent is found to be very important in producing a stable and effective Cu/MCM-41 catalyst. At a deposition temperature of 280 °C, the carrier gas oxygen can chemically react with the MCM-41 surface and the deposited copper forms stable Si–O–Cu bonding. Therefore, a thin layer of copper was strongly bonded to the MCM-41 surface. This layer is evenly distributed over the MCM-41 support due to the rotational motion of the tubular reactor and makes the material suitable for reduction of organic wastes present in water. The same research group has also developed a bimetal Fe/Cu modified MCM-41 (ref. 50) by CVD method. The immobilized metal catalyst shows a high degradation activity, durability and applicability over a wide pH range which overcome the two major problems faced by the heterogeneous Fenton reaction i.e. metal leaching and a narrow working pH range. So many other materials like Al–MCM-41, Fe/Al–MCM-41 and Fe/Nb–MCM-41 are also synthesized by CVD method.51–53
3. Characterizations of transition metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41
The transition metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41 materials can be characterized by different physico-chemical methods such as XRD, N2 adsorption–desorption studies, UV-vis DRS, PL, SEM and TEM etc. to get confirmed about the incorporation of different metals in the silica framework. The N2 adsorption–desorption, XRD, SEM and TEM methods are discussed in this section. The discussion for the other two methods i.e. UV-vis DRS and PL are embedded in the application of the materials for photocatalytic pollutant degradation.
3.1. N2 adsorption–desorption study
The BET surface area, pore size and pore volume of the catalytic materials are the most important parameters for heterogeneous catalysis. According to Wang et al.26 there is a remarkable increase in surface area of ZrO2 (18 m2 g−1) to Zr/MCM-41 (562 m2 g−1). The incorporation of a series of Cr and Ti into MCM-41 was studied by Guo et al.27 BET surface area for both Cr(X)–MCM-41 and Cr(X)–Ti–MCM-41 was gradually decreased with molar ratio from 100 to 10. A series of transition metal and bi metal (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Fe/Co and Fe/Ni) were incorporated into mesoporous silica hydrothermally by Shen et al.28 The surface area of M–MCM-41 decreases as compared to neat MCM-41, but the pore volume and pore size are increased. This shows the partial collapse of the ordered hexagonal mesopore structure and formation of distortions in the pore wall, which supports that the substitutional incorporation of transition-metal atoms into the Si–O framework and the crystal integrity of hexagonal mesoporous structure of MCM-41 are partly compromised. According to Eimer et al.36 the surface area and pore volume sharply decrease when titania has been deposited on the Cr/MCM-41. This is due to the dispersion of titania species and also the bigger size TiO2 nano-particles may block the pores of the structure. The pore wall thickness of Ti–Cr/MCM-41 is much larger than that of the typical MCM-41. It proves that the catalyst would possibly confer greater stability than neat MCM-41. Lee et al.38 showed the incorporation of transition metal ion in MCM-41 structure and TiO2 loading resulted in a considerable decrease in surface area. It is reported that, when the amount of TiO2-loaded on Cr–Ti–MCM-41 increased, the absorption in visible light increased slightly because some TiO2 particles are not closely bound to the wall of Cr–Ti–MCM-41. By increasing the TiO2 loading (by 33%) there is increase in degradation of 4-nitro phenol.
In case of mesoporous Fe2O3–SiO2 composite, synthesized by chemical precipitation method41 surface area plays an important role in degradation process. The main functions responsible for the degradation of methylene blue are the facile sorption of methylene blue dye enabling and stabilizing the high dispersion of Fe2O3 crystallites during visible light exposure. Fe2O3–SiO2 composite has a larger surface area and more available surface active sites for degradation of methylene blue. This high removal rate of Fe2O3–SiO2 composite is beneficial to practical use for water treatments.
It is believed that the degradation activity can be greatly improved by increasing the specific surface area of the catalytic materials. The Mn2O3/MCM-41 nanoporous composite with high surface area will provide more available active sites for catalyst and dyes interaction and enhance its activity.43
3.2. X-ray diffraction
Parent MCM-41 materials shows the characteristic peaks in low angle XRD at 2θ = 1.2, 2.1, and 5.0 corresponding to (100), (110) and (200) planes. After transition metal/metal oxide modification the characteristic peaks are retained with lesser intensity.54 Incorporation of a small amount of ZrO2 into MCM-41 would cause little distortion in the XRD peaks. But at higher ZrO2 content the peak shifted towards small 2θ angles that suggested a reduced regularity of silicate frame work of the Zr–MCM-41. The photocatalytic activity was checked with respect to evolution of hydrogen and it was observed that after incorporation of ZrO2 into MCM-41 show better result than pure ZrO2 and neat MCM-41.27 The XRD patterns for both Cr(X)–MCM-41 and Cr(X)–Ti–MCM-41 suggested that the intensity of the (100) peak decreases with increasing Cr content which may be due to the partial structure collapse of parent MCM-41. According to Sadjadi et al.29 the parent MCM-41 materials show the characteristic peaks for (100) plane at 2θ = 1.8 °C. The XRD patterns of TiO2 modified MCM-41 are independent of the characteristic peaks of TiO2, but the long range ordering of the material are retained. These findings are quite similar with those reported in literature.30–32 It is revealed that the titanium species are dispersed as TiO2 having interaction with the surface of the support.34 Even at high TiO2 loading, the mesostructural feature of MCM-41 was found to be intact without pore blockages. XRD study reveals that, a progressive increase of crystallite size which may be attributed to higher surface area of MCM-41, prevents agglomeration of particles and leads to uniform dispersion of smaller size titania crystals. The low and high angle XRD patterns of Cu/Ni–MCM-41 are shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Low and high angle XRD of Cu/Ni–MCM-41.54 
3.3. SEM study
SEM study is done to analyze the surface topography and to assess the surface dispersion of the active components over the MCM-41 substrate. Parida et al.54 extensively studied the Cu/Ni modified MCM-41 and found that the catalysts are well-ordered spherical particles. The metal particles are uniformly distributed over the support surface. The materials show porous structure with average particle size of 0.2 to 0.5 μm. Chirakom et al.35 studied the high resolution surface images of Ag/TiO2/MCM-41 composites and the particle size is found to be 10–15 nm. Again it shows very poor particle dispersion due to agglomerated MCM-41 particles (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  SEM images of Cu/Ni modified MCM-41.54 
3.4. TEM study
TEM images of the bimetallic mesoporous molecular sieves are characteristics for the mesoporous materials with hexagonal channel array, showing high quality in organization of channels of these catalysts. Parida et al. studied the TEM images of Cu/Ni modified MCM-41.54 From the figure, it is confirmed that the particles are spherical in nature and the metal particles are well dispersed throughout the silica framework. The particle size is calculated to be in between 0.2 to 0.5 μm. From the TEM study Zhou et al.55 confirmed that the parent MCM-41 has a hexagonal structure. The Au nano particles dispersed over TiO2/MCM-41 have the average particle size of 5–10 nm (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  TEM images of Cu/Ni–MCM-41.54 
4. Applications of metal oxide modified MCM-41
The parent MCM-41 materials have the porous structure but negligible activity due to inert nature of silica. But transition metal modified MCM-41 materials possess high surface area as well as enough surface reactive sites and nano scale channels facilitating transfer of photo generated charges to surface. Hence they have great potential to act as photocatalyst. However, the readily accessible mesoporous frameworks and adjustable porosities within the material are beneficial to the incorporation of transition metal ions. By dispersing the photoactive sites in the supporting materials, the functionalities of UV-visible light absorption is generated. The transition metal incorporated MCM-41 materials have been well documented in various research fields such as photocatalytic degradation of aqueous industrial pollutants,56 evolution of H2 and O2 from water, reduction of CO2,57,58 oxidation of methane to methanol.59 In addition to these photocatalytic activities they can also be explored for catalyzing redox reactions. The redox reactions are mainly suitable for the production of certain industrially important fine chemicals. Some reactions include oxidation of aromatics and side chains, reduction of halo aromatics, coupling and condensation reactions etc.
4.1. Photocatalysis
Transition metal modified MCM-41 materials containing large internal surface area and long range ordered mesoscale pores form a new class of photocatalysts. They have attracted attention for photocatalytic decomposition of aqueous pollutants present in water as well as in air. Photocatalytic activity can be used for H2 production, which can further be used in fuel cells.
The catalysts in photocatalytic reactions are normally semiconductor materials, which can form electrons and holes when exposed to light, and the reactions are normally either oxidation or reduction. Photocatalysts are generally divided into two categories (i) homogeneous catalysts and (ii) heterogeneous catalysts. A catalyst is defined as homogeneous if it is present in the same phase as that of the reagents, which means that the catalysts are present as solutes in a homogeneous catalytic reaction system. In contrast, a catalyst is said to be heterogeneous if it is present in a different phase than the reaction mixture. Photocatalysis is a “green” technique offers a potential for complete removal of the toxic chemicals in the environment through its efficiency. A semiconductor material contains a highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) known as the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) respectively. The VB and CB are separated by some energy barrier called the band gap (Eg). Semiconducting nanomaterials are generally preferred as good photocatalyst due to the energy gap between its electronically populated valence band and its largely vacant conduction band.
The principle of photocatalysis involves three important steps
(1) Proper excitation: the heterogeneous semiconductor photocatalyst must absorb light in the visible/UV range to excite an electron from valence band to conduction band. Visible light absorbing photocatalysis is much emphasized in today's research.60–62
(2) Bulk diffusion: the conduction band electron and the valence band hole diffuse from bulk to surface of the semiconductor photocatalyst. Crystalline of materials plays an important role for the bulk diffusion.63,64
(3) Surface charge transfer: the electron must transfer from surface of the catalyst to desired reactants to minimize the electron hole recombination. A co-catalyst is necessary for good surface charge transfer.65,66
Photocatalytic reactions can be classified into “downhill” and “up-hill” processes. In “down-hill” process organic compounds are oxidized at the expense of oxygen67 and a photocatalyst generates the production of various active species (O2˙−, OH˙, HO2˙, and H+, among others). This is the irreversible reaction. On the other hand, the “up-hill” water splitting into H2 and O2 is accompanied by a large positive change in the Gibbs free energy (ΔG0 = 237 kJ mol−1).68
The common photocatalysts are primarily metal oxides or sulphides, i.e., TiO2, ZnO, ZrO2, SnO2, WO3, CeO2, Fe2O3, Al2O3, ZnS and CdS. They loaded on MCM-41 to form a heterogeneous system for the photocatalytic processes.
4.1.1. Organic pollutant degradation. The organic compounds present in water such as dyes, phenol, acetaldehyde and acetone which can't be degraded by simple biological processes get accumulated in the body of the animals. These compounds are usually found in wastewater discharged from industries such as petroleum refineries, chemical synthesis, plastics, coke plants, dyes, pulp and paper, textiles, detergents, pharmaceutics as well as pesticides and herbicides synthesis etc.69–73 Heterogeneous photocatalysis or advanced oxidation process (AOP) is suitable for the oxidation of these contaminants.74In photocatalytic pollutant degradation process (Scheme 1), when the semiconductor photocatalyst is illuminated with light of sufficient energy (either sunlight or UV/visible light source), the electrons of valence band (VB) get excited to conduction band (CB), thus leaves a positive hole in the valence band (step-1). After the separation of electrons and holes, they are utilized for next redox reaction. A very reactive free hydroxyl radical is formed during redox reaction which is responsible for organic pollutant degradation. Pathways for OH˙ formation upon heterogeneous photocatalysis can be expressed by the following sequential reactions. Holes trapped at the surface of semiconductors are reacted with surface adsorbed water molecule and hydroxyl surface groups to form OH˙ (step-2). On the other hand the photo generated electron in the conduction band react with the dissolved oxygen forming superoxide (step-3) which again intermingles with the proton, yielding the hydroperoxyl radical (step-4) followed by the formation of hydrogen peroxide (step-5). Then hydroxyl radical is produced to attack the photo generated electron to the hydrogen peroxide (step-6). That hydroxyl radical oxidized the organic contaminant into CO2 and H2O. The mechanism of photocatalysis is shown in the Fig. 3 for single metal oxide. In case of mixed oxide, the same mechanism has been implemented.75,76
 Scheme 1  Mechanism of photocatalytic pollutant degradation. 
In corporation of hetero atoms into the frame work or onto the wall of mesoporous silicate can increase the amount of defect and improve the photocatalytic ability of silicate. Modification of the internal surface in these porous materials was also possible with metal oxide surface groups such as TiO2 a large band gap semiconductor and versatile photocatalyst. The photocatalytic degradation (PCD) of the organic pollutant i.e. methyl orange was studied on the surface of TiO2/MCM-41 photocatalyst under UV radiation. The modified photocatalyst has attracted considerable attention in waste water treatment due to its high PCD rate for various volatile organic molecules.77–80 Under UV radiation of TiO2/MCM-41, the conduction band electron can be removed quickly from the TiO2 site before charge recombination, because the electron rich MCM-41 surface functions as a hole.
Mn2O3/MCM-41 composite is studied by Wang et al.43 for the photocatalytic performance to degrade methylene blue and rhodamine B. More lattice oxygen in Mn2O3/MCM-41 composite favors the removal of azo dyes than those of the Mn2O3 nanoparticles and MCM-41. Its photocatalytic activity depends on the proportion of Mn2O3 in the composite. Due to oxygen vacancy Mn4+ is formed in the composite and a large fraction of the atoms are on the surface with reduction of the particle size and surface atom co-ordination. The transformation of Mn3+ ↔ Mn4+ derived from oxygen vacancies is a key issue in the oxidative degradation of MB or RB. The MB or RB dye can be oxidized by OH˙ in aqueous solution to form smaller organic molecules and eventually be mineralized into CO2 and H2O. BET surface area has a great influence on their catalytic activity under visible light irradiation.
The successful uses of the transition and rare earth metals in the catalyst are mainly the promoters in the mesoporous materials. CeO2 is one of the most reactive rare earth metal oxide, which has been extensively studied for ion conductors, oxygen storage capacitors, catalyst, UV blockers, polishing materials, and electrolytes for solid oxide fuel cell.81 CeO2 based materials are important for removal of organic contaminants from polluted water from different sources.82 CeO2/MCM-41 is the best photocatalytic materials towards the degradation of Congo red (CR) studied by Ahmadi et al.83 The adsorption of anionic dye on oxide surface was favored, leading to an increase of the dye concentration on the surface. High dispersion of CeO2 on the amorphous wall of MCM-41 increases the band gap between CB and VB, so the time of charge separation was elongated and prevent the recombination between photo generated holes and electrons. CeO2 nanoparticles act as an electron acceptor.84,85 Due to wide band gap of CeO2/MCM-41 the life time of photo generated holes and electrons of this catalyst are longer than that of the CeO2 nanoparticles.86–88 The percentage of degradation of CR gradually increased from 24.7% (without catalyst) to 51.9% (with CeO2) and again to 97.6% (with CeO2–MCM-41) in 120 min. Thus it is clear that the presence Ce in CeO2/MCM-41 plays an important role in photocatalytic reaction.
ZnO/MCM-41 contains two types of ZnO phase; one crystalline phase on the external surface of the supports which is photocatalytic active and secondly an amorphous phase, which forms an inactive spread layer on the internal pore.89 ZnO nanoparticles show n-type semiconductor properties and having binding energy of about 60 meV and direct band gap 3.37 eV at room temperature. In order to control the stability of the ZnO nanoparticles, MCM-41 are particularly interesting as host material for loading this nano crystalline material. The bulk ZnO nanoparticles show a strong absorption at 370 nm,90 but the nano crystalline ZnO powder support on MCM-41 are usually blue shifted to lower values i.e. 360 nm due to the well-known quantum size effect.91,92 After UV light irradiation, the highly reactive radicals OH˙ and O2˙− are formed on the catalyst and degraded the organic dye. The adsorption–desorption equilibrium between the photocatalyst and methylene blue depends on the porous properties of the photocatalyst (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Pictorial presentation of mechanism of photocatalytic organic pollutant degradation using ZnO/MCM-41. 
Bismuth oxide is an important metal-oxide semiconductor with a direct band gap of 2.8 eV and it can be excited by visible light.93,94 Nano sized Bi2O3 can dramatically reduces opportunities for recombination effect95 than micron sized. Bessekhouad et al.96 applied Bi2O3 semiconductor to degrade orange II pollutant in water under visible light. The photocatalytic efficiency of Bi2O3 was improved when it was dispersed on the surface of MCM-41.43 Photocatalytic activity of this nano composite Bi2O3/MCM-41 studied for methylene blue (MB) under UV and visible irradiation. Among the four crystalline structures of Bi2O3, α-Bi2O3 improved the photocatalytic activity of MCM-41 by decreasing electron–hole recombination, facilitating the interfacial charge transfer from the surface of photocatalyst to the substrate.
Wang et al. has reported that nanoporous silica and hematite can be the adsorbents and photocatalysts for the removal of the azo dyes (methylene blue) from waste water.41 Nano-Fe2O3 is one of the most important photocatalysts, which gives ion exchange site for photo catalytic reaction by introducing isomorphosly into the mesoporous frame work. Fe2O3–meso SiO2 is superior to Fe2O3–SiO2 catalyst because most Fe(II) ions were exposed at the surface due to the extremely high specific surface area of meso-SiO2. The high removal rate depends on facial sorption of methylene blue and stabilizing the high dispersion of Fe2O3 crystallites during visible light exposure. Fe2O3–meso-SiO2 composite gives Fe4+ ion under visible light illumination and it reacts with surface hydroxyl groups to produce hydroxyl radicals. This OH˙ radical is a powerful oxidizing agent capable of degradation of MB. This high removal rate of Fe2O3–meso-SiO2 composite makes it to be promising candidate for practical use for water treatment.
Smirniotis et al.97 observed different absorption peaks at different wavelengths for TiO2/TM–MCM-41 (TM = Cr, V, Fe, Cu, Mn, Co, Ni, Mo, and La) which were used for degradation of 4-chlorophenol. The absorption peak at 375 nm corresponds to Cr6+ and that at 450 nm to Cr3+. When titania loaded to TM–MCM-41, peaks were obtained in the UV range. Only 25% TiO2/Cr–MCM-41 exhibited considerable activity both in visible and UV light because Cr6+ acts as an intermediate level for electron excitation. It is based on the sensitization of titania with a tetrahedrally coordinated transition metal oxide. The incorporation of La did not result in any absorption of light in the visible band. Ni and Co incorporated inside the MCM-41 interacted with TiO2 during calcinations but they cannot bridge the valence and conduction bands of TiO2 for the electrons to leap with energy less than the band gap. V5+ incorporated catalyst can absorb visible light, but it did not enable the photocatalyst to utilize it, as the stability of a close electronic shell affects the electron trapping. Mn3+ incorporated catalyst was inactive because of the small energy driving force for electrons to de trap from Mn2+. The UV-vis DRS of transition metal modified MCM-41 and TiO2 loaded metal modified MCM-41 are shown in the figures given below [Fig. 9].
 Fig. 9  UV-vis DRS of transition metal modified MCM-41 and TiO2 loaded transition metal modified MCM-41 [reproduced from ref. 97]. 
Parida et al.98 studied extensively on metal oxide modified MCM-41 for the degradation of cationic dyes. In UV-vis DRS the Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41 photocatalyst showed the d–d transition band for octahedrally coordinated Cu2+ species at 760 nm.99 In comparison between Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41 and Al2O3–MCM-41, the above (760 nm) peak was absent in Al2O3–MCM-41, indicating less photocatalytic activity than Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41. The individual dye and mixed dyes (MB + MV + MG + Rd 6G) degradation activity shown by 5Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41 was found to be higher in comparison to Al2O3–MCM-41. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of Al2O3–MCM-41 shows that more PL intensity resulted in more electron–hole recombination. The lower PL intensity of Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41 indicated that the recombination of charges decreased after doping of Cu onto the surface of Al2O3–MCM-41. As a result Al2O3–MCM-41 led to less dye degradation as compared to 5Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41 (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Photoluminescence spectra of Al2O3–MCM-41 and 5Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41 [reproduced from ref. 89]. 
It has been observed by Rader et al.100 and Dutta et al.101 that highly alkaline medium is suitable for generation of OH˙. The three main factors i.e. intra-particle mesoporosity, electron transfer and generation of OH˙ radicals, are responsible for a high percentage of dye degradation in alkaline medium.
Au–TiO2/MCM-41 catalysts exhibit two bands; one in the visible region between 500 and 600 nm, which is attributed to the plasmon resonance phenomenon associated with nanostructured gold particles102 and another maximum appearing between 200 and 300 nm is due to the band gap transition of TiO2 semiconductor. The spectra of TiO2 showed red shift with the incorporation of gold indicating the interaction between the gold and the TiO2. Awate et al.103 reported that Au(2%)–TiO2/MCM-41 showed 1.6 times degradation (100%) of acetaldehyde than TiO2/MCM-41 and also better activity than Au(1%)–TiO2/MCM-41. The incorporation of 2% gold either generated new cluster by the nucleation or the enhancement of the existing clusters which contributes to the higher crystallite size.104 The photoactivity of titania was enhanced by clusters of the gold particles with smaller particle size, because of the increasing Fermi energy of gold particles due to quantum size effect, and possess an appropriate energy level between the conduction band of titania and the adsorbed molecular oxygen. Furthermore, the Fermi level of noble metals is lower than that of TiO2. Hence, photo-excited electrons can be transferred from CB to metal particles deposited on the surface of TiO2, while photo-generated VB holes remain on the TiO2. These activities greatly reduce the possibility of electron–hole recombination, resulting in efficient separation and stronger photocatalytic reactions.
Durgakumari et al.39 made a comparison between Ce–Al–MCM-41, TiO2/Al–MCM-41 and TiO2/Ce–Al–MCM-41 for the photocatalytic activity of phenol degradation. On dispersing TiO2 over Ce–Al–MCM-41 showed two distinct bands in UV-vis absorption. The first band remains as a characteristic feature of cerium which is in interaction with the support and the remaining spectrum resembles with that of TiO2/Al–MCM-41. That 10 wt% TiO2 loaded over 0.3 wt% Ce–Al–MCM-41 is highly photoactive and complete degradation of phenol occurred within 40 min. It shows a threefold decrease in the degradation time compared to TiO2/Al–MCM-41 and about a fivefold decrease in degradation time compared to pure TiO2. The interconversion of Ce3+ ↔ Ce4+ by photo irradiation helps in capturing the photo excited electron from the conduction band of TiO2 and minimized the electron–hole recombination of TiO2. Due to the synergistic effect of Ce–Al–MCM-41 and TiO2/Ce–Al–MCM-41 resulted in the enhanced photoactivity.
Fe@MnO2–MCM-41 materials show excellent results for the phenolic degradation in sunlight at room temperature. The percentages of degradation of different phenolic compounds are shown in the figure given below.44 The details of different materials, their synthesis methods and photocatalytic activity are listed in Table 1 (Fig. 11).
Table 1 Synthesis methods and photocatalytic activities of different transition metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41




Sl No.
Metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41
Method of preparation
Photocatalytic activity
References




1
TiO2/MCM-41
Hydrothermal
Degradation of methyl orange
29


2
TiO2/Al–MCM-41
Sol–gel
Degradation of methyl orange
33


3
TiO2/Cr/MCM-41
Impregnation
Degradation of acid orange 7
36


4
Cr–Ti–MCM-41
Impregnation
Decomposition of 4-nitrophenol
38


5
TiO2–Ce–Al–MCM-41
Impregnation
Oxidation of phenol
39


6
Fe2O3/MCM-41
Homogeneous deposition precipitation
Degradation some azo dyes like MO, CR, MB, RB
42


7
Mn2O3/MCM-41
Co-precipitation
Degradation of methylene blue and rhodamine B
43


8
Bi2O3–MCM-41
Solid state dispersion
Degradation of methylene blue
45


9
TiO2/MCM-41
Reflux
Decomposition of phenolic group
46


10
M–Al–MCM-41, (M = Mn, Cr, Cu or Co)
Co-assembly
Degradation of acetaldehyde
47


11
TiO2, Fe2O3, CoO–MCM-41
Two-step surfactant-based process
Degradation of indigo carmine dye
48


12
CeO2/MCM-41
Impregnation
Degradation of Congo red
83


13
ZnO/MCM-41
Impregnation
Degradation of methylene blue
89


14
M–TiO2–MCM-41 (M = Cr, V, Fe, Cu, Mn, Co, Ni, Mo, and La)
Sol–gel
Photodegradation of 4-chlorophenol
97


15
Cu–Al2O3–MCM-41
Co-precipitation
Degradation of mixed cationic dyes (MB + MV + MG + Rd 6G)
98


16
Au–TiO2/MCM-41
Homogeneous deposition precipitation
Mineralization of acetone
103


17
TiO2/M–MCM-41 (M = Cr, Fe, Co and Ti)
Impregnation
Photodegradation of acid orange 7
105


18
TiO2–Al–MCM-41
Solid state dispersion
Degradation of isoproturon herbicide
106


19
Ti(IV)–O–Ce(III)–MCM-41
Impregnation
Decomposition of 2-propanol into acetone
107


20
Cr/TiO2/MCM-41
Sol–gel
Photodegradation of diethyl sulfide and ethanol
108


21
Cu–MCM-41
Impregnation
Photochemically enhanced oxidation of phenol by hydrogen peroxide
109




 Fig. 11  Photocatalytic degradation of phenolic compounds in presence of different photocatalysts.44 

4.1.2. Fenton and photo-Fenton reaction. The Fenton and photo-Fenton oxidation, are the most advanced and developed methods for the degradation of organic pollutants. Most important benefit of Fenton type processes are their ability to convert a broad range of pollutants to harmless or biodegradable products and the fact that they are relatively cheap reagents, safe to handle and are environmentally benign.110In 19th century, H. J. H. Fenton reported that ferrous ions strongly promoted the oxidation of tartaric acid by hydrogen peroxide.111 Fenton's reagent is a mixture of H2O2 and ferrous ion, which generates hydroxyl radicals.112–114 If ferrous ion is replaced by ferric ion it is called Fenton-like reagent. The main advantages of Fenton reaction is the complete destruction of contaminants to harmless compounds like CO2, H2O, and inorganic salts.115–117 The ferrous ion (Fe2+) catalyses the decomposition of H2O2 and generates the hydroxyl radical and a hydroxide ion.118,119 Fenton reaction takes place in absence of light. A chain reaction initiates in the absence of light.Fe2+ + H2O2 → Fe3+ + HO˙ + H+Fe3+ + H2O2 → Fe2+ + HO˙ + OH−H2O2 + HO˙ → HO2˙ + H2O
The rate of pollutant oxidation in solutions containing the Fenton's reagent is accelerated substantially when the system is irradiated in UV/visible light. This process is known as photo-Fenton or photo assisted Fenton reaction.120,121 During the reaction, the amount of ferrous ion decreases and at the same time the amount of oxidized ferric ion gets accumulated in the system. The reaction stops only when all the Fe2+ ions are consumed. The newly generated ferrous ions react with H2O2 generating a second HO˙ radical and a ferric ion and the cycle continue. This is shown in the Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Reaction cycle for the photo-Fenton process. 
In principle, the heterogeneous catalyst for the photo-Fenton process may contain Fe ions, Fe clusters or Fe oxides as active sites. The use of other materials in particular copper is also reported.122 The use of Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41 and Fe/Al2O3–MCM-41 as heterogeneous photo-Fenton catalyst are reported for the degradation of dyes and phenolic compounds.
Parida et al.123 have shown the degradation of MO and MB and mixed dyes (MB + MO) by the Fe/Al2O3–MCM-41 catalyst with different pH scale. It has also been reported that at alkaline pH the generation of ˙OH radicals is more than that at acidic pH.124 The main reason for the quick degradation of dyes is that the Fe2+ ions from Fe/Al2O3–MCM-41 react rapidly with H2O2 in the presence of sunlight to generate more amount of ˙OH free radicals as well as Fe2+ is oxidized to form Fe3+. In the presence of a higher amount of iron, the active sites are blocked which leads to decrease in the MB degradation activity.
A highly active, stable, pH insensitive heterogeneous bimetallic iron–copper catalyst supported by MCM-41 was synthesized by Hu et al.51 for the photo-Fenton degradation of orange II. This new bimetallic catalyst FeCu/MCM-41 can function well over a wide pH range i.e. (3, 5.5 and 7) because iron works best at pH 3 as a Fenton catalyst while copper plays the leading role as a Fenton like catalyst at higher pH. Experimental results showed that total organic carbon (TOC) removal can be achieved for the photo-Fenton degradation of orange (II) using FeCu/MCM-41, 93%, 83%, and 78% at different pH 3, 5.5 and 7 respectively. This bimetallic photocatalyst (FeCu/MCM-41) maintains its high catalytic activity after 10 consecutive runs because of its extremely low metal leaching and strong chemical bonding of M–O–Si.
Degradation of phenolic compounds (phenol, 2-chloro-4-nitrophenol and 4-chloro-2-nitrophenol) by photo-Fenton process in aqueous solution using mesoporous Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41 nanocomposite was studied by Parida et al.125 Small particle size, easy reducibility of copper metal, stabilization of Cu2+ in mesoporous support Al2O3–MCM-41, high textural property and active on visible light are the key factors for degradation of phenolic compounds. With increasing in wt% of Cu, the degradation of phenolic compounds decreases. This is because the dispersion of copper particles is not uniform. The size of the particles increases due to agglomeration. The reduction of copper is not efficient because particles sat over each other, decreases the surface area with increase the copper content. It leads to less copper taking part in the reaction. Absence of Cu in Al2O3–MCM-41, MCM-41 and meso-Al2O3, leads to less degradation because in the absence of Cu there is no absorption of light in the visible region and reduces the percentage of degradation (Table 2).
Table 2 Synthesis methods and Fenton and photo-Fenton activities of different transition metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41




Sl No.
Metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41
Method of preparation
Fenton and photo-Fenton reaction
References




1
Cu–MCM-41
Chemical vapour deposition
Degradation of orange II
49


2
Fe/Cu–MCM-41
Chemical vapour deposition
Degradation of orange II
50


3
Fe/Al2O3–MCM-41
Co-precipitation
Degradation of methylene blue and methyl orange (100 ppm solution 100% degraded in 5 min)
123


4
Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41
Co-precipitation
Degradation of phenolic compounds (100 ppm solution 100% degraded in 45 min)
125


5
Fe2O3–meso SiO2
Homogeneous deposition precipitation
Decolourization of methyl orange (600 ppm solution 90% degraded in 20 min)
126





4.1.3. Photocatalytic H2 evolution. Hydrogen is considered as an ideal fuel for the future. Hydrogen fuel can be produced from clean and renewable energy sources. Renewable hydrogen production is not popular yet because the cost is still high. Photocatalytic water-splitting using photocatalysts for hydrogen production offers a promising way for clean, low-cost and environmentally friendly production of hydrogen by solar energy. The host mesoporous framework has large surface area that can make the metal oxide moieties highly dispersed and enhance the photocatalytic water splitting compared to bulk metal oxide. When photocatalysis is applied to perform water-splitting for production of hydrogen, the reducing CB electrons become important as their role is to reduce protons to hydrogen molecules. Water molecules are reduced by the electrons to form H2 and oxidized by the holes to form O2 for overall water splitting. Important points in the semiconductor photocatalyst materials are the width of the band gap and levels of the conduction and valence bands. The bottom level of the conduction band has to be more negative than the redox potential of H+/H2 (0 V vs. NHE), while the top level of the valence band be more positive than the redox potential of O2/H2O (1.23 eV). Therefore, the theoretical minimum band gap for water splitting is 1.23 eV. The physicochemical properties of a photocatalyst, such as crystallinity, crystal size, specific surface area, band gap energy, have significant importance as they influence directly the photocatalytic performance in splitting of water at active sites on the surface.127,128 This mechanism is given below (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Mechanism of H2 production by water splitting using Au/TiO2–MCM-41 as catalysts. 
ZrO2 is an important material widely used in ceramics technology, heterogeneous catalysis, restorative dentistry, polymer nano composite and sensors. The photocatalytic behavior of ZrO2 with a highly negative band potential (Etb = −1.0 eV NHE, pH = 0) and the wide band gab (Ebg = 5.0 eV) is very different from that of TiO2. ZrO2 is a promising light absorbing agent because its conduction band locates at a much higher energy level than other semiconductors. So ZrO2–MCM-41 can do the water splitting and gives the H2 gas. The band gap of Zr–MCM-41 has increased to 5.0 eV due to the blue shift for the absorption of Zr–MCM-41 compared to that of ZrO2. Highly dispersed ZrO2 on mesoporous frame work prolong separation of electron and holes and enhance the photocatalytic activity. A single narrow band at 205 nm was observed indicating the zirconium atoms were incorporated onto the wall of the MCM-41. Zr–MCM-41 accumulated 112 μmol H2 gas in 5 h by photocatalytic reaction. The hydrogen yield may be due to two possibilities i.e. (1) high dispersion of ZrO2 in the amorphous wall of MCM-41 and (2) the modified band gap between the conduction band and valence band of ZrO2 in MCM-41. Photodecomposition of H2O on this catalyst was enhanced by at least 2.5 times if compared with the pure ZrO2.26
Ti–MCM-41 exhibited a broad absorption band in the range of 200–400 nm. All the Ti species in this photocatalyst did not octahedrally coordinated. Thomas et al.129 suggested that, in the presence of adsorbates, such as air and water molecules, the absorption bands of the exposed Ti4+ ions in Ti–MCM-41 will become significantly broader. It is due to coordination of water molecules leading to an octahedral geometry of Ti4+ ions. After heating Ti–MCM-41 from 90 °C to 100 °C, it showed a sharp band at 230 nm instead of broad absorption band between 250–320 nm. Under the irradiation of UV light, the ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) arises, and the electrons transfer from [Ti4+–O2−] → [Ti3+–O−]*. The electron–hole pairs that are generated are localized next to each other that lead to their higher photocatalytic activity than the electron hole pairs produced by the conventional semiconductors such as TiO2.130 The photo generated electrons have higher reduction potential to reduce H+ to H2 compared with bulk TiO2. Koodali et al.40 explained that Ti4+ in tetrahedral coordination exhibits higher photoactivity compared with Ti4+ in octahedral coordination. Thus, not only the coordination of the photoactive species, but also the pore geometry of the silica support is an important factor that must be considered in the design of materials for photocatalytic solar hydrogen production.
Yang et al. studied131 TiO2–SiO2 mesoporous composite with optimum content of TiO2 and showed a positive effect on the photocatalytic activity as compared to pure TiO2. The presence of SiO2 effectively stabilizes TiO2, increases the specific surface areas and reduces the TiO2 crystallite size. It consequently enhances the photocatalytic hydrogen production efficiency of TiO2–SiO2 mesoporous photocatalyst. The photocatalyst exhibited an absorption band centered at 230 nm and a broad signal around 300–350 nm. But in case of 100% TiO2–SiO2 mesoporous photocatalyst sample, a broad signal around 300–350 nm was observed. Charge transfer transition between oxygen ligands and central Ti4+ ion with tetrahedral coordination occurred at 230 nm.132 So it is confirmed that titanium species interact with surface of support and dispersed on the framework of SiO2. The decrease in band gap energy was observed with increase of TiO2 loading, this may be caused by increase in TiO2 crystallite size. Mesoporous composite photocatalyst containing 60% TiO2–SiO2 had shown the best results compared to other composite photocatalysts. Upon Pt impregnation of TiO2–SiO2 mesoporous catalyst sample showed enhanced performance (∼8 times) for splitting of water (0.70161 mmol of H2 h−1 g−1 of TiO2). Co-catalyst plays a crucial role in introducing active sites for H2 evolution because the CB levels of many oxide photocatalysts are not high enough to reduce water to produce H2 without catalytic assistance. Co-catalyst also reduces the activation energy required for gas evolution. 1% Pt loading on (60%) TiO2–SiO2 mesoporous sample shows enhanced performance (∼1.9 times) for splitting of water compared to 1% Pt loading on TiO2 sample.
Shen et al.28 studied a series of transition metal modified MCM-41 for the photocatalytic water splitting. According to him, MCM-41 doesn't exhibit any absorption peak in 300–800 nm hence it isn't sensitive to either UV or visible light. But all the transition metal modified materials show optical absorption in UV-visible region because most of the transition metals are tetrahedrally coordinated with Si–O frame work of MCM-41.133–137 After incorporating Fe, Co, Ni into MCM-41, the photocatalytic activities were enhanced in order of Fe > Co ≈ Ni–MCM-41. Especially, Fe–MCM-41 showed the highest photocatalytic activity, with the very stable hydrogen production rate reaching 112.5 μmol h−1 g−1 of catalyst. Because in case of Fe–MCM-41, the [Fe2+–O−]* excited states can donate electrons to reduce water for hydrogen generation. After the electron and hole reacts with water and sacrificial reagent, respectively, the [Fe2+–O−]* excited states return back to be [Fe3+–O2−]. This catalytic cycle keeps Fe ions in 3+ oxidation state and contributes to the good photocatalytic stability for hydrogen production in Fe–MCM-41. But in case of Co–MCM-41, the triple-split 4A2(F) → 4T1(P) transition creates discrete sub-orbitals acting as recombination sites for photoinduced charges.138 This could be the main reason for the low photocatalytic activity of Co–MCM-41. For Ni–MCM-41, the weak optical absorption in UV-visible light region may be another possible reason for its poor photocatalytic activity. For Co- and Ni–MCM-41, the photocatalytic activities could be further enhanced by co-incorporation of Fe into the silica framework. The resulting Fe/Co and Fe/Ni–MCM-41 show photocatalytic activity 1.2 and 16.7 times higher than Co and Ni–MCM-41, respectively. When compared to Fe–MCM-41, the photocatalytic activity of Fe/Ni–MCM-41 was increased by 1.3 times. The synergistic effect of Ni2+ and Fe3+ co-incorporated in MCM-41 could then be responsible for the high photocatalytic activity, which could be attributed to its high efficiency in charge formation and separation. It has been reported that bi-metal modified MCM-41 exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity for hydrogen generation and CO2 reduction.139–145 In the case of Fe/Ni–MCM-41, the excitation of [Fe3+–O–Ni2+] → [Fe2+–O–Ni3+]* is accompanied with complete transfer of an electron from donor to acceptor center via oxo-bridge as shown in figure. This results in efficient charge separation and creation of long lived electrons and holes to initiate redox reaction. In Fe/Co–MCM-41, the [Fe2+–O–Co3+]* moieties initiate oxidation reaction with Co3+ as electron acceptor. Its lower photocatalytic activity for hydrogen production is consistent with the substantially lower oxidation power of Co3+ compared to Ni3+ (the redox potential of Co3+/Co2+ is 0.3 V lower than that of Ni3+/Ni2+),146 which limits the reactivity of photocatalytic oxidation process. Single metal incorporated MCM-41 could be attributed to ligand-to-metal charge-transfer (LMCT) excitation and bimetal incorporated MCM-41 based on metal-to-metal charge-transfer (MMCT) excitation (Fig. 14, Table 3).
 Fig. 14  Schematic of charge carrier transfer process in Fe/Ni–MCM-41 [reproduced from ref. 28]. 
Table 3 Synthesis methods and H2 evolution from water splitting by different transition metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41




Sl No.
Metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41
Method of preparation
Photocatalytic activity (H2 evolution) (μmol h−1 g−1)
References




1
ZrO2/MCM-41
Hydrothermal
22.4
26


2
Cr–Ti–MCM-41
Hydrothermal
146.5
27


3
M–MCM-41 (M = Fe, Ni, Co, Fe/Ni, Fe/Co)
Hydrothermal
141.9
28


4
Pt–TiO2–mesoporous SiO2
Impregnation
704.4
34


6
Ti/MCM-41
Co-precipitation
1480
42





5. Summery and outlook
The development of transition metal/metal oxide modified MCM-41 materials for photocatalytic applications have accomplished great achievements in the past few decades. All most all the transition metals have been studied and gave good results towards H2 energy production by splitting of water. However there are still some challenges for the stability of these materials and their practical utility. A key issue for the applicability of these mesoporous materials is associated with the thermal, and more importantly the hydrothermal and mechanical stabilities. In addition to the environmental and energy aspects these materials are also applicable as heterogeneous catalysts for fine chemical synthesis. The use of the catalysts in industrial scale is still a big challenge for the researchers. In particular by using the advantages of the mesoporous silica, the transition metal modified materials and their applications in heterogeneous photocatalytic pollutant degradation, green synthesis of fine chemicals and to overcome the energy demand are still some unmet challenges for future endeavors.
6. Conclusions
In order to satisfy the modern day energy demands in an environmentally friendly way both the materials as well as the process play a vital role. The achievement of the goal can be visualized only basing on the clean and renewable energy i.e. hydrogen energy. Production of hydrogen energy by catalytic water splitting can be the answer to the energy catastrophe. Among the advanced synthesized materials transition metal modified mesoporous silica can act as the best one to solve the present demand.
In this review, various methods for synthesis of different metal oxide modified MCM-41 materials have been compiled. The impact of these synthesis methods on photo catalytic activity especially on hydrogen energy production and aqueous pollutant degradation are discussed. The main aspire of this review is to give the readers an idea about the transition metal modified MCM-41 material and its endowment towards the future energy and environmental demands. With this background knowledge, some new modifications in material so also in method should be tried to improve their applicability in harvesting solar energy.
AcknowledgementsThe authors are thankful to the Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University for providing the platform to carry out the research work.
Notes and referencesJ. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniecc and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .J. C. Colmenares and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 765–778 RSC .J. C. Colmenares, R. Luque, J. M. Campelo, F. Colmenares, Z. Karpinski and A. A. Romero, Materials, 2009, 4, 2228–2258 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Q. Qu and X. F. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568–2580 RSC .S. S. Lin and M. D. Gurol, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 1417–1423 CrossRef CAS .A. Bianco-Prevot, C. Baiocchi, M. C. Brussino, E. Pramauro, P. Savarino, V. Augugliaro, G. Marci and L. Palmisano, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 971–976 CrossRef .B. Neppolian, H. C. Choi, S. Sakthivel, B. Arabindoo and V. Murugesan, Chemosphere, 2002, 46, 1173–1181 CrossRef CAS .U. Pagga and D. Brown, Chemosphere, 1986, 15, 479–491 CrossRef CAS .M. Saquib and M. Muneer, Dyes Pigm., 2003, 56, 37–49 CrossRef CAS .H. Shu, J. Xie, H. Xu, H. Li, Z. Gu, G. Sun and Y. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 496, 633–637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Rossetto, D. I. Petkowicz, J. H. Z. D. Santos, S. B. C. Pergher and F. G. Penha, Appl. Clay Sci., 2010, 48, 602–606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Gandhi, Mater. Lett., 2012, 94, 76–78 CrossRef PubMed .K. M. Parida and D. Rath, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 258, 381–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. G. Wu and T. Bein, Science, 1994, 264, 1756–1759 Search PubMed .K. Moller and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2950–2963 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Wu and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 1109–1112 CrossRef CAS .V. R. Elias, M. E. Crivello, E. R. Herrero, S. G. Casuscelli and G. A. Eimer, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2009, 355, 1269–1273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Schuth, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3184–3195 CrossRef .J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 835–847 CrossRef CAS .H. Yang, Y. Deng and C. Du, Colloids Surf., A, 2009, 339, 111–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Taguchi and F. Schüth, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 77, 1–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. S. Zhao, G. Q. Lu, A. K. Whittaker, G. J. Millar and H. Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 6525–6531 CrossRef CAS .H. Landmesser, H. Kosslick, W. Storek and R. Fricke, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 101, 271–277 CrossRef .M. F. Ottaviani, A. Galarneau, D. D. Giscard, F. Di Renzo and F. Fajula, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2001, 73, 44–45 Search PubMed .A. Galarneau, D. Desplantier-Giscard, F. Di Renzo and F. Fajula, Catal. Today, 2001, 68, 191–200 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Liu and H.
P. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 859–862 CrossRef CAS .S. Shen and L. Guo, Catal. Today, 2007, 129, 414–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Shen, J. Chen, R. T. Koodali, Y. Hu, Q. Xiao, J. Zhou, X. Wang and L. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150, 138–146 CrossRef PubMed .M. S. Sadjadi, N. Farhadyar and K. Zare, Superlattices Microstruct., 2009, 46, 266–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Okumura, K. Nishigaki and M. Niwa, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2001, 44–45, 509–516 CrossRef CAS .C. Anderson and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2611–2616 CrossRef CAS .N. B. Lihitkar, M. K. Abyaneh, V. Samuel, R. Pasricha, S. W. Gosavi and S. K. Kulkarni, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 314, 310–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Wu and S. Li, Mater. Sci. Appl., 2011, 2, 14–19 CAS .P. S. Niphadkar, S. K. Chitale, S. K. Sonar, S. S. Deshpande, P. N. Joshi and S. V. Awate, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 6383–6391 CrossRef CAS .W. Tongon, C. Chawengkijwanich and S. Chirakom, Superlattices Microstruct., 2014, 69, 108–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Elias, E. Sabrea, K. Sapagb, S. Casuscellia and G. Eimer, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 413–414, 280–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. C. Pradhan, S. Martha, S. K. Mahanta and K. M. Parida, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 12753–12760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. J. Do, J. H. Kim, J. H. Park, S. S. Park, S. S. Hong, C. S. Suh and G. D. Lee, Catal. Today, 2005, 101, 299–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. K. Reddy, V. Durgakumari, M. Subrahmanyam and B. Sreedhar, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1540–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Rasalingam, R. Peng and R. T. Koodali, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174, 49–59 CrossRef PubMed .F. Zhang, Y. J. Liu, X. C. Xiao, X. Y. Cai, H. Li and Y. D. Wang, Mater. Sci. Technol., 2012, 27, 196–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Peng, D. Zhao, N. M. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh and R. T. Koodali, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1605–1613 CAS .B. Han, F. Zhang, Z. Feng, S. Liu, S. Deng and Y. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2014, 6, 8093–8101 CrossRef PubMed .A. C. Pradhan, B. Nanda, K. M. Parida and G. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 14145–14159 CAS .S. L. Gargh, M. Mozaffari and M. S. Sadjadi, International Journal Of Bio-Inorganic Hybrid Nanomaterials, 2012, 1, 183–192 Search PubMed .S. Zheng, L. Gao, Q. Zhang and J. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 723–727 RSC .S. Rodrigues, S. Uma, I. N. Martyanov and K. J. Klabunde, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 165, 51–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Jyothi, P. A. Deshpande, B. R. Venugopal, S. Chndrasekaran and G. Madras, J. Chem. Sci., 2012, 124, 385–393 CrossRef CAS .F. L. Y. Lam, A. C. K. Yip and X. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 3328–3333 CrossRef CAS .F. L. Y. Lam and X. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 6639–6646 CrossRef CAS .F. L. Y. Lam and X. Hu, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 2125–2129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Trejda, J. Kujawa and M. Ziolek, Catal. Lett., 2006, 108, 141–146 CrossRef CAS .M. Hui, K. N. Hui, K. S. Lee, S. K. Cho, Y. R. Lee, H. Zhou, W. Cho, S. Chao, C. Y. H. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 107, 245–252 CrossRef PubMed .D. Rath and K. M. Parida, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 2839–2849 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhou, X. Yang, Y. Wang and W. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2014, 46, 228–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Zarrabi and M. H. Entezari, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 457, 353–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Lin and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1610–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Anpoa, H. Yamashitaa, K. Ikeuea, Y. Fujiia, S. G. Zhanga, Y. Ichihashia, D. R. Parka, Y. Suzukib, K. Koyanoc and T. Tatsumic, Catal. Today, 1998, 34, 327–332 CrossRef .Y. Hu, M. Anpo and C. Wei, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2013, 264, 48–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. P. Yoon, M. A. Ischay and J. Du, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 527–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wang, D. N. Tafen, J. P. Lewis, Z. Hong, A. Manivannan, M. Zhi, M. Li and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12290–12297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Gust, T. Moore and A. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. Lu, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5858–5868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Naik, K. M. Parida and C. S. Gopinath, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19473–19482 CAS .A. Kudo, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2003, 7, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10001–10017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Houas, H. Lachheb, M. Ksibi, E. Elaloui, C. Guillard and J. M. Herrmann, Appl. Catal., B, 2001, 31, 145–157 CrossRef CAS .F. M. M. Paschoal, M. A. Anderson and M. V. B. Zanoni, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 166, 531–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Cassano, R. Molinari, M. Romano and E. Drioli, J. Membr. Sci., 2001, 181, 111–126 CrossRef CAS .G. Crini, Bioresour. Technol., 2006, 97, 1061–1085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .O. Tunay, I. KabdaslI, D. Orhon and G. Cansever, Water Sci. Technol., 1999, 40, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .H. Shu, J. Xie, H. Xu, H. Li, Z. Gu, G. Sun and Y. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 496, 633–637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Ed. D. F. Ollis and H. Al-Ekabi, Photodegradation of water pollutants, Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam,  1993, vol. 49–65 Search PubMed .G. K. Pradhan and K. M. Parida, Int. J. Eng. Res. Tech., 2010, 2, 53–65 Search PubMed .K. M. S. Khalil, L. A. Elkabee and B. Murphy, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 78, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. M. S. Khalil, L. A. Elkabee and B. Murphy, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 287, 534–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhang, F. Zhang and K. Y. Chan, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 284, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, W. Lian, X. Fu, J. M. Basset and F. Lefebvne, J. Catal., 2006, 238, 13–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. L. Wang and X. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13563–13566 CrossRef CAS .R. S. Monteiro, L. C. Dieguez and M. Schmal, Catal. Today, 2001, 65, 77–89 CrossRef CAS .H. R. Pouretedal and M. Ahmadi, Int. Nano Lett., 2012, 2, 10 CrossRef .M. M. Mohamed and M. M. Al-Esaimi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 255, 5361–5367 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Wangcheng, L. Guanzhong, G. Yanlong, G. Yun, W. Yanging, W. Yansong, Z. Zhigang and L. Xiaohui, J. Rare Earths, 2008, 26, 515–522 CrossRef .P. Ji, J. Zhang, F. Chen and M. Anpo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17809–17813 CAS .K. Hadjiivanov, T. Tsoncheva, M. Dimitrov, C. Minchev and H. Knözinger, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 241, 331–340 CrossRef CAS .A. Sakthivel, S. E. Dapurkar and P. Selvam, Catal. Lett., 2001, 77, 155–158 CrossRef CAS .G. D. Mihal, V. Meynen, M. Mertens, N. Bilba, P. Cool and E. F. Vansant, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 5786–5794 CrossRef .D. W. Bahnemann, C. Kormann and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 3789–3798 CrossRef CAS .G. Ramakrishna and H. N. Ghosh, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 3006–3012 CrossRef CAS .E. M. Wong and P. C. Searson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 293 CrossRef PubMed .P. Maruthamuthu, K. Gurunathan and E. Subramanian, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1994, 19, 889–893 CrossRef CAS .K. Gurunathan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 933–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Zhang, J. Lin, Z. Chen, Y. Tang and Y. Yu, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 299, 292–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Bessekhouad, D. Robert and J. V. Weber, Catal. Today, 2005, 101, 315–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. P. Reddy, B. Sun and P. G. Smirniotis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17198–17205 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Pradhan, K. M. Parida and B. Nanda, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 73487356 RSC .M. C. Marison, E. Garbowski and M. Primet, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1990, 86, 3027 RSC .W. S. Rader, L. Soiujic, E. B. Miiosavijevlc and J. L. Hendrlx, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1993, 27, 1875–1879 CrossRef CAS .C. Dutta, R. Naidu and M. K. N. Yenkie, J. Sci. Ind. Res., 2004, 63, 518–521 Search PubMed .C. M. Yang, M. Kalwei, F. Schuth and K. Chao, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 254, 289–296 CrossRef CAS .N. P. Tangale, A. A. Belhekar, K. B. Kale and S. V. Awate, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2014, 225, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .R. P. Galhenage, H. Yan, S. A. Tenney, N. Park, G. Henkelman and P. Albrecht, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7191–7201 CAS .V. R. Elıias, E. G. Vaschetto, K. Sapag, M. Crivello, S. G. Casuscelli and G. A. Eimer, Top. Catal., 2011, 54, 277–286 CrossRef .M. V. P. Sharma, V. D. Kumari and M. Subrahmanyam, Chemosphere, 2008, 72, 644–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Nakamura, A. Okamoto, H. Osawa, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9596–9597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. A. Kolinko, P. G. Smirniotis, D. V. Kozlov and A. V. Vorontsov, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 232, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Srinivas, V. R. Rani, S. J. Kulkarni and K. V. Raghavan, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2002, 179, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Tarr, Bioremediation of aquatic and terrestrial eco system, Marcel Dekker Inc., New York, USA,  2003, pp. 165–200 Search PubMed .H. J. H. Fenton, J. Chem. Soc., 1894, 65, 899–910 RSC .L. Lei, X. Hu, P. L. Yue, S. H. Bossmann, S. Gob and A. M. Braun, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1998, 116, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .P. Bautista, A. Mohedano, J. Casas, J. Zazo and J. Rodriguez, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2008, 83, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Nogueira, A. Trovó and D. Modé, Chemosphere, 2002, 48, 385 CrossRef .P. Mazellier, M. Sarakha and M. Botte, New J. Chem., 1999, 23, 133–135 RSC .Y. D. Xie, F. Chen, J. J. He, J. C. zhao and H. Wang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2000, 136, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .C. Catastini, S. Rafgan, G. Mailhot and M. Sarakha, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 162, 97–103 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Zazo, J. A. Casas, A. F. Mohedano, M. A. Gilarranz and J. J. Rodriguez, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 9295–9302 CrossRef CAS .J. Bacardit, J. Stotzner, E. Chamarro and S. Esplugas, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 7615–7619 CrossRef CAS .G. Ruppert, R. Bauer and G. Heisler, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 73, 75–78 CrossRef CAS .P. L. Huston and J. J. Pignatello, Water Res., 1999, 33, 1238 CrossRef CAS .S. Hamoudi, F. Larachi and A. Sayari, J. Catal., 1998, 177, 247–258 CrossRef .A. C. Pradhan and K. M. Parida, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7567–7579 RSC .C. Dutta, R. Naidu and M. K. N. Yenkie, J. Sci. Ind. Res., 2004, 63, 518–521 Search PubMed .A. C. Pradhan, B. Nanda, K. M. Parida and M. Das, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 558–566 RSC .N. Panda, H. Sahoo and S. Mohapatra, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 185, 359–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Sreethawong and S. Yoshikawa, J. Chem. Eng., 2012, 197, 272–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .W. Zhang, M. Frcoba, J. Wang, P. T. Tanev, J. Wong and T. J. Pinnavaia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 9164–9171 CrossRef CAS .M. Matsuoka and M. Anpo, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 3, 225–252 CrossRef CAS .H. Yang, D. Deng and C. Du, Colloids Surf., A, 2009, 339, 111–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zheng, L. Gao, Q. Zhang, W. Zhang and J. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 578–658 RSC .A. Verberckmoes, M. G. Uytterhoeven and R. A. Schoonheydt, Zeolites, 1997, 19, 180 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Choi, S. S. Yoon, S. H. Jang and W. S. Ahn, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 280–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Stefanis, S. Kaciulis and L. Pandolfi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 99, 140–148 CrossRef PubMed .R. Peng, D. Zhao, N. M. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh and R. T. Koodali, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1605–1613 CAS .S. Lim, D. Ciuparu, C. Pak, F. Dobek, Y. Chen, D. Harding, L. Pfefferle and G. Haller, J. Phys. Chem., 2003, 107, 11048–11056 CrossRef CAS .G. Giuli, E. Paris, G. Pratesi, C. Koeberl and C. Cipriani, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 2003, 38, 1181–1186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Lin and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1610–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Nakamura and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10668–10669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Shen and L. Guo, Catal. Today, 2007, 129, 414–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, T. Shishido and K. Takehira, J. Catal., 2002, 20, 186–196 CrossRef .X. Wu, W. W. Weare and H. Frei, Dalton Trans., 2009, 10114–101121 RSC .W. Lin, H. Frei and C. R. Chim, Photosynth. Res., 2006, 111, 207–217 Search PubMed .R. Nakamura, A. Okamoto, H. Osawa, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9596–9597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Yang and J. J. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, 716–723 CrossRef PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Diptiprava Sahoo	Ms Dipti Prava Sahoo has completed her M. Sc. degree from the College Of Basic Science and Humanities, OUAT, Bhubaneswar in 2013. She is pursuing her Ph. D at the Dept. of Chemistry, Institute of Technical Education and Research, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, Odisha under the guidance of Prof. (Dr) K. M. Parida. Her research activities are mainly focused on the synthesis of metal oxide modified mesoporous materials and layered double hydroxides and their applications towards selective photocatalysis.
Dharitri Rath	Dr Dharitri Rath joined as a junior research fellow in the Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology in 2005. She completed her Ph. D in 2011 under the guidance of Dr K. M. Parida from Utkal University, Odisha. Now she is working as an Asst. Professor in the Dept. of Chemistry, Institute of Technical Education and Research, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University. She is the author of 12 international journal papers and one book chapter. Her research interests focus on metal modified mesoporous materials, functionalized mesoporous materials and their catalytic applications in catalytic and photo catalytic reactions.
Binita Nanda	Dr Binita Nanda completed her Ph. D in 2014 under the guidance of Dr K. M. Parida. She has been associated with the Dept. of Chemistry, Institute of Technical Education and Research, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University as an Asst. Prof. for six years. She is the author of 6 international research papers and one text book in Chemistry. Her research interests focus on metal modified mesoporous materials, functionalized mesoporous materials and their catalytic applications in catalytic and photo catalytic reactions.
K. M. Parida	Prof. K. M. Parida is currently working as professor in Chemistry and Director, Centre for Nanoscience and Nano technology, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, India. He is the author of more than 285 international journals, 18 national and international patents and also three book chapters. His research interest focuses on the design and development of materials such as metal oxides, metal phosphates, metal sulfates, cationic and anionic clays, perovskites, zeolites, graphene, C3N4 and nano metal/metal oxide/complex promoted mesoporous materials, naturally occurring materials such as manganese nodules, manganese nodules leach residue, manganese oxides of natural origin for energy and environmental application.

 	Fig. 1  Classification of materials as per the pore size.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic presentation of the various methods for the modification of mesoporous materials [reproduced from ref. 21].	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of synthesis of ZrO2/MCM-41 by hydrothermal method.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of synthesis of metal modified metal oxide/MCM-41 composite by co-precipitation method.	 

 	Fig. 5  Low and high angle XRD of Cu/Ni–MCM-41.54	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of Cu/Ni modified MCM-41.54	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM images of Cu/Ni–MCM-41.54	 

 	Scheme 1  Mechanism of photocatalytic pollutant degradation.	 

 	Fig. 8  Pictorial presentation of mechanism of photocatalytic organic pollutant degradation using ZnO/MCM-41.	 

 	Fig. 9  UV-vis DRS of transition metal modified MCM-41 and TiO2 loaded transition metal modified MCM-41 [reproduced from ref. 97].	 

 	Fig. 10  Photoluminescence spectra of Al2O3–MCM-41 and 5Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41 [reproduced from ref. 89].	 

1	TiO2/MCM-41	Hydrothermal	Degradation of methyl orange	29
2	TiO2/Al–MCM-41	Sol–gel	Degradation of methyl orange	33
3	TiO2/Cr/MCM-41	Impregnation	Degradation of acid orange 7	36
4	Cr–Ti–MCM-41	Impregnation	Decomposition of 4-nitrophenol	38
5	TiO2–Ce–Al–MCM-41	Impregnation	Oxidation of phenol	39
6	Fe2O3/MCM-41	Homogeneous deposition precipitation	Degradation some azo dyes like MO, CR, MB, RB	42
7	Mn2O3/MCM-41	Co-precipitation	Degradation of methylene blue and rhodamine B	43
8	Bi2O3–MCM-41	Solid state dispersion	Degradation of methylene blue	45
9	TiO2/MCM-41	Reflux	Decomposition of phenolic group	46
10	M–Al–MCM-41, (M = Mn, Cr, Cu or Co)	Co-assembly	Degradation of acetaldehyde	47
11	TiO2, Fe2O3, CoO–MCM-41	Two-step surfactant-based process	Degradation of indigo carmine dye	48
12	CeO2/MCM-41	Impregnation	Degradation of Congo red	83
13	ZnO/MCM-41	Impregnation	Degradation of methylene blue	89
14	M–TiO2–MCM-41 (M = Cr, V, Fe, Cu, Mn, Co, Ni, Mo, and La)	Sol–gel	Photodegradation of 4-chlorophenol	97
15	Cu–Al2O3–MCM-41	Co-precipitation	Degradation of mixed cationic dyes (MB + MV + MG + Rd 6G)	98
16	Au–TiO2/MCM-41	Homogeneous deposition precipitation	Mineralization of acetone	103
17	TiO2/M–MCM-41 (M = Cr, Fe, Co and Ti)	Impregnation	Photodegradation of acid orange 7	105
18	TiO2–Al–MCM-41	Solid state dispersion	Degradation of isoproturon herbicide	106
19	Ti(IV)–O–Ce(III)–MCM-41	Impregnation	Decomposition of 2-propanol into acetone	107
20	Cr/TiO2/MCM-41	Sol–gel	Photodegradation of diethyl sulfide and ethanol	108
21	Cu–MCM-41	Impregnation	Photochemically enhanced oxidation of phenol by hydrogen peroxide	109

 	Fig. 11  Photocatalytic degradation of phenolic compounds in presence of different photocatalysts.44	 
Fe2+ + H2O2 → Fe3+ + HO˙ + H+
Fe3+ + H2O2 → Fe2+ + HO˙ + OH−
H2O2 + HO˙ → HO2˙ + H2O

 	Fig. 12  Reaction cycle for the photo-Fenton process.	 

1	Cu–MCM-41	Chemical vapour deposition	Degradation of orange II	49
2	Fe/Cu–MCM-41	Chemical vapour deposition	Degradation of orange II	50
3	Fe/Al2O3–MCM-41	Co-precipitation	Degradation of methylene blue and methyl orange (100 ppm solution 100% degraded in 5 min)	123
4	Cu/Al2O3–MCM-41	Co-precipitation	Degradation of phenolic compounds (100 ppm solution 100% degraded in 45 min)	125
5	Fe2O3–meso SiO2	Homogeneous deposition precipitation	Decolourization of methyl orange (600 ppm solution 90% degraded in 20 min)	126

 	Fig. 13  Mechanism of H2 production by water splitting using Au/TiO2–MCM-41 as catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic of charge carrier transfer process in Fe/Ni–MCM-41 [reproduced from ref. 28].	 

1	ZrO2/MCM-41	Hydrothermal	22.4	26
2	Cr–Ti–MCM-41	Hydrothermal	146.5	27
3	M–MCM-41 (M = Fe, Ni, Co, Fe/Ni, Fe/Co)	Hydrothermal	141.9	28
4	Pt–TiO2–mesoporous SiO2	Impregnation	704.4	34
6	Ti/MCM-41	Co-precipitation	1480	42

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
