Core–shell structured titanium dioxide nanomaterials for solar energy utilization  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00443A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00443A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8203-8237Core–shell structured titanium dioxide nanomaterials for solar energy utilization

        
          
            Wei 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ahmed 
            Elzatahry
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dhaifallah 
            Aldhayan
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Dongyuan 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Shanghai Key Lab of Molecular Catalysis and Innovative Materials, iChEM and State Key Laboratory of Molecular Engineering of Polymers, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, P. R. China. E-mail: dyzhao@fudan.edu.cn; weilichem@fudan.edu.cn
bMaterials Science and Technology Program, College of Arts and Sciences, Qatar University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar
cDepartment of Chemistry, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      30th May 2018
    First published on 23rd August 2018AbstractBecause of its unmatched resource potential, solar energy utilization currently is one of the hottest research areas. Much effort has been devoted to developing advanced materials for converting solar energy into electricity, solar fuels, active chemicals, or heat. Among them, TiO2 nanomaterials have attracted much attention due to their unique properties such as low cost, nontoxicity, good stability and excellent optical and electrical properties. Great progress has been made, but research opportunities are still present for creating new nanostructured TiO2 materials. Core–shell structured nanomaterials are of great interest as they provide a platform to integrate multiple components into a functional system, showing improved or new physical and chemical properties, which are unavailable from the isolated components. Consequently, significant effort is underway to design, fabricate and evaluate core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials for solar energy utilization to overcome the remaining challenges, for example, insufficient light absorption and low quantum efficiency. This review strives to provide a comprehensive overview of major advances in the synthesis of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials for solar energy utilization. This review starts from the general protocols to construct core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials, and then discusses their applications in photocatalysis, water splitting, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, solar cells and photothermal conversion. Finally, we conclude with an outlook section to offer some insights on the future directions and prospects of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials and solar energy conversion.
Wei Li
Wei Li is currently an associate professor at Fudan University, China. He received his BS degree in chemistry from Heilongjiang University in 2008 and PhD degree in chemistry from Fudan University in 2014. He then worked as a postdoctoral follow at the University of Toronto (Canada) and the Institute of Basic Science Center (Korea). His research interests include porous and nanostructured materials for catalysis, and energy conversion and storage.
Ahmed Elzatahry
Ahmed Elzatahry is Dean of Graduate Studies at Qatar University. He received his BS and MS from Cairo University and PhD from Al-Azhar University. He joined the materials science and technology program at Qatar University in 2015. He has been awarded the state prize of Egypt in advanced science and technology – Chemistry (2010–2011), post-doctoral at Virginia Commonwelath University (2009) and Swiss Fellowship at ETH Institute of Science (1997–1999). He has published more than 140 papers and reviews, attracting more than 3500 citations and with h-index of 31.
Dhaifallah Aldhayan
Dhaifallah Aldhayan received his BS (1983) from King Saud University in Riyadh – Saudi Arabia and his PhD (1995) from UMIST in Manchester – UK. He joined the Chemistry department – KSU as assistant Professor in 1996. He was elected as a chairman of the Saudi Chemical Society in 2009 and appointed as chairman of the Chemistry department – KSU in 2010 for four years. His research interests focus on the synthesis of zeolites, mesoporous materials and heteropolyanions for catalysis applications.
Dongyuan Zhao
Dongyuan Zhao received his BS (1984) and PhD (1990) from Jilin University. After his post-doctoral experiences in the Weizmann Institute of Science and University of California at Santa Barbara, he joined Fudan University as a Professor in 1998. He was selected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007, and a member of The World Academy of Sciences in 2010. His research interests focus on the synthesis of mesoporous materials for catalysis, energy, water purification, and biomedicine applications.
1. Introduction
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is one of the most widely investigated metal oxides in the past few decades because of its outstanding features such as low cost, environmental benignity, plentiful polymorphs, good stability, and excellent electronic and optical properties.1–5 The discovery of photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting on a TiO2 electrode by Fujishima and Honda has sparked the exponential growth of scientific research on TiO2 materials,6 which greatly extends their applications from conventional areas (i.e., pigments, cosmetics, toothpaste, and paint) to recent promising fields including photocatalysis,7–17 water splitting,18–21 dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),22–28 lithium-ion batteries (LIBs),29–33 catalyst supports,34–37 sensors,38 biomedicines39–41 and recently emerging perovskite solar cells.42,43 Beyond all doubt, these functional applications cover the major leading ways for overcoming the challenges of energy and environmental problems facing humanity today. However, their performances are greatly limited by the properties of the TiO2 materials themselves. One limitation is the wide band gap, making TiO2 only sensitive to ultraviolet (UV) light, which just occupies less than 5% of the solar spectrum. Another key issue is the rapid electron–hole recombination and relatively poor charge transport property, which results in ultralow quantum efficiencies. To overcome these intrinsic drawbacks, various strategies have been developed to modify TiO2 materials. For example, doping with different elements,44–48 coupling with a visible-light sensitizer,49,50 surface hydrogenation51 and plasmon–exciton integration52 have been extensively investigated and applied to broaden the active spectrum. The separation and transport of charges could be improved by methods such as engineering the electronic structures, reducing the defects and traps and forming heterojunctions.53,54
Besides, it is greatly desired to maximize the specific surface areas and control surface chemistry,55,56 which can promote the interactions between molecules/ions and TiO2 in nearly all the functional applications listed above.
Recently, core–shell structured nanomaterials have attracted a great deal of attention as they represent the integration of individual components into a functional system, showing improved physical and chemical properties (e.g., stability, non-toxicity, dispersibility, multi-functionality), which are unavailable from the isolated components.57–65 More importantly, the active interfaces between individual components within a core–shell nanoparticle might give rise to outstanding synergistic functions and new properties. This makes them attractive in a variety of applications, such as catalysis, adsorption, separation, energy storage and conversion, drug delivery and optics.66–71 For TiO2 nanomaterials, this core–shell structured design would provide a promising way to overcome their disadvantages, thus resulting in improved performances.72–74 Compared to sole TiO2 material, core–shell structured TiO2 composites show tunable optical and electrical properties, even new functions, which are originated from the unique core–shell structures. For example, the introduction of conductive cores would greatly facilitate the transport of electrons in the TiO2 shells. Integrating with visible-light sensitizers can increase the solar light absorption. Forming heterojunctions would tremendously enhance the separation of photogenerated charges. The incorporation of magnetite nanoparticles enables TiO2 with magnetic separation properties. This interesting concept has been demonstrated in some previous reviews, but lacking a systematic overview and understanding.
Recently, a number of excellent reviews have appeared covering the synthesis, structures, properties, and applications of various TiO2 nanomaterials, such as nanoparticles,75–77 one-dimensional (1D) nanowires,78,79 2D nanosheets,80,81 and mesoporous materials.56,82 This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of major advances in core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials. Based on the geometry, core–shell structures typically comprise four categories: core–shell structure (core@shell), hollow structure (void@shell), yolk–shell structure (core@void@shell), and Janus structure (eccentric core@shell). Here, we mainly focus on the core@TiO2 shell type structures, which are the basis of the other three, attempting to give a snapshot on the state-of-the-art research status of this particular type of TiO2 nanomaterial. First, we summarize the general pathways, corresponding mechanisms and key factors for controllable synthesis of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials. Second, we comprehensively review the applications of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials in chemistry and energy transition, including: photocatalysis, water splitting, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, solar cells and photothermal conversion. Overall, the structures, interfaces, properties and related performances are discussed in detail. Finally, we present a brief conclusion and some perspectives on the future developments of this area.
2. Synthetic methods
The key to successful preparation of core–shell structured TiO2 nanostructures is to rationally control the hydrolysis and condensation of titanium precursors for preferential and uniform heterogeneous nucleation and growth of TiO2 on a core. Till now, a range of synthetic routes have been developed, which can be broadly divided into five categories: (i) sol–gel process strategies, (ii) hydro/solvothermal methods, (iii) layer-by-layer assembly strategies, (iv) atomic layer deposition methods and (v) thermal induced reduction strategies, summarized in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The summary and comparison of different methods (including sol–gel process strategies, hydro/solvothermal methods, layer-by-layer assembly strategies, atomic layer deposition methods and thermal induced reduction strategies) and their applications for core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials. Symbols: + advantages, - disadvantages, ↑ applications. 
2.1. Sol–gel process strategies
The sol–gel process is a versatile and popular solution approach for preparation of advanced materials, including ceramics, oxides, films and organic–inorganic hybrids.83–85 Through thoughtful choice of synthesis parameters (such as capping agents, precursors, solvents and catalysts), it is possible to fabricate well-defined core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials.

2.1.1. Capping agents. 
Liz-Marzán and co-workers first reported the sol–gel synthesis of Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles by refluxing silver nitrate with titanium tetrabutoxide (TBOT) in a mixture of ethanol and dimethylformamide (DMF) under the assistance of acetylacetonate.86 DMF as a solvent can first reduce silver ions, yielding stable Ag nanoparticles and a small amount of H2O, which in situ hydrolyzes TBOT, giving rise to the formation of core–shell structures. The acetylacetonate works as a capping agent, which helps to slow down the hydrolysis reaction of TBOT, making a uniform coating possible.87 Later, Sakai et al. showed the synthesis of uniform Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles by separate processes.88 The Ag nanoparticles were synthesized by using cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as a protective agent, which triggers the growth of an amorphous TiO2 layer with a thickness of 5–10 nm. CTAB facilitates preferential heterogeneous nucleation of TiO2, which is critical for the formation of uniform core–shell nanoparticles. By using pre-formed Au nanoparticles as a core, Liu et al. demonstrated the synthesis of Au@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles,89 in which the surface of Au nanoparticles was modified with a thin layer of (3-mercaptopropyl)triethoxysilane (MPTS) that can promote the coating of TiO2 shells due to the affinity of Si–OH groups toward amorphous TiO2 networks. These results indicate that controllable heterogeneous nucleation of TiO2 on core surface is very important for uniform core–shell structures.
Holgado et al. have directly revealed the uniform coating of TiO2 on colloidal SiO2 spheres using titanium ethoxide (TEOT) as a precursor.90 In this work, hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC) was used as a capping agent because of its good repulsive steric force, which is beneficial for the uniform growth of TiO2 shells in aqueous solution without aggregation. Kim et al. monitored and studied a detailed TiO2 coating process,91 where monodispersed SiO2 nanoparticles with a mean size of 161 nm were used as cores. As the reaction time increased, the particle size gradually grew to 186, 218, 257 and 370 nm, respectively. Combined with Nielsen's chronomal analysis and Overbeek's theory, coating of the TiO2 shells on SiO2 is presumed to be a surface reaction, in which the rate determining step was a first-order polynuclear-layer growth. Furthermore, Yin and co-workers have extended this method to synthesize uniform sandwich-like Fe3O4@SiO2@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles.92 The presence of a SiO2 interlayer and HPC greatly facilitates the uniform coating of TiO2 without aggregation. The thickness of TiO2 shells can be controlled from 12.6 to 14.7 nm by adjusting the total amount of TBOT. Interestingly, well-defined superparamagnetic 1D Fe3O4@SiO2@TiO2 peapod-like nanostructures can be obtained through magnetic stirring.93 The formation process involves chaining the Fe3O4@SiO2 cores first under a magnetic field and subsequent fixing the chain structure during the TiO2 coating. The number of Fe3O4@SiO2 cores arranged linearly in the chains can be precisely controlled by tuning the amount of titanium precursors or magnetic stirring rate.
As an alternative, Lutensol ON50, which is a type of nonionic surfactant (alkyl polyethylene glycol ether, RO(CH2CH2O)5H), has also been applied as a capping agent for TiO2 coating. The first work was presented by Imhof and co-workers.94 During the coating process, the hydrophilic part of Lutensol is likely to interact with the core surface while the hydrophobic part extends into the medium, thus providing additional steric stabilization for uniform growth of TiO2 shells.95,96 The resultant core–shell nanoparticles are monodispersed in size and have a very smooth surface (Fig. 2a). This method offers flexibility of tuning the thickness of TiO2 shells from 10 to 250 nm by changing the number of cores and amount of precursors. The authors tried to understand the TiO2 shell growth process by analyzing the competitive coating in a dispersion of polystyrene (PS) spheres with bimodal size distributions (340 and 670 nm, 1:1). It is noted that α describes the power-law dependence of the rate of incorporation of hydrolyzed monomers on a particle with radius R. Different growth processes are characterized by different values of α. In a reaction-limited process, the growth rate is limited by the condensation of hydrolyzed monomers on the particle surface. Thus, the rate of change in particle mass or volume is proportional to the particle surface, and for smooth surfaces, α = 2. If, on the other hand, diffusion of monomers to the particle surface is rate-limiting, the growth is proportional to the radius of the particles, α = 1. The plot, as shown in Fig. 2b, clearly indicates that the TiO2 coating follows a reaction-limited growth with α = 2, which is a reaction-limited process. The amphiphilic character of Lutensol ON50 enables the uniform TiO2 coating for a broad range of colloid surfaces such as metal nanoparticles,94 silica,97 oxides98–100 and upconversion nanoparticles.101
 Fig. 2  (a) The TEM image of the Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles prepared by using Lutensol ON50 as a stabilizing agent and (b) Ra/Rb plotted against the relative increase in the radius of the smallest spheres γ = Rb/R0b, where Ra and Rb are the size of large and small spheres, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Imhof et al. have also explored poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) as a capping agent to uniformly coat colloidal PS spheres with a smooth TiO2 layer.102 The positive charges on the surface of PS spheres can enable the negatively-charged titanium oligomers to rapidly deposit on them at neutral pH,103 however, the PS spheres are unstable during the charge reaction, which tend to result in significant aggregation. The addition of PVP can greatly improve the stability and dispersivity of PS spheres during the charge reversal process, thus making the uniform coating possible. The resultant TiO2 shell thicknesses can be varied from just a few nanometers to ∼50 nm. However, if too much PVP is added, the effect of steric blocking is higher than that of the electrostatic attraction in some domains and no TiO2 nanoparticles are formed on the core surfaces, which would cause the formation of separated TiO2 aggregates in the solution.104


2.1.2. TiO2 precursors. 
As claimed above, it is exceptionally difficult to uniformly coat nanoparticles with TiO2 shells because in titanium alkoxides, titanium atoms are highly electrophilic and can easily react with nucleophiles like water. This leads to their high sensitivity to moisture, thus resulting in fast homogeneous nucleation, and readily causing the aggregation of cores due to the energy change in the system.
Recently, Liu et al. have tried to use titanium diisopropoxide bis (acetylacetonate) (TDA) as a precursor for coating TiO2 on the helical structures of amino acid-derived amphiphile fibers.105 It was found that TDA can slowly hydrolyze in the pH range of 3–8, thus the nucleation and growth of TiO2 shells are well controllable. Additionally, the interactions between lipid helical fibers and TiO2 precursors through the titanium–carboxylic acid (Ti-COOH) coordination promote the formation of lipid@TiO2 helical fibers. After calcination, the organic lipid can be subsequently removed, and the amorphous TiO2 be transformed to highly crystallized anatase, leading to the formation of chiral TiO2 fibers. Later, Su et al. used this strategy for preparing Fe3O4@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles with controllable shell thicknesses.106
Lee et al. have employed titanium bis(ammonium lactato)dihydroxide (TALH) as a precursor for the synethsis of core–shell structured TiO2 nanoparticles.107 They found that the TALH is relatively stable in water, which eliminates the need for an alcohol-based solution and an inert atmosphere for the controllable hydrolysis and condensation. In addition, the hydrolyzed TALH can be directly converted into anatase upon heating around 90–100 °C.108,109 Strohm et al. have demonstrated that the deposition of TiO2 from hydrolyzed TALH is very sensitive to the nature of the core surface.110 With polyelectrolyte-modified PS spheres as an example, strong interactions with the coating solution lead to uniform growth of TiO2 shells at a slow rate without the formation of homogeneous TiO2 precipitates, whereas a poor interaction or a low nucleation density results in the preferred growth of patchy deposition with isolated nanoparticles.110
Yin and co-workers have disclosed that a titanium-glycolate chelated complex formed by reacting titanium alkoxide and ethylene glycol is an excellent precursor for TiO2 coating because of its superior stability to water.111 In aqueous solution, this precursor can undergo a more controlled reaction with acetone as a catalyst.112 As a result, a uniform titanium-glycolate layer on several materials can be obtained including gold and silver nanoparticles, gold nanorods, silver nanoplates, SiO2 and polymer microspheres. Moreover, the thickness of the titanium-glycolate shells can be facilely tuned from a few nanometers to ∼40 nm through sequential coatings. Due to its simplicity and generality, this method is especially promising for the synthesis of metal@TiO2 core–shell structured nanomaterials with sizes less than 50 nm. All these works suggest that rational control of the hydrolysis and condensation of TiO2 precursors is another key issue for uniform coating, which can be realized by designing the molecular structures of the precursors.
Recently, Sen and co-workers have demonstrated a new and versatile synthetic approach to uniform metal@TiO2 core–shell nanomaterials based on the oxidative conversion of Ti3+ ions to hydrous TiO2 through an electrochemical process, which occurs uniquely on the nanostructured metallic surfaces (Fig. 3).113 It has been demonstrated that Pt, Au and Ni are active for catalyzing TiO2 growth due to the known lower overpotential for H+ reduction to hydrogen on their surfaces. By varying the morphology of core metal nanostructures as well as by controlling selective TiO2 growth, segmented metal–TiO2 nanowires, metal@TiO2 core–shell nano/microparticles and nanotubes were fabricated. Additionally, TiO2 segment length or shell thickness can be well tuned by varying the heating, electricity, Ti3+ concentration and reaction time.114 Since the deposition occurs only on the surfaces of nanostructured Pt, Au and Ni surfaces, the homogeneous nucleation and growth of TiO2 in solution can be avoided, which is a general problem possibly associated with traditional sol–gel coating methods.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of TiO2 shell formation on nanostructured metal (Au, Ni, Pt) surfaces via an electrochemical oxidation process by using TiCl3 as a precursor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 


2.1.3. Solvents and catalysts. 
In sol–gel chemistry, the solvents have a key effect on solubility, stability and reaction rates. It was found that the hydrolysis and condensation reactions are much dependent on several competing factors that are not limited to the viscosity, degree of solvation, dielectric constants, boiling points, surface tension, and steric factors of the solvent media. Generally, a water and ethanol mixture is widely used for sol–gel reactions, however, this is not suitable for precise control of TiO2 coating. Recently, Koodali and co-workers have demonstrated that polar aprotic solvents such as DMF and CH3CN can react with M(OR)x groups to form solvate complexes, which limits the attack of the nucleophile reaction and results in longer gelation time. In addition, these solvents characteristically lack protons for H-bonding to the hydroxyl groups and this has an effect of reducing the electrophilicity on the Ti atoms, rendering the metal atoms less susceptible to nucleophilic attack, and thus slowing down hydrolysis as a result.115–121 Therefore, choosing the appropriate co-solvent is important for uniform coating. For example, well-defined SiO2@TiO2 core–shell microspheres can be obtained by using carboxyl-modified SiO2 spheres as a core and an ethanol/acetonitrile mixture as the solvent.122 In this case, the acetonitrile promotes the solubility and stability of TBOT and restricts its hydrolysis, resulting in better control for uniform deposition of TiO2 without the need of capping agents or special precursors. The shell thickness can be facilely tuned from 12 to 100 nm by changing the concentration of TBOT.123
Unlike the previous methods involving the use of surfactants, special precursors, or a mixed solvent, we for the first time have reported a kinetics-controlled coating method for the preparation of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials in pure ethanol with ammonia as the catalyst (Fig. 4a and b).124
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of TiO2 nucleation and growth on the surface of an α-Fe2O3 core via the kinetics-controlled coating method (a and b). The plot shows four distinct modes of time-dependent Cto under different ammonia content, the corresponding representation of nucleation and growth process of TiO2 on the surface of an α-Fe2O3 core and SEM images of the resultant α-Fe2O3@TiO2 composites are also illustrated. The scale bar of all SEM images is 1 μm. TEM images of α-Fe2O3@TiO2 (c and d) Fe3O4@TiO2 (e and f), SiO2@TiO2 (g and h) and GO@TiO2 (i and j) core–shell nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Generally, the hydrolysis kinetics of TBOT is dominated by the amount of catalyst while maintaining other parameters. At a low concentration of ammonia, the reaction rate is very slow, resulting in ultralow concentration of titania oligomers (Cto). Upon slightly increasing the content, the accelerated hydrolysis leads to quickly increasing oligomers in the system, resulting in the heterogeneous nucleation (Che) of TiO2. Although the appearance of nuclei consumes oligomers, the continuing production by hydrolysis and condensation leaves Cto above the saturation concentration (Csat). Therefore, TiO2 nuclei can gradually grow into networks, forming a uniform shell. With further increase in the ammonia concentration, the reaction kinetics is strongly enhanced, leading to a thick shell. While the initial content of ammonia is too high, heterogeneous and homogeneous nucleations occur almost simultaneously, leading to the formation of large and aggregated nanoparticles. This method is very simple, reproducible and versatile, and can be widely used for synthesis of various core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials with tunable shell thickness (Fig. 4c–i).125–131


2.1.4. Mesoporous TiO2 shells. 
The creation of mesoporosity in TiO2 materials has emerged as the most promising strategy to enhance their performances in various applicaions.56 We have found that the TiO2 shells derived from the Stöber system are incompletely hydrolyzed frameworks in nature and the directly formed core–shell nanoparticles cross-linked somewhat.132 That may be attributed to the use of low-content ammonia and water as a catalyst source. The hydrolysis and condensation of TBOT are directed toward the middle structures rather than the ends of completely cross-linked chains, which generally results in a continuous and highly branched polymer matrix possessing a large number of unhydrolyzed alkoxy groups (Fig. 5).84 Based on these findings, a post-hydrolysis strategy was developed, which gives rise to mesoporous TiO2 shells without the use of templates. By using α-Fe2O3 ellipsoids as cores, after annealing and H2 reduction, the obtained mesoporous Fe3O4@mTiO2 core–shell nanoparticles possess a well-defined uniformity, a high surface area (∼117 m2 g−1), a large pore size (∼5.4 nm), and exhibit a high magnetic susceptibility (∼18.0 emu g−1). In contrast, the end products are conglutinated bulky materials with a low surface area (∼21 m2 g−1) without the post-hydrolysis process. Such a strategy is of significant importance for applications from both environmental and industrial points of view.133,134
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of core@mesoporous TiO2 shell nanostructures through a post-hydrolysis strategy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The cooperative assembly-directed strategy has been widely used for coating various functional materials with mesoporous SiO2 shells. However, this strategy rarely works for other materials. Notably, Lou and co-workers have first demonstrated that such a strategy can be used for growing mesostructured TiO2 shells on diverse functional particles (Fig. 6a).135–137 Hexadecylamine (HDA) was used as a template, which can assemble with TiO2 oligomers due to the strong hydrogen-bonding interactions, and then grow on the core surface via the kinetics-controlled coating mechanism. The strong interaction and HDA modification on the surface are the key points for uniform coating. This method is simple and universal, and can rapidly produce mesoporous TiO2 shells on various inorganic, organic, and inorganic–organic composite materials, including silica, metals, metal oxides, organic polymers, carbon-based and metal–organic framework (MOF) nanomaterials. Moreover, this strategy also provides a versatile platform toward the fabrication of many TiO2-based novel nanostructures, including hollow and yolk–shell structures with tailored cavity sizes, shell thicknesses and hybrid structures for different applications (Fig. 6b–k). However, the main limitation is that the short hydrophobic carbon chains of HDA templates generally results in small mesopore size (<3 nm) and disordered mesostructures.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the cooperative self-assembly procedure for mesostructured TiO2 shells (a); TEM images of the resultant core–shell, yolk–shell and double-shell hollow structures: (b) SiO2@TiO2 core–shell spheres; (c) SiO2@TiO2 yolk–shell spheres; (d) Au@TiO2 yolk–shell nanospheres; (e) Fe2O3@TiO2 yolk–shell cubes; (f) double-shell TiO2–polymer nanospheres; (g) mesoporous SiO2@TiO2 core–shell nanospheres; (h) PS@TiO2 core–shell nanospheres; (i) GO@TiO2 core–shell nanosheets; (j) carbon nanospheres@TiO2 core–shell nanocomposites; (k) MOF@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135, Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Liu et al. have further demonstrated the coating of large pore mesoporous TiO2 shells on flexible carbon materials.138 Pluronic F127 is used as a template, which assembles with oligomers into spherical micelles for coating, thus creating a large pore size of 6.2 nm but still disordered mesostructures. The thickness of mesoporous TiO2 shells can be well tuned from ∼20 to 60 nm. Typically, the flexible CNTs@mesoporous TiO2 nanocables with a shell thickness of ∼20 nm show an ultrahigh surface area of 137 m2 g−1 and large pore volume of 0.26 cm3 g−1, thereby delivering a high-rate capacity (∼210 mA h g−1 at 20C), and superior cycling stability.

2.2. Hydro/solvothermal methods
The hydro/solvothermal technique is very powerful for the synthesis of various nanomaterials, and operates at elevated temperatures in a confined volume to generate high pressure.139

2.2.1. Hydrothermal methods. 
Li and Zeng have first reported the hydrothermal synthesis of Au@TiO2 core–shell nanostructures using TiF4 as a precursor.140 They found that the formed anatase crystallites preferred to aggregate on the surface of Au cores during the hydrothermal process, leading to the formation of uniform core–shell nanostructures due to the lowest interfacial energy. Notably, the TiO2 shell nanostructures and Au core sizes can be facilely adjusted by the Ostwald ripening and post-growth process.141–143 Subsequently, Lou and co-workers extended this hydrothermal process for synthesis of MOx@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles in the presence of PVP.144,145 In this process, PVP was explored to assist the stabilization of TiO2 nanoparticles for uniform deposition on large nanosized cores. Without PVP, the resultant core–shell nanoparticles tended to appear in the form of interconnected chain-like structures. Because of the high reactivity of α-Fe2O3 cores, the obtained α-Fe2O3@TiO2 core–shell nanostructures can be easily converted to robust hollow or yolk–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials by acidic etching, or magnetic functionization via a H2 reduction reaction.144,146 In the case of Cu2O, high-quality anisotropic TiO2 nanocages with entirely hollow interiors and tunable sizes of 100–1000 nm are obtained.145,147 Furthermore, the facile interior functionalization of the TiO2 nanocages by Au nanoparticles via a redox reaction with HAuCl4 was also demonstrated.145


2.2.2. Solvothermal methods. 
Unlike hydrothermal routes, which usually result in irregular morphologies or crystallites-aggregated nanostructures, the solvothermal process can produce TiO2 nanomaterials with unique morphologies and exposed high-energy (001) facets.148,149 For example, Chen et al. have successfully synthesized hierarchical anatase spheres assembled from ultrathin nanosheets with nearly 100% exposed (001) facets.150 This interesting phenomenon is attributed to the stabilizing effect of the tridentate diethylenetriamine (DETA) in the solvothermal system, which prohibits TiO2 growth along the [001] direction. Because of the ultrathin feature, the sheets are highly flexible and thus can readily self-organize into different architectures. Even after annealing at a high temperature for removal of DETA, the ultrathin feature of the nanosheet constituents can be perfectly retained. As shown in Fig. 7a, the as-obtained hierarchical spheres are very uniform with a size of ∼1 μm, and the nanosheet constituents can be clearly identified from TEM images of a single sphere (Fig. 7b). By introducing different cores into the above solvothermal system, various core–shell nanostructures can be obtained with TiO2 shells assembled from ultrathin nanosheets (Fig. 7c–h).151–156
 Fig. 7  FESEM and TEM images of hierarchical anatase spheres (a and b),150 MWCNTs@TiO2 core–shell nanocables (c and d),151 Fe2O3@SiO2@TiO2 core–shell spindles (e and f),152 SiO2@SnO2@TiO2 core–shell spheres (g and h).153 In all cases, TiO2 shells are assembled from nanosheets through the solvothermal method. (a and b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 150, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c and d) are reprinted with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. (e, f and g, h) are reprinted with permission from ref. 152 and 153, Copyright 2010 and 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Du et al. have directly obtained Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanowires via a one-pot solvothermal method.157 They proposed a template-induced Oswald ripening process. Ethylene glycol firstly reduces Ag+ to form silver nanoparticles, meanwhile, TBOT molecules are in situ hydrolyzed and then coated on Ag nanoparticles. The core–shell structures act as a template for the anisotropic growth of 1D nanowires via an Ostwald ripening process. The as-obtained TiO2 shell morphologies can be controlled to be smooth or nanosheet by altering the reaction temperature. On the other hand, with pre-synthesized Ag nanowires, uniform Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanowires have also been prepared by the solvothermal treatment at a relatively low temperature.158,159 Ramasamy et al. found that the presence of –OH groups on the surface of Ag nanowires is crucial for the production of a uniform TiO2 shell owing to their strong interaction with titanium species.159
In a further extension of the ethylene glycol solvothermal strategy, Liu et al. demonstrated the growth of TiO2(B) nanosheets on carbon nanofibers.160 In this case, TiCl4 is first hydrolyzed and chelated with ethylene glycol into monoethylene glycol octahedra at room temperature, which is critical for subsequent coating.161 After heating, condensed TiO2(B) nanosheets can be deposited on carbon nanofibers.160 When Cu nanowires were used as cores, hierarchical tubular structures constructed from ultrathin TiO2(B) nanosheets can be obtained due to the high activity of Cu toward acidic conditions.162 This synthesis strategy shows a few advantages in generating core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials, such as rapid and effective surface coating, no use of further treatment at high temperatures for crystallization, and the potential for scale-up production.163,164
Recently, we have developed a facile hydrothermal etching assisted crystallization route to synthesize Fe3O4@titanate microspheres with ultrathin nanosheets assembled double-shell structures (Fig. 8a).165 The sol–gel process of TEOS and TBOT is explored to coat SiO2 and TiO2 on uniform Fe3O4 nanoparticles, in turn, giving rise to a typical sandwich structure (Fe3O4@SiO2@TiO2) (Fig. 8b). During the subsequent hydrothermal treatment in an alkaline solution, the SiO2 interlayer can be first etched, followed by concurrent but separate TiO2 layer-etching and epitaxial titanate nanosheets-growth (Fig. 8c–f). In this case, the SiO2 layer not only promotes the coating of TiO2, but also acts as the template for the first cavity. When the internal SiO2 layer is first etched away, the hollow TiO2 shell provides two interfaces for the nucleation and discrete space for simultaneously self-assembled nanosheets-growth along opposite directions. In addition, the TiO2 layer would in situ act as the template for the second cavity. In this way, the yolk–shell structure with nanosheets assembled double shells can be obtained. Moreover, the titanate shells can be easily converted into anatase phase without changing the nanostructures, which show a remarkable photocatalytic performance. Notably, the inclusion of Fe3O4 cores allows the convenient separation and recycling by applying external magnetic fields.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the hydrothermal etching assisted crystallization strategy for the formation of Fe3O4@titanate double-shelled yolk–shell microspheres. The corresponding TEM images of a single sphere synthesized at 150 °C with hydrothermal treatment time: (b) 0 min, (c) 20 min, (d) 2 h, (e) 12 h, and (f) 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 

2.3. Layer-by-layer assembly strategies
The layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly strategies have attracted much attention for coating.166–169 Caruso et al. first used the LbL technique to deposit uniform TiO2 layers on various colloidal nanoparticles by using TALH as a precursor and poly(dimethyldiallylammonium chloride) (PDADMAC) as the polyelectrolyte.170–172 The success for forming uniform core–shell nanoparticles relies on the use of water-stable TALH, which can be first assembled with PDADMAC via electrostatic interactions at ambient temperature, and then undergo confinement hydrolysis and condensation to produce TiO2 shells. In contrast, titanium alkoxides or chlorides would hydrolyze rapidly in the presence of water, which results in the precipitation of isolated TiO2 in solution and possible aggregation without assembly with the polyelectrolyte. Calcination of the TALH/PDADMAC-coated PS nanoparticles leads to the formation of hollow TiO2 spheres, and the thickness of the shells can be easily tailored from 5 to 50 nm by the number of TALH/PDADMAC layers deposited.170 As an extension, Yu et al. demonstrated the use of porous polycarbonate (PC) membrane supports for the preparation of titania tubes via the LbL deposition of TALH in alternation with oppositely charged poly(ethylenimine) (PEI).173 The composition and crystal phase of the resultant TiO2 tubes can be well controlled by annealing the PEI/TALH multilayer-coated PC membranes at suitable temperatures.
Xiao et al. have prepared rutile@anatase core–shell nanorod arrays by the LbL assembly of TALH and PDADMAC on rutile nanorods, which can be further used as a scaffold for CdS quantum dot modification, resulting in a ternary core–shell heterostructure. Owing to the intimate integration and appropriate band alignment between the nano-building blocks, the resultant ternary core–shell structures exhibit improved photogenerated electron–hole separation and charge collection under simulated solar light irradiation.174
Lee et al. have reported the synthesis of highly photoreactive TiO2-coated polymer fibers through a LbL assembly method with negatively charged colloidal TiO2 nanoparticles as a precursor.175 In addition, instead of traditional linear cationic polyelectrolytes, such as PDADMAC and PEI, positively charged polyhedral oligosil-sesquioxane (POSS) molecules were introduced for the LbL TiO2 coating.175 The resultant TiO2-coated fibers display excellent photocatalytic properties in the degradation of allyl alcohol under UV illumination.176
Later on, Wang and Zeng have demonstrated the use of polyaniline (PAN) to mediate the LbL assembly for a uniform TiO2 layer with oleate-protected anatase nanoparticles as the precursor.177 In this case, the oil-soluble TiO2 nanoparticles play the vital role, which can first assemble on the surface of SiO2 spheres in toluene, and act as the starting sites for the polymerization of aniline, resulting in the formation of uniform SiO2@TiO2@PAN spheres. Then, an outer anatase shell can be deposited by direct hydrolysis of TiF4 in ethanol solution, which prefers to take place on both the outer and inner surfaces of the permeable PAN shells, leading to the formation of TiO2 shells. The authors showed that the present approach gives a high synthetic flexibility for tailor-making complex shelled nanostructures with different architectural designs.
Afterwards, a special case of LbL modification has also been shown to work for uniform deposition of TiO2 shells with the assistance of PVP molecules.178 For example, Au nanoparticles can be coated by a layer of hydrophobic ligands first, followed by modifying with a layer of PVP due to its affinity. Then, TiF4 slowly hydrolyzes in ethanol solution, enabling the successful encapsulation on Au@PVP. The strong interactions between the Au–ligand, ligand–PVP, and PVP–TiO2 layers result in the apparent Au–TiO2 interfacial energy, when considered as a whole, being greatly reduced. With these understandings, they developed a general method for coating oxides (e.g., TiO2, ZnO, Fe3O4, MnO, Co2O3, Eu2O3, and so on) on a variety of cores, including metals, oxides, polymer nanoparticles, and functionalized carbon materials.
Very recently, Dinh has explored uniform titanate nanodisks (TNDs) as a precursor for preparing core–shell SiO2@TND-PEI nanospheres through the LbL technique,179,180 which could then self-assemble into a 3D opal structure of Au/TiO2 hollow nanospheres, as illustrated in Fig. 9A. Due to the hydrophilic surface of the SiO2 spheres, PEI is attracted through electrostatic interaction and makes the surface charge positive. Then, TNDs with negative surface charge can be deposited by the LbL technique via electrostatic interaction with PEI, followed by loading Au precursors (HAuCl4) to produce TND-PEI-AuCl4−/SiO2 due to the strong interaction between AuCl4− and the amine groups in PEI. Assembly of TND–PEI–AuCl4−/SiO2 is performed by centrifugation at a low speed, followed by calcination to obtain the Au/TiO2/SiO2 3D opal structures. The silica cores can be removed by NaOH solution, giving rise to the 3D opal structure of Au/TiO2 hollow nanospheres (Fig. 9B–D). The LbL technique combined with the uniform size of TNDs allows the formation of a homogeneous and tunable shell thickness, which is crucial for the formation of 3D opal structures, showing remarkable activity in the decomposition of isopropanol compared to the same photocatalyst without 3D assembly.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the fabrication (A), SEM (B), TEM (C) and STEM (D) images of Au/TiO2 hollow nanospheres and 3D ordered assembly via layer-by-layer assembly using titanate nanodisks as a precursor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
2.4. Atomic layer deposition methods
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is one of the most promising techniques for the deposition of conformal and homogenous thin films.181–183
The application of ALD to TiO2 coating has been well demonstrated on various substrates with different morphologies such as films,184,185 nanoparticles,186,187 porous membranes,188,189 nanowires,189,190 nanotubes191–193 and 3D nanostructures.194–202 For example, the ZnO@TiO2 core–shell structured nanorod arrays can be prepared by using ZnO nanorod arrays and TiCl4 as the core and precursor, respectively.203 The TiO2 shell thickness increases at a rate of 0.9 Å per ALD cycle. Interestingly, shells thinner than 4 nm are conformal, amorphous, and smooth, while thicker shells are polycrystalline anatase and fairly rough due to variations in grain size. Alibabaei et al. have prepared mesoscopic core–shell films consisting of thin nanometer TiO2 shells deposited on nano ITO (tin-doped indium oxide) by ALD for application in DSSC photoanodes.187 The TiO2 layers are homogeneous over a range of thicknesses from 0.6 to 3.6 nm obtained by varying the number of ALD cycles from 10 to 60. At thicknesses ≤2.4 nm, efficient transfer of injected electrons and electron trapping in the nano-ITO core are followed by rapid transport through the mesoporous networks to the external circuit. At thicknesses ≥3 nm, electron trapping in the TiO2 shells occurs, resulting in an increase of back electron transfer decreasing device efficiencies. ALD is also explored for coating TiO2 on various metal surfaces with varying thicknesses.204–206 For example, Ag nanoparticles can be well protected by a pinhole-free thin-layer of ALD-TiO2 from oxidation, which deliver plasmon-enhanced photocurrents in the DSSCs.204,205
However, these studies generally reported homogeneous amorphous TiO2 films at a low temperature and rough polycrystalline anatase layers at a high temperature, which relies on self-limiting surface reactions of alternating gas precursors with the substrate surface. Taking CNTs as an example, the chemically inert carbon walls restrict the nucleation of TiO2 coating, leading to poor coverage. It is generally accepted that nucleation and growth initiate preferably at defect sites of the CNTs, where oxygen functional groups can chemisorb.207 Therefore, most of the studies about ALD-TiO2 coated CNTs used functionalized CNTs.208 Recently, Utke and co-workers have developed a new temperature-programmed ALD strategy to obtain complete TiO2 coating on non-functionalized CNTs.209 Typically, starting the ALD deposition at low temperature enables the complete and continuous coverage of CNTs with an amorphous ultrathin film. Subsequently, increasing the temperature triggers a conformal anatase coating on the amorphous layer. In contrast, starting with the deposition at high temperature and then decreasing results in sporadic crystal grains covered by an amorphous TiO2 layer. More recently, they have realized highly conformal thin layer (∼10 nm) and monocrystalline anatase on non-functionalized CNTs.210 The strategy adopts the above deposition of amorphous TiO2 for uniform core–shell structures, then combining with a post-annealing at 450 °C under vacuum results in a complete phase transformation to crystalline anatase. It might be because the amorphous TiO2 possesses some short-range order, for example, through Ti–O octahedrons, which transform to a long-range order by a sort of crystallization front moving along the film during annealing, hence leading to the monocrystallinity at a half-micron scale in relation to the thickness of ∼10 nm only.
Hu and co-workers have developed a liquid-phase ALD process for conformal TiO2 coating.211,212 In a typical deposition cycle, the substrates were immersed in TIPO/toluene solution for the chemisorption reaction, followed by immediate sonication in isopropanol to remove unreacted species. Then, they were immersed in water/ethanol solution to hydrolyze. The above steps can be repeated to obtain the desired thickness, which circumvents the need for vacuum conditions critical in traditional gas-phase ALD.
Chen et al. demonstrated a novel molecular layer deposition (MLD) process for N-doped TiO2 coating.213 The process is based on a four-step reaction sequence. Firstly, TiCl4 reacts with hydroxy groups on the substrate surface to form –TiClx species. Next, the hydroxy end of the ethanolamine reacts preferentially with the –TiClx species resulting in a –OCH2CH2NH2 terminated surface, which subsequently anchors the malonyl chloride in the following step to form a new surface species terminated by acyl chloride. That facilitates the reaction with the amino end of another ethanolamine molecule to reform hydroxyl groups on the surface. Finally, N-doped TiO2 can be obtained after annealing in a H2/Ar atmosphere. The perfectly replicated helical morphology of the initial templates highlights the advantage of MLD for the coating of high-curvature surfaces. The resultant TiO2 shell thickness can be facilely tuned by the desired number of the four steps.
2.5. Thermal induced reduction strategies
Mao and co-workers have demonstrated a new core–shell structured TiO2 through hydrogenation of TiO2 nanocrystals in a 20-bar H2 atmosphere, which consists of a crystalline core and a highly disordered surface layer where dopants are introduced as the shells, as illustrated in Fig. 10.214 In this case, the band gap of the resultant TiO2 is greatly reduced to about 1.54 eV, leading to a strong absorption in the visible and infrared region, accompanied by a dramatic color change from white to core–shell structured black, therefore called core–shell structured black TiO2. The mechanism for the enhanced light absorption can be attributed to the disorder on the surface, which breaks its lattice periodically and generates two tails from the valence band maximum and conduction band minimum, thus narrowing its band gap. Later, core–shell structured blue TiO2 could be obtained by high pressure H2 at elevated temperature with short reduction time.215,216
 Fig. 10  (A) Schematic illustration of the structure and electronic density of states (DOS) of the core–shell structured black TiO2 (TiO2@TiO2–xHx). H-Dopants are depicted as black dots, and disorder is represented in the outer layer of the nanocrystal. (B) A photo comparing unmodified white and black TiO2 nanocrystals. (C and D) HRTEM images of TiO2 nanocrystals before and after hydrogenation, respectively. In D, a short dashed curve is applied to outline the interface between the crystalline core and disordered outer layer of black TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214, Copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Different from hydrogenation of TiO2 under high H2 pressure, Wang et al. have developed a simple and effective strategy to synthesize core–shell structured black TiO2 nanowire and nanotube arrays by annealing the pristine ones under a hydrogen atmosphere.217 Although, the reduction capability of ambient H2 is relatively decreased compared to that of high pressure H2, it is enough to get a well-defined core–shell structure. Since then, this method has been widely accepted for the synthesis of black TiO2.218–222 For example, Zhou et al. have fabricated ordered mesoporous black TiO2 with a high surface area of ∼124 m2 g−1 and a large pore size of ∼9.6 nm.223 In this case, by using the ethylenediamine protecting strategy, highly crystalline ordered mesoporous anatase is facilely obtained, which can be stabilized at high temperature owing to the presence of surface bonded N-containing species. That makes it a promising candidate for hydrogenation treatment because it can not only facilitate H2 gas diffusion into TiO2 and interaction with its structure, but also retain the ordered mesoporous structures, as well as inhibit the phase transformation (from anatase to rutile) and crystal growth during the high-temperature H2 gas annealing.224 The resultant mesoporous core–shell structured black TiO2 materials with a large surface area exhibit a high solar-driven hydrogen production rate, which is almost two times as high as that of pristine mesoporous TiO2.
In 2013, Wang et al. reported a new hydrogen plasma method for synthesis of core–shell structured black TiO2.225 Since hydrogen plasma process offers high-energy species such as electrons, atoms, and radicals, which can improve thermodynamics and kinetics over conventional processing,226 such a process can convert well-crystallized TiO2 into a core–shell structured black one much easier than the H2-annealing process. The resultant TiO2@TiO2−xHx nanomaterials possess the largest solar absorption (83%) among recently developed black TiO2. In addition, it is proposed that the H-doped amorphous shells play the same role as Ag or Pt loading on TiO2 nanocrystals, which induces the localized surface plasma resonance (LSPR) and core–shell structured black coloration. This method can be facilely extended toward the synthesis of various core–shell structured black TiO2 nanomaterials such as nanoparticles,227 nanosheets,228 nanotubes229 and nanofibers.230
However, using hydrogen gas to prepare the core–shell structured black TiO2 is somewhat dangerous and complicated and one should be extremely careful. Tan et al. have recently developed a facile and general method for large-scale production of black TiO2 through a controllable solid-state reaction of NaBH4 and crystalline TiO2 at mild temperature.231 In this route, NaBH4 is decomposed at 300–350 °C and in situ produces the active hydrogen, which is more reactive than H2 at this temperature as mentioned above. The strong reduction capability of the active hydrogen is beneficial to carry out the reaction in a relatively short time and at low temperature, which is helpful in retaining the original morphology of nanocrystals, resulting in TiO2@TiO2−x core–shell structures. Furthermore, different reduced degrees of the TiO2−x shells can be obtained by controlling reaction time and temperature, which is also suitable for massive production of core–shell structured black TiO2.232
Alternatively, the much more safe molten Al has recently been used as a reductant for the synthesis of black TiO2 in an evacuated two-zone vacuum furnace, where metallic Al is melted in the high-temperature zone and the reduction is carried out in the low-temperature zone.233 Thermodynamically, the consumption of oxygen by Al to form Al2O3 at 800 °C can effectively decrease the system oxygen partial pressure to a degree much lower than the equilibrium value of TiO2, which provides a kinetic driving force to efficiently reduce TiO2 at a low temperature. The resultant black TiO2 has a unique TiO2@TiO2−x core–shell structure without H-dopants. The amorphous oxygen-deficient shells can be well-controlled by the reduction conditions. This aluminothermic reduction approach offers potential for the cost-effective and large-scale production of core–shell structured black TiO2.
Yu and co-workers have first demonstrated the synthesis of highly efficient and remarkably stable black TiO2 through a controlled magnesiothermic reduction under a 5% H2/Ar atmosphere.234 In this case, metallic Mg is the primary condition for the formation of core–shell structured black TiO2 with the help of H2 at a low temperature. The prepared TiO2@TiO2−x possess an optimum bandgap and band position, oxygen vacancies, surface defects, and charge recombination centers and show significantly improved optical absorption in the visible and infrared regions. As a result, a remarkable photocatalytic hydrogen production performance can be obtained.
More interestingly, Huang et al. have reported a transformative two-step approach for the modification of core–shell structured black TiO2 by sulfur doping on the shells (Fig. 11a).235 First, the black TiO2 (TiO2@TiO2−x) was prepared by the Al-reduction process. Next, H2S atmosphere was employed for sulfur doping at 600 °C (TiO2@TiO2−xSx). They report that no matter whether rutile or anatase was used as a raw material the final product was consistently rutile because there is enough activation energy in a flow of H2S for the phase transition. Moreover, the loosely packed microstructure ensures a high S doping (>4.68 at%) in the disordered shells. As a result, the S-doped black TiO2 exhibits much higher photocatalytic activity than pure rutile TiO2. Other nonmetal atoms such as H, I and N can also be facilely introduced into the oxygen vacancies of core–shell structured black TiO2 to reduce the recombination centers for producing high-performance photocatalysts (Fig. 11b–d).236 As an example, the photocatalytic H2 generation of the TiO2@TiO2−xNx was 15.0 mmol h−1 g−1 under 100 mW cm−2 of full-sunlight and 200 mmol h−1 g−1 under 90 mW cm−2 of visible light irradiation, respectively.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of synthesizing nonmetal (X) doped TiO2@TiO2−x core–shell nanoparticles via two-step reduction processes, and HRTEM images of the as-obtained TiO2@TiO2−x–N (b), TiO2@TiO2−x–S (c), and TiO2@TiO2−x–I (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 236, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3. Solar energy utilization
3.1. Photocatalysis
TiO2 has been widely used as a photocatalyst. Fundamentally, upon absorption of photons with energy larger than the band gap of TiO2, electrons are excited from the valence band to conduction band, creating electron–hole pairs. These charge carriers migrate to the surface, where they are then available to undergo redox reactions with adsorbed chemicals. This is followed by the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) at the solid/liquid interface.

3.1.1. Surface hydrogenation-driven photocatalysis. 
Indeed, bandgap engineering is a crucial step for optimizing light harvesting capability. Persistent efforts involving controlled metal or nonmetal impurities to generate donor or acceptor states in the band gap and self-doping that produces Ti3+ species have been well demonstrated.47,237,238
Recently, the hydrogenation into core–shell structured black TiO2 has been demonstrated to dramatically enhance light absorption in visible and infrared regions, thus resulting in high photocatalytic efficiency. For example, Mao and co-workers have showed that photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) is complete after 8 min for black TiO2 nanocrystals, whereas the white TiO2 nanocrystals under the same testing conditions took nearly 1 h.214 Similar improvement is also observed for photocatalytic decomposition of phenol. Huang and co-workers described that aluminothermic-reduced black TiO2 can absorb ∼65% of the total solar energy by improving visible and infrared absorptions, superior to pristine TiO2 (∼5%).233 When used as a photocatalyst under UV light irradiation, the core–shell structured black TiO2 exhibits a complete decomposition of methyl orange (MO) (breaking the NN bonding and the benzene ring). As a reference, an incomplete decomposition of MO (breaking the NN bonding) is obtained based on pristine TiO2. Visible-light catalytic activity was further investigated, and it was found that the core–shell structured black TiO2 degrades 52% of MO after 6 h, whereas pristine TiO2 only 4%. By doping with nonmetal X (X = H, N, S, I) into the disordered shell of black TiO2 (TiO2@TiO2−x), the solar energy absorption could be further improved from 65% up to 85%.236 Surprisingly, the resultant TiO2@TiO2−xXx material displays higher photodegradation activity than TiO2@TiO2−x and TiO2 under both UV and visible-light irradiations due to the optimized effect of nonmetal X dopants on oxygen vacancies.


3.1.2. Surface plasmon-assisted photocatalysis. 
Another promising route to enhance light absorption of TiO2 is the integration with plasmonic nanoparticles in terms of their LSPR properties.239–243 For example, Seh et al. have found that Au@TiO2 Janus and core–shell nanostructures (Fig. 12a and b) in isopropyl alcohol experienced a red-shift compared with Au nanoparticles due to an overall increase in the refractive index of the dielectric environment surrounding the gold nanoparticles upon TiO2 coating.244 As a result, obviously enhanced photocatalytic performances could be obtained as shown in Fig. 12c. The results are well in agreement with theoretical discrete dipole approximation (DDA) calculations (Fig. 12d–f). Under visible-light irradiation, photoexcitation of the LSPR occurs, thus resulting in the generation of plasmonic near-fields that are strongly localized at the Au–TiO2 interface. In this region, the surface plasmon excitations are converted into electron–hole pairs via optical transitions between the localized electronic states. The presence of gold nanoparticles facilitates efficient charge separation by capturing the holes, while the electrons can migrate to the surface for photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Similar results were also demonstrated in the case of Ag nanoparticles.245,246
 Fig. 12  TEM images of Au@TiO2 Janus (a) and core–shell (b) nanostructures. (c) Volume of hydrogen generated (VH2) under visible-light irradiation from a tungsten halogen lamp. Plasmonic near-field maps (cross-section view at z = 0) simulated using discrete dipole approximation (DDA) calculations for Janus Au@TiO2 (d), core–shell Au@TiO2 (e) and bare gold nanoparticles (f). The maps show the electric near-field intensity enhancements |E(r)/E0|2 of the nanostructures at their LSPR wavelengths (indicated on each map) with the incident polarization along the x-axis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
Generally, metal nanoparticles would be easily oxidized at direct contact with TiO2 due to the strong photo-oxidation properties of ROS, which greatly limits their performances. Awazu et al. have reported a new type of plasmonic photocatalyst – Ag@SiO2@TiO2 film.247 The SiO2 interlayer can well protect Ag nanoparticles from oxidation. The resultant sample exhibits a strong absorption in the near-UV region (∼410 nm) and the decomposition rate of MB is enhanced by a factor of seven compared to pure TiO2. It was found that the thickness of the protective SiO2 shells can greatly affect the photocatalytic activity. As the thickness increases, the photocatalytic activity gradually decreases due to the diminished LSPR effects.248 Nevertheless, these works present the deposition of TiO2 on a film substrate, which leads to a decreased surface area. Recently, Zhang et al. have reported the synthesis of a well-dispersed Ag@SiO2@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticle by sequential sol–gel coating processes.249 They have investigated the optimum SiO2 interlayer and TiO2 shell thickness to induce the maximum photocatalytic activity, which was ∼31 times larger than that of P25 TiO2 under visible light.249 Yin and co-workers have also reported a core–shell structured photocatalyst (SiO2@Au@TiO2).250 During the preparation, TiO2 can be doped with C and N, which come from the decomposition of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES), a ligand for the immobilization of Au nanoparticles on SiO2. The obtained SiO2@Au@TiO2 shows superior efficiencies in photocatalytic decomposition of organic compounds to P25 under UV, visible light, and direct sunlight. The excellent photocatalytic efficiency is attributed to the interfacial nonmetal doping, which improves visible light activity, to the plasmonic metal decoration, enhancing light harvesting and charge separation, and to the small grain size of anatase nanocrystals, and reducing the exciton recombination rate. Inspired by the above works, a series of new core–shell structured plasmonic photocatalysts have been developed recently.251–256


3.1.3. Upconversion-driven photocatalysis. 
Qin and co-workers have first demostrated the synthesis of an upconversion photocatalyst of YF3:Yb3+,Tm3+@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles,257 where near-infrared light is absorbed by the YF3:Yb3+,Tm3+ upconversion core and switched to visible and UV light with three strong emission peaks before 380 nm, which can excite TiO2 shells to proceed with photocatalytic reactions. As a result, 61% of MB can be decomposed by the core–shell nanoparticles after irradiation at 980 nm which is much better than that of pure YF3:Yb3+,Tm3+ cores and TiO2 shells, respectively. Since then, various upconversion photocatalysts, such as: NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@TiO2,258–262 Er3+/Yb3+ codoped CaF2@TiO2,263 and YF3:Yb3+,Tm3+@TiO2,264 have been fabricated for utilization of the infrared energy of sunlight. Qin and co-workers have also investigated the energy transfer process between the upconversion cores and TiO2 shells by steady-state and dynamic fluorescence spectroscopies.265 The results clearly indicate that the TiO2 is excited mainly and efficiently by the energy transfer from the excited states of Tm3+ ions (1I6 and 1D2), which well match with the band gap of TiO2via a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) process, rather than a radiation–reabsorption process (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of the energy transfer among Yb3+,Tm3+ ions and TiO2 shell based on a NaYF4:Yb,Tm@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticle: the upconversion and band-edge excitation processes and the generation of OH radicals for photodegradation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of NaYF4:Yb,Tm@SiO2@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles for photodynamic therapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
More recently, Xu et al. have designed a novel hybrid photocatalyst of Au nanoparticles loaded NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+,Tm3+@TiO2 core@shell microspheres, which can improve solar energy utilization by capturing UV, visible, and NIR photons via simultaneously employing the concepts of plasmonics and upconversion in the structure design.266 As a result, the photodegradation of MO increases from 0 to 53% with coating of TiO2 shells, and further to 75% with loading 1 wt% Au nanoparticles under NIR, which is higher than that based on a P25 TiO2 photocatalyst.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) involves local or systemic administration of a photosensitizer, followed by irradiation of the target lesion with light of a specific wavelength, which triggers oxidative photodamage by the generation of ROS, subsequently leading to direct tumor cell killing, vascular damage and activation of a nonspecific immune response.267 Recently, TiO2 has been extensively employed for PDT irradiated by UV light to generate ROS to kill tumor cells, due to the high activity, excellent stability, good biocompatibility, and long retention time in the body. However, the irradiated UV light is harmful to skin and especially lacks enough penetration depth for deeper therapy. Lucky et al. have demonstrated a core–shell design for NIR light triggered PDT,268 in which a thin layer of TiO2 was uniformly coated on NaYF4:Yb,Tm@SiO2 nanoparticles. The NaYF4:Yb,Tm cores upconvert NIR to UV light, which further excites the electrons in the valence band of TiO2 shells to the conduction band, leading to the formation of an electron–hole pair for the generation of ROS (Fig. 13b). The in vitro and in vivo tumor PDT treatment efficacies exhibit that the tumor growth can be significantly delayed after intratumoral injection of NaYF4:Yb,Tm@SiO2@TiO2 nanocomposites under 980 nm NIR light irradiation, which is much better than the control experiments (NIR alone, NaYF4:Yb,Tm@SiO2@TiO2 alone and TiO2 nanoparticles with NIR). Moving on, a multifunctional cancer therapy nanoplatform has been designed and fabricated through the upconversion core@TiO2 shell nanostructures for NIR light mediated and imaging guided PDT.269–272


3.1.4. Core–shell structured heterojunction photocatalysts. 
It is known that a unique Schottky junction can be formed between noble metals and TiO2 upon intimate contact, thus remarkably favoring the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes.273 The conventional way to realize this is to load noble nanoparticles on various TiO2 substrates. However, the noble metal particles easily suffer from corrosion or dissolution during a long-term photocatalytic reaction. Recently, it has been demonstrated that the formation of a metal@TiO2 core–shell structure promises to mitigate these problems.274–279 For example, Wu et al. have fabricated Au@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles with truncated wedge-shaped TiO2 morphology by a simple and flexible hydrothermal route.278 The resultant core–shell Au@TiO2 nanostructures show superior photocatalytic degradation of acetaldehyde to P25 under both UV and visible light. Interestingly, Xu and co-workers have found a new phenomenon that the M@TiO2 (M = Au, Pd, Pt) core–shell nanocomposites possess tunable photoreactivities.143 The incorporation of a noble metal core into TiO2 shells contributes to an enhancement of the visible light photocatalytic activity of TiO2, because noble metal cores are able to trap electrons, improve the charge carrier life, and enhance the visible light absorption intensity. However, under UV light irradiation, the core–shell M@TiO2 nanocomposites show lower activities than bare P25 as a result of the incorporation of the noble metal cores significantly lowering the UV light absorption intensity.143
In addition to metals, graphitized carbon nanomaterials such as CNT and graphene also exhibit metallic conductivity, which are widely used as an alternative to form the Schottky junction.280–287 For example, Ding et al. have reported facile and scalable synthesis of the SWNT@TiO2 core–shell nanostructures.288 The abundant covalent bonding between SWNTs and TiO2 facilitates the electronic coupling and interactions across the hybrid interface, leading to a more efficient and sensitive interfacial charge transfer. The resultant devices were used as chemi-resistors, which exhibited ultrahigh acetone sensitivities with linear and reversible responses at the concentration range between 2 and 20 ppm and a calculated detection limit of 0.4 ppm. In addition to the efficient charge transfer, the less ordered structure of as-synthesized TiO2 (amorphous in nature with few small crystalline areas) offers more oxygen vacancies or unsaturated surface Ti centers that are more reactive to acetone molecules, as compared to the highly crystallized commercial TiO2 nanoparticles. Recently, Moon et al. have fabricated a rGO@TiO2 hybrid photocatalyst for solar production of H2O2, which exhibits a higher activity than that of bare TiO2, Ag/TiO2, Au/TiO2, or Pt/TiO2. The introduction of rGO not only enhances the interfacial electron transfer, but rGO also plays a role as the co-catalyst with moderate activity for both the H2O2 formation and decomposition.289
Although anatase TiO2 usually exhibits better performance compared to rutile phase, the emergence of the synergistic effect between anatase and rutile becomes a promising strategy to design more efficient photocatalysts. Tian et al. reported the synthesis of rutile@anatase core–shell nanoarrays, where ultrathin anatase nanosheets with a high (001) percentage were anchored perpendicular on rutile nanorods.290 The resultant core–shell nanostructures exhibited better performances on PEC water oxidation and photodegradation of bispenol A than pure anatase and an anatase/rutile mixture. The excellent performance of the core–shell nanostructures was attributed to the integrated effects of more efficient light energy utilization, a larger concentration of photocarriers, and better separation of electrons and holes.291
Yang et al. prepared 1D TiO2(B)@anatase core–shell structured photocatalysts via two consecutive partial phase transformation processes with titanate nanofiber as the starting material.292 In this case, the anatase shells were first formed under moderate hydrothermal conditions; followed by a heating process, the fibril cores of titanate were converted into a TiO2(B) single crystal without changing the shell. The difference in the band edges of the two phases can promote migration of the photogenerated holes from anatase nanocrystals in the outer shell to the TiO2(B) core; meanwhile, the external surface of the anatase shell has a strong ability to produce reactive hydroxyl radicals (OH˙), giving rise to a high photocatalytic activity.293–295
Despite the great progress, the synergistic effect between different phases still remains unclear. Liu and co-workers have systematically demonstrated that in nanostructured TiO2 electrodes, the internal movement of electrons is faster inside anatase building blocks, while the rutile counterparts exhibit more efficient intergrain charge transfer. As a result, surface rutilization of anatase nanoparticles into core–shell structures can not only improve the charge mobility by facilitating the intergrain charge transfer between the adjacent building blocks, but also minimize the internal energy consumption and protect electrons form recombination, although the conduction band edge of rutile TiO2 is slightly higher than that of the anatase polymorph.296,297 Cao et al. have clearly figured out the charge transfer direction across the phase junction through design and synthesis of two types of TiO2 heterojunctions: anatase films/rutile nanorods and rutile nanorods/anatase films. Rutile nanowires on anatase film demonstrated enhanced photocurrent density and onset potential, whereas strong negative performance was obtained from anatase film on rutile nanowire structures.298 That is because photogenerated electrons tend to transfer from the rutile nanorods to anatase films, and holes are eager to migrate from anatase to the rutile surface, which provides an important guide for future heterojunction-based photoelectrode design.299
In addition to phase junctions, the core–shell semiconductor@TiO2 nanostructures have also been studied and demonstrated as an effective way to improve the photocatalytic performance with both enhanced light absorption and charge separation efficiency.300 Various semiconductors (including: ZnO, Fe2O3, CdS, CuOx, SnO2, etc.) have been extensively explored to form a heterojunction with TiO2 for boosting the photocatalytic performance.301–308 For example, 1D CdS@TiO2 core–shell nanocomposites have been synthesized via a two-step solvothermal method. The visible-light-driven photocatalytic activities of the as-prepared composites were evaluated by selective oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes under mild conditions. Compared to bare CdS cores, an obviously enhanced performance was achieved in the case of CdS@TiO2 nanocomposites, which might be ascribed to the prolonged lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers under visible light irradiation.303


3.1.5. Magnetic recyclable core–shell structured photocatalysts. 
Another problem of nano-sized TiO2 photocatalysts is their separation from the reaction system, which restricts their widespread application. Compared to centrifugation and filtration, magnetic separation is a very convenient approach for removing and recycling magnetic particles.309–311 A number of Fe3O4@TiO2 core–shell nanostructures have been fabricated and have demonstrated the feasibility as convenient and recyclable photocatalysts92,93,165,312–318 which can not only enable the separation of nano-sized TiO2, but also retain the catalytically active surface area. As a typical example, Zhao and co-workers have reported the synthesis of Ag@Fe3O4@SiO2@TiO2 multi-shelled photocatalysts for degradation of organic pollutants and reduction of hexavalent chromium ions (Fig. 14a),256 in which the Ag cores are used to extend the photoresponse to the visible region. The Fe3O4 shell facilitates the modulation of the Ag LSPR effect and enables efficient magnetic separation. The SiO2 interlayer protects Ag and Fe3O4 from corrosion and oxidation, meanwhile inhibiting the undesirable transfer of electron–hole from the TiO2 to Fe3O4 layer.319 TiO2 shells with high surface area are beneficial to promote the adsorption of pollutants, allowing more effective transport of the reactant molecules or ions to the active sites. The resultant photocatalysts exhibit a strong response to external magnetic fields and thus can be efficiently recycled without significant loss of either materials or photocatalytic activities (Fig. 14b–d).319
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM image and structure scheme (inset), (b) five cycles of the photodegradation of MB under sunlight illumination, (c) magnetization curve and (d) magnetic separation of the Ag@Fe3O4@SiO2@TiO2 photocatalysts in MB solutions under different conditions. (I) the initial solution; (II) after adsorption; (III) after sunlight illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Shen et al. have fabricated a magnetic photocatalyst of Fe3O4@SiO2–Au@TiO2.320 Interestingly, they found that by hydrothermal treatment with NH4F, the TiO2 layers can be well crystallized with exposed (001) facets, showing the selective adsorption and photocatalytic decomposition of azo dye molecules. Chalasani et al. described the synthesis of β-cyclodextrin-functionalized Fe3O4@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles for destroying the endocrine-disrupting chemicals, bisphenol A and dibutyl phthalate.321 The tethered cyclodextrins are responsible for the aqueous dispersibility of nanoparticles and the hydrophobic cavities for the capture of organic pollutants, which can be well photodegraded by TiO2 shells under UV illumination; and the magnetism associated with 9 nm crystalline Fe3O4 cores allows for interfacial separation of the reaction solution.

3.2. Photocatalytic water splitting

3.2.1. Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. 
In comparison to the photo-oxidation half-reaction, water splitting for hydrogen generation is a more challenging process, and continues to be a dream for clean and sustainable energy sources. However, implementations of TiO2 materials in water splitting still remain limited because of its wide band gap and low carrier densities. Much effort has been devoted to solve this problem.120,121,322–324 Zheng et al. have evaluated the effect of hydrogen treatment on the photocatalytic activity of anatase nanowires.222 They found that the hydrogen production rate of hydrogenated TiO2 nanowires (2.15 mmol h−1 g−1) is 3.2 and 3.8 times higher than those of air-treated TiO2 and commercial P25, respectively. Huang and co-workers have showed that the TiO2@TiO2−xHx core–shell nanoparticles steadily produce hydrogen up to 8.2 mmol h−1 g−1, which is much larger than that of pristine TiO2 (0.61 mmol h−1 g−1).225 The enhancement in the visible-light absorption of core–shell structured black TiO2 may be attributed to two factors: surface disorder and the formation of oxygen vacancies.214,217,325 Interestingly, it was found that the dramatic improvement in visible-light absorbance of black TiO2 is not a main contributor to its enhanced photoactivity.214,217,222 As shown by Chen et al. when full solar radiation was filtered so that only visible and infrared light was allowed to reach core–shell structured black TiO2 with Pt, the rate of H2 production drops from 10 to 0.1 mmol h−1 g−1.214 Furthermore, electrochemical impedance measurements reveals that black TiO2 increased their donor densities. The oxygen vacancies are demonstrated to be electron donors and considered to contribute to the enhanced donor density.326,327 The increased donor density can improve charge transport and shift the Fermi level of TiO2 toward the conduction band, which can facilitate the charge separation at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface. However, when the concentration of oxygen vacancies is too high, the defects can also act as charge recombination centers and thus cause a negative effect on the photocatalytic performance.
Huang and co-workers have also showed a beneficial effect on the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution of core–shell structured black TiO2 co-doped with various nonmetal atoms.235,236 They believed that nonmetal atoms can reduce the trapped states from oxygen vacancies, thus improving the visible-light photocatalytic performances. It should be noted that such core–shell structured black TiO2 can only show photocatalytic H2 evolution activities in the presence of a co-catalyst, such as Pt. Only the most recent work by Liu et al. has shown a remarkable activation of black TiO2 nanotubes in a high pressure H2 atmosphere for noble-metal-free photocatalytic H2 generation.215 In contrast, a classic reduction treatment with H2/Ar under atmospheric pressure, without co-catalysts, does not provide any significant effect. The main difference caused by the high pressure H2 annealing results in the stable and isolated Ti3+ defect-structure, which is located energetically close to the conduction band of anatase, as evident from electron spin resonance (ESR) investigations.328–330
More recently, Cheng and co-workers have demonstrated a new core–shell structured TiO2 photocatalyst for high performance water splitting.331 Starting from micro-sized rutile particles, a crystalline Ti3+ core@amorphous Ti4+ shell structure was obtained through a two-step hierarchically discrete modification combining thermal reduction and hydrothermal fluorination (Fig. 15a). Interestingly, the almost inactive micro-sized rutile crystals become highly active toward photocatalytic hydrogen production after modification. In this case, the anion-vacancy-containing crystalline core and amorphous shell can in situ form the unique band alignments, enabling the suppression of the transport of electrons while facilitating the transport of holes by the upward onsets of the band edges at the core–shell interface. The hydrogen evolution rate is improved by over 158 fold from 1.7 to 268.3 μmol h−1 (Fig. 15b). This significant improvement is attributed to the key role of the unusual core–shell structure in populating many more surface-reaching holes than electrons by regulating their transport behaviors from the interior to the surface under irradiation.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the formation of a crystalline Ti3+ core/amorphous Ti4+ shell photocatalyst by a two-step treatment. In step 1, oxygen is lost and Ti3+ created in the whole pristine TiO2 in H2 (denoted TiO2 with Ti3+). In step 2, the Ti3+-containing surface layer is converted into an amorphous layer by hydrothermally treating in a HF solution, with the surviving Ti3+ preserved in the core (denoted TiO2 with Ti3+ & AL, where AL means the amorphous layer). The reference sample of crystalline/amorphous core/shell TiO2 without Ti3+ obtained using only step 2 is denoted TiO2 with AL. (b) Comparisons of the photocatalytic hydrogen generation rates of the four prepared photocatalysts from a mixture of water and methanol with 1 wt% Pt as a co-catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 331, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, the hydrogen production efficiency can be improved by extending the light absorption to longer wavelengths, increasing light scattering, injecting hot electrons from plasmonic metals to the conduction band, or by exciting electron–hole pairs via metal plasmon energy transfer, which has been well demonstrated in the case of Au and Ag. For example, Moskovits and co-workers fabricated an efficient, autonomous solar water-splitting device based on a gold nanorod@TiO2 array in which essentially all charge carriers involved in the oxidation and reduction steps arise from the hot electrons resulting from the excitation of surface plasmons in the nanostructured gold (Fig. 16a–c).332 The top TiO2 layer functions almost exclusively as an electron filter, enabling the effective separation of hot electrons and holes for full water splitting.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic and (b) corresponding TEM images of the cross section of an individual gold nanorod@TiO2 photocatalyst showing the TiO2 cap decorated with Pt nanoparticles for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and the Co-OEC material deposited on the lower portion of the Au nanorod for oxygen evolution reaction (OER). (c) Energy level diagram superimposed on a schematic of an individual gold nanorod@TiO2 photocatalyst, showing the proposed processes occurring in its various parts and in energy space. EF, Fermi energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 332, Copyright 2013 The Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the Pt/SiO2@TiO2 core–shell composites. (e) Photocatalytic H2 production of SiO2@TiO2 and Pt/SiO2@TiO2 core–shell composites with different weight contents of Pt under visible-light irradiation (λ > 500 nm). (f) Schematic illustration of charge transfer in the Pt/SiO2@TiO2 composites under visible light (λ > 500 nm). Energetic hot electrons are photoexcited from Pt nanoparticles by absorbing scattered light in the near field of the dielectric surface of the SiO2 support and transfer to the conduction band of the semiconductor TiO2 shell to reduce the water molecule to H2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 333, Copyright 2016 The Nature Publishing Group. 
More recently, Zhang et al. have demonstrated the observation of a new light absorption model for small Pt nanoparticles with a dimension of 2–5 nm that used the enhanced near field of resonant scattering modes in spherical SiO2 supports to generate distinct absorption peaks of the Pt nanoparticles (Fig. 16d).333 This model is conceptually different from the widely reported SPR light absorption phenomenon associated with noble metal nanostructures. By adopting the SiO2 support, adjusting the distribution of Pt nanoparticles on the support and forming a core–shell structure using a thin-layer coating of TiO2 to modulate the dielectric environment of the Pt nanoparticles, visible absorption peaks are distinctly identified. These results were corroborated by joint experimental and theoretical analyses. The hot electrons generated from the photoexcitation of Pt nanoparticles under visible-light illumination also enable the core–shell Pt/SiO2@TiO2 composites to photocatalyze various redox reactions. For instance, with visible-light irradiation for 10 h, the level of H2 production reaches 326 μmol g−1 over 5% Pt/SiO2@TiO2. The apparent quantum yield, defined as the ratio of the number of reacted electrons (that is, twice the number of H2 molecules for the photocatalytic H2 evolution reaction) to the number of incident photons, reaches 0.22% for 5% Pt/SiO2@TiO2 under the present conditions. This value is even higher than that (∼0.1%) from the above Au nanorod-coated TiO2 layers (Fig. 16e and f).


3.2.2. Overall water splitting. 
Overall photocatalytic water splitting, in which the photocatalysts simultaneously split water into oxygen and hydrogen, is a promising alternative for sustainable solar-to-chemical energy conversion.334
Recently, Pan et al. have reported the synthesis of a uniform core–shell structured photocatalyst of LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N@TiOx/RhCrOy, which demonstrates the stoichiometrical water splitting into H2 and O2 under irradiation of 600 nm light.335 Although the quantum efficiency is still relatively low (∼0.03%) and only a moderate rate of simultaneous evolution of H2 and O2 can be observed, the photocatalytic activity could be further improved by minimizing the defects and optimizing the reaction kinetics. Moving on, the photodeposition of amorphous oxyhydroxides of group IV and V transition metals (Ti, Nb, Ta) over a semiconductor photocatalyst, creating a core–shell structure, and their water splitting behaviors were investigated in detail.336 It was found that the hydrophilic amorphous TiO2 nanolayer can serve as a molecular sieve to control surface redox reactions. Specifically, the reactants can diffuse into the nanolayer to participate in HER and OER, after which the resulting H2 and O2 are released to the outer phase. Conversely, the diffusion of H2 and O2 in the opposite direction (that is, into the nanolayer) is effectively inhibited. The ORR that may occur on the surfaces of the reduction co-catalyst and semiconductor is prevented by this one-way product diffusion process.337–339

3.3. PEC water splitting
PEC splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen by the direct use of sunlight is an ideal, renewable method of hydrogen fuels production that integrates solar energy collection and water electrolysis into a single photoelectrode.340

3.3.1. Light harvesting and charge separation. 
Wang et al. have revealed the significant effect of surface hydrogen treatment on the performance of rutile nanowires for PEC water splitting (denoted as H:TiO2).217 In comparison to pristine TiO2 nanowires, H:TiO2 shows substantially enhanced photocurrent in the entire potential window. More importantly, the H:TiO2 nanowires have exceptionally low photocurrent saturation potentials of −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, indicating very efficient charge separation and transportation. The optimized H:TiO2 nanowires yield a photocurrent density of ∼1.97 mA cm−2 at −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 100 mW cm−2, which is at least two times higher than that of pristine TiO2. This photocurrent density corresponds to a solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency of ∼1.63%. Interestingly, the incident-photon-to-current-conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements show that the values for H:TiO2 nanowires are uniformly higher than 95% in the wavelength range from 300 to 370 nm, but decrease to about 1% at 420 nm, indicating that the UV light is effectively used by H:TiO2 for water splitting. Hoang et al. reported a synergistic effect involving hydrogenation and nitridation co-treatment of rutile nanowire arrays, which can significantly improve the water photo-oxidation performance under visible light illumination.221 The visible light (>420 nm) photocurrent of the co-treated TiO2 is 0.16 mA cm−2 and accounts for 41% of the total photocurrent under simulated AM 1.5G illumination. It is believed that the interaction between the N-dopant and Ti3+ is the key to the extension of the active spectrum and the superior visible light water photo-oxidation activity. In addition, it has also been found that the PEC performance of TiO2 nanowires could be improved by the passivation of surface shell states to decrease the surface recombination rate.299,341 For example, Hwang et al. used the ALD technique to deposit the epitaxial film on rutile nanowires. The ALD-TiO2 coating enhances the photocatalytic activity by 1.5 times on 1.8 μm-long TiO2 nanowire photoanodes, reaching a current density of 1.1 mA cm−2.
Alternatively, plasmon-enhanced performance has also been observed in the PEC device. For example, Wang and co-workers presented a new p–n heterojunction photoelectrode design utilizing Cu2O and TiO2-P25 loaded with only 1 wt% Au@TiO2 plasmonic core–shell structure.342 The introduction of core–shell Au@TiO2 nanoparticles not only promotes light harvesting but also improves charge carrier separation, resulting in drastically improved photocurrent density up to −4.34 mA cm−2 at −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl under simulated AM 1.5, ∼20 fold enhancement compared to that based on a TiO2-P25/Cu2O photoelectrode.
On the other hand, effective circumvention of the poor charge transport property may be responsible for the improved performance of the PEC cells. The most straightforward strategy is the incorporation of conductive cores with TiO2 shells. For example, Hwang et al. have synthesized a core–shell Si@TiO2 nanowire array, which achieves 2.5 times higher photocurrent compared to a planar Si/TiO2 photoanode due to the enlargement of surface area, higher charge conductivity and better light absorption.343 Similarly, Wang and co-workers combined highly conductive TiSi2 nanonets as cores with ALD-TiO2 shells.344 When in contact with the electrolyte, the electron is collected in TiSi2 core and readily transported away, and the hole is transferred to the electrolyte for chemical reactions under UV light illumination. Shi et al. have fabricated a novel architecture by growing TiO2 nanorods uniformly on dense Si nanowire array backbones, followed by an additional thin film of anatase coated on the heterostructures by ALD (Fig. 17a).345 The hierarchical network offers large surface areas, good charge transport properties, and large porosities (Fig. 17b and c). A 2.1% PEC efficiency is obtained from such an architecture, which is three times higher than that of a TiO2 film–Si nanowire structure (Fig. 17d). In addition to Si, it was shown that well-defined Al-doped ZnO (AZO) nanocones can also improve the conductivity of TiO2 shells for enhanced PEC performance.346
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic procedures for preparing Si nanowires/TiO2 nanorods core–shell architectures. (b) Illustration of using Si nanowires@TiO2 nanorods core–shell structure as a PEC anode for water splitting. (c) SEM image of the Si nanowires@TiO2 nanorods core–shell architectures. (d) J−V curves of different Si@TiO2 configurations showing enhanced PEC performance by coating TiO2 nanorods on Si nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 


3.3.2. Photocorrosion/oxidation inhibition. 
Low bandgap semiconductors have been widely used as light-absorbing options for high efficiency photoconversion. However, they generally suffer from low stability.347 For example, Cu2O is highly promising for PEC water splitting with a STH efficiency of ∼18% under AM 1.5. The main limiting factor is its poor stability in aqueous solution. Recently, Paracchino et al. have presented a highly active Cu2O photocathode protected by a thin coating of AZO and TiO2 by ALD.348 In the best case, the resultant photocathodes show a stable current of up to −7.6 mA cm−2 at a potential of 0 V versus the RHE using Pt as co-catalysts. Notably, when being combined with suitable molecular catalysts replacing Pt, these protected photoeletrodes also show highly efficient and selective CO2 reduction performance with good stability over several hours.349,350
Yu et al. presented a smart implementation of ultrathin TiO2 protective coatings on nanostructured black Si surfaces, which greatly enhances charge separation capability for PEC water splitting (a saturated photocurrent density of 32.3 mA cm−2 at an external potential of 1.48 V versus the RHE). The impressive PEC performance can be attributed to the dual function of the TiO2 protective layer.351 It can effectively passivate the surface defective sites without compromising any light absorption and charge transport features. Meanwhile, the conformal TiO2 layer completely isolated the corrugated black Si surface from the alkaline electrolyte solution, leading to a drastic improvement of the operational stability under both in-air and in-electrolyte conditions.
However, a TiO2 thin layer coated by ALD at a low temperature is highly resistive in general. Interestingly, Hu et al. for the first time have demonstrated that the ALD-TiO2 protective shells become very conductive toward anodic current flow following the sputter-deposition of a Ni film or island.352 As a result, over 100 nm of ALD-TiO2 can be deposited onto a semiconductor film without concern for resistive losses. For example, buried-junction n–p+ Si photoanodes operate continuously for water oxidation for up to 100 h in 1.0 M KOH. It can also be applicable to n-Si, n–p+ GaAs, n-GaP and n-CdTe photoelectrodes.353,354 The low temperature and conformal nature of the ALD process are beneficial for the deposition of TiO2 onto easily oxidized materials, where a thick surface oxide and pinholes can lead to substantially decreased performance. The charge conduction mechanism of the amorphous TiO2 thick layer might be that anodic current flow proceeds through defect states in the ALD-TiO2 by a defect-state charge-hopping model.
In addition to planar semiconductors, n–p+-Si microwires can also be coated with ALD-TiO2 and then sputter-deposited with a NiCrOx catalyst, and operate for >2000 h of continuous light-driven PEC water oxidation in 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution.355 The microwire arrays produce 440 mV and 7.1 mA cm−2 of photovoltage and photocurrent density, respectively, at 1 sun illumination while containing only 4% of the material present in a silicon wafer of the same area. More recently, it has been found that such a thick ALD-TiO2 protective layer could work very well for p-GaInP2 and Si photoelectrodes with molecular oxidation catalysts.356,357 These results clearly demonstrate the rational design of core–shell structures with the protective TiO2 shells and small band gap semiconductors as the cores for large-scale solar fuel production.


3.3.3. Dye sensitized photoelectrosynthesis cell. 
Compared to water reduction into H2, water oxidation based on artificial photosynthesis into O2 is more challenging. Many efforts have been devoted to developing a dye sensitized photoelectrosynthesis cell (DSPEC), which provides a flexible approach for water oxidation based on the integration of the light absorption/catalytic properties of chromophore–catalyst assemblies on wide bandgap semiconductor oxide electrodes.358 A limiting factor dictating efficiencies in these devices is the accumulation of multiple oxidative equivalents at catalyst sites that meet the 4e−/4H+ demands for water oxidation. Oxidation is in competition with back electron transfer of injected electrons into the semiconductor oxide from the assembly, which can greatly decrease overall cell efficiencies. On TiO2 after injection, back electron transfer to the chromophore and to the catalyst occurs on the microsecond to millisecond time scale. Although diffusion rates through the films vary with applied bias and light intensity, they typically occur far more rapidly, on the millisecond time scale. Given the factor of 103 difference between internal capture and back electron transfer, there is a significant and deleterious mismatch in rates even for the first photo-activation step. To tackle the challenges, various core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials (e.g., ITO@TiO2, SnO2@TiO2) with a 3–5 Å outer shell of TiO2 have dominated as photoanode supports to greatly enhance photoconversion efficiencies.359–364 In this case, following excitation and injection by an external chromophore, the injected electrons reach the inner core by diffusion. With a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) core, relatively rapid electron transfer occurs from the oxide to the collector electrode. With SnO2 as the core, there is a difference in band gap energies between TiO2 and SnO2 of ∼0.4 V which traps electrons in the core for transfer to back contact.365–371
Another significant barrier to this approach arises from the limited stability of surface binding. Surface-bound molecular catalysts are typically unstable to hydrolysis in water. Meyer and co-workers have intensively investigated ALD-TiO2 coating as a strategy to stabilize the DSPEC. In the strategy, nano-sized ITO or TiO2 electrodes were first bound with a molecular water oxidation catalyst on the surface, which was then coated with a conformal nanoscale TiO2 coating by ALD.372,373 The overlayer of TiO2 acts to block the hydrolysis of molecular catalysts from the surface, which thus shows a remarkably enhanced surface binding stability even in basic solutions where a rate enhancement for water oxidation of ∼106 is observed compared with acidic conditions. It further demonstrates that ALD-TiO2 coating can be an effective protection strategy to simultaneously improve the performance and durability of PEC and DSSCs devices.374


3.3.4. Z-Scheme water splitting. 
In natural photosynthesis, the energy of absorbed sunlight produces charge carriers that execute chemical reactions in separate regions of the chloroplast. Inspired by this, Yang and co-workers have designed and fabricated a Z-scheme photocatalyst consisting of segment core–shell structured nanowire arrays for direct solar water splitting, as schematically shown in Fig. 18a and b.375 H2 and O2 can be obtained with a 2:1 stoichiometry without any applied bias under simulated sunlight (Fig. 18c). In this case, photoexcited electron–hole pairs are generated in p-Si and TiO2 upon illumination, which absorb different regions of the solar spectrum, respectively. Then, the electrons in the p-Si nanowires migrate to the surface and reduce protons to generate H2; meanwhile the holes in the TiO2 nanowires oxidize water to evolve O2. The holes from p-Si and electrons from TiO2 recombine at the Ohmic contact, completing the relay of the “Z-scheme”.376 Geometry optimization shows that when TiO2 nanorods cover 50–80% of the length of Si nanowires, the highest solar energy conversion efficiency of 0.12% can be achieved under simulated sunlight (Fig. 18d), which is comparable to that of natural photosynthesis.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of p-Si nanowire@TiO2 nanorod segment core–shell structured arrays as an integrated nanosystem for direct solar water splitting. The two insets show the oxidation and reduction reactions on TiO2 and Si surfaces with iridium oxide and Pt nanoparticles as co-catalysts, respectively. (b) False-colored SEM image of the segment core–shell structured arrays. (c) The evolution of H2 and O2 gases under simulated sunlight of 150 mW cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (d) Measured energy conversion efficiency (left axis) and estimated normalized relative photoactivity (right axis) of the integrated nanosystem with different TiO2 segment percentages. Reprinted with permission from ref. 375, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 

3.4. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction to hydrocarbon fuels along with water oxidation into O2 is an alternative approach to resolve the energy crisis and environmental problems. However, it still remains a great challenge due to the high potential of −2.14 V versus saturated calomel electrode (SCE) for the reduction of CO2 by one electron to form CO2˙−.377–379
TiO2-based materials are the most common photocatalysts for CO2 conversion, but low efficiencies have been reported.380–383 Recently, a new H and N co-doped black TiO2 photocatalyst with uniform core–shell structure has been synthesized through a H2/N2 plasma treatment strategy (Fig. 19a), which shows a good performance toward photocatalytic CO2 reduction.384 The combined study of experiments and DFT calculations clarify that the –NH groups at the interstitial sites enable its visible light absorption, and fast separation of electron–hole pairs can be realized by the Vo and Ti–Ns mid-gap states, thus leading to the efficient production of C1 fuels without the use of a charge scavenger (Fig. 19b). When using Cu as a co-catalyst, the activity is approximately eight-fold higher than that based on Pt due to the well-matched energy states (Fig. 19c).
 Fig. 19  (a) TEM image of H and N co-doped black TiO2 with the scale bar of 5 nm. (b) The schematic conduction pathways of photoexcited electrons and holes in a core–shell photocatalyst with Ns (substitutional nitrogen), NiH (hydrogen bonded interstitial nitrogen), and VO (oxygen vacancy). (c) The energy band levels of H and N co-doped black TiO2 nanoparticles versus RHE (pH 7) for CO2 reduction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 384, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
Yin et al. have developed a low-temperature solvothermal method for synthesis of core–shell structured TiO2 photocatalysts in a Li-dissolved ethanediamine solution,385 where the dissolved Li species can efficiently reduce TiO2 to produce numerous Vo, meanwhile, the in situ generated active H can intercalate into the matrix of TiO2. The obtained photocatalysts show a high activity of CH4 formation (16.2 μmol g−1 h−1 with a selectivity of 79%) under solar irradiation. The kinetic isotope measurements reveal that the cleavage of the CO bond from CO2 rather than the O–H bond from H2O is the rate-determining step. In addition, the in situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DR-FTIR) confirms the existence of CO2˙− intermediates, indicating that the defective surface of H-TiO2−x can efficiently accelerate the adsorption and chemical activation of CO2 molecules, thus enabling the single-electron reduction of CO2 to CO2˙−.
Another strategy is to couple TiO2 with other metal oxides for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.386 Recently, In et al. have designed a novel core–shell structured photocatalyst (CuO–TiO2−xNx) with a hollow cube morphology.322 The synthetic strategy uses uniform Cu3N nanocubes as a core for subsequent deposition of TiO2 shells and thermal induced transformation to hollow CuO–TiO2−xNx. The resultant core–shell photocatalysts show a high capability of converting CO2 into methane even without noble metal co-catalysts, which is 2.5-fold and 1.6-fold higher product yield than that of Degussa P25 and CuO–TiO2, respectively. This beneficial improvement may be due to the nitrogen doping and/or hollow structure.
In addition, carbon materials can also act as an electron acceptor or co-catalyst for photocatalytic reduction of CO2.380,387,388 For example, Gui et al. have demonstrated the synthesis of MWCNTs@TiO2 core–shell nanocomposites via a sol–gel coating approach, which exhibit the conversion of CO2 into methane in a continuous process under visible light at atmospheric pressure.389 A high methane yield of ∼0.17 μmol g−1 h−1 can be recorded. Graphene@TiO2 hybrid nanosheets prepared by an in situ simultaneous reduction–hydrolysis technique exhibit high and selective photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction into CH4 and C2H6, which results from fast migration of electrons in TiO2 to graphene promoted by the formation of d–π electron orbital overlap (Ti–O–C band).390 The synergistic effect of the surface Ti3+ sites and graphene is beneficial for the generation of C2H6, and the yield increases with the content of incorporated graphene.
Alternatively, Li et al. have reported a MOF@TiO2 hetero-structure for CO2 photocatalytic reduction to CH4 by using the gas storage property of MOFs (Fig. 20).391 Comparing with the bare TiO2 nanoparticles, the core–shell structures show enhanced activities due to the improved capture for CO2 molecules. The ultrafast spectroscopy experiments show that the light-induced electrons can be effectively transferred from the semiconductor to CO2 molecules adsorbed in the MOF. It is anticipated that combining MOF and semiconductor photocatalysts into a single system is a promising strategy for the targeted solar-to-chemical energy conversion by rationally utilizing the advantages of the two components.
 Fig. 20  MOF@TiO2 core–shell structured photocatalysts for CO2 reduction. Structural illustration (a) and TEM image (b) of Cu3(BTC)2@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles (1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate, BTC). (c) Schematic depiction of charge transfer from photoexcited TiO2 to MOF interface for reducing CO2 molecules captured in the MOF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 391, Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
3.5. Solar cells
Another attractive application is use in solar cells, which directly convert solar energy into electricity. Improving the conversion efficiency is a critical step to enable commercialization of photovoltaic technologies.

3.5.1. Dye-sensitized solar cells. 
In 1991, O’Regan and Grätzel first demonstrated the DSSC based on a mesoporous TiO2 thin film.22 Since then, a large number of TiO2 nanostructures have been synthesized as the electrodes to improve the light utilization and charge transport. Among them, the core–shell structure design has attracted much attention.392–395 For example, Qi et al. incorporated uniform core–shell Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles into the photoanode of DSSCs (Fig. 21).396 The optical absorption of dye molecules can be greatly enhanced by the LSPR effect of Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles. As a result, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) with very thin photoanodes (1.5 μm) was increased from 3.1 to 4.4%. Moreover, a small number of Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles (0.1 wt%) effectively improve the efficiency from 7.8 to 9.0% while decreasing the photoanode thickness by 25%. In this case, the ultrathin amorphous shell not only functions as the protecting layer of Ag nanoparticles against corrosion, but also facilitates the electron transfer to surrounding TiO2 nanoparticles.204,205 Later, the plasmonic core–shell TiO2 nanoparticles have been directly applied as the photoanodes, compared with conventional P25, which show an effective inhibition effect over the recombination and back reaction, thus giving rise to enhanced PCE.89,397,398
 Fig. 21  (a) TEM images of the Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles. (b) Optical absorption spectra of the Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles, ruthenium dye molecules, and their mixtures in the matrix of TiO2 thin film. (c) Photocurrent density–voltage curve (solid lines) and PCE (dashed lines) of the 0.1 wt% Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles and TiO2-only DSSCs with the same photoanode thickness of 1.5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 396, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Over the past 30 years, the efficiencies continue to increase and approach their theoretical limit and more effort is being focused on the various DSSC interfaces such as the semiconductor/electrolyte and semiconductor/TCO substrate interfaces. An interesting work by Alibabaei et al. demonstrated the construction of core–shell structures by depositing ALD-TiO2 on conductive Sn-doped In2O3 nanoparticles to prevent the charge recombination.187 When the shell thickness is maintained at 2–3 nm, it can effectively block recombination while simultaneously collecting charge through the mesoporous networks to an external circuit due to the tunneling mechanism. In contrast, without a TiO2 shell, a rapid back electron transfer and poor performance is obtained. With a thicker shell (>3 nm), electron trapping in the shell occurs, resulting in an increase in back electron transfer decreasing the PCE.399,400 This core–shell structure design is versatile to reduce recombination without impeding the injection for various metal oxide nanostructures with improved PCE.370,401–403
Another promising benefit of the core–shell structures is the protection effect.404 Labouchere et al. have recently demonstrated that the extra coating by ALD-TiO2 can passivate the hierarchical ZnO photoanodes to reduce the charge recombination and the degradation of ZnO in the iodine electrolyte. The resultant hierarchical structure shows a photovoltage of 0.95 V, which is much larger than the 0.6–0.7 V typically observed in DSSCs.405
In addition, core–shell structures are also studied to facilitate efficient charge transport in DSSCs. For example, Tétreault et al. developed a unique high electron mobility and light scattering macroporous photoanode, in which the conductive AZO layer is deposited before ALD-TiO2.406 The conductive AZO helps to extract photogenerated electrons, thereby boosting the electron mobility and diffusion coefficient by up to 6 orders of magnitude higher than that of anatase TiO2 nanoparticles. A similar result was also demonstrated by using ordered ITO nanorod arrays as the current collector.407


3.5.2. Perovskite solar cells. 
The emergence of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) recently brings a new hope to the solar cell industry due to their incredible improvement of the PCE exceeding 20.0% within several years. The efficiency and stability of PSCs depend strongly on the morphology and type of materials selected as the electron transport layer (ETL) in the device.
Understanding and engineering the interfaces between the ETL and perovskite are crucial to improve the device performance. Various fabrication methods have been adopted to deposit compact TiO2 ETL on the TCO substrates including spin coating, ALD, and chemical bath deposition. Although a similar compact structure can be obtained, the resultant ETL appears in different morphologies with variation of surface roughness, film thickness and crystallinity which in turn varies the device performance. For example, Lu et al. identified that the optimum thickness of ALD-TiO2 as the ETL for highly efficient planar PSCs is ∼10 nm due to high transmittance, low leakage current, and low charge transfer resistance and recombination rate.408 However, solution-based deposition techniques like spin-coating required much thicker compact TiO2 layers (>65 nm) as the ETL for achieving high performance devices.409,410 This is due to the fact that a thinner ETL increases the risk of pinhole formation which subsequently offers a direct contact between perovskite layer and TCO substrate.411 It is known that enhanced electronic coupling and chemical binding between the TiO2 ETL and perovskite interface play the key role in substantially reducing the trap states and recombination.412,413 For example, Cl-rich TiO2 nanocrystals have recently been developed and used as an ETL for planar PSCs by Tan et al. (Fig. 22).414 DFT calculations clearly reveal stronger chemical binding at the TiO2–Cl/perovskite interface compared with relatively weak binding between bare TiO2 and perovskite, anticipating enhanced electronic coupling at the TiO2/perovskite interface (Fig. 22c). Surprisingly, the J–V hysteresis disappears (Fig. 22d) as a result of the improved charge extraction in relation to the impact of interfacial capacitance on the hysteresis. Voc can be substantially enhanced from 1.06 (TiO2) to 1.14 V (TiO2–Cl). In Fig. 22e and f, a device with a small area of 0.049 cm2 demonstrates a PCE of 21.4% and with a large area of 1.1 cm2 delivers a PCE of 20.2%.
 Fig. 22  Cross-sectional and top-view SEM image of planar PCSs by spin-coating TiO2–Cl nanocrystals as the ETL on ITO substrate (a and b). DFT calculation result showing shallow and delocalized Pb–Cl anti-site defects at the PbCl2-terminated interface (c). Comparison of hysteresis between TiO2 and TiO2–Cl based devices (d). J–V curves of device employing Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45 on TiO2–Cl layer for the small area of 0.049 cm2 (e) and the large area of 1.1 cm2 (f). The inset shows a photo of the large-area device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 414, Copyright 2017 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Alternatively, the mesoporous ETL is typically used in mesoscopic PSCs, which can facilitate the growth and nucleation of perovskite materials within the confined space and provide larger contact interface enabling faster charge transfer kinetics.415 Various mesoporous TiO2 structures, either in forms of nanoparticles, nanowires, nanosheets or other forms of nanostructure, have been found assisting the PSC devices to get high PCE and long stability. Recently, Han et al. have demonstrated a new 1D core–shell structure ETL for mesoscopic PSCs, which consists of single-crystalline SnO2 nanowires as cores and epitaxial rutile TiO2 nanolayers as shells.416 The optimized devices show more than 95% internal quantum yield at 750 nm, and a PCE of 14.2%, which may be attributed to dramatically enhanced electron transport in the epitaxial TiO2 layers. Later, vertically aligned ZnO@TiO2 core–shell nanorod arrays have been developed on a FTO substrate. The resultant PCE reaches to about 15.3% with minimal hysteresis, which is much better than that of ZnO nanorod-based PSCs (11.56%).417 Here, the TiO2 shells can significantly increase the surface area and provide a better contact between the core–shell ETL and perovskite compared to an only ZnO nanorod-based device. In addition, the core–shell structures facilitate the charge separation, thus reducing the recombination of electron–hole pairs. Moreover, various branched TiO2 nanowire-based core–shell structures have been designed and fabricated as the ETL in PSC devices, showing improved photovoltaic performances and largely suppressed J–V hysteresis.418–420 Such 3D branched TiO2 nanowire films are able to provide a higher surface area and porosity compared to conventional TiO2 nanoparticles, which afford efficient perovskite infiltration and growth, superior light scattering for enhanced light collection by the perovskite, improved electron transport, and suppressed charge recombination for efficient charge collection.

3.6. Photothermal conversion
In addition to being an abundant and sustainable energy source in the above-mentioned processes, the photothermal effect provides an alternative approach for efficient conversion of solar energy into heat, which is widely used in industrial processes such as solar power generation, chemical separation/purification, as well as seawater desalination.421–423

3.6.1. Photothermal desalination. 
Recently, Huang and co-workers have prepared core–shell structured black TiO2 with a unique nanocage shape for solar-driven steam generation.424 A self-floating nanocages film delivers a superior light-to-heat conversion rate (∼1.9 times higher than that of water itself). Afterwards, Ye et al. spin-coated black TiO2 nanoparticles directly onto the surface of a stainless-steel mesh, followed by surface superhydrophobization using fluoroalkylation so that it itself can float on water (Fig. 23).425 The resultant mesh composites can efficiently generate water vapor with solar thermal conversion efficiency as high as 50.3% at 1000 W m−2 (1 sun), which is much higher than that of the bare mesh and the water itself. The photothermal effect of the black TiO2 is expected to depend on a convolution of a number of complex photophysical phenomena. The popular defect structures (Ti3+) can enhance the light absorption, leading to the above band gap non-radiative relaxation and phonon relaxation of below band gap states. The mesoporous structures resulted from the nanoparticle aggregation and the close contact interfaces facilitate the heat transfer and water vapor permeation.
 Fig. 23  SEM images of the bare stainless steel (SS) mesh (a and b) and SS mesh coated with black TiO2 (c and d). Schematic setup for the solar water evaporation measurement (e). The mass of the evaporated water as a function of their radiation time in the absence of the SS mesh and in the presence of the SS mesh coated with black TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 425, Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
He and co-workers used plasmonic core–shell Au@TiO2 or Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles as the effective light absorbers for solar water evaporation.426–428 Compared to the films based on solely Au or TiO2 nanoparticles, and their multilayer thin films, the core–shell nanoparticle film displays a much higher water evaporation capability.427 In addition to studies on films, an experimental study on photothermal performances including steam generation and solar energy capture in a thermal receiver containing the Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles based fluids was also conducted.428 An evaporation efficiency of 53.6% can be achieved when the core–shell nanoparticle concentration is only 200 ppm owing to local heating induced by the SPR.
More interestingly, Gao et al. designed a solar thermal collector (SiO2/Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanocomposites), which shows low thermal mass, reduced heat losses and highly targeted interfacial reactions. It is believed that such excellent performances are beneficial for both photocatalysis and desalination reactions,429 in which the TiO2 nanoparticles can absorb high energy photons for photocatalytic hydrogen generation and the Ag nanoparticles absorb low energy photons for steam generation via photothermal effects. At the same time, the SiO2 nanoparticles and coated TiO2 layers act as a barrier to avoid heat dissipation and protect the Ag nanoparticles from oxidation. This nanostructure not only fully utilizes the solar spectrum, but also generates green energy and freshwater simultaneously. The spatial confinement of the heat generated by the Ag core boosts the hydrogen generation by the photocatalytic water splitting effect of the TiO2 nanoparticles. A prototype reactor was also designed, in which the nanocomposite was placed in an insulated quartz tube (Fig. 24). Sunlight is absorbed by the SiO2/Ag@TiO2 nanocomposites after being reflected by the parabolic trough concentrator. Two outlets are involved in the tube, one is used for hydrogen release and the other one for condensing the steam. In outdoor experiments, the hydrogen generation rate is about 13.3 mmol g−1 h−1, while the freshwater production rate is approximately 2.2 L m−2 per day. The performance of the reactor suggests that this core–shell structured solar-driven steam generation system offers synergistic capabilities of distillate production and clean fuel generation.
 Fig. 24  Schematic of the prototype reactor with measurement of the time dependent graphs: (a) solar intensity and temperature, (b) hydrogen generation, (c) volume of the condensate (top) and chlorine concentration (bottom) using SiO2/Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles as a solar energy collector for photocatalysis and photothermal desalination reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 429, Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.6.2. Photothermal hydrogen production. 
Recently, Nikitenko et al. have reported a simple and easily scalable synthesis of Ti@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles, which exhibit strong photothermal catalytic activities toward HER in the absence of any noble metals.430 The stable Ti@TiO2 nanoparticles with quasi-spherical Ti cores (20–80 nm) and 5–15 nm defect-free anatase/rutile shells were prepared by the ultrasound and hydrothermal treatment of air-passivated titanium metal nanoparticles in water. In contrast to pristine TiO2, the Ti@TiO2 nanoparticles extend the photo-response from the UV to NIR light region due to the light absorption by a non-plasmonic Ti core, which exhibit the highest H2 production under the joint effect of Vis/NIR light and heat. However, a simple heating of the reaction mixture to 60 °C under a dark condition or using air-passivated Ti as the catalyst is insufficient to produce hydrogen. On the other hand, a decrease in the system temperature from 60 to 35 °C causes a significant drop in the H2 evolution even under Vis/NIR irradiation. These results suggest that the driving force for H2 production consists of the Ti core inter-band transition excitation followed by the formation of energetic electron–hole pairs through non-radiative Landau damping. Then, electrons and holes are accumulated in the Ti cores and TiO2 shells, respectively. Scavenging of holes by methanol molecules produces the intermediates that are transformed into HCOOH and into H+ ions, which then migrate to TiO2/TiO2 junctions and are reduced to H2 by electrons transferred from the Ti core. This intermediate migration process would be effectively activated by the photothermal energy.


3.6.3. Photothermal therapy. 
In general, the heat caused by the photothermal nanoparticles is concentrated in an ultra-small space, which creates a localized high-temperature microenvironment around the nanoparticles. That would be useful for various sensitive systems, such as light-triggered local hyperthermia, which is called photothermal therapy (PTT).74 For example, core–shell structured black TiO2 with dramatically near-infrared absorption was demonstrated as a photothermal agent for cancer therapy to circumvent the obstacle of ultraviolet light excitation.431 Under irradiation with an 808 nm NIR laser at 2 W cm−2 for 600 s, the temperature of black TiO2 aqueous solution is 66 °C with an increase of 44 °C, which is much higher than that of pure water. The photothermal conversion efficiency is calculated to be about 40.8%. When being directly applied to mice, the temperature of tumor sites increases very slowly and limits after 5 min irradiation of 2 W cm−2 NIR, and temperature is about 36.5 °C which is accepted and tolerated by tissue. However, the temperature increases quickly and reaches about 52.6 °C under the same NIR irradiation using PEG-coated black TiO2 nanoparticles. Therefore, the tumor can be effectively ablated by the photothermal effect of PEG-coated black TiO2. Later, black TiO2@mesoporous SiO2 nanocomposites have been designed for 808 nm NIR triggered thermal imaging and PTT integrated with chemotherapy for killing breast cancer,432 in which the black TiO2 core can not only act as the photothermal therapy agent, but also accelerate the doxorubicin-release in the pores of mesoporous SiO2 shells, thus showing a superior synergistic therapy effect than PTT or chemotherapy alone.433

4. Conclusions and perspectives
Undoubtedly, the development of core–shell structured TiO2 materials has been regarded as a new research area and will explosively increase in future. Compared with single TiO2 counterparts, the unique core–shell structures can provide new and improved physical and chemical properties, which produce breakthrough advances in a large number of applications. In this review, we comprehensively summarized recent progress in this research area. First, five general synthetic pathways for the core@TiO2 shell structured nanomaterials are reviewed, including sol–gel process strategies, hydro/solvothermal methods, layer-by-layer assembly strategies, atomic layer deposition method and thermal induced reduction strategies, basics about their corresponding principles and the key factors for controllable synthesis are highlighted. Then, the applications of these core@TiO2 shell structures for solar energy conversion have been overviewed in detail based on the structure–performance relationship, including: photocatalysis, photocatalytic water splitting, PEC water splitting, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, solar cells and photothermal conversion.
Future directions in this area have been schematically summarized in Fig. 25. Regarding the synthesis of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials, the central task is to realize the uniform coating of TiO2 on desired cores. The rational choice of suitable precursors, capping agents, and reaction system can greatly facilitate the coating process. Despite remarkable efforts having been achieved in wet-chemistry to control the hydrolysis and condensation of TiO2 for uniform coating, a simple, robust, and general synthetic method is much in demand toward various cores with different composition, geometry and surface properties. In addition, the real-time and real-space growth mechanisms of TiO2 shells during the solution coating processes are still lacking. A few guidelines have been reported in this review, but systematic studies of how the sol–gel chemistry and interfacial chemistry work are much needed for rational design, especially focusing on the basis of chemical science (thermodynamics, kinetics and diffusion principles). Compared to solution-based methods, ALD is an easy and mature process to control the TiO2 coating at the atomic level owing to its self-limiting mechanism, but it is not suitable for producing thick TiO2 shells (time-consuming) and complete coating of particular materials. New ALD processes and reactors should be paid more attention in the coming years. Since there is no single method to work for every situation, exploration of synergistic features and interconnection among different methods will continue to attract much more attention. Moreover, the synthetic method is still facing a challenge in establishing controllable fabrication of TiO2 shells with desired morphology, thickness, phase, crystallinity, specific crystal facet, surface chemistry and more, which are expected to provide the most opportunities to advance this field. It is very important and highly urgent to develop fast and simple methods for large scale synthesis of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials for practical applications.
 Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of future directions on the synthesis and applications of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials. 
Creating ordered mesopores in the TiO2 shells is highly of special interest to further improve their performances in catalysis and energy conversion reactions, which is an important issue in this research area. Although mesoporous TiO2 shells have been obtained through cooperative assembly methods, the resultant pore structures stemming from nanoparticle aggregation are generally disordered because the great challenge remains in controlling the assembly of ordered micelles on nanosized and curved surfaces. A promising breakthrough is based on a single micelle assembly strategy, in which ordered mesoporous TiO2 shells with different structures, thicknesses and pore sizes can be constructed by super-assembly, using single micelle units as building blocks like superlattice structures do. In addition, more work is required to manipulate the interfacial growth of TiO2 shells for novel hierarchical nanostructures, for instance, Janus core–shell structured TiO2 materials or controllable satellite-like shell structures, which are extremely fascinating for synthetic chemistry and applications.
From the application point of view, it can be seen that core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials have been widely used in solar energy utilization, converting solar energy into active chemicals, H2, hydrocarbon fuels, heat and electricity. Although substantial progress has been obtained by combining TiO2 shells with functional cores or surface/interface engineering, there is still big room for improvement. To realize the final goal of industrializing solar hydrogen production, photocatalysts with an absorption edge range up to 600–700 nm together with an AQY of 40–60% are necessary to get a STH conversion efficiency of about 10%. Rational design of well-defined core–shell structures with a light-absorbing core, TiO2 shells and co-catalysts for HER and OER provides potential for achieving this target. Alternatively, surface plasmon resonance should be well developed to promote the solar energy conversion, which is a promising branch of research in core–shell structured TiO2. Apart from photodegradation and photosplitting, the utilization of core–shell structured TiO2 with magnetic, improved optical, and new electronic properties for the light-induced selective chemical transformations to produce fine chemicals is a new ground for future photo-derived catalysis. In perovskite solar cells, a high-quality core–shell structured TiO2 ETL plays a key role and novel nanostructures for enhanced electron extraction and transfer are much desired.
Most importantly, the comprehensive and in-depth insights into the structure–property–performance relationships of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials are much needed in the near future, which hold the keys to developing advanced TiO2 nanomaterials. Strictly related to this point, better understanding and systematic studies of the interface chemistry between cores and TiO2 shells are required, for example to maximize forward charge transfer and utilization, while suppressing backward or side reactions. It is critical for fabricating highly efficient heterojunctions with more complex structures such as tandem junctions with perfect band alignment, full spectrum absorption, or multiple function coupling. It should be well considered and engineered toward system materials in the future. Moreover, controlling the molecular and nanoscale structures of TiO2 shells has been well demonstrated to be an effective way to improve the application performance. For example, doping the TiO2 shell with metal or nonmetal dopants to modify its band gap and band position and developing a porous single-crystal TiO2 shell for charge transfer are dreams of researchers. More efforts should be devoted to this area. Significantly, it is highly expected that core–shell structured TiO2 will see some breakthroughs in other applications such as gas sensing, catalysis, energy storage and biomedicine.
Overall, the development of core–shell structured TiO2 provides new opportunities for constructing advanced TiO2 materials with improved performances in a wide range of applications. We believe that, in the future, significant breakthroughs can be expected in this research area from both synthetic, fundamental, and practical viewpoints.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the State Key Basic Research Program of the PRC (2013CB934104, 2017YFA0207300 and 2016YFA0204000, 2018YFA0209401), and NSFC of China (Grant No. 21733003, U1463206 and 21603036), Key Basic Research Program of Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (17JC1400100). This work was sponsored by Shanghai Rising-Star Program. The authors extend their appreciation to the International Scientific Partnership Program ISPP at King Saud University for funding this research work through ISPP# 0018.
Notes and references
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Y. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9890–9918 CrossRef PubMed .
F. De Angelis, C. Di Valentin, S. Fantacci, A. Vittadini and A. Selloni, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9708–9753 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dahl, Y. Liu and Y. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9853–9889 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima, X. T. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef .
M. Anpo and M. Takeuchi, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 505–516 CrossRef .
H. H. Chen, C. E. Nanayakkara and V. H. Grassian, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5919–5948 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kubacka, M. Fernandez-Garcia and G. Colon, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1555–1614 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Henderson and I. Lyubinetsky, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4428–4455 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Lang, X. D. Chen and J. C. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC .
T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4802–4819 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9217–9233 RSC .
M. A. Henderson, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 185–297 CrossRef .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243–2245 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357–2387 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. C. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Gratzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215–218 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. S. Wang, H. Kawauchi, T. Kashima and H. Arakawa, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1381–1389 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, I. Mora-Seró, F. De Angelis, J. Bisquert and P. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10095–10130 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Deng, M. G. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 818–837 RSC .
G.-N. Zhu, Y.-G. Wang and Y.-Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6652–6667 RSC .
Z. Yang, D. Choi, S. Kerisit, K. M. Rosso, D. Wang, J. Zhang, G. Graff and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 588–598 CrossRef .
D. Chen and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1356–1374 CrossRef .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Liu, B. McAllister, H. Q. Ye and P. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4017–4022 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Maeda, Y. Iizuka and M. Kohyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 135, 906–909 CrossRef PubMed .
D. I. Enache, J. K. Edwards, P. Landon, B. Solsona-Espriu, A. F. Carley, A. A. Herzing, M. Watanabe, C. J. Kiely, D. W. Knight and G. J. Hutchings, Science, 2006, 311, 362–365 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Froschl, U. Hormann, P. Kubiak, G. Kucerova, M. Pfanzelt, C. K. Weiss, R. J. Behm, N. Husing, U. Kaiser, K. Landfester and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5313–5360 RSC .
J. Bai and B. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10131–10176 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu, M. Cao, A. Fujishima and L. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10044–10094 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fei Yin, L. Wu, H. Gui Yang and Y. Hua Su, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4844–4858 RSC .
J. J. Schwartz, S. Stavrakis and S. R. Quake, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 127–132 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 562–572 CrossRef PubMed .
N. G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, X. W. Wang, L. N. Cheng, J. Pan, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12868–12869 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, L. M. Liu, X. F. Lang, H. Y. Wang, X. W. Lou and E. S. Aydil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2592–2597 RSC .
B. Liu, H. M. Chen, C. Liu, S. C. Andrews, C. Hahn and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9995–9998 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Parayil, H. S. Kibombo, C. M. Wu, R. Peng, J. Baltrusaitis and R. T. Koodali, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8257–8267 CrossRef .
D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 805–811 CrossRef .
H. J. Yu, Y. F. Zhao, C. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Peng, Y. H. Cao, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. R. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3344–3351 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Liu and F. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1861–1885 RSC .
Z. F. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 458–465 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Jiang, Q. Cuan, C. Z. Wen, J. Xing, D. Wu, X. Q. Gong, C. Z. Li and H. G. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3764–3768 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, W. M. Cai, M. C. Long, B. X. Zhou, Y. H. Wu, D. Y. Wu and Y. J. Feng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6425–6432 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. W. Crossland, N. Noel, V. Sivaram, T. Leijtens, J. A. Alexander-Webber and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 495, 215–219 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, Z. X. Wu, J. X. Wang, A. A. Elzatahry and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 287–298 CrossRef .
S. H. Joo, J. Y. Park, C.-K. Tsung, Y. Yamada, P. Yang and G. A. Somorjai, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 126–131 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ghosh Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 2373–2433 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wei, Q. Wang, J. Zhu, L. Sun, H. Lin and Z. Guo, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4474–4502 RSC .
W. Li and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 142–149 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Guerrero-Martínez, J. Pérez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1182–1195 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, T. Asefa, H. Guo, A. V. Biradar, D.-L. Peng, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7540–7590 RSC .
F. Zhang, R. Che, X. Li, C. Yao, J. Yang, D. Shen, P. Hu, W. Li and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2852–2858 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Qian, Y. Lv, W. Li, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13025–13031 RSC .
Q. Zhang, I. Lee, J. B. Joo, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1816–1824 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Teng, X. Zhu, G. Zheng, F. Zhang, Y. Deng, L. Xiu, W. Li, Q. Yang and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17677–17684 RSC .
D. Shen, J. Yang, X. Li, L. Zhou, R. Zhang, W. Li, L. Chen, R. Wang, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 923–932 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wen, J. M. Wu, Y. Z. Jiang, L. L. Lai and J. Song, Chem, 2017, 2, 404–416 Search PubMed .
Z. J. Li, E. Hofman, J. Li, A. H. Davis, C. H. Tung, L. Z. Wu and W. W. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704288 CrossRef .
L. Sun, Z. Li, Z. Li, Y. Hu, C. Chen, C. Yang, B. Du, Y. Sun, F. Besenbacher and M. Yu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16183–16192 RSC .
M. M. Gao, L. L. Zhu, W. L. Ong, J. Wang and G. W. Ho, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 4703–4726 RSC .
S. Q. Liu, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 540–556 CrossRef .
P. Rai, S. M. Majhi, Y.-T. Yu and J.-H. Lee, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 76229–76248 RSC .
G. Li and Z. Tang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3995–4011 RSC .
L. Sang, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9283–9318 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, J. Pan, Y. Q. Yang, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9559–9612 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cargnello, T. R. Gordon and C. B. Murray, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9319–9345 CrossRef PubMed .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011–2075 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Li, J. Shi and Y. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9346–9384 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang and T. Sasaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9455–9486 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Chen, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9912–9924 RSC .
R. Zhang, A. A. Elzatahry, S. S. Al-Deyab and D. Zhao, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 344–366 CrossRef .
L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 33–72 CrossRef .
J. Livage, M. Henry and C. Sanchez, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1988, 18, 259–341 CrossRef .
R. Ciriminna, A. Fidalgo, V. Pandarus, F. Béland, L. M. Ilharco and M. Pagliaro, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6592–6620 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Pastoriza-Santos, D. S. Koktysh, A. A. Mamedov, M. Giersig, N. A. Kotov and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 2731–2735 CrossRef .
R. T. Tom, A. S. Nair, N. Singh, M. Aslam, C. L. Nagendra, R. Philip, K. Vijayamohanan and T. Pradeep, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 3439–3445 CrossRef .
H. Sakai, T. Kanda, H. Shibata, T. Ohkubo and M. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4944–4945 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-L. Liu, F.-C. Lin, Y.-C. Yang, C.-H. Huang, S. Gwo, M. H. Huang and J.-S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7953–7962 RSC .
M. Holgado, A. Cintas, M. Ibisate, C. J. Serna, C. López and F. Meseguer, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 229, 6–11 CrossRef PubMed .
K. D. Kim, H. J. Bae and H. T. Kim, Colloids Surf., A, 2003, 221, 163–173 CrossRef .
M. Ye, Q. Zhang, Y. Hu, J. Ge, Z. Lu, L. He, Z. Chen and Y. Yin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 6243–6250 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ye, S. Zorba, L. He, Y. Hu, R. T. Maxwell, C. Farah, Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7965–7969 RSC .
A. F. Demirörs, A. van Blaaderen and A. Imhof, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9297–9303 CrossRef PubMed .
A. F. Demirörs, A. van Blaaderen and A. Imhof, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 979–984 CrossRef .
S. Eiden-Assmann, J. Widoniak and G. Maret, Chem. Mater., 2003, 16, 6–11 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Wang, L. X. Chen and P. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5935–5943 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Li, S. D. Ji, Y. F. Gao, H. J. Luo and P. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6603–6614 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Li, S. D. Ji, Y. F. Gao, H. J. Luo and M. Kanehira, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1370 CrossRef PubMed .
A. F. Demirörs, A. Jannasch, P. D. J. van Oostrum, E. Schäffer, A. Imhof and A. van Blaaderen, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1626–1634 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. N. Tang, W. H. Di, X. S. Zhai, R. Y. Yang and W. P. Qin, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 405–412 CrossRef .
A. Imhof, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 3579–3585 CrossRef .
E. A. Barringer and H. K. Bowen, Langmuir, 1985, 1, 420–428 CrossRef .
X. Song and L. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8180–8187 CrossRef .
S. Liu, L. Han, Y. Duan, S. Asahina, O. Terasaki, Y. Cao, B. Liu, L. Ma, J. Zhang and S. Che, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1215 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Su, T. Zhang, L. Li, J. Xing, M. He, Y. Zhong and Z. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 8901–8906 RSC .
S.-W. Lee, J. Drwiega, C.-Y. Wu, D. Mazyck and W. M. Sigmund, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1160–1164 CrossRef .
K. E. deKrafft, C. Wang and W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2014–2018 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Müllner, T. Lunkenbein, M. Schieder, A. H. Gröschel, N. Miyajima, M. Förtsch, J. Breu, F. Caruso and A. H. E. Müller, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 6981–6988 CrossRef .
H. Strohm and P. Löbmann, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6772–6780 CrossRef .
M. Dahl, F. Castaneda, J. B. Joo, V. Reyes, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 10076–10084 RSC .
X. Yang, H. Fu, A. Yu and X. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 387, 74–83 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu and A. Sen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17505–17512 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kodiyath, M. Manikandan, L. Liu, G. V. Ramesh, S. Koyasu, M. Miyauchi, Y. Sakuma, T. Tanabe, T. Gunji, T. Duy Dao, S. Ueda, T. Nagao, J. Ye and H. Abe, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15553–15556 RSC .
S. Rasalingam, H. S. Kibombo, C.-M. Wu, R. Peng, J. Baltrusaitis and R. T. Koodali, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 148, 394–405 CrossRef .
S. Rasalingam, H. S. Kibombo, C.-M. Wu, S. Budhi, R. Peng, J. Baltrusaitis and R. T. Koodali, Catal. Commun., 2013, 31, 66–70 CrossRef .
H. S. Kibombo, S. Rasalingam and R. T. Koodali, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142, 119–128 CrossRef .
F. J. Heiligtag, N. Kränzlin, M. J. Süess and M. Niederberger, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2013, 70, 300–306 CrossRef .
H. S. Kibombo, D. Zhao, A. Gonshorowski, S. Budhi, M. D. Koppang and R. T. Koodali, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6126–6135 CrossRef .
R. Peng, S. Banerjee, G. Sereda and R. T. Koodali, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 17009–17018 CrossRef .
C.-M. Wu, R. Peng, N. M. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh and R. T. Koodali, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 127–136 CrossRef .
Z.-Y. Shen, L.-Y. Li, Y. Li and C.-C. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 354, 196–201 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, D. Qin, X. Yang and G. Liu, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 289–295 RSC .
W. Li, J. Yang, Z. Wu, J. Wang, B. Li, S. Feng, Y. Deng, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11864–11867 CrossRef PubMed .
S. X. Yu, L. W. Yang, Y. Tian, P. Yang, F. Jiang, S. W. Hu, X. L. Wei and J. X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12750–12758 RSC .
B. Ding, G. Xu, L. Shen, P. Nie, P. Hu, H. Dou and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14280–14285 RSC .
B. Yu, X. Jiang and J. Yin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5489–5498 RSC .
W. Luo, Y. X. Wang, L. J. Wang, W. Jiang, S. L. Chou, S. X. Dou, H. K. Liu and J. P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10524–10532 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Du, W. Shi, L. Z. Wang and J. L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 484–492 CrossRef .
J. P. Yang, Y. X. Wang, W. Li, L. J. Wang, Y. C. Fan, W. Jiang, W. Luo, Y. Wang, B. Kong, C. Selomulya, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and D. Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700523 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, F. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, J. Yang, L. Zhang, A. A. Elzatahry, D. Al-Dahyan, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2186–2193 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, M. Liu, S. Feng, X. Li, J. Wang, D. Shen, Y. Li, Z. Sun, A. A. Elzatahry, H. Lu and D. Zhao, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 439–445 RSC .
G. Zhang, H. B. Wu, T. Song, U. Paik and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12590–12593 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, F. X. Wang, Y. J. Zhao, Y. H. Li, Q. Yue, Y. P. Liu, Y. Liu, A. A. Elzatahry, A. Al-Enizi, Y. P. Wu, Y. H. Deng and D. Y. Zhao, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 165–173 CrossRef .
B. Y. Guan, L. Yu, J. Li and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501554 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702724 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, J. T. Zhang, B. Y. Guan, D. Wang, L. M. Liu and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13065 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, A. A. Elzatahry, W. Luo, K. Lan, P. Zhang, J. Fan, Y. Wei, C. Wang, Y. Deng, G. Zheng, F. Zhang, Y. Tang, L. Mai and D. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 80–90 CrossRef .
B. L. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O'Connor, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3893–3946 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li and H. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4342–4345 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-S. Kim, P. Rai and Y.-T. Yu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 186, 633–639 CrossRef .
M.-K. Song, P. Rai, K.-J. Ko, S.-H. Jeon, B.-S. Chon, C.-H. Lee and Y.-T. Yu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 3529–3535 RSC .
N. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9136–9145 CrossRef .
X. W. Lou and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1853–1858 CrossRef .
Z. Wang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4124–4129 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xia and L. Yin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18627–18634 RSC .
G. X. Wang, Y. M. Sui, M. N. Zhang, M. Xu, Q. X. Zeng, C. Liu, X. M. Liu, F. Du and B. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18577–18584 RSC .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. Yang, G. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, C. H. Sun, Y. G. Jin, S. C. Smith, J. Zou, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4078–4083 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Tan, C. M. Li, Y. L. Cheah, D. Y. Luan, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6124–6130 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4120–4125 CrossRef .
J. S. Chen, C. Chen, J. Liu, R. Xu, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2631–2633 RSC .
J. S. Chen, D. Luan, C. M. Li, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8252–8254 RSC .
P. Si, S. Ding, J. Yuan, X. W. Lou and D.-H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7617–7626 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Chen, H. Liu, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5687–5692 RSC .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5780–5782 RSC .
J. Du, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, B. Han, T. Jiang and Y. Huang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 1307–1312 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Cheng, Y. Le and J. Yu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 177, 971–977 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ramasamy, D.-M. Seo, S.-H. Kim and J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11651–11657 RSC .
S. Liu, Z. Wang, C. Yu, H. B. Wu, G. Wang, Q. Dong, J. Qiu, A. Eychmüller and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3462–3467 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, H. Jia, L. Han, J. Wang, P. Gao, D. Xu, J. Yang and S. Che, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3201–3204 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu, L. Yu, X. Gao, Z. Lin and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1480–1483 RSC .
H. Lin and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1580–1589 CrossRef .
X. Li, G. Wu, X. Liu, W. Li and M. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 1–8 CrossRef .
W. Li, Y. Deng, Z. Wu, X. Qian, J. Yang, Y. Wang, D. Gu, F. Zhang, B. Tu and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15830–15833 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Decher and J.-D. Hong, Makromol. Chem., Macromol. Symp., 1991, 46, 321–327 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, A. S. Angelatos and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 848–858 CrossRef .
K. Masuda, S. Morita, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 2493–2498 CrossRef .
J. D. Berrigan, T. S. Kang, Y. Cai, J. R. Deneault, M. F. Durstock and K. H. Sandhage, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1693–1700 CrossRef .
F. Caruso, X. Y. Shi, R. A. Caruso and A. Susha, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 740–744 CrossRef .
R. A. Caruso, A. Susha and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 400–409 CrossRef .
K. S. Mayya, D. I. Gittins and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3833–3836 CrossRef .
A. Yu, G. Q. Lu, J. Drennan and I. R. Gentle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2600–2605 CrossRef .
F.-X. Xiao, J. Miao and B. Liu, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 259–263 RSC .
J. A. Lee, K. C. Krogman, M. Ma, R. M. Hill, P. T. Hammond and G. C. Rutledge, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1252–1256 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, X. Zhang, S. Nishimoto, M. Jin, D. A. Tryk, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10916–10919 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Wang and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4811–4823 CrossRef .
H. Sun, J. He, J. Wang, S.-Y. Zhang, C. Liu, T. Sritharan, S. Mhaisalkar, M.-Y. Han, D. Wang and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9099–9110 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, H. Yen, F. Kleitz and T.-O. Do, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6618–6623 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-C. Nguyen, N.-N. Vu and T.-O. Do, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4413–4419 RSC .
C. Marichy, M. Bechelany and N. Pinna, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1017–1032 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Knez, K. Nielsch and L. Niinistö, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3425–3438 CrossRef .
C. Detavernier, J. Dendooven, S. Pulinthanathu Sree, K. F. Ludwig and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5242–5253 RSC .
K. Lee, M. D. Losego, D. H. Kim and G. N. Parsons, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 419–423 RSC .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Dühnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Chandiran, A. Yella, M. Stefik, L.-P. Heiniger, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3487–3493 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Alibabaei, B. H. Farnum, B. Kalanyan, M. K. Brennaman, M. D. Losego, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3255–3261 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. Hamann, A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10303–10307 CrossRef .
M. Kemell, V. Pore, J. Tupala, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1816–1820 CrossRef .
A. Nie, J. Liu, Q. Li, Y. Cheng, C. Dong, W. Zhou, P. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhu, Y. Zeng and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10665–10671 RSC .
C.-Y. Hsu, D.-H. Lien, S.-Y. Lu, C.-Y. Chen, C.-F. Kang, Y.-L. Chueh, W.-K. Hsu and J.-H. He, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6687–6692 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Deng, S. W. Verbruggen, Z. He, D. J. Cott, P. M. Vereecken, J. A. Martens, S. Bals, S. Lenaerts and C. Detavernier, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11648–11653 RSC .
H. Shin, D. K. Jeong, J. Lee, M. M. Sung and J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1197–1200 CrossRef .
S.-W. Kim, T. H. Han, J. Kim, H. Gwon, H.-S. Moon, S.-W. Kang, S. O. Kim and K. Kang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1085–1090 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. King, E. Graugnard, O. M. Roche, D. N. Sharp, J. Scrimgeour, R. G. Denning, A. J. Turberfield and C. J. Summers, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1561–1565 CrossRef .
J. T. Korhonen, P. Hiekkataipale, J. Malm, M. Karppinen, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1967–1974 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ahn, J. Park, D. Kim and S. Jeon, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10384–10389 RSC .
Y. Deng, H. Tüysüz, J. Henzie and P. Yang, Small, 2011, 7, 2037–2040 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. King, E. Graugnard and C. J. Summers, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1010–1013 CrossRef .
I. Alessandri, M. Zucca, M. Ferroni, E. Bontempi and L. E. Depero, Small, 2009, 5, 336–340 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, L. T. Su and A. I. Y. Tok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 209–215 RSC .
E. Graugnard, J. S. King, D. P. Gaillot and C. J. Summers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1187–1196 CrossRef .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451–18456 CrossRef .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407–8409 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2596–2600 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, B. D. Sherman, B. H. Farnum, M. V. Sheridan, S. L. Marquard, M. S. Eberhart, C. J. Dares and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 9809–9813 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Guerra-Nuñez, I. Utke, J. Michler, M. D. Rossell and R. Erni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3379–3387 CrossRef .
N. Janne-Petteri, M. Giovanni and K. Maarit, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2017, 32, 093005 CrossRef .
C. Guerra-Nunez, Y. Zhang, M. Li, V. Chawla, R. Erni, J. Michler, H. G. Park and I. Utke, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10622–10633 RSC .
Y. Zhang, C. Guerra-Nuñez, M. Li, J. Michler, H. G. Park, M. D. Rossell, R. Erni and I. Utke, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3488–3496 CrossRef .
T. R. B. Foong, Y. Shen, X. Hu and A. Sellinger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1390–1396 CrossRef .
Y. D. Shen, T. R. B. Foong and X. Hu, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 409, 87–90 CrossRef .
C. Chen, P. Li, G. Wang, Y. Yu, F. Duan, C. Chen, W. Song, Y. Qin and M. Knez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9196–9200 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Liu, C. Schneider, D. Freitag, M. Hartmann, U. Venkatesan, J. Müller, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3309–3313 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qiu, S. Li, E. Gray, H. Liu, Q.-F. Gu, C. Sun, C. Lai, H. Zhao and S. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8824–8830 CrossRef .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, J. Gan, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1690–1696 CrossRef PubMed .
F. M. Pesci, G. Wang, D. R. Klug, Y. Li and A. J. Cowan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25837–25844 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Ling, G. Wang and Y. Li, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 760–766 CrossRef .
S. Hoang, S. P. Berglund, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3659–3662 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zheng, B. Huang, J. Lu, Z. Wang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and M.-H. Whangbo, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5733–5735 RSC .
W. Zhou, W. Li, J.-Q. Wang, Y. Qu, Y. Yang, Y. Xie, K. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Fu and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9280–9283 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hu, W. Zhou, K. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, B. Jiang, G. Tian, D. Zhao and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7495–7502 RSC .
Z. Wang, C. Yang, T. Lin, H. Yin, P. Chen, D. Wan, F. Xu, F. Huang, J. Lin, X. Xie and M. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5444–5450 CrossRef .
R. A. Palmer, T. M. Doan, P. G. Lloyd, B. L. Jarvis and N. U. Ahmed, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2002, 22, 335–350 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, B. Hao, D. Wang, G. Chen, E. Markweg, A. Albrecht and P. Schaaf, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14507–14513 RSC .
B. Li, Z. Zhao, Q. Zhou, B. Meng, X. Meng and J. Qiu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 14763–14770 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Teng, M. Li, C. Gao, G. Zhang, P. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Chen and E. Xie, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 148, 339–343 CrossRef .
A. Lepcha, C. Maccato, A. Mettenbörger, T. Andreu, L. Mayrhofer, M. Walter, S. Olthof, T. P. Ruoko, A. Klein, M. Moseler, K. Meerholz, J. R. Morante, D. Barreca and S. Mathur, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18835–18842 CrossRef .
H. Tan, Z. Zhao, M. Niu, C. Mao, D. Cao, D. Cheng, P. Feng and Z. Sun, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10216–10223 RSC .
Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, G. Zhang, Z. Liu, D. Qu, X. Miao, P. Feng and Z. Sun, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 4061–4071 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, C. Yang, T. Lin, H. Yin, P. Chen, D. Wan, F. Xu, F. Huang, J. Lin, X. Xie and M. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3007–3014 RSC .
A. Sinhamahapatra, J.-P. Jeon and J.-S. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3539–3544 RSC .
C. Yang, Z. Wang, T. Lin, H. Yin, X. Lü, D. Wan, T. Xu, C. Zheng, J. Lin, F. Huang, X. Xie and M. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17831–17838 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Lin, C. Yang, Z. Wang, H. Yin, X. Lu, F. Huang, J. Lin, X. Xie and M. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 967–972 RSC .
R. Zhang, D. Shen, M. Xu, D. Feng, W. Li, G. Zheng, R. Che, A. A. Elzatahry and D. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301725 CrossRef .
F. Zuo, L. Wang, T. Wu, Z. Zhang, D. Borchardt and P. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11856–11857 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ.
Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 RSC .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Dai and M.-H. Whangbo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9813–9825 RSC .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, Y. Dai, Z. Lou, G. Wang, X. Zhang and X. Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2758–2774 RSC .
Y. Horiguchi, T. Kanda, K. Torigoe, H. Sakai and M. Abe, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 922–928 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, S. Liu, M. Low, S.-Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, A. Mlayah and M.-Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2310–2314 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fei and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 314–319 CrossRef PubMed .
H. R. Li, Y. R. He, Z. Y. Liu, B. C. Jiang and Y. M. Huang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 166, 52–60 CrossRef .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Kumar, S. Krishnamoorthy, L. K. Tan, S. Y. Chiam, S. Tripathy and H. Gao, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 300–308 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, S. Wang, J. Shen, B. Lin and C. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3359–3366 RSC .
Q. Zhang, D. Q. Lima, I. Lee, F. Zaera, M. Chi and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7088–7092 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lu, P. Zhang, A. Li, F. Su, T. Wang, Y. Liu and J. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5817–5819 RSC .
Z. Zheng, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and M.-H. Whangbo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9079–9087 RSC .
M. Ye, H. Zhou, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y. Shao, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 226, 209–216 CrossRef .
A. Tanaka, K. Fuku, T. Nishi, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16983–16989 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, F. Ren, S. Zhang, W. Wu, X. Xiao, Y. Liu and C. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13128–13138 RSC .
J. Su, Y. Zhang, S. Xu, S. Wang, H. Ding, S. Pan, G. Wang, G. Li and H. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5181–5192 RSC .
W. Qin, D. Zhang, D. Zhao, L. Wang and K. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2304–2306 RSC .
W. Wang, M. Y. Ding, C. H. Lu, Y. R. Ni and Z. Z. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 379–385 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, D. Zhao, K. Zheng, N. Liu and W. Qin, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 9761–9764 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang and Z. Hong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8930–8933 RSC .
S. Ullah, C. Hazra, E. P. Ferreira-Neto, T. C. Silva, U. P. Rodrigues-Filho and S. J. L. Ribeiro, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 3465–3475 RSC .
Z. L. Qiu, J. Shu and D. P. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 1021–1028 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Huang, L. Gu, C. Miao, Z. Lou, N. Zhu, H. Yuan and A. Shan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7874–7879 RSC .
Z. Li, C. Li, Y. Mei, L. Wang, G. Du and Y. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3030–3036 RSC .
Y. Tang, W. Di, X. Zhai, R. Yang and W. Qin, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 405–412 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, M. Quintanilla, F. Vetrone, A. O. Govorov, M. Chaker and D. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2950–2960 CrossRef .
J. Hu, Y. A. Tang, A. H. Elmenoufy, H. Xu, Z. Cheng and X. Yang, Small, 2015, 11, 5860–5887 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Lucky, N. Muhammad Idris, Z. Li, K. Huang, K. C. Soo and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 191–205 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zeng, Y. Pan, Y. Tian, X. Wang, W. Ren, S. Wang, G. Lu and A. Wu, Biomaterials, 2015, 57, 93–106 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, D. Yang, P. Yang, R. Lv, C. Li, C. Zhong, F. He, S. Gai and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7957–7968 CrossRef .
Z. Hou, Y. Zhang, K. Deng, Y. Chen, X. Li, X. Deng, Z. Cheng, H. Lian, C. Li and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2584–2599 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, W.-H. Chen, L.-H. Liu, W.-X. Qiu, W.-Y. Yu and X.-Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700626 CrossRef .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3928–3934 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5645–5647 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Sudeep, K. Takechi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2006, 111, 488–494 CrossRef .
J. Fang, L. Xu, Z. Zhang, Y. Yuan, S. Cao, Z. Wang, L. Yin, Y. Liao and C. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8088–8092 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-F. Wu, H.-Y. Song, J.-M. Yoon, Y.-T. Yu and Y.-F. Chen, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6438–6447 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-F. Wu, Y.-F. Chen, J.-M. Yoon and Y.-T. Yu, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 2208–2210 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 380–386 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Li, G. Liu, C. Zhen, F. Li, L. Zhang and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1717–1722 CrossRef .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2711–2718 CrossRef .
B. Gao, C. Peng, G. Z. Chen and G. Li Puma, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 85, 17–23 CrossRef .
K. Woan, G. Pyrgiotakis and W. Sigmund, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2233–2239 CrossRef .
L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1868–1882 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
M. Ding, D. C. Sorescu and A. Star, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9015–9022 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-H. Moon, W. Kim, A. D. Bokare, N.-E. Sung and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4023–4028 RSC .
H. Tian, G. Zhao, Y.-N. Zhang, Y. Wang and T. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 96, 199–205 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, B. Yu, J. Xu, H. Xu, L. Hao and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6138–6144 RSC .
D. Yang, H. Liu, Z. Zheng, Y. Yuan, J.-C. Zhao, E. R. Waclawik, X. Ke and H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17885–17893 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, A. Khare and E. S. Aydil, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4444–4450 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5754–5757 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7738–7744 RSC .
J. Chen, H. B. Yang, H. B. Tao, L. Zhang, J. Miao, H.-Y. Wang, J. Chen, H. Zhang and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 456–465 CrossRef .
J. Luo, J. Chen, B. Wu, T. W. Goh, W. Qiao, Z. Ku, H. B. Yang, L. Zhang, T. C. Sum and B. Liu, Chem, 2018, 4, 911–923 Search PubMed .
F. Cao, J. Xiong, F. Wu, Q. Liu, Z. Shi, Y. Yu, X. Wang and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12239–12245 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, C. Hahn, B. Liu and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5060–5069 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Feng, M. Li and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1766–1769 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lü, F. Huang, X. Mou, Y. Wang and F. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3719–3722 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xu, G. Yang, J. Liang, S. Ding, C. Tang, H. Yang, W. Yan, G. Yang and D. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 116–122 RSC .
S. Liu, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6378–6385 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Meng, C. Cui, H. L. Shen, D. Y. Liang, Y. Z. Xue, P. G. Li and W. H. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 527, 30–35 CrossRef .
O. A. Zelekew and D. H. Kuo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 393, 110–118 CrossRef .
H. H. El-Maghrabi, A. Barhoum, A. A. Nada, Y. M. Moustafa, S. M. Seliman, A. M. Youssef and M. Bechelany, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 351, 261–270 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Wang, W. J. Yang, X. J. Chen, J. Wang and Y. F. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 337–347 CrossRef .
N. Li, Y. M. Li, Y. J. Zhou, W. J. Li, S. D. Ji, H. L. Yao, X. Cao and P. Jin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 116–125 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, J. Yang, J. Wang, W. Li, S. Kaliaguine, X. Hou, Y. Deng and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6071–6074 RSC .
Y. Deng, Y. Cai, Z. Sun, J. Liu, C. Liu, J. Wei, W. Li, C. Liu, Y. Wang and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8466–8473 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Qiu, W. Li, B. Thokchom, B. Park, M. Cui, D. Zhao and J. Khim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6492–6500 RSC .
J. Gómez-Pastora, S. Dominguez, E. Bringas, M. J. Rivero, I. Ortiz and D. D. Dionysiou, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 310, 407–427 CrossRef .
S. Mortazavi-Derazkola, M. Salavati-Niasari, O. Amiri and A. Abbasi, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 17–23 CrossRef .
G. Liu, F. He, J. Zhang, L. Li, F. Li, L. Chen and Y. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150, 515–522 CrossRef .
H. S. Kim, D. Kim, B. S. Kwak, G. B. Han, M.-H. Um and M. Kang, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 243, 272–279 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, X. Yu, Y. Jia, Z. Jin, J. Liu and X. Huang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 5096–5104 CrossRef .
Y. Chi, Q. Yuan, Y. Li, L. Zhao, N. Li, X. Li and W. Yan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 262, 404–411 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Xin, M. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Gu, S. Wang, M. Liu and Q. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 288, 51–59 CrossRef .
L. De Matteis, R. Fernández-Pacheco, L. Custardoy, M. L. García-Martín, J. M. de la Fuente, C. Marquina and M. R. Ibarra, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5238–5247 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Yang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13341–13347 RSC .
R. Chalasani and S. Vasudevan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4093–4104 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. W. Huang, S. Q. Tian, D. W. Zeng, X. X. Wang, W. L. Song, Y. Y. Li, W. Xiao and C. S. Xie, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1477–1485 CrossRef .
M. Xu, P. M. Da, H. Y. Wu, D. Y. Zhao and G. F. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1503–1508 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12410–12412 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Janotti, J. B. Varley, P. Rinke, N. Umezawa, G. Kresse and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 085212 CrossRef .
D. C. Cronemeyer, Phys. Rev., 1959, 113, 1222–1226 CrossRef .
N. Liu, C. Schneider, D. Freitag, U. Venkatesan, V. R. R. Marthala, M. Hartmann, B. Winter, E. Spiecker, A. Osvet, E. M. Zolnhofer, K. Meyer, T. Nakajima, X. Zhou and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14201–14205 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Liu, V. Häublein, X. Zhou, U. Venkatesan, M. Hartmann, M. Mačković, T. Nakajima, E. Spiecker, A. Osvet, L. Frey and P. Schmuki, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6815–6820 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, V. Häublein, N. Liu, N. T. Nguyen, E. M. Zolnhofer, H. Tsuchiya, M. S. Killian, K. Meyer, L. Frey and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3763–3767 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Liu, J. T. S. Irvine and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5850–5856 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Krämer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, C. Han, Y.-J. Xu, J. J. Foley Iv, D. Zhang, J. Codrington, S. K. Gray and Y. Sun, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 473 CrossRef .
S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17050 CrossRef .
C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2955–2959 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Takata, C. Pan, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9627–9634 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Pan, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, C. Pan, T. Takata and K. Domen, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 521, 26–33 CrossRef .
C. Pan, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1854–1862 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Pan, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, S. Chen, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, A. Kudo and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7188–7196 CrossRef .
M. V. Sheridan, D. J. Hill, B. D. Sherman, D. G. Wang, S. L. Marquard, K. R. Wee, J. F. Cahoon and T. J. Meyer, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2440–2446 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-S. Yang, W.-P. Liao and J.-J. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7425–7431 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, T. Butburee, J.-H. Yun, H. Chen, R. M. Richards and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20127–20133 RSC .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 410–415 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, X. Liu, S. Sheehan and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2772–2773 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, Y. Hara, C. Sun, M. A. Anderson and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3413–3419 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Mi, L. Wen, R. Xu, Z. Wang, D. Cao, Y. Fang and Y. Lei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501496 CrossRef .
S. Hu, N. S. Lewis, J. W. Ager, J. Yang, J. R. McKone and N. C. Strandwitz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24201–24228 CrossRef .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Schreier, P. Gao, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo, T. Moehl, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. D. Tilley and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 855–861 RSC .
M. Schreier, J. Luo, P. Gao, T. Moehl, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1938–1946 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, Z. Zhang, X. Yin, A. Kvit, Q. Liao, Z. Kang, X. Yan, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17045 CrossRef .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, M. T. McDowell, S. Hu, H. B. Gray, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3334–3337 RSC .
M. F. Lichterman, K. Sun, S. Hu, X. Zhou, M. T. McDowell, M. R. Shaner, M. H. Richter, E. J. Crumlin, A. I. Carim, F. H. Saadi, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 11–23 CrossRef .
M. R. Shaner, S. Hu, K. Sun and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 203–207 RSC .
J. Gu, Y. Yan, J. L. Young, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 456 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Matheu, I. A. Moreno-Hernandez, X. Sala, H. B. Gray, B. S. Brunschwig, A. Llobet and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11345–11348 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Meyer, M. V. Sheridan and B. D. Sherman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6148–6169 RSC .
D. Wang, S. L. Marquard, L. Troian-Gautier, M. V. Sheridan, B. D. Sherman, Y. Wang, M. S. Eberhart, B. H. Farnum, C. J. Dares and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 719–726 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Brady, R. N. Sampaio, D. Wang, T. J. Meyer and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15612–15615 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, M. V. Sheridan, B. Shan, B. H. Farnum, S. L. Marquard, B. D. Sherman, M. S. Eberhart, A. Nayak, C. J. Dares, A. K. Das, R. M. Bullock and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14518–14525 CrossRef PubMed .
B. D. Sherman, M. V. Sheridan, K. R. Wee, S. L. Marquard, D. Wang, L. Alibabaei, D. L. Ashford and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16745–16753 CrossRef PubMed .
B. D. Sherman, Y. Xie, M. V. Sheridan, D. Wang, D. W. Shaffer, T. J. Meyer and J. J. Concepcion, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 2, 124–128 CrossRef .
W. Song, A. K. Vannucci, B. H. Farnum, A. M. Lapides, M. K. Brennaman, B. Kalanyan, L. Alibabaei, J. J. Concepcion, M. D. Losego, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9773–9779 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Brennaman, M. K. Gish, L. Alibabaei, M. R. Norris, R. A. Binstead, A. Nayak, A. M. Lapides, W. Song, R. J. Brown, J. J. Concepcion, J. L. Templeton, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13017–13026 CrossRef .
K. Hu, R. N. Sampaio, S. L. Marquard, M. K. Brennaman, Y. Tamaki, T. J. Meyer and G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 486–494 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, B. H. Farnum, M. V. Sheridan, S. L. Marquard, B. D. Sherman and T. J. Meyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33533–33538 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Gish, A. M. Lapides, M. K. Brennaman, J. L. Templeton, T. J. Meyer and J. M. Papanikolas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5297–5301 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. McCool, J. R. Swierk, C. T. Nemes, C. A. Schmuttenmaer and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2930–2934 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Knauf, B. Kalanyan, G. N. Parsons and J. L. Dempsey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28353–28360 CrossRef .
E. M. James, T. J. Barr and G. J. Meyer, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 859–867 CrossRef .
A. K. Vannucci, L. Alibabaei, M. D. Losego, J. J. Concepcion, B. Kalanyan, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 20918–20922 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hanson, M. D. Losego, B. Kalanyan, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4802–4809 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Son, C. Prasittichai, J. E. Mondloch, L. Luo, J. Wu, D. W. Kim, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11529–11532 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. J. Hwang, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3755–3758 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Marszewski, S. Cao, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 261–278 RSC .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, D. Xu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and C. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5020–5029 RSC .
S. Sorcar, Y. Hwang, C. A. Grimes and S.-I. In, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 507–515 CrossRef .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731–737 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tahir, B. Tahir, N. A. S. Amin and Z. Y. Zakaria, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 18, 250–260 CrossRef .
D. K. Lee, J. I. Choi, G. H. Lee, Y.-H. Kim and J. K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600583 CrossRef .
G. Yin, X. Huang, T. Chen, W. Zhao, Q. Bi, J. Xu, Y.-F. Han and F. Huang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1009–1017 CrossRef .
Ş. Neaţu, J. A. Maciá-Agulló, P. Concepción and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15969–15976 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Tian, J. Gao, X. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1215–1221 CrossRef .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2865–2870 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Gui, S.-P. Chai, B.-Q. Xu and A. R. Mohamed, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 122, 183–189 CrossRef .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, S. Yan, S. Bao, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1743–1749 CrossRef .
R. Li, J. Hu, M. Deng, H. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Hu, H.-L. Jiang, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Xie and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4783–4788 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Son, S. H. Hwang, C. Kim, J. Y. Yun and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4815–4820 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Ahn, D. J. Kim, W. S. Chi and J. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4893–4897 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Ahn, D. J. Kim, W. S. Chi and J. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5037–5044 CrossRef .
D. H. Kim, M. D. Losego, Q. Peng and G. N. Parsons, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600354 CrossRef .
J. Qi, X. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7108–7116 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Du, J. Qi, D. Wang and Z. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6914–6918 RSC .
J. Yun, S. H. Hwang and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2055–2063 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, S. Gao, T. Li, F.-Q. Liu, Y. Ren and T. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4419–4427 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-Y. Kim, J. S. Kang, J. Shin, J. Kim, S.-J. Han, J. Park, Y.-S. Min, M. J. Ko and Y.-E. Sung, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8368–8377 RSC .
T. R. Garvey, B. H. Farnum and R. Lopez, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2400–2408 RSC .
L. Li, S. Chen, C. Xu, Y. Zhao, N. G. Rudawski and K. J. Ziegler, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20978–20984 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Alibabaei, B. D. Sherman, M. R. Norris, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 5899–5902 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lu, W. Tian, J. Guo and L. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12765 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Labouchere, A. K. Chandiran, T. Moehl, H. Harms, S. Chavhan, R. Tena-Zaera, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel and N. Tetreault, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400217 CrossRef .
N. Tétreault, É. Arsenault, L.-P. Heiniger, N. Soheilnia, J. Brillet, T. Moehl, S. Zakeeruddin, G. A. Ozin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4579–4584 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Lee, P. Guo, S.-Q. Li, D. B. Buchholz and R. P. H. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17713–17722 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lu, Y. Ma, B. Gu, W. Tian and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16445–16452 RSC .
R. Wu, B. Yang, J. Xiong, C. Cao, Y. Huang, F. Wu, J. Sun, C. Zhou, H. Huang and J. Yang, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2015, 7, 043105 CrossRef .
J. Choi, S. Song, M. T. Hörantner, H. J. Snaith and T. Park, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6029–6036 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Tao, P. Qin, W. Ke and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3970–3990 RSC .
A.-N. Cho and N.-G. Park, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3687–3704 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. G. D. Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Huang, A. R. Pascoe, W.-Q. Wu, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, J. Zhong, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601715 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Han, H. S. Chung, D. H. Kim, B. J. Kim, J.-W. Lee, N.-G. Park, I. S. Cho, J.-K. Lee, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15284–15290 RSC .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and A. Amassian, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12812–12819 RSC .
W.-Q. Wu, F. Huang, D. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3264–3272 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, J. Li, D. Geng, J. Wang, L. Zhang, T. L. Andrew, M. S. Arnold and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 564–572 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1960–1967 RSC .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhu, J. Xu, W. Zhao and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31716–31721 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ye, J. Jia, Z. Wu, C. Qian, R. Chen, P. G. O'Brien, W. Sun, Y. Dong and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601811 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. He, Z. Liu, B. Jiang and Y. Huang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 166, 52–60 CrossRef .
J. Huang, Y. He, M. Chen, B. Jiang and Y. Huang, Sol. Energy, 2017, 155, 1225–1232 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. He, Z. Liu, Y. Huang and B. Jiang, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2017, 121, 617–627 CrossRef .
M. Gao, P. K. N. Connor and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3151–3160 RSC .
S. I. Nikitenko, T. Chave, C. Cau, H.-P. Brau and V. Flaud, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4790–4795 CrossRef .
W. Ren, Y. Yan, L. Zeng, Z. Shi, A. Gong, P. Schaaf, D. Wang, J. Zhao, B. Zou, H. Yu, G. Chen, E. M. B. Brown and A. Wu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 1526–1536 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ren, M. Z. Iqbal, L. Zeng, T. Chen, Y. Pan, J. Zhao, H. Yin, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, A. Li and A. Wu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11195–11204 RSC .
W. Guo, F. Wang, D. Ding, C. Song, C. Guo and S. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9262–9274 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Wei Li
	Wei Li is currently an associate professor at Fudan University, China. He received his BS degree in chemistry from Heilongjiang University in 2008 and PhD degree in chemistry from Fudan University in 2014. He then worked as a postdoctoral follow at the University of Toronto (Canada) and the Institute of Basic Science Center (Korea). His research interests include porous and nanostructured materials for catalysis, and energy conversion and storage.

Ahmed Elzatahry
	Ahmed Elzatahry is Dean of Graduate Studies at Qatar University. He received his BS and MS from Cairo University and PhD from Al-Azhar University. He joined the materials science and technology program at Qatar University in 2015. He has been awarded the state prize of Egypt in advanced science and technology – Chemistry (2010–2011), post-doctoral at Virginia Commonwelath University (2009) and Swiss Fellowship at ETH Institute of Science (1997–1999). He has published more than 140 papers and reviews, attracting more than 3500 citations and with h-index of 31.

Dhaifallah Aldhayan
	Dhaifallah Aldhayan received his BS (1983) from King Saud University in Riyadh – Saudi Arabia and his PhD (1995) from UMIST in Manchester – UK. He joined the Chemistry department – KSU as assistant Professor in 1996. He was elected as a chairman of the Saudi Chemical Society in 2009 and appointed as chairman of the Chemistry department – KSU in 2010 for four years. His research interests focus on the synthesis of zeolites, mesoporous materials and heteropolyanions for catalysis applications.

Dongyuan Zhao
	Dongyuan Zhao received his BS (1984) and PhD (1990) from Jilin University. After his post-doctoral experiences in the Weizmann Institute of Science and University of California at Santa Barbara, he joined Fudan University as a Professor in 1998. He was selected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007, and a member of The World Academy of Sciences in 2010. His research interests focus on the synthesis of mesoporous materials for catalysis, energy, water purification, and biomedicine applications.

 	Fig. 1  The summary and comparison of different methods (including sol–gel process strategies, hydro/solvothermal methods, layer-by-layer assembly strategies, atomic layer deposition methods and thermal induced reduction strategies) and their applications for core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials. Symbols: + advantages, - disadvantages, ↑ applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The TEM image of the Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles prepared by using Lutensol ON50 as a stabilizing agent and (b) Ra/Rb plotted against the relative increase in the radius of the smallest spheres γ = Rb/R0b, where Ra and Rb are the size of large and small spheres, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of TiO2 shell formation on nanostructured metal (Au, Ni, Pt) surfaces via an electrochemical oxidation process by using TiCl3 as a precursor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of TiO2 nucleation and growth on the surface of an α-Fe2O3 core via the kinetics-controlled coating method (a and b). The plot shows four distinct modes of time-dependent Cto under different ammonia content, the corresponding representation of nucleation and growth process of TiO2 on the surface of an α-Fe2O3 core and SEM images of the resultant α-Fe2O3@TiO2 composites are also illustrated. The scale bar of all SEM images is 1 μm. TEM images of α-Fe2O3@TiO2 (c and d) Fe3O4@TiO2 (e and f), SiO2@TiO2 (g and h) and GO@TiO2 (i and j) core–shell nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of core@mesoporous TiO2 shell nanostructures through a post-hydrolysis strategy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the cooperative self-assembly procedure for mesostructured TiO2 shells (a); TEM images of the resultant core–shell, yolk–shell and double-shell hollow structures: (b) SiO2@TiO2 core–shell spheres; (c) SiO2@TiO2 yolk–shell spheres; (d) Au@TiO2 yolk–shell nanospheres; (e) Fe2O3@TiO2 yolk–shell cubes; (f) double-shell TiO2–polymer nanospheres; (g) mesoporous SiO2@TiO2 core–shell nanospheres; (h) PS@TiO2 core–shell nanospheres; (i) GO@TiO2 core–shell nanosheets; (j) carbon nanospheres@TiO2 core–shell nanocomposites; (k) MOF@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135, Copyright 2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  FESEM and TEM images of hierarchical anatase spheres (a and b),150 MWCNTs@TiO2 core–shell nanocables (c and d),151 Fe2O3@SiO2@TiO2 core–shell spindles (e and f),152 SiO2@SnO2@TiO2 core–shell spheres (g and h).153 In all cases, TiO2 shells are assembled from nanosheets through the solvothermal method. (a and b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 150, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c and d) are reprinted with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. (e, f and g, h) are reprinted with permission from ref. 152 and 153, Copyright 2010 and 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the hydrothermal etching assisted crystallization strategy for the formation of Fe3O4@titanate double-shelled yolk–shell microspheres. The corresponding TEM images of a single sphere synthesized at 150 °C with hydrothermal treatment time: (b) 0 min, (c) 20 min, (d) 2 h, (e) 12 h, and (f) 24 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the fabrication (A), SEM (B), TEM (C) and STEM (D) images of Au/TiO2 hollow nanospheres and 3D ordered assembly via layer-by-layer assembly using titanate nanodisks as a precursor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Schematic illustration of the structure and electronic density of states (DOS) of the core–shell structured black TiO2 (TiO2@TiO2–xHx). H-Dopants are depicted as black dots, and disorder is represented in the outer layer of the nanocrystal. (B) A photo comparing unmodified white and black TiO2 nanocrystals. (C and D) HRTEM images of TiO2 nanocrystals before and after hydrogenation, respectively. In D, a short dashed curve is applied to outline the interface between the crystalline core and disordered outer layer of black TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214, Copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of synthesizing nonmetal (X) doped TiO2@TiO2−x core–shell nanoparticles via two-step reduction processes, and HRTEM images of the as-obtained TiO2@TiO2−x–N (b), TiO2@TiO2−x–S (c), and TiO2@TiO2−x–I (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 236, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM images of Au@TiO2 Janus (a) and core–shell (b) nanostructures. (c) Volume of hydrogen generated (VH2) under visible-light irradiation from a tungsten halogen lamp. Plasmonic near-field maps (cross-section view at z = 0) simulated using discrete dipole approximation (DDA) calculations for Janus Au@TiO2 (d), core–shell Au@TiO2 (e) and bare gold nanoparticles (f). The maps show the electric near-field intensity enhancements |E(r)/E0|2 of the nanostructures at their LSPR wavelengths (indicated on each map) with the incident polarization along the x-axis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of the energy transfer among Yb3+,Tm3+ ions and TiO2 shell based on a NaYF4:Yb,Tm@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticle: the upconversion and band-edge excitation processes and the generation of OH radicals for photodegradation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of NaYF4:Yb,Tm@SiO2@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles for photodynamic therapy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM image and structure scheme (inset), (b) five cycles of the photodegradation of MB under sunlight illumination, (c) magnetization curve and (d) magnetic separation of the Ag@Fe3O4@SiO2@TiO2 photocatalysts in MB solutions under different conditions. (I) the initial solution; (II) after adsorption; (III) after sunlight illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the formation of a crystalline Ti3+ core/amorphous Ti4+ shell photocatalyst by a two-step treatment. In step 1, oxygen is lost and Ti3+ created in the whole pristine TiO2 in H2 (denoted TiO2 with Ti3+). In step 2, the Ti3+-containing surface layer is converted into an amorphous layer by hydrothermally treating in a HF solution, with the surviving Ti3+ preserved in the core (denoted TiO2 with Ti3+ & AL, where AL means the amorphous layer). The reference sample of crystalline/amorphous core/shell TiO2 without Ti3+ obtained using only step 2 is denoted TiO2 with AL. (b) Comparisons of the photocatalytic hydrogen generation rates of the four prepared photocatalysts from a mixture of water and methanol with 1 wt% Pt as a co-catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 331, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic and (b) corresponding TEM images of the cross section of an individual gold nanorod@TiO2 photocatalyst showing the TiO2 cap decorated with Pt nanoparticles for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and the Co-OEC material deposited on the lower portion of the Au nanorod for oxygen evolution reaction (OER). (c) Energy level diagram superimposed on a schematic of an individual gold nanorod@TiO2 photocatalyst, showing the proposed processes occurring in its various parts and in energy space. EF, Fermi energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 332, Copyright 2013 The Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the Pt/SiO2@TiO2 core–shell composites. (e) Photocatalytic H2 production of SiO2@TiO2 and Pt/SiO2@TiO2 core–shell composites with different weight contents of Pt under visible-light irradiation (λ > 500 nm). (f) Schematic illustration of charge transfer in the Pt/SiO2@TiO2 composites under visible light (λ > 500 nm). Energetic hot electrons are photoexcited from Pt nanoparticles by absorbing scattered light in the near field of the dielectric surface of the SiO2 support and transfer to the conduction band of the semiconductor TiO2 shell to reduce the water molecule to H2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 333, Copyright 2016 The Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic procedures for preparing Si nanowires/TiO2 nanorods core–shell architectures. (b) Illustration of using Si nanowires@TiO2 nanorods core–shell structure as a PEC anode for water splitting. (c) SEM image of the Si nanowires@TiO2 nanorods core–shell architectures. (d) J−V curves of different Si@TiO2 configurations showing enhanced PEC performance by coating TiO2 nanorods on Si nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of p-Si nanowire@TiO2 nanorod segment core–shell structured arrays as an integrated nanosystem for direct solar water splitting. The two insets show the oxidation and reduction reactions on TiO2 and Si surfaces with iridium oxide and Pt nanoparticles as co-catalysts, respectively. (b) False-colored SEM image of the segment core–shell structured arrays. (c) The evolution of H2 and O2 gases under simulated sunlight of 150 mW cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (d) Measured energy conversion efficiency (left axis) and estimated normalized relative photoactivity (right axis) of the integrated nanosystem with different TiO2 segment percentages. Reprinted with permission from ref. 375, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) TEM image of H and N co-doped black TiO2 with the scale bar of 5 nm. (b) The schematic conduction pathways of photoexcited electrons and holes in a core–shell photocatalyst with Ns (substitutional nitrogen), NiH (hydrogen bonded interstitial nitrogen), and VO (oxygen vacancy). (c) The energy band levels of H and N co-doped black TiO2 nanoparticles versus RHE (pH 7) for CO2 reduction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 384, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  MOF@TiO2 core–shell structured photocatalysts for CO2 reduction. Structural illustration (a) and TEM image (b) of Cu3(BTC)2@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles (1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate, BTC). (c) Schematic depiction of charge transfer from photoexcited TiO2 to MOF interface for reducing CO2 molecules captured in the MOF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 391, Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) TEM images of the Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles. (b) Optical absorption spectra of the Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles, ruthenium dye molecules, and their mixtures in the matrix of TiO2 thin film. (c) Photocurrent density–voltage curve (solid lines) and PCE (dashed lines) of the 0.1 wt% Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles and TiO2-only DSSCs with the same photoanode thickness of 1.5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 396, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Cross-sectional and top-view SEM image of planar PCSs by spin-coating TiO2–Cl nanocrystals as the ETL on ITO substrate (a and b). DFT calculation result showing shallow and delocalized Pb–Cl anti-site defects at the PbCl2-terminated interface (c). Comparison of hysteresis between TiO2 and TiO2–Cl based devices (d). J–V curves of device employing Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45 on TiO2–Cl layer for the small area of 0.049 cm2 (e) and the large area of 1.1 cm2 (f). The inset shows a photo of the large-area device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 414, Copyright 2017 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 23  SEM images of the bare stainless steel (SS) mesh (a and b) and SS mesh coated with black TiO2 (c and d). Schematic setup for the solar water evaporation measurement (e). The mass of the evaporated water as a function of their radiation time in the absence of the SS mesh and in the presence of the SS mesh coated with black TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 425, Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic of the prototype reactor with measurement of the time dependent graphs: (a) solar intensity and temperature, (b) hydrogen generation, (c) volume of the condensate (top) and chlorine concentration (bottom) using SiO2/Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles as a solar energy collector for photocatalysis and photothermal desalination reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 429, Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of future directions on the synthesis and applications of core–shell structured TiO2 nanomaterials.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
