Revealing the stochastic kinetics evolution of photocatalytic CO 2 reduction   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR05413B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR05413B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 730-741Revealing the stochastic kinetics evolution of photocatalytic CO2 reduction†

        
          
            Zhonghui 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yimin 
            Xuan
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xianglei 
            Liu
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Qibin 
            Zhu
          
        
      ab
aSchool of Energy and Power Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China. E-mail: ymxuan@nuaa.edu.cn;   Tel: +86 25 84896901
bIntegrated Energy Research Institute, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China
Received 
      30th September 2022
    , Accepted 12th December 2022First published on 13th December 2022AbstractInvestigating kinetic mechanisms to design efficient photocatalysts is critical for improving photocatalytic CO2 reduction, but the stochastic photo-physical/chemical properties of kinetics remain unclear. Herein, we propose a statistical study to discuss the stochastic feature evolution of photocatalytic systems. The uncertainties of light absorption, charge carrier migration, and surface reaction are described by nonparametric estimation methods in the proposed model, which includes the effect of operational and material parameters. The density distribution of surface electrons shifts from a skewed distribution to an approximate uniform distribution as incident photon density increases. The system temperature rising induces the rate-determining step of surface reactions to change from charge carrier kinetics to reactant activation processes. Benefiting from the synergistic optimization between the operational parameter and active site density, the electron-capturing probability of active sites is boosted from 0.06 to 0.17. The modified reaction kinetic equation is constructed based on the distribution function of charge carrier kinetics. Furthermore, the experimental photoactivity results are consistent with the statistical analysis, which proves the feasibility of the established model. The characterization tests show that the gap between testing activities and theoretical efficiency is caused by a mismatch between charge carrier supply and mass transfer. Our work unveils the stochastic features in photocatalytic CO2 reduction, offering a comprehensive analytical framework for photocatalytic system optimization.
1. Introduction
Excessive consumption of fossil energy and enormous industrial carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions have caused energy shortages and disrupted the natural carbon cycle.1 Given these problems have a significant effect on both human life and the ecosystem, they need to be addressed urgently. Solar-driven reduction of CO2via photocatalysts holds great promise for converting renewable energy sources and mitigating the greenhouse effect and thus has attracted extensive research interest.2–5 The theoretical efficiency limit of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to solar fuels is predicted to be 46.7%, which further indicates the application potential of photocatalytic CO2 reduction.6 Continuous efforts have been conducted to increase the efficiency of CO2 reduction in recent years, but the performance of photocatalysis remains too poor to reach the theoretical efficiency. For instance, Wang et al. recently reported a hybrid Z-scheme photocatalyst that performs the photocatalytic CO2 reduction with water to form formic acid, but the solar energy conversion efficiency was only around 0.08%.7 As a result, it is critical to thoroughly investigate the underlying reasons for the huge gap between experimental and theoretical efficiencies of photocatalytic CO2 reduction for performance improvement.
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction systems are designed for the goal, which absorbs photons to excite electron–hole pairs, then electrons and holes migrate to the surface of photocatalysts for driving reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1. The reaction equation of photocatalytic CO2 reduction can be expressed as (1)where ΔG is the change in standard Gibbs free energy, nr is the number of electrons involved in the reaction, E is the difference of electrochemical potential for the reaction, and F is the Faraday constant. If the molar product yield of CO2-to-CO reduction is MCO, the number of electrons consumed in the reaction Nr can be written as Nr = MCO·NA·nr, where NA is the Avogadro constant. However, the number of electrons transferred in experiments is much smaller than the number of photogenerated electrons . There are various stochastic photo-physical/chemical processes in photocatalytic CO2 reduction, which cause most photogenerated charge carriers to be lost in the transfer and reaction processes. These random processes can be classified as follows: light absorption, charge carrier migration, and surface reaction.
 Fig. 1  The stochastic processes in the photocatalytic system. 
1.1. The solar spectral absorption of photocatalysts
The photocatalytic solid–liquid reaction is usually carried out in the reactor equipped with a magnetic stirrer, and the motion of photocatalysts in suspensions results in a nonstable process of light absorption for each nanoparticle.8–10 Incident photons are absorbed in variable positions within photocatalysts, which leads to the random generation of charge carriers. It is different from the generation of charge carriers in solar cells or photo-electro catalysis.11,12 There is thus no continuous concentration gradient to promote the diffusion and separation of electron–hole pairs. Although the photocatalyst layer is fixed in some gas–solid reaction systems, the scattering of incident photons among nanoparticles also leads to the uncertainty of light absorption position.13,14
1.2. The charge carrier kinetics within photocatalysts
Most photocatalysts are nanoparticle or nanosheet structures prepared by hydrothermal, sol–gel, and other physical–chemical methods, which may produce intrinsic bulk/surface defects.15–18 So the migrating direction of photogenerated charge carriers becomes more uncertain due to the defect trapping and detrapping process. It is distinct from electro-catalysis, where a bias is applied to drive the directed motion of charge carriers.19–21 Composite photocatalysts are proposed to form a built-in electric field for enhancing the migration and separation of charge carriers, which in effect regulates the randomness of charge carrier behaviors.22–24 The surface active site is generally created by loading noble metals (e.g., Au, Pt, and Pd.) or introducing surface defects (e.g., vacancies of oxygen, sulfur, and zinc).25 The electric field formed by the interfacial band bending promotes the movement of charge carriers, but the capture process of charge carriers is still irregular due to the different distribution of active sites.26
1.3. The interfacial reaction process
In contrast to photocatalytic water splitting, the supply of CO2 molecules in liquid is a phase of particular concern in the photocatalytic CO2 reduction system. Because the ad/des-sorption process of CO2 at active sites is a probabilistic event due to the low concentration of CO2 in water.27,28 There may be a molecular concentration gradient in the microenvironment of the reaction interface, but the random thermal movement of molecules still changes the reactant supply process.29 The probability of surface reaction is also affected by the match between the supply of electrons and reactants at the reaction interface.
Operational conditions also affect the random physical/chemical properties of photocatalysis, such as the indecent photon density and system temperature.30,31 For instance, the density and recombination rate of charge carriers were reported to vary nonlinearly with light intensity.32–34 The collision of surface molecules and the phonon-assisted transition of charge carriers may be changed by a rise in system temperature.35,36 So far, many photocatalytic models have been established based on semiconductor equations for analyzing the mechanism of photocatalytic processes.37–39 These equations can be used to accurately describe the carrier behavior in solar cells or electro-catalytic systems, but they may be unable to trace the stochastic characteristics of photocatalysis, which may overestimate catalytic activities.40 For example, the Lambert–Beer law was usually used to calculate the light absorption of photocatalysts in literature, which is different from the experimental situation as explained before.38,39 The random walking method was developed to study the charge carrier behaviors in disordered semiconductors, but the probability density evolution of system condition variation remains unclear.41–43 The analysis of probability statistics is essential for stochastic systems, but it is rare to employ the statistical method in photocatalytic systems yet.44 Therefore, it is important to understand and study the random feature of photocatalytic CO2 reduction from the perspective of stochastic probability statistics.
In this study, we propose a stochastic kinetics model based on nonparametric estimation methods for analyzing the random evolution of photocatalytic systems, in which key components of photocatalysis—light absorption, charge carrier kinetics, and surface reactions—are considered. Firstly, the stochastic model is introduced, consisting of stochastic catalytic performance and statistical analysis modules. The fluctuation of surface electron distribution is studied under various operating conditions for uncovering the mechanism of electron stochastic migration. According to the fitting function of electron random kinetics, the kinetic equation is corrected and properly matches the statistical reaction rate. Furthermore, photoactivity experiments and characterization tests of model photocatalysts are conducted to compare with simulated data. The goal of this work is to demonstrate the stochastic evolution mechanism of charge carrier behavior and reaction process in photocatalysis for evaluating photocatalysis performance.
2. Stochastic statistics model and experiments for photocatalytic CO2 reduction
This section introduces the modeling methods used in our investigation. The whole model consists of two parts: (1) the stochastic performance module (SPM) of photocatalytic CO2 reduction and (2) the statistical analysis module (SAM).45–47 The first module includes the description of the random features for the key steps and the distribution variation of charge carrier behavior and reaction rate. The second module is used to fit and analyze the probability density function of the stochastic events based on the non-parametric density estimation and response surface methods (RSMs).
2.1 The modeling of the photocatalytic stochastic performance

Fig. 2 illustrates the modeling flow for the SPM generation. The total photocatalytic system is divided into two parallel subsystems. The first subsystem comprises the light absorption, generation, migration, recombination, and capture process of charge carriers in series. The other subsystem contains the adsorption and desorption of molecules and interfacial charge carrier transfer. The input space involves material characteristics and operating conditions and is presented on the left side of Fig. 2. The output data is comprised of the density distribution of charge carriers captured by active sites and the surface reaction rate. The catalyst material of the SPM is set as Al-doped strontium titanate (Al/STO) because it is a widely reported and potential photocatalyst.48,49 It was reported that the photocatalytic performance of cubic Al/STO doped with metal elements is greatly improved.50–52 The material factors include the bandgap, trap density, and active site density, which meet the thermodynamic requirements of photocatalytic reactions.
 Fig. 2  The schematic diagram of the SPM of photocatalytic CO2 reduction. 

The light absorption process. 
When the photocatalyst material is chosen, a simulation region is designed in a 3D Cartesian coordinate system as a nanocube to replicate the real catalyst structure, according to the subsequent experimental and characterization results. When the simulation domain is created, the light absorption, random migration of charge carriers, and the ad/de-sorption of surface reactants are considered. As explained in the introduction section, the absorption position of incident photons for each photocatalyst nanoparticle is uncertain, and it cannot be simply treated as following the Lambert–Beer law. To simulate the average light absorption of photocatalysts, the photon can be absorbed anywhere inside the nanocube, and an electron–hole pair is excited at the same position. Hence, the coordinates of photon absorption are obtained by (2)where Xi, Yi, and Zi are the X, Y, and Z coordinates of light absorption positions, respectively. X0, Y0, and Z0 are the length, width, and height of the simulation region, respectively. randfunc(0,1) represents the random number generation function from 0 to 1. And the generation rate of charge carriers can be expressed as: (3)where Ge/h is the generation rate of charge carriers, I is the light intensity, α(λ) means the spectral absorptivity of photocatalyst, and λ represents the wavelength of incident photon flux. hp and c are the Planck constant and photon speed, respectively.


The charge carrier stochastic kinetics. 
To simulate the stochastic migration of photogenerated charge carriers in photocatalysts, the defect distribution needs to be set in advance. Positions of bulk/surface defects are distributed randomly in the simulation region. To represent the randomness of defect formation in the material synthesis process, and the energy state distribution of defects is assumed as an exponential distribution based on the previous reports.53 Active sites are also uniformly and randomly distributed on each surface of the photocatalyst. The method of coordinate generation is the same as that used in light absorption. It should be noted that active sites are generated on the surface of photocatalysts. All coordinates of defects and active sites are set up and stored for subsequent calculation.
When the physical model is built, the charge carrier behavior can be simulated by employing a charge random behavior approach considering the aforementioned random processes in charge carrier kinetics and interfacial reaction.54,55 Electrons and holes move freely in photocatalysts, and a multiple-trapping method is utilized for calculating the migration of photogenerated charge carriers, programming details of this method can be found in previous works.32,42,56 While charge carriers are moving within photocatalysts, they may be captured by defects or surface active sites. The defect filled by an electron may become the recombination center. If a hole is also captured by it, the charge carriers will be recombined. The probability of defect capture depends on the energy level of the defect. If an active site captures an electron and a reactant molecule is also adsorbed on the site, the reduction reaction may occur. The probability of charge carrier transfer depends on the reaction activation energy and can be obtained by57 (4)where v is the frequency of nuclear motion through the transition state (1012–1013 s−1). κ is a random coefficient uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. δ the reorganization energy, ΔG≠ = ΔG0 + δ is the activation energy. kB is the Boltzmann constant.


The surface reaction process. 
The second subsystem mainly contains the surface reaction. Due to random collisions caused by the thermal motion of CO2 molecules, the process of gas adsorption–desorption on surface active sites is considered. According to the Langmuir adsorption isotherms,58 the rate of adsorption Rads and desorption Rdes can be respectively expressed as (5) (6)where kads and kdes are the adsorption and desorption constant, respectively. ϕ is the adsorption probability which is evaluated by a uniform random distribution from 0 to 1. A is the area of each active site, mgas and pgas are the mass and partial pressure of gas molecules, respectively. Nt and No are the total density and occupied density of active sites, respectively. τ0 is the surface bond vibration frequency and Q the heat of molecule desorption.
Moreover, the surface reaction rate is calculated by using the Langmuir–Hinshelwood theory, which can be written as59 (7)where θ is the concentration of reactants in equilibrium, α = kads/kdes means the adsorption equilibrium constant, Kcat represents the reaction rate constant.  is a power function of temperature, and it can be expressed as58, where T’ = T/298 K is dimensionless temperature, v is the fitting factor. The nonlinear change of activation energy with temperature can be observed for some reaction types in the literature.60 So the rate constant is expressed in the following form: (8)where kc is the pre-exponential factor, Ea represents the apparent activation energy, R and n are the gas constant and the correction factor, respectively.
Though the kinetic equation can be widely used to analyze thermal catalytic reactions, photocatalysis depends on the kinetics of photogenerated charge carriers. Therefore, the charge carrier kinetics should be also considered. A correction term of the reaction kinetic equation is proposed, which is expressed as a function of light intensity and temperature: kc = fc(I,T)(9)where fc(I,T) is decided by the stochastic analysis of the photocatalytic reaction in the subsequent section. So, the surface reaction rate is rewritten as (10)
The reaction rate depends on the term of charge carrier kinetics fc(I,T), the reactant activation process, and the term of reactant ad/de-sorption fθ(T).
The light intensity and system temperature are chosen as the input variables. The input space is created by using a full factorial experimental design with 10 values per input variable. The light intensity ranges from 100 to 1000 mW cm−2. The temperature changes from 288 to 368 K. Various sample points are input to the SPM for the calculation to evaluate the correlation between operating conditions and photocatalytic performances. The SPM is performed with input parameters in continuous time, and the rate of electrons captured at each active site is recorded for establishing the surface electron density distribution. The yield distribution is obtained by the same statistical method.

2.2 Modeling method for the stochastic analysis
When the simulation of SPM is completed, the discrete distributions of output data are fitted to get their probability density functions by using the non-parametric density estimation method. Fig. 3 provides an overview of the modeling process for the SAM. The photocatalytic performance is associated with many parameters, and the distribution type of output data changes over the sample space. Besides, the total system consists of two parallel subsystems. So, the parametric estimation methods (e.g., the normal distribution) are not suitable to fit the changing trend of the result distribution well. The non-parametric density estimation method can be applied to capture these shifts of non-normal distributions, so it is used to fit the distribution of output results to get the probability density functions. Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) is one of the nonparametric density estimation methods, and the probability density function (PDF) can be obtained as follow,61 (11) (12)where h is the probability density function, xi the distributed sample point, n the number of sample points, and h is the bandwidth of the function. K(x) is the kernel function, a Gaussian kernel function is chosen based on the distribution of statistical SPM results.62
 Fig. 3  Modeling flow for the performance distribution of the photocatalytic system. 
The characteristic parameters of the fitted distribution for each operating condition may be determined after the PDFs of the simulated results are procured. For example, μ represents the mean value of surface charge carriers, and σ2 indicates the deviation amplitude of the number of charge carriers captured by surface active sites. μ and σ2 can be expressed as (13) (14)where xmax is the maximum of sample points.
Finally, the variation pattern of characteristic parameters can be obtained through the output data, and the corresponding parameters can be adjusted reasonably in the experimental design. An RSM is utilized to represent the simulated outcome distribution of the PDFs, and the fitting function is written as μ = f1,RSM(I,T,N)(15) σ2 = f2,RSM(I,T,N)(16)where I is light intensity, T refers to the average temperature of reaction systems, N is the density of active sites.
2.3 Experimental verification of the stochastic kinetics model
To evaluate the feasibility of theoretical analysis, photo-activity experiments are conducted under various reaction conditions. As shown in Fig. 4a, the photocatalytic performance test is carried out at a photoreactor with external circulating water, and the reaction solution is stirred using a magnetic stirrer. The experimental condition is the same as that discussed in the introduction section. The incident light intensity is regulated by changing the current of a Xenon lamp, and the system temperature is controlled by a circulating water tank. The model photocatalyst of Al/STO in the theoretical model is utilized in our experiments. The details of performance testing, synthesis methods, and characterization can be found in the ESI Note.† In Fig. 4a, the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image exhibits the nanocube construe of Al/STO. Silver (Ag), a widely used cocatalyst, is chosen as the active site in our model photocatalyst (Ag–Al/STO).25 The optical property and chemical structure of photocatalysts are presented in Fig. 4b, c, and S1.† The measured absorbance of Ag–Al/STO is also applied to build material parameters in our stochastic model. The crystal structure of Al/STO remains stable when the cocatalyst is loaded on the photocatalyst surface according to the XRD pattern. Besides, the photoluminescence (PL) characterization is conducted under different excitation intensities and temperatures. The comparison between the experimental and theoretical data will be discussed in the following section.
 Fig. 4  (a) The photocatalytic performance testing system and the SEM image of the model photocatalyst. (b) UV-vis absorption spectrum and (c) XRD pattern of photocatalysts. 
3. Results and discussion
In this section, the effect of operation conditions on the density distribution of surface charge carriers and photocatalytic performance is discussed. And the RSM is used to fit the statistical function according to the simulated data. The reaction kinetic equation is modified with the fitting function. Furthermore, experimental results are compared with the statistical data to find out the cause of the low efficiency of photocatalytic CO2 reduction systems.
3.1 The influence of operating conditions on photocatalytic stochastic processes
The surface electron distribution is taken as an example, and all distributions of results are fitted with the KDE method. Fig. 5a compares the correlation between the PDF of surface electron density and light intensity at a constant temperature (288 K). The probability density distribution deviates from the standard normal distribution and is properly fitted by the KDE function. Interestingly, the surface electron density of various active sites is not uniformly distributed, even under the condition of high photon flux, as shown in Fig. S2.† It may lead to the distinction of the multi-electron transfer process at different active sites. But it is observed that a high light intensity improves the uniformity of electron distribution for the formation of multi-electron products. Besides, following the addition of incident photon flux, a significant right-shift in the electron density distribution is observed, demonstrating a progressive rise in the capture rate of electrons. At the same time, the probability density of multi-electron capture decreases because of an acceleration in the charge carrier recombination caused by an increase in light intensity. Fig. 5b shows the statistical characteristic data of the electron density distribution. There is a gradual rise in the average value (from 10 to 30) with light intensity, as is the range of electron distribution. As can be seen in the probability plot of Fig. S3,† the electron density distribution begins to level off with the rising of light intensity, and thus the surface electron density becomes saturated. A high light intensity enhances the total electron concentration of photocatalysts, but it also affects the probability density distribution of surface electrons at various active sites in our previous work.32
 Fig. 5  (a) Probability distributions and (b) boxplot of surface electron density for various light intensities at a constant temperature of 288 K. Probability distributions of surface electron density for various temperatures at three light intensities (c) 100, (d) 300, and (e) 500 mW cm−2 (the number of active sites is set as 300 per catalyst nanoparticle). 
Surface active sites provide the function of capturing charge carriers and converting reactants. In photocatalytic experiments, the amount of cocatalyst material is often changed to adjust the active site density for improving the reaction rate. Hence, the active site density is assumed as another key parameter in the model. Each active site is assumed to be non-overlapping. According to the approximate size of photocatalysts (1.5 μm) and cocatalyst (10 nm) obtained by SEM results and our previous work,32 the maximum number is assumed as 900. Besides, too few reaction sites will result in a very low reaction rate in the simulation process which is far from the experimental activity. Because the electron capture probability is too small. The minimum value is selected as 300. Therefore, the number of active sites is changed from 300 to 900 per photocatalyst nanocube for investigating the correlation among the electron distribution, operating conditions, and material parameters. The change tendency of electron distribution is similar at different active site densities, as illustrated in Fig. S4 and S5.† There is a fall in the average value of surface electrons with the addition of active sites due to the harder competition for electron capture. On the other hand, the probability density of captured electrons is improved by increasing the site number at the same light intensity. For example, the largest probability density is boosted from 0.06 to 0.17 with the active site number. It can be found that the high active site number may cause a decline in the probability of electron capture without the regulation of light intensity.
The temperature of photocatalytic systems is another operating parameter of the SAM.63 As shown in Fig. 5c to e,† there is no obvious shift in the average number of captured electrons with the increase in temperature. Because the total number of photoexcited electrons is not affected by temperature but the light intensity. The temperature rise generally promotes phonon-assisted carrier migration, which makes it easier for charge carriers to be released from defects.64 Hence, the probability density of multiple electron capture is improved from the data in Fig. S6.† Besides, the influence of temperature on the probability density of electron distribution becomes more apparent at a higher light intensity. Fig. 5d and e reveal that there is a drop in the probability density with the rising temperature when the light intensity is higher. According to the result of previous works, the recombination probability is nonlinear and positively correlated with light intensities.32 The recombination rate is enhanced due to a high concentration of photogenerated electrons. And the subsequent photoluminescence experiments in this work also show that with the increase in temperature, trap-assisted recombination begins to strengthen. Therefore, the competition between the effective electron capturing and recombination processes leads to the change of PDFs. Changing the system temperature under different light-intensity conditions has diverse impacts on the charge carrier kinetics in photo-/photothermal catalysis. Moreover, the active site density is changed to discuss the effect of temperature on the electron-capturing process, as depicted in Fig. S7 and S8.† Additional active sites provide more capture opportunities, so the aggravation of charge carrier recombination which is caused by the temperature increase is mitigated.
The discrete distribution of surface electrons is represented by the continuity probability function in a KDE method, which is used to explain the random variation of the surface electron distribution. The average level and dispersion of charge carrier density can be characterized by the mean and variance of PDFs. Therefore, RSMs are considered to model the fitting function of the mean μ and variance σ2 of surface electron densities over changing light intensity and temperature, as illustrated in Fig. 6 The correlation under the different number of active sites is also fitted (Fig. S9 and S10†). Two feature factors are properly modeled with a quadratic mathematical model in RSMs (Fig. 6a and b). The effect of light intensity on the mean value is more significant than that of temperature. Therefore, the mathematical expression can be written as fI = keI’m, where ke represents the function factor involving the effect of some other parameters, I’ = I/I0 is the dimensionless light intensity, and m is the fitting index. Fig. 6c describes the effect of light intensity on the mean under various active site numbers. The mean variation trend at different sites is similar but the influence of light intensity slowed with increasing active sites. Because the probability of electron capture becomes smaller with more active sites. However, the variance has a linear relationship with light intensity as seen in Fig. 6d. The fluctuation of surface electron distribution caused by a higher light intensity is weakened with more active sites.
 Fig. 6  RSM plots describing effects of interaction between light intensity and temperature on (a) mean and (b) variance of electron distribution. Line plots showing the variation of (c) mean and (d) variance over changing light intensity under different active site density conditions. 
3.2 The influence of operating conditions on photocatalytic activities
The surface reaction depends on the charge carrier kinetics and reactant ad/de-sorption processes. Product types of CO2 reduction include CO, CH4, CH3OH, and so on.65–67 Most photocatalysts loaded with silver have a great product selectivity of CO, and the main reaction pathway is set out in Fig. S11.†68
The variation of the surface reaction process with changing light intensity and temperature is depicted in Fig. 7a. The light intensity has a temperature-dependent influence on the reaction, which is analogous to its effect on electron concentration distribution. When the temperature is set at 288 K, the surface response rate rises slightly before being saturated as the light intensity increases. Once the temperature is up to 358 K, the surface reaction is enhanced sooner at a high light intensity, as shown in Fig. 7b. A high light intensity boosts the mean of surface electron density for promoting the electron supply at active sites as discussed in Section 3.1. However, the activation barrier of reactants also influences surface reactant conversion and is negatively related to temperature. Therefore, a huge supply of electrons may not be employed in the process at a low temperature because of the high reaction barrier, such as the electron accumulation in photocatalysts.69 The determining step of the surface reaction is the activation process of surface reactants at this time. It is observed that the rising pace of reaction slows with increasing light intensity which is due to the saturation of electron density. As a result, the operation condition should be adjusted synergistically for the optimization of photocatalytic systems.
 Fig. 7  (a) Contour plots displaying the relationship between two operating variables and reaction rates. (b) The light intensity dependence of reaction rate at different temperatures. (c) and (d) The simulated reaction rate varies with the light intensity for different active site conditions at temperatures of 288 K and 358 K, respectively. 
The reaction site condition is another key factor of photocatalytic performance. From the data in Fig. 7c, the exposure of more reaction sites boosts the electron capturing rate and thus enhances the reaction rate at the temperature of 288 K. The interaction of operating parameters under various reaction site conditions is summarized in Fig. S12.† Nonetheless, the unit utilization of electrons is not improved because of the slow chemical conversion. Fig. 7d demonstrates the change of catalytic activity at 358 K. The distinction between the different numbers of active sites grows less, particularly for conditions 600 and 900. It is because the increase in light intensity weakens the probability density of surface electron distribution mentioned before. The surface supply of electrons is reduced and becomes the limiting step of the surface reaction. Therefore, the rate-determining step of photocatalytic performance varies under diverse situations. It implies that the underlying cause of the change in performance needs to be revealed in the analysis of performance experiments. For example, adjusting of cocatalyst load is a method for optimizing photocatalytic performance in many studies,70,71 which may conceal the real mechanism without considering the reaction conditions.
3.3 The comparison between the theoretical analysis and experimental results
Based on the statistical result in Section 3.1, the effect of light intensity on the charge carrier density in equilibrium is written as a nonlinear function fI = keI’m. Moreover, the charge carrier transfer is decided by the recombination and the trapping-de-trapping processes over the surface sites. The variation of light intensity and temperature affects the charge carrier distribution range, and the fitting function in Section 3.1 can be expressed as fI,T = keI’m + kTT’w, where m and w are fitting factors. It should be noted that the process of electron transfer is studied. When the surface reaction is in equilibrium, the relationship between electron utilization and loss can be judged by the ratio of two functions: (17)
Therefore, the total reaction rate (eqn (16)) can be expressed as the function of light intensity and temperature: (18)where Ktot = kekθ is the total rate constant of photocatalytic reactions.
This expression indicates the correlation between charge carrier kinetics and surface reactions. It includes the effect of operational conditions on photocatalytic reactions such as the light intensity, system temperature, and the molecule ab/de-sorption process. Fig. 8a provides the dependence of statistical reaction rate on the incident light intensity and temperature. The black dot plot shows the reaction rate of the statistical output, and the colored surface plot is the fitting results of the modified kinetic equation of the surface reaction. It can be found that the results of the kinetic function match the statistical data. The results of photocatalytic performance experiments in Section 2.3 are also discussed and compared with the statistical analysis. The relative errors of the kinetic rate equation are listed in Table S1.† As shown in Fig. 8b, the trend of experimental findings is consistent with the theoretical results. As the temperature increases, the reaction rate rises due to the reduced reaction barrier. The reaction will quickly reach a saturation state at low temperatures even if the light intensity increases. The steady-state PL intensity drops as temperature rises, which may be attributed to the enhancement of non-radiative recombination. The blue shift of PL intensities with temperature increasing is found in Fig. 8c. Meanwhile, the lifetime of charge carriers decreases with temperature increases, as illustrated in Fig. 8d and S13.† Therefore, the performance improvement at a high light intensity is attributed to the decrease of the reaction barrier by the high temperature rather than the charge carrier kinetics. The PL variation under different light intensities is depicted in Fig. S14.†
 Fig. 8  (a) Comparison of the reaction rate between the statistical data (black dots) and the fitting results (colored surface) of the reaction kinetic equation. (b) The relationship of simulated/measured surface reaction rate and incident irradiation for photocatalysts. (c) Steady-state PL spectra under various temperatures for the photocatalyst. (d) The plot of transient PL decay dynamics under different temperature conditions. 
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, this paper addresses a stochastic model for studying the stochastic property evolution of photocatalytic CO2 reduction by using a nonparametric statistical method. Three key components of photocatalysis are considered in the model, involving light absorption, charge carrier kinetics, and surface reactions. The density distribution function of the surface charge carrier can be fitted properly by the Kernel Density Estimation method. Increases in incident photon density induce a shift of the probability distribution of electrons captured by active sites from a skewed distribution to an approximately uniform distribution. The rate-determining step of the surface reaction is varied by temperature rising based on the sensitivity analysis, which changes from charge carrier kinetics to reactant activation. The electron-capturing probability of active sites is enhanced from 0.06 to 0.17 due to the synergistic regulation of operating parameters and reaction site density. The modified reaction kinetic equation is derived by coupling the charge carrier random kinetics. In addition, the experimental performance findings coincide with the statistical analysis, suggesting that the proposed statistical model is credible. PL testing results show that the poor photoactivity may be caused by the discrepancy between charge carrier transfer and reactant supply. This work investigates the stochastic characteristics of photocatalysis from the perspective of probability statistics, providing a novel insight into exploring the efficient photocatalytic system.
Author contributions
Zhonghui Zhu: conceptualization, investigation, writing – original draft preparation, experiment, and formal analysis. Yimin Xuan: conceptualization, writing–review and editing, supervision, and funding acquisition. Xianglei Liu: writing – review and editing. Qibin Zhu: writing – review and editing.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work is financially supported by the Basic Science Center Program for Ordered Energy Conversion of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51888103) and the Basic Research Program of Frontier Leading Technologies in Jiangsu Province (BK20202008).
References
Y. Meng, G. Liu, G. Zuo, X. Meng, T. Wang and J. Ye, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 14455–14465 RSC .
Z. Liu, H. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Yuan, K. Hills-Kimball, T. Cai, P. Wang, A. Tang and O. Chen, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1620–1627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, J. Lu, Y. Lu, C. H. Lau, Y. Zheng and X. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 292, 120147 CrossRef CAS .
M. Que, Y. Zhao, Y. Yang, L. Pan, W. Lei, W. Cai, H. Yuan, J. Chen and G. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 6180–6187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lai, Y. Qiao, J. Zhang, Z. Lin and H. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3603–3629 RSC .
Z. Zhu, X. Liu, C. Bao, K. Zhang, C. Song and Y. Xuan, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 222, 113236 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, J. Warnan, S. Rodríguez-Jiménez, J. J. Leung, S. Kalathil, V. Andrei, K. Domen and E. Reisner, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 703–710 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lundberg, D. Parviz, H. Kim, M. Lebowitz, R. Lu and M. S. Strano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 13623–13633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, F. Wei, B. Su, Z. Guo, Z. Ding, M.-Q. Yang and S. Wang, Mater. Today Energy, 2022, 24, 100943 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, S. Zhao, C. Gao, J. Qi, H. Yin, D. Wei, M. F. Mideksa, X. Wang, Y. Gao, Z. Tang and R. Yu, Small, 2018, 14, 1800762 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zheng and Y. Xuan, Appl. Energy, 2021, 301, 117496 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ješić, D. Lašič Jurković, A. Pohar, L. Suhadolnik and B. Likozar, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 407, 126799 CrossRef .
S. S. Bhosale, A. K. Kharade, E. Jokar, A. Fathi, S.-m. Chang and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20434–20442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Qin, P. Xu, Y.-D. Huang, L.-Y. Xiao, W. Lu, X.-G. Yang, L.-F. Ma and S.-Q. Zang, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 8468–8471 RSC .
J. Jin, S. Chen, J. Wang, C. Chen and T. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118353 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gu, B. Zhang, Y. Asakura, S. Tsukuda, H. Kato, M. Kakihana and S. Yin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 521, 146213 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Garay-Rodríguez, L. M. Torres-Martínez and E. Moctezuma, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 37, 18–28 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Huang, X. Liu, Y. Han and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123380 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, S. Jing, Y. Wang, X. Liu, L.-Y. Gan, C. Wang, J.-Y. Dai, X. Han and X. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, Z. Zhuang, J. Hao, K. Cao, Y. Hu, W. Wu, S. Lu, C. Wang, N. Zhang, D. Wang, M. Du and H. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 3251–3263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, X. Xuan, W. Wang, C. Ma and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005983 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, X. Ye, S. Zhang, S. Xue, C. Yang, Y. Hou, W. Xing, R. Yu, J. Sun, Z. Yu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bao, S. Song, G. Yao and S. Jiang, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100118 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
J. Fu, K. Jiang, X. Qiu, J. Yu and M. Liu, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 222–243 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. M. Schukraft, B. Moss, A. G. Kafizas and C. Petit, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 19342–19352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, B. Li, D. Zhang, L. Cheng and Q. Xiang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10552–10561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, K. Meng, B. Zhu, H. Liu, J. Xu and J. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904256 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, S. Li, N. Li, P. Zhang, C. Su, L. Gong, B. Chen, C. Qu, D. Qi, T. Wang and J. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202205585 CAS .
K. Yuan, L. Yang, X. Du and Y. Yang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 81, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Wan, Y. Zhao, N. Yang and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2238–2241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, Y. Xuan, X. Liu, K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhu and J. Wang, ChemPhysChem, 2022, 23, e202100851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. Neutzner, V. D'Innocenzo, F. Tassone, M. Gandini, Q. A. Akkerman, M. Prato, L. Manna, A. Petrozza and G. Lanzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13604–13611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, W. Qiao, M. Yuan, N. Li and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2369–2373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-c. Jian, X. Ma, J. Zhang and X. Yong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 15185–15193 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y.-K. Li, Y.-X. Zhao, G.-P. Wei, Y. Ren, K. R. Asmis and S.-G. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13788–13792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8006–8022 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Garcia-Esparza and K. Takanabe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2894–2908 RSC .
R. Bala Chandran, S. Breen, Y. Shao, S. Ardo and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 115–135 RSC .
W. Tress, M. Yavari, K. Domanski, P. Yadav, B. Niesen, J. P. Correa Baena, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 151–165 RSC .
B. Liu, J. Yang, X. Zhao and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 8866–8873 RSC .
B. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 11520–11527 RSC .
B. Liu, X. Zhao, J. Yu, A. Fujishima and K. Nakata, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31914–31923 RSC .

          S. Ghahramani, Fundamentals of probability: with stochastic processes, Chapman and Hall/CRC,  2018 .
A. I. Khuri and S. Mukhopadhyay, WIREs Comp. Stats., 2010, 2, 128–149 CrossRef .
M. J. Fryer, IMA J. Appl. Math., 1977, 20, 335–354 CrossRef .
M. Taddiken, T. Hillebrand, D. Peters-Drolshagen and S. Paul, Microelectron. Reliab., 2021, 118, 114044 CrossRef .
H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Maehara, M. Yamaguchi, Y. Kuromiya, Y. Nagatsuma, H. Tokudome, S. Akiyama, T. Watanabe, R. Narushima, S. Okunaka, N. Shibata, T. Takata, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2021, 598, 304–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Terranova, F. Viñes, N. H. de Leeuw and F. Illas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9392–9398 RSC .
T. H. Chiang, H. Lyu, T. Hisatomi, Y. Goto, T. Takata, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2782–2788 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, K. Teramura, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen, H. Asakura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanaka, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 8779–8786 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, K. Teramura, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen, H. Asakura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanaka, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1468–1475 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Reshchikov, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2021, 218, 2000101 CrossRef CAS .
J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11194–11205 CrossRef CAS .
D. Reifert, M. Kokainis, A. Ambainis, V. Kashcheyevs and N. Ubbelohde, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. O. Göbel and W. Graudszus, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1982, 48, 1277–1280 CrossRef .
A. Koch, D. Kinzel, F. Dröge, S. Gräfe and S. Kupfer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16066–16078 CrossRef CAS .
I. Langmuir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1916, 38, 2221–2295 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Kumar, K. Porkodi and F. Rocha, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 82–84 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, C. Liu, Q. Guo and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 72, 162–171 CrossRef CAS .
Z. I. Botev, J. F. Grotowski and D. P. Kroese, Annu. Stat., 2010, 38, 2916–2957 Search PubMed .
S. J. Sheather and M. C. Jones, J. R. Stat. Soc. B, 1991, 53, 683–690 Search PubMed .
J. Albero, Y. Peng and H. García, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5734–5749 CrossRef CAS .
R. Qian, H. Zong, J. Schneider, G. Zhou, T. Zhao, Y. Li, J. Yang, D. W. Bahnemann and J. H. Pan, Catal. Today, 2019, 335, 78–90 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiong, C. Mao, Z. Yang, Q. Zhang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Gu and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002928 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Sun, J. Xu, Y. Shao, J. Wu, X. Xu, Y. Pan, H. Ju, J. Zhu and Y. Xie, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 690–699 CrossRef CAS .
S. Navarro-Jaén, M. Virginie, J. Bonin, M. Robert, R. Wojcieszak and A. Y. Khodakov, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2021, 5, 564–579 CrossRef .
Q. Heng, B. Wang, X. Fan, W. Chen, X. Li, L. Mao and W. Shangguan, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 920, 165945 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, R. Godin, H. Kasap, B. Moss, Y. Dong, S. A. J. Hillman, L. Steier, E. Reisner and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11219–11229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, J. Xu, Y. Luo, Y. Yang, Z. Wang and H. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 26389–26397 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, Y. Li, B. Zhu, M. Jaroniec and J. Yu, J. Catal., 2017, 349, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nr05413bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  The stochastic processes in the photocatalytic system.	 

 	Fig. 2  The schematic diagram of the SPM of photocatalytic CO2 reduction.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
kc = fc(I,T)	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 3  Modeling flow for the performance distribution of the photocatalytic system.	 
	(13)
	(14)
μ = f1,RSM(I,T,N)	(15)
σ2 = f2,RSM(I,T,N)	(16)

 	Fig. 4  (a) The photocatalytic performance testing system and the SEM image of the model photocatalyst. (b) UV-vis absorption spectrum and (c) XRD pattern of photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Probability distributions and (b) boxplot of surface electron density for various light intensities at a constant temperature of 288 K. Probability distributions of surface electron density for various temperatures at three light intensities (c) 100, (d) 300, and (e) 500 mW cm−2 (the number of active sites is set as 300 per catalyst nanoparticle).	 

 	Fig. 6  RSM plots describing effects of interaction between light intensity and temperature on (a) mean and (b) variance of electron distribution. Line plots showing the variation of (c) mean and (d) variance over changing light intensity under different active site density conditions.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Contour plots displaying the relationship between two operating variables and reaction rates. (b) The light intensity dependence of reaction rate at different temperatures. (c) and (d) The simulated reaction rate varies with the light intensity for different active site conditions at temperatures of 288 K and 358 K, respectively.	 
	(17)
	(18)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Comparison of the reaction rate between the statistical data (black dots) and the fitting results (colored surface) of the reaction kinetic equation. (b) The relationship of simulated/measured surface reaction rate and incident irradiation for photocatalysts. (c) Steady-state PL spectra under various temperatures for the photocatalyst. (d) The plot of transient PL decay dynamics under different temperature conditions.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nr05413b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
