Cross-dehydrogenative coupling: a sustainable reaction for C–C bond formations  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC01871J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC01871J
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 6789-6862Cross-dehydrogenative coupling: a sustainable reaction for C–C bond formations

        
          
            Tian 
            Tian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiping 
            Li
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Chao-Jun 
            Li
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China. E-mail: zhipingli@ruc.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry and FQRNT Center for Green Chemistry and Catalysis, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West, Montreal, Quebec H3A 0B8, Canada. E-mail: cj.li@mcgill.ca
Received 
      26th May 2021
    , Accepted 23rd July 2021First published on 23rd July 2021AbstractWe are entering an era that emphasizes greenness and sustainability. Based on such a philosophy, it is critical to uncover novel and original sustainable reaction modes for future green chemical syntheses. The cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) reaction has thus been widely developed as one of the most sustainable and efficient synthesis strategies for constructing C–C bonds. This review summarizes the development of this field over the past 20 years, with a discussion on future trends and directions: from the original reaction model at the beginning and its development in the first decade, to extensive research in the second decade. The latest development sees the emergence of alternative forms of energy inputs (photoredox, mechano, microwave, electrochemical, continuous-flow and solar quantum dots) to facilitate CDC reactions, gradually replacing the classical form of thermal energy, which will inspire broader applications and innovations in the future.
1 Introduction
The construction of carbon–carbon bonds – central to organic chemistry – is ubiquitous in all areas of scientific research.1 It has a fundamental impact on life sciences, the pharmaceutical industry, natural product syntheses, and materials science and technologies. Consequently, C–C bond formation has been the subject of numerous studies by chemists around the world, with countless achievements. From the well-known classical nucleophilic substitutions, nucleophilic additions, electrophilic substitutions, electrophilic additions and pericyclic reactions,2 to the more modern transition-metal-catalyzed cross-couplings and radical chain reactions, and to the newer areas of NHC catalysis, nano-catalysis, photochemistry, electrochemistry and continuous flow chemistry, a wide range of reactions have been created for forming C–C bonds.3
Coupling reactions, a powerful strategy for organic syntheses, are one of the most important topics under study in the field of organic synthesis.4 Different types of coupling reactions, such as the Kumada-coupling,5 Hiyama-coupling,6 Stille-coupling,7 Negishi-coupling,8 Suzuki-coupling9 and Sonogashira-coupling,10 and various coupling substrates have been developed over the past decades (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Classical cross-coupling reactions. 
All these protocols require two coupling groups: depending on the electronegativity of the leaving group, the carbon attached to a leaving group such as a halogen, usually bears a δ + charge, while the carbon attached to a leaving group such as a reactive metal carries a δ − charge. When these two electronically different carbon coupling groups are placed in the transition-metal-catalyzed reaction system, they will undergo a favorable coupling reaction. However, the need to introduce these leaving groups adds extra-syntheses steps, leading to waste generation from reactions and purifications. Therefore, we can imagine that, if requirement for leaving groups is avoided and the cross-dehydrogenative coupling reaction takes place directly from the simplest C–H bonds, it will greatly shorten the reaction steps and improve the reaction efficiency and atom utilization (Scheme 2). Thus, the concept of cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) reactions was born and has gradually been developed and explored (Scheme 3).11 This review focuses on the historical development of this sustainable carbon–carbon bond construction mode and its future trends.
 Scheme 2  Electronic matching rules for cross-coupling reactions. 
 Scheme 3  A sustainable strategy for forming C–C bonds. 
2 Historical development of cross-dehydrogenative coupling
2.1 Pre-CDC era
The direct generation of C–C bonds from only C–H bonds can be traced back almost 150 years, when Glaser reported the homo oxidative dimerization of terminal alkyne C–H bonds to form a conjugated diyne (Scheme 4a) in 1869, using a stoichiometric amount of Cu as a catalyst and oxidant.12 In the following decades, homo-dimerizations of Csp2–H bonds and Csp3–H bonds were also reported successively. Among them, Iataaki,13a Tanaka,13b and Yamaguchi's groups13c used palladium-catalyzed, rhodium/photocatalytic or thermal systems, respectively, to dimerize benzene to form biphenyl (Scheme 4b). In addition, Crabtree and co-workers14 reported in 1989 the use of the mercury/photocatalytic system to dehydrogenatively couple two Csp3–H bonds of small alkanes to form a mixture of larger aliphatic organic compounds (Scheme 4c). The analysis of the three classical reactions revealed that all three systems used stoichiometric transition metals or light sources as oxidants to enable the reactions to occur, but under harsh conditions with an extremely limited range of substrates, and generally homo-dimerizations. Such restrictions are due to the fact that, because carbon is partially negatively charged in the C–H bond, due to its slightly greater electronegativity than hydrogen, there is an electronic mismatch when two negatively charged carbon atoms are coupled.
 Scheme 4  Early examples of forming C–C bonds from two C–H bonds. 
Therefore, an oxidizing agent must be added to the reaction system to selectively oxidize and dehydrogenate one of the C–H bonds, so that the carbon is surrounded by the positive δ+ and matches the other C–H carbon δ− electronically for coupling. Importantly, this strategy will allow chemists to cross-couple any two different C–H bonds readily. With this bold design and hypothesis, chemists have discovered through extensive exploration that this reaction mode generally produces the following three key intermediates in different catalytic reaction systems to make the cross-dehydrogenative coupling reaction successful: the first is a carbocation intermediate produced by the oxidative H-removal of C–H by an oxidant; the second is a carbon radical intermediate produced by a single-electron oxidation of C–H bonds by an oxidant or H-abstractor; and the third is a transition-metal complex intermediate formed by the activation of the C–H bond during transition-metal catalysis. The subsequent reaction with the C–H bond of another molecule results in the C–C bonds being constructed (Scheme 5).
 Scheme 5  Modern design model for cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions. 
2.2 The development of cross-dehydrogenative coupling
Guided by the philosophy of Green Chemistry,15 Li's research team pioneered the initial concept and exploration of cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions at the beginning of this century.16 They found that, through the selection and modulation of oxidants, different C–H bonds can undergo selective cross-dehydrogenative couplings. Gradually, a large number of CDC reactions have been developed and reported. A SciFinder search with the term “cross-dehydrogenative coupling” alone shows the rapid increase of publications on this topic (Scheme 6). It should be pointed out that an even larger number of publications based on the CDC concept but using other terms, such as “oxidative coupling”, “dehydrogenative cross-couplings”, and “C–H/C–H cross couplings”, have not been counted. Next, this paper will review the development and exploration of CDC reactions at the beginning of this century, in terms of the different types of classical reactions to which CDC reactions can be applied.
 Scheme 6  The number of publications per year found by searching for the term “cross-dehydrogenative coupling” in SciFinder. (There is still a large number of oxidative C–H/C–H coupling publications not being counted.) 

2.2.1 The cross-dehydrogenative coupling of Csp3–H bonds. 
2.2.1.1 CDC-type aza-Henry reaction. 
The aza-Henry reaction was reported by Leonard and Leubner in 1949,17 by reacting phenylnitromethane with dihydroisoquinoline iodide, which was pre-generated by the oxidation of tetrahydroisoquinoline with iodine, eventually giving the corresponding coupling product. Li's group first reported the CDC-type aza-Henry reaction in 2005.18 Using different tertiary amines and different nitroalkanes as the two coupling partners, the authors found that the reaction under the catalysis of cuprous bromide with tert-butyl hydroperoxide as the oxidant gave the products in good yields, in which the Csp3–H bond at the α-position of the nitrogen atom dehydrocoupled with the Csp3–H at the α-position of the nitro group. Subsequently, the authors chose different tertiary amines (tetrahydroisoquinoline and N,N-dimethylaniline) for coupling with nitromethane and nitroethane for the reaction, to afford the expected products in 30–75% yields (Scheme 7).
 Scheme 7  Copper-catalyzed CDC aza-Henry-type reaction. 
Subsequently, different aza-Henry reactions via cross-dehydrogenation coupling were gradually reported. Li's,19a Xiang's,19b Liang's,19c Zhu's,19d Prabhu's,19e Todd's19f and Itoh's19g groups and others used different oxidation systems to achieve more efficient aza-Henry type cross-dehydrogenation coupling of tetrahydroisoquinolines with nitroalkanes under various conditions. In particular, the use of natural oxygen or hydrogen peroxide as green oxidants and water as a solvent in these studies gave the desired coupling products in good yields (Scheme 8).
 Scheme 8  Various systems of CDC-type aza-Henry reaction. 
In an earlier study of this reaction, Li's group suggested a possible mechanism,18 in which the copper-catalyzed reaction would reduce the α-position of the nitro group to produce an iminium oxide intermediate, followed by oxidative dehydrogenation of the α-position of the tertiary amine to produce an iminium intermediate. The former would undergo nucleophilic addition to the iminium intermediate under the coordination of the copper catalyst to give the final product (Scheme 9).
 Scheme 9  Plausible mechanism for the copper-catalyzed aza-Henry-type CDC reaction. 
2.2.1.2 CDC-type Mannich reaction. 
In the above mechanistic discussions, the iminium intermediate is key for the reaction to proceed. As the Mannich reaction is an important method for synthesizing β-carbonyl amines, great efforts have been made to extend the CDC reaction to Mannich-type reactions.20
In 2005, Li and co-workers successfully synthesized β-carbonylamine products by reacting tetrahydroisoquinolines with malonic acid esters catalyzed by CuBr in the presence of tert-butyl hydroperoxide as the oxidant.21 The following possible reaction mechanism was proposed: the tertiary amine in the α-position to the C–H bond was oxidized to form an iminium intermediate coordinated with the copper catalyst, while the malonate ester formed a six-membered ring intermediate coordinated with copper upon enolization. The two intermediates then couple to produce the desired final product and regenerate the copper catalyst (Scheme 10).
 Scheme 10  Copper-catalyzed CDC Mannich-type reaction and a plausible mechanism. 
A few years later, several related Mannich-type cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions were reported. β-Carbonyl amines were obtained by Guo's group22a in good yields using tertiary amines with ketones in a copper-catalyzed system in the presence of oxygen. In the same year, Klussmann and co-workers22b achieved the same reaction using a vanadium-catalyzed system. In 2012, Prabhu's team22c again achieved this archetypical cross-dehydrogenative coupling under metal-free conditions in the presence of DDQ and AIBN as catalysts (Scheme 11).
 Scheme 11  Various catalytic CDC Mannich-type reaction systems. 
2.2.1.3 Friedel–Crafts-type CDC reaction. 
The formation of a Csp2–Csp3 bond, an important transformation in organic synthesis, is of great synthetic value.23 For the construction of this chemical bond, one of the most important reactions is the Friedel–Crafts alkylation reaction, i.e. the classical electrophilic substitution reaction of aromatic compounds (SAr2). Cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions were found to be possible for Friedel–Crafts reactions. In 2005, Li and co-workers used CuBr as a catalyst for the Friedel–Crafts-type cross-dehydrogenative coupling reaction of the nitrogen atom in the α-position of tetrahydroisoquinolines with indoles in the presence of tert-butyl hydroperoxide to obtain the indole alkylation product with a broad substrate scope (Scheme 12).24
 Scheme 12  Copper-catalyzed CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction. 
In the following years, related Friedel–Crafts-type CDC reactions were continuously explored and different catalytic systems were developed. Among them, Schnürch,25a Che25b and Hayashi25f,g reported different iron catalysts for CDC aromatic alkylation. Che's,25c Huang's,25d Zhang's25e and Prabhu's25h groups further achieved such reactions catalyzed by ruthenium, copper and vanadium. These research studies further expanded the scope of CDC reactions and demonstrated the convenience and efficiency of such reactions (Scheme 13).
 Scheme 13  Various catalytic CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction systems. 
With further research, Schnürch's group developed a more reasonable hypothesis for the reaction mechanism.25a First, the lone pair of electrons of the oxygen atom in the Boc protecting group of the tertiary amine coordinates with the iron catalyst, followed by coordination of the electron lone pair on the nitrogen atom in the indole. At the same time, the tert-butyl hydroperoxide homolytically cleaves and the resulting tert-butoxy radical performs H-abstraction on the nitrogen atom of the tertiary amine, forming radical intermediates. Then radical addition followed by re-aromatization after single electron transfer gives the final indole alkylation product, with regeneration of the iron-catalyst to start a new catalytic cycle (Scheme 14).
 Scheme 14  Plausible mechanism for the iron-catalyzed CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction. 
On the other hand, in 2006, Li's group found that tetrahydroisoquinolines could undergo CDC reactions with naphthol in the presence of a copper catalyst. Because naphthol is less reactive than indole for the Friedel–Crafts reaction, but bears a reactive hydroxyl group, it gives rise to both homo and cross-coupled products.26 After optimization of the reaction conditions, self-coupled by-products could be minimized, with the CDC alkylation product of naphthol being obtained in good yield (Table 1).
Table 1 Copper-catalyzed CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction of tetrahydroisoquinolines with naphthols









Entry
[Cu]
Yield of main productsa,b (%)
Yield of by-productsa,b (%)





a Tetrahydroisoquinoline (0.1 mmol), 2-naphthol (0.1 mmol), TBHP (0.1 mmol, 5.5 M in decane), and [Cu] (5 mol%), unless mentioned otherwise.
b Reported yields were determined by NMR using an internal standard.
c Tetrahydroisoquinoline (0.2 mmol).





1
CuI
57
13


2
CuCl
51
10


3
CuBr
58
23


4
CuBr2
63
10


5c
CuBr
63
10


6c
CuBr2
72
11


7
CuSO4
53
11


8
Cu(OTf)2
55
15




The CDC reactions for other heterocycles continued after more intensive studies on indoles. In 2011, Li and co-workers achieved a palladium-catalyzed Friedel–Crafts-type cross-dehydrogenative reaction of alkyl alcohols with aromatic N-heterocycles.27 The reaction was carried out in a mixed oxidation system of peroxide and air, to form the new C–C bond at the hydroxyl α-position. A series of secondary alcohol products were also obtained in high yields (Scheme 15).
 Scheme 15  Palladium-catalyzed CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction of N-heteroaromatics and alcohols. Conditions: 0.2 mmol of heterocycle, 1.0 mL of alcohol, 5.0 mol% PdCl2, 5.0 mol% rac-biNap, 3.5 equiv. of DCP at 120 °C in air for 16 h unless otherwise noted. Isolated yields. aAt 135 °C with 3.0 equiv. of DCP. 
In the same year, Wang and co-workers used benzoxazole, benzimidazole and benzothiazole to dehydrogenatively couple with alcohols or ethers at the α-position in the presence of tert-butyl hydroperoxide, to generate Csp2–Csp3 bonds in high yields.28 Also, the authors speculated on a possible reaction mechanism based on the results. Under heating conditions, tert-butyl hydroperoxide undergoes O–O homolytic cleavage, releasing tert-butoxy radicals and hydroxyl radicals. The two radicals perform H-abstraction at the α-position to nitrogen atoms of N-containing heterocycles and the α-position of alcohols or ethers, respectively, to produce new aryl radicals and alkyl radicals, which couple to generate the final product. At the same time, the authors also observed the self-coupling products of the two radicals, thus confirming the postulated mechanism (Scheme 16).
 Scheme 16  CDC reactions of benzimidazoles, benzothiazoles and benzoxazoles with ethers under metal-free conditions. 
2.2.1.4 CDC Morita–Baylis–Hillman reaction. 
The Morita–Baylis–Hillman (MBH) reaction is an important reaction for the efficient synthesis of organic compounds.29 In 2006, Li's group combined the CDC strategy using tetrahydroisoquinolines with olefins or acrylates in the presence of tert-butyl hydroperoxide and DABCO as catalysts to obtain the final alkenylated products, extending the use of CDC reactions in organic synthesis (Scheme 17).26
 Scheme 17  Copper-catalyzed Morita–Baylis–Hillman-type CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with alkenes. 
2.2.1.5 CDC-type alkynylation. 
The synthesis of alkynes has long been a focus of organic synthesis.30 To address this challenge through cross-dehydrogenative coupling, Li's group was the first to explore the coupling reaction of alkynes with tertiary amines in 2004.31 It was found that, when using CuBr as the catalyst and TBHP as the oxidant, the reaction could yield the tertiary amine alkynylated products in good yields at 100 °C, while still being able to react with less reactive aliphatic-terminated alkynes (Scheme 18).
 Scheme 18  Copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of N,N-dimethylanilines with alkynes. Reaction conditions: 4.0 mmol aniline, 2.0 mmol alkyne, 0.1 mmol copper bromide, and 0.4 mL t-BuOOH (5–6 M in decane). Isolated yields were based on alkynes. 
The authors speculate that the reaction occurs mainly by the following reaction mechanism: the tertiary amine readily generates copper-coordinated iminium intermediates under the oxidation of copper catalyst and peroxide; and at the same time, copper can activate the terminal alkynes to form copper intermediates to enhance their nucleophilicity, and the intermediates undergo nucleophilic addition to the former to give the alkynylated products, with the copper catalyst being regenerated for the next catalytic cycle (Scheme 19).
 Scheme 19  A plausible mechanism of CDC alkynylation reactions. 
Subsequently, the use of CDC for alkynylation was extensively developed. In 2009, Vogel and co-workers32a obtained tertiary amine alkynylation products in high yields using iron catalysts in the presence of di-tert-butyl peroxides. The next year, Li and co-workers32b successfully achieved the CDC alkynylation of C–H bonds adjacent to oxygen atoms in ethers with terminal alkynes using a silver-catalyzed system in the presence of DDQ as an oxidant. In 2012, Nakamura's group32c used alkynylamines to react with terminal alkynes in a dehydrogenative coupling reaction at the neighboring position of the alkynylamines catalyzed by zinc bromide, in which the alkynes were reduced to olefins to give the 1,6-enyne products in good yields. The reaction cleverly used the alkyne in the substrate as an internal oxidant for the reaction, more easily and efficiently achieving CDC alkynylation. In the same year, Jiao's research team reported the C–H bond alkynylation of ethers contiguous with oxygen atoms.32d The final alkynylation products were obtained under inexpensive iron-catalyzed conditions using DDQ as the oxidizing agent. A few years later, Chikhalia's group carried out C–H bond alkynylation of thiazolidinones as coupling units in the presence of oxygen using a palladium catalyst adjacent to the sulfur atom.32e In the same year, Lei and co-workers achieved the selective alkynylation of simple unactivated alkanes in a mixed copper/nickel/silver catalytic system by exploiting the efficient reactivity of free radicals.32f In addition, the authors demonstrated through mechanistic studies that the radical-mediated cleavage of Csp3–H is the tachyonic step. These alkynylation reactions using CDC strategies have opened up new horizons for Csp3–Csp bond construction (Scheme 20).
 Scheme 20  Diverse CDC alkynylation reactions. 
2.2.1.6 CDC of α-amino acid derivatives. 
The 21st century has been called the era of life sciences, in which green chemistry can play an important role. In 2008, Li and co-workers reported the CDC reaction of glycine derivatives with malonate esters or terminal alkynes positioned at the C–H bond adjacent to the N atom33a (Scheme 21(a) and (b)). In the following year, Li and co-workers continued the alkynylation reactions of C–H adjacent to nitrogen atoms in glycine derivatives and peptides under mild conditions.33b This reaction was carried out at room temperature in a copper-catalyzed system using tert-butyl hydroperoxide as the oxidizing agent. Importantly, this reaction allowed the retention of the optically active chiral center of the glycine derivatives. Thus, this protocol is expected to provide a late-stage functionalization tool for increasingly important proteomics and peptide-based drug research (Scheme 21(c)). Based on the experimental results, the authors proposed that the reaction mechanism proceeded via the coordination of the enolate form of the malonate derivative with a copper catalyst to form a six-membered ring intermediate. On the other side, the glycine derivative forms an imine intermediate under copper-catalyzed oxidation conditions, which then undergoes nucleophilic addition with the aforementioned malonate metal complex to obtain the final product.
 Scheme 21  Copper-catalyzed CDC reaction of glycine derivatives with malonates or alkynes and a plausible mechanism. 
Subsequently, extensive efforts were made to explore the more general CDC reaction of glycine derivatives. Since the mechanism involves crucial iminium intermediates, the CDC reaction has been extended to other types of C–H bonds as well as small peptides. Later, Huang's group used glycine derivatives and carbonyl compounds with copper acetate as a catalyst and pyrroline as a co-catalyst in the presence of TBHP or DDQ, to obtain β-amino ketones in high yields.34 The authors augmented the nucleophilicity of the carbonyl compounds by the clever use of pyrroline. They deduced the mechanism to be as follows: the glycine derivative under the oxidation of DDQ generates amine radical cations, which are then dehydrogenated by DDQ again to generate imine intermediates ligated with copper to enhance the reaction activity. At this time, the pyrroline catalyst reacts with carbonyl compounds to form enamine intermediates, which undergo nucleophilic addition to the previously produced imine–copper intermediate to obtain β-amino ketones upon hydrolysis (Scheme 22). Meanwhile, Huo and co-workers reported the CDC reaction between indole and a glycine derivative under oxygen in the absence of a metal catalyst (Scheme 23).35
 Scheme 22  Copper-catalyzed CDC Mannich-type reactions of glycine derivatives with ketones and a plausible mechanism. 
 Scheme 23  Metal-free CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reactions of glycine derivatives with indoles and a plausible mechanism. 
2.2.1.7 CDC of benzylic C–H bonds. 
The C–H bond at the benzylic position is an important reactive center.36 In 2007, Li's group was the first to report the CDC reaction of 1,3-diketones with benzylic C–H bonds. By using inexpensive iron as a catalyst in the presence of di-tert-butyl peroxides, highly selective CDC reaction products were obtained.37 In the same year, Lu and co-workers discovered the self-coupling reaction of p-xylene catalyzed by palladium with potassium persulfate and trifluoroacetic acid, to give the dehydrogenative coupling of the benzyl C–H bond of p-xylene with the phenyl C–H bond of another molecule.38 A few years later, Li's group, through the continued exploration of the CDC reaction, successfully dehydrogenatively coupled the C–H bond of the benzylic position to the C–H bond of the terminal alkyne using a copper catalyst.39 Three different types of Csp3–Csp3, Csp3–Csp2 and Csp3–Csp bonds have been successfully constructed at the benzylic position. Soon after, the CDC reaction at the benzylic position continued to be developed and studied by chemists. In 2012, Patel and co-workers enabled the CDC reaction of toluene with phenylpyridine in a palladium-catalyzed system to give the product of 2-position arylation.40 This reaction proceeded through four C–H bond cleavages to efficiently synthesize diaryl ketones by installing aryl groups at the proximal sites with guided substrates in a highly selective manner. Next, Huang's group41 followed C–H bond activation at the benzylic position of toluene and constructed Csp3–Csp2 bonds using the CDC reaction to introduce open-chain enones into the benzylic position in a copper-catalyzed system in 2015 (Scheme 24).
 Scheme 24  Diverse CDC reactions at the benzylic position. 
After extensive studies, Li's group was the first to propose a possible mechanism for the benzylic CDC reaction.37 Under catalytic conditions with the Fe catalyst, the di-tert-butyl peroxide oxidizes FeII to FeIII and produces tert-butoxy radicals, which then abstract H from the methyl group of toluene to form radicals at the benzylic position, while 1,3-diketones undergo enolization followed by coordination with FeIII. The benzyl radicals undergo radical addition to the enol, and at the same time FeIII dissociates by reduction to complete the catalytic cycle (Scheme 25).
 Scheme 25  A plausible mechanism of iron-catalyzed CDC reactions of 1,3-diketones and diarylmethanes. 
2.2.1.8 CDC of allylic C–H bonds. 
Tsuji–Trost-type reactions via C–H bond functionalization at the allylic position are still of great interest.36 The classical Tsuji–Trost reaction, requiring an allylic leaving group, provided an important strategy for constructing Csp3–Csp3 bonds at the allylic position decades ago.42 After the success of using CDC reactions to construct Csp3–Csp2 and Csp3–Csp bonds at the benzylic position, in 2005, Li's group achieved the first Tsuji–Trost-type dehydrogenative coupling reaction with 1,3-diketones using a cyclic alkene as the reaction substrate and TBHP as the oxidant in a mixed copper/cobalt catalytic system (Scheme 26).43
 Scheme 26  Copper/cobalt catalyzed CDC Tsuji–Trost-type reaction. Conditions: 0.025 mmol of CuBr, 0.1 mmol of CoCl2, 5.0 mmol of alkene, 1.0 mmol of 1,3-dicarbonyl compound, and 2.0 mmol of TBHP. Isolated yields were based on 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds. 
A few years later, White44 and Shi's45 groups independently reported allylic CDC reactions between allylarenes and nitroacetate or 1,3-dicarbonyls, respectively, in a palladium-catalyzed system using dimethylbenzoquinone (and benzoquinone) as the oxidant to obtain the corresponding products in good yields. The reaction extended the classical palladium-catalyzed Tsuji–Trost-type reaction using a CDC strategy (Scheme 27). Shi and co-workers have studied the mechanism of this protocol and proposed a possible mechanism:46 first, an electrophilic allylic C–H bond cleavage step leads to the formation of the critical π-allyl palladium complex intermediate A from the allyl aromatic compound and the palladium catalyst, which is subsequently nucleophilically substituted by the 1,3-dicarbonyl compound so that the final product is delivered. Meanwhile, the palladium catalyst (Pd0) was re-oxidized by benzoquinone to complete the catalytic cycle. In this study, the authors emphasize that benzoquinone plays an important role in this reaction mode, which eliminates the need for the addition of a base. Thus, the quinone is not only used as an oxidant but also as a proton acceptor to facilitate the reaction.
 Scheme 27  Palladium catalyzed CDC Tsuji–Trost-type reaction. 
Such allylic CDC reactions continue to evolve, due to the important allylic functionality in synthesis and applications. Recently, Dong's group developed a CDC reaction of simple unactivated allylic compounds using di-tert-butyl peroxide as an oxidant and veratronitrile as an additive to produce homoallylic nitriles under copper-catalyzed conditions.47 This protocol has been mechanistically investigated by the authors and the results show that alkyl nitrile radicals play a crucial role. Ligand exchange between copper pivalate (CuII) and alkyl nitriles gave copper nitrile CuII species. Homolytic cleavage released nitrile alkyl radicals and CuI. Then radical addition to the alkene was followed by single electron oxidative addition to give copper (CuIII) pivalate, which underwent reductive elimination to give the final product (Path A). The authors also proposed another pathway in which copper pivalate was oxidized by peroxides to produce tert-butoxy radicals, which released a molecule of acetone to produce methyl radicals. H-Abstraction of alkyl nitrile compounds by the methyl radical produced nitrile alkyl radicals and then continued the catalytic cycle (Path B) (Scheme 28).
 Scheme 28  Copper-catalyzed CDC Tsuji–Trost-type reaction and a plausible mechanism. 
After the success of the CDC reaction to construct Csp3–Csp3 bonds, the construction of Csp3–Csp2 and Csp3–Csp bonds at the allylic position became the next challenge. The allyl carbocation, as an important reactive intermediate, is involved in a large number of methodological synthesis studies. In 2009, Bao's group used a palladium-catalyzed system to obtain the CDC reaction products of the allyl C–H bond with indole under the oxidation conditions of DDQ.48 On the basis of experiments, the authors give a possible mechanism. First, DDQ performs oxidative dehydrogenation of allyl compounds to form allyl carbocation intermediates, followed by coordination with palladium chloride and indole to form allylpalladium intermediates. The final product is obtained after ligand migration and re-aromatization. When indole was reacted with monosubstituted or unsymmetric 1,3-disubstituted propylene, isomers were detected, which implied the involvement of the π-allylpalladium intermediate during the catalytic cycle, thus corroborating the reaction mechanism (Scheme 29).
 Scheme 29  Palladium-catalyzed CDC reaction of allylic compounds with indoles and a plausible mechanism. 
Then, Mejia's group developed a copper-catalyzed CDC reaction between an allyl C–H bond and the terminal alkyne C–H bond in the presence of di-tert-butyl peroxide to give the 1,4-enyne derivatives with high efficiency.49 A possible mechanism was proposed as follows: di-tert-butyl peroxide undergoes homolytic cleavage to produce the tert-butoxy radical, which releases a molecule of acetone to produce the methyl radical. Another tert-butoxy radical oxidizes the copper catalyst to form tert-butoxy copper (CuII), and the methyl radical abstracts a H-atom from the allyl C–H bond to produce the allyl radicals that form the π-allyl Cu intermediate after single-electron oxidative addition to the copper (CuII) catalyst. Another part of the copper catalyst forms alkynyl copper compounds with alkynes, which undergo transmetallation and reductive elimination to afford the alkynyl propargylation products (Scheme 30).
 Scheme 30  Copper-catalyzed CDC alkynylation reaction of allylic positions and a plausible mechanism. 
2.2.1.9 Aldol-type reaction. 
The aldol reaction is an important strategy for the synthesis of α,β-unsaturated ketones and β-hydroxy or alkoxy ketones.50 In 2005, Li and co-workers used a CDC strategy to obtain aldol-type products. The reaction uses a copper/indium catalytic system to dehydrogenatively couple the C–H bond adjacent to oxygen and the carbonyl group in the presence of DDQ or simply using DDQ as an oxidant without using a metal catalyst under heating.51,52 Mechanistically, with malonic acid ester as the reaction substrate, it formed a six-membered ring metal-complex with copper/indium coordination. For the ether substrate under the oxidation of DDQ, the hydrogen atom of the C–H bond adjacent to oxygen was abstracted to form an oxonium ion, which then underwent nucleophilic addition with the metal-complex intermediate to form the aldol-type products. For metal-free catalysis, the authors proposed that DDQ, the two-electron oxidant, performed a secondary one-electron oxidation of the ether to give an oxonium ion intermediate. Subsequently, the ketone is deprotonated by the DDQ anion to generate an enolate intermediate, which then undergoes nucleophilic addition to the oxonium intermediate to give the final aldol-type product (Scheme 31).
 Scheme 31  CDC aldol-type reactions under copper/indium-catalyzed or metal-free conditions and plausible mechanisms. 
Soon after, Li's group used NHPI as a catalyst and oxygen as the terminal oxidant in the previous Cu/In hybrid system for the aldol-type CDC reaction in 2009.53 The use of NHPI in the reaction permits the C–H bond adjacent to oxygen to undergo H-abstraction readily to form alkyl radicals,54 which are then trapped by oxygen to form a hydroperoxide intermediate that is reduce to a hydroxyl group by the metal catalyst. The final product was obtained after substitution by the enolate generated between the metal catalyst and the carbonyl compound (Scheme 32).
 Scheme 32  NHPI-mediated copper-catalyzed CDC aldol-type reactions of benzocyclic ethers with ketones and plausible mechanism. 
Shortly before this, Li and co-workers used either an iron-catalyzed system or a 2-chloranil oxidation system to react ethers or thioethers with 1,3-diketones, via the C–H bond adjacent to oxygen or sulfur, to obtain aldol-type products.55 This series of Csp3–Csp3 bond constructions once again demonstrates the efficiency of the CDC strategy (Scheme 33).
 Scheme 33  Diverse CDC aldol-type reactions between 1,3-diketones and heteroatom compounds. 
2.2.1.10 Alkylation. 
The C–H bond functionalization of simple aliphatic alkanes has always been one of the research focuses of chemists. Due to the inertness of the C–H bond of aliphatic alkanes, its activation is always difficult. How to use the CDC strategy to activate such bonds to construct C–C bonds is the focus of this review. In 2007, Li's group reported the first CDC reaction of simple alkanes and 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds catalyzed by iron. The proposed reaction mechanism was analogous to the earlier iron-catalyzed CDC reaction of the benzylic C–H bond with the α-C–H bond of 1,3-dicarbonyl (Scheme 34(a)).56 In 2008, Li's group further developed a ruthenium-catalyzed direct CDC reaction between the C–H bond of aliphatic alkanes and the C–H bond of aromatic hydrocarbons.57 This new C–C bond construction method led to a wide range of subsequent research lines (Scheme 34(b)). Shortly afterwards, the research group reported a CDC reaction between pyridine N-oxide derivatives and simple cycloalkanes with di-tert-butyl peroxide as an oxidant under metal-free conditions (Scheme 34(c)).58 In the same year, with Sc(OTf)3 as a Lewis acid catalyst, the regioselectivity of the CDC reaction of nitrogen heterocyclic compounds, such as pyridine and quinoline, with the C–H bonds of cycloalkanes can be controlled at the 2-position (Scheme 34(d)).59 In 2011, the research team further extended such CDC reactions between simple alkanes to benzene derivatives using a ruthenium catalyst.60 In the presence of di-tert-butyl peroxide, CDC of simple cycloalkanes or toluene and benzene derivatives (especially benzoic acid) gave Csp3–H bond arylation products efficiently. The electronic nature of the substituents on the benzene ring does not affect the reaction site on the arene ring, generally giving para-functionalizations (Scheme 34(e)).
 Scheme 34  Diverse CDC reactions of simple alkanes with N-heterocyclics. 
For the ruthenium-catalyzed CDC reaction between the 2-position C–H bond of 2-arylpyridine and alkanes, the following mechanism was proposed: firstly, ruthenium undergoes C–H activation to generate a ruthenium intermediate, which then forms an alkylated ruthenium complex intermediate upon reaction with alkanes and di-tert-butyl peroxide. Finally, reductive elimination takes place to release the final product and regenerate the ruthenium catalyst for the next catalytic cycle (Scheme 35).54
 Scheme 35  Ruthenium-catalyzed CDC reactions of arenes and alkanes. 
2.2.1.11 Intramolecular CDC reaction. 
Finally, the intramolecular CDC reaction has also been extensively studied. In 2004, Sames and co-workers developed an intramolecular CDC reaction using allylamidopyrroles catalyzed by iridium, resulting in a bipyrrolic ring skeleton.61 Mechanistically, the active Ir-catalyst is generated via ligand exchange. Then the catalyst will undergo coordination and insertion into the adjacent C–H bond of the amide. Subsequently, alkyl-migration and reductive elimination will give the olefin intermediate and regenerate the active catalyst. Finally, double bond isomerization gives the endo double bond product for the major 5-membered ring product, while the minor product is obtained via the less favorable alkylation migration pathway (Scheme 36).
 Scheme 36  Iridium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reaction and a plausible mechanism. 
The group of Yu also explored intramolecular CDC reactions in 2010. The authors developed a palladium-catalyzed direct allylation of Csp3–H bonds.62 They used amides with acrylates as reaction substrates, and after the addition of equivalent amounts of copper and silver to the system, the amides underwent a 1,4-conjugate addition step to give cyclic lactam products. Cyclopropylidene C–H bonds and substrates containing α-hydrogen atoms are equally applicable in this system (Scheme 37).
 Scheme 37  Palladium-catalyzed intermolecular CDC reaction. Reaction conditions: 0.2 mmol of substrate, 0.1 mL of benzyl acrylate, 10 mol% Pd(OAc)2, 2.0 equiv. of LiCl, 1.1 equiv. of Cu(OAc)2, 1.1 equiv. of AgOAc, 1.0 mL of DMF, 120 °C, N2, 12 h. The yields are isolated yields. aObtained as a mixture of inseparable cis/trans diastereomers. Optically inactive starting materials were used. 
Shortly afterwards, Ge's group developed an intramolecular CDC reaction by a similar domino reaction model. The authors reported for the first time that copper-catalyzed Csp3–H bonding of N-methyl-N-phenylhydrazones underwent a sequence of oxidation, cyclization, and aromatization steps, leading to the synthesis of cinnoline derivatives.63 A possible mechanism was proposed as follows: the hydrazone, upon isomerization and oxidation catalyzed by copper, evolved into an aldehyde intermediate, which then underwent subsequent Friedel–Crafts-type cyclization, dehydration, and demethylation to give the final cinnoline derivatives (Scheme 38).
 Scheme 38  Copper-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reaction and a plausible mechanism. 


2.2.2 The cross-dehydrogenative coupling of Csp2–H bonds. 
2.2.2.1 CDC via a Heck-type reaction. 
The construction of Csp2–C bonds plays a pivotal role in organic synthesis, the pharmaceutical industry, organic photovoltaic polymers and life sciences. Over the past two decades, as cross-dehydrogenation coupling reactions have been developed, Csp2–C bond formation via the CDC route has attracted great interest. The Heck-type reaction is one of the most important synthesis strategies for the preparation of endo-alkenes, and the combination of the CDC and Heck reactions can lead to a more efficient and green construction of Csp2–C bonds for the synthesis of various olefins.64
In the 1960s, Moritani's group was the first to use stoichiometric palladium catalysts for the oxidative coupling of benzene and alkenes, and achieved the first so-called oxidative Heck-type reaction, (although it requires the functional alkene functional group, it can be loosely called CDC reaction) successfully constructing Csp2–Csp2 bonds.65 A possible mechanism for the palladium-catalyzed Heck-type CDC reaction was gradually studied. In general, most Heck-type reactions under the CDC strategy proceed by the following two reaction processes: firstly, zero-valent palladium is oxidized to PdII by the oxidant, and then, the PdII catalyst activates the C–H bond of the aromatic to generate the aryl PdII; then addition of the aryl PdII to the olefin gives the carbopalladated intermediate, which undergoes syn-β-H reductive elimination to give the final product and regenerates the Pd0 catalyst.66 In the other reaction mode, Pd0 is first oxidized to PdII so that it is more readily coordinated to the olefin, followed by palladation/rearomatization with the aromatic hydrocarbon and syn-β-H reductive elimination to afford the product and regenerate the Pd0 catalyst (Scheme 39).67
 Scheme 39  Palladium-catalyzed Heck-type CDC and two types of plausible mechanisms. 
In 2002, Leeuwen's group reported the palladium-catalyzed Heck-type CDC reaction between acyl aromatic amines and acrylates using benzoquinone as an oxidant. The reaction yielded products after coupling with olefins under mild conditions and in excellent yields. The mechanism was proposed to involve PdII-catalyzed C–H bond activation, followed by the insertion to olefins to form a carbopalladated intermediate. The final product was formed upon β-hydride elimination while the released Pd0 was oxidized by benzoquinone to PdII (Scheme 40).68
 Scheme 40  Palladium-catalyzed CDC Heck-type reactions of acyl anilines with alkenes and a plausible mechanism. 
Subsequently, extensive studies were reported by Lipshutz69 and Yu70–72 using palladium-catalyzed intermolecular CDC of acyl anilines, phenylacetic acids or unactivated aromatics with olefins, all yielding the final coupling products with high efficiency. Furthermore, in Yu's work, a carboxylate-oriented strategy was used to achieve a tunable regio-selective synthesis of natural product backbones by using amino acid derivatives as ligands (Scheme 41).
 Scheme 41  Diverse palladium-catalyzed CDC Heck-type reactions. 
Moreover, the intramolecular Heck-type reaction under the CDC strategy plays a crucial role in the total synthesis of natural products. In 2002, Corey's group reported coupling of the C–H bond at the 2-position of indole with an intramolecular olefin catalyzed by palladium, which led to the successful completion of the 3-step synthesis of (+)-deoxyisoaustamide.73 Subsequently, in 2004, the Stoltz group used a palladium-catalyzed system to dehydrogenatively couple the C–H bond at the 3-position of pyrrole with an intramolecular olefin, leading to the synthesis of the natural product (+)-dragmacidin F (Scheme 42).74
 Scheme 42  Applications of diverse palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reactions in the total synthesis of natural products. 
In 2008, Gaunt's group achieved the palladium-catalyzed dehydrogenative coupling reaction of the intramolecular pyrrole-2-position C–H bond with intramolecular olefins by using tert-butyl peroxybenzoate, to give fused-ring compounds. The proposed mechanism involves C–H bond activation with PdII (generated in situ from Pd0 and peroxide), intramolecular 6-exo-trig cyclization on the olefin, and subsequent syn-β-H elimination to give the product and regenerate Pd0 (Scheme 43).75
 Scheme 43  Palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reaction and a plausible mechanism. 
Besides palladium, other transition-metal catalytic systems have also been used for the Heck-type CDC strategy. The use of ruthenium and rhodium catalyst systems for the dehydrogenation coupling of aromatic C–H bonds with the C–H bonds of olefins was reported by Milstein's group76 and Li's group77 in 2001 and 2010, respectively. Oxygen and silver salts were uncovered as oxidants. Mechanistically, unlike the palladium catalyst system, the valence state of the ruthenium catalyst was proposed to remain unchanged and the catalytic cycle was driven by the formation of the ruthenium–hydride species (Scheme 44).
 Scheme 44  Other transition-metal-catalyzed CDC Heck-type reactions and a plausible mechanism. 
The C–H bond of aromatic hydrocarbons can be readily coupled dehydrogenatively with quinones, in addition to olefins. As early as 2002, Knölker's group reported palladium-catalyzed intramolecular coupling for the total synthesis of natural products. Using anilino-1,4-benzoquinone as a reaction substrate, the authors synthesized the potent lipid peroxidation inhibitor, carbazoquinocin C, in a palladium-catalyzed reaction with copper acetate as the oxidant (Scheme 45).78
 Scheme 45  Applications of palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reactions of benzoquinones in the total synthesis of natural products. 
In addition to intramolecular dehydrogenative coupling, the intermolecular CDC reaction with benzoquinone was developed by Pirrung's research group in 2005. With silver as an oxidant and hydrated zinc triflate as a catalyst, the dehydrogenative coupling of quinones with the indole 3-position proceeded efficiently (Scheme 46(a)).79 The CDC and double CDC reactions of benzoquinone with indole were reported by Li and co-workers under catalyst-free conditions in water in 2006. This protocol realized water-promoted direct coupling of indole compounds with 1,4-benzoquinones under metal-free, organic solvent-free and additive-free conditions to give the products smoothly (Scheme 46(a) and (b)).80
 Scheme 46  CDC Heck-type reactions of benzoquinones. 
On the other hand, the CDC reaction of C–H bonds of two olefins catalyzed by palladium to form conjugated diolefins also has an important role in synthetic chemistry. From 2004 to 2010, the groups of Ishii,81 Loh82 and Yu83 have been leading the way on this topic, from the coupling of two-molecules of acrylates, to the coupling between acrylate or α,β-unsaturated ketones and common olefins (Scheme 47).
 Scheme 47  Diverse palladium-catalyzed CDC Heck-type reactions between two olefins. 
For the intramolecular CDC reaction of two olefins, Tius and co-workers used dienyl ketones as reaction substrates using oxygen as an oxidant catalyzed by palladium to generate cyclopentenone derivatives. A possible mechanism was proposed to involve C–H activation, carbopalladation, and β-H elimination (Scheme 48).84
 Scheme 48  Palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reaction of two olefins and a plausible mechanism. 
Besides two regular alkenyl C–H bonds, the intramolecular CDC of alkenyl C–H bonds with alkenyl C–H bonds of enols was developed by Widenhoefer85 and Yang in 2002 and 2005, respectively.86 Using long-chain 1,3-diketones as reactants in palladium/copper or palladium/ytterbium hybrid catalytic systems, the 1,3-diketones underwent enolization and then dehydrogenative coupling to give various aliphatic carbocyclic or heterocyclic compounds. These CDC reactions are undoubtedly important strategies in the construction of Csp2–Csp2 bonds (Scheme 49).
 Scheme 49  Palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reactions of olefins with enolates. 
2.2.2.2 CDC of two arenes. 
How to obtain highly selective coupling products via the CDC reaction of C–H bond of two arenes has been continuously studied by chemists. Initially, homo-coupling reactions were introduced first. The homo-CDC reaction of two arenes under oxidizing conditions dates back to the last century.13 In the last two decades, the homo-CDC reaction of 2-arylpyridines has been studied by Sanford,87 Yu88 and Li89,90 by using palladium, copper and ruthenium as catalysts, respectively. This reaction allowed the synthesis of a series of polycyclic aromatic compounds in good yields and excellent selectivity under mild conditions. Different mechanisms have been proposed for the different catalytic systems. For the ruthenium-catalyzed system,86 the mechanism was proposed to involve two consecutive C–H bond activations of two 2-arylpyridine molecules followed by reductive elimination to give the 2-arylpyridine dimer and regenerate the ruthenium catalyst (Scheme 50).
 Scheme 50  Transition-metal-catalyzed homo-CDC reactions of 2-arylpyridines and a possible mechanism under ruthenium catalysis. 
Li and co-workers synthesized a series of functionalized biphenyldicarboxylic acids by the homo-CDC reaction of C–H bonds of two benzoic acid molecules in a rhodium-catalyzed system in water using manganese dioxide as the oxidant in 2015.91 The reaction was applied for the rapid syntheses of natural products such as ellagic acid (Scheme 51(a)). In the following year, Li's group used the same system to produce functionalized biphenyldicarboxylic acid esters (Scheme 51(b)).92 A possible mechanism was proposed to involve a carboxylate-directed double C–H activation of two benzoic acids to form a rhodium intermediate. The final product is generated via reductive elimination.
 Scheme 51  Rhodium-catalyzed one-pot CDC reaction of two benzoic acids and a plausible mechanism. 
In 2006, Lu and co-workers explored the palladium-catalyzed dehydrogenative coupling between benzene and naphthalene derivatives. Using D-isotope experiments, the authors found that kH/kD = 1 when naphthalene was fully deuterated and kH/kD = 9 when benzene was fully deuterated, suggesting that the C–H bond cleavage of benzene was the rate limiting step of the reaction.93 In the following year, Fagnou's group achieved the CDC reaction of indole with benzene in good yield and selectivity by using palladium as the catalyst and copper acetate as the oxidant (Scheme 52).94
 Scheme 52  Palladium-catalyzed CDC reactions of two arenes and KIE studies. 
Meanwhile, Sanford's group reported a highly chemo- and regio-selective CDC reaction between azaphenanthrene and methoxybenzene catalyzed by palladium in 2007 with different benzoquinone oxidants.95 Two years later, the authors carried out more detailed mechanistic studies on this reaction and found that the reaction likely involved N-directed C–H activation to give a cyclopalladation intermediate, which then coordinated with different quinones to give highly chemo and regioselective coupling products after addition and reductive elimination. The palladium catalyst is oxidized by the silver salt to complete the catalytic cycle (Scheme 53).96
 Scheme 53  Palladium-catalyzed regioselective CDC reaction of azaphenanthrene with anisole and a plausible mechanism. 
Soon after, Dong and co-workers developed the CDC reaction between O-phenylcarbamates and simple aromatics with sodium persulfate as a convenient oxidant. In this study, an O-phenylcarbamate derived bimetallic Pd species containing weak Pd–Pd interactions was discovered and characterized for the first time. The key reaction mechanism was proposed to proceed via a directed C–H activation and an electrophilic metallization process (Scheme 54).97
 Scheme 54  Palladium-catalyzed CDC reaction of two different arenes via the directing group strategy. 
Besides intermolecular CDC reactions of two arenes, in 2009, Ohno's group used a palladium-catalyzed system to construct a functionalized carbazole backbone by a one-pot method using cheap and readily available aniline and aryl trifluorosulfonate in the presence of oxygen. The authors found that the substituent effect of aniline caused a more pronounced effect on the reaction. The mechanism was proposed to involve a palladium-catalyzed C–H/C–O coupling followed by a palladium-catalyzed CDC reaction catalytic cycle.98 In addition, Cheng and co-workers99 used a similar palladium-catalyzed system in the following year to perform a one-pot intramolecular dehydrogenative coupling of iodobenzenes with ketones using silver oxide as the oxidant, and various phenanthrone derivatives were synthesized by this method (Scheme 55).
 Scheme 55  Palladium-catalyzed one-pot cross-coupling and intramolecular CDC reaction and a plausible mechanism. 
2.2.2.3 CDC of aldehyde C–H bonds. 
In 2006, Li and co-workers reported the C–H/N–H CDC reaction of aldehydes with amine hydrochloride100 using a copper catalyst and TBHP as an oxidant to generate amide, providing the basis for a number of subsequent studies on the CDC reaction of aldehydes. The authors suggest a possible reaction mechanism involving an aminol intermediate (Scheme 56).
 Scheme 56  Copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with amines and a plausible mechanism. 
Subsequently, Li's group expanded on the CDC reactions of aldehydes to C–H/C–H couplings between 2-arylpyridines and azaphenanthrenes with aldehydes 2010.101 The authors used the Pd(II)/Pd(IV) catalytic system to enable highly selective CDC acylation of N-heterocyclic compounds by using TBHP as an oxidant. Both aromatic and aliphatic aldehydes are suitable for this reaction. In addition, the authors suggest a possible mechanism involving a directed Csp2–H activation of the N-heterocyclic compound by palladium acetate, followed by nucleophilic addition (Path A), and β-H elimination to give the final product. Alternatively, the aldehyde undergoes C–H activation to form a palladium complex intermediate (Path B), and subsequent reduction elimination gives the final product (Scheme 57).
 Scheme 57  Palladium-catalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with N-heterocycles and a plausible mechanism. 
In 2013, Lei's group successfully synthesized a number of functionalized chalcone compounds using the CDC reaction of aldehydes with olefins in the presence of TBHP using copper chloride as a catalyst. Through preliminary explorations, the authors proposed a possible mechanism involving an acyl radical intermediate, which underwent radical addition to olefins and copper catalyzed oxidative dehydration to give the final α,β-unsaturated ketones (Scheme 58).102
 Scheme 58  Copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with olefins and a plausible mechanism. 
Soon after, Lei and co-workers successfully achieved the CDC reaction of aldehydes with terminal alkynes by using a Zn/In bimetallic catalytic system. It is noteworthy that the introduction of a new oxidant, α,α,α-trifluoroacetophenone, allowed the reaction to proceed efficiently, even with a substrate ratio of 1:1. Mechanistically, it was proposed that the coordination of the electron lone pair on the aldehyde oxygen with zinc activated the aldehyde, and at the same time an alkynyl zinc intermediate was formed from terminal alkynes; then nucleophilic addition of alkynylzinc to the activated carbonyl, followed by dehydrogenation gave the final ynone product (Scheme 59).103
 Scheme 59  Zinc-catalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with alkynes and a plausible mechanism. 
In addition, the intramolecular CDC reaction of aldehydes has been applied to fluorenones and xanthones. Li,104 Glorius,105 Studer106 and Liu107 used different oxidative coupling systems to produce a series of functionalized fluorenones and xanthones via such a strategy. In addition, an ionic liquid-catalyst was also applied to such reactions (Scheme 60).
 Scheme 60  Diverse intramolecular CDC reactions of aldehydes under different catalyzed systems. 
2.2.2.4 CDC Minisci-type reactions. 
Since the first report by Li's group on the CDC Minisci-type reaction with pyridine and quinoline derivatives as described earlier,58 CDC reactions related to heterocycles have been widely explored. Mechanistically, they are often similar to Minisci-type reactions for heterocyclic compounds but without the required functional group for radical generation, making them more efficient and greener alternatives to the classical Minisci-type reaction in synthesis. The most common reaction substrates are quinoxalin-2(1H)-ones, flavonoid derivatives and coumarin derivatives. In this paper, we will introduce CDC reactions for three representative types of substrate.

Quinoxalin-2(1H)-ones: The CDC reaction of quinoxalin-2(1H)-ones has been extensively developed by chemists in recent years, providing a broad basis for Csp2–Csp2 and Csp2–Csp3 bond construction in heterocyclic systems. The dehydrogenative couplings of quinoxalin-2(1H)-ones with aromatics, aldehydes and alkanes have all been explored and developed (Scheme 61).108
 Scheme 61  Diverse CDC reactions of quinoxalin-2(1H)-ones under different catalyzed systems. 
Based on the palladium-catalyzed system of Lee and co-workers, a possible mechanism was proposed to involve the oxidation of Pd(0) to Pd(II) followed by ligand exchange with quinoxalin-2(1H)-one; then acetate-facilitated C–H activation followed by reductive elimination gave the final product and regenerated Pd(0) (Scheme 62).108a
 Scheme 62  A plausible mechanism of the palladium-catalyzed CDC reaction of quinoxalin-2(1H)-ones with benzenes. 

Chromones: Hong,109a,b,e,f Antonchick109c,g and Ge's109d groups performed dehydrogenative coupling of C–H bonds at different positions of flavonoid derivatives. CDC reactions of chromones with benzene, olefins, benzoquinones and simple alkanes were all developed. Single-electron-transfer radical addition mechanisms catalyzed by transition metals or in the presence of peroxides have been generally proposed for these reactions (Scheme 63).
 Scheme 63  Diverse CDC reactions of chromones under different catalyzed systems. 

Coumarins: Finally, as the isomers of chromones, coumarin derivatives are known for a range of pharmacological properties such as anti-HIV, antitumor and antioxidant activities.110 Therefore, Hong111,112 and Duan's113 groups developed CDC reactions of coumarin derivatives with aromatics, alkenes and common alkanes in 2012, 2013 and 2014, respectively. In the reaction systems, copper or palladium were used as catalysts, while silver salts, oxygen or peroxide were used as oxidizing agents to complete the catalytic cycle. As a representative example using the work by Hong, the mechanism involves a palladium-catalyzed C–H activation with coumarin derivatives, followed by olefin insertion and β-H elimination, to obtain the final products, while regenerated Pd0 is oxidized by oxygen to restart the catalytic cycle (Scheme 64).
 Scheme 64  CDC reactions of coumarins and a plausible mechanism of the palladium-catalyzed coupling reaction of coumarins with alkenes. 
2.2.2.5 Sonogashira-type reactions. 
The well-known palladium-catalyzed Sonogashira coupling reaction is one of the most important methods for synthesizing alkynes.10 However, such a reaction requires the introduction of halogens into aromatic hydrocarbons. In 2010, Li’ s group used a special potassium palladate as a catalyst for the successful CDC reaction of the 2-position of 3-methylindole with the terminal alkyne. A possible reaction mechanism was proposed to involve both C–H palladation of an alkyne and C–H palladation of 3-methylindole. Subsequent reductive elimination gave the Sonogashira-type product while the eliminated palladium catalyst was oxidized to complete the catalytic cycle (Scheme 65(a)).114 At nearly the same time, Su and co-workers used a copper catalytic system to realize the CDC Sonogashira-type reaction of electron-deficient polyfluoroarenes and terminal alkynes under mild conditions with a wide range of substrates in the presence of DDQ (Scheme 65(b)).115
 Scheme 65  Palladium-catalyzed CDC Sonogashira-type reactions of alkynes with indoles and a plausible mechanism. 
In addition, similar CDC reactions were reported by different chemists in the same year. Among them, Miura116,117 and Nevado's118 groups reported nickel, copper and gold catalysts for the CDC reaction of heterocycles (e.g., benzoxazole, benzothiazole) with terminal alkynes (Scheme 66).
 Scheme 66  CDC Sonogashira-type reactions of alkynes with aromatic substrates. 


2.2.3 The CDC reaction of Csp–H and Csp–H bonds. 
Finally, the construction of Csp–Csp bonds has also attracted attention recently. Since the classical Glaser homo-coupling of the last century, chemists have never stopped exploring the cross-coupling of two different alkynes. Lei and co-workers reported the CDC reaction of two different alkynes in air using Ni/Cu catalysis. This reaction effectively achieved the coupling of two different terminal alkynes to produce a number of conjugated diynes. A possible mechanism was proposed via the formation of an alkynyl–copper intermediate from the copper catalyst and the alkyne, and the formation a highly reactive peroxynickel intermediate from oxygen and the nickel catalyst, which was then transmetallated by the two molecules of alkyne–copper to introduce the two molecules of alkyne into the nickel catalyst. Then reductive elimination gave the conjugated diyne product and regenerated the nickel catalyst (Scheme 67).119
 Scheme 67  Nickel/copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of two alkynes and a plausible mechanism. 
Other catalytic systems were also developed for the homo CDC reaction of two alkynes. Lei,120 Ferrando-Soria121 and Zhang's122 groups obtained dehydrogenated coupling products with different catalytic systems. In particular, the use of metallic copper nanoparticles as heterogeneous catalysts is also effective for this strategy (Scheme 68).
 Scheme 68  CDC reactions of two alkynes under different catalyzed systems. 

3 Future perspectives of cross-dehydrogenative coupling
In the above sections, we discussed classical reaction types and research progress in the development and exploration of their CDC alternatives. These developments have led to the creation of a large volume of research works in the construction of C–C bonds via CDC reactions and their applications in the synthesis of natural products, biological agents and organic materials. In recent years, CDC reaction systems have been further refined, for example, for the asymmetric synthesis of organic small molecules and metal-complexes. In addition, newer reaction tools, namely photoredox catalysis, mechanochemistry, microwave-based syntheses, flow chemistry, electrochemistry and solar energy inputs, have also been developed and applied in CDC reactions. In the following section, each of these aspects will be briefly reviewed.
3.1 Asymmetric CDC reaction
Asymmetric synthesis is an indispensable branch of organic chemistry. Combining asymmetric synthesis with cross-dehydrogenative coupling is an inevitable future development of green organic chemistry.123

3.1.1 Enantioselective CDC reaction catalyzed by transition-metals. 
As early as 2004, Li's group achieved the first asymmetric CDC reaction by combining chiral asymmetric ligands with copper catalysis. The authors used tetrahydroisoquinolines as the reaction substrate to dehydrogenatively couple the C–H bond adjacent to the nitrogen atom with the terminal alkyne and achieved enantioselective alkynylation with 73% ee. Aliphatic alkynes gave a lower enantioselectivity than the aromatic ones. The report initiated subsequent asymmetry CDC studies, and since then, a large number of asymmetric CDC reactions have been developed by chemists (Scheme 69).124
 Scheme 69  Copper-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with alkynes. 
A few years later, Wang and co-workers achieved asymmetric cross dehydrogenation coupling reactions adjacent to the nitrogen atom of glycine derivatives with 1,3-diketones in the presence of DDQ in a copper-catalyzed system with chiral oxazole derivative ligands. The reaction gave both good yields and enantioselectivity. A possible mechanism was proposed by the authors as follows: firstly, the glycine derivative was oxidatively dehydrogenated by DDQ to form an imine intermediate; at the same time, 1,3-diketone was coordinated to the chiral oxazole-bonded copper catalyst after enolization; then, nucleophilic addition of the metal complex to the imine, gave the final product in 99% ee (Scheme 70).125
 Scheme 70  Copper-catalyzed enantioselective CDC Mannich-type reactions of glycine derivatives with 1,3-diketones and a plausible mechanism. 
In 2016, Pappo and co-workers developed a novel chiral iron phosphate catalyst for application in CDC reactions. The use of di-tert-butylperoxides as an oxidant allowed the CDC reaction of two different naphthol derivatives to give both cross- and homo binaphthol products with good axial chiral selectivity. Through a more in-depth mechanistic study, the authors proposed the following mechanism: oxidative cleavage of di-tert-butyl peroxide by the chiral iron phosphate catalyst followed by ligand exchange with naphthol generated an iron–naphtholate intermediate; single-electron-transfer within the iron-complex gave a radical intermediate, which coordinated with another naphthol derivative to undergo radical cyclization; and finally, rearomatization via H-abstraction by the tert-butoxy radical generated the binaphtholate-complex with axial chirality, which was then protonated to give the chiral binaphthol product and regenerate the catalyst (Scheme 71).126
 Scheme 71  Iron-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions of two naphthols and a plausible mechanism. 


3.1.2 Enantioselective CDC reaction synergistically catalyzed by cooperative strategies. 
On the other hand, transition-metal catalysis coupled with other catalytic pathways for asymmetric CDC reactions has become a well-established method for constructing C–C bonds asymmetrically. In particular, the introduction of chiral organocatalysts, such as chiral imidazolinone catalysts, by Liu's group achieved asymmetric CDC of the C–H bond adjacent to the oxygen atom in benzocyclic ethers or the C–H bond at the 2-position of benzodipyrans with the α-C–H bond of carbonyls.127 Meanwhile, in 2018 Scheidt and co-workers introduced a chiral Cu–oxazole catalyst together with a base to achieve the asymmetric intramolecular CDC cyclization of a 1,3-carbonyl compound to give an asymmetric cyclohexanone skeleton.128 Recently, Liu's129 group also developed the use of an axial chiral phosphoric acid catalyst to enable the asymmetric coupling reaction of the benzylic position of the nitrile alkylphenol with the C–H bond at the indole 3-position (Scheme 72).
 Scheme 72  Diverse enantioselective CDC reactions. 
In 2017, Pericàs and co-workers reported the asymmetric dehydrogenative coupling of thianthracene or xanthene with the α-C–H bond of the aldehyde carbonyl group by using chiral 2-substituted tetrahydropyrrole combined with a ruthenium photoredox catalyst. The reaction gave a high yield and enantioselectivity, with good functional group tolerance. The mechanism of the reaction was proposed to involve both a photoredox catalytic cycle and a chiral organocatalytic cycle (Scheme 73).130
 Scheme 73  Photoredox-induced enantioselective CDC reactions of thianthracene or xanthene with aldehydes and a plausible mechanism. 
In 2017, Wu and Luo's group used a chiral cyclohexanediamine derivatives with a Ru/Co catalytic system to achieve asymmetric CDC reactions between tetrahydroisoquinolines and the C–H bond at the carbonyl α-position by adding m-nitrobenzoic acid to the system. The reaction gave very high enantioselectivity, with good functional group tolerance.131 In the following year, Rueping and co-workers used photoredox catalysis together with chiral amino acids to achieve the asymmetric CDC reaction of tetrahydroisoquinolines with the carbonyl α-C–H bond.132 In this dual-catalytic system, the good yield and enantioselectivity were attributed to the activation of ketones by the chiral primary amine catalyst and tetrahydroisoquinolines by the visible light photoredox catalyst (Scheme 74).
 Scheme 74  Chiral-amine-catalyzed enantioselective CDC Mannich-type reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with ketones. 
In 2017, the group of Luo further developed the asymmetric Mannich-type reaction of tetrahydroisoquinolines with the carbonyl α-C–H bond by using a synergistic catalytic system of electrochemical oxidation and chiral organodiamine derivatives. The good yield and high enantioselectivity are the advantages of this reaction (Scheme 75).133
 Scheme 75  Electrochemical-induced chiral-o-diamine-catalyzed enantioselective CDC Mannich-type reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with ketones. 
In the same year, Feng and co-workers used an iron/zinc combined catalytic system together with chiral N,N′-dioxide with oxygen as the oxidant to realize the asymmetric CDC reaction the C–H bond adjacent to the nitrogen atom in tetrahydroisoquinolines and the C–H bond of the terminal alkyne in excellent yield and enantioselectivity. A possible mechanism was proposed to be as follows: the chiral N,N′-dioxide–Zn(II) complex reacts with the terminal alkyne in the presence of a base (tetrahydroisoquinolines or a basic anion generated during the oxidation process) to produce an acetylated zinc intermediate; meanwhile, the hydroxyl radicals generated by single-electron-transfer between iron and peroxides perform H-abstraction on the tetrahydroisoquinolines; and the resulting radical intermediate is oxidatively dehydrogenated to form an iminium intermediate, which is then nucleophilically attacked by the previously formed Zn(II) complex to obtain the final product (Scheme 76).134
 Scheme 76  Iron-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with alkynes and a plausible mechanism. 


3.1.3 Enantioselective cross-dehydrogenative coupling catalyzed by organocatalysts. 
Organocatalytic systems for asymmetric synthesis and catalysis have been extensively explored by chemists in recent years. Due to the ability to avoid the use of transition metals, the reactions are greener and simpler. The Enders group used cinchona alkaloid derivatives as catalysts to dehydrogenatively couple the C–H bond of pyrazolinones with the α-C–H bond of cyclopentenones.135 The reaction led to the construction of a series of pyrazoles functionalized with a tertiary center in good yields and enantioselectivity. A possible mechanism was proposed as follows: the cinchona alkaloid catalyst brings the two reactants together via hydrogen bonding; Michael addition of pyrazolones to cyclopentenones gives the addition intermediate; finally, reductive dehydrogenation followed by keto–enol tautomerization generates the final product. Soon after, Jørgensen's group cleverly cross-coupled indoles with aldehydes via CDC using amino acid-derived chiral organocatalysts.136 The C–H bond at the 3-position of indole was cross-coupled with the C–H bond adjacent to the aldehyde carbonyl group in good yield and enantioselectivity, with DDQ as a two-electron oxidant (Scheme 77).
 Scheme 77  Organo-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions and a plausible mechanism. 

3.2 Alternative energy inputs (photo-, mechano, microwave and electrical)

3.2.1 Photoredox. 
The renaissance of free radical chemistry in organic synthesis in the last decade has also sparked interest in photochemistry. One of the most rapidly expanding areas of free radical chemistry is photoredox catalysis. Likewise, photoredox catalytic systems have been applied in CDC reactions to achieve the construction of C–C bonds under milder reaction conditions with higher reaction efficiency. This section will review the use of the photoredox strategy for CDC reactions in terms of different types of C–C bonds constructed.137
3.2.1.1 Csp3–Csp3 cross-dehydrogenative coupling. 
In 2010, Stephenson's group achieved the aza-Henry-type CDC reaction of tetrahydroisoquinolines with nitroalkanes under photoredox catalytic conditions using an iridium photoredox catalyst. The authors obtained the final product in good yield and speculated on a possible mechanism: the excited state of iridium oxidizes tetrahydroisoquinolines to form an amine radical cation; H-abstraction generates an iminium ion, which undergoes nucleophilic addition to nitroalkanes to give the final product (Scheme 78).138
 Scheme 78  Iridium photoredox-catalyzed CDC aza-Henry-type reactions of tetrahydroquinolines with nitroalkanes and a plausible mechanism. 
Recently, several aza-Henry-type CDC reactions under photoredox conditions have been developed. Han139 and Cui's140 groups achieved the CDC reaction of tetrahydroisoquinolines with nitroalkanes in high yield and selectivity by using a unique cationic polycarbazole network and an organic carbon framework, respectively (Scheme 79).
 Scheme 79  Photoredox-induced CDC aza-Henry-type reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with nitroalkanes. 
In addition, the CDC reaction between the α-C–H bond of carbonyl compounds and C–H bond adjacent to the nitrogen atom in tertiary amines has also been developed with a photoredox catalyst. Between 2011 and 2015, Rueping,141 Zhang,142 Wu143 and Meggers144 used different photocatalysts, such as ruthenium or organochromes, to achieve CDC reactions in good yields with a wide range of substrates. In particular, Zhang used polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, a green and highly transparent polymer material) sponge bearing the organochrome Rose Bengal photocatalyst to obtain CDC products efficiently under visible light (Scheme 80).
 Scheme 80  Photoredox-induced CDC Mannich-type reactions of amines with nitroalkanes. 
In addition to this, a specific CDC reaction between tertiary amines and two 1,3-diketones can occur under photoredox catalytic conditions to generate a series of methylene-bridged 1,3-diketones, as reported by Kobayashi,145 Li's,146 and He's147 groups. This reaction mode further expanded the scope of CDC reactions (Scheme 81).
 Scheme 81  Photoredox-induced CDC Mannich-type reactions of tertiary amines as methylene reagents with 1,3-diketones. 
3.2.1.2 Csp3–Csp2 cross-dehydrogenative coupling. 
In 2013, Wu and co-workers reported two CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinoline with indole by combining a palladium catalyst with a photoredox catalyst or with graphene-supported RuO2 nanocomposites (G-RuO2) combined with eosin Y as a photosensitizer.148,149 In particular, the second work describes the cross-coupled hydrogen evolution (CCHE) concept, which produces only hydrogen (H2) as a byproduct without using any sacrificial oxidant, to achieve the CDC reaction at room temperature in quantitative yields under visible light irradiation. The reaction mechanism proposed by the authors is as follows: the oxidation of tetrahydroisoquinolines by the excited-state of eosin Y forms tertiary amine radical cations, which lose a hydrogen atom to graphene-supported RuO2 to form iminium intermediates; then a Friedel–Crafts type reaction between the iminium ion and indole gives the final product (Scheme 82).
 Scheme 82  Photoredox-induced CDC Friedel–Craft-type reactions of indoles with tetrahydroisoquinolines. 
The CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction with other arenes or heterocycles was developed and explored by Stephenson150 and Wang151 by using ruthenium and iridium photoredox catalysts in 2012 and 2018, respectively, with persulfates and peroxides as oxidants. For the former, the mechanism was proposed to involve the reduction of the peroxynitrate anion by the ruthenium catalyst after being photoexcited to generate sulfate radical anions, which undergo H-abstraction of the dialkyl amide to form radicals on the carbon adjacent to the nitrogen atom; further oxidation of the radical generates the iminium intermediate, which undergoes Friedel–Crafts alkylation to give the final product (Scheme 83).
 Scheme 83  CDC Friedel–Craft-type reactions of (hetero)arenes with ruthenium and iridium photoredox catalysts. 
Meanwhile, modifications of glycine derivatives through the photoredox-induced CDC strategy have also been studied. Among them, the C–H bonding of glycine derivatives adjacent to nitrogen atoms and the C–H bond of indole 3-positions under photoredox catalytic conditions were explored and developed by Rueping,152 Wu143 and Lu's153 groups by using iridium, ruthenium or organochrome Rose Bengal photocatalysts, respectively. In particular, Rueping introduced a Lewis-acid into the system to increase the reaction rate and efficiency. Among the possible mechanisms proposed by the authors, the excited iridium catalyst oxidizes the glycine derivative to the amine radical cation, followed by oxidative dehydrogenation to form the imine intermediate; the imine intermediate ligates to the Lewis acid to form a more polarized intermediate, which undergoes a Friedel–Crafts type reaction with indole to give the final product and release the Lewis acid (Scheme 84).
 Scheme 84  Photoredox-induced CDC Friedel–Craft-type reactions of indoles with glycine derivatives. 
Then, a divergent photoredox-catalyzed CDC reaction was developed by Jiang and co-workers in 2016. By using DPZ as a photoredox agent together with a chiral Beta-ICD catalyst, the CDC reaction between tetrahydrocarbazoles or tetrahydroisoquinolines with acrolein gave up to 95% ee with good functional group tolerance (Scheme 85).154
 Scheme 85  Asymmetric photoredox-induced CDC reactions of tetrahydrocarbazoles or tetrahydroisoquinolines with acrolein. 
For the construction of Csp2–C bonds, the CDC Minisci-type reactions between ethers, alcohols or simple alkanes with N-heteroaromatic compounds under photoredox conditions were reported by Macmillan,155 Lei156 and Li's157 groups in 2015 and 2019. Among them, Macmillan's work used the iridium-photoredox catalyst to construct a series of Csp2–Csp3 bonds, and even highly volatile ether substrates were also applicable in this reaction system. A possible mechanism was proposed as follows: the excited iridium catalyst reacted with peroxynitrite via single-electron-transfer to give a sulfate radical anion; H-abstraction adjacent to oxygen on the ether produced a radical, which underwent a Minisci-type reaction with pyridine derivatives to give the final product (Scheme 86).
 Scheme 86  Photoredox-induced CDC Minisci-type reactions of N-heteroaromatics with alcohols, ethers or alkanes. 
Finally, asymmetric CDC acylation of tetrahydroisoquinolines with aldehydes was achieved by Rovis's group in 2012 by introducing a chiral NHC ligand into a ruthenium-photoredox system. The reaction achieved 93% ee with good yield and functional group tolerance.158 In addition, Murakami and co-workers recently catalyzed the CDC reaction of aldehydes with benzylic sites under visible light using an iridium/nickel mixture. Thus far, a series of α-aryl ketones have been synthesized.159 The authors proposed the following reaction mechanism: firstly, the reaction between iridium and nickel catalysts in the system under visible light generated the bromine radical; the highly reactive bromine radicals abstract H from the aldehyde C–H bond and the benzylic C–H bond to produce acyl radicals and benzyl radicals; the two radicals undergo two single-electron oxidative additions to the nickel catalyst, followed by reductive elimination to give the final product (Scheme 87).
 Scheme 87  Photoredox-induced CDC reactions of aldehydes and a possible mechanism. 
3.2.1.3 Csp3–Csp cross-dehydrogenative coupling. 
In 2012, Rueping and co-workers developed for the first time a CDC reaction using a dual photoredox catalytic and metal catalytic system. Tetrahydroisoquinolines and terminal alkynes were coupled efficiently. The authors give a possible reaction mechanism based on relevant literature and experimental results: tetrahydroisoquinoline is oxidized to an amine radical cation by an excited ruthenium catalyst; then either 1,2-hydrogen atom transfer or H-abstraction gives iminium ions, which undergo nucleophilic addition to the alkyne–copper intermediate generated from the alkyne to give the final product (Scheme 88).160
 Scheme 88  Photoredox-induced CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with terminal alkynes and a possible mechanism. 
3.2.1.4 Csp2–Csp2 cross-dehydrogenative coupling. 
Recently, a protocol for the construction of Csp2–Csp2 bonds was reported by Li's group under the induction of visible light. The reaction used a dual photocatalyst and cobalt catalyst system to give 1,3-conjugated dienes in high yields with regio- and stereospecificity of both olefins. The authors proposed the following mechanism: the olefin is oxidized by the excited photocatalyst with a single electron being transferred to form a styryl radical cation, which reacts with another olefin molecule followed by successive deprotonation and single-electron-transfer to give the diene product. In addition, the successive elimination of the proton is achieved by the cobalt-catalyst to release hydrogen gas, effectively facilitating the continuation of the system (Scheme 89).161
 Scheme 89  Visible-photoinduced cobalt-catalyzed CDC reactions of two alkenes and a possible mechanism. 
3.2.1.5 Csp2–Csp cross-dehydrogenative coupling. 
In 2018, the group of Bhalla used supramolecular polymers consisting of PBI derivatives and ZnO NPs to catalyze the CDC reaction between an aldehyde C–H bond and the C–H bond of terminal alkynes with high efficiency under photoredox conditions. The authors suggest that the mechanism of the reaction most likely proceeds according to the following process: the hydrogen atom in the C–H bond of the aldehyde can interact with ZnO bonded to the supramolecular material under the induction of light energy, followed by H-abstraction to form a ZnO complexed acyl radical intermediate; on the other hand, alkynes undergoes nucleophilic addition to acyl radicals on the surface of supramolecular nanomaterials bonded with ZnO, and subsequent oxidation gives the final ynone product (Scheme 90).162
 Scheme 90  Photoredox-induced supramolecular polymer ZnO-NPcatalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with alkynes and a possible mechanism. 
3.2.1.6 Csp–Csp cross-dehydrogenative coupling. 
The CDC reaction of two alkynes also proceeds efficiently under photoredox conditions. In 2016, Hwang and co-workers achieved the construction of Csp–Csp bonds using a simple copper catalyst for the efficient coupling of two alkynes under visible light irradiation. A series of non-symmetrical conjugated diynes were synthesized easily and rapidly under mild conditions by this method. In addition, the authors concluded that the reaction proceeded by forming stable ground state bipolar heterodimeric CuI–acetylide complexes, which were photoexcited to promote the cross-coupling reaction of the dimeric alkyne ligands within the complex (Scheme 91).163
 Scheme 91  Photoredox-induced copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of two alkynes and a possible mechanism. 


3.2.2 Mechanochemistry. 
Besides photoenergy, mechanical energy is also being used by chemists as a potential future alternative form of energy input for organic transformations. The CDC reaction via mechanochemistry has also been studied in recent years.164 In 2016, Su and co-workers pioneered a mechanically induced CDC reaction between benzylic C–H bonds of indole derivatives and acidic C–H bonds under high-speed-ball-milling (HSBM) and solvent-free conditions at room temperature, by using an iron catalyst in the presence of DDQ. The mechanism was proposed as follows: DDQ, a two-electron oxidant, performs a secondary single-electron oxidation of the benzyl C–H bond to form the benzylic carbocation, which reacts with the iron–1,3-dicarbonyl complex to give the final product with dissociation of the iron catalyst (Scheme 92).165
 Scheme 92  Mechanically induced iron-catalyzed CDC reactions of indoles with alkanes and a possible mechanism. 
The CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with other compounds were fully explored by Su's group using a mechanically induced ball-milling strategy. In 2011, the authors successfully performed a series of CDC reactions with nitroalkanes, indoles, alkynes and even carbonyl compounds under mechanically induced solvent-free conditions with the DDQ oxidation system (Scheme 93).166
 Scheme 93  Diverse mechanical-induced CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines. 
Su's group also introduced asymmetric ligands into the system, which permitted the asymmetric CDC reaction between the C–H bond adjacent to the nitrogen atom of tetrahydroisoquinolines and the C–H bond of the terminal alkyne under mechano conditions. This study avoided the use of transition metals and solvents, and the chiral ligands controlled the enantioselectivity. Both aromatic and aliphatic alkynes can be effectively applied to this reaction system, but the introduction of substituents into tetrahydroisoquinolines reduces the enantioselectivity (Scheme 94).162
 Scheme 94  Mechanically induced enantioselective CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with alkynes. 


3.2.3 Microwave. 
Another well-known form of energy input, microwaves, has also been used extensively in organic synthesis. The reaction time is greatly reduced under microwave heating. In particular, for CDC reactions, efficient reactions and good selectivity have been explored by chemists with the assistance of microwaves.167
3.2.3.1 Intermolecular CDC reactions. 
In 2017, Fan and co-workers successfully achieved the CDC reaction between the C–H bond of simple cycloalkanes and the α-C–H bond of ketones under microwave-assisted conditions using di-tert-butyl peroxide as the oxidant. Due to the more reactive carbonyl group in ketones, there are more potential side reactions. The proposed mechanism involved cleavage of the O–O bond in di-tert-butylperoxides to release two molecules of tert-butoxy radicals under microwave heating, which underwent H-abstraction of ketones and cycloalkanes, respectively; the two newly generated radical intermediates were coupled to give the final product (Scheme 95).168
 Scheme 95  Microwave-assisted CDC reactions of ketones with cycloalkanes and a plausible mechanism. 
Recently, Chaudhary's group explored the microwave-assisted CDC reaction of caffeine and other natural methylxanthines (C8-position) with substituted aliphatic alcohols, with tert-butyl hydroperoxide in the absence of a transition metal catalyst. Again, because of microwave assistance, the reaction efficiency was significantly improved and the reaction time was shortened to minutes. A similar reaction mechanism as that outlined above was proposed (Scheme 96).169
 Scheme 96  Microwave-assisted CDC reactions of caffeine and other natural methylxanthines with aliphatic alcohols. 
In addition, the microwave-assisted CDC reaction of two alcohol C–H bonds was reported by Porcheddu and co-workers in 2014. The authors used a silica-grafted primary amine together with a ruthenium catalyst to co-catalyze the coupling of two alcohols to obtain a series of α,β-unsaturated aldehydes. This protocol provides a sequential transfer–dehydrogenation and CDC reaction at the α-position of the hydroxyl group of one alcohol and at the β-position of the hydroxyl group of the other alcohol. Coupling resulted in the production of highly selective α,β-unsaturated aldehydes in high yields. Mechanistically, the ruthenium catalyst, assisted by microwave heating, leads to oxidative dehydrogenation of alcohol hydroxyl groups to produce two aldehydes as intermediates, followed by the formation of an imine intermediate between the silica-grafted primary amine and one aldehyde, and then its subsequent condensation with another aldehyde intermediate to obtain the final product and regenerate the silica-grafted amine. The addition of acrylonitrile facilitated ruthenium-catalyzed dehydrogenation by removing generated hydrogen gas (Scheme 97).170
 Scheme 97  Microwave-assisted ruthenium and silica-grafted primary-amine co-catalyzed CDC reactions of two aliphatic alcohols. 
In 2017, an efficient double CDC reaction in a microwave-assisted ruthenium-catalyzed system was developed by Baruah's group. Diverse 3,3-bis(indolyl)methanes were obtained in high yield by reacting the industrial by-product tetramethylurea with two molecules of indole, in which the tetramethylurea (TMU) analog served as a methenylation reagent. In this system, via catalysis of ruthenium, TBHP oxidizes TMU to an amine radical cation, which then undergoes H-abstraction to form an iminium intermediate; a Friedel–Crafts-type reaction between the iminium intermediate and indole at the 3-position followed by elimination of trimethylurea forms an olefin at the indole 3-position, which reacts with another indole to give the bis(indolyl)methane product (Scheme 98).171
 Scheme 98  Microwave-assisted ruthenium-catalyzed CDC reactions of TMU with two indoles and a plausible mechanism. 
3.2.3.2 Intramolecular reactions. 
Microwave-assisted intramolecular CDC reactions were reported by Xu and co-workers in 2018. This protocol effectively dehydrocouples two Csp2–H bonds with a mixed palladium/copper catalytic system, allowing the synthesis of several series of N-nonprotected isoazacoumestans (indolo[2,3-c]coumarins) and indolo[2,3-c]quinolones. Mechanistically, palladium acetate first activates the C–H bond in the substrate to obtain the palladated metal complex, followed by the second C–H activation to form a six-membered cyclic palladium intermediate; and then reductive elimination generates the final cyclization product with the palladium catalyst being oxidized by the copper salt to continue the catalytic cycle (Scheme 99).172
 Scheme 99  Microwave-assisted palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reactions and a plausible mechanism. 


3.3.4 Electrical. 
Although the use of electrical energy for organic synthesis can be traced back to the early stages of organic chemistry, the topic has been neglected by the scientific community for decades. The field has been brought back to the forefront of research in recent years. Because, on an inert electrode, a small current cycle permits a large number of electrons to be added or removed, electrochemical synthesis is a highly sustainable and green alternative energy input for various synthetic applications compared with the use of traditional stoichiometric oxidant and reductant additives.
In fact, the combination of electrochemical synthesis and CDC reactions was developed more than a decade ago. When the CDC reaction was initially designed, chemists hoped that the oxidative coupling of two C–H bonds would not only be exploited as a valuable protocol in synthesis but could also generate valuable hydrogen resources by the direct removal of two hydrogens. This idealistic design has been made possible by electrochemical synthesis.173
Waldvogel's group was one of the first to explore electrochemical redox-catalyzed CDC reactions, by focusing on efficient dehydrogenation coupling of two CAr–H bonds under electrochemical energy input to construct a series of CAr–CAr bonds. The group has explored a wide variety of CDC reactions under electrochemical redox conditions using phenolic compounds over the past 15 years. They started their exploration with the synthesis of the simplest biphenyls, and gradually transitioned to non-symmetrical biphenyldiphenols, biphenol, triphenol, benzidine, biphenyl ethers, and later to polyfunctionalized aromatic compounds (Scheme 100).174–186
 Scheme 100  Electrochemically induced CDC reactions of phenol or aniline with aromatics (Waldvogel's work). 
In 2010, Li and co-workers used an ionic liquid catalyst system to realize the aza-Henry-type CDC reaction of tetrahydroisoquinolines and nitromethanes under electrochemical oxidation or under aerobic oxidation.187 By using [BMIm][BF4] as a solvent, with a copper catalyst and oxygen as the terminal oxidant, the reaction system could be recycled 9 times to obtain the CDC product in good yield. This reaction mode opens up the opportunity for future research into electrochemical catalytic CDC reactions (Scheme 101).
 Scheme 101  Electrochemical CDC reaction of tetrahydroisoquinolines and nitromethanes in an ionic liquid. 
In addition, Xu and co-workers developed CDC reactions of Csp2–H and Csp3–H bonds with electrochemical redox catalytic systems in 2017 and 2018.188,189 The authors synthesized a series of fluorinated or functionalized acyl anilines in an electrochemical cell with an RVC as the anode and platinum as the cathode. A series of indolones and quinolones with or without fluoro groups were synthesized by electrochemical redox catalysis. Based on the experimental results, the authors proposed a mechanism in which the ferrocene catalyst is oxidized at the anode, and then abstracts an electron from the carbanion to form a free radical intermediate, which undergoes intramolecular addition to the arene ring followed by oxidation and re-aromatization to give the final product (Scheme 102).
 Scheme 102  Electrochemically induced iron-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reactions and a plausible mechanism. 
In addition, Pan's group successfully constructed a CN double bond in 2019 by an intramolecular double C–H/N–H CDC reaction between an internal primary amine group and the C–H bond adjacent to the nitrogen atom of tetrahydroisoquinolines under electrochemical catalysis. The reaction used an RVC anode and a platinum cathode in the presence of tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate as an electrolyte. Various polycyclic compounds were synthesized efficiently, and the method has been elegantly applied to the synthesis of the natural products deoxypodophyllinone and rutinine.190 On the other hand, Chiba and co-workers used two platinum electrodes to successfully couple two Csp2–H bonds within the dihydroindole-bonded benzamide molecule via an intramolecular CDC,191 generating a series of polycyclic compounds (Scheme 103).
 Scheme 103  Electrochemical-induced iron-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reactions for the synthesis of N-polycyclic compounds. 
Meanwhile, very recently, various electroredox-catalyzed intermolecular CDC reactions have been widely developed by chemists. Li's group reported the CDC reactions of two aromatic amines by using an RVC anode and a Pt cathode to synthesize a series of biaryl diamines using tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate as a phase transfer catalyst under mild conditions and in good yields. A possible mechanism is proposed to be as follows: first, one molecule of aromatic amine is oxidized at the anode to form an amine radical cation, which then transforms into an azidoquinone cation and forms a radical intermediate after nucleophilic addition to another molecule of aromatic amine; two protons are removed in succession to obtain the final biaryl diamine product; the removed protons are reduced to hydrogen gas at the cathode (Scheme 104).192
 Scheme 104  Electrochemical-induced intermolecular CDC reactions of two N,N-dimethylanilines and a plausible mechanism. 
Subsequently, a similar electrochemical CDC reaction was applied to Csp3–H bonds. Li's group reported last year a protocol for the dehydrogenation of α-position C–H bonds of xanthene with ketones, to generate various Csp3–Csp3 bonds in good yields.193 This year, Wu and co-workers cross-coupled N-aryl-tetrahydroisoquinoline and 4-hydroxycoumarins to form polycyclic compounds using a C anode and a W cathode in an electroredox reaction cell.194 Through mechanistic studies, the authors concluded that free radical coupling and nucleophilic addition were the key steps in this transformation (Scheme 105).
 Scheme 105  Electrochemical-induced intermolecular CDC reactions. 
In addition, the combined catalytic strategy of multiple alternative energy inputs is an interesting development for the expansion of CDC reactions. Xu and co-workers combined electrochemical and photoredox catalytic systems for Csp2–Csp3 bond construction of aromatics and alkanes with an RVC anode and a platinum cathode via CDC reactions. The system was activated by ingeniously aliasing light energy acting on chlorine, allowing the reaction to proceed efficiently in good yield and selectivity under the irradiation of a purple LED light. Based on the reaction results, the authors proposed that the dissociation of hydrogen chloride in the solvent caused the oxidation of chlorofluoride ions at the anode to form chlorine gas, which generated chlorine radicals via homolytic cleavage under light irradiation and abstracted hydrogen from alkanes to produce new alkyl radicals; then radical addition to the arenes followed by a second H-abstraction by another chlorine radical gave the final product; on the other hand, the proton dissociated from the hydrogen chloride was reduced to hydrogen gas at the cathode (Scheme 106).195
 Scheme 106  Electrochemical-induced HCl-mediated intermolecular CDC reactions of aromatics with alkanes and a plausible mechanism. 

3.3 Applications in organometallic synthesis
The rapid synthesis and functionalization of organometallic reagents plays an important role in catalysis and material research. In particular, the generation of a transition-metal complex is the core of catalyst design. Therefore, how to synthesize the catalyst efficiently and easily is very important in the field of catalysis. The CDC reaction is undoubtedly a simple, efficient and fast choice for the synthesis of transition metal complexes.
In 2016 and 2019, You's group applied the activation of the Csp2–H bond of different heteroaromatic hydrocarbons to the synthesis and modification of transition metal complexes. In addition, by using chiral organic small molecule catalysts together with a palladium catalyst, the CDC reaction between the C–H bonds of indole, thiophene, thiazole, oxazole, benzofuran and other heteroaromatics with the C–H bonds of ferrocene compounds generated a series of planar chiral ferrocene compounds in good yield and high enantioselectivity.196,197 A possible mechanism was proposed to be as follows: firstly, N-directed C–H activation of ferrocene bearing tertiary amines by palladium forms a palladium substituted ferrocene intermediate, which then undergoes electrophilic palladation with electron-rich heteroarenes followed by reductive elimination to give the final products (Scheme 107).
 Scheme 107  Palladium-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions of a metal-complex with heteroaromatics and a possible mechanism. 
3.4 Flow synthesis
In the past decade or so, the rise of continuous flow chemistry has opened up new opportunities for organic synthesis. The development of flow-synthesis overcomes the limitations of previous batch reactions, such as long reaction time, low conversion and process control efficiency, and high energy consumption. In particular, classical CDC reactions have been studied and explored through continuous flow chemistry.198
In 2013, Rueping's group reported the first case of the CDC reaction of tetrahydroisoquinolines with nitroalkanes and malonic esters in good yield and selectivity by using a combination of continuous flow chemistry and a photoredox system, with Rose Bengal as a photosensitive catalyst, to generate Csp3–Csp3 bonds. This reaction avoids the use of transition metals and shortens the reaction time (Scheme 108(a)).199 In the following years, Noël and co-workers used a simple continuous flow strategy to realize the CDC reaction between the 3-position Csp2–H bond of indole and the Csp2–H bond of olefins, and the dehydrogenative coupling of two molecules of o-xylene with oxygen as an oxidant catalyzed by palladium (Scheme 108(b) and (c)).200,201 In 2018, Bédard and Adamo's group used a continuous flow tool to develop a fully integrated, universal system to optimize known chemical reactions. Among them are the CDC reactions that this review focuses on. In a continuous flow chemical reactor, with a photoredox catalytic system, the CDC reaction between tetrahydroisoquinoline and nitromethane or dimethyl malonate can be efficiently carried out (Scheme 108(d)).202
 Scheme 108  Early continuous-flow-induced CDC reactions. 
Subsequently, in 2017 van der Eycken and Noël's group combined continuous flow chemistry and photoredox catalysis in a Pd/Ir hybrid catalytic system to successfully cross couple the 2-position of 1-pyrimidine indole with an aldehyde to produce a series of acylated products with TBHP as an oxidant. The authors found that the reaction time could be reduced by a factor of ten with the continuous flow chemistry strategy and the catalyst dosage could be reduced to one-fourth of the intermittent reaction dosage. The authors demonstrated that C–H bond activation in the first step was the rate-limiting-step by a KIE test. A possible mechanism is as follows: first, the 2-position C–H bond of 1-pyrimidinylindole is activated by the palladium catalyst to form a palladation intermediate; on the other hand, tert-butyl hydroperoxide is reduced by the iridium catalyst after excitation to produce tert-butoxy radicals and hydroxyl anions; H-abstraction occurs in the Csp2–H bond of the aldehyde by tert-butoxy radicals, resulting in the generation of acyl radicals; reaction of the acyl radical with the palladium intermediate, followed by single-electron oxidation by the iridium catalyst gives the high-valent palladium intermediate; finally, reductive elimination generates the CDC product and regenerates the active catalyst (Scheme 109).203
 Scheme 109  Continuous-flow/photoredox-induced palladium-catalyzed CDC acylation of indoles at the 2-position and a plausible mechanism. 
In addition, Waldvogel's group has developed a strategy by combining continuous flow chemistry with electrochemical redox catalysis, again allowing the CDC reaction of two phenols to generate biphenol derivatives (Scheme 110).204,205
 Scheme 110  Continuous-flow/electrochemical-induced CDC reaction for the formation of Csp2–Csp2 bonds. 
3.5 Quantum dot (QD) catalysis
Finally, as a new energy input method for CDC reactions – quantum dots (QDs) were introduced recently by Wu and co-workers. This protocol uses cadmium selenide quantum dot nanomaterials as catalysts to achieve the CDC reaction between C–H bonds at allylic positions with C–H bonds adjacent to nitrogen atoms in tertiary amines or C–H bonds in heteroaromatics under visible light. The protocol is compatible with a variety of functional groups, results in high yields and good selectivity, and generates hydrogen as a by-product, providing a new direction for green synthesis. The authors also conducted an in-depth study of the reaction mechanism by radical capturing experiments, product distribution, EPR spectroscopy and deuterium experiments. A possible mechanism is proposed as follows: on the surface of QDs, C–H bond cleavage at the allylic position due to the transfer from quantitative forces to electrons gives rise to allyl radicals, followed by the generation of radical intermediates at the nitrogen atom neighboring position of tertiary amines in the same way; then, coupling of the two radicals gives the final product. On the other hand, the allyl radical can also add to heteroaromatics via a Minisci-type process to give the heteroarene allylation product. In this process, the oxidatively deprotonated protons and electrons from the reaction substrate are merged on the surface of the quantum dots by solar energy to produce hydrogen radicals, and then rapid self-coupling permits hydrogen gas to escape from the reaction system (Scheme 111).206
 Scheme 111  Solar-power-driven quantum-dot (QD)-catalyzed CDC reactions of the allylic position and a plausible mechanism. 
4 Conclusion and outlook
This review summarized important research progress for the cross-dehydrogenation coupling reaction over the past 20 years. Guided by the concept of green and sustainable chemistry, the design and implementation of this concept, the initial development of this reaction in the first decade, and more recent developments and future trends are introduced in detail. The development of the CDC reaction has led to breakthrough advances in the field of carbon–carbon bond formation. In particular, with the advance of a large number of science and technology tools, new forms of energy input, such as photoredox, electrochemical redox, microwave-assisted, continuous flow chemistry and quantum dot catalysis, are gradually replacing classical energy inputs in synthesis with their unique advantages. At the same time, the original design and intention of this reaction mode – with only a single by-product of hydrogen – has now been realized. Thus, in the future, CDC reactions will be widely developed not only for carbon–carbon bond formation and the synthesis of important organic molecular skeletons, but also for energy storage while performing the above processes. Meanwhile, an untackled ideal of the CDC reaction is the production of long chain alkanes and hydrogen gas by a simple dehydrogenation of methane (a major greenhouse gas), which will also become one of the focuses of synthetic chemists in the near future. Indeed, this landmark organic synthesis protocol will have an increasingly meaningful role in and impact on various fields of science and technologies.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Z. P. L. is grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22071266), and C.-J. L. thanks the Canada Research Chair Foundation, the CFI, FQRNT Center for Green Chemistry and Catalysis, NSERC and McGill University for support of our research.
References

  (a) 
            E. J. Corey and X. M. Cheng, The Logic of Chemical Synthesis, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1989 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) I. B. Perry, T. F. Brewer, P. J. Sarver, D. M. Schultz, D. A. DiRocco and D. W. C. MacMillan, Nature, 2018, 560, 70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) 
            I. Fleming, Pericyclic Reactions, Oxford University Press, New York,  1999, pp. 1–89 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) B. E. Rossiter and N. M. Swingle, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 771 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Rueping and B. J. Nachtsheim, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2010, 6, 6 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) E. A. Ilardi, C. E. Stivala and A. Zakarian, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 3133 RSC ; 
  (e) Y. Liu and M. P. Doyle, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2012, 10, 6388 RSC .
Textbooks: 
  (a) 
            J. E. Bäckvall, J. F. Normant, L. E. Overman, P. Knochel, K. Sonogashira, A. de Meijere, A. Suzuki, T. N. Mitchel, J. Tsuji and E.-i. Negishi, Metal-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Reactions, ed. A. de Meijere and F. Diederich, Wiley-Interscience, Weinheim,  1998, vol. 1–2 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
Handbook of Organopalladium Chemistry for Organic Synthesis ed. E.-i. Negishi, A. de Meijere, J. E. Bäckvall, S. Cacchi, T. Hayashi, Y. Itoh, M. Kosugi, S. I. Murahashi, K. Oshima and Y. Yamamoto, Wiley-Interscience, New York,  2002, vol. 1 and 2; reviews:  Search PubMed ; 
  (c) D. S. Surry and S. L. Buchwald, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 13 RSC ; 
  (d) J. Magano and J. R. Dunetz, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 2177 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) I. Vasilevich, R. V. Kombarov, D. V. Genis and M. A. Kirpichenok, J. Med. Chem., 2012, 55, 7003 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (f) C. C. C. J. Seechurn, M. O. Kitching, T. J. Colacot and V. Snieckus, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5062 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (g) G. C. Fu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
For several selected reviews, see: 
  (a) R. Jana, T. P. Pathak and M. S. Sigman, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 1417 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            R. H. Crabtree, The Organometallic Chemistry of Transition Metals, Wiley Interscience, New York, 4th edn,  2005, pp. 1–560 CrossRef ; 
  (c) 
            F. J. McQuillin, D. G. Parker and G. R. Stephenson, Transition Metal Organometallics for Organic Synthesis, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.,  1991, pp. 1–614 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) 
            J. Tsuji, Transition Metal Reagents and Catalysts: Innovations in Organic Synthesis, Wiley, Chichester, U.K.,  2002, pp. 1–496 CrossRef .
K. Tamao, K. Sumitani, Y. Kiso, M. Zembayashi, A. Fujioka, S. Kodama, I. Nakajima, A. Minato and M. Kumada, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1976, 49, 1958 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hatanaka and T. Hiyama, J. Org. Chem., 1988, 53, 918 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Stille, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1986, 25, 508 CrossRef .

  (a) E.-i. Negishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6738 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. O. King, N. Okukado and E.-i. Negishi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 683 RSC .

  (a) N. Miyaura and A. Suzuki, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2457 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. Miyaura, T. Yanagiand and A. Suzuki, Synth. Commun., 1981, 11, 513 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sonogashira, Y. Tohda and N. Hagihara, Tetrahedron Lett., 1975, 16, 4467 CrossRef .
For a perspective, see:   C.-Y. Huang, H. Kang, J. Li and C.-J. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2019, 84, 12705 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Glaser, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1869, 2, 422 CrossRef ; 
  (b) C. Glaser, Ann. Chem. Pharm., 1870, 154, 137 CrossRef .

  (a) H. Iataaki and H. Yoshimoto, J. Org. Chem., 1973, 38, 76 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Toshiyasu, S. Touru, T. Yuko and M. Tanaka, Chem. Lett., 1987, 16, 2211 CrossRef ; 
  (c) M. Nakada, Y. Aimin, S. Kawakami, S. Iwaki and T. Yamaguchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1989, 62, 3392 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. H. Brown and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 2935 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Á. Molnár, Sci. Synth., 2009, 48, 469–471 Search PubMed .
For reviews on green chemistry, see: 
  (a) C.-J. Li and B. M. Trost, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 13197 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            P. T. Anastasand and J. C. Warner, Green Chemistry: Theory and Practice, Oxford University Press, New York,  1998 Search PubMed .
For several selected reviews, see: 
  (a) C.-J. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 335 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. A. Girard, T. Knauberand and C.-J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. Henry, Bull. Soc. Chim. Fr., 1895, 13, 999 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) H. B. Hass and E. F. Riley, Chem. Rev., 1943, 32, 373 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Yoshikoshiand and M. Miyashita, Acc. Chem. Res., 1985, 18, 284 CrossRef ; 
  (d) A. G. M. Barrett and G. G. Graboski, Chem. Rev., 1986, 86, 751 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) N. J. Leonard and G. W. Leubner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1949, 71, 3408 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and C.-J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) O. Basle and C.-J. Li, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 1047 RSC ; 
  (b) A. Yu, Z. Gu, D. Chen, W. He, P. Tan and J. Xiang, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 162 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X.-Z. Shu, X.-F. Xia, Y.-F. Yang, K.-G. Ji, X.-Y. Liu and Y.-M. Liang, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 7464 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. Xie, H. Li, J. Zhou, Y. Cheng and C. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) K. Alagiri and K. R. Prabhu, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2012, 10, 835 RSC ; 
  (f) A. S.-K. Tsang and M. H. Todd, Tetrahedron Lett., 2009, 50, 1199 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) T. Nobuta, N. Tada, A. Fujiya, A. Kariya, T. Miura and A. Itoh, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. M. van Marle and B. Tollens, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1903, 36, 1351 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Tramontini, Synthesis, 1973, 703 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Tramontini and L. Angiolini, Tetrahedron, 1990, 46, 1791 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) L. E. Overman, Acc. Chem. Res., 1992, 25, 352 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. Arend, B. Westermann and N. Risch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 1044 CrossRef ; 
  (f) A. Córdova, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 102 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li and C.-J. Li, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 3173 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Shen, M. Li, S. Wang, T. Zhan, Z. Tan and C.-C. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2009, 953 RSC ; 
  (b) A. Sud, D. Sureshkumar and M. Klussmann, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3169 RSC ; 
  (c) K. Alagiri, P. Devadig and K. R. Prabhu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5160 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Yamase, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1961, 34, 480 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. M. Schubert, W. A. Sweeney and H. K. Latourette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1954, 76, 5462 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. R. Edward Jr. and E. C. Sibelle, J. Org. Chem., 1963, 28, 674 CrossRef .
Z. Li and C.-J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6968 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Ghobrial, K. Harhammer, M. D. Mihovilovic and M. Schnürch, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8836 RSC ; 
  (b) P. Liu, C.-Y. Zhou, S. Xiang and C.-M. Che, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2739 RSC ; 
  (c) M.-Z. Wang, C.-Y. Zhou, M.-K. Wong and C.-M. Che, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 5723 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) F. Yang, J. Li, J. Xie and Z.-Z. Huang, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 5214 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) L. Huang, T. Niu, J. Wu and Y. Zhang, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 1759 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) E. Shirakawa, N. Uchiyama and T. Hayashi, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 25 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) E. Shirakawa, T. Yoneda, K. Moriya, K. Ota, N. Uchiyama, R. Nishikawa and T. Hayashi, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 1041 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) K. Alagiri, G. S. R. Kumara and K. R. Prabhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11787 RSC .
Z. Li, D. S. Bohle and C.-J. Li, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 8928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Correia, L. Yang and C.-J. Li, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 4581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, L. Yu, L. Zhang, L. Wang and M. Wang, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 5016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. Basavaiah, A. J. Rao and T. Satyanarayana, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 811 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. G. Jellerichs, J.-R. Kong and M. J. Krische, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7758 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) D. Basavaiah, D. S. Sharada, N. Kumaragurubaran and R. M. Reddy, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 67, 7135 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) M. E. Krafftand and T. F. N. Haxell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10168 CrossRef .
For several selected reviews, see: 
  (a) T. Tian and Z. Li, Sci. Synth., Knowl. Updates, 2020, 2, 375 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J.-S. Zhang, L. Liu, T. Chen and L.-B. Han, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li and C.-J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. M. R. Volla and P. Vogel, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 1701 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. A. Correia and C.-J. Li, Heterocycles, 2010, 82, 555 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Sugiishi and H. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2504 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) S.-K. Xiang, B. Zhang, L.-H. Zhang, Y. Cui and N. Jiao, Sci. China: Chem., 2012, 55, 50 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. U. M. Shaikh, S. S. Mudaliar and K. H. Chikhalia, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 50780 RSC ; 
  (f) S. Tang, P. Wang, H. Li and A. Lei, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11676 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) L. Zhao and C.-J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7075 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Zhao, O. Basle and C.-J. Li, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 4106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie and Z.-Z. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huo, Y. Yuan, M. Wu, X. Jia, X. Wang, F. Chen and J. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
For recent review, see:   I. Bosque, R. Chinchilla, J. C. Gonzalez-Gomez, D. Guijarro and F. Alonso, Org. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1717 RSC .
Z. Li, L. Cao and C.-J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rong, R. Li and W. Lu, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 4376 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Correia and C.-J. Li, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2010, 352, 1446 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guin, S. K. Rout, A. Banerjee, S. Nandi and B. K. Patel, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 5294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qun, X. Chen, L. Yang and H. Huang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2882 CrossRef .

  (a) J. Tsuji, H. Takahashi and M. Morikawa, Tetrahedron Lett., 1965, 6, 4387 CrossRef ; 
  (b) K. E. Atkins, W. E. Walker and R. M. Manyik, Tetrahedron Lett., 1970, 11, 3821 CrossRef ; 
  (c) G. Hata, K. Takahashi and A. Miyake, J. Chem. Soc. D, 1970, 1392 RSC ; 
  (d) B. M. Trostand and T. J. Fullerton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 292 CrossRef ; 
  (e) P. W. N. M. van Leeuwen, P. C. J. Kamer, J. N. H. Reek and P. Dierkes, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 2741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li and C.-J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Young and M. C. White, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, C.-X. Song, J.-X. Cai, W.-H. Wang and Z.-J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12901 CrossRef .
B.-J. Li and Z.-J. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5588 RSC .
X. Wu, J. Riedel and V. M. Dong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mo and W. Bao, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 2845 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. A. Almasalma and E. Mejía, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 12269 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. A. Almasalma and E. Mejía, Synthesis, 2020, 52, 529 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Kane and J. Prakt, Chem, 1838, 15, 129 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) C. H. Heathcock, Science, 1981, 214, 395 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Grçger, E. M. Vogland and M. Shibasaki, Chem. – Eur. J., 1998, 4, 1137 CrossRef ; 
  (d) R. Mahrwald, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1095 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) S. Saito and H. Yamamoto, Chem. – Eur. J., 1999, 5, 1959 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) G. Casiraghi, F. Zanardi, G. Appendino and G. Rassu, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1929 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) T. D. Machajewski and C.-H. Wong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1352 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) C. Palomo, M. Oiarbide and J. M. García, Chem. – Eur. J., 2002, 8, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) C. Palomo, M. Oiarbideand and J. M. García, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 65 RSC ; 
  (j) S. Saito and H. Yamamoto, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and C.-J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1949 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and C.-J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yoo, C. A. Correia, Y. Zhang and C.-J. Li, Synlett, 2009, 138 CAS .
C. Galli, P. Gentili and O. Lanzalunga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Li, R. Yu and H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7497 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Li, H. Li, X. Guo, L. Cao, R. Yu, H. Li and S. Pan, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and C.-J. Li, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2007, 4654 CrossRef CAS .
G. Deng, L. Zhao and C.-J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Deng, K. Ueda, S. Yanagisawa, K. Itami and C.-J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Deng and C.-J. Li, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo and C.-J. Li, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 4977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. DeBoef, S. J. Pastineand and D. Sames, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wasa, K. M. Engle and J.-Q. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, J. Miao, Y. Zhao and H. Ge, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8318 CrossRef CAS .
For reviews on Heck alkenylations, see: 
  (a) 
Handbook of Organopalladium Chemistry for Organic Synthesis, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York,  2002, ch. IV.2, vol. 1 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) X.-F. Wu, P. Anbarasan, H. Neumann and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9047 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) G. T. Crisp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1998, 27, 427 RSC ; 
  (d) I. P. Beletskayaand and A. V. Cheprakov, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 3009 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (e) J. G. de Vries, Can. J. Chem., 2001, 79, 1086 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. de Meijere and F. E. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1995, 33, 2379 CrossRef .
For a selected review, see:   I. Moritani and Y. Fujiwara, Synthesis, 1973, 524 CrossRef CAS .
For a discussion on the mechanism of oxidation of Pd(0) to Pd(II), see: 
  (a) J. Piera and J.-E. Bäckvall, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. M. Gligorichand and M. S. Sigman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6612 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Muzart, Chem. - Asian J., 2006, 1, 508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Beck and M. J. Gaunt, Top. Curr. Chem., 2009, 292, 85 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. K. Boele, G. P. F. van Strijdonck, A. H. M. de Vries, P. C. J. Kamer, J. G. de Vries and P. W. N. M. van Leeuwen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nishikataand and B. H. Lipshutz, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 1972 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-H. Wang, K. M. Engle, B.-F. Shi and J.-Q. Yu, Science, 2010, 327, 315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Engle, D.-H. Wang and J.-Q. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Zhang, B.-F. Shi and J.-Q. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Baran and E. J. Corey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Garg, D. D. Caspi and B. M. Stoltz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Beck, R. Hatley and M. J. Gaunt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Weissman, X. Song and D. Milstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 337 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, G. Song and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H.-J. Knölker and W. Fröhner, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1998, 173 RSC ; 
  (b) H.-J. Knölker, K. R. Reddy and A. Wagner, Tetrahedron Lett., 1998, 39, 8267 CrossRef ; 
  (c) H.-J. Knölker, W. Fröhner and K. R. Reddy, Synthesis, 2002, 557 CrossRef .
M. C. Pirrung, Y. Liu, L. Deng, D. K. Halstead, Z. Li, J. F. May, M. Wedel, D. A. Austin and N. J. G. Webster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4609 CrossRef CAS .
H.-B. Zhang, L. Liu, Y.-J. Chen, D. Wang and C.-J. Li, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 869 CrossRef .
Y. Hatamoto, S. Sakaguchi and Y. Ishii, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 4623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Xu, J. Lu and T.-P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, W. Jin, C. Sun, J. Chen, W. Du, S. He and Z. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bee, E. Leclerc and M. A. Tius, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 4927 CrossRef .

  (a) T. Pei, X. Wang and R. A. Widenhoefer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 648 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Liu, X. Wang, T. Pei and R. A. Widenhoefer, Chem. – Eur. J., 2004, 10, 6343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-T. Yip, J.-H. Li, O.-Y. Lee and D. Yang, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 5717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Hull, E. L. Lanni and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, G. Dobereiner, X.-S. Hao, R. Giri, N. Maugel and J.-Q. Yu, Tetrahedron, 2009, 65, 3085 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, G. Deng and C.-J. Li, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 2071 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Y. Zhu and C.-J. Li, Synthesis, 2016, 48, 1616 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gong, H. Zeng, F. Zhou and C.-J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G.-J. Deng, S. Li, C.-J. Li and H. Gong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 91617 RSC .
R. Li, L. Liang and W. Lu, Organometallics, 2006, 25, 5973 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Stuart and K. Fagnou, Science, 2007, 316, 1172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Hull and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11904 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Hull and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. S. Yeung and V. M. Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Watanabe, S. Oishi, N. Fujii and H. Ohno, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 4720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gandeepan, K. Parthasarathy and C.-H. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yoo and C.-J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Basle, J. Bidange, Q. Shuai and C.-J. Li, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2010, 352, 1145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Liu, J. Yuan and A. Lei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang, L. Zeng, Y. Liu and A. Lei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, H. Rao, R. Hua and C.-J. Li, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shi and F. Glorius, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 829 RSC .
S. Wertz, D. Leifert and A. Studer, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, B. Wang and W. Liu, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 932 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Paul, H. D. Khanal, C. D. Clinton, S. H. Kim and Y. R. Lee, Org. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 231 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Yuan, J. Fu, S. Liu, Y. Xiao, P. Mao and L. Qu, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2018, 16, 3203 RSC ; 
  (c) L. Hu, J. Yuan, J. Fu, T. Zhang, L. Gao, Y. Xiao, Pu Mao and L. Qu, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2018, 4113 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Yuan, J. Fu, J. Yin, Z. Dong, Y. Xiao, P. Mao and L. Qu, Org. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2820 RSC ; 
  (e) S. Toonchue, L. Sumunnee, K. Phomphrai and S. Yotphan, Org. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1928 RSC ; 
  (f) S. Sharma, N. B. Dutta, M. Bhuyan, B. Das and G. Baishya, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2020, 18, 6537 RSC .

  (a) M. Min, H. Choe and S. Hong, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2012, 1, 47 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Moon, D. Kwon and S. Hong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11333 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Narayan and A. P. Antonchick, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4568 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) B. Niu, W. Zhao, Y. Ding, Z. Bian, C. U. Pittman Jr., A. Zhou and H. Ge, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 7251 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) D. Kim and S. Hong, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 4466 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) Y. Moon and S. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7191 RSC ; 
  (g) R. Samanta, R. Narayan and A. P. Antonchick, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 6108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
For a selected review, see:   D. Kang, K. Ahn and S. Hong, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2018, 7, 1136 CrossRef CAS .
M. Min and S. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9613 RSC .
M. Min, Y. Kim and S. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 196 RSC .
S.-L. Zhou, L.-N. Guo and X.-H. Duan, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2014, 8094 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Zha and C.-J. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4184 RSC .
Y. Wei, H. Zhao, J. Kan, W. Su and M. Hong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Matsuyama, M. Kitahara, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kitahara, K. Hirano, H. Tsurugi, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. de Haro and C. Nevado, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yin, C. He, M. Chen, H. Zhang and A. Lei, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, H. Yi, G. Zhang, Y. Deng, R. Bai, H. Zhang, J. T. Miller, A. J. Kropf, E. E. Bunel and A. Lei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 924 CrossRef CAS .
R. Adam, M. Mon, R. Greco, L. H. G. Kalinke, J. A. VidalMoya, A. Fernandez, R. E. P. Winpenny, A. Doménech-Carbó, A. Leyva-Perez, D. Armentano, E. Pardo and J. Ferrando-Soria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qu, F.-Q. Zhang, D.-H. Wang, H. Li, J.-J. Hou and X.-M. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
For a recent review, see:   A. M. F. Phillips, M. F. C. G. da Silva and A. J. L. Pombeiro, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 529 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and C.-J. Li, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 4997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Y. Zhang and R. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Narute, R. Parnes, F. D. Toste and D. Pappo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16553 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Meng, S. Sun, H. Yuan, H. Lou and L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 543 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Pan, X. Liu, S. Sun, Z. Meng and L. Liu, Chin. J. Chem., 2018, 36, 1187 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. Hong, W. Sun, D. Yang, G. Li and R. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4006 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Becica and G. E. Dobereiner, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2019, 17, 2055 RSC .

  (a) A. Lee, R. C. Betori, E. A. Crane and K. A. Scheidt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6212 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Mondal and G. Panda, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 28317 RSC .
Z. Wang, Y. Zhu, X. Pan, G. Wang and L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Larionov, M. M. Mastandrea and M. A. Pericàs, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7008 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, L. Zhang, C. Ye, S. Luo, L.-Z. Wu and C.-H. Tung, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hou, S. Zhu, I. Atodiresei and M. Rueping, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2018, 1277 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fu, L. Li, Q. Yang and S. Luo, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 2122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Huang, X. Liu, J. Lang, J. Xu, L. Lin and X. Feng, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5654 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. O. Ratnikov, X. Xu and M. P. Doyle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9475 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Vetica, S. Bailey, P. Chauhan, M. Turberg, A. Ghaur, G. Raabe and D. Enders, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 3729 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Chauhan, S. Mahajan and D. Enders, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12890 RSC ; 
  (c) A. Schmidt and A. Dreger, Curr. Org. Chem., 2011, 15, 1423 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Rezayee, V. H. Lauridsen, L. Næsborg, T. V. Q. Nguyen, H. N. Tobiesen and K. A. Jørgensen, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 3586 RSC .
For a recent review, see:   A. K. Bagdi, M. Rahman, D. Bhattacherjee, G. V. Zyryanov, S. Ghosh, O. N. Chupakhin and A. Hajra, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 6632 RSC .
A. G. Condie, J. C. Gonzalez-Gomez and C. R. J. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Liang, Q. Chen and B.-H. Han, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5313 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, X. Wu, X. Han, C. Yuan, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 1494 RSC .
M. Rueping, C. Vila, R. M. Koenigs, K. Poscharny and D. C. Fabry, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2360 RSC .
X. Li, Y. Li, Y. Huang, T. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Yang, C. He, X. Zhou and J. Zhang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2925 RSC .
X.-W. Gao, Q.-Y. Meng, J.-X. Li, J.-J. Zhong, T. Lei, X.-B. Li, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2391 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tan, W. Yuan, L. Gong and E. Meggers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13045 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yoo, A. Tanoue and S. Kobayashi, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 2764 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Dai, X.-L. Xu, D.-P. Cheng and X.-N. Li, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2014, 25, 545 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Wu, L. Tang, S.-G. Zhou, Y.-J. Peng, X.-D. He, Z. Guan and Y.-H. He, Tetrahedron, 2017, 73, 6471 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Zhong, Q.-Y. Meng, G.-X. Wang, Q. Liu, B. Chen, K. Feng, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 6443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-Y. Meng, J.-J. Zhong, Q. Liu, X.-W. Gao, H.-H. Zhang, T. Lei, Z.-J. Li, G.-X. Wang, K. Feng, B. Chen, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai, F. Meschini, J. M. R. Narayanam and C. R. J. Stephenson, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 4425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dong, Q. Xia, X. Lv, C. Yan, H. Song, Y. Liu and Q. Wang, Org. Lett., 2018, 20, 5661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu and M. Rueping, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11960 RSC .
C. Ni, W. Chen, C. Jiang and H. Lu, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 313 RSC .
G. Wei, C. Zhang, F. Bures, X. Ye, C.-H. Tan and Z. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3708 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin and D. W. C. MacMillan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Niu, J. Liu, X.-A. Liang, S. Wang and A. Lei, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 467 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-Y. Huang, J. Li, W. Liu and C.-J. Li, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 5018 RSC .
D. A. DiRocco and T. Rovis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8094 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawasaki, N. Ishida and M. Murakami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rueping, R. M. Koenigs, K. Poscharny, D. C. Fabry, D. Leonori and C. Vila, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, B. Zheng, X. Zhou, L. Pan, Q. Liu and Y. Li, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 1692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kataria, H. Deol, G. Singh, M. Kumar and V. Bhalla, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 822 RSC .
A. Sagadevan, P.-C. Lyu and K. C. Hwang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 4526 RSC .
For a selected review, see:   
          J. Yu, Z. Jiang and W. Su, Ball Milling Towards Green Synthesis: Applications, Projects, Challenges, RSC Green Chemistry,  2015, no. 31, ch. 5, pp. 96–113 Search PubMed .
J.-B. Yu, Y. Zhang, Z.-J. Jiang and W.-K. Su, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 11514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W.-K. Su, J.-B. Yu, Z. Li and Z.-J. Jiang, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 9144 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            T. Fujii and M. Ohba, The Alkaloids, ed. G. A. Cordell, Academic Press, New York,  1998, vol. 51, p. 271 Search PubMed .
For several selected reviews, see: 
  (a) M. B. Gawande, S. N. Shelke, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1338 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. T. McBurney, F. Portela-Cubillo and J. C. Walton, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1264 RSC .
Q.-Q. Wang, Z.-X. Wang, X.-Y. Zhang and X.-S. Fan, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2017, 6, 1445 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. K. Shyamlal, M. Mathur, D. K. Yadav and S. Chaudhary, Fitoterapia, 2020, 143, 104533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Mura, L. D. Luca, M. Taddei, J. M. J. Williams and A. Porcheddu, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 2586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Deb, P. J. Borpatra, P. J. Saikia and P. K. Baruah, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 1435 RSC .
C.-X. Gu, W.-W. Chen, B. Xu and M.-H. Xu, Tetrahedron, 2019, 75, 1605 CrossRef CAS .
For several selected reviews, see: 
  (a) J. L. Röckl, D. Pollok, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 45 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. Yan, Y. Kawamata and P. S. Baran, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 13230 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Wiebe, T. Gieshoff, S. Mohle, E. Rodrigo, M. Zirbes and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5594 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) S. R. Waldvogel, S. Lips, M. Selt, B. Riehl and C. J. Kampf, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Malkowsky, U. Griesbach, H. Putter and S. R. Waldvogel, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 4569 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kirste, M. Nieger, I. M. Malkowsky, F. Stecker, A. Fischer and S. R. Waldvogel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 2273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kirste, G. Schnakenburg, F. Stecker, A. Fischer and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kirste, B. Elsler, G. Schnakenburg and S. R. Waldvogel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Elsler, D. Schollmeyer, K. M. Dyballa, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wiebe, D. Schollmeyer, K. M. Dyballa, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Lips, A. Wiebe, B. Elsler, D. Schollmeyer, K. M. Dyballa, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10872 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Lips, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Synlett, 2019, 30, 1174 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schulz, M. Enders, B. Elsler, D. Schollmeyer, K. M. Dyballa, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wiebe, S. Lips, D. Schollmeyer, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Beil, T. Muller, S. B. Sillart, P. Franzmann, A. Bomm, M. Holtkamp, U. Karst, W. Schade and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lips, D. Schollmeyer, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13325 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lips, B. A. Frontana-Uribe, M. Dorr, D. Schollmeyer, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 6057 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Rockl, D. Schollmeyer, R. Franke and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 315 CrossRef .
O. Basle, N. Borduas, P. Dubois, J. M. Chapuzet, T.-H. Chan, J. Lessard and C.-J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8162 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-J. Wu and H.-C. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Wu, S.-R. Li, H. Long and H.-C. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4601 RSC .
Q.-Y. Li, S.-Y. Cheng, H.-T. Tang and Y.-M. Pan, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 5517 RSC .
K. Okamoto and K. Chiba, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-J. Luo, Y. Li, X.-H. Ouyang, J.-H. Li and D.-L. He, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2707 RSC .
Y.-Z. Yang, Y.-C. Wu, R.-J. Song and J.-H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 7585 RSC .
Y. Kong, J. K. Kim, Y. Li, J. Zhang, M. Huang and Y. Wu, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 1274 RSC .
P. Xu, P.-Y. Chen and H.-C. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-W. Gao, Q. Gu and S.-L. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2544 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z.-J. Cai, C.-X. Liu, Q. Gu, C. Zheng and S.-L. You, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2149 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Schaarschmidt and H. Lang, Organometallics, 2013, 32, 5668 CrossRef CAS .
For several selected reviews, see: 
  (a) K. Jähnisch, V. Hessel, H. Löweand and M. Baerns, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 406 CrossRef ; 
  (b) 
Flow Chemistry Fundamentals (Vol. 1) & Applications (Vol. 2), ed. F. Darvas, V. Hessel and G. Dorman, De Gruyter, Berlin,  2014 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Plutschak, B. Pieber, K. Gilmore and P. Seeberger, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11796 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) I. Rossetti and M. Compagnoni, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 296, 56 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) T. H. Rehm, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 16952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rueping, C. Vila and T. Bootwicha, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1676 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. L. Gemoets, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 5800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Erdmann, Y. Su, B. Bosmans, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 831 CrossRef CAS .
A.-C. Bédard, A. Adamo, K. C. Aroh, M. G. Russell, A. A. Bedermann, J. Torosian, B. Yue, K. F. Jensen and T. F. Jamison, Science, 2018, 361, 1220 CrossRef PubMed .
U. K. Sharma, H. P. L. Gemoets, F. Schroder, T. Noël and E. V. V. Eycken, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3818 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gleede, M. Selt, C. Gutz, A. Stenglein and S. R. Waldvogel, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2020, 24, 1916 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hielscher, B. Gleede and S. R. Waldvogel, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 368, 137420 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, J. Qiao, R.-N. Ci, X.-Z. Wang, Y. Wang, J.-H. Wang, B. Chen, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Chem, 2021 DOI:10.1016/j.chempr.2021.01.019 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Classical cross-coupling reactions.	 

 	Scheme 2  Electronic matching rules for cross-coupling reactions.	 

 	Scheme 3  A sustainable strategy for forming C–C bonds.	 

 	Scheme 4  Early examples of forming C–C bonds from two C–H bonds.	 

 	Scheme 5  Modern design model for cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions.	 

 	Scheme 6  The number of publications per year found by searching for the term “cross-dehydrogenative coupling” in SciFinder. (There is still a large number of oxidative C–H/C–H coupling publications not being counted.)	 

 	Scheme 7  Copper-catalyzed CDC aza-Henry-type reaction.	 

 	Scheme 8  Various systems of CDC-type aza-Henry reaction.	 

 	Scheme 9  Plausible mechanism for the copper-catalyzed aza-Henry-type CDC reaction.	 

 	Scheme 10  Copper-catalyzed CDC Mannich-type reaction and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 11  Various catalytic CDC Mannich-type reaction systems.	 

 	Scheme 12  Copper-catalyzed CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction.	 

 	Scheme 13  Various catalytic CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction systems.	 

 	Scheme 14  Plausible mechanism for the iron-catalyzed CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction.	 



1	CuI	57	13
2	CuCl	51	10
3	CuBr	58	23
4	CuBr2	63	10
5c	CuBr	63	10
6c	CuBr2	72	11
7	CuSO4	53	11
8	Cu(OTf)2	55	15

 	Scheme 15  Palladium-catalyzed CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reaction of N-heteroaromatics and alcohols. Conditions: 0.2 mmol of heterocycle, 1.0 mL of alcohol, 5.0 mol% PdCl2, 5.0 mol% rac-biNap, 3.5 equiv. of DCP at 120 °C in air for 16 h unless otherwise noted. Isolated yields. aAt 135 °C with 3.0 equiv. of DCP.	 

 	Scheme 16  CDC reactions of benzimidazoles, benzothiazoles and benzoxazoles with ethers under metal-free conditions.	 

 	Scheme 17  Copper-catalyzed Morita–Baylis–Hillman-type CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with alkenes.	 

 	Scheme 18  Copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of N,N-dimethylanilines with alkynes. Reaction conditions: 4.0 mmol aniline, 2.0 mmol alkyne, 0.1 mmol copper bromide, and 0.4 mL t-BuOOH (5–6 M in decane). Isolated yields were based on alkynes.	 

 	Scheme 19  A plausible mechanism of CDC alkynylation reactions.	 

 	Scheme 20  Diverse CDC alkynylation reactions.	 

 	Scheme 21  Copper-catalyzed CDC reaction of glycine derivatives with malonates or alkynes and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 22  Copper-catalyzed CDC Mannich-type reactions of glycine derivatives with ketones and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 23  Metal-free CDC Friedel–Crafts-type reactions of glycine derivatives with indoles and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 24  Diverse CDC reactions at the benzylic position.	 

 	Scheme 25  A plausible mechanism of iron-catalyzed CDC reactions of 1,3-diketones and diarylmethanes.	 

 	Scheme 26  Copper/cobalt catalyzed CDC Tsuji–Trost-type reaction. Conditions: 0.025 mmol of CuBr, 0.1 mmol of CoCl2, 5.0 mmol of alkene, 1.0 mmol of 1,3-dicarbonyl compound, and 2.0 mmol of TBHP. Isolated yields were based on 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds.	 

 	Scheme 27  Palladium catalyzed CDC Tsuji–Trost-type reaction.	 

 	Scheme 28  Copper-catalyzed CDC Tsuji–Trost-type reaction and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 29  Palladium-catalyzed CDC reaction of allylic compounds with indoles and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 30  Copper-catalyzed CDC alkynylation reaction of allylic positions and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 31  CDC aldol-type reactions under copper/indium-catalyzed or metal-free conditions and plausible mechanisms.	 

 	Scheme 32  NHPI-mediated copper-catalyzed CDC aldol-type reactions of benzocyclic ethers with ketones and plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 33  Diverse CDC aldol-type reactions between 1,3-diketones and heteroatom compounds.	 

 	Scheme 34  Diverse CDC reactions of simple alkanes with N-heterocyclics.	 

 	Scheme 35  Ruthenium-catalyzed CDC reactions of arenes and alkanes.	 

 	Scheme 36  Iridium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reaction and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 37  Palladium-catalyzed intermolecular CDC reaction. Reaction conditions: 0.2 mmol of substrate, 0.1 mL of benzyl acrylate, 10 mol% Pd(OAc)2, 2.0 equiv. of LiCl, 1.1 equiv. of Cu(OAc)2, 1.1 equiv. of AgOAc, 1.0 mL of DMF, 120 °C, N2, 12 h. The yields are isolated yields. aObtained as a mixture of inseparable cis/trans diastereomers. Optically inactive starting materials were used.	 

 	Scheme 38  Copper-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reaction and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 39  Palladium-catalyzed Heck-type CDC and two types of plausible mechanisms.	 

 	Scheme 40  Palladium-catalyzed CDC Heck-type reactions of acyl anilines with alkenes and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 41  Diverse palladium-catalyzed CDC Heck-type reactions.	 

 	Scheme 42  Applications of diverse palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reactions in the total synthesis of natural products.	 

 	Scheme 43  Palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reaction and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 44  Other transition-metal-catalyzed CDC Heck-type reactions and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 45  Applications of palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reactions of benzoquinones in the total synthesis of natural products.	 

 	Scheme 46  CDC Heck-type reactions of benzoquinones.	 

 	Scheme 47  Diverse palladium-catalyzed CDC Heck-type reactions between two olefins.	 

 	Scheme 48  Palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reaction of two olefins and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 49  Palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC Heck-type reactions of olefins with enolates.	 

 	Scheme 50  Transition-metal-catalyzed homo-CDC reactions of 2-arylpyridines and a possible mechanism under ruthenium catalysis.	 

 	Scheme 51  Rhodium-catalyzed one-pot CDC reaction of two benzoic acids and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 52  Palladium-catalyzed CDC reactions of two arenes and KIE studies.	 

 	Scheme 53  Palladium-catalyzed regioselective CDC reaction of azaphenanthrene with anisole and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 54  Palladium-catalyzed CDC reaction of two different arenes via the directing group strategy.	 

 	Scheme 55  Palladium-catalyzed one-pot cross-coupling and intramolecular CDC reaction and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 56  Copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with amines and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 57  Palladium-catalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with N-heterocycles and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 58  Copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with olefins and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 59  Zinc-catalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with alkynes and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 60  Diverse intramolecular CDC reactions of aldehydes under different catalyzed systems.	 

 	Scheme 61  Diverse CDC reactions of quinoxalin-2(1H)-ones under different catalyzed systems.	 

 	Scheme 62  A plausible mechanism of the palladium-catalyzed CDC reaction of quinoxalin-2(1H)-ones with benzenes.	 

 	Scheme 63  Diverse CDC reactions of chromones under different catalyzed systems.	 

 	Scheme 64  CDC reactions of coumarins and a plausible mechanism of the palladium-catalyzed coupling reaction of coumarins with alkenes.	 

 	Scheme 65  Palladium-catalyzed CDC Sonogashira-type reactions of alkynes with indoles and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 66  CDC Sonogashira-type reactions of alkynes with aromatic substrates.	 

 	Scheme 67  Nickel/copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of two alkynes and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 68  CDC reactions of two alkynes under different catalyzed systems.	 

 	Scheme 69  Copper-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with alkynes.	 

 	Scheme 70  Copper-catalyzed enantioselective CDC Mannich-type reactions of glycine derivatives with 1,3-diketones and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 71  Iron-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions of two naphthols and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 72  Diverse enantioselective CDC reactions.	 

 	Scheme 73  Photoredox-induced enantioselective CDC reactions of thianthracene or xanthene with aldehydes and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 74  Chiral-amine-catalyzed enantioselective CDC Mannich-type reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with ketones.	 

 	Scheme 75  Electrochemical-induced chiral-o-diamine-catalyzed enantioselective CDC Mannich-type reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with ketones.	 

 	Scheme 76  Iron-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with alkynes and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 77  Organo-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 78  Iridium photoredox-catalyzed CDC aza-Henry-type reactions of tetrahydroquinolines with nitroalkanes and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 79  Photoredox-induced CDC aza-Henry-type reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with nitroalkanes.	 

 	Scheme 80  Photoredox-induced CDC Mannich-type reactions of amines with nitroalkanes.	 

 	Scheme 81  Photoredox-induced CDC Mannich-type reactions of tertiary amines as methylene reagents with 1,3-diketones.	 

 	Scheme 82  Photoredox-induced CDC Friedel–Craft-type reactions of indoles with tetrahydroisoquinolines.	 

 	Scheme 83  CDC Friedel–Craft-type reactions of (hetero)arenes with ruthenium and iridium photoredox catalysts.	 

 	Scheme 84  Photoredox-induced CDC Friedel–Craft-type reactions of indoles with glycine derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 85  Asymmetric photoredox-induced CDC reactions of tetrahydrocarbazoles or tetrahydroisoquinolines with acrolein.	 

 	Scheme 86  Photoredox-induced CDC Minisci-type reactions of N-heteroaromatics with alcohols, ethers or alkanes.	 

 	Scheme 87  Photoredox-induced CDC reactions of aldehydes and a possible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 88  Photoredox-induced CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with terminal alkynes and a possible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 89  Visible-photoinduced cobalt-catalyzed CDC reactions of two alkenes and a possible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 90  Photoredox-induced supramolecular polymer ZnO-NPcatalyzed CDC reactions of aldehydes with alkynes and a possible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 91  Photoredox-induced copper-catalyzed CDC reactions of two alkynes and a possible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 92  Mechanically induced iron-catalyzed CDC reactions of indoles with alkanes and a possible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 93  Diverse mechanical-induced CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines.	 

 	Scheme 94  Mechanically induced enantioselective CDC reactions of tetrahydroisoquinolines with alkynes.	 

 	Scheme 95  Microwave-assisted CDC reactions of ketones with cycloalkanes and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 96  Microwave-assisted CDC reactions of caffeine and other natural methylxanthines with aliphatic alcohols.	 

 	Scheme 97  Microwave-assisted ruthenium and silica-grafted primary-amine co-catalyzed CDC reactions of two aliphatic alcohols.	 

 	Scheme 98  Microwave-assisted ruthenium-catalyzed CDC reactions of TMU with two indoles and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 99  Microwave-assisted palladium-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reactions and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 100  Electrochemically induced CDC reactions of phenol or aniline with aromatics (Waldvogel's work).	 

 	Scheme 101  Electrochemical CDC reaction of tetrahydroisoquinolines and nitromethanes in an ionic liquid.	 

 	Scheme 102  Electrochemically induced iron-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reactions and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 103  Electrochemical-induced iron-catalyzed intramolecular CDC reactions for the synthesis of N-polycyclic compounds.	 

 	Scheme 104  Electrochemical-induced intermolecular CDC reactions of two N,N-dimethylanilines and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 105  Electrochemical-induced intermolecular CDC reactions.	 

 	Scheme 106  Electrochemical-induced HCl-mediated intermolecular CDC reactions of aromatics with alkanes and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 107  Palladium-catalyzed enantioselective CDC reactions of a metal-complex with heteroaromatics and a possible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 108  Early continuous-flow-induced CDC reactions.	 

 	Scheme 109  Continuous-flow/photoredox-induced palladium-catalyzed CDC acylation of indoles at the 2-position and a plausible mechanism.	 

 	Scheme 110  Continuous-flow/electrochemical-induced CDC reaction for the formation of Csp2–Csp2 bonds.	 

 	Scheme 111  Solar-power-driven quantum-dot (QD)-catalyzed CDC reactions of the allylic position and a plausible mechanism.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
