Scaffold-reinforced perovskite compound solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE02185B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE02185B
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2500-2508Scaffold-reinforced perovskite compound solar cells†

        
          
            Brian L. 
            Watson‡
, 
      
        
          
            Nicholas 
            Rolston‡
, 
      
        
          
            Adam D. 
            Printz‡
 and 

        
          
            Reinhold H. 
            Dauskardt
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-2205, USA. E-mail: dauskardt@stanford.edu
Received 
      3rd August 2017
    , Accepted 23rd August 2017First published on 23rd August 2017AbstractThe relative insensitivity of the optoelectronic properties of organometal trihalide perovskites to crystallographic defects and impurities has enabled fabrication of highly-efficient perovskite solar cells by scalable solution-state deposition techniques well suited to low-cost manufacturing. Fracture analyses of state-of-the-art devices, however, have revealed that both the perovskite active layer and adjacent carrier selective contacts are mechanically fragile—a major obstacle to technological maturity that stands to significantly compromise their thermomechanical reliability and operational lifetimes. We report a new concept in solar cell design, the compound solar cell (CSC), which addresses the intrinsic fragility of these materials with mechanically reinforcing internal scaffolds. The internal scaffold effectively partitions a conventional monolithic planar solar cell into an array of dimensionally scalable and mechanically shielded individual perovskite cells that are laterally encapsulated by the surrounding scaffold and connected in parallel via the front and back electrodes. The CSCs exhibited a significantly increased fracture energy of ∼13 J m−2—a 30-fold increase over previously reported planar perovskite (∼0.4 J m−2)—while maintaining efficiencies comparable to planar devices. Notably, the efficiency of the microcells formed within the scaffold is comparable to planar devices on an area-adjusted basis. This development is a significant step in demonstrating robust perovskite solar cells to achieve increased reliability and service lifetimes comparable to c-Si, CIGS, and CdTe solar cells.

Broader context
The development focus for next generation photovoltaic technology has been to lower costs while retaining power conversion efficiencies and performance lifetimes comparable to conventional CdTe, CIGS, and c-Si technologies. Perovskite solar cells are a promising, low-cost, solution-processed solar technology that already exhibit high efficiencies, but suffer from challenging instabilities and degradation modes that limit their performance lifetimes. For example, in their present planar design, perovskite solar cells are the most fragile class of cells ever tested, offering negligible resistance to fracture and limiting their commercial viability and path to market. In this work, we present a new robust design partitioning a perovskite solar cell into an array of microcells with a mechanically-shielding scaffold to address both its mechanical fragility and chemical instability. The compound solar cell represents an advance in the design of solution-processed devices, dramatically improving the resilience of chemically and mechanically unstable semiconductors.

The remarkable potential of organometal trihalide perovskite photoactive materials has recently been demonstrated in the production of efficient solar cells and light-emitting diodes.1–7 Their optoelectronic properties are relatively insensitive to crystallographic defects and impurities, enabling highly-efficient solar cells to be fabricated using scalable solution-state processes well suited to low-cost manufacturing. The use of perovskites in photovoltaic devices has been a particularly fruitful avenue, with rapid progress resulting in an increase of device efficiency from 3.8 to over 22%—comparable to silicon (Si), cadmium telluride (CdTe), and copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS) devices—in a little over seven years.8–12 These high efficiencies, in concert with their solution-processability, promise to reduce the levelized cost of electricity and allow facile integration into flexible technologies.13–15
Realizing the promise of perovskite solar cells, however, requires overcoming several challenges that include their chemical and thermal stability, sensitivity to moisture, light-induced phase segregation (Hoke effect), and extreme mechanical fragility, which stand as obstacles to achieving the required stability and service lifetimes.16–20 The field has recently started shifting focus away from pursuing ever-higher efficiencies toward addressing the challenges that are currently preventing perovskite solar cells from commercialization. Recent publications have begun to address the Hoke effect, as well as thermal and environmental degradation, through material selection and device encapsulation.19,21 However, the extreme mechanical fragility of perovskites remains a major obstacle to further technological advance.
In a recent study investigating the fracture properties of a wide variety of solution processed perovskite solar cells, we consistently observed Gc values of cohesive and adhesive fracture—a key metric of thermomechanical reliability—well below ∼1.5 J m−2, values so low they stand to compromise the thermomechanical reliability and operational lifetimes of perovskite solar cells.20 Based on years of research in microelectronic devices and packaging materials in our own laboratory, we have observed that devices with a Gc below 5 J m−2 are prone to mechanical failure in production due to the stresses from manufacturing and handling.
The field has recently begun to appreciate the mechanical fragility of perovskites; however, the real challenges associated with this fragility have yet to be observed since the focus has been on producing small, lab-scale devices. At the lab scale, the displacements imposed at the edge of devices due to thermal mismatch—which scales with size—are minimal. At the module scale, much larger displacements, and thus shear strains, are generated than for lab-scale devices, leading to residual stresses that drive delamination and result in device failure.
In mature solar technologies such as c-Si and CIGS, it is well established that mechanical properties are excellent predictors for device resilience to environmental stressors that accelerate the evolution of internal defects causing delamination of layered structures. Recent work has demonstrated this concept in metallized surfaces and anti-reflection coatings22 within solar modules, along with encapsulation and backsheet structures23 exposed to heat and humidity. Currently, the development of perovskite solar cells has proceeded along a pathway similar to that of organic photovoltaics, except perovskites are even more susceptible to fracture.20,24 Clearly, new concepts in the design of solar cells employing such fragile materials are required.
Instead of attempting to improve upon the intrinsically fragile nature of perovskites—which is related to their brittle, salt-like crystal structure—a new cell design that extrinsically shields the cells from mechanical stresses is proposed. Such approaches are not without precedent. Many inherently fragile material systems with desirable properties such as light-weight yet mechanically weak polymers25 and high-temperature stable yet brittle ceramics26 can exhibit remarkable improvements in thermomechanical stability by exploiting mechanisms of extrinsic shielding from mechanical stresses to create mechanically-robust structural composites. Examples include transformation toughening and grain-bridging in ceramics,27–29 fiber-reinforced polymers,30 and even recent demonstrations of toughened hybrid glasses using molecularly confined polymer-molecules.31
Inspired by the compound eyes of insects comprising a close-packed array of independent photoreceptor units, we developed the compound solar cell (CSC), a conventional solar cell partitioned by a scaffold into a vast array of smaller, encapsulated, mechanically shielded, and chemically contained perovskite microcells. In this demonstration of the scaffold-partitioned CSC, we utilized a close-packed hexagonal or honeycomb structure design for the scaffold (Fig. 1). The honeycomb is mechanically resilient to mechanical stresses,32,33 and close-packed hexagons exhibit the best combination of mechanical properties, packing efficiency, and reduced internal cell perimeter in comparison to other geometries.34
 Fig. 1  (a) Top and side view of the compound solar cell. The partitioning scaffold (gray) shields the fragile perovskite microcell array from mechanical stress. The individual microcells in the array are connected in parallel by the top and bottom electrode. (b) An expanded illustration of a single perovskite microcell. The dashed black lines highlight the region where PTAA-X bonds to the scaffold. (c) Calculation of the active photovoltaic surface area of the microcell array, the microcell area fraction (fMA). (d) A photograph of a compound solar cell illuminated from a light-source below. The hexagonal scaffolds are visible in the regions coated by the silver electrode. 
Minimizing the internal microcell perimeter decreases the total surface area with which the perovskite contacts the scaffold, and thus, limits the number of charge recombination sites that may be introduced through scaffold partitioning. These geometric arguments suggest that, for CSCs, the honeycomb structure is the optimal structure for providing structural support while sustaining high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs). Given twice the scaffold apothem (i.e., the wall-to-wall distance, 300 μm, 400 μm, or 450 μm), and the periodicity of the cells, dper (i.e., 500 μm), the microcell area fraction (fMA) can be calculated as (2 × apothem)2/dper2 (Fig. 1c). The fMA of CSCs with scaffold wall widths of 50, 100, and 200 μm were calculated to be 0.81, 0.64, and 0.36, respectively. We demonstrate efficient perovskite CSCs with fracture energies comparable to c-Si, CIGS, and CdTe solar devices, a first for any low-cost solution-processed solar technology and an advance that repositions the viability of perovskite solar cell technology.
Fabrication of a CSC device is shown schematically in Fig. 2. The scaffold was fabricated by photolithographic patterning of a positive photoresist on a transparent, conductive ITO electrode coated with a mechanically robust, solution processed TiO2 nanoparticle (NP) electron-transport layer (ETL). The hexagonal scaffolds had a center-to-center periodicity of 500 μm and scaffold walls widths of 50, 100, or 200 μm (the microcell sizes were either 450, 400, or 300 μm per 500 μm period). Prior to filling, the scaffolds (Fig. 3a) were hard-baked at 200 °C to increase the degree of cross-linking and prevent dissolution in N,N-dimethylformamide, the solvent of the perovskite precursor solution.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the fabrication process of a compound solar cell. The polymeric scaffolds were lithographically patterned in photoresist onto the transparent front electrode composed of ITO, and electron-transport layer, TiO2 nanoparticles on glass. The perovskite microcells were then formed within the spaces defined by the scaffold by evaporation of C60 and spin-coating of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite precursor solution. The entire structure was then coated with a hole-transport layer, PTAA-X (cross-linked PTAA) followed by the reflective back Ag electrode. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Optical micrograph of the unfilled scaffold with 50 μm wall width (beige) on a silicon/TiO2 substrate (blue) and (b) of the same scaffold after deposition of C60 and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. Profilometry line scans of the scaffolds with 50 μm, 100 μm, and 200 μm wall widths (c) before and (d) after deposition of the perovskite layer, which results in the formation of microcells that intimately contact the scaffold walls. 
Thermally evaporated C60 and spin-coated perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) were sequentially deposited into the scaffold (Fig. 3b). Spin-coated atop these layers and the scaffold was the polymeric hole-transporting material (HTM), cross-linked poly(triarylamine) (PTAA-X), which leveraged a recent development in our lab—the use of a light activated cross-linking node, 1,3,5,7-tetrakis-(p-benzylazide)-adamantane (TPBA)—to cross-link the PTAA layer and covalently bond it to the scaffold, ensuring that the hole-transport layer and adjacent metal electrode did not peel away from the scaffold-partitioned perovskite layer, a known weak layer as reported elsewhere.20
Deposition of perovskite films by spin-coating onto substrates featuring the scaffolds resulted in the formation of arrays of hexagonal microcells which, when inspected by optical microscopy (Fig. 3b and Fig. S1, ESI†) and profilometry (Fig. 3c and d), were shown to fill the scaffolds uniformly, exhibiting flat topography and consistent cell height (∼250 nm) between the scaffold walls. These observations addressed central questions for creating scaffold-reinforced CSCs of how effectively and uniformly the perovskite microcells could be formed, the variance of the height and topology of the individual hexagonal microcells, the degree of conformal contact of each cell with the surrounding scaffold walls, and the resulting quality of perovskite crystals formed within the scaffold wells. Importantly, the microcell arrays formed consistently without the presence of unfilled microcells, thus preventing electrode-to-electrode contact and device shorting during subsequent fabrication steps.
Formation of the scaffold microcells did not show any dependence on the thickness of the intervening scaffold wall-width, or corresponding microcell surface area. Importantly, for the purpose of mechanical reinforcement, the perovskite formed within the scaffold and did not coat the scaffold sidewalls. The perovskite-free sidewalls ensured that a contiguous perovskite layer—a weak layer likely to be the source of delamination and device failure under applied stress—did not form and created a perovskite-free surface to which the PTAA-X capping layer adhered. By partitioning the fragile perovskite, the robust scaffolds can instead accommodate mechanical stresses, increasing the resistance to fracture.
The impact of scaffold-partitioning on the mechanical stability of the perovskite layers was determined by fabricating double cantilever beam (DCB) specimens containing the CSCs and measuring their fracture energy, Gc (Fig. 4a). We previously reported that planar CH3NH3PbI3 exhibited extreme mechanical fragility with a cohesive fracture energy of only 0.37 ± 0.04 J m−2.20 The scaffold material, cross-linked SPR™ 3612 photoresist—a cresol novolac resin—was used to enhance the fracture resistance of the fragile CH3NH3PbI3 layer. The architecture of these DCB specimens was Si/CH3NH3PbI3(planar and partitioned)/PTAA-X/Cr/Al/Epoxy/Si. All scaffold-partitioned perovskites exhibited a significant increase in fracture energy relative to planar perovskite. Interestingly, the scaffold layers exhibited similar fracture energies of 12.6 ± 2.9, 12.0 ± 4.3, and 10.7 ± 5.3 J m−2 for the 50, 100, and 200 μm wall widths, respectively. In comparison to planar and mesoporous perovskite films with varied compositions of A-site cations (Cs, formamidinium, methylammonium, butylammonium) and halides (I, Br, Cl) deposited from the solution-state by either spin or slot-die coating, the CSC fracture energy was more than an order of magnitude higher without sacrificing the photovoltaic performance of individual microcells (Fig. 4b). For reference, the fracture energies of conventional CIGS and c-Si cells are ∼10 J m−2 and above,20 indicating that the CSC design positions perovskite solar cells in the domain of proven solar technologies that have demonstrated mechanical stability and service lifetimes.
 Fig. 4  (a) Fracture energy, or Gc, of planar and scaffold-partitioned CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layers. Insets are illustrations of the fracture paths (red arrows) through the specimens. In planar specimens, the fracture path is directly through the brittle perovskite layer. Scaffold-partitioned cells exhibit a meandering fracture path—avoiding the scaffold—due to the disruption in the continuity of the brittle perovskite film. This meandering fracture path results in an increase of fracture energy more than 30 times greater than observed in planar perovskite. (b) The measured Gcversus PCE of solution-processed solar cells (i.e., OPV and perovskites). A clear trade-off in reliability for efficiency is shown (ref. 20 and 38), except for CSCs, which demonstrate an order of magnitude or greater increase in fracture energy while maintaining high efficiency. 
The observed trend of decreasing fracture energy with increasing scaffold wall width can be rationalized in terms of two factors related to the scaffold wall thickness. Firstly, thicker walls present a larger surface area on top of the scaffold, which allows for the formation of a fragile and mechanically unshielded perovskite overburden, and secondly, thicker walls are coupled with smaller microcell perimeters, resulting in less surface area for the mechanically-enhancing cross-linking interaction between the scaffold and PTAA-X, thus lowering overall resistance to fracture.
The fractured CSCs were analyzed by profilometry and optical micrographs of the fractured interfaces were taken to highlight the fracture path (Fig. S2–S4, ESI†). The predominant failure path did not follow the brittle perovskite and instead meandered throughout the entire test structure (Fig. 4a). While this meandering fracture path did pass through the fragile perovskite layer, significant energy was required to fracture through the reinforcing scaffold containing the toughened PTAA-X and metal layers. Evidence of scaffold fracture was observed in a few regions (Fig. S3a, ESI†), but the scaffold remained largely intact upon the substrate on which it was originally deposited, indicating that the scaffold was resistant to cohesive failure and exhibited strong adhesion to the substrate.
We further probed the fracture interfaces using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. S5–S7, ESI†) by performing survey scans of multiple regions of both the metal side and scaffold side of the fractured CSC specimens. Detection of Pb and I indicated that the fracture path was either through the perovskite or at its interface. Detection of only C, N, and O indicated fracture through the encapsulating layers. XPS data agreed with the evidence provided by profilometry and optical microscopy that the fracture path meandered through the entire test structure, with some regions having failed cohesively through the perovskite and encapsulating layers and other regions having failed adhesively at the silicon substrate. Importantly, the number of regions in which detection of Pb and I occurred on the metal side of the CSC specimens increased with increasing scaffold wall width. This observation coincided with decreasing Gc and agreed with our hypothesis that thicker scaffold walls may allow for formation of more fragile perovskite overburden.
While the improved mechanical stability of CSCs over planar devices was significant, the value of scaffold-partitioning would be limited if the improved stability coincided with a large decrease in PCE. It was therefore important to determine the performance of CSCs compared to analogous planar devices and to extract the efficiency of the microcell arrays formed within the scaffold. Devices were fabricated with an architecture of ITO/TiO2 NPs/C60/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA-X/Ag. The J–V curves for the highest efficiency devices and batch-averaged devices are shown in Fig. 5a and Fig. S8 (ESI†), respectively, and the photovoltaic figures of merit are presented in Table 1. The average PCE of the planar devices was 15.2 ± 0.4%, which are comparable to similar devices in the literature.35 Devices with a 50 μm scaffold wall width exhibited efficiencies of 12.0 ± 0.8%, while devices with 100 μm and 200 μm scaffold wall widths had measured efficiencies of 9.7 ± 0.4% and 5.5 ± 0.4%, respectively. Notably, the CSC with the thinnest scaffold walls exhibited not only the highest fracture energy, but also the highest efficiency.
 Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of representative devices with the architecture ITO/TiO2 NPs/C60/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA-X/Ag and scaffold wall widths of 50 μm, 100 μm, and 200 μm compared to a scaffold-free planar device. (b) The average PCE and Jsc of devices measured experimentally versus their PCE and Jsc predicted by multiplying the efficiency of the planar device by the corresponding microcell area fraction of the CSCs. (c) The scaled-PCE of CSCs was calculated by scaling the resulting CSC by the active area of the microcell array (i.e., dividing the experimental PCE by the microcell area fraction). The scaled-PCE is a measure of the PCE of the microcell array factoring out the inactive intervening scaffold layer, and indicates the device PCE that can possibly be achieved with efficient light management. (d) Laser beam induced current maps of representative section of CSCs. Red represents higher current and yellow, lower current. These scans demonstrate that the microcells are consistently defect-free. 
Table 1 The figures of merit for the photovoltaic devices measured in this study, where Voc is the open-circuit voltage, Jsc is the short-circuit current, FF is the fill factor, and PCE is the power conversion efficiency. The PCE of the best-performing devices are in parenthesis. The scaled-PCE is calculated by dividing the PCE by the microcell area fraction




Solar cell type

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Scaled-PCE (%)




Planar
1.00 ± 0.01
21.8 ± 0.5
70 ± 2
15.2 ± 0.4 (15.8)
15.2 (15.8)


50 μm scaffold wall width
1.00 ± 0.03
17.6 ± 0.3
69 ± 3
12.0 ± 0.8 (12.7)
14.8 (15.6)


100 μm scaffold wall width
1.00 ± 0.02
13.9 ± 0.3
69 ± 1
9.7 ± 0.4 (10.4)
15.2 (16.3)


200 μm scaffold wall width
0.99 ± 0.04
8.1 ± 0.5
70 ± 4
5.5 ± 0.5 (5.9)
15.3 (16.4)




Like PCE, a similar trend of decreasing short-circuit current, Jsc, with increasing wall width of the scaffolds was observed. The PCE and Jsc of the CSCs could be reliably predicted by a simple geometric argument based on the fraction of the surface area of the device occupied by the microcells (Fig. 1c). When these area fractions were multiplied by the measured Jsc and PCE for the planar devices, the values were nearly identical to those experimentally determined, demonstrating that there was no deleterious effects on individual microcell device quality when partitioned by a polymer scaffold (Fig. 5b).
The presence of the scaffold did not affect device hysteresis or stabilized power output (Fig. 6). The observed minor hysteresis was attributed to the use of TiO2 as the electron transport layer, and was minimized by depositing C60 on top to modify the n-type contact and improve electron transfer.36 The TiO2 was utilized instead of C60 alone to achieve optimal PCE and minimize recombination at the ITO contact (Fig. S9, ESI†). The relative hysteresis for representative devices is presented in Table S1 (ESI†), where the PCE differs in magnitude of 9.1% for the scaffold-free, planar device and less than 5% for all CSC devices.
 Fig. 6  Forward and backward scanned J–V curves of representative devices for (a) scaffold-free planar and CSC devices with scaffold wall width of (b) 50 μm, (c) 100 μm, and (d) 200 μm showing little hysteresis with the architecture used. (e) Stabilized efficiency values from maximum power point tracking for scaffold-free planar and scaffold wall widths of 50 μm, 100 μm, and 200 μm. 
External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were taken from representative devices to verify the same trends of short-circuit current occurred in the extracted Jsc. The experimental Jsc also closely followed the predicted values from multiplying the extracted short-circuit current by the area fraction (Fig. S10, ESI†). The extracted current from EQE closely matched that from the J–V curves for the same devices.
Unlike PCE and Jsc, the open-circuit voltage, Voc, and fill-factor, FF, were not dependent on fMA. Voc was measured to be ∼1.0 V for all devices, indicating that the scaffolds did not substantially increase the amount of charge recombination occurring. Similarly, when compared to the planar devices, FF of the CSCs was not significantly different. The photovoltaic performance of CSCs and planar devices also performed similarly when exposed to environmental stressors. Encapsulated devices were exposed to ISOS D-3 conditions (85 °C and 85% relative humidity) for 6 weeks while maintaining over 60% of initial PCE, performing better than the encapsulated planar devices and indicating that packaged CSCs were resistant to thermal and environmental degradation (Fig. S11, ESI†). This result demonstrated that CSCs were not susceptible to any pathways for accelerated degradation or further chemical instability compared to planar devices and are compatible with long-term encapsulation strategies that will lead to greatly improved service lifetimes. Future work will involve more detailed studies to better understand the role of environmental stressors on long-term device reliability. The fundamental connection between material degradation and stressing parameters, together with their mechanistic origins, remains largely uncharacterized in perovskite solar cells. For example, the synergistic effect of UV photon energy and flux along with operational conditions of elevated heat and humidity have been shown to affect the kinetics of interface debonding in OPV devices.37
The use of photon management strategies to focus incident solar radiation away from the scaffold and into the microcells (i.e., an array of lenses and concentrators or the addition of light-scattering particles directly into the scaffolds) would further increase the efficiency of the devices while maintaining the favorable mechanical stability afforded by the scaffold. As an illustration of the potential device CSC efficiencies, we assumed perfect photon management and calculated the scaled-PCEs of the microcells by dividing their batch-average efficiencies by their fMA and found that their scaled efficiencies were nearly identical to planar devices (Fig. 5c). This result alleviated any concern that scaffold partitioning would compromise device efficiency by introducing a high density of edge defects.
A potential criticism of this approach is that in the case of perfect photon management, light concentration is induced and the quantity of photons incident on the microcells is increased by a factor of 1 Sun/fMA. To determine how the CSCs behaved under this increased light intensity, we simulated the concentration of light into each of the CSCs at light intensities of 100 mW cm−2 (simulating 1 Sun), 123 mW cm−2 (simulating 1 Sun concentrated into microcells with 50 μm scaffold wall widths), and 156 mW cm−2 (simulating 1 Sun concentrated into microcells with 100 μm scaffold wall widths) and observed that Jsc and PCE increased linearly with light intensity (Fig. S12 and S13, ESI†). This result indicates that such concentrated light is not deleterious to the CSC performance, but crucially, that it results in a proportional increase in current, meaning that photon management could restore all of the efficiency loss observed from incorporating the scaffolds.
The photovoltaic responses of the CSCs were imaged using a laser-beam induced current (LBIC) system. The LBIC scans of the CSCs are shown in Fig. 5d. We observed that the current is roughly equivalent in each cell, again confirming the uniformity of fill and device formation within the scaffolds. The non-zero photovoltaic response of the scaffold regions and the curved profile observable in the CSC current maps are attributed to the resolution of the technique, which was limited by the laser spot diameter (∼35 μm).
In light of these results, it is reasonable to expect that with optimization of the scaffold and use of photon management strategies, the PCEs of CSCs can be increased to that of planar devices through the use of thinner scaffold walls and photon management. Another avenue of future interest would be fabrication of scaffolds using dense materials impermeable to methylamine, which has been shown to increase perovskite solar cell stability significantly.21 In doing so, the CSC design provides a strategy for solving challenges beyond mechanical fragility, including moisture sensitivity and chemical instability of this promising photovoltaic technology. The CSC design and uncompromised performance of the microcell array formed within the scaffold presents a much-needed pathway to overcoming hurdles facing the further development and commercialization of perovskite solar cell technology.
In summary, we have developed a device design capable of addressing the major issues associated with perovskite stability. We leveraged the remarkable flexibility of perovskite formation by showing that a vast array of microcells can be formed with high fidelity around preformed, patterned reinforcing scaffolds. We have demonstrated that integration of partitioning scaffolds into perovskite solar cells can be used to extrinsically shield the mechanically fragile perovskite absorber layer from mechanical stresses. The 30-fold increase in fracture resistance exhibited by the scaffold-reinforced CSCs repositions perovskite-based solar cell technology into the same domain of mechanical resilience of proven solar technologies like c-Si, CdTe, and CIGS cells. We found that we could form microcells within the scaffold without impairing the performance of the perovskite material at all, and in some cases, created microcells with scaled efficiencies greater than those of planar cells. These results affirm the merit of design-for-reliability, which can be achieved in the development of device technologies without compromising efficiency.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant from the Stanford Precourt Institute. Part of this work was performed at the Stanford Nano Shared Facilities (SNSF), supported by the National Science Foundation under award ECCS-1542152. Additional support was provided by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship, awarded to N. Rolston under award DGE-1656518. We thank Daniel J. Slotcavage for his assistance in acquiring the LBIC images and the McGehee group for the use of their facilities.
References
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hwang, Y. S. Jung, Y. J. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D. Y. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 CAS .
G. D. Spyropoulos, C. O. Ramírez Quiroz, M. Salvador, Y. Hou, N. Gasparini, P. Schweizer, J. Adams, P. Kubis, N. Li, E. Spiecker, T. Ameri, H.-J. Egelhaaf and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2302–2313 CAS .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xing, F. Yan, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, H. Yu, Q. Zhang, R. Zeng, H. V. Demir, X. Sun, A. Huan and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6623–6630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Horantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, S. Orlandi, T. Matsui, S. Aghazada, M. Cavazzini, J.-P. Correa-Baena, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Mosconi, K.-H. Dahmen, F. De Angelis, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt, G. Pozzi, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15017 CrossRef CAS .
C. Roldán-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, A. Soriano, G. Mínguez Espallargas, A. Garcia, P. Reinecke, T. Kroyer, M. I. Dar, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 994 Search PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10425–10428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Jung, S. T. Williams and A. K. Y. Jen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 62971–62977 RSC .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. Il Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D’Haen, L. D’Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and H. G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500963 CrossRef .
N. Rolston, B. L. Watson, C. D. Bailie, M. D. McGehee, J. P. Bastos, R. Gehlhaar, J. E. Kim, D. Vak, A. T. Mallajosyula, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite and R. H. Dauskardt, Extreme Mech. Lett., 2016, 9, 353–358 CrossRef .
K. A. Bush, C. D. Bailie, Y. Chen, A. R. Bowring, W. Wang, W. Ma, T. Leijtens, F. Moghadam and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3937–3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Brock, R. Rewari, F. D. Novoa, P. Hebert, J. Ermer, D. C. Miller and R. H. Dauskardt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 153, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tracy, N. Bosco, F. Novoa and R. Dauskardt, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2017, 25, 87–96 CAS .
J.-H. Kim, I. Lee, T.-S. Kim, N. Rolston, B. L. Watson and R. H. Dauskardt, MRS Bull., 2017, 42, 115–123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Benson, I. Kovalenko, S. Boukhalfa, D. Lashmore, M. Sanghadasa and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6625–6632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Waku, N. Nakagawa, T. Wakamoto, H. Ohtsubo, K. Shimizu and Y. Kohtoku, Nature, 1997, 389, 49–52 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. J. Hannink, P. M. Kelly and B. C. Muddle, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 83, 461–487 CrossRef CAS .
P. Swanson, C. Fairbanks, B. R. Lawn, Y.-W. Mai and B. J. Hockey, Am. Ceram. Soc., 1987, 70, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Dauskardt, Acta Metall. Mater., 1993, 41, 2765–2781 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Norman and R. E. Robertson, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2003, 90, 2740–2751 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Isaacson, K. Lionti, W. Volksen, T. P. Magbitang, Y. Matsuda, R. H. Dauskardt and G. Dubois, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 294–298 CrossRef PubMed .

          L. J. Gibson and M. F. Ashby, Cellular Solids: Structure and Properties, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2nd edn,  1997 Search PubMed .
L. Wahl, S. Maas, D. Waldmann, A. Zurbes and P. Freres, J. Sandwich Struct. Mater., 2012, 14, 449–468 CrossRef .
T. C. Hales, Discrete Comput. Geom., 2001, 22, 1–22 Search PubMed .
B. L. Watson, N. Rolston, K. A. Bush, T. Leijtens, M. D. McGehee and R. H. Dauskardt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25896–25904 CAS .
K. Wojciechowski, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, G. Sadoughi, A. Sadhanala, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, C.-Z. Li, R. H. Friend, A. K.-Y. Jen and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12701–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Rolston, A. D. Printz, S. R. Dupont, E. Voroshazi and R. H. Dauskardt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 170, 239–245 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bruner and R. Dauskardt, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 1117–1121 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee02185b‡ Equal contributions.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
The development focus for next generation photovoltaic technology has been to lower costs while retaining power conversion efficiencies and performance lifetimes comparable to conventional CdTe, CIGS, and c-Si technologies. Perovskite solar cells are a promising, low-cost, solution-processed solar technology that already exhibit high efficiencies, but suffer from challenging instabilities and degradation modes that limit their performance lifetimes. For example, in their present planar design, perovskite solar cells are the most fragile class of cells ever tested, offering negligible resistance to fracture and limiting their commercial viability and path to market. In this work, we present a new robust design partitioning a perovskite solar cell into an array of microcells with a mechanically-shielding scaffold to address both its mechanical fragility and chemical instability. The compound solar cell represents an advance in the design of solution-processed devices, dramatically improving the resilience of chemically and mechanically unstable semiconductors.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Top and side view of the compound solar cell. The partitioning scaffold (gray) shields the fragile perovskite microcell array from mechanical stress. The individual microcells in the array are connected in parallel by the top and bottom electrode. (b) An expanded illustration of a single perovskite microcell. The dashed black lines highlight the region where PTAA-X bonds to the scaffold. (c) Calculation of the active photovoltaic surface area of the microcell array, the microcell area fraction (fMA). (d) A photograph of a compound solar cell illuminated from a light-source below. The hexagonal scaffolds are visible in the regions coated by the silver electrode.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the fabrication process of a compound solar cell. The polymeric scaffolds were lithographically patterned in photoresist onto the transparent front electrode composed of ITO, and electron-transport layer, TiO2 nanoparticles on glass. The perovskite microcells were then formed within the spaces defined by the scaffold by evaporation of C60 and spin-coating of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite precursor solution. The entire structure was then coated with a hole-transport layer, PTAA-X (cross-linked PTAA) followed by the reflective back Ag electrode.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Optical micrograph of the unfilled scaffold with 50 μm wall width (beige) on a silicon/TiO2 substrate (blue) and (b) of the same scaffold after deposition of C60 and CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. Profilometry line scans of the scaffolds with 50 μm, 100 μm, and 200 μm wall widths (c) before and (d) after deposition of the perovskite layer, which results in the formation of microcells that intimately contact the scaffold walls.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Fracture energy, or Gc, of planar and scaffold-partitioned CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layers. Insets are illustrations of the fracture paths (red arrows) through the specimens. In planar specimens, the fracture path is directly through the brittle perovskite layer. Scaffold-partitioned cells exhibit a meandering fracture path—avoiding the scaffold—due to the disruption in the continuity of the brittle perovskite film. This meandering fracture path results in an increase of fracture energy more than 30 times greater than observed in planar perovskite. (b) The measured Gcversus PCE of solution-processed solar cells (i.e., OPV and perovskites). A clear trade-off in reliability for efficiency is shown (ref. 20 and 38), except for CSCs, which demonstrate an order of magnitude or greater increase in fracture energy while maintaining high efficiency.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of representative devices with the architecture ITO/TiO2 NPs/C60/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA-X/Ag and scaffold wall widths of 50 μm, 100 μm, and 200 μm compared to a scaffold-free planar device. (b) The average PCE and Jsc of devices measured experimentally versus their PCE and Jsc predicted by multiplying the efficiency of the planar device by the corresponding microcell area fraction of the CSCs. (c) The scaled-PCE of CSCs was calculated by scaling the resulting CSC by the active area of the microcell array (i.e., dividing the experimental PCE by the microcell area fraction). The scaled-PCE is a measure of the PCE of the microcell array factoring out the inactive intervening scaffold layer, and indicates the device PCE that can possibly be achieved with efficient light management. (d) Laser beam induced current maps of representative section of CSCs. Red represents higher current and yellow, lower current. These scans demonstrate that the microcells are consistently defect-free.	 

Planar	1.00 ± 0.01	21.8 ± 0.5	70 ± 2	15.2 ± 0.4 (15.8)	15.2 (15.8)
50 μm scaffold wall width	1.00 ± 0.03	17.6 ± 0.3	69 ± 3	12.0 ± 0.8 (12.7)	14.8 (15.6)
100 μm scaffold wall width	1.00 ± 0.02	13.9 ± 0.3	69 ± 1	9.7 ± 0.4 (10.4)	15.2 (16.3)
200 μm scaffold wall width	0.99 ± 0.04	8.1 ± 0.5	70 ± 4	5.5 ± 0.5 (5.9)	15.3 (16.4)

 	Fig. 6  Forward and backward scanned J–V curves of representative devices for (a) scaffold-free planar and CSC devices with scaffold wall width of (b) 50 μm, (c) 100 μm, and (d) 200 μm showing little hysteresis with the architecture used. (e) Stabilized efficiency values from maximum power point tracking for scaffold-free planar and scaffold wall widths of 50 μm, 100 μm, and 200 μm.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee02185b
‡ Equal contributions.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
