A perspective on solar-driven water splitting with all-oxide hetero- nanostructures  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE02186A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE02186A
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3889-3899Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA perspective on solar-driven water splitting with all-oxide hetero-nanostructures

        
          
            Coleman X. 
            Kronawitter
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lionel 
            Vayssieres
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shaohua 
            Shen
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Leijin 
            Guo
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Damon A. 
            Wheeler
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jin Z. 
            Zhang
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Bonnie R. 
            Antoun
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Samuel S. 
            Mao
          
        
      *ab
aUniversity of California at Berkeley, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 6141 Etcheverry Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. E-mail: ssmao@lbl.gov;  Fax: +510-486-7303;   Tel: +510-486-7038
bLawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Environmental Energy Technologies Division, 1 Cyclotron Rd MS 70-108B, Berkeley, CA 94709, USA
cNational Institute for Materials Science, International Center for Materials NanoArchitectonics, Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan
dXi'an Jiaotong University, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710049, China
eUniversity of California at Santa Cruz, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Physical Sciences Building, Steinhart Way, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
fSandia National Laboratories, P.O. Box 969 MS 9042, Livermore, CA 94551-0969, USA
Received 
      20th July 2011
    , Accepted 18th August 2011First published on 6th September 2011AbstractA perspective on the design of all-oxide heterostructures for application in photoelectrochemical cells for solar water splitting is provided. Particular attention is paid to those structures which possess nanoscale feature dimensionality, as structures of this type are most likely to utilize the benefits afforded by the formation of oxide heterojunctions and likely to show functional behavior relating to the interfacial region. In the context of this discussion, a novel hetero-nanostructure array, based on quantum-confined and visible light-active iron(III) oxide nanostructures and their surface modification with tungsten(VI) oxide, is introduced. The heterostructure architecture is designed to combine the functionality of the consituent phases to address the primary requirements for electrodes enabling the efficient generation of hydrogen using solar energy: visible light activity, chemical stability, appropriate bandedge characteristics, and potential for low-cost fabrication. Photoelectrochemical characterization for solar hydrogen/oxygen generation indicates the presence of unexpected minority carrier transfer dynamics within the oxide hetero-nanostructures, as observed additionally by ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy.

Broader context
Metal oxide nanomaterials possess a wide range of functional optoelectronic properties, which relates to the diversity of cation oxidation states, crystal structures, and electronic configurations associated with oxides and especially with the oxides of transition metals. Utilizing this diversity by combining dissimilar oxides in hetero-nanostructure materials allows for design of photoelectrodes specialized to perform the optical, electronic, and chemical functions required of photoelectrochemical (PEC) solar water splitting cells. This article provides a perspective on the recent use of all-oxide hetero-nanostructures in photoanodes whose function is to oxidize water using solar energy. In the context of these recent studies, experimental results that are representative of the all-oxide hetero-nanostructure photoelectrode design strategy are presented. Arrays of alpha-phase iron(III) oxide quantum rods forming a heterojunction with nanostructured tungsten(VI) oxide are studied as photoanodes in PEC cells. These results as well as the broad set of phenomena associated with the fabrication of oxide heterostructures are discussed in terms of the design of PEC devices enabling the solar-driven generation of hydrogen fuel.

1. Introduction
Metal oxide heterostructures can be engineered to possess functionality that results both from the bulk properties of their constituent phases as well as from the emergent properties that relate directly to the electronic and atomic character of their interfaces. The study of oxide heterostructures has led to the discovery of a number of new and technologically promising interfacial phenomena, including magnetism from non-magnetic materials,1 electronic conductivity from insulators,2 and emergent ionic conductivity.3
In addition to their prospective application as electronic and magnetic device components, oxide heterostructures have been applied as photoactive components of photoelectrochemical (PEC) devices devoted to the clean and sustainable generation of hydrogen from water using sunlight. The motivation for these applications relates to the diversity of cation oxidation states, crystal structures, and electronic configurations, and to the concomitant material properties, associated with oxides and especially with the oxides of the transition metals. Utilizing this diversity by combining dissimilar oxide materials allows for design of photoelectrodes specialized to perform the optical, electronic, and chemical functions required of PEC solar water splitting cells.
This perspective focuses on the design of all-oxide heterostructure photoanodes whose function is to enable the photo-oxidation of water, a critical and performance-limiting half reaction in the overall splitting of water to produce hydrogen and oxygen gas.4 Particular attention is paid to those heterostructures with nanoscale dimensionality, as structures of this type are most likely to utilize the benefits afforded by the formation of oxide heterojunctions and likely to show functional behavior relating to the interfacial region. For detailed analyses of alternative designs, readers are referred to the comprehensive and ever-expanding literature of this field, which most recently includes books,5 general and comprehensive reviews,6,7 including progress in α-Fe2O3 electrodes,8,9 discussions of composite systems incorporating catalytic phases,10 and summaries of the use of nanomaterials,11 among others.
2. Motivation for water oxidation at nanoscale oxide heterostructure photoanodes
2.1 
          Oxide
nanostructures

The in-depth consideration of physical processes that occur on nanometer length scales is the defining principle guiding advances in the next generation of solar energy conversion technologies.12 The application of nanoscience to solar energy conversion appears to represent a pivotal step toward implementing cost-effective energy conversion schemes.5,6,13–18 Recent notable contributions in this area include the study of Si nanowire arrays for photovoltaics19,20 the fabrication of efficient dendritic α-Fe2O3 nanostructures for water oxidation,8 and the use of plasmonic resonance modes to enhance PEC performance.21 Most important to the success of these endeavors is the design of new materials, structures, or architectures that can utilize a fast-growing understanding of nanoscale optoelectronic phenomena, and which can potentially bypass or surpass certain constraints that arise from consideration of conventional materials for this application.
Metal oxide nanomaterials in particular have been extensively investigated for application to solar energy conversion for their diversity of optical properties, electronic and ionic transport properties, chemical and thermal stability, ease of fabrication, and relative low cost. When integrated into solar energy conversion devices, single-crystalline one-dimensional (1-D) metal oxide structures optimize crucial operation processes by increasing optical path lengths and providing direct electronic carrier transport pathways. Aligned oxide nanostructures can now be fabricated onto large-area substrates using controllable and inexpensive techniques.22
Photoactive oxide nanomaterials - those with suitable bandgaps to absorb visible light - are stable when irradiated and biased in most chemical environments, and are therefore compatible with a number of PEC device configurations for solar electricity and renewable fuel production. This includes semiconductor-based PEC cells for water splitting or electricity generation23 as well as dye-24 and quantum dot-sensitized12 solar cells. However, no single photoactive metal oxide material has proven to possess the required optoelectronic properties to efficiently convert solar light energy into electrical or chemical energy (although recent promising results indicate progress in this direction25).
2.2. 
          Oxide heterostructures
A summary of the various motivations for design of oxide heterostructures for solar water oxidation is presented in Fig. 1. As has been established in the decades of research in tandem photovoltaics, placing in series multiple optical absorbers has the potential to dramatically increase the overall conversion efficiencies of solar energy conversion devices. Because of the known thermodynamic requirements7 for the photo-oxidation of water, it is likely a successful heterostructure will involve successive absorption of UV and visible (blue, green, and yellow) light.
 Fig. 1  Illustrations depicting the primary processes responsible for performance enhancements in oxide heterostructure photoelectrodes. 
Optical absorption enhancements effected by multiple bandgaps translate to conversion efficiency enhancements only if the band structure alignments permit efficient utilization of photoexcited charges. In solid-state nanostructured photovoltaic devices, heterostructures comprised of photoactive semiconductors exhibiting Type II band offsets are utilized to promote the efficient separation of photogenerated charges under irradiation.26 Similarly, in dye- and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, heterojunctions of transparent oxides with differing electron affinities are utilized to suppress detrimental back reactions (or charge recombination). By directing charges to lower energy states physically separated from the photoexcited dye or quantum dots, this technique has led to efficiency enhancements in both nanoparticulate27 and nanorod28 configurations.
Band offsets among photoactive oxides can promote charge separation if the constituent phases and their junctions provide the necessary conduction pathways for efficient operation of the electrochemical cell. Establishing efficient conduction paths in oxide heterostructure photoanodes is complicated generally by the orbital composition of most relevant oxides' occupied electronic structures: valence band edges are primarily of O 2p character, resulting in little deviation in ionization potential among the oxides.29 Their common orbital character creates difficulty in establishing valence band offsets that facilitate hole separation during operation of the oxide heterostructure photoanode. However, because the oxides' conduction bands are generally cationic in character,29 this observation contrasts with that found for electron transfer across heterojunctions. The recent development of highly efficient Cu2O-based heterostructure photocathodes30 highlights the additional versatility provided by energy bands whose chemical character is primarily cationic.
There is considerable evidence available suggesting that the surface modication of oxide photoanodes with ultrathin oxide coatings has the potential to effect enhanced kinetics for water oxidation at the oxide-electrolyte interface. Ultrathin coatings permit electron tunneling, passivate dangling bonds, or possess electronic structures that differ from corresponding bulk structures. These configurations potentially alleviate restrictions associated with incompatible band alignments.
Finally, it is suggested here that the fabrication of oxide hetero-nanostructures possessing high interfacial areas is likely to enable the development of materials with entirely new electronic structures, with associated electronic and optical properties and thus technological potential. As will be elaborated upon later in this report, the powerful combination of nanoscience and oxide interface engineering may potentially lead to development of new interface-property-driven electrode structures.
3. Discussion of selected recent systems
There is considerable content in the literature that suggests the benefits described above indeed are associated with performance enhancements for oxide photoanodes in PEC cells. Table 1 provides a summary of selected recent systems from the literature that highlight these findings. The table also includes the charge transfer among oxide phases suggested in the study. This summary is by no means comprehensive and is meant solely as an introduction to the recent research efforts dedicated to the design of oxide heterostructures for this application.
Table 1 Summary of selected recent oxide heterostructure systems discussed in this report




Heterostructure
Description
Fabrication methods
Suggested charge transfer
Reference


Electron
Hole




α-Fe2O3–CoAl2O4

Nanoparticle composite
Doctor blading

                  α-Fe2O3 → CoAlO4

                  CoAlO4 → α-Fe2O3

37



α-Fe2O3–TiO2
Bilayer film
Thermal growth; CVD

                  TiO2 → α-Fe2O3

                  α-Fe2O3 → TiO2

42



α-Fe2O3–WO3
Bilayer film
Sol–gel

                  WO3 → α-Fe2O3
none

41




                  WO3–α-Fe2O3
Nanostructured composite

APCVD


                  α-Fe2O3 → WO3
none

33




                  WO3–BiVO4
Core-shell nanostructure arrays
Solvothermal technique; spin coating

                  BiVO4 → WO3

                  WO3 → BiVO4

36




                  WO3–BiVO4
Bilayer film

Spin coating; polymer-assisted direct deposition

                  BiVO4 → WO3

                  WO3 → BiVO4

38,39




                  WO3–SrTiO3
Bilayer film

Spin coating


                  SrTiO3 → WO3

                  WO3 → SrTiO3

40




                  WO3–TiO2
Core-shell nanostructure arrays
Oblique-angle deposition

                  TiO2 → WO3

                  WO3 → TiO2

34




                  WO3–TiO2
Coated nanotube arrays
Electrochemical anodization and deposition
none
none

35




                  ZnO–α-Fe2O3
Core-shell nanostructure arrays
Aqueous chemical synthesis; filtered arc deposition

                  α-Fe2O3 → ZnO
none

32





3.1 Nanoscale architectures
Various heterostructure architectures possessing nanoscale feature dimensionality show promise to effectively utilize the benefits described above. The concept of extremely-thin-absorbers,31 as established for photovoltaic devices, has been successfully applied in designs for oxide heterostructure photoanodes. In short, by placing the absorbing phase in intimate contact with a nanostructured conductive substrate, this technique permits the use of materials with small carrier diffusion lengths but large optical absorption lengths. Glasscock32 fabricated and characterized core-shell nanorod ZnO-α-Fe2O3 heterostructures using a combination of aqueous chemical synthesis and vapor phase deposition. Their characterization revealed the presence of α-Fe2O3 → ZnO electron transfer during irradiation, and showed some long wavelength conversion enhancements associated with the architecture. The analysis suggested a significant energy barrier for electron injection from α-Fe2O3 into ZnO, which is consistent with expectations considering ZnO's greater electron affinity. Sivula et al.33 utilized a two-step atmospheric pressure CVD process to produce WO3-α-Fe2O3 heterostructures, which showed PEC enhancements at weakly absorbing long wavelengths, which was directly attributed to the presence of the nanostructured WO3 substrate. Oblique-angle physical vapor deposition, which enables fabrication of nanostructured films using ballistic species transport and self-shadowing effects, has recently been used to fabricate WO3-TiO2 core-shell nanostructures.34 Charge transfer between the phases was observed and was associated with overall efficiency enhancements. A related nanoscale architecture was previously achieved by coating TiO2 nanotubes with WO3 by electrochemical deposition.35

          WO3 and BiVO4 were combined in a recent work by Suet al.36 to efficiently utilize both the complimentary optical absorption of these materials and charge separation ability associated with their junction. Because the valence band edge of BiVO4 contains contributions from Bi s states, it is situated at higher energies than that of WO3, and therefore provides an efficient mechanism for the separation of photogenerated holes during photanode operation. Their results showed considerable enhancements are associated with the heterostructure configuration.

Nanoparticle heterostructures comprised of α-Fe2O3 and CoAl2O4 nanoparticles have shown PEC performance enhancements over bare p-type CoAl2O4.37 It was speculated that the differing conductivity types of the nanoparticles, organized in three dimensions, facilitated charge separation under irradiation.
3.2 Bilayers
In systems not limited by charge transport, simple bilayer heterostructures provide an effective means to utilize the complimentary functionalities of metal oxides. WO3 and BiVO4 bilayers have been studied comprehensively,38,39 and in general these configurations permit the simultaneous utilization of the transport properties of WO3 as well as the optical absorption properties of BiVO4.38 Similarly, WO3 has been combined with the transparent wide-bandgap insulator SrTiO340 for the purpose of charge separation, with consistent enhancements evident. WO3-α-Fe2O3 bilayer films show enhancements associated with formation of their junction.41 Interestingly, PEC characterization of an electrode comprised of a 120 nm TiO2 surface layer on thermally grown α-Fe2O3 was shown to exhibit energetic contributions from both phases.42 In general, the simple geometries of bilayer heterostructures provide systems that are suitable for fundamental analyses of prospective photoanode materials and especially of the potential benefits of junction formation.
3.3 Ultrathin coatings
In a disucssion of oxide heterostructures with nanoscale dimensionality it is worthwhile to comment on the influence of ultra-thin surface coatings, and especially on their influence on α-Fe2O3-based photoanodes. The poor water oxidation kinetics of α-Fe2O3 focuses attention on the modification of surface states, toward increasing rate constants associated with electron transfer from hydroxyl ions in solution. It was shown that the deposition of tungsten oxide species on the surface of α-Fe2O3 films increases the faradic rate constant for water oxidation.43 More recently the α-Fe2O3 surfaces were passivated with ultrathin Al2O344 and Ga2O345 layers, which show consistent and positive effects on photoelectrochemical performance, including a cathodic shift of the photocurrent onset of α-Fe2O3. In general it can be expected that ultrathin coatings passivate surface states and therefore reduce the probability of electron-hole recombination associated with their presence. This is especially true for those oxides that are isostructural to α-Fe2O3.45
4. The α-Fe2O3-WO3 system
4.1 Introduction to material system
The above discussion above describes the motivation and framework for developing effective oxide heterostructures with nanoscale dimensionality for efficient solar water oxidation. The present section introduces and discusses in this provided context recent experimental work from the authors' laboratories.

Tungsten(VI) oxide (tungsten trioxide, WO3) and its slightly reduced form WO3-x are intensely studied as solar energy materials for their significant photoactivity under UV and blue light irradiation. In PEC devices, nanostructured WO3 films produce high photocurrents for water oxidation, and are compatible with a number of tandem designs based on multiple photosystems.46,47 The material's ability to produce high, stable photocurrents for sea water splitting is considered an important discovery toward sustainable and economical solar fuel production.48

          Alpha-phase iron(III) oxide (hematite, α-Fe2O3) is highly abundant in Earth's crust and is widely utilized by a number of established and global industries. Nanostructured α-Fe2O3 in particular has proven to be a highly functional metal oxide for a number of energy applications. It has received considerable attention as a solar energy conversion material because its bandgap is well-suited for solar photon absorption and its high ionization potential yields a valence band appropriately positioned to accept charges toward the oxidation of water. The extreme low cost and chemical stability of α-Fe2O3 make its implementation into solar energy conversion devices highly attractive for the development of economical solar electricity and fuel production.

Fig. 2 provides an illustration depicting the hetero-nanostructure design. Depending on the fabrication conditions and application at hand, these anisotropic composites might be described as nanoparticle-sensitized, core-shell, or radial-junction structures. In the present case, both materials are photoactive under solar irradiation when applied as electrodes in a PEC cell, as indicated in the illustration and described later in this report. The arrays were fabricated through application of a combination of aqueous chemical growth49 and physical vapor deposition techniques (see Methods for details).
4.2 Physical and optical characterization
The morphology of the arrays is examined through scanning electron microscopy and is presented in Fig. 3a-e. Fig. 3a shows the α-Fe2O3 nanorods produced by the hydrolysis-condensation and dehydration process.49 The width of these rod bundles is approximately 50 nm and their length is approximately 800 nm. As indicated in the HRTEM image in Fig. 2, they consist of 3–5 nm-diameter single crystals whose electrons are quantum-confined in the lateral dimension, which manifests as a cathodic shift (vs SHE) of the conduction band and a bandgap blue-shift.50 They provide a very efficient pathway for both majority carriers (direct pathway along the vertically oriented rods) and minority carriers (hole diffusion length match with the quantum rod lateral dimensions). The structures after modification with WO3 are displayed in Fig. 3b-d. The large internal surface area is maintained and the diameter of the structures increases with increasing deposition time indicating that the rods are coated with a thin layer of WO3 during exposure to the deposition source. Similar coatings resulting from nanorod exposure to laser ablation plasmas have previously been observed for a ZnO-ZnSe system.51Fig. 3e shows a cross sectional view of the structures after extended exposure. There is a slight gradient in thickness along the length of the rod, which is attributed to shadowing effects commonly encountered in vacuum deposition techniques.
 Fig. 2  Illustration depicting the design of metal oxide hetero-nanostructure arrays and their application as photoanodes for photoelectrochemical cells. The HRTEM image shows an individual single-crystalline α-Fe2O3 quantum rod. The picture on the right shows the as-prepared sample (Scale bar indicates 1 cm). 
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM images of α-Fe2O3 arrays as fabricated by aqueous chemical growth. (b)-(d) SEM images of arrays modified by WO3 for increasing deposition times, indicating the evolution of the structure morphology. (e) SEM Cross-sectional view of hetero-nanostructure array after longest deposition time. All scale bars indicate 1 μm. Insets provide cross-sectional views at identical magnification. (f) UV-vis-near IR optical absorptance of α-Fe2O3-WO3. (g) X-ray diffraction pattern of the hetero-nanostructure array indicating the presence of orthorhombic WO3 (blue), trigonal Fe2O3 (red), and tetragonal SnO2 substrate (*). 
Optical and structural properties of the hetero-nanostructures are provided in Fig. 3f and 3g. All samples are deep red and transparent to lower-energy visible light (see representative sample photograph in Fig. 2). The UV-vis-near IR spectrum of the hetero-nanostructures is presented in Fig. 3h. The main absorption transition around 600 nm matches closely to those of the α-Fe2O3 nanorods,52 which is consistent with expectations considering the larger bandgap of WO3. X-ray diffractograms (Fig. 3h) indicate the presence of three distinct crystal phases: orthorhombic WO3, trigonal Fe2O3 (hematite), and the tetragonal SnO2 (cassiterite) substrate.
4.3 Photoelectrochemistry
The samples have been applied as photoelectrodes in PEC cells for solar hydrogen generation. For this application, the interest in this system lies in the complimentary functionality offered by the two components. When the electrode is applied as an anode in a PEC cell for water photoelectrolysis, photogenerated holes participate in the water oxidation reaction and electrons travel to the back contact and enter the external circuit. The faradic rate constant for electron transfer from hydroxyl ions at the WO3 surface is orders of magnitude greater than at the α-Fe2O3 surface (rWO3 = 103–104 cm s−1; rα-Fe2O3 = 0.1–1 cm s−1),53 due to the superior kinetics of charge injection into O 2p bands. The modification of α-Fe2O3 film surfaces with tungsten oxide species has been shown previously to increase the faradic rate constant for water oxidation.43 The hole diffusion length in WO3 has been estimated to be about 150 nm,54 two orders of magnitude higher than that estimated for α-Fe2O3, 2–4 nm.55 Despite these advantages, the theoretical maximum water splitting efficiency of WO3 remains low due to insufficient overlap between its optical absorption and the solar spectrum. The bandgap of α-Fe2O3 on the other hand is nearly ideal, which results in a theoretical efficiency of 12.9%.56 The ultrafine α-Fe2O3 nanorods utilized in this study were first designed and fabricated by Vayssieres et al. with the small hole diffusion length of α-Fe2O3 in mind; their photoelectrochemistry has been documented.52,57
The hetero-nanostructure arrays and the bare α-Fe2O3 electrodes were studied in a two-electrode configuration for solar hydrogen generation. Fig. 4a shows chopped-light current-potential behavior in an aqueous 0.5 M NaCl solution with solar-simulated 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G-filtered (1 sun) irradiation; Fig. 4b provides an incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum. The sodium chloride solution is chosen for its similarity to the composition of filtered sea water; under these conditions the thermodynamically favorable electrochemical reactions are the hydrogen, oxygen (and potentially chlorine at high bias) gas evolution reactions. No sacrificial reagents are employed and the solution is neutral. All PEC results presented indicate that the arrays behave as photoanodes in these electrolytic conditions; that is, a positive photocurrent is observed at applied anodic potential.
 Fig. 4  Photoelectrochemical characterization in aqueous 0.5 M NaCl solution: (a) Photocurrent-potential curve under chopped (0.2 s−1), 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G-filtered solar-simulated irradiation. Potential applied vs. a Pt counter electrode. (b) IPCE spectrum with +1 V applied versus a Pt counter electrode. Data correspond to arrays fabricated as those in Fig. 2c. 
These PEC data suggest that a significant quantity of holes originating from visible-light excitations is extracted before recombining with electrons traveling to the back contact. This is confirmed in the IPCE spectrum, which shows spectral response beyond 550 nm. Considering the transparency of WO3 to visible light (Egap ∼ 3 eV), these low energy excitations must occur either in the α-Fe2O3 core, or at intra-bandgap defect, surface, or interface states in WO3. The electrode operation is discussed below in the context of its physical design and its potential for possessing anomalous electronic characteristics.
The hetero-nanostructure architecture demands electron transport through the α-Fe2O3 rods in order for the PEC cell to register photocurrent in the external circuit. Conduction band electron transport between the layers is therefore a topic of interest. Results in previous reports of α-Fe2O3-WO3 composite photoanodes suggest electron transfer occurs in either direction under applied anodic potential.33,41 Understanding of the band alignment in the present system is complicated by the quantum confinement effect in the α-Fe2O3 rods (Ref. 50 indicates the electron affinity is near 0 V vs.SHE).
Simultaneously, the oxidation reaction must occur in order to limit the recombination of free carriers, and therefore holes must be present at the hetero-nanostructure-liquid interface to accept charges from electrolyte species. From the viewpoint of bulk semiconductor physics, it is expected that there is an energy barrier of ca. 0.5 eV58 for hole injection from α-Fe2O3 into WO3, due to the energetic difference between O 2p orbitals, of which the valence band of WO3 is comprised, and the Fed levels at which holes arrive at the α-Fe2O3 surface (it is likely that holes arrive at the surface in a band of eg levels, which are expected to be the highest occupied orbitals in α-Fe2O353). The observation of photoactivity originating from visible light excitations could involve phenomena directly related to the nanoscale architecture. Indeed, at the length scales considered here, the interfacial region is expected to play an important role in the electronic band construction. In transition metal oxide heterostructures, interface electronic orbital reconstruction has been reported by a number of mechanisms, depending on the precise nature of the chemical bonds at the interface.59 Considering the very high density of interface states in this system, owing to the nanoscale particle dimensions, it is feasible the valence band consists of hybridized orbitals with character resulting from both metal oxides and their surface configurations. The electronic character of the α-Fe2O3-WO3 interface is expected to be extremely complex, and depend on several interface system properties, including charge transfer and orbital hybridization. Understanding these interface properties requires intense experimental investigations, the strategies for which are being studied in the authors' laboratories.60
Alternatively, due to the physical dimensions of the α-Fe2O3 structures (ca. 5 nm lateral dimension50) and thin WO3 layers, quantum-mechanical tunneling processes must be considered for hole extraction from the core. The transfer of holes from α-Fe2O3 to an electrolyte through TiO2, which also has a valence band edge derived from O 2p orbitals, was reported as early as 198242 and was attributed to a tunneling process. Ref. 42 also suggests that band banding at the semiconductor-liquid interface could potentially extend through both phases in heterostructure photoelectrodes. If this is the case during operation of the present electrodes, depletion effects and upward band banding could assist in overcoming energy barriers for charge transfer from α-Fe2O3 to the electrolyte. It is unknown to what extent band banding exists in the α-Fe2O3-WO3 electrodes; numerous previous studies suggest these effects are absent in nanostructured electrodes in contact with electrolytes.61–63 Exciting work is currently being conducted in this area: a recent study from Augustynski and coworkers64 suggests that during operation proton intercalation induces structural changes in mesoporous WO3 electrodes, which results in a core-shell structure.
In the PEC configurations studied above, the electrode photocurrent response is remarkably similar to those found in previous studies of α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays.52,57,65 In addition, the photoelectrochemical characterization instrumentation employed was not precise enough to identify differences among samples with varying WO3 thickness. Indeed, these PEC performance similarities most likely result from the current-limiting effect of the undoped α-Fe2O3 core, which is expected to be highly resistive.66 These observations suggest that more in-depth optoelectronic characterization techniques are required to elucidate the complex charge transfer processes present in quantum-confined metal oxide hetero-nanostructures containing d-shell electrons. To this end the hetero-nanostructures' carrier dynamics were examined by ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy.
4.4 Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy
The ultrafast carrier dynamics of α-Fe2O3 thin films, single crystals, and nanoparticle suspensions have been comprehensively examined.67–70 It is observed that intraband carrier thermalization occurs on extremely fast times scales (< 150 fs;67 < 75 fs69). Transient absorption signals at longer times are therefore attributed to relaxation of excited electrons to a dense manifold of electronic states within the bandgap and valence band, resulting from both intrinsic defects and surface states.67 However, the assignment of transient absorption signals to specific physical correlates in this complex material system must be conducted in the context of all available information. This includes the many studies performed over the past few decades,67–71 including several recent advances,72,73 with numerous signal assignments proposed. In general the analysis is complicated by the d-d transitions present over spectral ranges commonly probed. Analyses of carrier dynamics of α-Fe2O3 nanomaterials are made difficult in addition by high densities of surface states, which may introduce new decay pathways.
Of particular relevance to the present analysis is a recent report from Durrant and colleagues,73 which describes the use of a hole-scavenging sacrificial chemical to determine the correspondence of the transient absorption signal at 580 nm to unoccupied valence band states (holes) in α-Fe2O3. The following discussion is presented in the context of this and other studies of excited carrier dynamics in related material systems.
The samples were pumped with 540 nm (2.29 eV) 130 fs pulses, which excite the α-Fe2O3 core near the weak Fe 3d→3d transition.5 The transient absorbance spectrum of a representative α-Fe2O3-WO3 sample is presented in Fig. 5a at 500 fs after excitation. Absorption difference signals at various probe energies reflect the occupancies of electronic states with corresponding absorption energies after excitation. A broad distribution of absorbance signals over the studied wavelength range is evident at this delay time. Spectra of this type have been previously observed in femtosecond relaxation studies of iron oxide particulate suspensions.69 These studies concluded that because the electron relaxation processes possess both a fast (∼1 ps) and slower (∼10 ps) decay over the entire probe spectrum, they may correspond to a common physical process - for instance, the capture of electrons by oxygen-deficient centers of Fe3+.69 As observed below, all relaxation processes exhibit both a sub-picosecond fast component as well as a longer component extending to hundreds of picoseconds.
 Fig. 5  Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy for hetero-nanostructure electrodes: (a) Transient difference absorbance spectra for α-Fe2O3-WO3 before excitation (black squares) and 500 fs after excitation (blue circles). Transient absorption signals for α-Fe2O3 (black) and α-Fe2O3-WO3 (red) at the picosecond time scale for 579.31 nm probe (b) and 674.23 nm probe (c) and the sub-nanosecond time scale for 579.31 nm probe (d) and 674.23 nm probe (e). 

Fig. 5b–e show the normalized transient absorption signals for α-Fe2O3 and α-Fe2O3-WO3 at two probe wavelengths, 579.31 nm (2.14 eV) and 674.23 nm (1.84 eV), in two time regimes. For both energies, there is an ultrafast rise in signal intensity limited by the laser pulse. Examination of the transient absorption at the picosecond time scale (Fig. 5b,c) reveals the fast components of the kinetics for both probe energies are very similar before and after modification with WO3. Because the time signatures of the signals' rise and decay overlap at this scale, the corresponding fast physical processes apparently occur irrespective of the presence of surface modification.
Additional information is provided by the transient absorption at longer time scales (Fig. 5d,e). For all probe wavelengths examined, following the initial fast process, there is a slow process that persists to beyond 100 ps. The most notable feature of these data is that the normalized transient absorption signal at 579.31 nm decays at a faster rate for α-Fe2O3-WO3 than for α-Fe2O3. Considering that the transient absorption signal signifies the occupation of an electronic state at a given delay time, a faster destruction of the absorption signal at 579.31 nm may suggest a faster destruction (removal) of unoccupied states (holes) from the probed system. It is observed that the accelerated decay is nonexistent for the lower energy transition recorded at 674.23 nm. Alternatively, it is possible the decays represent a trapping process, and the introduction of the WO3 phase enhances the trapping rate of electrons within a particular range of corresponding probe energies. Trapped electrons in this case possess a low extinction coefficient, which manifests as an attenutation of the associated probe signal.
Given the knowledge that α-Fe2O3 nanomaterials possess many midgap states, associated with both the d levels and high surface areas, the wavelength dependence could describe migration of photoexcited electrons from conduction bands into shallow levels and deep traps. In this case, the associated recombinations evolve over the spectral range probed.
Upon examination of the decay kinetics over the complete probe spectrum, it is found that the signals' attenuation difference upon creation of a α-Fe2O3-WO3 interface is determined by the energetic position of the corresponding electronic state. Larger probe energies, near the bandgap of α-Fe2O3, exhibit the largest signal difference upon creation of an α-Fe2O3-WO3 interface. Indeed, the aforementioned study on operating α-Fe2O3-based PEC cells73 indicates that the removal of surface-trapped holes from α-Fe2O3 corresponds to decay in 580 nm absorption after excitation. Adoption of this assignment in the present study suggests that modification of α-Fe2O3 nanostructures with WO3 promotes the extraction of surface-trapped holes on picosecond time scales.
These observations, when connected to the PEC results and band structure descriptions provided above, indicate the possible existence of anomalous carrier transport dynamics upon photoexcitation of the hetero-nanostructures.
5. Electronic structure of heterostructure interfaces
A number of the device performance enhancements associated with the use of nanomaterials relate directly to high surface areas and high densities of surface electronic states. Oxide hetero-nanostructures possess high interfacial areas, which can similarly be expected to contribute significantly to their electronic structures and therefore performance of electronic devices into which they are integrated.
The mechanisms by which oxide heterostructure interfaces are found to possess emergent functionality has been recently discussed74 in a summary of the variety of physical phenomena associated with their fabrication. The summary proposes several strategies to tune the interface system's degrees of freedom, including charge transfer, epitaxial strain, symmetry breaking, electrostatic coupling, and frustration.74 In addition to those effects isolated at interfaces, it is noted that several phenomena extend well away from interfaces. These phenomena include unscreened Coulomb interactions as well as relaxations toward bulk properties away from the interface, which result in gradients of structure, polarization, and magnetization properties.
In the oxides of the transition metals, the d orbital character and occupancy critically influences the interaction of metal ions, and by extension the physical properties of these materials. Recent experiments conducted in the authors' laboratories60 indicate that the formation of heterostructures comprised of titanium oxide and iron oxide nanomaterials, both of which are intensely investigated for photoelectrochemical applications, results in a number of modifications to the orbital character of the interface. Most importantly, it was found that the d orbitals in the interfacial region were enriched with electrons, which has a number of implications for devices utilizing transitions to and from their associated electronic states. In addition, through examination of the oxygen site environment, these studies provided evidence that the interface possessed an emergent degree of p-d orbital hybridization that was directly associated with formation of the heterojunction. These results provide confirmation of applicability of the principles of transition metal oxide interface engineering to the design of oxide heterostructure photoelectrodes for solar water splitting cells.
Conclusions
A perspective on the design of oxide heterostructure photoanodes for solar water oxidation has been presented. Performance enhancements can be associated with increased optical absorption, efficient charge separation across heterojunctions, kinetic advantages, and potentially with the engineering of interface electronic characteristics.
The demonstration of the successful combination of large-scale chemical and vapor phase synthesis techniques for the fabrication of vertically oriented metal oxide hetero-nanostructures without template, surfactant or applied fields toward solar energy conversion is of direct relevance to optimized (doped) nanostructured oxide materials. These results suggest that through this novel nanoscale architecture it is possible to engineer interesting or unexpected interfacial minority carrier transport properties for PEC applications of metal oxide hetero-nanostructures. The constituent oxides are highly functional nanomaterials for a number of applications and as such the hetero-nanostructure array is expected to display further functionalities, as well as to pave the way to cost-effective, large scale, hetero-nanostructure devices for solar energy conversion.
Methods
The fabrication procedure of arrays in this work consists of application of a combination of solution chemistry and physical vapor deposition techniques. The α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays were first fabricated onto SnO2:F-coated glass (FTO; Pilkington TEC7) following the procedure for hydrolysis-condensation described in detail in ref. 49. For PEC characterization, the samples were annealed in air 700 °C. The WO3 layer was fabricated by deposition of species from pulsed laser ablation of a rotating (10 rpm) pressed polycrystalline WO3 target in O2 ambient (reactive pulsed laser deposition) using a Lambda Physik LPX 200 KrF Excimer Laser (248 nm). A stainless steel chamber was evacuated to a base pressure about 10−4 torr, after which O2 gas (industrial grade) was flowed through the evacuated chamber for 30 min at 18 sccm, as set by a mass flow controller, to replace residual gases. The α-Fe2O3/FTO sample was mounted on a substrate holder using conductive Ag paste. Deposition occurred at a laser fluence of ∼ 1 J cm−2 per pulse with pulse frequency of 9 Hz for various times. Fig. 2b-2e show samples from deposition times of 5, 10, 16, and 16 min, respectively. The O2 pressure during deposition was approximately 4 × 10−3 torr as measured by a pirani pressure gauge. Before deposition the target was ablated for a several minutes at the deposition laser parameters to remove any contaminants from the target surface, during which the entire substrate was masked with a mechanical shutter. Throughout deposition the sample was maintained at 100 °C using a resistance heater and thermocouple embedded in the substrate holder. After deposition the chamber was sealed and the sample was allowed to cool to room temperature in the quiescent low-pressure O2 ambient. After the sample was removed it was annealed in air at 400 °C for 2 h (the ramp rate to 400 °C was approximately 1.5 °C/min).
Physical characterization

          Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained with a Hitachi environmental field emission scanning electron microscope (Model S-4300SE/N) with an accelerating voltage of 3–5 kV, operating in secondary electron detection mode.
Spectral transmittance and reflectance measurements were taken on the α-Fe2O3-WO3/SnO2:F/glass samples with a Perkin Elmer Lambda Spectrophotometer fitted with an integrating sphere over the wavelength range 375 nm to 900 nm at a wavelength interval of 2 nm. The sample was irradiated from the α-Fe2O3-WO3 surface. The spectral absorptance was obtained by solution of the equation Aλ= (100 − Rλ − Tλ) − Aλ,FTO.

X-ray diffraction data were obtained with Cu Kα radiation from a commercial diffractometer.
Photoelectrochemical characterization
The electrolyte was prepared with 18.1 MΩ-cm water with 0.5 M NaCl (Sigma Aldrich; 98%). An electrical contact was made to the SnO2:F electrode with a conductive silver paste and copper wire. Photoelectrochemical measurements were made in an open pyrex cell fitted with 3 mm thick quartz window. A 1 cm2 masked-off, sealed area of the sample was irradiated with a 300 W Xe bulb solar simulator with adjustable power settings through an AM 1.5G filter (Oriel; 81092). For current-potential measurements, the light intensity at the sample location in the photoelectrochemical cell was 100 mW cm−2 as measured by a power detector (Newport; 70284). No correction was made for the optical absorption of the 4 cm of electrolyte between the quartz window and sample location. A potentiostat (Pine Instruments Bipotentiostat) was used to measure electrochemical data in a two-electrode setup using a coiled Pt wire counter electrode. N2 gas was continuously bubbled in solution and directly over the Pt counter electrode before and during the experiment to remove any dissolved O2 and therefore suppress the reduction of dissolved O2 at the counter electrode. For current-potential measurements, the potential scan was anodic (in the positive direction) and at a rate of 5 mV s−1, with the light mechanically chopped every ten seconds. To measure the IPCE spectra, a monochromator was used to select wavelengths (10 nm interval) from the chopped (5 Hz) output of a 70 W Xe bulb solar simulator. The incident photon flux at each wavelength was measured by diverting a portion of the beam with a beam splitter into a calibrated silicon photodiode.
Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy
The ultrafast laser system is based on a Quantronix femtosecond laser system,75 consisting of an Er-doped fiber oscillator, a regenerative/multi-pass amplifier, and a diode-pumped, Q-switched, second harmonic Nd:YLF pump laser (527 nm, 10 W capacity). Before injection into the amplifier, chirped pulse amplification is performed to temporally stretch, amplify, and recompress the initial short pulse, resulting in a pulse near its original duration, albeit with a vastly higher energy level (sub-nJ raised to mJ). After amplification, the as-generated fundamental (795 nm) is beam-split to generate both a white light continuum (WLC) probe pulse as well as feeding a tunable optical parametric amplifier (OPA) consisting of two delay stages: a signal pre-amplification stage and a power amplification stage. The output of the OPA was passed through wavelength separators in order to achieve a tunable pump wavelength. The system operates at 750 Hz repetition rate.
The final output was ca. 130 fs pulses centered at 540 nm excitation wavelength which was attenuated with neutral density filters. The pump beam was overlapped spatially and temporally with the WLC probe beam at the sample. The time delay between the pump and probe beams was controlled by a translation stage with 1 μm resolution. Each sample was tested for four cycles to achieve a lower-noise average response.
Acknowledgements
This research has been partially supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. C.X.K. and B.R.A. were supported by Sandia National Laboratories. Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the U.S. Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000. Additional support was provided by MEXT Japan; the National Natural Science Foundation of China; the National Basic Research Program of China; and the China Scholarship Council. J.Z.Z. is grateful to the Basic Energy Sciences Division of the U.S. DOE (DE-FG02-ER46232) for support. D.A.W. was supported in part by the W.M. Keck Center for Nanoscale Optofluidics at UCSC.
Notes and references
A. Brinkman, M. Huijben, M. van Zalk, J. Huijben, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, W. G. van der Wiel, G. Rijnders, D. H. A. Blank and H. Hilgenkamp, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 493–496 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ohtomo and H. Y. Hwang, Nature, 2004, 427, 423–426 CrossRef CAS .
J. Garcia-Barriocanal, A. Rivera-Calzada, M. Varela, Z. Sefrioui, E. Iborra, C. Leon, S. J. Pennycook and J. Santamaria, Science, 2008, 321, 676–680 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, L. Tong, Y. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011 10.1039/C1EE01276B  , Advance Article.

On Solar Hydrogen & Nanotechnology, Ed: L. Vayssieres, John Wiley & Sons, Singapore,  2009 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, S. Sheehan, S. Zhou and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011 10.1039/C1EE01850G  , Advance Article.
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–444 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252–1261 CAS .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, R. Liu, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 507, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2735–2741 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .

Nanostructured and Photoelectrochemical Systems for Solar Photon Conversion, Eds: M. D. Archer, A. J. Nozik, Imperial College Press, London,  2008 Search PubMed .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Park and J. K. Holt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1028–1036 CAS .
S. Shen, J. Shi, P. Guo and L. Guo, Int. J. Nanotech., 2011, 8, 523–591 CAS .
M. C. Putnam, S. W. Boettcher, M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, J. M. Spurgeon, E. L. Warren, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1037–1041 Search PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–244 CrossRef CAS .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. Chen, B. M. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, A. Hagfeldt and S. -E. Lindquist, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 47–52 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 508, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6851 CrossRef .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6538–6543 CAS .
H. J. Snaith and C. Ducati, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1259–1265 CrossRef CAS .
N. O. V. Plank, I. Howard, A. Rao, M. W. B. Wilson, C. Ducati, R. S. Mane, J. S. Bendall, R. R. M. Louca, N. C. Greenham, H. Miura, R. H. Friend, H. J. Snaith and M. E. Welland, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18515–18522 CAS .
H. H. Kung, H. S. Jarrett, A. W. Sleight and A. Ferretti, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 2463–2469 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ernst, A. Belaidi and R. Könenkamp, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18, 475–479 CrossRef CAS .

          J. A. Glasscock, PhD Thesis, University of New South Wales, Australia,  2008, 1–220 .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
W. Smith, A. Wolcott, R. C. Fitzmorris, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10792–10800 RSC .
J. H. Park, O. O. Park and S. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 163106 CrossRef .
J. Su, L. Guo, N. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1928–1933 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Ahn, Y. Yan, M.-S. Kang, J.-Y. Kim, S. Shet, H. Wang, J. Turner and M. Al-Jassim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 022116 CrossRef .
S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781–1787 CAS .
P. Chatchai, Y. Murakami, S.-y. Kishioka, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Nosaka, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 1147–1152 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Yu, X. Chen, H. Zhang, S. Ouyang, Z. Li, J. Ye and Z. Zou, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 3925–3930 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, T. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Li, J. Ye and Z. Zou, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 1091–1096 CrossRef CAS .
F.-T. Liou, C. Y. Yang and S. N. Levine, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 342–345 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kishi and M. Aritsuka, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1988, 34, 345–353 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, N. Tétreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, F. Le Formal, M. Cornuz, J. Brillet, N. Tétreault, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2512–2515 Search PubMed .

          J. Augustynski, G. Calzaferri, J. C. Courvoisier and M. Grätzel, in Proc. of the 11th World Hydrogen Energy Conference, Eds: T. N. Veziroglu, C. J. Winter, J. P. Baselt, G. Kreysa, Stuttgart,  1996, p. 2379 Search PubMed .
E. L. Miller, R. E. Rocheleau and X. M. Deng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 615–623 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Augustynski, R. Solarska, H. Hagemann and C. Santato in Proc. SPIE, 6340, Ed. L. Vayssieres, SPIE Press, Bellingham,  2006, 63400J-1 Search PubMed .
L. Vayssieres, N. Beermann, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 233–235 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, C. Sathe, S. M. Butorin, D. K. Shuh, J. Nordgren and J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2320–2323 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, J. Chen, W. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Yan, J. Pern and A. Mascarenha, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3248–3253 CrossRef CAS .
N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2456–2461 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Dare-Edwards, J. B. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. R. Trevellick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 2027–2041 RSC .
M. A. Butler, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 1914–1920 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709–714 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999–2017 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lindgren, H. Wang, N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 71, 231–243 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
J. Chakhalian, W. Freeland, H.-U. Habermeier, G. Cristiani, G. Khaliullin, M. van Veenendaal and B. Keimer, Science, 2007, 318, 1114–1117 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, J. R. Bakke, D. A. Wheeler, W.-C. Wang, C. Chang, B. R. Antoun, J. Z. Zhang, J. Guo, S. F. Bent, S. S. Mao and L. Vayssieres, Nano Lett., 2011 DOI:10.1021/nl201944h .
J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 59, 15374–15380 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao, G. Oskam, G. J. Meyer and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 17021–17027 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, K. Sivula, A. Kay, R. Zboril and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 772–782 CAS .
A. Królikowska, P. Barczuk, R. Jurczakowski and J. Augustynski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011 DOI:10.1016/j.jelechem.2011.07.003 .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Morin, Phys. Rev., 1954, 93, 1195–1199 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Cherepy, D. B. Liston, J. A. Lovejoy, H. Deng and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 770–776 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Joly, J. R. Williams, S. A. Chambers, G. Xiong, W. P. Hess and D. M. Laman, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 053521 CrossRef .
V. A. Nadtochenko, N. N. Denisov, V. Y. Gak, F. E. Gostev, A. A. Titov, O. M. Sarkisov and V. V. Nikandrov, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2002, 51, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. He, Y. M. Miao, C. R. Li, S. Q. Wang, L. Cao, S. S. Xie, G. Z. Yang, B. S. Zou and C. Burda, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 125411 CrossRef .
N. M. Dimitrijevic, D. Savic, O. I. Micic and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 4278–4283 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Cowan, C. J. Barnett, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10134–10140 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, K. Sivula, J. Tang, M. Grätzel, D. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 716–718 RSC .
P. Zubko, S. Gariglio, M. Gabay, P. Ghosez and J.-M. Triscone, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys., 2011, 2, 141–165 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Newhouse, H. Wang, J. K. Hensel, D. A. Wheeler, S. Zou and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 228–235 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Metal oxide nanomaterials possess a wide range of functional optoelectronic properties, which relates to the diversity of cation oxidation states, crystal structures, and electronic configurations associated with oxides and especially with the oxides of transition metals. Utilizing this diversity by combining dissimilar oxides in hetero-nanostructure materials allows for design of photoelectrodes specialized to perform the optical, electronic, and chemical functions required of photoelectrochemical (PEC) solar water splitting cells. This article provides a perspective on the recent use of all-oxide hetero-nanostructures in photoanodes whose function is to oxidize water using solar energy. In the context of these recent studies, experimental results that are representative of the all-oxide hetero-nanostructure photoelectrode design strategy are presented. Arrays of alpha-phase iron(III) oxide quantum rods forming a heterojunction with nanostructured tungsten(VI) oxide are studied as photoanodes in PEC cells. These results as well as the broad set of phenomena associated with the fabrication of oxide heterostructures are discussed in terms of the design of PEC devices enabling the solar-driven generation of hydrogen fuel.


 	Fig. 1  Illustrations depicting the primary processes responsible for performance enhancements in oxide heterostructure photoelectrodes.	 


α-Fe2O3–CoAl2O4	
Nanoparticle composite	Doctor blading	
                  α-Fe2O3 → CoAlO4	
                  CoAlO4 → α-Fe2O3	
37

α-Fe2O3–TiO2	Bilayer film	Thermal growth; CVD	
                  TiO2 → α-Fe2O3	
                  α-Fe2O3 → TiO2	
42

α-Fe2O3–WO3	Bilayer film	Sol–gel	
                  WO3 → α-Fe2O3	none	
41


                  WO3–α-Fe2O3	Nanostructured composite	
APCVD
	
                  α-Fe2O3 → WO3	none	
33


                  WO3–BiVO4	Core-shell nanostructure arrays	Solvothermal technique; spin coating	
                  BiVO4 → WO3	
                  WO3 → BiVO4	
36


                  WO3–BiVO4	Bilayer film	
Spin coating; polymer-assisted direct deposition	
                  BiVO4 → WO3	
                  WO3 → BiVO4	
38,39


                  WO3–SrTiO3	Bilayer film	
Spin coating
	
                  SrTiO3 → WO3	
                  WO3 → SrTiO3	
40


                  WO3–TiO2	Core-shell nanostructure arrays	Oblique-angle deposition	
                  TiO2 → WO3	
                  WO3 → TiO2	
34


                  WO3–TiO2	Coated nanotube arrays	Electrochemical anodization and deposition	none	none	
35


                  ZnO–α-Fe2O3	Core-shell nanostructure arrays	Aqueous chemical synthesis; filtered arc deposition	
                  α-Fe2O3 → ZnO	none	
32


 	Fig. 2  Illustration depicting the design of metal oxide hetero-nanostructure arrays and their application as photoanodes for photoelectrochemical cells. The HRTEM image shows an individual single-crystalline α-Fe2O3 quantum rod. The picture on the right shows the as-prepared sample (Scale bar indicates 1 cm).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM images of α-Fe2O3 arrays as fabricated by aqueous chemical growth. (b)-(d) SEM images of arrays modified by WO3 for increasing deposition times, indicating the evolution of the structure morphology. (e) SEM Cross-sectional view of hetero-nanostructure array after longest deposition time. All scale bars indicate 1 μm. Insets provide cross-sectional views at identical magnification. (f) UV-vis-near IR optical absorptance of α-Fe2O3-WO3. (g) X-ray diffraction pattern of the hetero-nanostructure array indicating the presence of orthorhombic WO3 (blue), trigonal Fe2O3 (red), and tetragonal SnO2 substrate (*).	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoelectrochemical characterization in aqueous 0.5 M NaCl solution: (a) Photocurrent-potential curve under chopped (0.2 s−1), 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G-filtered solar-simulated irradiation. Potential applied vs. a Pt counter electrode. (b) IPCE spectrum with +1 V applied versus a Pt counter electrode. Data correspond to arrays fabricated as those in Fig. 2c.	 

 	Fig. 5  Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy for hetero-nanostructure electrodes: (a) Transient difference absorbance spectra for α-Fe2O3-WO3 before excitation (black squares) and 500 fs after excitation (blue circles). Transient absorption signals for α-Fe2O3 (black) and α-Fe2O3-WO3 (red) at the picosecond time scale for 579.31 nm probe (b) and 674.23 nm probe (c) and the sub-nanosecond time scale for 579.31 nm probe (d) and 674.23 nm probe (e).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
