An open thermo-electrochemical cell enabled by interfacial evaporation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA10190F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA10190F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6514-6521An open thermo-electrochemical cell enabled by interfacial evaporation†

        
          
            Qingchen 
            Shen‡
, 
      
        
          
            Ziyang 
            Ning‡
, 
      
        
          
            Benwei 
            Fu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shuai 
            Ma
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhiying 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Shu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lifu 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xinyu 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiale 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Tao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chengyi 
            Song
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jianbo 
            Wu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Deng
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Wen 
            Shang
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, P. R. China. E-mail: dengtao@sjtu.edu.cn; shangwen@sjtu.edu.cn
Received 
      23rd October 2018
    , Accepted 16th February 2019First published on 18th February 2019AbstractThis work explores an alternative approach to generate electric energy from a solar-driven interfacial water evaporation system. A thermo-electrochemical redox couple was combined with an evaporation system to take advantage of the temperature difference between the air–liquid interface and the bulk solution of water. An open thermo-electrochemical cell (TEC) was demonstrated to achieve the parallel processes of clean water generation and also electricity generation. Both deionized (DI) water and seawater (from the East China Sea) were used for the preparation of the electrolyte of the TEC system. Under one-sun illumination, the peak output electric power of the TEC with the seawater-based electrolyte was ∼0.5 mW m−2. The electric output of the TEC with the solution of seawater still reached ∼2.3 × 10−2 mW m−2 even without solar illumination due to the temperature difference generated by natural evaporation, which provides a possibility for electricity generation at night. The TECs can also be connected in series to increase the output voltage to charge capacitors or power LEDs, as demonstrated in the work.
Introduction
The energy crisis and lack of drinkable water are two critical challenges in modern times.1,2 With the exhaustion of fossil fuels in the not so distant future, the development of renewable energy technologies is urgently needed to sustain the development of society.3,4 In this work, we explored electricity generation during the solar-driven desalination process through an open thermo-electrochemical cell (TEC) enabled by solar-driven interfacial evaporation of seawater.
Interfacial evaporation is an efficient process to generate water vapor through localizing the heat at the air–liquid interface,5,6 and one of the most popular applications of interfacial evaporation is the desalination of seawater.7,8 With the first demonstration of desalination using solar-driven interfacial evaporation,7 many studies have been reported in the optimization of the interfacial evaporation system to improve the evaporation efficiency, including the development of broadband and efficient solar absorbers, thermal insulation materials and designs, and liquid transportation approaches.9–11
With interfacial evaporation, solar energy can be converted into thermal energy and harvested efficiently. Besides converting solar energy into thermal energy stored in water vapor, there also exist other opportunities, for example, the upward flow of water induced by interfacial evaporation, and the concentration difference and the temperature difference between the interface and bulk solution, for energy conversion. These opportunities can enable the generation of electric energy together with the generation of water vapor. Hu et al. and Guo et al. demonstrated that the upward flow induced by interfacial evaporation could be used to generate electric energy based on the streaming potential when the flow went through a nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane and carbon black nanostructures, respectively.12,13 Using an ion selective membrane, Zhou et al. reported the generation of electric energy based on the concentration difference that resulted from interfacial evaporation.14 Due to the heat localization at the air–liquid interface in interfacial evaporation, the temperature difference between the interface and the bulk can be quite substantial, which provides another opportunity to generate electricity while water vapor is generated.
In this work, we explored electricity generation using an open TEC to take advantage of the temperature difference generated during the interfacial evaporation process. A TEC converts thermal energy into electric energy by using temperature-dependent electrochemical redox potentials. When there is a temperature difference between the two electrodes of the TEC, the oxidation and reduction reactions happen at different electrodes, which generates a steady electric current. Compared with conventional solid thermoelectric material systems, TECs have the potential in achieving a much higher Seebeck coefficient (Se).15–20 Since the demonstration of a TEC using Pt electrodes by Quickenden and Vernon,21 carbon electrodes with high surface area and low cost, including multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) buckypaper,22 single-walled CNT–reduced graphene oxide (SWCNT–rGO) composite films,23 and CNT aerogel sheets,24 were developed to improve the output power density and thermal–electrical conversion efficiency. For example, the use of the CNT aerogel-based electrodes generated a high output power, 6.6 W m−2, for a temperature difference of 51 °C, with a Carnot-relative efficiency of 3.95%.24
A proof of concept design, the open TEC, was demonstrated in this work for the parallel processes of clean water generation and electricity generation. Most TECs reported so far are closed systems to avoid the loss of liquid during the operation of TECs. In this work, the access to the open environment enables the evaporation of liquid at the air–liquid interface and the generation of the temperature difference needed for the operation of the TEC, so an open design is adapted. The I3−/I− redox couple was integrated into the interfacial evaporation system to generate the open TEC. Graphite felt served as both the solar absorber for interfacial evaporation and the electrode for the TEC in the system. The open TEC with a seawater-based electrolyte achieved an electric power output of ∼0.5 mW m−2 under one-sun illumination. Compared to the original seawater, the concentrations of the primary ions in condensed water were reduced substantially. In this study, the TECs were also connected in series to increase the output voltage for charging of capacitors and powering of LEDs. The findings in this work provide an alternative approach to the generation of electricity during the solar-driven interfacial evaporation process. The electric output of the TEC with the seawater-based electrolyte still reached ∼2.3 × 10−2 mW m−2 even without solar illumination due to the temperature difference generated by natural evaporation, which provides the possibility for electricity generation at night.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the schematic of an open TEC enabled by interfacial evaporation. Two electrodes are placed at the air–liquid interface and the bottom of a beaker, respectively. The surface electrode also serves as a solar absorber to drive interfacial evaporation. The ion pair of I3−/I−, which shows temperature-dependent electrochemical redox potentials, was used as the redox couple in the TEC. When the system is illuminated by solar light, a temperature difference is built up between the two electrodes, which induces the difference of electrochemical redox potentials of I3−/I− at the two electrodes to produce electricity. Adding α-cyclodextrin (α-CD) can potentially increase the Se.16 The α-CD shows efficient host–guest inclusion for triiodide (I3−) to generate the α-CD–I3− complex, and the inclusion process also depends on the temperature. At the low-temperature side (bottom of the beaker), the encapsulation of I3− by α-CD is enhanced, which decreases the concentration of I3− and promotes the oxidation of I− to I3−. At the high-temperature side, the reaction is reversed. This temperature-dependent host–guest interaction generates a concentration difference of redox ions between the two electrodes to improve the performance of the TEC.16 The potassium cation from the addition of KCl into the DI water-based electrolyte and the metal cations in the original seawater can shield the electrostatic repulsion in the α-CD–I3− complex to generate solid complexes at the low-temperature side, which will further enhance the concentration difference of I3− between the two electrodes and improve the Se of the TEC.16,25
 Fig. 1  Schematic of an open TEC enabled by interfacial evaporation. 

Fig. 2a shows the optical image of the graphite felt that serves as both the electrode for the TEC and the solar absorber for the interfacial evaporation system. The graphite felt consists of graphite fibers with a diameter of ∼20 μm (Fig. 2b). As shown in the insets of Fig. 2a, the graphite felt is superhydrophilic with a contact angle close to 0. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to characterize the surface of the graphite felt. The deconvoluted C1s XPS spectrum (Fig. 2c) shows three characteristic peaks at 284.6 eV (C–C), 285.4 eV (C–O) and 288.0 eV (CO).26 The hydroxyl, epoxy and carboxyl functional groups on the surface of the graphite felt generate the peaks of C–O and CO.11 Such hydrophilic functional groups, in combination with the microstructure of the felt, result in the superhydrophilic surface of the graphite felt. Fig. 2d shows that the optical absorption of the graphite felt is more than 90% over a broad range of wavelengths (250 nm to 2500 nm). The electrical resistivity of the graphite felt is about 1.2 Ω cm, which was measured using the four-probe approach.
 Fig. 2  Graphite felt serves as both the solar absorber for interfacial evaporation and the electrode for the TEC. (a) Optical image of the graphite felt. The insets indicate that the contact angle for the graphite felt is near zero. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the graphite felt. (c) C1s XPS spectrum of the graphite felt. (d) Absorption spectrum of the graphite felt. 
A sealed polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) foam was placed under the top electrode to reduce the downward conductive heat loss. The use of the PDMS foam is beneficial for both the improvement of the interfacial evaporation efficiency and the maintenance of the temperature difference between the two electrodes for the operation of the TEC (Fig. S1†).11,27,28 As shown in Fig. 3a, the temperatures of the top and bottom electrodes of the TEC with a DI water-based electrolyte were monitored using thermocouples. The open voltage of the TEC was measured using a multi-channel data acquisition system. Before solar illumination, the temperature of the top electrode was lower than that of the bottom electrode due to the natural evaporation at the air–liquid interface. A lower temperature corresponds to a lower electrochemical potential of the redox pair, which induced a negative open voltage of the TEC.16 When the TEC was illuminated by light with an energy density of 100 mW cm−2 (one sun) generated using a solar simulator, the top graphite felt absorbed light and its temperature quickly increased, which resulted in an increase of the open voltage. When the temperature of the top electrode was higher than that of the bottom electrode, the open voltage changed to a positive value. When the light was turned off, the temperature of the top electrode gradually decreased due to the continuous evaporation of water at the interface, and eventually returned back to the initial state of the TEC before illumination with the temperature lower than that of the bottom electrode. The infrared (IR) images of the TEC (insets of Fig. 3a) clearly show the temperature differences between the top and bottom electrodes of the TEC with or without light illumination. Based on the open voltage and temperature difference between the top and bottom electrodes at the steady state under illumination, the Se of this TEC was calculated to be ∼1.4 mV K−1, which is much higher than the Se of conventional solid thermoelectric alloys such as Bi2Te3.17,29
 Fig. 3  Performance of the TEC with the DI water-based electrolyte enabled by interfacial evaporation. (a) The open voltage of the TEC and the temperature difference between the top electrode and bottom electrodes versus time. The blue line represents the open voltage, and the red line represents the temperature difference, ΔT. The simulated solar light with 100 mW cm−2 power density (one sun) was turned on at 30 min and turned off at 60 min. The insets are the IR images of the TEC at different times. (b) Output power of the TEC with and without solar illumination. The room temperature was ∼25 °C, and the relative humidity was ∼50%. (c) Mass change of the DI water-based electrolyte with and without TEC under one-sun illumination. (d) The schematic of the thermal and electric processes of the TEC under light illumination. 
The output power of the TEC was calculated based on the voltages measured across the resistances (Fig. 3b) both with and without solar illumination. The peak output power was 1.3 mW m−2 for the TEC under one-sun illumination and was 5.3 × 10−2 mW m−2 for the TEC without solar illumination. It is worth noting that the performance of the TEC without solar illumination is comparable with the performance of the natural evaporation system reported by Guo et al. recently.13 The output power reached 2.1 × 10−1 mW m−2 in Guo's study, but their system is based on a different mechanism for electricity generation, which involves the use of the directional migration of ions within a carbon black film. Besides the characterization of electricity generation, the evaporation performance of the TEC under one-sun illumination was also studied. As shown in Fig. 3c, the evaporation rate of the TEC is much higher than that of the electrolyte solution without the use of graphite felt. After 30 min illumination (one sun), the evaporation rate of the TEC was stable at ∼1.1 kg m−2 h−1. The evaporation efficiency of the TEC was calculated by using eqn (1): (1)where ṁ is the stable evaporation rate, hlv is the enthalpy change of water during evaporation (including both sensible heat and phase-change enthalpy), and qsolar is the power density of the solar energy (100 mW cm−2). After subtracting the natural water evaporation without solar illumination, the calculated evaporation efficiency of the TEC reached ∼61%.

Fig. 3d shows the schematic for both the thermal process and electric process in the open TEC under one-sun illumination. In the thermal process, the top graphite felt works as a solar absorber to convert solar energy into thermal energy. The sealed PDMS foam works as a thermal insulator to reduce the heat loss to the underlying electrolyte. The heat transfer involved in the open TEC is shown in the thermal process. The heat losses involved in the process include convective and radiative heat loss to the ambient environment, and conductive heat loss to the underlying water as shown in eqn (2):30 ṁhlv = αqsolar − qconv − qrad − qcond(2)where α is the solar absorptance of the graphite felt. According to the absorption spectrum of the graphite felt in Fig. 2d, α is estimated to be 0.93.
The convective heat loss, qconv, can be calculated using eqn (3): qconv = h(Ttop − T∞)(3)where h is the heat transfer coefficient, Ttop is the top surface temperature of the solar absorber (∼37 °C) and T∞ is the room temperature (∼25 °C). In this work, the value of h (∼6.23 W m−2 K−1) is estimated using a horizontal plate model.31 The calculated qconv was 74.8 W m−2 and accounted for ∼7.5% of the solar power used in illumination.
The radiative heat loss, qrad, can be calculated using eqn (4): qrad = σε(Ttop4 − T∞4)(4)where σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant (5.67 × 10−8 W m−2 K−4), and ε as the emissivity of the wet surface is 0.98.11 The calculated qrad was 75.1 W m−2 and accounted for ∼7.5% of the solar power used in illumination.
The conductive heat loss to the underlying water, qcond, includes two parts (qcond1 and qcond2) as shown in the following equations (eqn (5)–(7)). qcond1 is the heat loss through the sealed PDMS foam (averaged over the top surface area of the solar absorber, A), and qcond2 is the heat loss directly through the electrolyte (averaged over the top surface area of the solar absorber, A). qcond = qcond1 + qcond2(5) (6) (7)where A1 is the top-surface area of the sealed PDMS foam, and A2 is the cross-sectional area of the electrolyte surrounding the PDMS foam. A2 is equal to the difference between A and A1. T1 is the temperature on the bottom surface of the PDMS foam (∼29 °C), and at the same height, the temperature of the electrolyte surrounding the PDMS foam is T2 (∼30 °C). The temperatures were measured using thermocouples. Ltop and Lmedi are the thicknesses of the top graphite felt (∼5 mm) and the PDMS foam (∼5 mm), respectively. ktop is the effective thermal conductivity of the wet graphite felt which was estimated to be 11.58 W m−1 K−1 according to the porosity factor of the graphite felt.32kmedi as the thermal conductivity of the PDMS foam was measured to be 0.09 W m−1 K−1 using the transient plane source method. kelec as the thermal conductivity of the electrolyte is about 0.6 W m−1 K−1.16,33 The conductive heat loss through the sealed PDMS foam was therefore calculated to be 129.0 W m−2 and accounted for ∼12.9% of the solar power used. The conductive heat loss through the electrolyte was 77.9 W m−2 and accounted for ∼7.8% of the inputted solar power. The increase of the thickness and the decrease of the thermal conductivity of the sealed PDMS foam can further decrease the downward heat loss and increase the evaporation efficiency (Fig. S2†).
In the electric generation process, the conductive heat loss through the electrolyte (qcond2) can be reused to induce the redox reaction in the TEC. The I3− within the electrolyte obtains electrons from the top hot electrode to generate I−, and I− then loses electrons at the bottom cold electrode to form I3−. Such a redox reaction induces the current flow in the external circuit to generate electric power. The thermal efficiency (η) can be calculated using eqn (8): (8)where PMax is the maximum output electrical power in Fig. 3b. The calculated η, 1.7 × 10−3%, is comparable with that of the closed system reported by Yamada et al.16 The conversion efficiency can be further improved by using CNT-based electrodes that have a much larger surface area than the graphite felt-based electrodes.22–24 The performance of the TEC is also affected by other factors such as the thickness of the top electrode and solar flux (Fig. S3 and S4†).
In order to demonstrate the practical applicability of the open TEC enabled by interfacial evaporation, seawater from the East China Sea was used to replace DI water to prepare the electrolyte solution containing KI, I2, and α-CD. With substantial metal cations in the seawater, there is no need to add additional KCl into the solution. The electric and evaporation performance of the TEC with the seawater-based electrolyte were then studied. Fig. S5† shows the mass change of the seawater-based electrolyte with and without the TEC under one sun illumination. The evaporation rate of the TEC reached a stable value of 1.1 kg m−2 h−1 after 30 min illumination. Based on the above calculation, the evaporation efficiency of the TEC with the seawater-based electrolyte was ∼60%, which was slightly lower than the evaporation efficiency of the TEC with the DI water-based electrolyte. In order to demonstrate the stability of the electricity generation of the TEC with the seawater-based electrolyte under one-sun illumination, the open voltage was monitored for 6 hours of operation. As shown in Fig. 4a, before solar illumination, the open voltage decreased with time due to natural evaporation. Once the simulated solar light was turned on, the voltage quickly increased to about 16 mV. The voltage slowly decreased with time, which might be due to the thermal conduction from the top interfacial electrode to the bottom electrode, as shown in the IR images in Fig. 4a. When the temperature difference between the two electrodes decreased, the open voltage also decreased. After about 2 h solar illumination, the TEC reached a thermal balance and the open voltage reached a stable value (∼10 mV). When the solar light was turned off, the temperature of the top electrode quickly decreased due to continuous evaporation of water at the interface, which resulted in the decreasing of the open voltage. As the temperature of the top electrode was less than that of the bottom electrode, the open voltage would become negative. Fig. 4b shows the output power of the TEC with and without solar illumination. The corresponding peak output power was about 0.5 mW m−2 and 2.3 × 10−2 mW m−2, respectively. To evaluate the effect of desalination, the concentration of primary ions in seawater and purified water collected after condensation was measured using ion chromatography. As shown in Fig. 4c, for the purified water collected from the condensation chamber, the concentrations of all four primary cations (Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+, K+) in the original seawater were greatly reduced. The concentration of Na+ was decreased almost four orders of magnitude, and the concentration of K+ ions was reduced to the level below the detection limit of the instrument. The concentration of iodine in the condensed water was measured to be 2.7 mg L−1 using a mass spectrometer, which means that only an insignificant amount of iodine escaped from the seawater-based electrolyte with an initial iodine concentration of 2854.3 mg L−1. The concentration of iodine can be further decreased by adding the condensed water generated from an interfacial evaporation system without the insertion of the TEC.
 Fig. 4  Performance of the TEC with seawater-based electrolyte solution. (a) The change of the open voltage of the TEC under solar illumination. The simulated solar light with a power density of 100 mW cm−2 (one sun) was turned on at 30 min and turned off at 5 h 30 min. The insets were the IR images of the TEC at different times. (b) Output power of the TEC with and without light illumination. The room temperature was ∼25 °C, and the relative humidity was ∼50%. (c) The concentrations of primary ions in an actual seawater sample (from the East China Sea), in the seawater-based electrolyte and in condensed water. (d) The open voltage of one cell and eleven cells connected in series under light illumination. The simulated solar light was turned on at 10 min. (e) The charging curve of a capacitor of 2200 μF by using the eleven TECs connected in series under light illumination. Eleven charged capacitors of 2200 μF were connected in series to power a LED in the inset image. 
For practical use, the TECs were connected in series to increase the output voltage. Fig. 4d shows the output voltage of one TEC and also eleven TECs connected in series before and during solar illumination. Compared with the output voltage of one TEC, the steady output voltage of eleven TECs connected in series increased about ten times to reach 200 mV during solar illumination. The TECs connected in series under solar illumination were used to charge a capacitor of 2200 μF. The voltage of the capacitor gradually increased as recorded in Fig. 4e. Charged capacitors of 2200 μF were then connected in series to further improve the output voltage to power a LED, as shown in the inset image of Fig. 4e.
Conclusions
In summary, this work demonstrated an open TEC system for the generation of electric energy during the solar-driven interfacial evaporation process. The open TEC system takes advantage of the intrinsic temperature difference generated by interfacial evaporation between the interface and bulk water. Both DI water-based electrolyte and seawater-based electrolyte were used in the TEC system. Under one-sun illumination, the evaporation rate of the TEC with the seawater-based electrolyte reached about 1.1 kg m−2 h−1, and the calculated evaporation efficiency of the TEC was ∼60%. With improved insulation designs reported recently, the evaporation efficiency could be further increased. After desalination, the primary cations (Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+, K+) of seawater were largely reduced. The peak output electric power of the TEC system with the seawater-based electrolyte reached about 0.5 mW m−2. The use of other redox couples, for example, Fe2+/Fe3+ redox couple, can minimize the risks associated with the continuous sublimation of I2. TECs can also be connected in series to charge capacitors or power LEDs. The output electric power can be increased by replacing graphite felt with other electrodes with larger surface areas that can provide more reaction sites for the redox reaction than graphite felt. Increasing the migration of ions through replacing the sealed PDMS foam with some other thermal insulators that ions can pass through can also improve the output power. With the improvement of TECs, the efficiency of the heat to electricity conversion can be further increased. Compared to a capillary driven electrokinetic generator,12,13 this TEC system can operate at a large concentration range of ions, including that of seawater. Zhou et al. also reported an electricity generation system that was based on the concentration difference formed during interfacial evaporation.14 The open TEC approach reported in this work provides an alternative approach for electricity generation during interfacial evaporation, and may operate at a higher solar flux than the system based on the concentration difference. Certainly, these different approaches are complimentary to each other. Our TEC approach can also be combined with other approaches for generating electricity during interfacial evaporation, such as taking advantage of both the capillary flow of water and the concentration difference, to harvest the waste thermal energy from the interfacial evaporation system. The electric output of the TEC with solution of seawater can still reach ∼2.3 × 10−2 mW m−2 even without solar illumination due to the temperature difference generated by natural evaporation, which provides a possibility for electricity generation at night.
Experimental
Preparation of electrolyte solution
To prepare the DI water-based electrolyte, KI (207.5 mg) and I2 (63.4 mg) were dissolved in 100 mL DI water, and then α-CD (389.1 mg) and KCl (1.5 g) were added to the solution and sonicated. To prepare the seawater-based electrolyte, KI (207.5 mg) and I2 (63.4 mg) were dissolved in 100 mL seawater (from the East China Sea), and then only α-CD (389.1 mg) was added to the solution. Sonication was then used to help dissolve the solutes.
Characterization and property measurement
A field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Sirion 200, FEI) was used to characterize the microstructure of the graphite felt. An X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) (AXIS UltraDLD, Kratos Analytical Ltd.) was used to study the chemical composition on the surface of the graphite felt. An ultraviolet (UV)-Visible (VIS) spectrometer (Lambda 950, PerkinElmer) was utilized to measure the absorption spectrum of the graphite felt. Thermocouples (TT-K-30-SLE, Omega) and an IR camera (FLIR T620, FLIR Systems, Inc.) were used to monitor the temperature of the TEC system. The transient plane source method (TPS-2500S, Hot Disk) was used to measure the thermal conductivity of the PDMS foam. A multi-channel data acquisition system (Agilent 34972A, Agilent Technologies Inc.) was used to measure the output voltage. Ion chromatography (ICS-5000+/900, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to measure the concentration of primary ions (Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+, K+) in seawater before and after desalination. An inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (i CAPQ, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to measure the content of iodine in condensed water.
Evaporation performance measurement
One-sun illumination with an energy density of 100 mW cm−2 was generated using a solar simulator (94023A, Newport). An electronic analytical balance was used to monitor the mass change of the TEC during water evaporation.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the financial support from National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2016YFB0402100), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51521004, 51420105009, 51403127, 21401129), and the 111 Project (Grant No. B16032).
Notes and references

          E. D. Coyle and R. A. Simmons, Understanding the Global Energy Crisis, Purdue University Press,  2014 Search PubMed .
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
J. E. Trancik, Nature, 2014, 507, 300–302 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Tao, Q. Shen, N. Yi, F. Zhang, Q. Liu, C. Song, D. Zhang, W. Shang and T. Deng, Small, 2014, 10, 3234–3239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2768–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604031 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, D. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Gan, Z. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Ye, X. Liang, J. Xu, C. Chang, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, P. Tao and T. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16359–16368 RSC .
C. Li, K. Liu, H. Liu, B. Yang and X. Hu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 90, 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xue, Y. Xu, T. Ding, J. Li, J. Yin, W. Fei, Y. Cao, J. Yu, L. Yuan, L. Gong, J. Chen, S. Deng, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 317–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .
A. Gunawan, C.-H. Lin, D. A. Buttry, V. Mujica, R. A. Taylor, R. S. Prasher and P. E. Phelan, Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2013, 17, 304–323 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. Yamada and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10502–10507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Poudel, Q. Hao, Y. Ma, Y. Lan, A. Minnich, B. Yu, X. Yan, D. Wang, A. Muto, D. Vashaee, X. Chen, J. Liu, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Science, 2008, 320, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shakouri, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 399–431 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tan, L.-D. Zhao and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12123–12149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Dupont, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6288–6302 RSC .
T. I. Quickenden and C. F. Vernon, Sol. Energy, 1986, 36, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hu, B. A. Cola, N. Haram, J. N. Barisci, S. Lee, S. Stoughton, G. Wallace, C. Too, M. Thomas, A. Gestos, M. E. d. Cruz, J. P. Ferraris, A. A. Zakhidov and R. H. Baughman, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 838–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Romano, N. Li, D. Antiohos, J. M. Razal, A. Nattestad, S. Beirne, S. Fang, Y. Chen, R. Jalili, G. G. Wallace, R. Baughman and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6602–6606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Im, T. Kim, H. Song, J. Choi, J. S. Park, R. Ovalle-Robles, H. D. Yang, K. D. Kihm, R. H. Baughman, H. H. Lee, T. J. Kang and Y. H. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Noltemeyer and W. Saenger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 2710–2722 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Z. Chen, W.-Y. Liao, W.-Y. Hsieh, C.-C. Hsu and Y.-S. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 894–898 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Kim, N. Li, T. J. Kang, J. Chen, J. M. Pringle, M. Zhang, A. H. Kazim, S. Fang, C. Haines, D. Al-Masri, B. A. Cola, J. M. Razal, J. Di, S. Beirne, D. R. MacFarlane, A. Gonzalez-Martin, S. Mathew, Y. H. Kim, G. Wallace and R. H. Baughman, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605652 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Hasan, S. M. Said, M. F. M. Sabri, A. S. A. Bakar, N. A. Hashim, M. M. I. M. Hasnan, J. M. Pringle and D. R. MacFarlane, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Zhao, X. H. Ji, Y. H. Zhang, T. J. Zhu, J. P. Tu and X. B. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 062111 CrossRef .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16126 CrossRef CAS .

          J. P. Holman, Heat Transfer, McGraw-Hill, 10th edn,  2010 Search PubMed .

          H. Ma, Oscillating Heat Pipes, Springer,  2015 Search PubMed .
M. L. V. Ramires and C. A. Nieto de Castro, Int. J. Thermophys., 2000, 21, 671–679 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta10190f‡ These authors equally contributed to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of an open TEC enabled by interfacial evaporation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Graphite felt serves as both the solar absorber for interfacial evaporation and the electrode for the TEC. (a) Optical image of the graphite felt. The insets indicate that the contact angle for the graphite felt is near zero. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the graphite felt. (c) C1s XPS spectrum of the graphite felt. (d) Absorption spectrum of the graphite felt.	 

 	Fig. 3  Performance of the TEC with the DI water-based electrolyte enabled by interfacial evaporation. (a) The open voltage of the TEC and the temperature difference between the top electrode and bottom electrodes versus time. The blue line represents the open voltage, and the red line represents the temperature difference, ΔT. The simulated solar light with 100 mW cm−2 power density (one sun) was turned on at 30 min and turned off at 60 min. The insets are the IR images of the TEC at different times. (b) Output power of the TEC with and without solar illumination. The room temperature was ∼25 °C, and the relative humidity was ∼50%. (c) Mass change of the DI water-based electrolyte with and without TEC under one-sun illumination. (d) The schematic of the thermal and electric processes of the TEC under light illumination.	 
	(1)
ṁhlv = αqsolar − qconv − qrad − qcond	(2)
qconv = h(Ttop − T∞)	(3)
qrad = σε(Ttop4 − T∞4)	(4)
qcond = qcond1 + qcond2	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 4  Performance of the TEC with seawater-based electrolyte solution. (a) The change of the open voltage of the TEC under solar illumination. The simulated solar light with a power density of 100 mW cm−2 (one sun) was turned on at 30 min and turned off at 5 h 30 min. The insets were the IR images of the TEC at different times. (b) Output power of the TEC with and without light illumination. The room temperature was ∼25 °C, and the relative humidity was ∼50%. (c) The concentrations of primary ions in an actual seawater sample (from the East China Sea), in the seawater-based electrolyte and in condensed water. (d) The open voltage of one cell and eleven cells connected in series under light illumination. The simulated solar light was turned on at 10 min. (e) The charging curve of a capacitor of 2200 μF by using the eleven TECs connected in series under light illumination. Eleven charged capacitors of 2200 μF were connected in series to power a LED in the inset image.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta10190f
‡ These authors equally contributed to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
