Single-chirality of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) through chromatography and its potential biological applications  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ04056E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ04056E
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2023, 47, 992-1022Single-chirality of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) through chromatography and its potential biological applications

        
          
            Asif 
            Khalid
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenhui 
            Yi
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Sweejiang 
            Yoo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shakeel 
            Abbas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jinhai 
            Si
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xun 
            Hou
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jin 
            Hou
          
          
        
      *b
aKey Laboratory for Information Photonic Technology of Shaanxi & Key Laboratory for Physical Electronics and Devices of the Ministry of Education, School of Electronics Science and Engineering, Faculty of Electronics and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, China. E-mail: yiwenhui@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Science, Xi’an Medical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710021, China
Received 
      15th August 2022
    , Accepted 27th November 2022First published on 23rd December 2022AbstractThe separation of highly pure single-chirality single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) is challenging and also in demand due to their intrinsic physical, optical, and electronic properties. The use of single-chirality and their performance characteristics makes them a selective candidate for multifunctional applications and opens a new front in nanotube development. It has previously been reported that SWCNTs can be separated in various ways by employing direct control and post-synthesis approaches. Herein, we review the separation of single-chiralities of SWCNTs on account of simplicity and time/cost effectiveness by using gel chromatography. The most recent progress in the controlled synthesis of SWCNTs is comprehensively reviewed in terms of selective-diameter, single-chirality, and specific geometric shape. The method to achieve the single-chirality of SWCNTs is also highlighted. Besides addressing COVID-19 characteristics, epidemiology, and pathology, we also review the most recent developments in nano-biosensors for the rapid and early detection of COVID-19. Furthermore, the photothermal/bioimaging response of single-chirality is reviewed in order to enhance the cytotoxicity of drugs against cancer cells over simple carbon nanotubes (CNTs). The single-chirality allows for precise imaging (due to efficient absorption and emission) of tumors/blood vessels up to ∼10-fold higher by injecting a low dose. We hope this review stimulates further study on single-chirality controlled SWCNTs for practical applications.
Asif Khalid
Asif Khalid received the BS degree in Electronics Science from the University of Lahore (UOL), Pakistan, and received a Master's degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University, China in 2017. He is currently pursuing a PhD degree at Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. His research interests from the last five years include developing biosensors, diagnosing cancer cells (through phototherapy and drug delivery), and synthesizing organic and inorganic materials for electronics and healthcare applications.
Wenhui Yi
Wenhui Yi received the Bachelor's, Master's, and PhD degrees from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 1996, 1999, and 2004, respectively. He is an Associate Professor with the Faculty of Information and Electronics Engineering, School of Electronics Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University. He has been working in the past five years on developing biosensors and the intelligent diagnosis and treatment system toward cancers, including diagnosis of cancers by classifying pathological images utilizing deep convolutional neural networks. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Akron from 2007 to 2008. He was also a Visiting Scientist at MIT from 2011 to 2013.
Sweejiang Yoo
Sweejiang Yoo received the Master's and PhD degrees from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2015 and 2020, respectively. His research work has been published in various reputed journals, including the International Journal of Nanomedicine, Wiley, ACS, and others. He presented oral presentations at NDNC 2016 and the Annual World Congress of Advanced Materials 2017. His research interests include organic chemistry, bioimaging, biosensors, and gas sensors.
Jinhai Si
Jinhai Si received the Bachelor's and Master's degrees from Liaoning University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and the PhD degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 1994. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences from 1994 to 1996, and at the Tokyo Institute of Technology from 1988 to 1990. He was a Lecturer and an Associate Professor with Liaoning University from 1985 to 1994, and an Associate Professor with the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences from 1996 to 1999, and a Chief Researcher and the Team Leader of Japan Science and Technology Agency from 1997 to 2005. He has been a Full Professor with Xi’an Jiaotong University since 2005. His research interests include ultrafast optical spectroscopies and techniques, femtosecond laser-based micro-nano machining, and transient imaging and ultrafast measurements using femtosecond optical Kerr gate.
Xun Hou
In 1959, Hou Xun graduated from the Department of Physics, Northwestern University. From August 1979 to November 1981, he studied for two years in the Department of Physics, Imperial College London. After graduating from university, he worked at the Xi'an Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and was promoted to Researcher in June 1986. He served as the Director of the Institute from June 1986 to March 1995. In 2000, he was employed as a Professor at Xi'an Jiaotong University. In September 2003, he was appointed Dean of the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University. His research interests include plasma physics, experimental physics, atomic, molecular and optical physics.
Jin Hou
Jin Hou received the Master's degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University, in 2000, and the PhD degree from Fourth Military Medical University, in 2006. She joined as an Assistant Professor at Xi’an Medical College in 2000, and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2008, and to Full Professor in 2016. She was a Visiting Scholar at the Whitehead Institute, MIT in 2013, and at the University of Houston in 2017. She is working on screening compounds for antitumor drugs. Her research interests include muscarinic receptors and intracellular signal transduction.
1 Introduction
Carbon is a fascinating element because of its essential role in numerous aspects of daily life and its ability to exist in a range of allotropic forms, which is rare in other elements.1 CNTs with varying diameters were first made public in 1991 by Iijima.2,3 Furthermore, nanomaterials have unique physical, electrical, and optical properties, opening up new possibilities for potential applications.4 CNTs (species of carbon material) have been extensively used in scientific and industrial nanotechnology research and development. Since their discovery, CNTs, which are rolled-up graphene sheet cylinders that are seamless, have caught the curiosity of scientists due to their outstanding properties.3,5,6 According to the number of graph layers from which a nanotube is composed, CNTs are classified as SWCNTs, double-walled carbon nanotubes (DWCNTs), and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), as illustrated in Fig. 1.7 Thus, the structure of a SWCNT can be described by its chirality (n,m), diameter (d), and chiral angle (θ), which is further explained in Section 2. Notably, SWCNTs can be metallic (m-) and semiconducting (sc-) depending on their chirality and diameter, whereas MWCNTs and DWCNTs are predominantly metallic (m-). For instance, if n − m is a multiple of 3, SWCNTs exhibit metallic (m-) or quasi-metallic (when n − m = 3q, where q is an integer) behavior due to bands crossing at the Fermi level, while the remaining two-thirds are semiconducting (sc-) (when n − m ≠ q) with a finite bandgap.8–10
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the construction of a nanotube by rolling up an infinite strip of graphite sheet (so called graphene) and dividing into SWCNT, MWCNT, and DWCNT. (b) The DOS specific properties are attributed to van Hove singularities due to the electronic structure of SWCNTs. (c) The peaks in the UV-vis-NIR are caused by SWCNTs with various chiralities in an aqueous solution. (d) Illustration of the Raman spectra of SWCNTs. 
SWCNTs have received significant attention and exploration, as evidenced by the number of articles published. SWCNTs have been used in a wide range of applications, indicating their expanding significance. SWCNTs are compatible with field effect transistor (FET) designs and high-K dielectrics, which are well-known industrial processes and commercial products.11–14 Furthermore, it is utilized in lithium-ion batteries, biosensors, medical equipment, and drug delivery systems.15–17 Unfortunately, the heterogeneity of the as-synthesized SWCNTs (metallicity (metal/semiconductor), chirality, and diameter) has hindered the use of SWCNTs in the aforementioned applications. Thus, to ensure the desired performance in all conceivable applications, the population of SWCNTs should be monodisperse in terms of the selective-diameter and single-chirality.18–21
SWCNTs may be metallic or semiconducting, while MWCNTs are mostly metallic, depending on the chirality. Metallic types should be avoided since they have a negative impact on the electrical performance of the devices and circuits. Unfortunately, there are no direct means to create electronic-pure-grade sc-SWCNTs by regulating the growth. However, high purity sc-SWCNTs can be obtained by sorting the SWCNTs raw materials. In general, there are three main approaches to acquire a certain type of SWCNTs: post-synthesis sorting/separation, preferential synthesis, and selective destruction, and each method is briefly discussed in Table 1. Post-synthesis sorting is a long and time-consuming process, but it has the advantages of large-scale production, ultra-high purity, and high resolution, which make them both scientifically and commercially valuable.
Table 1 Main approaches to obtain specific types of SWCNTs




Approach
Description
Difficulty




Preferential synthesis
Tuning the synthesis parameter to produce predetermined chirality
Difficult to engineer a catalyst/precursor to produce predetermined chirality


Includes cloning, catalyst engineering and in situ growth selective etching14,22,23
sc-purity yet to satisfy semiconductor application requirement


Selective destruction
Preferentially etching the undesired CNT types
Irreversible and collateral damage to adjacent SWCNTs.


Includes electrical destruction, gas-phase etching and light/plasma/microwave-assisted etching24–26
Lower purity (limited by etching precision)


Post-synthesis sorting/separation
Differentiates the complex mixtures of CNTs into desire fractions.
Tedious and contamination


Includes gel chromatography, density gradient ultracentrifuge (DGU), DNA wrapping, polymer extraction, and aqueous two-phase extraction (ATPE)
Introduces defect and low yield




Generally, before sorting the SWCNTs, the nanotubes must be dispersed in a liquid form like water or an organic solvent. The misfortune is that there are some restraints that prevent separation in an aqueous dispersion. The main hurdle in the sorting process is the interaction (van der Waals force) between the nanotubes. Thus, numerous techniques have been reported for sorting the mixed species of SWCNTs (dispersed in an aqueous solution). Various post-growth procedures for sorting SWCNTs have been developed, including selective chemistry, dielectrophoresis, selective oxidation, ultracentrifugation, DNA wrapping, aqueous two-phase extraction (ATPE), polymer sorting, and gel chromatography.27–32 However, low yields and exorbitant costs plague these potent nanotube sorting technologies. Notably, to use nanotubes in a wide range of applications, it is necessary to have tight control over their structural and physical properties, such as selective-diameter, single-chirality, and electrical properties. To regulate single-chirality is the most difficult one. So, we need to explore the m- and sc-separation of SWCNTs on account of the simplicity and cost/time effectiveness.33
Gel column chromatography is a feasible and scalable approach for sorting SWCNTs based on their single-chirality. In 2008, Tanka et al. reported on the large-scale separation of m-SWCNTs and sc-SWCNTs using agarose gel electrophoresis.34 Later, they developed the gel squeezing method based on selective adsorption onto an agarose gel that yielded up to ∼70% m-SWCNTs and ∼90% sc-SWCNTs.35,36 On the basis of these methods, Moshammer et al. and Tanaka et al. developed a simple chromatographic method for sorting the m-SWCNTs and sc-SWCNTs.37,38 Generally, the SWCNTs were dispersed in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution before being applied to a column filled with agarose gel beads. Firstly, the parent suspension was applied onto the gel to adsorb the suspension. The sc-SWCNTs were trapped by the gel beads, while the m-SWCNTs passed through the column because they had not been absorbed with the gel. A low concentration of the eluting solution (such as sodium deoxycholate (DOC) or sodium cholate (SC) solution) can be used to extract any leftover m-SWCNTs in the gel column due to the weak attraction/adsorption with gel beads. Furthermore, the solution was applied to release the trapped sc-SWCNTs, and the column could be used for repeated separation, further explained in Section 3. This novel approach has the potential to drastically cut the cost (via recycling) and considerably increase the separation efficacy of multiple chiral species. It uses a cheap SDS surfactant and disperses the eluent for SWCNTs so that the gel medium can be used again. In addition, gel column and ATPE techniques were examined for prospective applications (bioimaging, biosensor).
The different adsorption strengths of the gel and surfactant wrapped SWCNTs assemblies are because of the variable quantities of surfactants linked to the different m-/sc-SWCNTs. A decrease in the adsorption strength occurs when the surface area of a surfactant increases, resulting in an increase in the SWCNTs’ adhesion to the gel beads. Thus, the selective adsorption of the surfactant-wrapped SWCNTs that were assembled onto the gel provides the basis for separating the SWCNTs using gel chromatography. Usually, the SWCNTs adsorption decreased for the m-SWCNTs because it was coated with a greater amount of surfactant than sc-SWCNTs. Surfactant molecules on sc-SWCNTs are typically aligned parallel to the SWCNTs side walls, whereas on m-SWCNTs, they are stacked vertically, as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  The surfactant adjusts the SWCNTs and gel interaction. (a) A higher density surfactant coating might reduce the SWCNT gel adsorbability. Both colors represent different structures of SWCNTs. (b) Illustration of the surfactant's chemical structure (SDS, SC, DOC).39 Copyright John Wiley and sons, 2018. 
It was confirmed experimentally in 1998 through STM research on randomly selected SWCNTs that the single-chirality electronic structure was one of the most important aspects of such chirality-dependent properties.40 Liu et al. correlated the transport characteristics of DWCNTs with the chirality of both outer and inner tubes using diffraction and transport analyses.41 Furthermore, by using electron diffraction, Kauppinen et al. demonstrated that m-SWCNTs were more reactive than sc-SWCNTs when their diameters were identical, focusing attention on the mechanism of the selective growth of sc-SWCNTs in an oxidative environment.42 According to Dai et al., they fabricated FETs employing enriched (10,5) large-diameter (∼1.01 nm) SWCNTs, which had a higher on-state current as compared to the small-diameter SWCNTs.43
Additionally, our group recently synthesized m-SWCNTs (95%) and sc-SWCNTs (99%), employing temperature-controlled gel chromatography.44 The temperature influenced the interaction of the nanotubes with gel, determining the orientation and covering density of the surfactant on the nanotubes. A repeatable separation approach was carried out using the same co-surfactant system by observing the nanotube retention and release in the hydrogel at various temperatures, as shown in Fig. 3. A further study evaluated the variation in the surfactant coverage among several (n,m) SWCNT species, which resulted in different adsorption strengths for each single-chirality nanotube. The curvature of the nanotubes affected the surfactant coverage, and this was mainly true for SDS. The adsorption of the nanotubes was carried out at elevated temperatures (30, 35, 40 °C) and eluted at a lower temperature (12 °C) without altering the eluent solution. As the temperature rose, the SDS micelles shrank in size and became more loosely packed in solution. However, the release of SWCNTs led us to believe that the retention forces in the gel were weaker when the temperature was low (10 °C), which was consistent with this hypothesis (Fig. 3). Yanhya et al. suggested that the temperature variation was due to changes in the structure and density of the surfactant micelles. At low temperatures, the SDS micelles around the nanotube undergo structural rearrangement, resulting in an increase in the surfactant covering density.
 Fig. 3  (a) Temperature-controlled adsorption and elution of SWCNTs. Illustration of how the temperature affects the surfactant morphology and coverage density. As the temperature rises above 12 °C, the surfactant coverage density increases and the molecules form a herringbone pattern. Desorption of SWCNTs from the adsorption sites is due to significant screening effects, and then SWCNTs elute through the column. (b) Photograph of the sorted SWCNTs. (c) UV-vis-NIR spectra for iterations at different separation temperatures.44 Copyright John Wiley and sons 2020. 
The single-chirality and selective-diameter of the SWCNTs influence their electrical and electronic properties, while modifying the geometric shapes of the SWCNTs also affects their intrinsic properties. Theoretically, many SWCNTs based on geometric shapes have been observed, but less experimental work has been done. The shape of the SWCNTs was determined by the periodic arrangement of the pentagon-heptagon atomic tori/coil within the hexagonal carbon network. The most typically experienced geometric shape variations are coil/tori, waved, Y-shape, and beads, as shown in Fig. 4.45–48 Tori/coil is one of the geometric shapes that has garnered a lot of attention among scientists.49 Numerous studies have shown that the coil/tori SWCNTs, are more stable under high pressure than their straight ones, showing excellent mechanical strength, electrical conductivity, and persistent current (Ipc).50–57 However, the controlled structuring of SWCNTs that have always developed as long strings into a tori-like topology may open up new application possibilities.58–60 Recently, the Pickering emulsion approach has been used to synthesize a toroidal carbon nanotube (TCN) by using the pure m- and sc-SWCNTs collected from gel chromatography.61–65 The facile and simple approach in the fabrication of m- and sc-TCN should provide insight towards the practical uses of TCN and tori-based quantum interference devices. Furthermore, the tori/coil nanotubes exhibit the negative magnetoresistance characteristics of weak one-dimensional localization at low temperatures. The intriguing electronic behavior is explained by quantum interference, which is enabled by the tori structure. An electron wave entering the tori can propagate in a clockwise or counter-clockwise manner around the ring and the two waves interefere constructively at the injection point due to the identical lengths of the paths. The constructive interference is destroyed by applying a magnetic field perpendicular to the tori/coil where the conjugate electron's wave acquires opposite phases.62,65 Here, the highly enriched m- and sc-SWCNTs are separated and coiled into a form of nanotori via oil-in-water and water-in-oil emulsions in a controlled manner. Notably, a m-TCN sheath (Ipc) shows the same behavior as it results in TCN, while a sc-TCN sheath (Ipc) shows the same behavior as their primary tori/coil.53 Whenever, the single-chirality shifts to self-coiling geometry, the electrical properties of the material alter in a noticeable way. Overall, this phenomenon is a new way in electronics and biomedical applications at large-scale production.
 Fig. 4  Different geometric shapes of the SWCNTs (branched CNT, Y junction, and a tori/coil SWCNT).45 Copyright IEEE 2009. 
Nanomaterials with a one-dimensional (1D) structure, such as SWCNTs, have numerous applications in bioimaging, phototherapy, and drug delivery. SWCNTs can absorb light in the visible-to-NIR range, which make them ideal for phototherapy. Light scattering across biological tissues is related to light wavelengths. The longer the light wavelength is, the larger the penetration depth into biological tissues, resulting in better internal organ images. Thus, only a small portion of SWCNTs emit light in the biological environment, and the remaining amount does not contribute due to the mixed chiralities. This means that single-chiralities (sc-SWCNT with narrow bandgap) are excellent candidates for phototherapy and bioimaging. Single-chiralities of SWCNT enable low doses in biological systems and improve detection sensitivity. It is essential to sort the different SWCNT species because the electrical and optical characteristics of SWCNTs are influenced by their chirality (with high purity). These chiralities have very similar E11 (∼802 nm for (12,1) chirality and ∼798 nm for (11,3) chirality) and E22 (∼1171 nm for (12,1) and ∼1197 nm for (11,3) chirality) energies. Thus, they can be stimulated by a single wavelength laser (808 nm), and both have good photoluminescence (PL) at ∼1200 nm.20,66 The sorted chiralities that have ∼5 times stronger PL and a 6-fold lower injection dose is therefore required to achieve good biological and photothermal imaging.67 In addition, the irradiation of (6,5) SWCNTs under a 980 nm laser allowed for a higher temperature as compared to the unsorted SWCNTs.
In this review, single-chiralities have been studied through the gel column chromatography separation approach, and the incorporation of multistage and temperature control, to enhance the M/S separation purity. Despite that, there is still room for improvement and bottlenecks for future development. Explicitly, the small-diameter SWCNTs should be separated into high purity (n,m) subpopulations. These small-diameter nanotubes are practically useful for therapeutic and sensor applications due to their large bandgap. The large bandgap is favorable in sensing applications for better gating effect and Schottky barrier build-up. The early diagnosis of infectious diseases (like COVID-19) using these sensing technologies is still highly beneficial in reducing the disease impact. Thus, compared to traditional methods, single-chirality SWCNTs provide a high signal-to-noise ratio, quick, selective and label-free detection. The sc-SWCNT FET detection test technique (for COVID-19) provides the ability for multiplex detection of not only viral antigens, but also antibodies that recognize these antigens. The exceptional properties of the SWCNTs are also extensively related to their geometric structure. Several methods have been found for forming SWCNTs with annular geometry (ring/tori) by using a simple and general emulsion process. Here, we review the formation of nanotori SWCNTs for various applications, such as drug delivery and bioimaging. Due to the strong plasmonic interaction between the AuNPs and the CNT nanoring (CNTR), CNTR@AuNP has stronger Raman, photoacoustic (PA), and photothermal therapy (PTT) signals than straight CNT@AuNP. Furthermore, the photothermal responses of the simple SWCNTs and separated SWCNTs (single-chirality) under NIR irradiations are compared. There is a clear trade-off between the power, density/concentration, and time. Having efficient light-heat conversion is always favorable in photothermal therapy to alleviate toxicity concerns and optical hazards. Therefore, sc-SWCNTs with the strongest light-heat conversion are the most appropriate choice for photothermal therapy and bioimaging. Herein, we review the latest progress in sorting the SWCNT species and their applications based on single-chirality, selective-diameter, and specific geometric shapes.
2 Characteristic of SWCNTs
The manner in which graphene is rolled onto a cylinder determines the properties of SWCNTs.7 To illustrate the two directions and unit vectors of the hexagonal lattice, a pair of indices (n,m) or different chiralities are utilized, as shown in Fig. 5. Along the nanotube axis, the SWCNT is a periodic 1D structure.68 Those nanotubes (n, 0) are named “zigzag,” while those (n,n) are named “armchair”, and the rest of the nanotubes are referred to as helical. When n − m is a multiple of 3, SWCNTs display metallic or quasi-metallic behavior; otherwise, they are semiconducting with a finite bandgap.
 Fig. 5  The indexing scheme for folding the graphene sheet of SWCNT, where a1 and a2 are the primitive lattice vectors of the hexagonal lattice. Importantly, the vector (connecting the origin to the lattice point defines the nanotube index) determines the helicity and diameter of the tube. All of the (n, 0) nanotubes are called zigzag nanotubes, (n, n) nanotubes are the armchair nanotubes, whereas the others are chiral nanotubes.69 Copyright RCS, 2009. 
Armchair tubes, also known as (n,n), are truly metallic, with band crossings at k = ±2/3 of the 1D Brillouin zone. The graphene electronic structure can be described as a zero-gap semiconductor, wherein the bonding and antibonding π-bands are degenerate at the K-point (zero corner) of the hexagonal 2D Brillouin zone.68 Metallic conduction occurs when one of these permissible wave vectors crosses the K-point of the hexagonal 2D Brillouin zone. The valence and conduction bands are degenerate because of the peculiar symmetry of the 2D graphene lattice. More wave vectors become allowed along the circumferential direction when the nanotube diameter increases, forging more 2D nanotubes where the semiconducting bandgap vanishes. In the case, n − m ≠ 3l (where l is an integer), the bandgap (Egap) depends on the diameter.70
The bandgap (Egap) is defined as:Egap = (2γ0aC–C)/dtThe diameter (dt) is defined as:dt(nm) = 0.0783(n2 + m2 + nm)1/2where dt is the diameter; aC–C is the nearest-neighbor C–C distance (0.142 nm); and γ0 is the C–C tight-binding overlap energy.
2.1 UV-vis-NIR spectrum
SWCNTs exhibit distinctive optical absorption in the UV, visible, and NIR regions. Through Kataura's plot, UV-vis-NIR spectroscopy is increasingly utilized to determine the purity and concentration of single-chirality. The electrical properties of the SWCNTs are determined by the diameter and chirality because the density of states (DOS) of SWCNTs has a series of strong interband transitions or Van Hove maxima at energies indicated by E11E22, etc. (depending on tube diameter). SWCNTs with pure subpopulations (diameter and chirality) have spectrally narrow interband transitions. Although each index has a unique set of interband transitions between the Van Hove singularities (VHs), the optical absorption spectrum makes it simple to detect the SWCNT single-chirality. Absorption peaks in the range of 950–1350 nm, 650–950 nm, and 300–450 nm correspond to the first, second, and third optical bands of the sc-SWCNTs and are denoted as S11, S22, and S33, respectively. The absorption peak between 450–650 nm is denoted as the optical transition of m-SWCNTs (M11). The SWCNTs (dt > 1.0 nm) are denoted at wavelength ranges from 1400–1900 nm, 750–1150 nm, 420–580 nm, and 600–750 nm as S11, S22, S33, and M11, respectively.
The absorption peak ratio of (ϕi) was determined to quantify the degree of separation, and was adopted as the metric for describing the sc-purity. The linear baseline (pink area) encloses the M11 and S22 bands in the wavelength range of 8400–16000 cm−1 (1900–625 nm), as shown in Fig. 6. A simple optical evaluation approach was used to estimate the metallic and semiconducting ratio of SWCNTs, which is termed m-purity, because the (ϕi) does not reveal the m-purity. Unlike the (ϕi) value, this general model directly estimates the m-purity as a percentage.
 Fig. 6  Calculation of SWCNT peak ratio (ϕi) based on UV-vis-NIR.71 @copy right RSC 2014. 
The (ϕi) value is defined as:ϕi = (ACNT)/(ACNT + AB)where ACNT is the area enveloped by M11 and S22 peaks with linear baseline subtraction, and AB denotes the area below the same region.
The m-purity is defined as:  
2.2 Raman spectrum
Even though UV-vis spectrum analysis has a limited resolution, it is inexpensive and fast. Thus, Raman spectrum analysis is a powerful characterization approach for carbon-based nanomaterials. The single-chirality (n,m) can be calculated by comparing the observed Raman spectrum with the Kataura plot shown in Fig. 7. According to a previous study, nanotube species with optical transition energies in resonance with the laser energy can exist in the spectrum.72 As a result, Raman spectra with numerous laser lines can be used to determine the diameter distribution of all nanotubes in a sample. Arujo et al. measured 125 radial breathing mode (RBM) frequencies with laser energies between 1.26 to 2.71 eV, and plotted them on a two-dimensional graph.73 Raman spectrum are typically used to identify the metallicity and chirality of SWCNTs. The modes defined from graphite include the high-frequency tangential mode and the RBM, which are associated with the vibratory motions of carbon molecules. The tangential G mode in SWCNTs (around 1500–1600 cm−1) breaks into two submodes, G+ for atomic displacement along the tube axis and G-mode in a circumferential direction, because of the quantum confinement effect. Due to the huge number of free electrons in m-SWCNTs, the G-peak has a broadened shape compared to the Lorentzian-like line shape of sc-SWCNTs.
 Fig. 7  The Raman spectra analysis, known as Kataura's plot. It shows the relationship between the optical transition energies and ωRBM. The optical energies of sc-SWCNTs (circles) and m-SWCNTs (stars).74 Copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2010. 
Nanotube lattice vibrations (carbon atoms) vibrate in the radial direction, as if they are “breathing”. RBM is regarded as a fingerprint for SWCNTs. The RBM frequency (ωRBM) reveals the tube diameter (dt), while its intensity (IRBM) reveals the electronic structure. Hence, the (n,m) assignment is possible through the analysis of the ωRBM and IRBM. The relationship between the tube diameter and ωRBM is monotonic. The SWCNTs RBM are unique and occur in the range of 120–250 cm−1 for SWCNTs of diameter in the range of 0.7 nm < dt < 2 nm.
The ωRBM is defined as:  where the variables A and B are determined experimentally. For SWCNT bundles, dt = 1.5 ± 0.2 nm, A = 234 cm−1 and B = 10 cm−1. B is the upshift in ωRBM assigned to the tube-tube interactions. For isolated SWCNTs on an oxidized Si substrate, dt = 1.5 ± 0.2 nm, A = 248 cm−1 and B = 0. However, for dt < 1 nm, the simple ωRBM = A/dt + B relationship might not be exactly true. It is the nanotube lattice distortions that lead to the chirality dependence of ωRBM.
3 Sorting of the carbon nanotubes
The peculiar properties of SWCNTs only manifest upon well-separated single-chirality and selective-diameter conditions. This section will discuss the metal/semiconductor (M/S) separation and its mechanism, together with the incorporation of multistage and temperature control, to enhance the M/S separation quality. The M/S separation is a low-cost, rapid, and straightforward process. This enables the separation of selective-diameter SWCNTs via gel chromatography. Moreover, the temperature effect modulates the SDS and SC micelle's structure, as well as their coverage on the nanotube. We also have a very brief overview of the ATPE method employed for biomedical applications (based on single-chirality).
Many approaches for the separation of single-chirality have been used over the last few decades. In 2001, the selective destruction methods enabled the first separation of SWCNTs via electrical destruction.75 However, the publication on post-synthesis separation increased significantly since 2003, which probably stimulated by the individualization of nanotubes in aqueous solution and the advancement in spectroscopic analysis of SWCNTs by Smalley and Weisman.76–78 These efforts provide a more accurate preliminary and post-separation appraisal of the SWCNTs diameter and structures (n,m). In 2003, the wrapping of SWCNTs with single-stranded DNA enabled the separation of the nanotubes by tube diameter, single-chirality, and electronic properties.27 In 2004, Zheng et al. adequately reported the (6,5) enriched SWCNTs via ion exchange chromatography.79 Furthermore, DGU separation was reported by Hersam and co-workers in 2005 and 2006.28,29 The DUG method is an established and widely adopted method for biochemical separation. They found that DUG performed on SC and DOC dispersed the SWCNTs, allowing the SWCNTs to be separated by electronic structure and diameter. Fluorene-based polymers and aromatic polymers were used to isolate specific species in 2007.29,30 By this method, ∼10 semiconducting single-chiralities were sorted by applying size exclusion chromatography, which first reduced the nanotube length distribution. This was followed by ion-exchange chromatography to separate the (6,5), (6,4), and (9,1) nanotubes.80 Subsequently, the 12 primary semiconducting single-chirality sequences were identified by screening the hundreds of single-standard DNA sequences.81 The Nicolas group found that polyfluorenes (PFO) selectively dispersed sc-SWCNTs in the organic solvent.30 His finding was considered a landmark achievement in SWCNTs separation.
A chromatography-based separation approach was devised in 2009, where a polysaccharide gel was employed as a separating agent for the single-chirality purification of surfactant-dispersed SWCNTs.36,37,82,83 Like ion-exchange chromatography, the polysaccharide gel is widely used in biochemical separation. Tanaka et al. and Moshammer et al. found an unexpected phenomenon when they exposed SDS-dispersed SWCNTs to a gel medium. Adsorption of the surfactant-dispersed SWCNTs with the gel was significant, as was the surfactant employed to separate the metallic (m-) and semiconducting (sc-) SWCNTs. Temperature also had a significant impact on adsorption. The semiconducting species were mainly trapped or drawn to the gel. This behavior enabled the separation of the SWCNT species on a simple and vast scale. The Kataura group and Strano group showed that with the use of gel column chromatography through surfactant and temperature control, 13 SWCNTs chiralities were separated with up to 90% purity, influenced by metallicity (electronic type), diameter, and single-chirality.18,84–88 Their efforts had allowed the helicity and handedness separation. ATPE, a separation technique for cellular components and biomolecules, was firstly used to separate SWCNTs in 2013.89 To separate the mixed SWCNTs into a chosen subpopulation, ATPE typically uses the surfactant concentration to regulate SWCNT partitioning between the two phases.90 These post-synthesis separation methodologies, as shown in Fig. 8, such as DNA wrapping, DUG, ATPE, polymer extraction, and gel column chromatography, enable the fractionalization or separation of heterogeneous SWCNTs by metallicity and single-chirality.31,81,89,91,92
 Fig. 8  Example of the post-synthesis separation methods for different (n,m) chiralities of SWCNTs.93 Copyright RSC, 2017. 
3.1 Gel chromatography
SWCNTs are generally dispersed in SDS before being applied to the gel bead column. The beads confine the sc-SWCNTs to the column, while the m-SWCNTs flow freely. It is possible to use the same eluent (DOC or SC) for several separations once it has been used to elute trapped sc-SWCNTs, as shown in Fig. 9.37,94,95 The mechanism behind the selective separation was attributed to the surfactant orientation and aggregation number or size exclusion of sc-SWCNTs due to selective aggregation, as proposed by Moshammer et al.38,96 for chirality extraction. Liu et al. developed single surfactant multistage chromatography in 2011.18 Yomogida et al. demonstrated a large separation of SWCNTs (9,4) and (10,3) for biological imaging.97 Tvrdy et al. produced solar cells based on CNTs using chiral mixes (7,5) and (8,3), as well as pure (6,5) single-chirality species.87,98 Kataura's coworkers separated 9 semiconducting optical isomers, whereas Wei et al. demonstrated the division of optical isomers (11,5) and (6,5) on a milligram-scale.34,99,100
 Fig. 9  Scalable method for the separation of m- and sc-SWCNTs; the separation is performed by selective absorption of sc-SWCNTs onto agarose gel beads, while the relatively heavy SDS coated m-SWCNTs went through the gel column. The process affords a solution with a 70% purity of m-SWCNTs, and leaves a gel containing 90% pure sc-SWCNTs.37 Copyright Appl. Phys., 2009. 
3.2 Multistage chromatography
A number of gel columns were filled with gel and joined vertically in order to generate large-scale single-chiralities.9,14,18,101 After applying the parent suspension to col 1, the surfactant wrapped SWCNTs strongly interacted with the gel and gradually replaced the other nanotubes, occupying the entire gel of col 1. After that, the unbounded nanotubes flowed down to the next gel column, where the same phenomena happened. Unbound nanotubes in a gel column can be gradually and selectively separated by diameter based on their gel interaction strength. Based on the strength of their interaction with the gel, nanotubes with different structures were classified into other columns, as shown in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of multistage chromatography. (b) Optical absorption spectra of ∼13 different species (m- and sc-). (c) Picture of different single-chiralities that shows their distinct colors. (d) PL mapping of each single-chirality containing sc-SWCNTs.18 Copyright Nat. Commun., 2011. 
3.3 Temperature-dependent gel chromatography
Hammouda observed that the frequency of SDS aggregations decreased through small angle neutron dispersion techniques with increasing temperature.18 According to Yahya et al., temperature may influence both SDS and the nanotube coverage density.102 The SDS micelles decreased in size and were packed loosely with increasing temperature. Meanwhile, Hirano et al. and Thendie et al. used thermodynamics to clarify the temperature-dependent SWCNT adsorption on the gel.86,103,104 They found that the net absorbability of SWCNTs increased linearly with temperature.105 The smaller SDS micelle structure around the sc-SWCNT at low temperatures (10–20 °C) rendered them more vulnerable to being physisorbed on the gel surface. Sc-SWCNTs with small-diameters were separated at 10 and 20 °C, while m-SWCNTs were selectively separated at 30 and 40 °C. By using this method, we can sort more single-chiralities and manipulate the SDS micelles to afford m-SWCNT separation. To investigate the effect of temperature, the synthesis process was carried out at different temperatures (10–50 °C) sequentially, as shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of temperature based gel column chromatography. (b) Optical absorption spectra of sorted SWCNTs chiralities at different temperature levels. (c) Photographic illustration of sorted SWCNTs based on temperature.103 Copyright ACS, 2013. 
3.4 Aqueous two-phase separation
SWCNTs and ssDNA (10 mg ml−1 in IDTE buffer) were combined at a ratio of 2:1 (w/w) in 1 ml of phosphate buffered saline (PBS), and sonicated for 30 minutes. After the samples were sonicated, they were ultracentrifuged at 250000 × g for 40 minutes. The top 90% of the supernatant was kept. To remove free ssDNA, centrifuge filters were used. The ssDNA-wrapped SWCNTs were resuspended in PBS.106,107 ATPE is also a quick and simple procedure for achieving the high purity of single-chirality. This technique is also widely employed in bioimaging and biosensing applications.108
3.5 Advantages and disadvantages of both separation methods
Here, we look at the advantages and disadvantages of both methods based on how they work and what they can be used for.
To sort the SWCNTs, gel chromatography is a viable technique. By this method, both small-diameter and large-diameter single-chiralities are achieved. To be more specific, the small-diameter SWCNTs should be sorted into high purity subpopulations. The bandgap of these small-diameter SWCNTs makes them valuable in therapeutic and sensing applications. Because their bandgap decreases with increasing diameter, large-diameter SWCNTs are extremely susceptible to oxidation, making separation difficult. Therefore, more work needs to be put into developing thin-film transistors and transparent conductive thin films using sorted SWCNTs (based on selective-diameter and high purity). Gel chromatography for SWCNT separation has the disadvantage of being very expensive due to the high cost of the gels that are used, the low separation power, and time-consuming process. Furthermore, the mass of the SWCNTs is also limited to application on the gel column. Thus, researchers need to recycle the gel to overcome this hurdle. Gel columns also have advantages such as suitability, simplicity, and straightforward process.109,110
ATPE has been used to separate animal and plant cells, bacteria, viruses, and cellular organelles, such as chloroplasts, mitochondria, membrane vesicles, proteins, and nucleic acids. ATPE is made by adding two chemically different water-soluble polymers or polyethylene glycol and salt to water, forming two immiscible phases. With their high-water content, aqueous systems are suitable for the purification and separation of biomolecules. ATPE provides a favorable separation environment for biomolecules, where polymers stabilize their structure and biological activities. These systems are versatile enough to be utilized with both streams of tiny particulate matter and huge quantities moving continuously with short contact periods. This method is environmentally friendly, low-cost, continuous, scalable, and efficient for many studies, especially for biomolecule concentration and purification.108 Biomolecule partitioning in ATPE is notoriously difficult to predict, especially for bigger molecules, which is one of the major disadvantages. Biological products may be harmed by the process conditions and organic solvents used in other liquid–liquid extraction (LLE) procedures.111
4 Selective-diameter of sorted SWCNTs
SWCNTs are a complex mixture of multi-species described by the chiral index distribution (n,m). SWCNTs have demonstrated their potential to achieving the next generation of electronics, optoelectronics, and biological applications based on their single-chirality and diameter selectiveness.112–114 Although there is tremendous potential for improving the effectiveness of the current procedures, a mixture of different types of chirality is routinely used, even after selective synthesis methods have been published.115,116 The separation of single-chirality and selective-diameter is thus a critical and application-oriented goal.117–119
By loading unbound nanotubes into a gel column, the sc-SWCNTs can be gradually and selectively separated by diameter on the basis of their magnitude of interaction strength with the gel. Based on the strength of their interaction with the gel, nanotubes with different structures were classified into different columns/environments. As in the multi-gel-column method, every col was enriched with certain chiralities. By using this method, almost ∼13 single-chiralities were separated. The separation in diameter and selection was caused by the different grades of SDS coverage on the nanotubes, in which the coverage scales the interaction strength or affinity of each species (van der Waals or hydrophobic) with gel. The coverage and morphology of SDS on the nanotubes are dependent on the diameter, chiral angle, and the smallest bond curvature radius.18,95,102,120 The nanotubes with the smallest bond curvature are less likely to be covered with SDS coating. They have the highest affinity or strong interaction with the gel matrix due to their low aggregation number, causing them to appear in the first column.Rc = dt/(2cos2)(30 − θ)where dt is the diameter, θ is the chiral angle, and Rc is the bond curvature radius.
Large-diameter sc-SWCNTs (dt > 1.0 nm) are preferred over smaller-diameter sc-SWCNTs in thin film transistors, solar cells, and infrared detectors due to their lower exciton binding energy and high carrier mobility.121–123 The enormous carrier mobility scales quadratically with the diameter of the nanotube, but the exciton binding energy scales inversely with the diameter of the nanotube.124,125 However, the large-diameter has decreased the difference in the nanotube properties species, as a large radius of curvature decreases the differentiation in the electronic structure and likely the difference in the surfactant shell. In comparison with smaller-diameter SWCNTs, the large-diameter SWCNTs have a greater number of species. There are roughly ∼150 species present within the 1–2 nm diameter range, whereas 32 species are found within the 0.6–1 nm diameter range.126–128 As the diameter increases, the difference in bandgap between the metallic and semiconducting subspecies decreases. The difference in bond strain and diameter among nearby species reduces the size of these subpopulations. The reduction in the chemical difference between species, in combination with the decreased mass of specific species, by mass minimizes the structural differences in the surfactant shell around each (n,m) species, which impedes separation based on SWCNTs wrapped with the surfactant.129–131 In 2013, Zhang et al. examined the transistor performance with various diameters of sc-SWCNTs. The thin film transistor has the highest mobility with the large-diameter SWCNTs.132,133
Moreover, large-diameter SWCNTs are covered with more surfactant or heavier surfactant shells due to the stronger polarization by smaller bandgaps. We may expect a strong screening effect from the heavy surfactant shell, which leads to weak retention forces in the gel matrix, and inevitably complexing the separation. Thus far, the primary goal remains focused on the extraction of large-diameter SWCNTs by metallicity in high purity and large throughput, yet achievable with a simple protocol.
5 Washing techniques
The use of an amphiphilic surfactant allowed the usage of accessible SWCNTs to explore their significant physical and electrical properties for various potential applications. The SWCNTs’ poor water-solubility makes them challenging to work with. Therefore, a stable aqueous dispersion is required.134 SDS is the most frequently utilized surfactant in manufacturing applications, such as transparent conducting films, batteries, chirality separation, organic photovoltaics, drug delivery, and healthcare. However, residual SDS acts as spacers that block the van der Waals interaction and π–π stacking, and can require additional post-processing purification for potential applications.
SDS, an anion surfactant that was utilized to disperse the nanotube and manage the interaction with gel beads throughout the sorting process, was employed to cover the sorted species. Therefore, the removal of SDS is critical toward the applications of SWCNTs.135 Several approaches have been considered for SDS removal for the reasons of simplicity, cost-effectiveness, and efficiency. There is dialysis, alcohol washing, chloroform/methanol/water (C/M/W) extraction, acetone extraction, H2SO4-control method, and HCl-control method.
5.1 Dialysis
This method is a very simple technique to separate unwanted molecules in a solution. This common laboratory technique operates on the same basic principle as medical dialysis. By this method, unwanted molecules such as salts and reducing agents were removed. This technique also helps to understand buffer exchange and drug binding.136 However, dialysis is incapable of removing the SDS surfactant effectively or thoroughly. Thus, researchers got curious and interested in searching for an alternative washing approaches.
5.2 Chloroform/methanol/water (C/M/W)
This washing methodology was reported by Wessel and Flugge.134,137 First, 2 ml of solvent containing sorted SWCNTs were mixed into 8 ml of methanol. Next, 2 ml of chloroform and 6 ml of water were added for phase separation. Then, the solution was vortexed until homogenous and centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 rpm. The sorted SWCNTs were localized at the interphase. The upper supernatant was removed carefully. Then, 6 ml of methanol was added to the lower chloroform phase. Again, the mixture was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 10000 rpm. The upper supernatant was carefully removed. The C/M/W ratio is 1:4:3 (v/v).138 After applying the C/M/W method to the sorted species, the surfactant is removed efficiently, as shown in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  FTIR spectra of the surfactant (SDS) removal.61 Copyright ACS, 2020. 
5.3 HCl extraction
Firstly, the SWCNTs were dissolved into a 6 M HCl solution in the ultrasound bath to convert sodium salt into deoxycholic acid. This treatment caused precipitation of the material. Then, the obtained mixture was filtered through a vacuum filter, and flushed with water and acetone. In the next step, the filtrated nanotubes were redispersed in ethanol and heated at 80 °C to dissolve the deoxycholic acid covering the nanotube surface. After cooling down to room temperature, the nanotubes were filtered again and washed with additional ethanol. Then, it was placed in a vacuum oven at 100 °C until it became fully dry.139
6 Formation of SWCNTs for various structural shapes
This section discusses the string shapes of the SWCNT constraints and their immediate application to molecular wires, fibrous composites, and field emission sources. However, the shape of the SWCNTs that are consistently grown in a controlled manner as long strings into various geometry topologies, particularly the tori shape, could open new possibilities. It is interesting that their electronic behavior depends on geometric structures. Furthermore, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were deposited on SWCNT rings for theragnostic applications.
Since the discovery of CNTs, nanomaterials and nanotechnology have made significant progress. CNTs have a lot of exciting physical, optical, electronic, and electrical properties, as well as high tensile strength, flexural rigidity, and aspect ratio.140,141 CNTs have always had a geometry of straight cylinders since they were first reported by Iijima. Subsequently, a plethora of studies have reported on the various geometric shapes of SWCNTs.142,143 The geometric formation of nanomaterials can be formed by using a variety of procedures, including laser growth phase, organic method, and chemical deposition.52,144–147 Through theoretical studies, a number of geometric shapes (coil, branched, twisted, bent, kinked, coalescent, and toroidal) have been investigated.45 These geometric shapes are based on the insertion of non-hexagonal defects into seamless hexagonal grids. In particular, the regular TCNs are based on a unique arrangement of pentagons and heptagons in a complete hexagonal lattice. Notably, among these geometric shapes, the tori/coil geometric shapes are more stable and functional.148–151
The formation of SWCNTs, which have been regulated as long strings in a ring\tori topology, creates new opportunities for potential applications.58–60 Recently, a lot of research has focused on the significance of tori geometric structures and their electrical properties. The formation of a tori in a very controlled manner with good stability is impressive. It should be noted that their behavior in electronics is actively dependent on their geometric structures.62,64,65 The geometric shape of the tori started with the work of Liu et al., who introduced a low yield TCN synthesis (0.01–1%) and observed the tori at 300–500 nm in diameter and 5–15 nm in thickness.152 Subsequently, Avouris and co-workers fabricated SWCNT tori (TSN) through sidewall–sidewall van der Waals interactions. The arrangement of the coil/tori by the bubble–liquid interface was also investigated. Later, Sano et al. synthesized the rings by using end-functionalized tubes.146 Nagy and co-workers shaped a few MWCNT rings with a diameter of 500 nm. Colomer et al. observed rings by reducing the solution of Mg0.9Co0.1O in the H2–CH4 atmosphere.153 Martel et al. observed that straight CNTs under ultrasonic radiation induced tori/ring shapes. Most recently, Tsukruk et al. developed DWCNT rings, which were similar to TSNs, with a diameter of almost 500 nm. By using the CVD method, Xie's team made TSNs with the minimum possible diameter of 120 nm.64,153
Several approaches have been suggested to understand the formation of TSNs. In this review, simple and large-scale approaches are revealed for the formation of coil/tori shapes that can be used in a wide range of applications. Furthermore, the emulsion technique is a simple method for forming TSN. This emulsion method is rapid, straightforward, and cost/time effective.154 The hydrophobic (oil-in-water) and hydrophilic (water-in-oil) emulsion is employed for the formation of TSN, m-TSN, and sc-TSN, as shown in Fig. 13.61 First, the SWCNTs are dispersed in dimethylformamide (DMF), and then toluene is applied to the above suspension.155 After that, water is applied in a single shot, when DMF is diffused into water, and the tori shape is revealed. After being turned into TSN, the hydrophobic SWCNTs become hydrophilic.
 Fig. 13  SWCNTs coiling/tori schematic illustration with hydrophobic emulsion oil-in-water (upper) and hydrophilic emulsion water-in-oil emulsion.154 Copyright ACS, 2012. 
In an aqueous solution and even under strong sonication, the structure of TSN is very stable.156 Compared to straight SWCNTs, the TSN size is smaller. More interestingly, the size can be controlled by the DMF/toluene ratio (v/v). The small size of TSN is useful for the dispersion of aqueous solutions. Moreover, the structure of TSN is very stable in an aqueous solution and even under strong sonication.156 The small size of TSN also employs water-soluble molecules, including proteins, DNA, and polymers, for further surface functioning.157–159 Therefore, the nanomaterial diameter and size exhibit interesting physical properties and offer new possibilities for biomedical research and applications in various fields, including therapy, bioimaging, and medicine.72,160–162 Sc-SWCNTs with a small bandgap on the order of 1 eV exhibit PL in the NIR range.76,163 The emission range of SWCNTs is 800–2000 nm, which covers the transparency window of biological tissue and makes them suitable for medical imaging.164 Imaging and therapy can be performed with SWCNTs because of their intrinsic physical features.17,72 Furthermore, TSNs could be used to make new mechanical or electronic devices, as well as to study transport mechanisms and electrical properties that are not possible in straight or string nanotubes.62,165–167 Theoretical studies have also shown that the electronics characteristics of SWCNTs with a ring/tori geometry could be very useful due to their interesting physical phenomena, such as the Aharonov–Bohm effect and magnetotransport.59,60
Recently, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were deposited on CNTR for theranostic applications.165–167 The enhanced coupling between the CNTR and plasmon modes of the AuNPs led to more Raman scattering and photothermal conversion. In the cavity of the AuNP shell, there was also a strong electromagnetic field.62 Although the CNTR was dispersed in a solvent (water or DMF), they retained their shape (tori/ring) because of π–π stacking. Furthermore, many theoretical studies have been carried out on the persistent currents and magnetic responses due to the cyclic boundary condition of the electronics system of CNTR.168 The CNTR's tunable geometric shape with AuNP, tuned optical absorption, and a strong electromagnetic field effect. The conduction electrons of the AuNP nanoshell oscillated and arose when triggered by a NIR laser. The light was trapped at the AuNP surface due to its geometric shape and electron oscillations under NIR, which increased the overall absorption and the local electrical field.
The photothermal responses of CNTR, CNT, CNT@AuNP, and CNTR@AuNP were observed near the NIR. When compared to other samples in the same condition, the CNTR@AuNPs exhibited a significant temperature increase (∼45 °C) in the first few minutes under NIR irradiation (808 nm laser at 0.5 or 0.25 W cm−2), as shown in Fig. 14. Meanwhile, for the other samples, the PTT results showed significantly less increase in temperature. Hence, the combined effect of improved coupling between the ring and plasmon mode for the AuNPs and the strong electromagnetic field in the cavity of the AuNP shell led to significant improvements in the Raman scattering and photothermal conversion. Furthermore, CNTR@AuNPs were explored as PA contrast agents. The PA intensity of CNTR with an AuNP nanoshell was roughly two orders of magnitude higher than that of CNTR without a gold nanoshell. When measured at 808 nm, the CNTR@AuNP PA signal's optical density was linearly proportional to it. To ensure biosafety, the CNTR@AuNP was wrapped in PEG. The PA and the image diagnosis result of CNTR@AuNP offered highly observable and quantifiable indications in bioimaging. Thus, CNTR@AuNP injected mice had a substantially greater PA signal (high signal-to-noise ratio) in tumors than in other samples. Notably, the CNTR@AuNP was more stable in PBS, water, and other media, making it suitable for in vivo experiments. Even at low laser power (0.5 W cm−2), CNTR@AuNPs can effectively kill cancer cells, and the tumor growth in mice was completely stopped using CNTR@AuNP. Even after the treatment of ∼2 months, there was no scar and no evidence of tumor regrowth, whereas the other samples exhibited tumor growth. Furthermore, there was no considerable reduction in body weight and no visible inflammation or injury to major organs after photothermal treatment. Thus, the geometric shape of CNTR and the plasmonic coupling of AuNP are very functional and exhibit electronic properties.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of CNTR@AuNP. (b) Temperature variations of CNTR@AuNP with other samples at a laser irradiation of 808 with 0.5 W cm−2. (c) Ultrasound and PA images of CNTR@AuNP compared with other samples. (c and d) PA intensity of CNTR@AuNP with other samples at the same optical intensity (with 808 nm) and PA amplitude.62 Copyright ACS, 2016. 
7 Biosensors for COVID-19 detection
In this section, we cover the detection of COVID-19 using electrochemical, FET-based, and optical nano-biosensors. Biosensors provide continuous and real-time detection via nanomodification, making them a new diagnostic tool for COVID-19. This technology is rapid, cheap, accessible, and efficient. The properties and electron transfer ability of m-SWCNTs and sc-SWCNTs for detecting target analytes are further determined.
In the last few decades, human coronaviruses have emerged and grown into the most severe threat to worldwide social health.169–171 Three major viruses with high fatality rates have been identified to date: the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in 2002, the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in 2012, and the existing severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2).172–177 The World Health Organization (WHO) recognized the present coronavirus as COVID-19 in January 2020, and the International Committee on the Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) named COVID-19 as SARS-CoV-2 in February 2020.178 Thus, in March 2020, the WHO declared a global pandemic for COVID-19 due to the rapid increase in cases and released interim management guidelines.179 The coronavirus can infect both animals and humans, causing a wide range of respiratory illnesses, but ∼35% of COVID-19 instances are asymptomatic. Thus, it is critical to distinguish healthy people from those who are infected and asymptomatic.180 The most prevalent symptoms are cough, fever, breathing discomfort, and headache. Patients with weak immune systems suffer from severe respiratory pathologies.181 Therefore, the primary objective is to develop tools, methodologies, and strategies for combating this pandemic based on its infection rate and impact on human health.182–184 Many monitoring and screening procedures still need to be developed to detect COVID-19 and its modified variants for early detection.
Since 1965, viruses that can infect both people and animals have been extensively studied and usually spread from animal to human or human to animal.185,186 Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Ebola virus, and some coronaviruses are all examples of potentially deadly animal viruses.185,187,188 These viruses can be more fatal in the early stages of an epidemic because there is no treatment or vaccine available. Coronaviruses are single-stranded enclosed RNA viruses that are further classified into four groups: alpha (α), beta (β), gamma (γ), and delta (δ), as shown in Fig. 15.189,190 These four groups of viruses impact the upper and lower airways, nose, and lungs. 229E and NL63 coronaviruses belong to the alpha group. OC43 and HKU1 belong to the beta group (SARS and SARA-CoV-2), and are transmitted by mammals. Gamma coronaviruses are primarily associated with birds, and both mammals and birds could be infected by delta coronaviruses.191 Compared to MERS and SARS, COVID-19 is more harmful in terms of pathogenicity. Therefore, it is critical to distinguish between healthy and symptomatic individuals. Symptomatic patients are further classified as asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic. Patients who test positive for COVID-19 (but are pre-symptomatic) may not show symptoms for up to 14 days following their diagnosis.180,192 Thus, rapid and reliable testing is required for both COVID-19 positive and symptomatic patients for the safety of healthy people.193–195
 Fig. 15  Coronavirus based on RNA dependent sequences and classification of their phylogenetic subgroups. Further details are shown of the intermediate host of these coronaviruses with geometric representation. 
First, a computerized tomography (CT) scan was used to compare patients with healthy lungs (images) and determine whether they have COVID-19.196 Afterward, the body temperature and thermal scanner are used. Bhanushree et al. reviewed the diagnostic procedure, epidemiology, and pathophysiology of pandemic causing pathogens.197 Thus, the COVID-19 infection should be confirmed by screening for a specific RNA sequence, as suggested by WHO. In order to employ the RT-PCR approach for COVID detection, high-tech equipment and highly-trained personnel were required.182,196 Further detection for this more commercial assay includes enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA), a chemiluminescence immunoassay (CLIF), and a lateral flow immunoassay (LFIA).198,199 All of these techniques have limitations, including their time-consuming process and cost.196
The prerequisites for developing a sensing device are rapid detection, low cost, and ease of use. Biosensors are an excellent alternative for detecting and diagnosing these viruses since they can detect nanomodifications in real-time. To put it another way, a biosensor is an analytical device or a bioreceptor capable of detecting and transducing physical signals resulting from the biological change. Nano-biosensors are made of antibodies or DNA, and can transmit signals optically, electrochemically, or via FETs.200,201 Therefore, utilizing unique nanomaterials for nano-biosensors can overcome some obstacles and limitations. To detect viral contamination, researchers have focused their efforts on developing biosensors based on electrochemical, optical, FET-based, and microfluid-based technologies, among other approaches.202–204 The selection of nanomaterials is further influenced by parameters, such as the size, shape, and electrical properties (single-chirality). After selecting the material for biosensor, the biosensor is evaluated on the basis of sensitivity, the limit of detection, linear range, repeatability, selection, and other responses. Biosensors are essential for the rapid detection of body analytes because they allow for real-time analysis.205 In this section, we review the numerous potential biosensors for the early detection of viruses that are low cost, allow for rapid detection, and are simple.
Generally, biosensors comprise biological parts (organic), transducers (inorganic), and signal analysis components that are capable of detecting a target analyte and providing data. The bioreceptor of a biosensor interacts with the analyte, whereas electrochemical interference offers a surface for reaction and converts the biochemical signals into electrical signals for accurate and rapid detection. To increase the sensitivity and specificity, nanomaterial-based biosensors can be identified with antibodies or other particular molecules with high affinity for the targeted markers/components. Biosensors can be categorized into electrochemical, optical, mass-sensitive, and other types depending on their signal sensing methods and principles of transduction.
7.1 Electrochemical biosensor for COVID-19 based on sc-SWCNTs
Promising biosensor-based approaches for the early detection of COVID-19 in the existing pandemic crisis have been rushed by researchers all over the world. Thus, the use of nanomaterials in signal reinforcement of electrochemical sensors and biosensors can significantly boost sensitivity and selectivity, as shown in Fig. 16.206 Viral antigens and antibodies can be detected using electrochemical approaches owing to their high sensitivity and selectivity, low cost, and miniaturization for use at the point of care.207 An electrochemical sensor can measure changes in conductivity, current, and impedance because of the recognition process that occurs on the detecting surface, while the transducer is the electrode material.206 Electrochemical devices can be classified into amperometric (current), potentiometric (potential), and (EIS) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (resistance), and others based on the measurement method.208,209 For the detection of viruses and other pathogens, amperometric biosensors are routinely employed, which measure a change in the current at a fixed potential.210 Faraday's law is utilized to characterize a chemical process using electrical measurements in the EIS approach.211 In order to acquire data on diffusion and charge transfer, a low oscillating voltage is applied to an electrochemical cell, and electrical impedance signals are collected and analyzed.212
 Fig. 16  A schematic illustration of an electrochemical biosensor for COVID-19 virus detection.213 Copyright MDPI, 2021. 
Yakoh et al. recently developed a paper-based electrochemical sensor for COVID-19 diagnosis. Immunocomplexes were formed between captured immunoglobulins and the immobilized spike protein of COVID-19 to identify the COVID positive individuals.214 Mahari et al. developed two electrochemical biosensors to detect the COVID-19 spike protein antigen (COVID-19). They fabricated an electrochemical biosensor using fluorine-doped tin oxide, modified the surface with gold nanoparticles, and then immobilized it with monoclonal antibodies, while the second biosensor (eCovSens) utilized antibodies immobilized on a screen-printed electrode.215 Joshi et al. demonstrated that graphene oxide-based electrochemical biosensors could be used to detect the human influenza virus (H1N1).216 Tian et al. employed Au@Pt/MIL-53 as multifunctional catalysts to create electrochemical signals on the gold electrode surface to detect the SARS-CoV-2 N protein (aptamer-based).217 A conductivity glucose biosensor was developed by Besteman et al. using a SWCNT transistor.218 A connecting molecule controlled GOx adhesion to the SWCNT sidewall, as shown in Fig. 17. Such immobilization led to decreased conductivity. By putting a gate voltage between a conventional electrode and a semiconducting SWCNT, they created an enzyme-coated tube that could be used as both a pH sensor and a conductance sensor.
 Fig. 17  An illustration of two electrodes connected to a semiconducting SWCNT with GOx enzymes on its surface.218 Copyright ACS, 2003. 
Selecting the most appropriate electrode material for the electrochemical biosensor is critical to the development of the devices. Consequently, nanomaterials (SWCNT, graphene) have been the most appealing materials over the past few decades owing to their significant properties, ease of production, and low cost. Recently, SARS-CoV-2 (spike protein) was detected using a transistor-based biosensor that was built utilizing coated graphene sheets of FETs and a specific antibody. Thus, a single-chirality SWCNTs-based FET biosensor was developed for the rapid and accurate detection of COVID-19 in a short time. Recently, a single-chirality (6,5)-based electrochemical sensor was produced to measure the different magnitude peaks of current. Furthermore, the handedness of the single-chirality SWCNTs influenced the electrode interface's ability to identify the analyte enantiomers. Due to their inherent chirality, the chiral (6,5) SWCNTs were capable of distinguishing between the two enantiomers of the chiral compounds. Hence, the obtained IL/ID was more than 1.219 This work created a novel electrochemical sensing interface with an excellent chiral selection mechanism, but it also showed that the functionalized electrodes could be used as potential tools for exploring chiral compounds. The chirality-based SWCNT sensors have a well-defined appearance, are mechanically stable (with good resistance to mechanical abrasion), and exhibit higher electrochemical reactivity (compared to conventional carbon strips). Electrochemical detection technologies combined with nanomaterials provide a solution to this challenge and the ability to detect very susceptible proteins.
7.2 FET biosensor for COVID-19 based on sc-SWCNTs
In the past, FETs were built with semiconductors, such as doped silicon and indium gallium arsenide, as channel materials. The FETs are building blocks for electronic devices. Unfortunately, the present semiconductors are subject to scaling (shrinking in dimension), power consumption, and processing limitations. The extended π-band conjugation (from rigid sp2, C–C bonds) in SWCNT leads to excellent transport characteristics, such as high-effect mobility (79000 cm2 V−1 s−1), high carrier mobility (>100000 cm2 V−1 s−1) at room temperature, high hole mobility (20000 cm2 V−1 s−1), high thermal conductivity (>2000 W m−1 K−1), long free path (exceeding ∼0.7 μm) and high on/off ratios (107–8).220–223 These intrinsic properties make sc-SWCNTs favorable to replace the traditional semiconductor in high-performance electronics, biosensing, sensors, and low-cost FETs.13 Moreover, the flexible and transparent sc-SWCNTs will be likely incorporated into plastic electronics.224,225
SWCNTs are metallic or semiconducting, depending on their chirality. When biomolecules are attached to SWCNTs, the electrical properties of the SWCNT-based FET can be altered. An individual SWCNT-based biosensor was developed by Besteman et al. on a molecule-level basis.218 So et al. reported on SWCNTs that were grown on a Si substrate. Photolithography was used to define the source, drain, and electrodes, and lift-off techniques were used to define the SWCNT-based FET source, drain, and electrodes.226 Martnez et al. used a CNT transistor array to detect electronics DNA hybridization.227 It was designed by Oh et al. to detect amyloid b (Ab) in human serum using a SWCNTs film-based biosensor.228 Yanagi et al. and Topinka et al. showed that increasing the sc-SWCNT content resulted in the transition of the conduction mechanism from a weak to strong localization regime.229–231 The strong localization arose from the disordered nanotubes, which may occur due to Schottky barriers between the m-SWCNTs and bandgap differences between sc-SWCNTs. Notably, from the simulation, a high and uniform current was observed in pure m-SWCNTs or sc-SWCNTs, whereas the mixture or combination of metallic and semiconducting tubes blocked the current.229
Today, numerous sensing methods for biosensing and detection have been proposed and studied to alleviate environmental and public health concerns.232–235 Locating the source of viral-related illness can be difficult, but it is essential. Thus, the ability to rapidly and accurately identify viral infections and detect disease is necessary for medical diagnostics.205 To design the biosensor, two essential factors must be considered, the number of layers (self-assembled) and the device dimensions. The layered patterns imply that SWCNTs are mostly adsorbed parallel to the substrate. A significant role is played in biosensor design by the selection of materials and the single-chirality of the sensor. The conductance of a biosensor decreases as the length of the sensor increases, and electron transfer increases as the distance between the two electrodes are reduced. Due to their high surface-to-volume ratio, high electron mobility, and strong electrical conductivity, SWCNTs are commonly used in various applications. The SWCNTs’ large surface area increases the biomolecule loading capacity. At the same time, the nanotube's small bandgap and good conductivity allow them to transport electrons between the electrode surface and the biomolecules via adsorption and covalent crosslinking. Thus, the electrical resistance of the composite is determined by the single-chirality of the m- and sc-SWCNTs resistance, as well as the contact resistance of the nanotube.
Zhang et al. designed an immunosensor capable of rapid detection and capturing the COVID-19 protein (spike) with a detection limit of 0.2 pM in ∼2 minutes.236 Seo et al. developed a graphene-based FET biosensing device for the detection of the COVID virus.204 For viral disease detection (COVID-19), the graphene based-FET sensor showed significant potential as compared to other detection techniques (NAAT, RT-PCR) within a short period of time. Brohmann et al. stated that the junction only partially determined the overall charge carrier mobilities in pure and mixed SWCNT networks.237 Interestingly, another group recently examined the functionalized single-chirality sc-SWCNTs (high purity) with a specific antibody to detect COVID-19 proteins (S and N antigens) in terms of the time/cost reduction, as well as rapid detection and label-free FET-based biosensors.
The high purity of sc-SWCNTs (single-chirality) results in a higher on/off ratio for FET-based applications than other 1D nanomaterials (raw SWCNT), which leads to higher analytical sensitivity. The molecular biosensor based on sc-SWCNTs displayed high sensitivity at an order of magnitude lower than the other sensors, and were able to diagnose the sample (distinguish between positive and negative COVID-19 result) efficiently, as shown in Fig. 18.238 The antibody functionalization was revealed with sc-SWCNT by Raman spectroscopy, and two significant peaks were found in the RBM region. After functionalization, the peak between 125 and 225 cm−1 decreased in intensity, suggesting a preference of antibody functionalization on SWCNTs with larger diameters. The shift of the threshold voltage toward more negative gate voltages and the decrease in the device conductance in the p-type region demonstrated the successful antibody functionalization on the sc-SWCNTs, as shown in Fig. 18. With their large surface area, semiconducting behavior, band gap fluorescence, and high Raman spectral signal, the single-chirality SWCNTs (along with functionalized SWCNT sidewall) are suitable for sensing biomolecular interactions and detection.239,240 Single-chirality SWCNTs with enriched (10,5) were used to fabricate FETs, which had a higher on-state current than the small-diameter ones by Zhang and colleagues.43 This was because the large-diameter SWCNTs were capable of delivering a high current, and it was also relatively simple to construct low-resistance connections for them. Additionally, the sc-SWCNT FET detection technique enabled the multiplex detection of not only viral antigens, but also antibodies specific to these antigens. Thus, the single-chirality, selective-diameter, and purity of the SWCNTs play an important role in the current detection biosensing for COVID-19 and other potential applications. Table 2 shows the implications of sc-SWCNTs-based FETs.
 Fig. 18  Detection of COVID-19 using a SWCNT (single-chirality) based FET biosensor. (a and b) Schematic illustration of COVID-19 with proteins and the FET biosensor; antibody functionalized SWCNT is applied for detection, which is signalling a rapid detection of the COVID-19 antigen diagnostic tool with low cost. (c and d) show the high-resolution XPS spectra of N 1s of bare and antibody-functionalized SWCNT, respectively, with deconvolutions of the overall signal. (e and f) In the RBM area, the SWCNT's Raman spectra show the D and G peak regions, respectively. Excitation laser at 785 nm captured the RBM area normalized to the Si peak at 507 cm−1. We measured the D and G peak areas at 638 nm. All spectra were adjusted to the 1587 cm−1 G peak. (g) SWCNT FET transfer characteristics during SAb functionalization.238 Copyright ACS interfaces, 2021. 
Table 2 Advantages of sc-SWCNTs in FET-based application




Parameter
Advantages




High mobilities
Field-effect mobility (79000 cm2 V−1 s−1), carrier mobility (>100000 cm2 V−1 s−1), and hole mobility (20000 cm2 V−1 s−1).241


High cut-off frequencies
Power gain cut-off frequencies (30 GHz) and current gain cut-off frequencies (153 GHz)


Easy processability
SWCNTs are dispersed easily in several organic and inorganic solvents. These nanotubes dispersions can be readily printed via ink-jet or roll-to-roll process onto substrates (e.g., plastic and glass).242,243


Low Schottky barriers
Formation of small Schottky barriers between large-diameter sc-SWCNTs and standard source/drain electrode materials (e.g., aluminum, titanium, and platinum).




7.3 Optical biosensor for COVID-19 based on sc-SWCNTs
It is feasible to use optical biosensors to detect and analyze respiratory viral infections in a wide range of other disciplines, such as biomedicine and the health sector. High sensitivity, label-free operation, electromagnetic interference immunity, optical output and detection for a wide range of targets, and point-of-care applications make optical biosensors an ideal candidate.244,245 Optical biosensors are categorized according to the wavelength of the light employed and the absorbent used. Optical sensors commonly include UV-visible sensors, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) sensors, fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) sensors, and many others, as shown in Fig. 19.246,247 Several studies have shown efficient optical biosensor-based detection for different viruses (like coronavirus) based on surface plasmon resonance and fluorescence.248 In fluorescence-based detection: the target molecule and the biomarker are first tagged with fluorescent dyes, while the fluorescence intensity indicates the existence of target molecules and a strong contact with the biosensor.249 Furthermore, changes in the refractive index generated by biomolecule binding in the presence of metal nanostructures, such as the interaction between antigen and antibody, are detected using localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). The enhanced plasmonic field in the region of a nanostructure makes LSPR sensing systems more sensitive to local fluctuations.250–252
 Fig. 19  COVID-19 can be diagnosed via localized surface plasmon resonance as an optical biosensor.253 Copyright IEEE, 2021. 
CNTs exhibit fluorescence properties that rely highly on their physical structure. Hence, they have been broadly applied in fluorescent sensors and biosensors.254 A wide range of biomolecules can be employed to leverage the CNTs' fluorescence properties for biosensing. Utilizing CNTs immobilized with carboxylated polyphospholipids, Strano et al. immobilized the enzyme luciferase on the surface of the CNT (ethylene glycol).255 In the presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the enzyme catalyzed the conversion of D-luciferin to oxyluciferin, which resulted in the quenching of the fluorescence of the CNTs, leading to a measurable change in the fluorescence intensity. Yang et al. presented a self-assembled, quenched complex of fluorescent ssDNA and SWCNTs as an effective molecular beacon (MB) for detecting single nucleotide changes in DNA using fluorescence.256 According to Moitra et al. a colorimetric assay using gold nanoparticles encapsulated with SARS-CoV-2 N-gene specific antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) could detect positive COVID-19 cases in isolated RNA samples within 10 minutes.257
Notably, single-chirality-based sc-SWCNTs can operate as fluorophore quenchers and exhibit near-infrared PL due to bandgap fluorescence. Due to the narrow bandgaps, sc-SWCNTs exhibit photoluminescence in the NIR. Sc-SWCNTs can be employed as NIR fluorophores to build nanoscale biosensors that can detect and image sensitive molecules inside cells. Nandeshwar et al. used the decomposition of SWCNTs to establish a new colorimetric approach. Because of the enzyme, SWCNTs oxidatively degrade when exposed to hydrogen peroxide and chloride ions. Using near infrared wavelengths, the researchers were able to detect myeloperoxidase with a 327 ng ml−1 detection limit. The SWCNTs' luminous characteristics had also been used to detect COVID-19. Pinals et al. developed a simple and quick fluorescence sensor for the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein by non-covalently binding the protein ACE2. The binding of this protein to ACE2 results in a 2-fold increase in the near-infrared fluorescence. In order to detect the COVID-19 protein, anti-COVID-19 antibodies were bound on a modified electrode and utilized as a probe.258 Thus, an optical sensor is an attractive candidate for label-free and real-time analytes.
Virus detection techniques like ELISA, LFIA, and PCR have certain flaws that require modifications in their applications. As with immunodiagnostic assays, RT-PCR has trouble in identifying real positive and negative COVID-19 infections. Furthermore, it required different lab tools.259 Biosensors in terms of point-of-care methods have the potential to be utilized in hospitals and public places, but can also be utilized as diagnostic tools at home. Nanomaterials have significantly facilitated medical diagnostics in the health sector, which has improved the early detection and management of diseases and pandemics effectively. Therefore, biosensors based on SWCNTs and graphene have the potential to be created as tools that are dependable, quick, and highly sensitive. Optical sensors provide an immediate qualitative assessment of an analyte, while electrochemical biosensors deliver more precise quantitative data. At 10 fM concentrations of positive target sequences, CNT-FET sensors exhibited a promising sensing signal to diagnose COVID-19. High-purity sc-SWCNTs (single-chiality) give high on-state conductance and a high on/off ratio for FETs, enabling higher analytical sensitivity than unsorted SWCNTs and graphene. Recently, the Shao group used sc-SWCNTs-FET to detect COVID-19 in less than 5 minutes (rapid, sensitive) with a detection limit of between 0.55 and 0.016 fg ml−1. Sc-SWCNT FETs have been found to be effective in a wide range of ultrasensitive biosensor applications, including aptasensors and label-free protein sensors. SWCNT is less expensive and more commonly available than CVD graphene films, which reduces the cost of SWCNT FET (single-chirality) sensors and enables novel multiplex detection applications.238,239,260,261
8 Chirality based SWCNTs for phototherapy and NIR imaging
This section discusses how CNTs are good heat delivery vehicles for the laser treatment of tumors (PTT) due to their high optical absorption in the NIR region and effective heat generation. The well-functionalized SWCNTs can evade the endosomal compartment and translocate directly into the cytoplasm of different types of cells. At the same time, the associated enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect affords a high tumor uptake even without the targeting agent. Furthermore, without the off-resonance nanotube (non-contributing to heat generation), the sc-SWCNTs (single-chirality) have the highest light-to-heat conversion efficiency under laser irradiation with a low dose and low toxicity.
There has been a tremendous increase in the use of nanomaterials for biological applications in recent years. A wide range of nanomaterials, such as liposomes, polymeric, magnetic nanoparticles, quantum dots, carbon-based nanomaterials, gold nanoparticles, as well as cyclodextrins, have been created with promising results in vitro and in vivo for drug delivery, imaging, and therapy.262 One-dimensional nanomaterials like CNTs play a significant role in efficient biological research and development.263 They exhibit strong optical absorption in the infrared range (NIR I & II), PL, Raman scattering, and photoacoustic properties, which make them ideal candidates for monitoring in biological environments. Covalent or non-covalent functionalization of SWCNTs with drugs and targeting agents through π–π stacking allows for controlled drug release, enhanced bioactivity, and reduced toxicity.264
The inability of nanoparticles to target drug resistance and other factors is a key limitation of their use in medicine.265 These challenges can be overcome by combining therapies that use numerous drugs to overcome drug resistance, reduce drug doses, and affect various therapeutic targets.266 On the other hand, the insoluble nature of CNTs in an aqueous solution is a significant impediment to their employment as drug carriers, due to the more hydrophobic nature of the graphene side wall and the strong π–π affinity between individual tubes. Thus, Foldvari et al. recommended four fundamental approaches for the desirable dispersion of nanomaterials in a solvent: (1) side wall functionalization, (2) biomolecular dispersion, (3) solvent-dispersion, and (4) surfactant-assisted dispersion.267,268 Additionally, toxicity is influenced by numerous parameters in the biological environment, including purity, functionalization, size, and length.269 For reliable results, the uniformity and stability of the CNT dispersion in an aqueous solution are critical because they are essential for gastrointestinal absorption, blood transit, and biocompatibility.108,270–272
Functionalization has proven to be the most effective approach among those. In addition, length, purity (single-chirality), and size (diameter) are the key factors.273 This approach can reduce cytotoxicity, improve biocompatibility, and allow for drug, protein, or gene appendage molecules to be used as delivery systems.274
SWCNTs have been extensively explored in recent years for their potential use in the detection/diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment of cancer cells.275–278 The great optical absorption in the NIR region and the effective heat generation of SWCNTs make them ideal heat delivery vehicles for laser treatment of malignancies (PTT).277,279,280 Simultaneously, the increased EPR effects confer significant tumor uptake even in the absence of a targeting agent.278
SWCNT-based PTT has been considered safe, non-invasive, and effective since 2005, when NIR laser irradiation was introduced. Dai and co-workers synthesized DNA-coated SWCNTs for cancer cells (in vitro) through PTT.160 Significant cell death was seen when HeLa cells were subjected to a laser power density of 1.4 W cm−2 for two minutes in the presence of DNA-wrapped SWCNTs. Moon et al. showed that PEGylated SWCNTs injected into a tumor can exhibit a robust photothermal response when irradiated with an 808 nm laser.277 Welsher et al. investigated the biodistribution of SWCNTs (optical properties) in vivo for deep tissue and arterial imaging.67 A cisplatin was loaded into SWCNTs for efficient drug delivery, as shown by Borowiak-Palen et al.281 Zhang et al. conducted an in vivo cancer therapy using positively charged SWCNTs to transfer therapeutic siRNA into cancer cells.282 In addition, a SWCNTs-siRNA complex was directly injected into the tumor, rather than systemic injection of the siRNA. In another study, Liu et al. employed polyethyleneimine (PEI)-grafted MWCNTs for DNA binding and delivery approaches with less cytotoxicity.283 It is also necessary to investigate the ability of single-chirality SWCNTs to be used in multidrug treatments that target the intended area of interest. Thus, Cherukuri et al. studied NIR PL by using sc-SWCNTs in rabbits to track the nanotubes.284 Apart from the photothermal impact, the bandgap structure of sc-SWCNTs confer the ability to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) and PL, which are essential for photodynamic therapy (PDT) and bioimaging, respectively. Furthermore, the emission (S11) and excitation (S22) of SWCNTs inside the biological transparency window (700–1400 nm) have drawn interest in biological imaging methods using NIR fluorescence. So, the use of single-chirality is desired in order to enhance the efficiency of potential applications.97 A study was conducted to determine the significance of single-chirality and metallicity of the SWCNTs. For this, single-chirality (9,4), semiconducting, and ordinary SWCNTs were prepared under the same conditions (environment) and in the same manner (mass per unit area). Concerning biocompatibility, PEG was wrapped around the sample surface through functionalization. When all samples were placed under a light-emitting diode (LED) at a wavelength of 735 nm, single chiral (9,4) SWCNT exhibited 4-fold high excitation and a ∼15-fold higher absorption and PL intensity. It is also worth noting that the dose concentration of single-chiral (9,4)-based SWCNT is ∼4 times lower (in terms of toxicity). In addition, (9,4) and other SWCNTs were examined in mice to further explore the bioimaging of the whole body (including the inner organs, tissues, and vessels). The (9,4) gave clear vascular and deep-organ (heart, lung, and liver) imaging with a high signal-to-noise ratio and high temporal resolution with a lower dose, as shown in Fig. 20.97,285 Antaris et al. demonstrated that (6,5) SWCNTs that were resonantly photothermally heated at 980 nm had reached the requisite photothermal tumor ablation temperatures with a ∼10 fold lower injected dose than the as-synthesized SWCNT mixtures, as shown in Fig. 21.112 They claimed that on a per mass basis, single-chirality SWCNTs absorbed 10–20× more light than the optimized gold nanorods or nanoparticles when under strong resonance with a laser. They achieved the lowest dose of 0.254 mg kg−1 for intravenously injected in vivo photothermal therapy. The separated sc-SWCNTs with subpopulations that resonate with the excitation NIR had superior NIR adsorption owing to VHs.
 Fig. 20  The imaging of chirality-based SWCNTs. (a) The setup for the imaging of SWCNTs in a mouse. (b) Video-rate imaging in a mouse.285 Copyright APS, 2011. 
 Fig. 21  Chirality-based SWCNTs for low dose photothermal treatment. (a) PL spectra ensure the sorted species (chirality based). (b) UV-vis-NIR spectra of SWCNTs before and after the sorting, the sorted chirality (6,5) had ∼10-fold greater absorbance at 980 nm than the other samples. (c) NIR-II fluorescent resolution of mice (with tumor) with injected chirality-based SWCNT. (d) NIR-II thermal pictures of mice (with tumor) injection with chirality-based SWCNTs (after 48 h). (e) After irradiation for 5 min with ∼0.5 W cm−2 at 980 laser (at low dose). (f) After receiving 980 nm laser irradiation, the tumor temperature varies between different groups of mice.112,286 Copyright ACS, 2013. 
Achieving a low dose of SWCNTs in biological systems would be possible with selective-diameter and single-chirality. When excited with 808 nm light, the chirality sorted (12,1) and (11,3) SWCNTs emit NIR-II emission at about 1200 nm, and interacted as a single fluorophore in the NIR-II region. A pioneering work based on sonicating SWCNTs (12,1) and (11,3) with sodium cholate followed by surfactant exchanges to form biocompatible phospholipid–polyethylene glycol SWCNTs was shown to improve the PL quantum yield due to possible chiral extraction by sodium cholate and phospholipid. As a result, the SWCNTs were demonstrated to achieve high image contrast at a relatively low dose for whole-mouse imaging (200 μl, 17 mg L−1) and high-resolution intravital imaging (300 μl, 170 mg L−1) in the NIR-II window.287 Hence, it is clear that the improvement over the SWCNTs quantum yield is the most likely critical factor to achieving NIR imaging with high-resolution, deep penetration depth, low dose, and safe excitation/exposure power.288
It is now possible to isolate chirality-specific SWCNTs that resonate inside the biological window by using a single excitation wavelength due to the recent development in SWCNTs separation, such as (6,5), (9,4), (12,1), and (11,3).112 Separated SWCNTs without the off-resonance nanotubes would not contribute to heat generation (thermal treatment) or photoluminescence (imaging), and would significantly reduce the therapeutic doses, alleviating toxicity concerns.112 Separated SWCNTs can penetrate deeper within tissue because the excitation wavelength falls within the biological window (700–1100 nm), avoiding the absorption of biological tissue and water. For instance, the Dai group had shown that chirality-sorted SWCNTs, (12,1), and (11,3)-enriched sc-SWCNTs had ∼5 folds higher PL intensity under resonant excitation than unsorted SWNTs on the per-mass basis.289 Usually, only a small fraction of nanotubes (<9%) can be resonantly excited under a single excitation wavelength, which limits the use of nanotubes in biological systems. The chirality enrichment allows the strong emission from resonance excitation, which results in much more effective NIR-II fluorophores and in vivo NIR-II imaging. It is foreseen that by removing off-resonance nanotubes, the separated SWCNTs would have enhanced heat generation and PL. Separated SWCNTs (single-chirality) without the off-resonance nanotubes that do not contribute to heat generation or PL would significantly alleviate toxicity concerns. Table 3 summarizes the recent progress of SWCNT and sorted SWCNTs in PTT, PDT, and bioimaging.
Table 3 Table 3 Progress of CNT(1D) in PTT, PDT and bioimaging




Agents
Model
Power density (W cm−2)
Excitation wavelength (nm)
Imaging wavelength
Dose






sc-SWCNTs (6,5)-porphyrin


4–9 mili
570, 630, 760 and 940
NA
NA
PDT290


sc-SWCNTs (9,4)
Mouse vasculatures
40 mili
735@100 ms
1100–1150 nm
100–200 μl@0.17 mg ml−1 (34 μg per mouse)
Imaging97


sc-SWCNTs (6,4)
MDA-MB-468 cells
1
785@1 s
≈900 nm
NA
Imaging291


U87MG cells


sc-SWCNTs
(Cerebrovascular imaging)
160 mili
808@100 ms
1.3–14 μm
200 μl@0.22 ml−1
Imaging292


sc-SWCNTs (6,5)
4T1 murine breast cancer
0.6
980@3 min
900–1400 nm
50 μl@3.2 μg ml−1 (0.254 mg kg−1)
PTT, imaging293


0.14


sc-SWCNTs (12,1), (11,3)
4T1 murine breast cancer cells
0.14
808
1200 nm
200 μl@16 mg L−1 (0.16 mg kg−1)
Imaging20


sc-SWCNTs
Human lung cancer NCI-H460
0.8
808@10 min
NA
NA
PDT, PTT294


SWCNTs
4T1 murine breast cancer cells
0.2
808@100 ms
1.1–1.4 μm
200 μl@0.35 mg l−1
Imaging295


SWCNTs
Anatomical imaging
140 mili
808@30–78 s
NIR-II
200 μl@500 nM
Imaging296


SWCNTs
4T1 murine breast cancer cells
1.0
808@5 min
NA
200 μl@0.5 mg ml−1
PTT297


SWCNTs
4T1 murine breast cancer cells
0.6
808@5 min
1.0–1.4 μm
200 μl@0.35 mg ml−1 (3.6 mg kg−1)
PTT, Imaging298


Nano-graphene
4T1 murine breast cancer
2.0
808@5 min
NA
200 μl@2.0 mg ml−1 (20 mg kg−1)
PTT151


MWCNTs
Malignant tissue
2.0–4.0
1064@30 s–70 s
NA
1–100 μg ml−1
PTT299


2.5
1064@70 s
NA
10 μl@500 μg ml−1


SWCNTs
Human epidermoid mouth carcinoma
3.8
808@180 s
NA
100 μl@ 120 mg L−1
PTT277


SWCNTs
Mouse vasculatures
0.13
808@10 ms–1 s
1.1–1.7 μm
200 μl@17 mg L−1
Imaging287


NIR-II


LS174T (intravital imaging)
100 mW/100 μm
685@1–3 s
NA
300 μl@170 mg L−1




The post-synthesis method makes it possible to achieve high yield single-chirality SWCNTs. Chirality-selective dispersion, gel chromatography, and ATPE using DNA-dispersed SWCNTs are employed for bioimaging, therapy, and biosensing.300 In ATPE, SWCNTs are modified with biopolymers like ssDNA or PEGylated phospholipids by tip-sonification, resulting in colloidally stable and biocompatible probes.106 In gel chromatography, SDS-wrapped SWCNTs interact with gel beads. Gel chromatography enables the large-scale separation of m-/sc-SWCNTs with particular bandgaps. Both APTE and gel column methods are rapid, straight, and simple.39,301 DNA adsorbs on the exposed SWCNT surface and promises excellent exchange/recover yields, making ATPE a promising technique for biosensing, cellular structures, and chemotherapies. However, the APTE approach generates fractions with fixed (DNA) surface modifications, making interchange challenging and time-consuming. ATPE biomolecule partitioning is notoriously difficult to predict, especially for larger compounds.272,302,303 Single-chirality, selective-diameter, and particular bandgaps play a vital role in biomedical and electronics applications. Compared to other materials, SWCNTs are intriguing for possible biomedical applications due to their optical, electrical, and single-chirality (specific bandgap). SWCNTs interact with many biomolecules due to their high biological activity, solubility, and fast electron transfer to electroactive species. SWCNTs with a single-chirality can be utilized as biosensors for the detection of viruses, cancer, drug delivery, and therapy.304 Significant properties make SWCNT a promising choice. However, solubility and toxicity are still hurdles.305 Single-chirality (with a specific bandgap) and selected diameters are preferred for safe biomedical applications. Numerous studies have demonstrated that sc-SWCNTs encased in biopolymers are non-toxic and low in dose, which makes them suitable for drug delivery, imaging, and sensing.262,306,307
9 Toxicity effects of SWCNTs
Safety (low toxicity) is the most fundamental requirement in the biological environment. Numerous studies have been conducted in recent years to determine whether or not nanomaterials are harmful. The solubility and biocompatibility of nanomaterials (SWCNTs) depend on various factors, such as material selection, surface chemistry, functionalization, length, and electronic structure. SWCNTs have the potential to cause asbestos-like pathologies, such as pulmonary and inflammatory responses, due to their string-like structure.308,309 So, the toxicity of nanomaterials (SWCNTs) on cells and tissues has been observed in both in vivo and in vitro studies. Cytotoxicity, genotoxicity, epigenetic effects, splenic toxicity, immunotoxicity, eye irritation, and skin hypersensitivity are all possible impacts of nanomaterials.310–313 Among these types of toxicity, genotoxicity is the most significant risk factor for cancer caused by SWCNTs (unmodified and functionalized).314 SWCNT toxicity is determined by those factors, such as the selection of the nanomaterial, the electrical structure, and the degree of functionalization. On the other hand, untreated nanomaterials (SWCNTs) are more harmful in a biological environment. ROS can be linked to SWCNTs in several ways, such as direct contact with biological components or indirect damage that leads to ROS. That is why it is so well-known that ROS has both positive and negative impacts on the biological environment.
Cui et al. and Ding et al. reported that CNTs induced cell cycle arrest and enhanced apoptosis/necrosis in human skin fibroblasts.315,316 According to Sayes et al., the toxicity of SWCNTs was also affected by the density of functionalization.317 Jin et al. observed that SWCNTs taken up by cells through endocytosis exited cells through exocytosis without affecting cell viability.318 Shvedova et al. demonstrated that SWCNTs were potent inducers of TGF-β, which draws macrophages to the lungs and induces inflammation.319 However, morphological alterations of SWCNTs and flow cytometry exhibited aspects of cytotoxicity, which was reported by Mittal et al.314 Thus, the toxicity impacts of SWCNTs (1D) were studied based on their size, functionalization, electronics structure, dose, administration routes, and morphologies, as shown in Fig. 22.
 Fig. 22  Impurities, functionalization, shape and size are some of the key factors that have been demonstrated to play a role in SWCNT toxicity. 
One of the most essential physiochemical features of nanomaterials is their particle size. Numerous studies have been conducted on various nanomaterials to determine their size-dependent biological effects and biodistribution. Brown and their colleagues found that the cytotoxicity of SWCNT was proportional to the length of the nanotubes.320 Particles with a diameter of less than 1 μm can easily penetrate cells, whereas particles with a diameter of more than 1 μm cannot cross the outermost layer of skin in most cases.321 The study further revealed that small nanoparticles were harmful and generated ROS, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and apoptosis due to their high surface-to-volume ratio, which decreases with increasing nanoparticle size.322 According to a study by Rotoli et al., only shorter SWCNTs substantially impacted the survival of human lung cancer cells.323 The shorter length SWCNTs exhibited higher toxicity, which might be due to the shorter tubes being more mobile and less likely to aggregate, making penetration easier compared to the longer tubes. Thus, nanoparticles with different sizes are used for various applications. Nanoparticles (Au) with a size of 2–15 nm have been used in tissue engineering, while 20–60 nm particles are used for drug delivery and DNA testing, and 80–250 nm particles are used for medical electrics and X-ray optics.324,325
The electronic structures (metallic and semiconducting) significantly impact the toxicity and stress response of SWCNTs. The toxicity of m-SWCNTs is much higher than that of sc-SWCNTs.326–331 Numerous studies revealed that sc-SWCNTs with comparable diameters were significantly less reactive than m-SWCNTs. The enhanced electron density and conductivity around the Fermi level of SWCNTs could be attributed to the high response of m-SWCNTs. The micrometer length and conductive properties of m-SWCNTs allow them to operate as conductive bridges over lipid bilayers, allowing cells to potentially short-circuit and release energy into the external environment. Vecitis et al. suggested that m-SWCNTs increased cellular oxidation by forming a conductive bridge over the lipid bilayer, and then helping the oxidation of specific polypeptides, like glutathione, which was important for keeping the cell's redox environment stable and leading to cell death.332,333 Furthermore, the shape of nanoparticles had an impact on the catalytic characteristics of the particles, which in turn impacted the bio-interface interaction and facilitated cellular uptake. The surface area of materials varied based on their shape, which was another consideration. A study revealed that spherical nanoparticles had a better uptake than nanorods, which had a lower resistance.334,335
The Gambhir group conducted the first in vivo toxicity research of functionalized SWCNTs.336 However, DNA damage and genotoxicity were the most common toxicity categories for both carboxylated and hydroxylated SWCNTs (functionalized), regardless of whether an excess surfactant was present or not. Prato et al. revealed that SWCNTs covalently functionalized by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition, including primary immune cells, were safe for testing cell lines.337,338 In addition, Bertozzi et al. created CNTs that were coated with a biocompatible coating (PEG), which was determined to be safer for cell growth than other CNT coatings.339,340 It was found that carboxylated SWCNTs caused more genotoxicity, chemical stress, protein damage, and overall toxic effects than hydroxylated SWCNTs. However, the oxidative stress level was the same in both functionalized SWCNTs. Yang and their colleagues also demonstrated that SWCNTs dispersed in Tween-80, a coating that was probably not appropriate, had a low toxicity test in a biological environment (in vivo) at a high dose, and they also followed this toxicity study for three months.341 The oxidative stress induced by accumulated SWCNTs in a biological system may also contribute to toxicity. The carboxylated SWCNTs had a high permanently negative charge, and were substantially more stable in water than the uncarboxylated SWCNTs. Due to their greater water solubility and dispersion, functionalized SWCNTs had a higher chance of binding to the protein, peptide, or oligonucleotide by Yang and coworkers.342 Another group demonstrated that COOH modified short SWCNTs (1–2 μm) had higher genotoxicity than unmodified SWCNTs. Poland and colleagues observed that intraperitoneal injections of long and non-coated MWCNTs (10–50 μm) into the abdominal cavity of mice caused inflammation and lesions known as granulomas.343 Thus, the toxicity of SWCNTs would be determined by the nanotubes surface, chemical composition, and size.
10 Conclusions
This review highlighted how nanomaterials (SWCNTs) with intrinsic properties are widely used in various potential applications, including diagnostics, drug delivery, and bioimaging. Several covalent and non-covalent functionalization techniques for SWCNTs have been devised to enable the use of nanomaterials for this purpose. Functionalized SWCNTs have been used for the ultra-sensitive detection of biological species because of their electrical, optical, and electronic properties. They are also being studied for various applications, such as PTT, PDT, biosensors, and early detection of viruses. Functionalized nanomaterials can selectively aggregate and effectively ablate cancer cells by utilizing NIR light and the EPR effect in early detection. However, when nanomaterials cause hyperthermia in response to NIR irradiation, DNA damage and protein destabilization can occur, which leads to tumor death. Furthermore, by utilizing SWCNTs that have been irradiated with NIR light, oxygen in the surrounding environment can be transformed into ROS. Moreover, functionalized SWCNTs with biocompatible coatings (PEG) are durable in biological spots and exhibit nontoxic properties when exposed to NIR light or used for drug delivery. SWCNTs used for tumor targeting are capable of both passive targeting via the EPR effect and active targeting via designed ligands, which have the potential to assist in cancer treatment.
In this infectious and pathogenic environment, viral diagnostic tools are essential. Therefore, biosensor-based techniques have the potential to significantly reduce the spread of respiratory viral infections such as COVID-19 because of their high throughput, low cost, and rapid detection. Herein, we review the recent advancements in the fabrication/detection of electrochemical, optical, and FET biosensing for COVID-19 detection and how these sensors can meet the time requirement. Additionally, the multiplex detection of viral antigens and antibodies is possible with sc-SWCNT biosensor detection approaches.
Apart from their inherent properties, SWCNTs can be loaded with anticancer drugs such as DOX and metformin for tumor therapy. Surface functionalization chemistry is a significant and vital factor in binding proteins and drugs with nanomaterials. A coating such as long and branching PEG on SWCNTs provides inertness in the biological environment. Furthermore, it reduces toxicity and non-specific binding, thereby making them more biocompatible. Thus, the reduction of non-specific binding is significant in SWCNT-based biosensors and bioimaging because it increases the chance of detection sensitivity. Non-specific endocytosis of SWCNTs is reduced by the absence of non-specific binding, which favors the selective administration of drugs to specific cell types. Moreover, the SWCNTs are strongly influenced by their surface coating in the biological environment (in vivo). SWCNTs with a hydrophilic coating can extend blood circulation and lower the RES uptake. The use of single-chiralities and size of SWCNTs in biological sensing and imaging results in further improvement, which is attributed to better tumor targeting.
The intrinsic properties of the SWCNTs have been reviewed based on their specific subpopulations. Recently, how to sort the single-chirality, selective-diameter, and particular shapes of SWCNTs to use their unique electrical and electronic properties has been explored. Gel chromatography is among the most significant separation methods because of its simplicity and ease of repetition to achieve the specific subspecies (with distinct parameters). However, the separation mechanism remains a subject of debate, where the understanding of the self-assembly structure of the surfactant on SWCNT would improve the separation process. Surfactant adsorption on SWCNTs may alter the structure and morphology of the surfactant, as well as its structural composition. Inspired by the redox effect, the temperature effect could suppress the oxidation, hence overcome the deficiency of gel chromatography in separation of single-chirality and selective-diameter. To resolve and elute the separated fraction with a single co-surfactant system, researchers have found that the temperature governs the interaction between nanotubes and surfactants, which simplified the iterative separation largely. As a result, the high purity sc- and m- achieved.
Furthermore, the light penetration depth is a significant concern in phototherapy for cancer treatment. Due to lower light absorption and scattering in the NIR window, NIR absorbing photothermal agents are definitely favored over those with visible absorption. The NIR light penetrates tissues at a depth of less than 1 cm. The photothermal impact of SWCNTs can significantly reduce tumor growth in superficial tumors such as melanoma. Still, for deeper tumors (bone cancer), the efficacy of PTT is limited by the depth to which the laser penetrates. Thus, single-chiralities play a vital role due to their electronic structure and different wavelength absorption. By using single-chirality, the dose concentration will be reduced, absorbing more light energy at relevant frequencies and emitting more heat at the tumor site to kill cancer, as compared to other nanomaterials and mixed chiralities of SWCNTs. In bioimaging, the single-chiralities also help to see the inner organs of the body up to ∼10-fold higher than the others. In recent work, we observed that researchers preferred semiconducting single-chirality over semiconducting materials as a biosensor for COVID-19 detection, which gave better results due to its bandgap and subspecies. The size of the nanomaterials significantly affects their retention and penetration at the tumor site. A diameter range of 50–100 nm exhibits prolonged blood circulation and a high rate of tumor accumulation due to the EPR effects. The geometric formation also impacts the application's use due to its shape and length. Among them, the coiled geometric shape ensured stability under the strong sonication pressure and is further utilized in photothermal applications.
In addition, the functionalization alters the level of toxicity, whereas the carboxylated one causes more damage to DNA and proteins than the hydroxylated one. Carboxylated SWCNTs have a stronger permanent negative charge and significant water solubility. The m- and sc-SWCNTs were also found to have significantly different toxicity levels and stress responses, which were shown to have higher toxicity for m-SWCNTs than sc-SWCNTs. So, low dose (single-chirality) and biocompatible coatings are essential due to toxicity factors. Thus, the selective-diameter and single-chirality of nanotubes have the potential to revolutionize semiconductor and biological applications, which is one of the ultimate aims of nanotube research. The single-chirality of SWCNTs can be used as a distinct color in NIR PL-imaging and Raman scattering because all nanotubes can be in resonance with a single excitation wavelength. Based on these aspects (single-chirality, selective-diameter, and specific geometric shape), SWCNTs are useful and ideal candidates for healthcare, early detection, therapy, and other potential applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D program of China (Grant No. 2019YFA0706400, 2019YFA0706402), the Pre-research Funds for Equipment of China (No. 61409220115), the Natural Science Foundation of China (61275179, 60970815), the Natural Science Basic Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China (Program No. 2016JM8047), the Fundamental Funds for the Central Universities (No. xjj2015112), Shaanxi Province Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine (15-ZY036), and Xi’an Medical University State Fund Cultivation Project (2016GJF01). We also thank the Instrumental Analysis Center (IAC), Xi’an Jiaotong University, for support of the characterization.
References
N. J. Coville, S. D. Mhlanga, E. N. Nxumalo and A. Shaikjee, S. Afr. J. Sci., 2011, 107, 01–15 CrossRef .
A. Dupuis, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2005, 50, 929–961 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gupta, S. M. Gupta and S. K. Sharma, Carbon Lett., 2019, 29, 419–447 CrossRef .
H. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1035–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Mceuen and J. Y. Park, MRS Bull., 2004, 29, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Ajayan, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1787–1800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Song, C. Jeon, Y. S. Kim, Y. T. Kwon, D. S. Jung, S. W. Jang, W. C. Choi, J. S. Park, R. Saito and C.-Y. Park, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1012–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagen and T. Hertel, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 383–388 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shen, F. Li, C. Liu and L.-C. Yin, New Carbon Mater., 2016, 31, 525–531 CrossRef .
T. Dürkop, T. Brintlinger and M. S. Fuhrer, AIP Conf. Proc., 2002, 633, 242–246 CrossRef .
P. L. McEuen, M. S. Fuhrer and P. Hongkun, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2002, 1, 78–85 Search PubMed .
M. Engel, J. P. Small, M. Steiner, M. Freitag, A. A. Green, M. C. Hersam and P. Avouris, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2445–2452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qu, F. Du and L. Dai, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2682–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, S. Tabakman, K. Welsher and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 85–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, K. Chen, C. Davis, S. Sherlock, Q. Cao, X. Chen and H. Dai, Cancer Res., 2008, 68, 6652–6660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yum, T. P. McNicholas, B. Mu and M. S. Strano, J. Diabetes Sci. Technol., 2013, 7, 72–87 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, D. Nishide, T. Tanaka and H. Kataura, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 309 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Mowbray, A. P. Paz, G. Ruiz-Soria, M. Sauer, P. Lacovig, M. Dalmiglio, S. Lizzit, K. Yanagi, A. Goldoni, T. Pichler, P. Ayala and A. Rubio, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 18316–18322 CrossRef CAS .
S. Diao, G. Hong, J. T. Robinson, L. Jiao, A. L. Antaris, J. Z. Wu, C. L. Choi and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16971–16974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Hemasa, N. Naumovski, W. A. Maher and A. Ghanem, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 186 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Smalley, Y. Li, V. C. Moore, B. K. Price, R. Colorado, H. K. Schmidt, R. H. Hauge, A. R. Barron and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15824–15829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Bachilo, L. Balzano, J. E. Herrera, F. Pompeo, D. E. Resasco and R. B. Weisman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11186–11187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Collins, M. Hersam, M. Arnold, R. Martel and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 3128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Zhao, L. Tong and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27655–27663 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miao, C. Wu and L. Guan, Nanotechnology, 2018, 30, 06LT01 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zheng, A. Jagota, M. S. Strano, A. P. Santos, P. Barone, S. G. Chou, B. A. Diner, M. S. Dresselhaus, R. S. McLean, G. B. Onoa, G. G. Samsonidze, E. D. Semke, M. Usrey and D. J. Walls, Science, 2003, 302, 1545–1548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Arnold, A. A. Green, J. F. Hulvat, S. I. Stupp and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 60–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Arnold, S. I. Stupp and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 713–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nish, J.-Y. Hwang, J. Doig and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 640–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ao, J. K. Streit, J. A. Fagan and M. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16677–16685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Subbaiyan, S. Cambré, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, E. H. Hároz, S. K. Doorn and J. G. Duque, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1619–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Bachilo, L. Balzano, J. E. Herrera, F. Pompeo, D. E. Resasco and R. B. Weisman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11186–11187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanaka, H. Jin, Y. Miyata and H. Kataura, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 114001 CrossRef .
T. Tanaka, H. Jin, Y. Miyata, S. Fujii, D. Nishide and H. Kataura, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2009, 246, 2490–2493 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, H. Jin, Y. Miyata, S. Fujii, H. Suga, Y. Naitoh, T. Minari, T. Miyadera, K. Tsukagoshi and H. Kataura, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1497–1500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe, D. Nishide and H. Kataura, Appl. Phys. Express, 2009, 2, 125002 CrossRef .
K. Moshammer, F. Hennrich and M. M. Kappes, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 599–606 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, D. Yang, H. Liu, N. Zhou and H. Kataura, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1700727 CrossRef .
T. W. Odom, J.-L. Huang, P. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 1998, 391, 62–64 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, W. Wang, X. Zhi, X. Bai, E. Wang, Y. Yao, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 62–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Jiang, A. V. Krasheninnikov, A. G. Nasibulin, W. Ren, C. Liu, E. I. Kauppinen and H. M. Cheng, Small, 2013, 9, 1379–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, X. Tu, K. Welsher, X. Wang, Z. Ming and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2454–2455 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yoo, W. Yi, A. Khalid, J. Si and X. Hou, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2020, 257, 1900714 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang and J. Li, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 12–18 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ihara, S. Itoh and J. I. Kitakami, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 12908–12911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ihara, S. Itoh and J. I. Kitakami, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 5643–5647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fan, M. G. Chapline, N. R. Franklin, T. W. Tombler, A. M. Cassell and H. Dai, Science, 1999, 283, 512–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Shadmi, A. Kremen, Y. Frenkel, Z. J. Lapin, L. D. Machado, S. B. Legoas, O. Bitton, K. Rechav, R. Popovitz-Biro, D. S. Galvão, A. Jorio, L. Novotny, B. Kalisky and E. Joselevich, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2152–2158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, H. Wang, J. Xu, X. Shen, L. Yao, L. Zhu, Z. Zeng, H. Zhang and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9654–9657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Martel, H. R. Shea and P. Avouris, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7551–7556 CrossRef CAS .
R. Martel, H. R. Shea and P. Avouris, Nature, 1999, 398, 299 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23, 105302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Zhan, H. Fan and Y. Lu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. D. Alharbi, Y. Shingaya, K. Vimalanathan, T. Nakayama and C. L. Raston, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 5282–5289 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Kharissova, M. Garza Castañón and B. I. Kharisov, J. Mater. Res., 2019, 34, 3998–4010 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sarapat, J. M. Hill and D. Baowan, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 2301 CrossRef CAS .
R. Setton and N. Setton, Carbon, 1997, 35, 497–505 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Shea, R. Martel and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4441–4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Haddon, Nature, 1997, 388, 31–32 CrossRef CAS .
K. Asif, W. Yi, S. Yoo, W. Jin, J. Si, X. Hou and J. Hou, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 1394–1401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, F. Wang, X. Yang, B. Ning, M. G. Harp, S. H. Culp, S. Hu, P. Huang, L. Nie and J. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cuniberti, J. Yi and M. Porto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 850–852 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, L. J. Ci, C. H. Jin, P. H. Tan, L. F. Sun, W. J. Ma, L. F. Liu, D. F. Liu, Z. X. Zhang and Y. J. Xiang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. R. Semler, I. Ostanin, E. K. Hobbie and T. Dumitrica, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 8635–8640 RSC .
R. D. Mehlenbacher, T. J. McDonough, M. Grechko, M. Y. Wu, M. S. Arnold and M. T. Zanni, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Welsher, Z. Liu, S. P. Sherlock, J. T. Robinson, Z. Chen, D. Daranciang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 773–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Knupfer, T. Pichler, M. S. Golden and J. Fink, in The Physics of Fullerene-Based and Fullerene-Related Materials, ed. W. Andreoni, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  2000, pp. 135–173 DOI:10.1007/978-94-011-4038-6_4 .
C. H. Liu, Y. Y. Liu, Y. H. Zhang, R. R. Wei and H. L. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 7257–7267 RSC .
J. W. G. Wildoer, L. C. Venema, A. G. Rinzler and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1998, 391, 59 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, Z. Li, J. Lefebvre, F. Cheng, G. Dubey, S. Zou, P. Finnie, A. Hrdina, L. Scoles, G. P. Lopinski, C. T. Kingston, B. Simard and P. R. L. Malenfant, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2328–2339 RSC .
A. M. Rao, E. Richter, S. Bandow, B. Chase, P. C. Eklund, K. A. Williams, S. Fang, K. R. Subbaswamy, M. Menon, A. Thess, R. E. Smalley, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Science, 1997, 275, 187–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Araujo and A. Jorio, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 2201–2204 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Soares, L. G. Cançado, E. B. Barros and A. Jorio, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2010, 247, 2835–2837 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Collins, M. Hersam, M. Arnold, R. Martel and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 3128–3131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. O'Connell, S. M. Bachilo, C. B. Huffman, V. C. Moore, M. S. Strano, E. H. Haroz, K. L. Rialon, P. J. Boul, W. H. Noon, C. Kittrell, J. Ma, R. H. Hauge, R. B. Weisman and R. E. Smalley, Science, 2002, 297, 593–596 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 2361–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Strano, S. K. Doorn, E. H. Haroz, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge and R. E. Smalley, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1091–1096 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ming and B. Diner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15490–15494 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zheng and E. D. Semke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6084–6085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tu, S. Manohar, A. Jagota and M. Zheng, Nature, 2009, 460, 250–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanaka, H. Jin, Y. Miyata, S. Fujii, D. Nishide and H. Kataura, Phys. Status Solidi, 2010, 246, 2490–2493 CrossRef .
G. Hui, H. Li, F. Tan, H. Jin, J. Zhang and Q. Li, Carbon, 2012, 50, 332–335 CrossRef .
H. Liu, Y. Feng, T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe and H. Kataura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9270–9276 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe, D. Nishide, H. Liu, S. Asano, S. Nishiyama and H. Kataura, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2010, 247, 2867–2870 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hirano, T. Tanaka and H. Kataura, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tvrdy, R. M. Jain, R. Han, A. J. Hilmer, T. P. McNicholas and M. S. Strano, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1779–1789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Jain, K. Tvrdy, R. Han, Z. Ulissi and M. S. Strano, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3367–3379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Khripin, J. A. Fagan and M. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Zaslavsky, FEBS Lett., 1995, 367, 98 CrossRef .
J. A. Fagan, M. Zheng, V. Rastogi, J. R. Simpson, C. Y. Khripin, C. A. Silvera Batista and A. R. Hight Walker, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3373–3387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Subbaiyan, S. Cambré, A. Parra-Vasquez, E. Hároz, S. K. Doorn and J. G. Duque, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1619–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Janas, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 36–63 RSC .
A. J. Blanch, J. S. Quinton and J. G. Shapter, Carbon, 2013, 60, 471–480 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Duque, C. G. Densmore and S. K. Doorn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16165–16175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Silverabatista, D. C. Scott, S. M. Mcleod and K. J. Ziegler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9361–9369 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yomogida, T. Tanaka, M. Zhang, M. Yudasaka, X. Wei and H. Kataura, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Jain, R. Howden, K. Tvrdy, S. Shimizu, A. J. Hilmer, T. P. McNicholas, K. K. Gleason and M. S. Strano, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4436–4439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, T. Tanaka and H. Kataura, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6237–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, T. Tanaka, T. Hirakawa, M. Tsuzuki, G. Wang, Y. Yomogida, A. Hirano and H. Kataura, Carbon, 2018, 132, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dervishi, Z. Li, Y. Xu, V. Saini, A. R. Biris, D. Lupu and A. S. Biris, Part. Sci. Technol., 2009, 27, 107–125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyata, T. Kawai, Y. Miyamoto, K. Yanagi, Y. Maniwa and H. Kataura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9671–9677 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe and H. Kataura, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1996–2003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Thendie, H. Omachi, J. Hirotani, Y. Ohno, Y. Miyata and H. Shinohara, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, 065102 CrossRef .
I. Yahya, F. Bonaccorso, S. K. Clowes, A. C. Ferrari and S. R. P. Silva, Carbon, 2015, 93, 574–594 CrossRef CAS .
B. Podlesny, B. Olszewska, Z. Yaari, P. V. Jena, G. Ghahramani, R. Feiner, D. A. Heller and D. Janas, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 10618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Sims and J. A. Fagan, Carbon, 2022, 191, 215–226 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nißler, J. Ackermann, C. Ma and S. Kruss, Anal. Chem., 2022, 94, 9941–9951 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Janas, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 36–63 RSC .
S. Kim and W.-J. Kim, Gels, 2022, 8, 76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Iqbal, Y. Tao, S. Xie, Y. Zhu, D. Chen, X. Wang, L. Huang, D. Peng, A. Sattar, M. A. B. Shabbir, H. I. Hussain, S. Ahmed and Z. Yuan, Biol. Proced. Online, 2016, 18, 18 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Antaris, J. T. Robinson, O. K. Yaghi, G. Hong, S. Diao, R. Luong and H. Dai, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3644–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Green and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2185–2190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Graf, C. Murawski, Y. Zakharko, J. Zaumseil and M. C. Gather, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706711 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Yang, D. Luo, Z. Xu, J. Wei, J.-Q. Wang, Z. Xu, F. Peng, X. Li, R. Li, Y. Li, M. Li, X. Bai, F. Ding and Y. Li, Nature, 2014, 510, 522–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Sanchez-Valencia, T. Dienel, O. Gröning, I. Shorubalko, A. Mueller, M. Jansen, K. Amsharov, P. Ruffieux and R. Fasel, Nature, 2014, 512, 61–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Brohmann, F. J. Berger, M. Matthiesen, S. P. Schießl, S. Schneider and J. Zaumseil, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7323–7332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, A. Chortos, Y. Wang, R. Pfattner, T. Lei, A. C. Hinckley, I. Pochorovski, X. Yan, J. W.-F. To and J. Y. Oh, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 183 CrossRef .
X. He, H. Htoon, S. K. Doorn, W. H. P. Pernice, F. Pyatkov, R. Krupke, A. Jeantet, Y. Chassagneux and C. Voisin, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 663–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, X. Yang and Z. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 985–991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Lee, Y. Yoon, S. Park, J. H. Oh, S. Hong, L. S. Liyanage, H. Wang, S. Morishita, N. Patil and Y. J. Park, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 541 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, H. W. Lee, H. Wang, S. Selvarasah, M. R. Dokmeci, Y. J. Park, S. N. Cha, J. M. Kim and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2487–2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. Wei, Q. Zhao, D. Zhang, S. Wang and L. M. Peng, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6805–6812 RSC .
Y. Liu, N. Wei, Q. Zeng, J. Han, H. Huang, D. Zhong, F. Wang, L. Ding, J. Xia, H. Xu, Z. Ma, S. Qiu, Q. Li, X. Liang, Z. Zhang, S. Wang and L.-M. Peng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 188 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Appenzeller, J. Knoch, Y. M. Lin and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1497–1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Ding, C. Guo, J. Lefebvre and P. R. L. Malenfant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705568 CrossRef .
T. Lei, X. Chen, G. Pitner, H. S. P. Wong and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 802–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, J. Deslippe, F. Xiao, R. B. Capaz, X. Hong, S. Aloni, A. Zettl, W. Wang, X. Bai and S. G. Louie, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, J. De Slippe, F. Xiao, R. B. Capaz, X. Hong, S. Aloni, A. Zettl, W. Wang, X. Bai and S. G. Louie, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. van Bezouw, D. H. Arias, R. Ihly, S. Cambré, A. J. Ferguson, J. Campo, J. C. Johnson, J. Defillet, W. Wenseleers and J. L. Blackburn, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6881–6894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, W. Su, D. Yang, S. Li, X. Wei, N. Zhou, W. Zhou, S. Xie, H. Kataura and H. Liu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, J. Y. Park, S. Huang, J. Liu and P. L. Mceuen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 146805 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, G. Hui, B. Liu, L. Jia and C. Zhou, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 906–920 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Rossi, K. J. Soule, E. Cleveland, S. W. Schmucker, C. D. Cress, N. D. Cox, A. Merrill and B. J. Landi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 495, 140–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Zueva, O. N. Makshakova, B. Z. Idiyatullin, D. A. Faizullin and Y. F. Zuev, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2016, 65, 1208–1215 CrossRef CAS .

          W. T. Chen, Method for Dialysis, US Pat., 4601830,  1986 Search PubMed .
D. Wessel and U. I. Flügge, Anal. Biochem., 1984, 138, 141–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vrana, A. Goodling, M. Afkarian and B. Prasad, Drug Metab. Dispos., 2016, 44, 1692–1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lukaszczuk, M. Rümmeli, M. Knupfer, R. J. Kalenczuk and E. Borowiak-Palen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 687–691 CrossRef CAS .

          D. J. Johnson, in Introduction to Carbon Science, ed. H. Marsh, I. A. S. Edwards, R. Menendez, B. Rand, S. West, A. J. Hosty, K. Kuo, B. McEnaney, T. Mays, D. J. Johnson, J. W. Patrick, D. E. Clarke, J. C. Crelling and R. J. Gray, Butterworth-Heinemann,  1989, pp. 197–228 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-408-03837-9.50011-7 .
T. C. Dinadayalane and J. Leszczynski, Struct. Chem., 2010, 21, 1155–1169 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, F. Guo, A. Jachak, S. P. Kim and R. H. Hurt, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1996–2002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zu, W. Lu, Q. W. Li, Y. Zhu, G. Wang and T. W. Chou, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, L. J. Ci, L. F. Sun, C. Jin and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1817–1821 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Lucas and P. Lambin, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2005, 68, 1181–1249 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sano, A. Kamino, J. Okamura and S. Shinkai, Science, 2001, 293, 1299–1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Geng, Y. K. Ko, S. C. Youn, Y. H. Kim, S. A. Kim, D. H. Jung and H. T. Jung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12264–12271 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, T. Hayashida, M. Zhang and Y. Nakayama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 40, L235–L237 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, K. Mukhopadyay, J. Yadev and V. K. Varadan, Smart Mater. Struct., 2003, 12, 744 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hou, Z. Jun, F. Weller and A. Greiner, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3170–3175 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tang, J. Wen, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, K. Lin and Y. Du, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 241–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Dai, J. H. Hafner, D. T. Colbert, R. E. Smalley, S. J. Tans and C. Dekker, Nature, 1997, 385, 780–781 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Colomer, L. Henrard, E. Flahaut, G. Van Tendeloo, A. A. Lucas and Ph Lambin, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 685–689 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, S. Yu, H. Wang, J. Xu, C. Liu, W. H. Chong and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 835–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Horn and J. Rieger, ChemInform, 2010, 33 DOI:10.1002/chin.200215240 .
Z. Yang, Z. Li, M. Xu, Y. Ma, J. Zhang, Y. Su, F. Gao, H. Wei and L. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2013, 5, 247–259 CrossRef .
R. J. Chen, S. Bangsaruntip, K. A. Drouvalakis, N. W. S. Kam, M. Shim, Y. Li, W. Kim, P. J. Utz and H. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 4984–4989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, S. Bansaruntip, N. Nakayama, E. Yenilmez, Y. L. Chang and Q. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1632–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. M. Tabakman, A. P. Goodwin, M. G. Kattah, D. Daranciang, X. Wang, G. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Liu, P. J. Utz, K. Jiang, S. Fan and H. Dai, Nat. Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 1285–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. W. S. Kam, M. O'Connell, J. A. Wisdom and H. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 11600–11605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chakravarty, R. Marches, N. S. Zimmerman, A. D. E. Swafford, P. Bajaj, I. H. Musselman, P. Pantano, R. K. Draper and E. S. Vitetta, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 8697–8702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. De la Zerda, C. Zavaleta, S. Keren, S. Vaithilingam, S. Bodapati, Z. Liu, J. Levi, B. R. Smith, T.-J. Ma, O. Oralkan, Z. Cheng, X. Chen, H. Dai, B. T. Khuri-Yakub and S. S. Gambhir, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 557–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Welsher, Z. Liu, D. Daranciang and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 586–590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cherukuri, S. M. Bachilo, S. H. Litovsky and R. B. Weisman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15638–15639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stakenborg and L. Lagae, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 173114 CrossRef .
A. E. Cetin and H. Altug, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9989–9995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Pan, T. Zhang, H. Yang, W. Diao, N. Li and B. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 10581–10588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, G. Y. Guo, C. S. Jayanthi and S. Y. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 217206 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Valeri, S. Y. Robbins-Juarez, J. S. Stevens, W. Ahn, M. K. Rao, J. Radhakrishnan, A. G. Gharavi, S. Mohan and S. A. Husain, J. Am. Soc. Nephrol., 2020, 31, 1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Suttle, Nature, 2005, 437, 356–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Zhang, W.-C. Wu, M. Shi and E. C. Holmes, Curr. Opin. Virol., 2018, 31, 9–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Rothan and S. N. Byrareddy, J. Autoimmun., 2020, 109, 102433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Loeffelholz and Y.-W. Tang, Emerging Microbes Infect., 2020, 9, 747–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, C.-K. Lee, S.-Y. Lee, C.-L. Kao, C.-W. Lin, A.-B. Wang, S.-M. Hsu and L.-S. Huang, Cell. Microbiol., 2005, 7, 1763–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Deng, R. Liang, M. Su, C. He, L. Hu, Y. Su, J. Ren, F. Yu, L. Du and S. Jiang, J. Med. Virol., 2020, 92, 408–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuiken, R. A. M. Fouchier, M. Schutten, G. F. Rimmelzwaan, G. van Amerongen, D. van Riel, J. D. Laman, T. de Jong, G. van Doornum, W. Lim, A. E. Ling, P. K. S. Chan, J. S. Tam, M. C. Zambon, R. Gopal, C. Drosten, S. van der Werf, N. Escriou, J.-C. Manuguerra, K. Stöhr, J. S. M. Peiris and A. D. M. E. Osterhaus, Lancet, 2003, 362, 263–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Abdelrahman, M. Li and X. Wang, Front. Immunol., 2020, 11, 552909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lu, X. Zhao, J. Li, P. Niu, B. Yang, H. Wu, W. Wang, H. Song, B. Huang, N. Zhu, Y. Bi, X. Ma, F. Zhan, L. Wang, T. Hu, H. Zhou, Z. Hu, W. Zhou, L. Zhao, J. Chen, Y. Meng, J. Wang, Y. Lin, J. Yuan, Z. Xie, J. Ma, W. J. Liu, D. Wang, W. Xu, E. C. Holmes, G. F. Gao, G. Wu, W. Chen, W. Shi and W. Tan, Lancet, 2020, 395, 565–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sohrabi, Z. Alsafi, N. O'Neill, M. Khan, A. Kerwan, A. Al-Jabir, C. Iosifidis and R. Agha, Int. J. Surg., 2020, 76, 71–76 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Qiu, A. I. Nergiz, A. E. Maraolo, I. I. Bogoch, N. Low and M. Cevik, Clin. Microbiol. Infect., 2021, 27, 511–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fu, B. Wang, T. Yuan, X. Chen, Y. Ao, T. Fitzpatrick, P. Li, Y. Zhou, Y.-f. Lin, Q. Duan, G. Luo, S. Fan, Y. Lu, A. Feng, Y. Zhan, B. Liang, W. Cai, L. Zhang, X. Du, L. Li, Y. Shu and H. Zou, J. Infect., 2020, 80, 656–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Udugama, P. Kadhiresan, H. N. Kozlowski, A. Malekjahani, M. Osborne, V. Y. C. Li, H. Chen, S. Mubareka, J. B. Gubbay and W. C. W. Chan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3822–3835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Vemula, J. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Wang, S. Biswas and I. Hewlett, Viruses, 2016, 8, 96 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Carter, L. V. Garner, J. W. Smoot, Y. Li, Q. Zhou, C. J. Saveson, J. M. Sasso, A. C. Gregg, D. J. Soares, T. R. Beskid, S. R. Jervey and C. Liu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 591–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F.-W. Chan, K. K.-W. To, H. Chen and K.-Y. Yuen, Curr. Opin. Virol., 2015, 10, 63–69 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ji, W. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Zai and X. Li, J. Med. Virol., 2020, 92, 433–440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu and R. Yang, Influenza Other Respir. Viruses, 2020, 14, 474–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K.-M. Goh, A. K. Dunker, J. A. Foster and V. N. Uversky, Biomolecules, 2019, 9, 178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Annu. Rev. Virol., 2016, 3, 237–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Q. Liu and D. Guo, J. Med. Virol., 2020, 92, 418–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, X.-L. Yang, X.-G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H.-R. Si, Y. Zhu, B. Li, C.-L. Huang, H.-D. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Luo, H. Guo, R.-D. Jiang, M.-Q. Liu, Y. Chen, X.-R. Shen, X. Wang, X.-S. Zheng, K. Zhao, Q.-J. Chen, F. Deng, L.-L. Liu, B. Yan, F.-X. Zhan, Y.-Y. Wang, G.-F. Xiao and Z.-L. Shi, Nature, 2020, 579, 270–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Lai, Y. H. Liu, C.-Y. Wang, Y.-H. Wang, S.-C. Hsueh, M.-Y. Yen, W.-C. Ko and P.-R. Hsueh, J. Microbiol., Immunol. Infect., 2020, 53, 404–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nguyen, D. Duong Bang and A. Wolff, Micromachines, 2020, 11, 306 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ilkhani, N. Hedayat and S. Farhad, Anal. Biochem., 2021, 634, 114362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rai, B. K. Kumar, V. K. Deekshit, I. Karunasagar and I. Karunasagar, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2021, 105, 441–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fu, N. Tang, Y. Chen, L. Ma, Y. Wei, Y. Lu, K. Ye, H. Liu, F. Tang, G. Huang, Y. Yang and F. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 11548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Velagapudi, A. Kumar, H. S. Bhatia, A. El-Bakoush, I. Lepiarz, B. L. Fiebich and O. A. Olajide, Int. Immunopharmacol., 2017, 48, 17–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Carter, L. V. Garner, J. W. Smoot, Y. Li, Q. Zhou, C. J. Saveson, J. M. Sasso, A. C. Gregg, D. J. Soares, T. R. Beskid, S. R. Jervey and C. Liu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 591–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Han, C. Wang, X. Yang, S. Zheng, X. Cheng, Z. Liu, B. Zhao and R. Xiao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2022, 351, 130897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Campàs and I. Katakis, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2004, 23, 49–62 CrossRef .
S. Liu, D. Leech and H. Ju, Anal. Lett., 2003, 1, 1–19 CrossRef .
S. Yu-Cheng, H. Wei-En and C. T. Lin, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2018, 7, Q3196–Q3207 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, R. Ren, H. Pu, X. Guo, J. Chang, G. Zhou, S. Mao, M. Kron and J. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 10974 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Seo, G. Lee, M. J. Kim, S.-H. Baek, M. Choi, K. B. Ku, C.-S. Lee, S. Jun, D. Park, H. G. Kim, S.-J. Kim, J.-O. Lee, B. T. Kim, E. C. Park and S. I. Kim, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5135–5142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Yeh, K. Gulino, Y. H. Zhang, A. Sabestien and M. Terrones, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 117, 201910113 Search PubMed .
S. S. Mahshid, S. E. Flynn and S. Mahshid, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 112905 Search PubMed .
J. Tian, Z. Liang, O. Hu, Q. He, D. Sun and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 387, 138553 CrossRef CAS .
Rajesh, V. Bisht, W. Takashima and K. Kaneto, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 3683–3690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bhalla, P. Jolly, N. Formisano and P. Estrela, Essays Biochem., 2016, 60, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Loncaric, Y. Tang, C. Ho, M. A. Parameswaran and H. Z. Yu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 161, 908–913 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, G. Yang, H. Li, D. Du and Y. Lin, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dutta, S. Park, A. Singh, J. Seo, S. Kim and H. Yang, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 3574–3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pradhan, P. Lahare, P. Sinha, N. Singh, B. Gupta, K. Kuca, K. K. Ghosh and O. Krejcar, Sensors, 2021, 21, 7823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yakoh, U. Pimpitak, S. Rengpipat, N. Hirankarn, O. Chailapakul and S. Chaiyo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 176, 112912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Mahari, A. Roberts, D. Shahdeo and S. Gandhi, bioRxiv,  2020, p. 059204.
S. R. Joshi, A. Sharma, G.-H. Kim and J. Jang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 108, 110465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, Z. Liang, O. Hu, Q. He, D. Sun and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 387, 138553 CrossRef CAS .
K. Besteman, J. O. Lee, F. Wiertz, H. A. Heering and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 727–730 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pu, Y. Xu, Q. Liu, A. Zhu and G. Shi, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 3015–3020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dürkop, S. Getty, E. Cobas and M. Fuhrer, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 35–39 CrossRef .
P. L. McEuen, M. S. Fuhrer and H. Park, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2002, 1, 78–85 Search PubMed .
F. Lv, M. Qin, F. Zhang, H. Yu, L. Gao, P. Lv, W. Wei, Y. Feng and W. Feng, Carbon, 2019, 149, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, M. Qin and Y. Feng, Carbon, 2016, 109, 575–597 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Feng, M. Qin, L. Gao, Z. Li, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, F. Lv and W. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901383 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, D. Ren, L. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, D. Liu, Q. Zhang, W. Feng and Q. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2107082 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. So, K. Won, Y. H. Kim, B.-K. Kim, B. H. Ryu, P. S. Na, H. Kim and J.-O. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11906–11907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Martínez, Y.-C. Tseng, N. Ormategui, I. Loinaz, R. Eritja and J. Bokor, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 530–536 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Oh, G. Yoo, Y. W. Chang, H. J. Kim, J. Jose, E. Kim, J.-C. Pyun and K.-H. Yoo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 50, 345–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Topinka, M. W. Rowell, D. Goldhaber-Gordon, M. D. McGehee, D. S. Hecht and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1866–1871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miyata, K. Yanagi, Y. Maniwa and H. Kataura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3591–3596 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yanagi, H. Udoguchi, S. Sagitani, Y. Oshima, T. Takenobu, H. Kataura, T. Ishida, K. Matsuda and Y. Maniwa, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4027–4032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Morales-Narváez and C. Dincer, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 163, 112274 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Abe, K. Murata, A. Kojima, Y. Ifuku and M. Shimizu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8667–8670 CrossRef CAS .
R.-C. Chen, L.-C. Su, Y.-C. Li, Y.-F. Chang, Y.-J. Lee, C.-C. Lee and C. Chou, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 3714–3718 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gondran, J. Baur, M. Holzinger, E. Defrancq, H. Perrot and S. Cosnier, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 1066–1072 CrossRef PubMed .

          X. Zhang, Q. Qi, Q. Jing, S. Ao, Z. Zhang, M. Ding, M. Wu, K. Liu, W. Wang, Y. Ling, Z. Zhang and W. Fu,  2020, arXiv:2003.12529.
M. Brohmann, F. J. Berger, M. Matthiesen, S. P. Schießl, S. Schneider and J. Zaumseil, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7323–7332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shao, M. R. Shurin, S. E. Wheeler, X. He and A. Star, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 10321–10327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Li, P. X. Hou, C. Liu, D. M. Sun, J. Yuan, S. Y. Zhao, L. C. Yin, H. Cong and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6831–6839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, H. Tomita, S. Hasegawa, Y. Kitamura, M. Nakano and J. Suehiro, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 904–911 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Dürkop, T. Brintlinger and M. S. Fuhrer, AIP Conf. Proc., 2002, 633, 242–246 CrossRef .
C. Cao, J. B. Andrews and A. D. Franklin, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700057 CrossRef .
L. Cai, S. Zhang, J. Miao, Z. Yu and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5698–5705 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Carrascosa, C. S. Huertas and L. M. Lechuga, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2016, 177–189 CrossRef CAS .
H. Maddali, C. E. Miles, J. Kohn and D. M. O'Carroll, ChemBioChem, 2021, 22, 1176–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8999–9010 RSC .
A. B. Socorro-Leránoz, D. Santano, I. Del Villar and I. R. Matias, Biosens. Bioelectron.: X, 2019, 1, 100015 Search PubMed .
A. Abbas, M. J. Linman and Q. Cheng, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 1815–1824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 442–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Li, B. Yuan, J. H. Liu, M. L. Liu, P. F. Gao, Y. F. Li, M. Li and C. Z. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8719–8724 RSC .
J. Sengupta and C. M. Hussain, Carbon Trends, 2021, 2, 100011 CrossRef .
J. Lukose, S. Chidangil and S. D. George, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 178, 113004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and G. Shi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2014, 19, 20–34 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. W. Barone, H. Jin, J. Zhang, D. A. Heller and M. S. Strano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1456–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yang, J. Jin, Y. Chen, N. Shao, H. Kang, Z. Xiao, Z. Tang, Y. Wu, Z. Zhu and W. Tan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8351–8358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Moitra, M. Alafeef, K. Dighe, M. B. Frieman and D. Pan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7617–7627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. El-Said, A. S. Al-Bogami and W. Alshitari, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2022, 264, 120237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Parihar, P. Ranjan, S. K. Sanghi, A. K. Srivastava and R. Khan, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 7326–7343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rasmi, X. Li, J. Khan, T. Ozer and J. R. Choi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2021, 413, 4137–4159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Thanihaichelvan, S. N. Surendran, T. Kumanan, U. Sutharsini, P. Ravirajan, R. Valluvan and T. Tharsika, Mater. Today: Proc., 2022, 49, 2546–2549 CAS .
B. R. C. d Menezes, K. F. Rodrigues, B. C. d S. Fonseca, R. G. Ribas, T. L. d A. Montanheiro and G. P. Thim, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 1343–1360 RSC .
A. C. V. Doughty, A. R. Hoover, E. Layton, C. K. Murray, E. W. Howard and W. R. Chen, Materials, 2019, 12, 779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rahamathulla, R. R. Bhosale, R. A. M. Osmani, K. C. Mahima, A. P. Johnson, U. Hani, M. Ghazwani, M. Y. Begum, S. Alshehri, M. M. Ghoneim, F. Shakeel and H. V. Gangadharappa, Materials, 2021, 14, 6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ke and L. Shen, Front. Lab. Med., 2017, 1, 69–75 CrossRef .
C. Núñez, J. L. Capelo, G. Igrejas, A. Alfonso, L. M. Botana and C. Lodeiro, Biomaterials, 2016, 97, 34–50 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Foldvari and M. Bagonluri, Nanomedicine, 2008, 4, 173–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Foldvari and M. Bagonluri, Nanomedicine, 2008, 4, 183–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Horie, H. Kato, K. Fujita, S. Endoh and H. Iwahashi, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2012, 25, 605–619 Search PubMed .
A. Spreinat, M. M. Dohmen, J. Lüttgens, N. Herrmann, L. F. Klepzig, R. Nißler, S. Weber, F. A. Mann, J. Lauth and S. Kruss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 18341–18351 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nißler, L. Kurth, H. Li, A. Spreinat, I. Kuhlemann, B. S. Flavel and S. Kruss, Anal. Chem., 2021, 93, 6446–6455 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. A. De los Santos, Z. Lin and M. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 20628–20632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shen, J. Wu, Y. Yu, S. Liu, W. Jiang, H. Nurmamat and B. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 7557 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Donaldson, R. Aitken, L. Tran, V. Stone, R. Duffin, G. Forrest and A. Alexander, Toxicol. Sci., 2006, 92, 5–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, K. Chen, C. Davis, S. Sherlock, Q. Cao, X. Chen and H. Dai, Cancer Res., 2008, 68, 6652–6660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, K. Welsher, S. M. Tabakman, S. P. Sherlock, H. Wang, R. Luong and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 779–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Moon, S. H. Lee and H. C. Choi, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3707–3713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Fisher, S. Sarkar, C. F. Buchanan, C. S. Szot, J. Whitney, H. C. Hatcher, S. V. Torti, C. G. Rylander and M. N. Rylander, Cancer Res., 2010, 70, 9855–9864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Burke, X. Ding, R. Singh, R. A. Kraft, N. Levipolyachenko, M. N. Rylander, C. Szot, C. Buchanan, J. Whitney and J. Fisher, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 12897–12902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chakravarty, R. Marches, N. S. Zimmerman, A. D. Swafford, P. Bajaj, I. H. Musselman, P. Pantano, R. K. Draper and E. S. Vitetta, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 8697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tripisciano, K. Kraemer, A. Taylor and E. Borowiak-Palen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 478, 200–205 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, B. Zeng, S. Wang, T. Zhu, R. B. S. Roden, Y. Chen and R. Yang, Clin. Cancer Res., 2006, 12, 4933–4939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, D.-C. Wu, W.-D. Zhang, X. Jiang, C.-B. He, T. S. Chung, S. H. Goh and K. W. Leong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4782–4785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cherukuri, C. J. Gannon, T. K. Leeuw, H. K. Schmidt, R. E. Smalley, S. A. Curley and R. B. Weisman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 18882–18886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Welsher, S. P. Sherlock and H. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 8943–8948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, C. Wang, L. Feng, K. Yang and Z. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10869–10939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Welsher, Z. Liu, S. P. Sherlock, J. T. Robinson, Z. Chen, D. Daranciang and H. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Langenbacher, J. Budhathoki-Uprety, P. V. Jena, D. Roxbury, J. Streit, M. Zheng and D. A. Heller, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 6441–6448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Diao, G. Hong, J. T. Robinson, L. Jiao, A. L. Antaris, J. Z. Wu, C. L. Choi and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16971–16974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Monteiro, D. C. Ferreira, G. A. Sáfar, R. N. Gontijo, C. Fantini, D. C. Martins, Y. M. Idemori, M. V. Pinheiro and K. Krambrock, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 20459–20465 RSC .
A. L. Antaris, O. K. Yaghi, G. Hong, S. Diao, B. Zhang, J. Yang, L. Chew and H. Dai, Small, 2015, 11, 6325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hong, S. Diao, J. Chang, A. L. Antaris, C. Chen, B. Zhang, S. Zhao, D. N. Atochin, P. L. Huang and K. I. Andreasson, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Antaris, J. T. Robinson, O. K. Yaghi, G. Hong, S. Diao, R. Luong and H. Dai, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Murakami, H. Nakatsuji, M. Inada, Y. Matoba, T. Umeyama, M. Tsujimoto, S. Isoda, M. Hashida and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, G. Hong, Y. Liang, Z. Bo, O. K. Yaghi and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10664–10669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Welsher, S. P. Sherlock and H. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 8943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, H. Tao, K. Yang, S. Zhang, S. T. Lee and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 144–151 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, K. Welsher, S. M. Tabakman, S. P. Sherlock, H. Wang, R. Luong and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, S. Dutta, E. Gomes, D. Carroll, J. R. D'Agostino, J. Olson, M. Guthold and W. H. Gmeiner, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2667–2673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hong, S. Diao, A. L. Antaris and H. Dai, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10816–10906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Turek, T. Shiraki, T. Shiraishi, T. Shiga, T. Fujigaya and D. Janas, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 535 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. P. Landry, P. W. Barone, J.-H. Kim, S. Lin, Z. W. Ulissi, D. Lin, B. Mu, A. A. Boghossian, A. J. Hilmer, A. Rwei, A. C. Hinckley, S. Kruss, M. A. Shandell, N. Nair, S. Blake, F. Şen, S. Şen, R. G. Croy, D. Li, K. Yum, J.-H. Ahn, H. Jin, D. A. Heller, J. M. Essigmann, D. Blankschtein and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 959–968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Avramenko, J. Defillet, M. Á. López Carrillo, M. Martinati, W. Wenseleers and S. Cambré, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 15484–15497 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Li, S. Koo, Y. Sun, Y. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Pan, Z. Zhang, M. Du, S. Lu, X. Qiao, J. Gao, X. Wang, Z. Deng, X. Meng, Y. Xiao, J. S. Kim and X. Hong, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 209–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Alshehri, A. M. Ilyas, A. Hasan, A. Arnaout, F. Ahmed and A. Memic, J. Med. Chem., 2016, 59, 8149–8167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, S. Xu, X. Wang and C. Chen, Carbon, 2018, 138, 436–450 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mishra, P. Kesharwani and N. K. Jain, Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug Carrier Syst., 2018, 35, 293–330 CrossRef PubMed .
L. C. Ong, F. L. Chung, Y. F. Tan and C. O. Leong, Arch. Toxicol., 2016, 90, 103–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, S. Li, G. Zhao, X. Fu and Z. Lai, Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 263–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, H. Gao, J. Sui, W. N. Chen and C. B. Ching, Toxicol. In Vitro, 2011, 25, 1820–1827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lan, N. Gou, C. Gao, M. He and A. Z. Gu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 12937–12945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Alpatova, W. Shan, P. Babica, B. L. Upham, A. R. Rogensues, S. J. Masten, E. Drown, A. K. Mohanty, E. C. Alocilja and V. V. Tarabara, Water Res., 2010, 44, 505–520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ema, A. Matsuda, N. Kobayashi, M. Naya and J. Nakanishi, Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol., 2011, 61, 276–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mittal, V. Sharma, N. Vallabani, S. Kulshrestha, A. Dhawan and A. K. Pandey, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2011, 7, 108–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cui, F. Tian, C. S. Ozkan, M. Wang and H. Gao, Toxicol. Lett., 2005, 155, 73–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ding, J. Stilwell, T. Zhang, O. Elboudwarej, H. Jiang, J. P. Selegue, P. A. Cooke, J. W. Gray and F. F. Chen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2448–2464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Sayes, F. Liang, J. L. Hudson, J. Mendez, W. Guo, J. M. Beach, V. C. Moore, C. D. Doyle, J. L. West, W. E. Billups, K. D. Ausman and V. L. Colvin, Toxicol. Lett., 2006, 161, 135–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, D. A. Heller and M. S. Strano, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1577–1585 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Shvedova, E. R. Kisin, R. Mercer, A. R. Murray, V. J. Johnson, A. I. Potapovich, Y. Y. Tyurina, O. Gorelik, S. Arepalli, D. Schwegler-Berry, A. F. Hubbs, J. Antonini, D. E. Evans, B.-K. Ku, D. Ramsey, A. Maynard, V. E. Kagan, V. Castranova and P. Baron, Am. J. Physiol.: Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol., 2005, 289, L698–L708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Brown, K. Donaldson and V. Stone, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2010, 6, 224–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, B. Wan, Y. Yang, X. Ren and L. H. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1518 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Kim, M. Kim, H. S. Park, U. S. Shin, M. S. Gong and H. W. Kim, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2012, 100, 1033–1043 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Rotoli, O. Bussolati, A. Barilli, P. Zanello, M. Bianchi, A. Magrini, A. Pietroiusti, A. Bergamaschi and E. Bergamaschi, Hum. Exp. Toxicol., 2009, 28, 361–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gu, Z. Xu, L. Gu, H. Xu, F. Han, B. Chen and X. Pan, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2021, 19, 167–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naya, K. Honda, M. Ema, H. Kataura and H. Takehara, J. Toxicol. Sci., 2017, 42, 367–378 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2073–2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, N. D. Mansukhani, L. M. Guiney, J. H. Lee, R. Li, B. Sun, Y.
P. Liao, C. H. Chang, Z. Ji and T. Xia, ACS Nano, 2016, 6008–6019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Krewski, D. Acosta, Jr., M. Andersen, H. Anderson, J. C. Bailar, 3rd, K. Boekelheide, R. Brent, G. Charnley, V. G. Cheung, S. Green, Jr., K. T. Kelsey, N. I. Kerkvliet, A. A. Li, L. McCray, O. Meyer, R. D. Patterson, W. Pennie, R. A. Scala, G. M. Solomon, M. Stephens, J. Yager and L. Zeise, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, Part B, 2010, 13, 51–138 CAS .
C. W. Schmidt, Environ. Health Perspect., 2009, 117, A348–A353 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Rasmus, E. S. Irving, J. Wang, T. Kasper, D. S. Sutherland, A. Herman and B. Christiane, Toxicol. Res., 2014, 228–241 Search PubMed .
M. Kanungo, H. Lu, G. G. Malliaras and G. B. Blanchet, Science, 2009, 323, 234–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 13–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Vecitis, K. R. Zodrow, S. Kang and M. Elimelech, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5471–5479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahmoudi, K. Azadmanesh, M. A. Shokrgozar, W. S. Journeay and S. Laurent, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3407–3432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pal, Y. K. Tak and J. M. Song, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2007, 73, 1712–1720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Schipper, N. Nakayama-Ratchford, C. R. Davis, N. W. S. Kam, P. Chu, Z. Liu, X. Sun, H. Dai and S. S. Gambhir, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 216–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, S. Wieckowski, G. Pastorin, M. Benincasa, C. Klumpp, J. P. Briand, R. Gennaro, M. Prato and A. Bianco, ChemInform, 2005, 117, 6516–6520 Search PubMed .
H. Dumortier, S. Lacotte, G. Pastorin, R. Marega, W. Wu, D. Bonifazi, J.-P. Briand, M. Prato, S. Muller and A. Bianco, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1522–1528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Joddar, E. Garcia, A. Casas and C. M. Stewart, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, U. C. Tam, J. L. Czlapinski, G. S. Lee and C. R. Bertozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6292–6293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Yang, X. Wang, G. Jia, Y. Gu and Y. Liu, Toxicol. Lett., 2008, 181, 182–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Yang, K. Fernando, J. H. Liu, J. Wang and Y. P. Sun, Small, 2010, 4, 940–944 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. Poland, R. Duffin, I. Kinloch, A. Maynard, W. A. H. Wallace, A. Seaton, V. Stone, S. Brown, W. Macnee and K. Donaldson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 423–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
Table Content:

Asif Khalid
	Asif Khalid received the BS degree in Electronics Science from the University of Lahore (UOL), Pakistan, and received a Master's degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University, China in 2017. He is currently pursuing a PhD degree at Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. His research interests from the last five years include developing biosensors, diagnosing cancer cells (through phototherapy and drug delivery), and synthesizing organic and inorganic materials for electronics and healthcare applications.

Wenhui Yi
	Wenhui Yi received the Bachelor's, Master's, and PhD degrees from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 1996, 1999, and 2004, respectively. He is an Associate Professor with the Faculty of Information and Electronics Engineering, School of Electronics Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University. He has been working in the past five years on developing biosensors and the intelligent diagnosis and treatment system toward cancers, including diagnosis of cancers by classifying pathological images utilizing deep convolutional neural networks. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Akron from 2007 to 2008. He was also a Visiting Scientist at MIT from 2011 to 2013.

Sweejiang Yoo
	Sweejiang Yoo received the Master's and PhD degrees from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2015 and 2020, respectively. His research work has been published in various reputed journals, including the International Journal of Nanomedicine, Wiley, ACS, and others. He presented oral presentations at NDNC 2016 and the Annual World Congress of Advanced Materials 2017. His research interests include organic chemistry, bioimaging, biosensors, and gas sensors.

Jinhai Si
	Jinhai Si received the Bachelor's and Master's degrees from Liaoning University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and the PhD degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 1994. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences from 1994 to 1996, and at the Tokyo Institute of Technology from 1988 to 1990. He was a Lecturer and an Associate Professor with Liaoning University from 1985 to 1994, and an Associate Professor with the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences from 1996 to 1999, and a Chief Researcher and the Team Leader of Japan Science and Technology Agency from 1997 to 2005. He has been a Full Professor with Xi’an Jiaotong University since 2005. His research interests include ultrafast optical spectroscopies and techniques, femtosecond laser-based micro-nano machining, and transient imaging and ultrafast measurements using femtosecond optical Kerr gate.

Xun Hou
	In 1959, Hou Xun graduated from the Department of Physics, Northwestern University. From August 1979 to November 1981, he studied for two years in the Department of Physics, Imperial College London. After graduating from university, he worked at the Xi'an Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and was promoted to Researcher in June 1986. He served as the Director of the Institute from June 1986 to March 1995. In 2000, he was employed as a Professor at Xi'an Jiaotong University. In September 2003, he was appointed Dean of the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University. His research interests include plasma physics, experimental physics, atomic, molecular and optical physics.

Jin Hou
	Jin Hou received the Master's degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University, in 2000, and the PhD degree from Fourth Military Medical University, in 2006. She joined as an Assistant Professor at Xi’an Medical College in 2000, and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2008, and to Full Professor in 2016. She was a Visiting Scholar at the Whitehead Institute, MIT in 2013, and at the University of Houston in 2017. She is working on screening compounds for antitumor drugs. Her research interests include muscarinic receptors and intracellular signal transduction.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the construction of a nanotube by rolling up an infinite strip of graphite sheet (so called graphene) and dividing into SWCNT, MWCNT, and DWCNT. (b) The DOS specific properties are attributed to van Hove singularities due to the electronic structure of SWCNTs. (c) The peaks in the UV-vis-NIR are caused by SWCNTs with various chiralities in an aqueous solution. (d) Illustration of the Raman spectra of SWCNTs.	 

Preferential synthesis	Tuning the synthesis parameter to produce predetermined chirality	Difficult to engineer a catalyst/precursor to produce predetermined chirality
Includes cloning, catalyst engineering and in situ growth selective etching14,22,23	sc-purity yet to satisfy semiconductor application requirement
Selective destruction	Preferentially etching the undesired CNT types	Irreversible and collateral damage to adjacent SWCNTs.
Includes electrical destruction, gas-phase etching and light/plasma/microwave-assisted etching24–26	Lower purity (limited by etching precision)
Post-synthesis sorting/separation	Differentiates the complex mixtures of CNTs into desire fractions.	Tedious and contamination
Includes gel chromatography, density gradient ultracentrifuge (DGU), DNA wrapping, polymer extraction, and aqueous two-phase extraction (ATPE)	Introduces defect and low yield

 	Fig. 2  The surfactant adjusts the SWCNTs and gel interaction. (a) A higher density surfactant coating might reduce the SWCNT gel adsorbability. Both colors represent different structures of SWCNTs. (b) Illustration of the surfactant's chemical structure (SDS, SC, DOC).39 Copyright John Wiley and sons, 2018.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Temperature-controlled adsorption and elution of SWCNTs. Illustration of how the temperature affects the surfactant morphology and coverage density. As the temperature rises above 12 °C, the surfactant coverage density increases and the molecules form a herringbone pattern. Desorption of SWCNTs from the adsorption sites is due to significant screening effects, and then SWCNTs elute through the column. (b) Photograph of the sorted SWCNTs. (c) UV-vis-NIR spectra for iterations at different separation temperatures.44 Copyright John Wiley and sons 2020.	 

 	Fig. 4  Different geometric shapes of the SWCNTs (branched CNT, Y junction, and a tori/coil SWCNT).45 Copyright IEEE 2009.	 

 	Fig. 5  The indexing scheme for folding the graphene sheet of SWCNT, where a1 and a2 are the primitive lattice vectors of the hexagonal lattice. Importantly, the vector (connecting the origin to the lattice point defines the nanotube index) determines the helicity and diameter of the tube. All of the (n, 0) nanotubes are called zigzag nanotubes, (n, n) nanotubes are the armchair nanotubes, whereas the others are chiral nanotubes.69 Copyright RCS, 2009.	 
Egap = (2γ0aC–C)/dt
dt(nm) = 0.0783(n2 + m2 + nm)1/2

 	Fig. 6  Calculation of SWCNT peak ratio (ϕi) based on UV-vis-NIR.71 @copy right RSC 2014.	 
ϕi = (ACNT)/(ACNT + AB)

 		 

 	Fig. 7  The Raman spectra analysis, known as Kataura's plot. It shows the relationship between the optical transition energies and ωRBM. The optical energies of sc-SWCNTs (circles) and m-SWCNTs (stars).74 Copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2010.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Example of the post-synthesis separation methods for different (n,m) chiralities of SWCNTs.93 Copyright RSC, 2017.	 

 	Fig. 9  Scalable method for the separation of m- and sc-SWCNTs; the separation is performed by selective absorption of sc-SWCNTs onto agarose gel beads, while the relatively heavy SDS coated m-SWCNTs went through the gel column. The process affords a solution with a 70% purity of m-SWCNTs, and leaves a gel containing 90% pure sc-SWCNTs.37 Copyright Appl. Phys., 2009.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of multistage chromatography. (b) Optical absorption spectra of ∼13 different species (m- and sc-). (c) Picture of different single-chiralities that shows their distinct colors. (d) PL mapping of each single-chirality containing sc-SWCNTs.18 Copyright Nat. Commun., 2011.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of temperature based gel column chromatography. (b) Optical absorption spectra of sorted SWCNTs chiralities at different temperature levels. (c) Photographic illustration of sorted SWCNTs based on temperature.103 Copyright ACS, 2013.	 
Rc = dt/(2cos2)(30 − θ)

 	Fig. 12  FTIR spectra of the surfactant (SDS) removal.61 Copyright ACS, 2020.	 

 	Fig. 13  SWCNTs coiling/tori schematic illustration with hydrophobic emulsion oil-in-water (upper) and hydrophilic emulsion water-in-oil emulsion.154 Copyright ACS, 2012.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of CNTR@AuNP. (b) Temperature variations of CNTR@AuNP with other samples at a laser irradiation of 808 with 0.5 W cm−2. (c) Ultrasound and PA images of CNTR@AuNP compared with other samples. (c and d) PA intensity of CNTR@AuNP with other samples at the same optical intensity (with 808 nm) and PA amplitude.62 Copyright ACS, 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  Coronavirus based on RNA dependent sequences and classification of their phylogenetic subgroups. Further details are shown of the intermediate host of these coronaviruses with geometric representation.	 

 	Fig. 16  A schematic illustration of an electrochemical biosensor for COVID-19 virus detection.213 Copyright MDPI, 2021.	 

 	Fig. 17  An illustration of two electrodes connected to a semiconducting SWCNT with GOx enzymes on its surface.218 Copyright ACS, 2003.	 

 	Fig. 18  Detection of COVID-19 using a SWCNT (single-chirality) based FET biosensor. (a and b) Schematic illustration of COVID-19 with proteins and the FET biosensor; antibody functionalized SWCNT is applied for detection, which is signalling a rapid detection of the COVID-19 antigen diagnostic tool with low cost. (c and d) show the high-resolution XPS spectra of N 1s of bare and antibody-functionalized SWCNT, respectively, with deconvolutions of the overall signal. (e and f) In the RBM area, the SWCNT's Raman spectra show the D and G peak regions, respectively. Excitation laser at 785 nm captured the RBM area normalized to the Si peak at 507 cm−1. We measured the D and G peak areas at 638 nm. All spectra were adjusted to the 1587 cm−1 G peak. (g) SWCNT FET transfer characteristics during SAb functionalization.238 Copyright ACS interfaces, 2021.	 

High mobilities	Field-effect mobility (79000 cm2 V−1 s−1), carrier mobility (>100000 cm2 V−1 s−1), and hole mobility (20000 cm2 V−1 s−1).241
High cut-off frequencies	Power gain cut-off frequencies (30 GHz) and current gain cut-off frequencies (153 GHz)
Easy processability	SWCNTs are dispersed easily in several organic and inorganic solvents. These nanotubes dispersions can be readily printed via ink-jet or roll-to-roll process onto substrates (e.g., plastic and glass).242,243
Low Schottky barriers	Formation of small Schottky barriers between large-diameter sc-SWCNTs and standard source/drain electrode materials (e.g., aluminum, titanium, and platinum).

 	Fig. 19  COVID-19 can be diagnosed via localized surface plasmon resonance as an optical biosensor.253 Copyright IEEE, 2021.	 

 	Fig. 20  The imaging of chirality-based SWCNTs. (a) The setup for the imaging of SWCNTs in a mouse. (b) Video-rate imaging in a mouse.285 Copyright APS, 2011.	 

 	Fig. 21  Chirality-based SWCNTs for low dose photothermal treatment. (a) PL spectra ensure the sorted species (chirality based). (b) UV-vis-NIR spectra of SWCNTs before and after the sorting, the sorted chirality (6,5) had ∼10-fold greater absorbance at 980 nm than the other samples. (c) NIR-II fluorescent resolution of mice (with tumor) with injected chirality-based SWCNT. (d) NIR-II thermal pictures of mice (with tumor) injection with chirality-based SWCNTs (after 48 h). (e) After irradiation for 5 min with ∼0.5 W cm−2 at 980 laser (at low dose). (f) After receiving 980 nm laser irradiation, the tumor temperature varies between different groups of mice.112,286 Copyright ACS, 2013.	 

sc-SWCNTs (6,5)-porphyrin	
	4–9 mili	570, 630, 760 and 940	NA	NA	PDT290
sc-SWCNTs (9,4)	Mouse vasculatures	40 mili	735@100 ms	1100–1150 nm	100–200 μl@0.17 mg ml−1 (34 μg per mouse)	Imaging97
sc-SWCNTs (6,4)	MDA-MB-468 cells	1	785@1 s	≈900 nm	NA	Imaging291
U87MG cells
sc-SWCNTs	(Cerebrovascular imaging)	160 mili	808@100 ms	1.3–14 μm	200 μl@0.22 ml−1	Imaging292
sc-SWCNTs (6,5)	4T1 murine breast cancer	0.6	980@3 min	900–1400 nm	50 μl@3.2 μg ml−1 (0.254 mg kg−1)	PTT, imaging293
0.14
sc-SWCNTs (12,1), (11,3)	4T1 murine breast cancer cells	0.14	808	1200 nm	200 μl@16 mg L−1 (0.16 mg kg−1)	Imaging20
sc-SWCNTs	Human lung cancer NCI-H460	0.8	808@10 min	NA	NA	PDT, PTT294
SWCNTs	4T1 murine breast cancer cells	0.2	808@100 ms	1.1–1.4 μm	200 μl@0.35 mg l−1	Imaging295
SWCNTs	Anatomical imaging	140 mili	808@30–78 s	NIR-II	200 μl@500 nM	Imaging296
SWCNTs	4T1 murine breast cancer cells	1.0	808@5 min	NA	200 μl@0.5 mg ml−1	PTT297
SWCNTs	4T1 murine breast cancer cells	0.6	808@5 min	1.0–1.4 μm	200 μl@0.35 mg ml−1 (3.6 mg kg−1)	PTT, Imaging298
Nano-graphene	4T1 murine breast cancer	2.0	808@5 min	NA	200 μl@2.0 mg ml−1 (20 mg kg−1)	PTT151
MWCNTs	Malignant tissue	2.0–4.0	1064@30 s–70 s	NA	1–100 μg ml−1	PTT299
2.5	1064@70 s	NA	10 μl@500 μg ml−1
SWCNTs	Human epidermoid mouth carcinoma	3.8	808@180 s	NA	100 μl@ 120 mg L−1	PTT277
SWCNTs	Mouse vasculatures	0.13	808@10 ms–1 s	1.1–1.7 μm	200 μl@17 mg L−1	Imaging287
NIR-II
LS174T (intravital imaging)	100 mW/100 μm	685@1–3 s	NA	300 μl@170 mg L−1

 	Fig. 22  Impurities, functionalization, shape and size are some of the key factors that have been demonstrated to play a role in SWCNT toxicity.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
