Biomass derived carbon for energy storage devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA08742F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA08742F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2411-2428Biomass derived carbon for energy storage devices

        
          
            Jie 
            Wang†
, 
      
        
          
            Ping 
            Nie†
, 
      
        
          
            Bing 
            Ding
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shengyang 
            Dong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Hao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Dou
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xiaogang 
            Zhang
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Materials and Technologies for Energy Conversion, College of Material Science & Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, 210016, P. R. China. E-mail: azhangxg@nuaa.edu.cn
Received 
      9th October 2016
    , Accepted 14th December 2016First published on 15th December 2016AbstractElectrochemical energy storage devices are becoming increasingly more important for reducing fossil fuel energy consumption in transportation and for the widespread deployment of intermittent renewable energy. The applications of different energy storage devices in specific situations are all primarily reliant on the electrode materials, especially carbon materials. Biomass-derived carbon materials are receiving extensive attention as electrode materials for energy storage devices because of their tunable physical/chemical properties, environmental concern, and economic value. In this review, recent developments in the biomass-derived carbon materials and the properties controlling the mechanism behind their operation are presented and discussed. Moreover, progress on the applications of biomass-derived carbon materials as electrodes for energy storage devices is summarized, including electrochemical capacitors, lithium–sulfur batteries, lithium-ion batteries, and sodium-ion batteries. The effects of the pore structure, surface properties, and graphitic degree on the electrochemical performance are discussed in detail, which will guide further rational design of the biomass-derived carbon materials for energy storage devices.
1. Introduction
To address the challenges presented by the growing population and excessive consumption of fossil fuels, renewable and green energy technologies must be developed for future energy generation, storage, and usage.1 Electrical energy storage systems are becoming increasingly important for consumer electronics, electric vehicles, and grid scale storage to best utilize the renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar. Among various energy storage systems, electrochemical energy storage devices, such as electrochemical capacitors (ECs), Li–sulfur (Li–S) batteries, Na-ion batteries (NIBs), and Li-ion batteries (LIBs), demonstrate great potential and have attracted broad research interests.2–4 The dominant performance metrics for evaluating these energy storage devices include gravimetric/volumetric energy densities, rate response, cost, and cycle stability. The ECs possess high power density and cyclability but with limited energy density, whereas rechargeable batteries are known for their high energy density but at the expense of the charge–discharge rate and cycle life. In turn, the performance of the device is primarily reliant on the electrode materials used. Therefore, exploiting the high-performance electrode materials is of particular significance. Besides, considering the environmental concern and economic value, ideally such electrode materials should be derived from the renewable resources in a highly efficient way.5
In the context of the materials exploited, carbon plays a key role in the earth's civilization. Analogously, carbon materials have an increasingly important role in the energy storage devices because of their large specific surface area (SSA), tunable pore size, high electric conductivity, and strong mechanical property.4 Specifically, high-SSA carbon materials are the best commercially available electrode materials for ECs; porous carbon materials are promising conductive matrices to support the sulfur cathodes for Li–S batteries; graphite is the most common anode material for LIBs. Furthermore, the discovery of a new type of carbon materials, such as fullerene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and graphene, has attracted significant interest in updating the carbon-based materials and their applications. As a consequence, research on carbon materials brings the fastest developments in the modern material science.
To prepare high-quality carbon materials for specified applications, a lot of methods have been developed to optimize their microstructure, surface area and porosity. For example, to obtain aligned CNT arrays with superior mechanical and electronic properties, chemical vapor deposition (CVD),6 wet spinning7 and dry drawing8 methods have been developed. These methods are effective but too expensive for scalable production. Layered graphene prepared through a CVD method suffers from high cost and very low yield. An alternative strategy is to reduce the graphite oxide, which is feasible for mass-production but tedious and toxic, requiring oxidation and exfoliation in the preceding steps.9–11 Although some synthetic methods are well developed at a lab scale, they are still far from commercialization because of the complex synthetic approaches. In addition, some carbon materials can be derived from expensive carbon precursors rather than sustainable resources, like polyacrylonitrile.12 Therefore, the study of carbon materials requires developing more efficient and environmental friendly methods with low-cost precursors.
Biomass compounds, which are mainly composed of carbohydrates, have the potential to serve as a sustainable source for preparing carbon materials. During the past few years, lignin, carbohydrates, cellulose, chitin, proteins, etc., have been widely adopted to prepare carbon materials,13–17e.g., pyrolysis combined with the activation of coconut obtained activated carbon (AC) with an ultrahigh SSA and micropore-predominant structure.18 Direct carbonization of bacterial cellulose derives freestanding carbon nanofiber films with uniform diameters.19 In addition, the biomass-derived carbon contains abundant functionality, and one of the challenges in this field is to develop methods to control the functionality of carbon. Combining the production of carbon and disposal of biomass waste into an integrated biomass refinery would dramatically reduce the price of carbon, which is one of the main impediments to wide-spread biomass use. However, the typical top-down approaches are incapable of controlling the material features, including morphology, porosity and surface chemistry, which goes against the electrode materials for specified applications.
To avoid these drawbacks, several novel methods were recently developed to adjust the physical structures and surface properties in the resulting carbon. In this review, we aim to highlight the recent advances in the synthesis of carbon materials from the biomass precursors (both isolated carbohydrates and crude biomass are discussed). We will first introduce the latest progress on controllably preparing carbon materials from biomass with an understanding of the mechanisms. Then, considerable attention will be paid to the remarkable results documented for these carbon materials in ECs, Li–S batteries, LIBs, and SIBs applications. We try to underline the necessity of generating innovative solutions for a sustainable future for carbon materials science and for energy storage devices.
2. Preparation methods
The common method to prepare carbon materials from biomass is a thermochemical process, which involves thermal decomposition of organic matter in the absence of oxygen at elevated temperatures. To provide the necessary control for the physical structure and surface chemistry of the resulting carbon materials, several strategies, including activation, hydrothermal carbonization, molten salt carbonization and the template method, have been proposed.
2.1 Activation
Activation is the most convenient method to increase the surface area of carbon materials and adjust the meso/micropore proportion. According to the activation mechanism, the activation methods can be attributed to three categories, chemical activation, physical activation and self-activation.

2.1.1 Chemical activation. 
Potassium hydroxide (KOH) is a well-known chemical activation reagent. The mechanisms for KOH activation can be summarized as follows: (1) the carbon matrix is etched by the K-containing species (KOH, K2CO3, K2O) through a redox reaction, resulting in abundant micro/mesopores; (2) the water vapor produced in the activation process contributes to the gasification of carbon, which further helps to develop the porosity; (3) the intermediate products (metallic K) can intercalate into the carbon framework and expand the carbon lattices, leading to a highly porous structure.20,21 As a result, the obtained porous carbon exhibits a high SSA ranging from several hundreds to thousands of square meters per gram after the activation process. Furthermore, by controlling the activation conditions (i.e., the proportion of the precursor/activation agent, activation temperature, activation time, etc.), the porous structure can be tuned. A variety of porous carbon materials with different morphologies and pore textures have been fabricated from natural biomass precursors including plants, animal organs or waste materials through KOH activation.15,22–27 Hu et al. prepared high surface area ACs by KOH activation of coconut shell.28 The surface area of the carbon materials prepared through direct carbonization of coconut shell was only about 16 m2 g−1. By changing the activation temperature from 600 to 800 °C, the SSA of the obtained activated carbon increased from 709 to 1379 m2 g−1, and the pore volume varied from 0.37 to 0.71 cm3 g−1. Additionally, with an increasing KOH/shell ratio, more micropores widened into new mesopores, further increasing the proportion of mesopores.
Activation of biomass precursors containing abundant heteroatoms provides a direct and easy way to produce heteroatom functionalized porous carbon, which is promising in energy storage device applications.29–31 Xing et al. prepared a series of N-enriched activated carbons by activating bean dreg with KOH.32 With the increasing activation temperature and KOH mass, the SSA of the resultant carbon materials was enhanced, while the N content decreased due to severe etching. Therefore, it is necessary to modify the activation strategy to prepare carbon materials with a large SSA as well as high-level heteroatom doping.
Except for KOH activation, zinc chloride (ZnCl2) activation has similar positive effects in enhancing the SSA. Because of its Lewis acid nature, ZnCl2 can promote the dehydration of the biomass precursor at low temperatures and aromatic condensation reactions at high temperatures.33 Sun et al. prepared a N,B-co-doped porous graphitic carbon (BNGC) by using chitosan as a starting material and ZnCl2 as an activation agent. Because of the intrinsic microstructure of chitosan, the BNGC exhibits a porous graphitic microstructure with a large surface area and high N and B contents.34 These activation methods have been extended to other natural biomass including coffee beans,35 coconut shell,36,37Camellia oleifera shell,38 sugar cane bagasse,39 peanut shell,40 rich husk,41 and pomegranate seed.42 Nevertheless, considering the corrosive property of the hydrogen chloride released during the high temperature pyrolysis and the high cost of ZnCl2, this technique still needs to be improved.
Phosphoric acid (H3PO4) is another activation reagent that can introduce micropores and P-containing functional groups into the carbon matrix.43 Hulicova-Jurcakova and Lu synthesized P-rich porous carbon by subjecting fruit stones to a H3PO4 activation process.44 The grafted P-containing functional groups are beneficial and enhance the stability of the electrode when it is operated at a broadened voltage window for ECs in aqueous electrolytes.
Recently, a greener and more efficient chemical activation reagent (KHCO3) was proposed by Sevilla et al.45 By using hydrochar as the precursor, the obtained carbon materials possess a large SSA, up to 2300 m2 g−1, and a high pore volume of 1.4 cm3 g−1, which is higher or comparable to the KOH activation sample.46,47 More importantly, owing to the mild reacting condition, the KHCO3 activation is less corrosive, low-cost and more environmentally friendly. Furthermore, the yield was increased by 10% when compared to the result of the KOH activation, which better fits the industrial requirement.


2.1.2 Physical activation. 
CO2 and H2O steam activation are the main ways of physical activation.48 Activation with CO2/H2O as a gasification agent involves the C–CO2/H2O reactions, resulting in the removal of carbon atoms and contributing to the development of the porous structure. For example, Yang et al. synthesized activated carbon through a one-step carbonization process of coconut shells in a CO2 atmosphere.49 Under the optimized activated condition, the achieved activated carbon exhibited a high surface area of 1667 m2 g−1 and a microporous volume of 0.89 cm3 g−1, which are higher than those of the porous carbon obtained by steam activation of the same biomass.50 Notably, the investigation results revealed that the surface area and pore volume of the physically activated carbon increases with the activation temperature, holding time, and gas flow rate.49 In addition, different from CO2 activation, the reaction rate of C–H2O is much faster than the diffusion rate of H2O, and the reaction is restricted to the surface of the carbon. Therefore, CO2 activation generates more microporosity than steam activation, resulting in relatively higher SSAs. Recently, Ji et al. studied the pyrolysis of cellulose filter paper (CFP) under NH3 to prepare N-doped activated carbon (NAC) membranes with large surface areas (1973.3 m2 g−1).51 The N atoms doped in carbon at 500 °C further reacted with NH3 at 700 °C, leading to carbon gasification.
Compared to chemical activation, porous carbon prepared through physical activation of biomass precursors usually has a high yield and bulk density but suffers from a relatively low surface area and pore volume because of the lower degree of carbon etching. Furthermore, physical activation is incapable of adjusting the electronic and surface chemistry properties of carbon materials compared to chemical activation, which also limits its application to some extent.


2.1.3 Self-activation. 
Unlike chemical and physical activation, no additional activation reagents are needed for self-activating biomass, which simplifies the procedure and decreases the cost. The self-activation process contains two activation mechanisms. One is utilizing the gases emitted during the pyrolysis process of biomass to activate the converted carbon (physical self-activation).52 The other mechanism uses the inorganic materials (like K+) that already exist within the biomass to in situ activate the converted carbon (chemical self-activation).53,54 Bommier et al. prepared cellulose-derived activated carbon with a high surface area through a one-step annealing process.52 The self-activation was induced by the gases produced from the pyrolysis process (physical self-activation mechanism). The activation degree can be tuned by tailoring the gas flow rates, resulting in a controllable surface area ranging from 98 to 2600 m2 g−1. To understand the self-activated mechanism, Xia et al.55 developed an activated model using kenaf core as the raw material and demonstrated the relationship of the experimental parameters with the yields, SSAs, and specific pore volumes. In addition, another type of biomass containing K can also induce self-activation during pyrolysis. Chen et al. fabricated activated carbon using K-rich biomass (pokeweed) as the precursor. The in situ self-activation proceeded because of the reaction between the K-containing component and converted to carbon during the calcination process, resulting in a high surface area of 718 m2 g−1.56 The self-activation method uses the gases emitted during the carbonization of the biomass to etch the carbon frame rather than an activating gas or chemicals. Therefore, compared to the conventional activation approach, the self-activation method is more environmentally friendly and cost effective.

2.2 Template method
To control the porosity of biomass-derived carbon materials for specific applications, template methods, including hard and soft templates, have been adopted.
By using hard templating/nanocasting approaches, the obtained carbon materials reversely replicate the morphology of the templates. Various architectures have been prepared, such as an ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) matrix,57 hierarchically porous carbon monoliths,58 carbon nanosheets,59 carbon spheres,60 as well as peanut-like carbon.17 The hard template can also be adopted to introduce more mesopores in the resulting carbon matrix. The nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC), for example, can form chiral nematic NCC–silica films with long-range orientation through a hydrolysis reaction (Fig. 1).61 After calcination and washing with an alkali solution, a mesoporous carbon with a high SSA and excellent chiral nematic organization can be obtained. At an optimum silica concentration, the maximum SSA of 1465 m2 g−1 and micropore volume of 1.22 cm3 g−1 can be achieved. Another brilliant example was demonstrated by Estevez and co-workers and was based on a dual templating strategy.18 Combining silica and ice templating with physical activation, interconnected macro-, meso- and micropores were generated in a glucose-derived carbon. This technique provides advantages in controlling the morphology and pore structure. However, the largest challenge is the use of the template, which involves time-consuming steps and is expensive.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic for the synthesis of chiral nematic mesoporous carbon (CMC). (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the side view of the fracture of CMC, and (c) the high-magnification image of the fracture shows a left-handed chiral nematic structure. (d) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of CMC-3. (e) N2 adsorption isotherms of CMC-1, CMC-3, and CMC-5 (ref. 61) (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). 
Using the soft templating method of block-co-polymer micelles, OMC materials have been prepared using biomass, like fructose and dopamine, as the carbon precursor.62,63 Tang et al. demonstrated that by employing three PS-b-PEO diblock copolymers with different polymerization degrees in the PS and PEO chains, OMC spheres with uniform particle sizes but different pore sizes were obtained.63 This soft-templating method simplifies the production of porous carbon greatly by avoiding the step of removing the template.
2.3 Hydrothermal carbonization
Hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) is a process similar to coal formation. The resulting carbon, which has coal-like properties, is considered a sustainable alternative to traditional carbon.64,65 Compared to carbon materials prepared through thermal pyrolysis, the HTC materials have furanic and aromatic units with oxygen-substituted arene-type moieties.66,67 This offers the possibility of introducing additional materials during the hydrothermal reaction or post functionalization, which can further modify the physical and chemical properties of HTC materials.
In 2001, glucose was transferred into carbon spheres through a hydrothermal treatment for the first time.68,69 The addition of metal ions accelerates the hydrothermal reaction of starch and changes the morphologies of the carbon–metal composite into spheres (Fig. 2a),70 nanofibers,71 and nanocables.71 Using a different precursor, carbon materials with various morphologies can be obtained (Fig. 2b–f).72–75 However, the main problems with HTC carbons are their intrinsically low porosity and conductivity. Wu et al. found that hydrothermal treatment of watermelon soft tissue will give sponge-like three-dimensional (3D) carbogels with a high porosity, which had a great potential to further functionalize carbon materials.76,77 3D carbon aerogels can also be efficiently prepared by adding borax and phenols during the HTC process.78,79 These additives stabilize the formation of small initial carbonaceous nuclei during the initial nucleation and cross-link them into a 3D interdigitated network. Chen et al. proposed introducing highly conductive materials, like graphene, during the HTC process, which can not only lead to a 3D porous structure but also greatly enhance the bulk conductivity of the resultant carbon materials.80 To further improve the surface area, chemical activation combined with pyrolysis can be performed following HTC. The resultant carbon materials demonstrated an ultra-high SSA of 3523 m2 g−1.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of the carbon spheres obtained after HTC of glucose followed by pyrolysis70 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). SEM images of (b) HTC-treated oak leaf and (c) HTC-treated pine needles72 (Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society). (d) TEM image of the prawn shell-derived carbon materials73 (Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) TEM image of HTC-synthesized carbon aerogels74 (Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) TEM image of the HTC-synthesized carbon nanoparticles75 (Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In addition to nanoarchitecture, the chemistry property of the HTC materials can also be moderated by adding amino acids, glycoproteins and so on.81,82 For example, during the hydrothermal process, cysteine offers sulfur functionalities and is subsequently incorporated into the carbon framework by nucleophilic addition within the so-called Maillard schemes,83 resulting in an S-doped carbon.81 It is notable that, contrary to the pyrolysis approach, the content of the heteroatoms in the HTC carbon was not reduced even after high-temperature pyrolysis. This is because the heteroatoms are covalently incorporated into the carbon structure and remained a part of the materials. In addition, much higher graphitization was shown in the carbon prepared through HTC and pyrolysis. Furthermore, a variety of hybrid composites can also be synthesized by incorporating inorganic nanostructures during the HTC process. For example, Li4Ti5O12 and Si nanoparticles have been added to carbon materials through a thermal carbonization step, which demonstrates a remarkable performance in LIB applications.84,85
2.4 Molten salt carbonization
The hydrothermal reaction usually ends at around 200 °C because of the limitations of solvent boiling. After high-temperature pyrolysis, the final carbon structures shrink significantly due to mass loss. However, the molten salt system, with a much higher heat capacity, can provide a much wider operating temperature window. In addition, the carbonaceous material mechanically stabilizes against shrinkage because of the molten salt, resulting in a greatly enhanced yield. The resulting carbons can be easily isolated and the molten salts can be recycled by washing with water. So far this method has been realized using glucose,86 peanut shells87 and many other organic precursors.88 With glucose as a precursor, the carbohydrate undergoes polymerization in the presence of strongly interacting ionic species (KCl/LiCl) and finally transfers to a nanoporous carbon with an amorphous nature and adjustable pore size (Fig. 3).86 By tuning the proportion of glucose/molten salts, the process yields a rather pure graphene material. The chemistry structure of the carbon materials can be further modified by N or S atoms by adding a strong oxidant, like KNO3 and K2SO4.89 The alkali metal can also work as an activator to increase the surface area of the carbon. The metal halides used can include NaCl/KCl, KCl/ZnCl2, LiF/NaF/KF, LI/KI and so on. In addition, oxosalts, like NaOH/KOH, LiNO3/KNO3, Li2SO4/K2SO4, and Li2CO3/K2CO3 can also be utilized as solvents to synthesize carbon. Due to the different melting points and vapour pressures, the reaction temperature suitable for these systems will vary over a wide range. In addition, the salts will have an influence on the final nanoarchitecture and chemical structure of the carbon materials.90 For example, peanut shell carbonized in a Li2CO3/K2CO3 mixture derived from carbon materials will have a higher SSA than those in LiCO3/Na2CO3/K2CO3, CaCl2, and CaCl2/NaCl. Molten salt carbonization is an efficient and green method to prepare carbon materials from biomass. More investigations on the mechanisms, however, are needed to further modify the resultant carbon materials.
 Fig. 3  Graphene prepared from glucose by a molten salt method. (a) Schematic of the conversion of glucose to porous carbon (or graphene) at high (or low) glucose concentrations (Cg) in a LiCl/KCl melt. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the porous carbon with high Cg (glucose/salt = 1/10). The green arrows point to the thin-layer at the edge of the main structure. (d) TEM and (e) atomic force microscope (AFM) image for the graphene synthesized at Cg = 1/100 (ref. 86) (Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). 
3. Applications in energy storage
Generally, biomass compounds can be placed into two categories. One is “soft” tissues without an extended crystalline organic scaffold. These tissues can lose their original structure, forming globular carbonaceous nanoparticles with very small sizes and interstitial porosity. Mass loss caused during the carbonization process results in significant structural changes on the nanometer scale, usually resulting in a porous, bicontinuous carbonaceous network with a large SSA. Another category is “hard” tissues with structural, crystalline organic scaffolds that can preserve their outer shape and structural features on the macro- and microscale levels. The special nanostructures in this kind of biomass can be maintained. These characteristics can be utilized in different applications, which will be discussed in the next section.
3.1 ECs
ECs, also called supercapacitors, have attracted more attention in high power energy storage applications, such as hybrid electric vehicles, load-levelling devices, and memory back-up systems for their fast charging–discharging rates and long cycle life.91 According to energy storage mechanisms, ECs can be classified as electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors (PCs). EDLCs operate on the mechanism of physical adsorption/desorption of electrolyte ions inside the pores of the electrodes when an external voltage is applied.92 EDLCs mainly use porous carbon as the electrode material, such as activated carbon, mesoporous carbon, carbide-derived carbon, and graphene, because of their large SSA, tunable pore structures, high electrical conductivity, and excellent chemical and thermal stability.93,94 PCs are based on redox reactions that occur largely (but not exclusively) on the electrode surfaces. Therefore, PCs show much higher levels of charge storage but poorer rate capability and cycle stability than the EDLCs. Therefore, several strategies have been adopted to improve the performance of PC materials, such as in situ growing PC materials on 3D carbon frameworks.95,96 In recent years, biomass-derived carbon has been widely applied in ECs, either as EDLCs electrodes or as substrates to grow PC materials.97,98 To achieve high-performance ECs, efforts have mainly included adjusting the pore structure and modifying the surface property.

3.1.1 Pore structure. 
The capacitances of ECs generally improve with increasing SSA, but the relationship is nonlinear. Pore structure (porosity and pore size distribution) is also vital to the electrochemical performances of carbon materials for ECs. Hierarchical porous structures, which contain micropores (<2 nm), mesopores or macropores (>50 nm), are effective in enhancing electrochemistry performance in ECs applications. Macropores can serve as buffering reservoirs, minimizing the ion diffusion distances. Short-range mesopores can provide low-resistant pathways for the ions and facilitate ion transportation. Micropores provide high SSA and strengthen the EDL capacitance.94,99,100 Over the past years, many researchers have reported the fabrication of hierarchical porous carbon (HPC), which shows a high specific capacitance and excellent rate capability. Coal tar pitch was developed into HPC through a microwave-assisted process coupling KOH activation and a magnesium oxide (MgO) template. By changing the mass ratio of MgO and KOH/pitch, the proportion of micro/meso/macropores can be adjusted. Under optimized conditions, the obtained carbon electrode, with a SSA of 1143 m2 g−1, exhibits a capacitance of 241 F g−1 in a symmetric cell with 6 M KOH as the electrolyte.101Via a single-step pyrolysis of dead plant leaves, Ogale et al. obtained porous carbon with a high surface area of about 1230 m2 g−1. Such carbon materials exhibit an ultra-high capacitance of 400 F g−1 and an energy density of 55 W h kg−1 in 1 M H2SO4 and a capacitance of 88 F g−1 and an energy density of 56 W h kg−1 in 1 M LiPF6 in EC–DEC.53 Wang and co-workers reported a novel and large-scale synthetic method for the production of carbon spheres with hierarchically porous structures. Through hydrothermal reaction and activation in static air, abundant mesopores and micropores were introduced into the spherical particles. The small size of the spheres (60–80 nm) ensures that these mesopores and micropores are short enough for ion access. The resulting HPCs show a BET surface area of 1306 m2 g−1 and pore volumes up to 1.11 cm3 g−1. The ratio of the mesopore volume and total pore volume reaches 63.9%. The obtained carbon materials exhibit an excellent capacitance of 170 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and superior rate capability (140 F g−1 at 10 A g−1).102 Compared to the template methods and acid/base activation, this method is much easier and cost-effective.
Carbon nanostructures with 2D open morphology combine the advantages of the high utilization of micropores in the interconnected hierarchical porous structure and high ion-transport capability across the electrodes, which would lead to a higher capacitance and better rate capability.103,104 HPC nanosheets, which were prepared through simultaneous activation and graphitization of biomass-derived natural silk, exhibited a capacitance of 242 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 in an ionic liquid electrolyte and excellent capacitance retention (65% at 10 A g−1).105 The high BET surface area (2494 m2 g−1) provided abundant active sites for the formation of the electric double layer; the hierarchical porous structure enhanced the liquid electrolyte transport between the electrode and ions. By employing hemp as a precursor, Mitlin and co-workers obtained graphene-like carbon nanosheets (CNS) with ultrahigh SSA (up to 2287 m2 g−1), a high proportion of mesopores (up to 58%), and good electrical conductivity (211–226 S m−1) (Fig. 4).106 The as-assembled device yields an energy density higher than commercially available supercapacitors over wide operating temperatures in an ionic liquid electrolyte. The outstanding performance can be attributed to the porous structure. The macroporous voids serve as ion-buffering reservoirs, and the high ratio of mesopores facilitates the accessibility of the electrolyte ions to the electrode surface and allows for fast ion transport. Wang and co-workers prepared a hierarchical porous graphene-activated carbon (G-aC) material via activating biomass cellulose and graphene hybrids.107 By using graphene to direct the structure, the resulting G-aC possess macropores of interconnected walls and micro/mesopores on the carbon nanosheets. When used as EDLCs electrodes, the G-aC electrodes have an excellent performance: a high specific capacitance of 300 F g−1 in aqueous KOH and high gravimetric (180–200 F g−1) and volumetric (145–160 F cm−3) specific capacitances in organic or ionic liquid electrolytes.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process for the CNS materials. (b) Annual dark field (ADF) TEM image of CNS-800. Inset: electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) thickness profile. (c) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of CNS-800 at different scan rates (at 20 °C). (d) Rate capability and (e) Ragone plot of CNS-800 evaluated at different temperatures. The energy and power density were calculated based on the total mass of the active material (solid) and the mass of the device (hollow). (f) Comparison of the performance of the CNS-based device measured at 20–100 °C and commercial batteries and supercapacitors106 (Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 
Although traditional porous carbon materials with large SSA and short ion transport distances possess high gravimetric performances, they suffer from poor volumetric performances because of the low density and/or high pore volume of the electrode materials. Fan and co-workers proposed to prepare densely porous graphene-like carbon (PGC) nanosheets through hydrothermal treatment of fungus followed by carbonization.108 Such PGC nanosheets derived from cell walls of fungus possess large SSA (1103 m2 g−1), hierarchically interconnected porous frameworks, and most importantly, a high bulk density (about 0.96 g cm−3). These unique characterizations give the PGC nanosheets an ultra-high volumetric capacitance of 360 F cm−3 and excellent cycling stability. The as-assembled symmetric EC delivers a superior volumetric energy density of 21 W h L−1. The same group recently reported the fabrication of a large-scale HPC monolith from a lignin source via a dual-template approach, which exhibited superior volumetric capacitances of 97.1 F cm−3 at a high mass loading of 14.4 mg cm−2.109 The promising volumetric performances suggested the large-scale 3D interconnected HPC network may provide a low-cost and environmentally-friendly design for electrode materials for high volumetric-performance ECs. Above all, a balance between the particle density and porosity is needed to achieve both high gravimetric and volumetric performances for ECs.


3.1.2 Surface properties. 
In addition to the SSA and pore structure, the surface properties of biomass-derived carbon materials also play an important role in their electrochemical performance. Recent studies suggest that the surface functional groups or doped heteroatoms can significantly modify the surface properties (such as improved wettability, introducing pseudocapacitance reactions and increased conductivity) of the carbon electrodes.110 This strategy is ideal when the biomass serves as a precursor for synthesizing heteroatom-doped carbon materials.
As a promising method to improve the supercapacitive performance, O doping into carbon frameworks is beneficial for enhancing the wettability and introducing faradic pseudocapacitance in aqueous electrolytes.111 Generally, O-doping is generated by carbonization of O-rich biomass precursors, chemical activation with KOH,21 electrochemical oxidation,112 and O2-plasma treatment.113 Zhang et al. prepared an O-enriched activated carbon with a layered sedimentary rocks structure using gelatin as the precursor.111 The obtained oxygen-enriched carbon showed a capacitance of 181.7 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 in a symmetrical cell and still retained 140.4 F g−1 even at 30 A g−1.
N is the most widely studied heteroatom in the optimization of carbon materials. It is reported that incorporating N into carbon frameworks can further improve the electronic conductivity of carbon materials and introduce pseudocapacitance in an acid electrolyte, leading to a significant increase in the capacitance.114,115 Typically, N groups can be incorporated into a carbon framework by carbonization in the presence of extra ammonia or direct pyrolysis of N-containing carbon precursors. Huang and co-workers produced a 3D N-doped mesoporous carbon by directly carbonizing kelp under an NH3 atmosphere. The abundant N-functional groups on the surface of the porous carbon combined with the high SSA offer a strong tendency to deliver a volumetric capacitance over 360 F cm−3 and excellent cycling stability.116 Moreover, incorporating multiple heteroatoms into a carbon matrix (dual or ternary-doping) is a comparatively new strategy to enhance the electrochemical performance for ECs applications. Sevilla et al. proposed to add melamine to the activation mixture, which leads to carbon materials with ultra-high SSA (3300–3400 m2 g−1), hierarchically micro/mesoporous structure, and N,O-co-doping. Combining these advantages, the carbon materials exhibit high specific capacitances in aqueous electrolytes (>270 F g−1 in H2SO4 and >190 F g−1 in Li2SO4) and outstanding rate capabilities (retaining 55–65% at 150 A g−1 in H2SO4 and 70% at 80 A g−1 in Li2SO4).117
N doping in the obtained carbon using the above method, however, is heterogeneous and low-concentration. To overcome this deficiency, researchers paid more attention to the carbonization of N-enriched biomass precursors to synthesize N-doped porous carbon. Mitlin and co-workers prepared 3D porous carbon films composed of interwoven connected carbon fibers by carbonizing chicken eggshell membranes.119 Because of the continuous hierarchical porous structure and high N content (8%), the obtained materials displayed an exceptional specific capacitance of 297 F g−1, an excellent rate capability and superior cycling stability. Jin and co-workers prepared carbon microporous nanoplates (H-CMNs) by activation of regenerated silk fibroin during carbonization (Fig. 5a and b).118 The resulting material exhibited numerous heteroatoms (N and O) and a lateral size greater than 5 μm and a thickness less than 100 nm. With a high SSA of 2557.3 m2 g−1 (Fig. 5c) and heteroatom doping, H-CMNs exhibited a capacitance of 264 F g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 and 168 F g−1 in BMIMBF4/AN (Fig. 5d–f). The H-CMNs-based device could reach a maximum energy density of 133 W h kg−1 and power density of 217 kW kg−1. Titirici and co-workers prepared porous N,O-doped carbon (HC-GA) via hydrothermal carbonization of biomass followed by chemical activation.120 The preceding hydrothermal treatment can maintain a higher content of N and O in the resulting carbon framework compared to direct pyrolysis.65,121 Despite a medium-range SSA (571 m2 g−1), the HC-GA carbon exhibited a surprisingly high capacitive performance of 300 F g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 and 220 F g−1 in 6 M KOH at a current density of 0.1 A g−1.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic model of the Bombyx mori silk fibroin lamellar-like layer formation in water by self-assembly. (b) SEM image of regenerated silk fibroin film after thermal treatment at 200 °C. (c) N2 adsorption and desorption isotherm curves and pore-size distribution curve (inset) of the H-CMNs. CV curves of the H-CMNs (d) in BMIMBF4/AN electrolyte and (e) in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, respectively. (f) Rate capability of H-CMNs measured in organic and aqueous electrolytes118 (Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). 
In addition, other heteroatoms, such as B, P and S, can also benefit the ECs performance of carbon materials. Similar to N-doping, B-doping can also improve the electrical conductivity and introduce pseudocapacitance, leading to carbon materials with a high performance. Moreover, B-doping can improve the wettability of carbon materials in organic electrolytes and increase the electrolyte-accessible surface area.122,123 Recently, Qiu et al. developed a scalable and economical approach for sustainable production of N,B-doped carbon nanosheets (B/N-CS) by assembling the gelatin molecule in 2D crystals of boric acid followed by annealing (Fig. 6).104 Boric acid is employed as both the 2D template and boron source for B doping in carbon nanosheets. The electrodes made of B/N-CS powder deliver an impressive specific capacitance of 358 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and maintain 267 F g−1 at 30 A g−1, corresponding to a BET area-normalized capacitance of 86 and 64 μF cm−2, respectively. P-Doping can also increase the specific capacitance because of the pseudocapacitive effect.124 In addition, P-doping can broaden the electrochemical window, dramatically increasing the energy density.125 Hulicova-Jurcakova and co-workers prepared P-rich porous carbon by H3PO4 activation of waste coffee grounds. The obtained carbon provided high specific capacitances in both aqueous and organic electrolytes.126 It was demonstrated that the assembled ECs can work under a wide potential window because the electrochemical hydrogen-storage process is reversible in P-doped carbon. Wang et al. prepared N,P-co-doped porous carbon via activation of fish scale, which is rich in lecithin.127 The obtained carbon materials have proven to be good electrode materials for ECs. S-Doping could affect the p electrons in the carbon lattice and improve the electrical conductivity, surface reactivity and wettability of the resultant carbon.128 Zhang et al. successfully prepared S-doped porous carbon materials from the shells of broad beans, and the as-prepared porous carbon displayed a high specific capacitance of 202 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 with a superior cycling performance for EDLCs.129 In summary, heteroatoms incorporated into carbon frames have been demonstrated to be effective in increasing the electrochemical performances of carbon materials. However, the mechanism of how the introduced heteroatoms affect the performance of ECs is not fully understood. Next, in situ technology will be a powerful approach to explore the mechanism during the electrochemical charge/discharge process.
 Fig. 6  (a) Optical images of a B/N-CS film: (a1) a freestanding B/N-CS film, (a2) a flexible film wrapping around a glass rod, and (a3) a cross-section SEM image of a B/N-CS film. (b) N2 sorption isotherm of B/N-CSs. Inset: the corresponding pore size distribution curve. (c) C 1s XPS spectra of B/N-CSs. (d) CV curves of a B/N-CS film electrode in a three-electrode system in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. Electrochemical performance of B/N-CS film-based symmetric supercapacitor: (e) CV curves at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 within different voltage windows and (f) Ragone plots within different voltage windows104 (Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH). 


3.1.3 Graphitization. 
The electrical conductivity of carbon materials is also crucial with respect to their electrochemical performances, such as internal resistance, rate capability, power delivery, and energy efficiency. As we know, a high electrical conductivity is usually associated with a high graphitization degree. However, it will result in a small SSA and an undeveloped pore structure. Therefore, there is a compromise between the graphitization degree and pore structure in order to maximize the electrochemical performance. Fu and co-workers synthesized porous graphitic carbon nanosheets (PGCs) by an in situ self-generating template strategy based on the carburized effect of iron with cornstalks.130 Owing to the excellent conductivity, the planar and graphitic structures of the PGCS can facilitate electron transport, and they show excellent electrochemical capacitances up to 213 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and rate performances in 6 M KOH electrolyte. Jiang and co-workers reported a facile method to synthesize catalyst-free, flexible, mesoporous, and highly graphitized carbon aerogels based on bacterial cellulose toughened lignin–resorcinol–formaldehyde gels.131 Because of their unique nanostructure and large mesopore proportion, the carbon materials exhibit an area capacitance of 62.2 μF cm−2, which is higher than most of the reported values in the literature. Fu and co-workers developed a simple and novel approach for producing porous graphene-like nanosheets (PGNSs) with a large SSA via an effective simultaneous activation–graphitization route from coconut shell, and the high conductivity of the PGNSs promotes electron transport during the charge–discharge process (Fig. 7).132 As a result, the PGNSs obtained an outstanding specific capacitance (268 F g−1 in an aqueous electrolyte and 196 F g−1 in an organic electrolyte), high capacity retention, and good cycling stability.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) HRTEM images of PGNS-3-900. Inset: Raman spectrum of PGNS-3-900 materials. (c) Charge–discharge curves of PGNS-3-900 at different current densities (2–10 A g−1). (d) Ragone plots of PGNS-3-900-based symmetric supercapacitor in 6 M KOH and 1 M Et4NBF4/PC electrolytes132 (Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). 

3.2 Li–S battery
Owing to their high theoretical energy density of 2600 W h kg−1, Li–S batteries hold great potential as the next-generation of large-scale and high energy density energy-storage devices.133–136 However, the low electrical conductivity of sulfur (5 × 10 g−30 S cm−1 at 25 °C), the dissolution of polysulfide intermediates in the organic electrolytes, and the large volume expansion of the sulfur electrode during cycling cause poor cycle stability in Li–S batteries.137–139 It has been shown that incorporating sulfur into different carbon matrices could improve the conductivity of sulfur species and accommodate the volume expansion of sulfur during cycling. Porous carbon materials possessing high SSA and excellent chemical stability are ideal host matrices for elemental sulfur.140–142 Biomass derived carbons are selected for Li–S batteries as one of the most promising porous host materials because of their special micro-structure, elemental composition, and low cost.36,143–145

3.2.1 Pore structure. 
A hierarchically porous structure with interconnected macro-, meso- and micro-pores is the most desirable structure for Li–S batteries. The mesopores serve as sulfur and electrolyte reservoirs, act as ion highways and improve mass transport. The micropores are beneficial for repressing the “shuttle effects,” and hierarchical porous carbon is highly desirable for Li–S batteries.146 Zhang and co-workers reported highly electronically conductive carbon matrices (CA) combined with abundant micropores and high surface areas as hosts for S.147 This obtained hierarchically porous carbon host possesses a large surface area of 900 m2 g−1 and pore volume of 1–3 cm3 g−1. The abundant micropores and mesopores of the prepared CA can be employed as excellent sulfur reservoirs for Li–S batteries to effectively eliminate the capacity fading effect caused by the dissolution of polysulfide. The S/CA hybrid retained a capacity of 820 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 100 mA h g−1. Even at a current density of 3.2C, the reversible capacity of the S/CA hybrid can still be maintained at ∼521 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles.
Carbon hosts with uniformly distributed mesopores, which could provide a more facile path for ion transportation, are expected to show a better performance. Using starch as a feedstock and colloidal silica as a template, highly porous carbon (HPBC) with uniform mesopores was prepared via a sol–gel route.148 As a result, the obtained HPBC possesses a large surface area up to 950 m2 g−1 and a high pore volume of 3.14 cm3 g−1. Due to the uniform and favorable pore structure of HPBC, a high sulfur loading up to 82.3% was achieved. An initial discharge specific capacity of 922 mA h g−1 and a reversible capacity of 683 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles at 0.5C were obtained. Even at a larger current rate of 1C after 300 cycles, a capacity of nearly 500 mA h g−1 was still maintained for the as-prepared HPBC-S cathode.
A 3D hierarchically ordered porous carbon was prepared by in situ self-assembly of 350 nm colloidal poly(methyl methacrylate–butyl acrylate–acrylic acid) spheres and 9 nm silica spheres with sucrose as the carbon source (Fig. 8).149 The obtained honeycomb-like carbon (HOPC) exhibited a high SSA of 850 m2 g−1 and pore volume of 1.4 cm3 g−1. The S–HPHC composite with S content of 67 wt% had an initial discharge capacity of 1193 mA h g−1 and a reversible discharge capacity of 884 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 0.1C. Particularly, the S–HPHC composite presents a large capacity of 650 mA h g−1 at 1C. The excellent rate performance can be attributed to the unique 3D hierarchical porous honeycomb structure, which provides better contact between carbon and sulfur, highly enhancing the electrical conductivity of the sulfur species.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic for the preparation of HOPC and HOPC/S nanocomposites. (b) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of HOPC. Inset: the corresponding size distribution curve. (c) Reversible capacity vs. current density for the HOPC/S nanocomposite electrode. (d) EIS spectra of the HOPC nanocomposite at different cycles. Inset: the equivalent circuit used to fit the impedance spectrum149 (Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). 


3.2.2 Surface properties. 
In addition to the porous nanostructure, the surface properties, in particular the heteroatom doping in carbon materials, also play an important role in improving the electrochemical performance of sulfur cathodes.150 For example, functionalization with N and S heteroatoms can modify the electron density distribution and lead to much stronger polysulfide binding.151 Nazar et al. used a porous N,S dual-doped carbon (NSC), which was derived from the liquid-crystal-driven self-assembly of bio-sustainable and low-cost cellulose nanocrystals, as a host for sulphur (Fig. 9a).152 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies combined with ab initio calculations revealed that the strong Li+–N and Sn2−–S interactions facilitate the polysulfide chemisorption. The sulfur electrodes exhibit an ultralow capacity fading of 0.052% per cycle over 1100 cycles (Fig. 9b and c).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic for the synthesis of NSC. (b) The discharge capacity retention of NSC/S-70, NC/S-70, CDC/S-70, and NP-NSC/S-70 electrodes at C/5 rates. (c) The long-term cycling performance of the NSC/S-70 electrode at 2C rate, showing the coulombic efficiency on the left y-axis152 (Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH). 
In conclusion, carbon materials derived from biomass are needed for Li–S batteries because of their tunable porosity and heteroatom doped surfaces. High SSA and hierarchical nanopores are desirable for high sulfur loading and strong suppression of the disillusion of polysulfides, respectively. Heteroatom doping can further enhance the electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries by effectively suppressing the dissolution of polysulfides.


3.2.3 Interlayer. 
In addition to their application as sulfur host materials, biomass-derived carbon can also be used as interlayers for Li–S batteries.153,154 For example, Zhang et al. reported porous bamboo carbon fibers (BCFMs) as a captor interlayer for Li–S batteries (Fig. 10a).154 The interwoven BCFs employed here acted as conductive networks that could improve the utilization of sulfur. More importantly, the highly porous nanostructure of BCFs provided additional physical adsorption to suppress the deposition of Li2S2/Li2S on the cathode. Consequently, excellent long-term cyclability over 300 cycles at a current rate of 1C and a high coulombic efficiency (ca. 98%) were obtained (Fig. 10b). This green and low cost BCFM can provide an attractive alternative for large-scale commercialization of Li–S batteries.
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic configuration of the Li–S cell with a BCFM interlayer. (b) Cycle life of the cells with and without the interlayer at 1C (ref. 154) (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). 

3.3 Li-ion batteries
Currently, graphite is recognized as the leading anode material in commercial LIBs because of its low cost, high electrical conductivity, long cycling stability, and environmental friendliness.155,156 However, graphite suffers from a low capacity of <372 mA h g−1 and a poor rate capability because of its low Li+ diffusion coefficient. Therefore, it cannot meet the urgent demand of advanced power systems with high energy and high power density, such as electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).157,158 Considerable efforts have been made to explore other novel carbonaceous materials possessing high capacity, high rate performance, and easy accessibility.
Over the years, various new biochars have been developed by employing appropriate biomass precursors and different treatment strategies, such as: (1) designing novel nanostructures that can shorten the ion/electron diffusion pathways and offer a large electrode/electrolyte interface; (2) hierarchical porosity (intertwined micropores, mesopores, and macropores) can offer a rapid ion transport route with an enhanced rate capability; (3) introducing defects and functional groups and/or heteroatoms can increase available active sites and effectively modulate their electronic and chemical character. In this section, we will review the current state-of-the-art for biomass derived carbon for LIBs.

3.3.1 Micro morphology. 
Natural biomass usually possesses a variety of microstructures that can be used as precursors for preparing carbonaceous materials with different structures. These biomass-derived carbons deliver high capacity, enhanced rate performance and cycling stability as anode materials for LIBs. Dahn et al. used sugar-derived carbon, which was prepared via carbonization at 1050 °C under Ar flow or vacuum, and obtained a reversible capacity of about 650 mA h g−1 as anodes for LIBs, exceeding that of graphite.159 Cao et al. reported a carbon nanofiber web (A-pBC-6) with a hierarchically porous structure and a large surface area that was created by activating pyrolyzed bacterial cellulose (Fig. 11a).160 The as-prepared A-pBC-6 exhibits a significantly improved electrochemical performance compared to commercial graphite, and it can deliver a high capacity of over 857.6 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles (Fig. 11b). The significant enhancement of the Li-ion storage performance could be attributed to its hierarchical micropore–mesopore microstructure and high surface area, which can greatly enhance the electrolyte-accessible area, decrease the diffusion resistance of Li+, and shorten the transport length for Li-ions and electrons. A full LIB was assembled by coupling the A-pBC-6 anode with a commercially available LiFePO4 cathode (Fig. 11c and d), which exhibited a stable discharge capacity of 122.4 mA h g−1 (77.5%) after 40 cycles. The template method is also a promising strategy to generate pores. For example, Zhu et al. proposed a novel and scalable method to fabricate porous carbon using MgO as a hard template and cotton cellulose as a precursor.161 The obtained carbon possesses a macro/mesoporous structure and a high SSA of 1260 m2 g−1. When evaluated as the anode material for LIBs, the porous carbon exhibits attractive electrochemical performances demonstrated by a high reversible capacity of 793 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 500 cycles and a capacity of 355 mA h g−1 at 4 A g−1. It was also noted that micro-sized carbon materials are favorable for practical energy storage applications since they usually enable a higher tap density than nanosized materials and are expected to lead to a higher volumetric capacity. Qiu et al. prepared micro-sized porous carbon spheres from corn starch using an integrated procedure of enzymolysis, pre-oxidation, and carbonization.162 The porous carbon spheres (PCSs) demonstrated a superb rate capability as the anode material for LIBs because of the uniquely abundant and porous structure. For example, the PCS electrode delivers a high capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at an ultrafast current density of 20 A g−1 (about 27 s to be fully charged).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the electron transfer and lithium-ion storage in the A-pBC-6. (b) Cycling performance of the A-pBC-6 at 100, 300, 1000, 2000 and 4000 mA g−1. (c) Voltage profiles of LiFePO4/A-pBC-6 full cell for 1, 5, 10, 20, 30 and 40 cycles and (d) corresponding specific capacity vs. cycle number of the battery (left) and columbic efficiency (right)160 (Copyright 2015 Elsevier). 


3.3.2 Surface property. 
As anode materials for LIBs, most biomass-derived carbons usually deliver high capacity, good rate capability and cycling stability. Nevertheless, the serious disadvantage of biochar, a kind of hard carbon, is the large initial capacity loss and obvious hysteresis in the voltage profile, which restrict its commercialization for LIBs. Increasing the graphitic degree of carbon materials can overcome these shortcomings. Yang et al. successfully synthesized interconnected, highly graphitic carbon nanosheets (HGCNS) via a combined hydrothermal and graphitization process under 2600 °C using wheat stalk as the carbon precursor.163 The graphitic degree is up to 90.2%. The resultant HGCNS employed as an anode material for LIBs show superior electrochemical properties in numerous respects, including high initial coulombic efficiency (62.9%), long cycling stability, good rate capability, and tiny charge/discharge voltage hysteresis.
Besides the degree of graphitization, surface functional groups and/or heteroatoms (such as O, N and B) will affect the electrochemical performance of carbon materials. For example, LIB anodes employing N and B-doped graphene demonstrate capacities as high as 1043 and 1549 mA h g−1, respectively.164,165 Fey et al. developed a high-capacity disordered carbon derived from peanut shells (4765 mA h g−1).166 The high insertion capacity is due to the binding of Li on the extra surfaces of the single layers of carbon and the surface functional groups. Recently, Pol et al. successfully synthesized carbon with unique microstructures from bee pollen (ABP) and cattail pollen (ACP).167 Both samples contain high levels of O (about 11.5%), which contributes to their outstanding capacities and rate capabilities. For example, ACP carbon delivered high specific capacities (590 mA h g−1 at 50 °C and 382 mA h g−1 at 25 °C) when cycled at C/10 rate. It is well-known that the residue N left in the biomass-derived carbons has a positive effect on their electrochemical properties. This improvement, however, is very limited because of the relatively low content. The key is to prepare carbon with a high SSA, suitable pore structure and high N content. Recently, N contents of 4.7%, 5.13%, and 5.5% were achieved using natural silk as a precursor,168 and wheat straw169 and ox horns170 as biomass precursors, respectively. Research by Mitlin et al. resulted in mesoporous N-rich carbon (PMC) with a bulk N content of 10.1%, SSA of 800 m2 g−1, and bimodal mesopore distribution, which was prepared using egg white as the carbon precursor and cellular foam silica as the template (Fig. 12).171 Such carbon exhibits a reversible capacity of 1780 mA h g−1 as the LIB anode, which is among the highest value ever reported for any carbon-based electrode (Fig. 12d–f). The excellent properties may be attributed to a unique combination of a high surface area, partial graphitization and very high bulk N content.
 Fig. 12  (a) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of PMC carbons. Inset: the corresponding pore-size distribution curves. (b) N 1s XPS spectra of PMC carbons. (c) TEM image of PMC-850. (d) CV curves at 0.1 mV s−1 and (e) charge–discharge curves of PMC-650 at 0.1 A g−1. (f) Charge–discharge capacity vs. cycle number for PMC carbons171 (Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). 


3.3.3 Novel carbon composites. 
Biomass derived carbon is an ideal electrode material and a desired conductive substrate to combine with other electro-active materials. For example, high performance fibrous transition metal oxide anodes such as Ni-doped NiO fiber, yolk–shell structured carbon@Fe2O3 fiber, and hollow CuO fiber with controllable nanostructures were prepared using alginate microfibers as the carbon precursor and templates.172 Taking advantage of the interconnected nano-porous structure naturally existing in rice husks, the derived silicon/carbon porous nano-composite exhibits excellent cycling and power performance as a LIB anode.173 Yu et al. discovered a smart and scalable method to convert disposable bamboo chopsticks into uniform carbon fiber (Fig. 13a–d).174 When measured as an anode for LIBs, this biochar exhibited a competitive electrochemical performance with commercial graphitic materials. They further upgraded the performance of carbon fibers by growing nanostructured MnO2 nanowires (NWs) on it (Fig. 13e and f). The as-designed hybrid electrode possessed a good cycling performance (without decay after 300 cycles) and excellent rate performance (Fig. 13h). The enhanced electrochemical performance is ascribed to the combination of the robust skeleton of carbon fibers and the firmly anchored C/MnO2 NWs forming a unique core–shell architecture with great synergetic effects.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic displaying the overall evolution of bamboo chopsticks into uniform carbon fibers. SEM images of (b–d) the produced carbon fibers and (e and f) the C/MnO2 NWs/carbon fibers hybrid. (g) Cycling performance and charge/discharge profiles (inset) of carbon fibers (green) and bulky bamboo carbons (black). (h) Cycling performance of C/MnO2 NWs/carbon fibers, MnO2 NWs/carbon fibers and the pristine carbon fibers performed at 0.2 A g−1 for 300 cycles174 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 

3.4 Na-ion battery
NIBs are expected to be a promising alternative to LIBs for low cost and next-generation large-scale electrochemical energy storage applications.175–177 Currently, there have been some cathode materials for NIBs, but the major challenge in realizing NIBs is the absence of suitable anode materials. LIBs usually utilize a graphite anode, as Li+ can reversibly form the stage-one graphite intercalation compound (LiC6).178 However, the larger radii of the Na-ion vs. the Li-ion along with its atomic weight results in a low capacity of about 35 mA h g−1.179 Hard carbon materials and their derivatives have been studied as an available anode for NIBs.180,181 Recently, researchers investigated carbon-based materials derived from biomasses such as organic waste products, which otherwise have low economic cost, and explored their applications in electrochemical energy storage and environmental science.182–184
Xu et al. proposed a very simple method to prepare hard carbons via a one-step pyrolysis of shaddock peel under N2 without activation or any further treatments.185 The unique honeycomb-like micro-structure and the large interlayer distance (0.38 nm) provide the hard carbon with very high reversible Na storage capacities up to 430 mA h g−1 at a current density of 30 mA g−1 with a high initial coulombic efficiency of 69%. As we all know, designing a nanosized morphology or/and hierarchically porous structure is an effective method to enhance the electrochemical performance of carbon materials, as the nanostructure can provide more active sites for Na-ion storage, decrease the diffusion distance of Na-ions, and improve the rate capability. However, the developed porosity and high surface area usually lead to a very low initial coulombic efficiency, usually only 20–50%.185,186 For example, Huang and Zhang et al. prepared porous carbon with a high surface area of 1272 m2 g−1 from shaddock peels by H3PO4 treatment, which was functionalized by O- and P-containing functional groups.186 The porous hard carbon delivered a reversible capacity of 314.5 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 as an anode for NIBs. The Na storage mechanisms of the as-prepared carbon can be explained by Na+ intercalation into the disordered graphene layers, redox reaction of the surface O-containing groups and Na+ adsorbed in the nanoscale pores. However, such a carbon electrode exhibited a low coulombic efficiency of 27% because of the formation of an SEI film and the side reactions of the surface phosphorus groups. Hu et al. reported amorphous monodispersed hard carbon microspherules (HCS) from sucrose as a high performance anode material for NIBs and investigated the influence of the carbonization temperature on the structure (Fig. 14a and b) and the Na-ion storage properties (Fig. 14c and d).187 Interestingly, the plateau capacity in the low voltage region increased with increasing pyrolysis temperature. The HCS pyrolyzed at 1600 °C exhibited the highest plateau capacity of 220 mA h g−1 and outstanding cycling stability with a capacity retention of 93% after 100 cycles. Moreover, the initial coulombic efficiency of the HCS increased from 54% to 83% by coating its surface with soft carbon through the pyrolysis of toluene. Later, Kumar and Zhao et al. demonstrated a flame deposition method to prepare carbon nanoparticles (CNPs) using coconut oil as a bio-precursor.188 The biochar delivered a second-cycle discharge capacity of ∼277 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 as a NIB anode. The stability of CNPs against cycling can be significantly enhanced by surface modification with a piranha solution to obtain surface-carboxylated carbon nanoparticles (c-CNPs). Recently, Yan et al. revealed a novel concept employing okra as the source of both C and N yielding carbon (NDCs) with a high content of N (∼9.89%).189 The unique structure, high content of N, and high accessible surface area endow NDCS with a high specific capacity (∼300 mA h g−1) and extremely long life (over 2000 cycles) for NIB.
 Fig. 14  (a) Raman spectra and (b) relation curve of ID/IG and carbonization temperature of HCS materials. Inset: SEM image of HCS material. (c) Retained capacity from plateau and slope contributions under different current rates of HCS samples. (d) Cycling performance of HCS1600/Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 full cell187 (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the relevant cathode/anode charge storage mechanisms in NICs. Charge/discharge profiles of (b) PSNC-3-800 and (c) PSOC-A, respectively. (d) Ragone plots of PSNC-3-800//PSOC-A at 0 °C, 25 °C, and 65 °C. (e) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of PSNC-3-800//PSOC-A tested at 6.4 A g−1 for 10000 cycles191 (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Recently, self-supported electrode architectures have been reported to overcome the drawbacks of additive mixing and exhibited fast charging/discharging rates. Shi and Wang et al. fabricated low-cost carbon nanofibrous webs (PL-CNFs) from polyacrylonitrile (PAN)-refined lignin (RL), which is extracted from hardwood lignosulfonate by simple electrospinning followed by stabilization and carbonization processes.190 The mechanically flexible and 3D interconnected PL-CNFs can be directly used as a NIB anode without a binder or current collector. The optimized electrode delivered a high reversible capacity of 292.6 mA h g−1, prominent initial coulombic efficiency of 70.5% and a good rate capability (80 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1).
Mitlin and co-workers created a unique hybrid Na-ion capacitor (NIC) with both electrodes obtained entirely from a single biomass precursor, waste peanut shells, by tailoring the synthesis process (Fig. 15).191 The cathode (ion adsorption-type electrode) based on a peanut shell nanosheet carbon (PSNC) displayed a hierarchically porous structure, a sheet-like morphology, a large specific surface area (up to 2396 m2 g−1) and high levels of oxygen doping (up to 13.51 wt%). A low surface area peanut shell ordered carbon (PSOC) was used as an ion intercalation anode. The assembled NIC operates within a wide temperature range (0–65 °C), yielding an ultra-high energy density of 201 W h kg−1 and power density of 16.5 kW kg−1 at room temperature. At 1.5–3.5 V, the device achieved 88% capacity retention even after 10000 cycles at 51.2 A g−1.
4. Conclusions and outlook
Biomass is an abundant and sustainable source for the production of carbon. To develop processes for the efficient utilization of biomass resources, it is important to understand carbon chemistry and how additional agents can be used to alter the parameters of carbon materials. This review highlighted the innovative research on biomass derived carbon materials and their applications in energy storage devices. To meet the special needs for different energy storage devices, various preparation methods have been developed for tailoring the properties of biomass derived carbon materials, including surface area, pore size distribution, surface chemistry and graphitization degree, etc. For ECs and Li–S batteries, where the carbon material is usually used as the host materials for absorbing electrolyte ions and confining active materials, the biomass derived carbon materials should feature large surface areas, high electric conductivities and abundant functional heteroatoms. Therefore, activation methods combined with heteroatom-doping and/or nanostructure design were widely used to boost the performance. For LIBs and NIBs where lithium/sodium ions are inserted into the carbon framework, biomass derived materials should possess a high graphitization degree and high electric conductivity. Moreover, to enhance the specific capacity and rate performance, the biomass derived carbon materials should exhibit an optimized pore structure for shortening ion diffusion pathways and favorable surface properties for avoiding large irreversible capacities.
The prospects of biomass derived carbon materials have improved remarkably over the past few years, but more improvements are still needed to exploit their full potentials for high-performance energy storage devices. First, fundamental studies are necessary to understand and control the properties of biomass derived carbon materials that are prepared using different biomass precursors and methods. Furthermore, the effects of the pore structure and surface/bulk chemistry of the biomass derived carbon materials on the electrochemical performance in different electrolytes and/or potentials should be further studied. In situ technologies, such as X-ray absorption, X-ray diffraction and nuclear magnetic resonance, may be powerful tools for understanding these fundamental issues. While some research work is informative, more realistic, scalable approaches to biomass derived carbon materials are vital for wide-scale commercialization. In addition, further work should pay more attention to other parameters of biomass derived carbon materials, such as ash content and tap density, which are normally ignored but play important roles in the overall performances.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the 973 Program (Grant No. 2014CB239701), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 51372116, No. 51672128), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK2011740, No. BK20151468), the Priority Academic Program for Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), Funding for Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation in NUAA (no. BCXJ14-12), and Jiangsu Innovation Program for Graduate Education (no. KYLX_0254).
Notes and references
T. Abbasi and S. A. Abbasi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 919–937 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, W. Li, B. Ma and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5926–5940 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
Z. Yang, J. Ren, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5159–5223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bazaka, M. V. Jacob and K. Ostrikov, Chem. Rev., 2015, 116, 163–214 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Kim, L. Shi, A. Majumdar and P. McEuen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 215502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Behabtu, C. C. Young, D. E. Tsentalovich, O. Kleinerman, X. Wang, A. W. Ma, E. A. Bengio, R. F. ter Waarbeek, J. J. de Jong and R. E. Hoogerwerf, Science, 2013, 339, 182–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Klionsky, F. C. Abdalla, H. Abeliovich, R. T. Abraham, A. Acevedo-Arozena, K. Adeli, L. Agholme, M. Agnello, P. Agostinis and J. A. Aguirre-Ghiso, Autophagy, 2012, 8, 445–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
S. Wang and R. A. Dryfe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5279–5283 CAS .
W. Du, X. Jiang and L. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10592–10606 CAS .
Z. Li, J. T. Zhang, Y. M. Chen, J. Li and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, F. Dai, Q. Xiao, L. Yang, J. Shen, C. Zhang and M. Cai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 102–106 CAS .
W. Zhang, H. Lin, Z. Lin, J. Yin, H. Lu, D. Liu and M. Zhao, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2114–2122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, T. Li, H. Yu, L. Zhi, Z. Liu and Z. Lei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2079–2086 CAS .
J. Wang, L. Shen, Y. Xu, H. Dou and X. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 9497–9503 RSC .
Z. Li, Z. Xu, X. Tan, H. Wang, C. M. Holt, T. Stephenson, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 871–878 CAS .
L. Estevez, R. Dua, N. Bhandari, A. Ramanujapuram, P. Wang and E. P. Giannelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1785–1790 CAS .
Z. Y. Wu, C. Li, H. W. Liang, J. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 2997–3001 CrossRef .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei and Z. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300816 CrossRef .
J. Wang and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23710–23725 RSC .
X. Li, W. Xing, S. Zhuo, J. Zhou, F. Li, S.-Z. Qiao and G.-Q. Lu, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-S. Choi, W.-G. Shim, D.-W. Ryu, M.-J. Hwang and H. Moon, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 155, 274–280 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, K. Leng, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Small, 2013, 9, 1342–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C. Han, X. Chen and C. Shi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 131, 303–309 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balathanigaimani, W.-G. Shim, M.-J. Lee, C. Kim, J.-W. Lee and H. Moon, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 868–871 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, H. Zhang, Y. Huang, W. Wang and S. Wei, Carbon, 2011, 49, 838–843 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu and M. Srinivasan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 1999, 27, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lahaye, G. Nanse, A. Bagreev and V. Strelko, Carbon, 1999, 37, 585–590 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Wang, F. Li, L. C. Yin, X. Lu, Z. G. Chen, I. R. Gentle, G. Q. M. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5345–5351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, J. Wang, Z. Chang, B. Ding, Y. Wang, L. Shen, C. Mi, H. Dou and X. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1–8 CrossRef .
W. Xing, C. Liu, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, S. Zhuo, Z. Yan, H. Gao, G. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7323–7327 CAS .
J. I. Hayashi, A. Kazehaya, K. Muroyama and A. P. Watkinson, Carbon, 2000, 38, 1873–1878 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, Y. Fu, C. Tian, Y. Yang, L. Wang, J. Yin, J. Ma, R. Wang and H. Fu, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1637–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Rufford, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, Z. Zhu and G. Q. Lu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1594–1597 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, C. Tian, M. Li, X. Meng, L. Wang, R. Wang, J. Yin and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6462–6470 CAS .
H. M. Mozammel, O. Masahiro and S. C. Bhattacharya, Biomass Bioenergy, 2002, 22, 397–400 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, L. Gong, K. Sun, J. Jiang and X. Zhang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 2179–2186 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Rufford, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, K. Khosla, Z. Zhu and G. Q. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 912–918 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jain, C. Xu, S. Jayaraman, R. Balasubramanian, J. Y. Lee and M. P. Srinivasan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 218, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ucar, M. Erdem, T. Tay and S. Karagoz, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 8890–8896 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Solum, R. J. Pugmire, M. Jagtoyen and F. Derbyshire, Carbon, 1995, 33, 1247–1254 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, A. M. Puziy, O. I. Poddubnaya, F. Suárez-García, J. M. Tascón and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1880–1888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Q. Cao, X. Wang, B. Jing, H. Kuang and L. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 101–107 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qian, F. Sun, Y. Xu, L. Qiu, C. Liu, S. Wang and F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 379–386 CAS .
J. Wei and E. Iglesia, J. Catal., 2004, 224, 370–383 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, J. Peng, H. Xia, L. Zhang, C. Srinivasakannan and S. Guo, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2010, 41, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mi, X.-R. Wang, R.-J. Fan, W.-H. Qu and W.-C. Li, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 5321–5329 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, B. Wang, C. G. Heron, M. J. Allen, J. Morre, C. S. Maier, W. F. Stickle and X. Ji, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2225–2229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bommier, R. Xu, W. Wang, X. Wang, D. Wen, J. Lu and X. Ji, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 709–717 CrossRef CAS .
M. Biswal, A. Banerjee, M. Deo and S. Ogale, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1249–1259 CAS .
E. Raymundo-Piñero, M. Cadek and F. Béguin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1032–1039 CrossRef .
C. Xia and S. Q. Shi, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2063–2071 RSC .
Y.-D. Chen, M.-J. Huang, B. Huang and X.-R. Chen, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2012, 98, 159–165 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Mane, S. N. Talapaneni, C. Anand, S. Varghese, H. Iwai, Q. Ji, K. Ariga, T. Mori and A. Vinu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3596–3604 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Dhawale, G. P. Mane, S. Joseph, C. Anand, K. Ariga and A. Vinu, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 1563–1569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ling, Z. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Dong, S. Liu, Y. Wang and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
A. Olejniczak, M. Lezanska, J. Wloch, A. Kucinska and J. P. Lukaszewicz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8961–8967 CAS .
K. E. Shopsowitz, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10991–10995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kubo, R. J. White, N. Yoshizawa, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4882–4885 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, J. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li, M. O. Tade, S. Dai and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 588–593 CAS .

          M.-M. Titirici, Sustainable carbon materials from hydrothermal processes, Wiley Online Library,  2013 Search PubMed .
B. Hu, K. Wang, L. Wu, S. H. Yu, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 813–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Falco, F. Perez Caballero, F. Babonneau, C. Gervais, G. Laurent, M.-M. Titirici and N. Baccile, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14460–14471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, K. S. Ro, M. Chappell, Y. Li and J. Mao, Energy Fuels, 2010, 25, 388–397 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Carbon, 2001, 39, 2211–2214 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 597–601 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Shen, B. Ding, P. Nie, H. Deng, H. Dou and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 7538–7544 RSC .
S.-H. Yu, X. Cui, L. Li, K. Li, B. Yu, M. Antonietti and H. Cölfen, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1636–1640 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Titirici, A. Thomas, S. H. Yu, A. J. O. Müller and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4205–4212 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8645–8650 RSC .
S. A. Wohlgemuth, R. J. White, M. G. Willinger, M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1515–1523 RSC .
Y. Yang, J. Cui, M. Zheng, C. Hu, S. Tan, Y. Xiao, Q. Yang and Y. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 380–382 RSC .
X.-L. Wu, T. Wen, H.-L. Guo, S. Yang, X. Wang and A.-W. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3589–3597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, L.-C. Zhang, J.-X. Cheng, C.-X. Ding and C.-H. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 102, 306–311 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Fellinger, R. J. White, M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3254–3260 CrossRef CAS .
N. Brun, S. A. Wohlgemuth, P. Osiceanu and M. M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2514–2524 RSC .
L. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, G. Long, Y. Wu, T. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, A. Yu and Y. S. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1408 Search PubMed .
S.-A. Wohlgemuth, F. Vilela, M.-M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 741–749 RSC .
M.-M. Titirici, R. J. White, N. Brun, V. L. Budarin, D. S. Su, F. del Monte, J. H. Clark and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 250–290 RSC .
V. A. Yaylayan, A. Huyghues-Despointes and M. Feather, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 1994, 34, 321–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Luo, L. Shen, K. Rui, H. Li and X. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 572, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M. M. Titirici, J. O. Müller, R. Schlögl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Giordano and M. Attonietti, Small, 2013, 10, 193–200 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yin, B. Lu, Y. Xu, D. Tang, X. Mao, W. Xiao, D. Wang and A. N. Alshawabkeh, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 8101–8108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Elumeeva, N. Fechler, T.-P. Fellinger and M. Antonietti, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 588–594 RSC .
X. Liu and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6284–6290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chang, M. Antonietti and T. P. Fellinger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5507–5512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hao, X. Li and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3899–3904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Béguin, V. Presser, A. Balducci and E. Frackowiak, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2219–2251 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Long, D. Qi, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. Jiang and Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3953–3961 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Chen, Z. H. Huang, H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4746–4752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, M. Li and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 4824–4854 RSC .
J. Deng, Y. You, V. Sahajwalla and R. K. Josh, Carbon, 2016, 96, 105–115 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fang, J. H. Kim, M. S. Kim and J. S. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1397–1406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
X. He, R. Li, J. Qiu, K. Xie, P. Ling, M. Yu, X. Zhang and M. Zheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4911–4921 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, Z. Wei, J. Wang, P. Zhang, H. Li and Y. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, J. Luo, W. Lv, D. W. Wang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5254 CrossRef .
Z. Ling, Z. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Dong, S. Liu, Y. Wang and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 26, 111–119 CrossRef .
J. Hou, C. Cao, F. Idrees and X. Ma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2556–2564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Xu, A. Kohandehghan, Z. Li, K. Cui, X. Tan, T. J. Stephenson, C. K. King'Ondu, C. M. Holt, B. C. Olsen, J. K. Tak, D. Harfield, A. O. Anyia and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5131–5141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Huang, J. Y. Wang, C. W. Wang, H. N. Zhang, C. X. Lu and J. Z. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2107–2113 CrossRef CAS .
C. Long, X. Chen, L. Jiang, L. Zhi and Z. Fan, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 141–151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, D. Yuan, C. Tang, S. Wang, J. Sun, Z. Li, T. Tang, F. Wang, H. Gong and C. He, Carbon, 2016, 100, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2839–2855 CAS .
L. L. Zhang, H. H. Li, Y. H. Shi, C. Y. Fan, X. L. Wu, H. F. Wang, H. Z. Sun and J. P. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4233–4241 CAS .
J. S. Ye, X. Liu, H. F. Cui, W. D. Zhang, F. S. Sheu and T. M. Lim, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 249–255 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lota, J. Tyczkowski, R. Kapica, K. Lota and E. Frackowiak, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7535–7539 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, H. Lai, Z. Lyu, Y. Jiang, K. Xie, X. Wang, Q. Wu, L. Yang, Z. Jin and Y. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3541–3545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Shen, P. Nie, X. Yun, Y. Xu, H. Dou and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2853–2860 CAS .
L. Jia, L. Kang, G. Xiang, B. Yao, K. Huo, Y. Cheng, X. Cheng, D. Chen, W. Bo and W. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24622–24628 Search PubMed .
A. B. Fuertes and M. Sevilla, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1049–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Yun, S. Y. Cho, J. Shim, B. H. Kim, S. J. Chang, S. J. Baek, Y. S. Huh, Y. Tak, Y. W. Park and S. Park, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1993–1998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, L. Zhang, B. S. Amirkhiz, X. H. Tan, Z. W. Xu, H. L. Wang, B. C. Olsen, C. M. B. Holt and D. Mitlin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 431–437 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Z. Fan, M. Q. Zhou, H. Guan, S. Qiao, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5202–5206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 39, 103–116 RSC .
L. S. Panchakarla, K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. K. Saha, G. Achutharao, H. R. Krishnamurthy, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, A. M. Puziy, O. I. Poddubnaya, F. Suárez-García, J. M. Tascón and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, B. Ding, J. Pan, J. Han, P. Nie, Y. Zhu, Q. Sheng and H. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23268–23273 CAS .
C. Huang, T. Sun and D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2330–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Shen, Y. Xu, H. Dou and X. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 9497–9503 RSC .
A. M. El-Sawy, I. M. Mosa, D. Su, C. J. Guild, S. Khalid, R. Joesten, J. F. Rusling and S. L. Suib, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501966 CrossRef .
G. Y. Xu, J. P. Han, B. Ding, P. Nie, J. Pan, H. Dou, H. S. Li and X. G. Zhang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1668–1674 RSC .
L. Wang, G. Mu, C. Tian, L. Sun, W. Zhou, P. Yu, J. Yin and H. Fu, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 880–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, J. Zhou, D. H. Nagaraju, L. Jiang, V. R. Marinov, G. Lubineau, H. N. Alshareef and M. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3193–3202 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, C. G. Tian, M. T. Li, X. Y. Meng, L. Wang, J. Yin and H. G. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6462–6470 CAS .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 CAS .
J. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rosenman, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach, A. Garsuch and F. F. Chesneau, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500212 CrossRef .
W. Da-Wei, Z. Qingcong, Z. Guangmin, Y. Lichang, L. Feng, C. Hui-Ming, I. R. Gentle and L. Gao Qing Max, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9382–9394 Search PubMed .
X. Guiyin, D. Bing, P. Jin, N. Ping, S. Laifa and Z. Xiaogang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12662–12676 Search PubMed .
T. Xu, J. Song, M. L. Gordin, H. Sohn, Z. Yu, S. Chen and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11355–11362 CAS .
C. Hoffmann, S. Thieme, J. Brueckner, M. Oschatz, T. Biemelt, G. Mondin, H. Althues and S. Kaskel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12130–12140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, B. He, X.-Q. Zhang and A.-H. Lu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8504–8513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Moreno, A. Caballero, L. Hernán and J. Morales, Carbon, 2014, 70, 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang, M.-Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, X.-B. Cheng, X.-Y. Liu, W.-Z. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2772–2781 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schuster, G. He, B. Mandlmeier, T. Yim, K. T. Lee, T. Bein and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3591–3595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xin, L. Gu, N. H. Zhao, Y. X. Yin, L. J. Zhou, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18510–18513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Z. Li, F. Hao, X. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Qi, R. Fan and L. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2500–2509 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, F. Qin, L. Zhang, K. Zhang, Q. Li, Y. Lai, Z. Zhang and J. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13916–13922 CAS .
B. Ding, C. Yuan, L. Shen, G. Xu, P. Nie and X. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 19, 1013–1019 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qu, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Ren, X. Wang, Y. Lai, Y. Liu and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 439–446 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Y. Liu, J. Manuel, G. S. Chauhan, H.-J. Ahn, K.-W. Kim, K.-K. Cho and J.-H. Ahn, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3234–3241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Pang, J. Tang, H. Huang, X. Liang, C. Hart, K. C. Tam and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6021–6028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, L.-X. Yuan, W.-X. Zhang, X.-L. Hu and Y.-H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15703–15709 CAS .
X. Gu, C. Lai, F. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Hou and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9502–9509 CAS .
K. Z. Cao, L. F. Jiao, H. Q. Liu, Y. C. Liu, Y. J. Wang, Z. P. Guo and H. T. Yuan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401421 CrossRef .
K. Tang, R. J. White, X. Mu, M. M. Titirici, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 400–403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shen, E. Uchaker, X. Zhang and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6502–6506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xing, J. Xue and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3046–3052 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Sun, B. Liu, S. Wang and M. Cao, Carbon, 2015, 91, 56–65 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu and T. Akiyama, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2106–2114 RSC .
M. Chen, C. Yu, S. H. Liu, X. M. Fan, C. T. Zhao, X. Zhang and J. S. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1791–1795 RSC .
X. Zhou, F. Chen, T. Bai, B. Long, Q. Liao, Y. Ren and J. Yang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2078–2088 RSC .
Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Wang, P. Han, H. Xu, K. Zhang, S. Dong, J. Yao and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5430–5434 RSC .
T. K. Fey, D. C. Lee, Y. Y. Lin and T. P. Kumar, Synth. Met., 2003, 139, 71–80 CrossRef .
J. Tang and V. G. Pol, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, C. Cao, F. Idrees and X. Ma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2556–2564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Lin, W. Yang, Y. Meng, Y. Guo, M. Li and D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9684–9690 CAS .
J. Ou, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, Q. Zhao, Y. Meng, Y. Guo and D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6534–6541 CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Xu, X. Tan, H. Wang, C. M. B. Holt, T. Stephenson, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 871–878 CAS .
C. Lv, X. Yang, A. Umar, Y. Xia, Y. Jia, L. Shang, T. Zhang and D. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22708–22715 CAS .
D. S. Jung, M. H. Ryou, Y. J. Sung, S. B. Park and J. W. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 12229–12234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, J. Zhu, W. Ai, Z. Fan, X. Shen, C. Zou, J. Liu, H. Zhang and T. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2670–2679 CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, M. Kajiyama, J. Iwatate, H. Nishikawa, S. Hitomi, R. Okuyama, R. Usui, Y. Yamada and S. Komaba, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 512–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, M. Zhou, X. Wang, C. Wang, L. Liang, F. Grote, M. Wu, Y. Mi and Y. Lei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8768–8771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dong, L. Shen, H. Li, G. Pang, H. Dou and X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohzuku, Y. Iwakoshi and K. Sawai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 2490–2498 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, Y. Ma, S. J. Visco and L. C. Dejonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 169–170 CrossRef .
Z. Jian, Z. Xing, C. Bommier, Z. Li and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 6, 1501874 CrossRef .
C. Bommier, T. W. Surta, M. Dolgos and X. Ji, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5888–5892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Xu, J. P. Han, B. Ding, P. Nie, J. Pan, H. Dou, H. S. Li and X. G. Zhang, Green Chem., 2014, 17, 1668–1674 RSC .
P. Chen, L. K. Wang, G. Wang, M. R. Gao, J. Ge, W. J. Yuan, Y. H. Shen, A. J. Xie and S. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4095–4103 CAS .
L. Wu, D. Buchholz, C. Vaalma, G. A. Giffin and S. Passerini, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 231–233 Search PubMed .
N. Sun, H. Liu and B. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20560–20566 CAS .
K. L. Hong, L. Qie, R. Zeng, Z. Q. Yi, W. Zhang, D. Wang, W. Yin, C. Wu, Q. J. Fan, W. X. Zhang and Y. H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12733–12738 CAS .
Y. M. Li, X. Y. Wu, J. Z. Yu, Y. S. Wang, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, L. Q. Chen and X. J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 71–77 CAS .
R. R. Gaddam, D. Yang, R. Narayan, K. Raju, N. A. Kumar and X. S. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 346–352 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yang, T. Qian, M. Wang, X. Shen, N. Xu, Z. Sun and C. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 28, 1503221 Search PubMed .
J. Jin, B. J. Yu, Z. Q. Shi, C. Y. Wang and C. B. Chong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 800–807 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, K. Cui, D. Karpuzov, X. Tan, A. Kohandehghan and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 941–955 CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic for the synthesis of chiral nematic mesoporous carbon (CMC). (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the side view of the fracture of CMC, and (c) the high-magnification image of the fracture shows a left-handed chiral nematic structure. (d) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of CMC-3. (e) N2 adsorption isotherms of CMC-1, CMC-3, and CMC-5 (ref. 61) (Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of the carbon spheres obtained after HTC of glucose followed by pyrolysis70 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). SEM images of (b) HTC-treated oak leaf and (c) HTC-treated pine needles72 (Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society). (d) TEM image of the prawn shell-derived carbon materials73 (Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) TEM image of HTC-synthesized carbon aerogels74 (Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) TEM image of the HTC-synthesized carbon nanoparticles75 (Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  Graphene prepared from glucose by a molten salt method. (a) Schematic of the conversion of glucose to porous carbon (or graphene) at high (or low) glucose concentrations (Cg) in a LiCl/KCl melt. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the porous carbon with high Cg (glucose/salt = 1/10). The green arrows point to the thin-layer at the edge of the main structure. (d) TEM and (e) atomic force microscope (AFM) image for the graphene synthesized at Cg = 1/100 (ref. 86) (Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process for the CNS materials. (b) Annual dark field (ADF) TEM image of CNS-800. Inset: electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) thickness profile. (c) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of CNS-800 at different scan rates (at 20 °C). (d) Rate capability and (e) Ragone plot of CNS-800 evaluated at different temperatures. The energy and power density were calculated based on the total mass of the active material (solid) and the mass of the device (hollow). (f) Comparison of the performance of the CNS-based device measured at 20–100 °C and commercial batteries and supercapacitors106 (Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic model of the Bombyx mori silk fibroin lamellar-like layer formation in water by self-assembly. (b) SEM image of regenerated silk fibroin film after thermal treatment at 200 °C. (c) N2 adsorption and desorption isotherm curves and pore-size distribution curve (inset) of the H-CMNs. CV curves of the H-CMNs (d) in BMIMBF4/AN electrolyte and (e) in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, respectively. (f) Rate capability of H-CMNs measured in organic and aqueous electrolytes118 (Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Optical images of a B/N-CS film: (a1) a freestanding B/N-CS film, (a2) a flexible film wrapping around a glass rod, and (a3) a cross-section SEM image of a B/N-CS film. (b) N2 sorption isotherm of B/N-CSs. Inset: the corresponding pore size distribution curve. (c) C 1s XPS spectra of B/N-CSs. (d) CV curves of a B/N-CS film electrode in a three-electrode system in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. Electrochemical performance of B/N-CS film-based symmetric supercapacitor: (e) CV curves at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 within different voltage windows and (f) Ragone plots within different voltage windows104 (Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) HRTEM images of PGNS-3-900. Inset: Raman spectrum of PGNS-3-900 materials. (c) Charge–discharge curves of PGNS-3-900 at different current densities (2–10 A g−1). (d) Ragone plots of PGNS-3-900-based symmetric supercapacitor in 6 M KOH and 1 M Et4NBF4/PC electrolytes132 (Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic for the preparation of HOPC and HOPC/S nanocomposites. (b) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of HOPC. Inset: the corresponding size distribution curve. (c) Reversible capacity vs. current density for the HOPC/S nanocomposite electrode. (d) EIS spectra of the HOPC nanocomposite at different cycles. Inset: the equivalent circuit used to fit the impedance spectrum149 (Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic for the synthesis of NSC. (b) The discharge capacity retention of NSC/S-70, NC/S-70, CDC/S-70, and NP-NSC/S-70 electrodes at C/5 rates. (c) The long-term cycling performance of the NSC/S-70 electrode at 2C rate, showing the coulombic efficiency on the left y-axis152 (Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic configuration of the Li–S cell with a BCFM interlayer. (b) Cycle life of the cells with and without the interlayer at 1C (ref. 154) (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the electron transfer and lithium-ion storage in the A-pBC-6. (b) Cycling performance of the A-pBC-6 at 100, 300, 1000, 2000 and 4000 mA g−1. (c) Voltage profiles of LiFePO4/A-pBC-6 full cell for 1, 5, 10, 20, 30 and 40 cycles and (d) corresponding specific capacity vs. cycle number of the battery (left) and columbic efficiency (right)160 (Copyright 2015 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of PMC carbons. Inset: the corresponding pore-size distribution curves. (b) N 1s XPS spectra of PMC carbons. (c) TEM image of PMC-850. (d) CV curves at 0.1 mV s−1 and (e) charge–discharge curves of PMC-650 at 0.1 A g−1. (f) Charge–discharge capacity vs. cycle number for PMC carbons171 (Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic displaying the overall evolution of bamboo chopsticks into uniform carbon fibers. SEM images of (b–d) the produced carbon fibers and (e and f) the C/MnO2 NWs/carbon fibers hybrid. (g) Cycling performance and charge/discharge profiles (inset) of carbon fibers (green) and bulky bamboo carbons (black). (h) Cycling performance of C/MnO2 NWs/carbon fibers, MnO2 NWs/carbon fibers and the pristine carbon fibers performed at 0.2 A g−1 for 300 cycles174 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Raman spectra and (b) relation curve of ID/IG and carbonization temperature of HCS materials. Inset: SEM image of HCS material. (c) Retained capacity from plateau and slope contributions under different current rates of HCS samples. (d) Cycling performance of HCS1600/Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 full cell187 (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the relevant cathode/anode charge storage mechanisms in NICs. Charge/discharge profiles of (b) PSNC-3-800 and (c) PSOC-A, respectively. (d) Ragone plots of PSNC-3-800//PSOC-A at 0 °C, 25 °C, and 65 °C. (e) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of PSNC-3-800//PSOC-A tested at 6.4 A g−1 for 10000 cycles191 (Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
