Regenerable smart antibacterial surfaces: full removal of killed bacteria via a sequential degradable layer   - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TB01122B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TB01122B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 3946-3955Regenerable smart antibacterial surfaces: full removal of killed bacteria via a sequential degradable layer†

        
          
            Yangcui 
            Qu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Ting 
            Wei‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Zhao‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Shuaibing 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Yang
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Yu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Hong 
            Chen
          
        
      a
aState and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Novel Functional Polymeric Materials, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: yuqian@suda.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloids Chemistry, Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an, 710119, China. E-mail: yangpeng@snnu.edu.cn
Received 
      28th April 2018
    , Accepted 17th May 2018First published on 18th May 2018AbstractConventional antibacterial surfaces are becoming less effective due to the emergence of multidrug resistant bacteria; in addition, difficulties related to the accumulation of killed bacteria are generally encountered. To circumvent these problems, in the present work, an antibiotic-free and regenerable antibacterial hybrid film with both photothermal bactericidal activity and bacteria-releasing properties was fabricated on diverse substrates by sequential deposition of a gold nanoparticle layer (GNPL) and a phase-transitioned lysozyme film (PTLF). Due to the photothermal effect of the GNPL, the hybrid film was able to kill >99% of attached bacteria under near-infrared laser irradiation in 5 min. Moreover, the topmost PTLF layer could be degraded and detached from the surface by immersion in vitamin C solution for a short period, leading to removal of the killed bacteria and surface regeneration. The surface could be used and regenerated in this way through multiple cycles for long-term effective performance. The surface fabrication process is simple and environmentally friendly, and can be applied to diverse materials. These hybrid films thus offer a viable alternative for the killing and removal of adherent bacteria (particularly multidrug resistant bacteria) on the surfaces of medical devices for in vitro applications.
1. Introduction
Attachment and subsequent colonization by bacteria on the surfaces of synthetic materials and devices pose serious problems in both human healthcare and industrial applications.1,2 Therefore, antibacterial surfaces with capability to prevent bacterial attachment and biofilm formation have been a longstanding focus of research.3–5 Conventional antibacterial surfaces usually rely on natural or synthetic antibiotics or other biocidal compounds;6–10 however, these surfaces are becoming less effective due to the emergence of multidrug resistant (MDR) bacteria, which have proved to be especially problematic in both hospital and community settings.11,12 Therefore, alternative antibiotic-free antibacterial surfaces that can kill adherent bacteria irrespective of their antibiotic susceptibility are urgently needed.
Photothermal therapy using strong light absorbers to generate local heat for physical destruction of bacteria provides a promising approach for circumventing the problem of antibiotic resistance.13–15 In particular, near infrared (NIR) irradiation in the range of 700–1100 nm is most attractive for photothermal therapy because of its ability to penetrate biological tissues with sufficient intensity and with minimal tissue damage.16 In recent years, there has been considerable interest in NIR photothermal materials such as gold-based nanomaterials,17–20 reduced graphene oxide (rGO),21–23 and polypyrrole nanoparticles24 for antibacterial applications. Among these materials, gold-based nanoparticles (GNPs) hold great promise as bactericidal agents because of their highly efficient light-to-heat conversion capability via surface plasmon resonance in the NIR region, their relatively good biocompatibility, and their great potential for functionalization with bacterial affinity ligands.25,26 Several GNP-based photothermal bactericides have been developed against bacteria in suspension and the antibacterial efficacy and targeting ability of these bactericides could be further improved by conjugation with specific antibodies.27–29 However, the use of GNPs as photothermal agents for surface modification to kill attached bacteria under NIR laser irradiation has not been reported.
Previous reports have suggested that photothermal antibacterial coatings based on immobilized other photothermal agents (such as polyaniline,30 polydopamine,31 or Cs0.33WO3 nanoparticles32) that can destroy attached bacteria on surfaces under irradiation with NIR or solar light provide an alternative approach to combat infection and contamination on surfaces resulting from bacterial adhesion, particularly MDR bacteria. However, these coatings suffer from the same inherent drawbacks as traditional antibacterial surfaces based on contact-killing mechanisms, and even if they show high bactericidal efficiency, they remain contaminated by dead bacteria and other debris, which not only provide nutrients for subsequent bacterial interactions, but may also trigger severe immune responses and inflammation.33 To circumvent the problem of dead bacteria, a promising “kill-and-release” strategy has been proposed for the development of smart antibacterial surfaces with the capability of not only killing the attached bacteria but also releasing dead bacteria and debris “on demand” under an appropriate stimulus.34,35 Compared with conventional bactericidal surfaces, such smart surfaces provide a more promising solution for the prevention of initial bacterial attachment and subsequent biofilm formation. In particular, the triggered-cleaning properties and repeatable function switching make these surfaces more suitable for applications where long-term antibacterial activity is required.36–42 However, to the best of our knowledge, smart photothermal antibacterial surfaces with bacteria-releasing properties are yet to be developed.
In the work reported herein, we have developed an efficient smart antibacterial hybrid coating with both photothermal bactericidal activity and bacteria-releasing properties as illustrated in Scheme 1. This hybrid coating is composed of two functional layers. The first is a gold nanoparticle layer (GNPL) composed of GNP aggregates which serve as the photothermal bactericidal agent. Compared with dispersed GNPs, the aggregated GNPs exhibit a more efficient photothermal effect due to the red-shifted absorption.43 In addition, the GNPL possesses a unique micro-nanotopography that provides multiple sites for contact with bacteria and facilitates local hyperthermia induced by NIR laser irradiation. We showed previously that the GNPL can be used as an efficient photoporation platform for intracellular delivery of macromolecules to mammalian cells under NIR laser irradiation.44,45 Based on the same principle, it is anticipated that the GNPL can also be used as an effective antibacterial material on which attached bacteria can be destroyed photothermally. In addition, the GNPL was coated with a thin phase-transitioned lysozyme film (PTLF) as a contamination releasing layer. PTLF was recently developed in our previous works as a novel biocompatible two-dimensional (2D) proteinaceous nanofilm with versatile applications in tissue engineering,46 antimicrobial materials,47 surface functionalization and biomimetic adhesive bonding to virtually any substrate.48–51 For substrates immersed in phase-transitioned lysozyme solution, a PTLF composed of densely aggregated oligomers within amyloid-like structures was shown to form on the surface in a few minutes. Such PTLFs are transparent and exhibit strong substrate bonding even in extreme pH conditions or under gas plasma treatment.52,53 It is thus expected that the addition of PTLF will not affect the light-to-heat conversion capability of the GNPL or the bactericidal efficacy of the GNPL. As an alternative, we showed in the present work that the degradation of PTLF can be triggered in a closely controlled manner by treatment with vitamin C (Vc). Almost all of the killed bacteria could be removed by incubating the surface in Vc solution for a short time period (10 min) due to the degradation of the topmost layer of PTLF. The GNPL and PTLF are relatively simple, environmentally friendly materials, and can be applied to diverse substrates. In addition, the GNPL–PTLF coating can be used repeatedly over multiple “kill-and-release” cycles, which is of particular importance for long-term usage.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of a smart antibacterial surface based on a GNPL–PTLF hybrid film with photothermal bacteria-killing capability and Vc-triggered bacteria-releasing ability. 
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Surface preparation and characterization
Fabrication of the GNPL–PTLF hybrid surface involved sequential deposition of GNPL and PTLF on a substrate. A stable GNPL was prepared on a gold substrate via a chemical plating method as reported previously.54 As observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), the GNPL was composed of numerous aggregates of GNPs uniformly distributed on the surface (Fig. 1). The density of these aggregates and the corresponding surface roughness of the GNPL could be further adjusted by changing the quantity of plating solution used for preparation (Fig. S1, ESI†). Afterwards, a thin PTLF was formed directly on the GNPL by immersing in a phase transitioned lysozyme buffer for 2 h.47 As control, a smooth gold surface coated with PTLF (Au–PTLF) was prepared in a similar way. It is noted that the entire preparation process was conducted in aqueous solution in a simple and environmentally friendly manner. For a “single” typical coating process, the thickness of the PTLF was 54.8 ± 1.6 nm as measured by ellipsometry; this could be increased by additional coating steps. The PTLF was continuous and gap-free; no large aggregates were observed and the gold and GNPL surfaces were completely covered as observed by SEM (Fig. 1 and Fig. S2, ESI†). No color change was seen after formation of the PTLF, indicating excellent optical transparency. The integration of the PTLF led to a significant increase in surface hydrophobicity such that the water contact angle increased from 43.8 ± 9.7° (pristine GNPL surface) to 98.7 ± 3.6° (GNPL–PTLF surface), possibly due to synergy between surface chemistry and topography.55 The successful formation of the PTLF on the GNPL was confirmed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) where the gold signal decreased and the nitrogen signal increased, reflecting the presence of a proteinaceous substrate (Table S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Schematic depicting the procedure for preparation of GNPL–PTLF on a substrate. The surface morphology of the GNPL surface before and after coating with PTLF was observed using SEM. 
Previous work demonstrated that aggregated GNPs converted absorbed NIR laser irradiation to heat more efficiently than dispersed GNPs, and that the GNPL exhibited excellent photothermal properties upon NIR laser irradiation.44 In the present work, the photothermal effects of the films were evaluated by monitoring the surface temperature during exposure to an 808 nm continuous-wave (CW) laser at 2.3 W cm−2 in the dry state in situ using an infrared thermal camera. As shown in Fig. 2a, under laser irradiation for 90 s, the surface temperature of the GNPL increased rapidly to 130 °C; both the rate of temperature increase and the final temperature on the GNPL were much higher than on the control Au surface due to the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of the GNP aggregates.56 Moreover, the presence of the PTLF on the GNPL did not influence the light-to-heat conversion efficiency because of the high transparency of the PTLF allowing ∼100% NIR transmission.52
 Fig. 2  (a) Comparison of photothermal properties of a smooth, unmodified gold surface, a GNPL surface and a GNPL–PTLF surface under NIR laser irradiation (2.3 W cm−2) in the dry state. (b) Effect of irradiation time on the photothermal biocidal activity of the GNPL–PTLF surface against E. coli evaluated by colony-counting assay. # indicates live bacteria percent <0.5. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3). 
It has been demonstrated that elevated temperatures may cause irreversible cell damage via disruption of metabolic signals, denaturation of proteins, and rupture of cell walls.14 Therefore we proceeded to test the NIR-induced antibacterial activity of the GNPL–PTLF hybrid surfaces. Preliminary results indicated that the photothermal bactericidal performance of the GNPL surface was influenced by the density of GNP aggregates, laser power density, and irradiation time: higher density of aggregates, higher laser power density, and longer irradiation time led to greater killing efficiency (Fig. S3–S5, ESI† and Fig. 2b). The use of a GNPL optimized for aggregate density and a 5 min irradiation time led to the killing of >99.9% of attached bacteria; these conditions were therefore chosen for subsequent experiments.
After confirming the excellent photothermal bactericidal capability of the GNPL–PTLF hybrid film, we further tested its bacteria-releasing ability based on the stimulus-responsive degradation of the PTLF. In the formation of PTLF on the gold substrate, the protein unfolded upon treatment with the disulfide breaker tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP); hydrophobic residues were thereby exposed to the solution. Hydrophobicity-induced aggregation of partially unfolded lysozyme chains then occurred, and a PTLF rich in β-sheet structures was formed on the substrate with robust interfacial adhesion.52 For the degradation of the PTLF under mild conditions, we exploited the properties of vitamin C (Vc), a naturally occurring molecule with strong anti-oxidant activity. It is reported that Vc inhibits amyloid formation in vitro due to its bonding to the exposed hydrogen atoms of the N–H groups in the β-sheet backbone, which disrupts the hydrogen bonding between β-sheets that is necessary for the stabilization of amyloid structures.57 Therefore, it was hypothesized that incubation of PTLF in Vc solution might degrade the topmost layer of the PTLF, i.e. the PTLF could be used as a “sacrificial layer” for removal of contaminants including dead bacteria.
To test this hypothesis, the effects of Vc solution concentration and incubation time on Vc-induced degradation of PTLF were systematically investigated (Fig. S6, ESI†). It was found that degradation increased with increasing concentration of Vc solution and increasing incubation time. Considering the degradation efficiency and potential cytotoxicity of Vc at high concentration, optimal degradation conditions were determined to be Vc = 100 mM and 10 min incubation time and were used in subsequent experiments. Under these conditions, the PTLF layer thickness on Au–PTLF decreased from 54.8 ± 1.6 nm to 9.7 ± 1.1 nm. The residual film may be due to strong Au–S bonding with degraded protein fragments containing thiol groups.52 The partial degradation and detachment of PTLF from the GNPL surface under Vc treatment was confirmed by changes in surface wettability and elemental composition. As shown in Fig. 3b, the water contact angle of GNPL–PTLF did not change significantly after Vc treatment, suggesting that the treated surface retained the properties of PTLF. In addition, as shown in Fig. 3c, the gold signal disappeared on attachment of PTLF to the GNPL. Upon immersion of the GNPL–PTLF surface in Vc solution, the gold content “recovered” to about half that of the GNPL, demonstrating the partial degradation of the PTLF.
 Fig. 3  (a) Thickness of Au–PTLF and Au–PTLF* surfaces. (b) Water contact angle, and (c) high-resolution XPS Au4s spectra of GNPL, GNPL–PTLF and GNPL–PTLF* surfaces. Au–PTLF* and GNPL–PTLF* represent Au–PTLF and GNPL–PTLF surfaces after incubation in 100 mM Vc solution for 10 min, respectively. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 6). 
2.2. Photothermal inactivation of bacteria
Antibacterial performance was evaluated using two common clinically relevant wound pathogens, Gram-positive S. aureus and Gram-negative E. coli, by a universally adopted colony-counting assay. Smooth Au, smooth Au–PTLF, and GNPL surfaces were used as controls. The surfaces were incubated in a suspension of S. aureus or E. coli (1 × 107 cells mL−1) at 37 °C for 1 h, followed by exposure to an 808 nm NIR laser for 5 min or being kept in the dark. Bacteria adherent on the surfaces were detached by sonication and the resulting bacterial suspensions were diluted to an appropriate concentration and plated in triplicate on Luria–Bertani (LB) agar plates. The plates were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h and the bacterial colonies formed were counted (typical visual images are shown in Fig. S7, ESI†). For each type of surface, the killing efficiency was calculated as the ratio of the number of colonies after and before NIR treatment. As shown in Fig. 4a, the Au and Au–PTLF surfaces showed negligible killing for both bacterial strains (efficiency <20%), indicating that NIR alone did not induce bactericidal activity. In contrast, the GNPL and GNPL–PTLF surfaces showed high killing efficiencies against both E. coli (>99%) and S. aureus (>96%) upon treatment with NIR laser irradiation. The slight difference in the killing efficiency between the two bacterial strains may be attributable to the difference in their sensitivity to heat (Gram-positive bacteria have greater heat resistance than Gram-negative bacteria).21,58 To further investigate the killing mechanism, the surface morphologies of attached bacteria on Au and GNPL–PTLF surfaces with and without NIR laser treatment were observed using SEM. As shown in Fig. 4b, without laser treatment all of the bacteria on the Au and GNPL–PTLF surfaces exhibited intact and smooth surfaces and maintained their normal shapes (sphere-like for S. aureus, rod-like for E. coli). Exposure to NIR laser irradiation for 5 min did not affect the morphology of bacteria on Au but caused serious damage to the outer membrane of bacteria on the GNPL–PTLF surface. It is suggested that the aggregates of GNPs convert absorbed NIR energy to heat sufficiently to cause denaturation of proteins and enzymes and irreversible damage to the membranes of bacteria, leading to destruction of bacterial activity and leakage of cellular contents.13–15,25,26 This thermal killing mechanism has advantages including non-invasive nature, high efficiency, and non-generation of antibiotic resistance over traditional antibiotic-based approaches. Considering the data from these two different but complementary assays, it is concluded that GNPL–PTLF surfaces possess excellent broad-spectrum bactericidal activity under short-term NIR laser irradiation.
 Fig. 4  Evaluation of the bactericidal activity of different surfaces with/without NIR laser irradiation (2.3 W cm−2, 5 min). (a) Photothermal bactericidal activity of surfaces against E. coli and S. aureus under NIR laser irradiation evaluated using a colony counting assay. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3). (b) Typical SEM images of attached bacteria on Au and GNPL–PTLF surfaces with/without NIR laser irradiation. 
2.3. Triggered-release of killed bacteria
Similar to traditional antibacterial surfaces based on contact-killing mechanisms, most photothermal antibacterial surfaces suffer from the presence of killed bacteria which can provide nutrients for subsequent bacterial interactions, and trigger immune responses and/or inflammation. Therefore, it is of great interest to endow surfaces with bacteria-releasing properties so that bacteria are removed once they are killed, giving a renewed surface for long-term use. Previous smart antibacterial surfaces have taken advantage of surface-anchored stimuli-responsive polymers to switch surface functions between bacteria-killing and bacteria-releasing;36–42,59–62 however, integration of these polymers usually involves multistep procedures that can only be used with specific substrates. In this work, we showed that PTLF was degraded in Vc solution. We thus hypothesized that after NIR treatment, the killed bacteria on the GNPL–PTLF surface would be removed along with the PTLF layer upon exposure to Vc solution. Because Vc treatment does not affect the GNPL, the “remaining” GNPL–PTLF surface should still exhibit photothermal bactericidal activity. This Vc-based bacteria-release function may provide a convenient and environmental-friendly solution to the residual dead bacteria problem.
The Vc-based bacteria-release capability of the GNPL–PTLF surface together with that of the control surfaces was therefore evaluated. After bacterial attachment and laser treatment as described above, the surfaces were gently rinsed to remove loosely bound bacteria and stained with a mixture of SYTO 9 (green fluorescent dye) and PI (red fluorescent dye) to label attached live and dead bacteria, respectively. The surfaces were then incubated in 100 mM Vc solution for 10 min and rinsed with buffer. The concentration of Vc and the incubation time were chosen based on preliminary data (Fig. S6 and S8, ESI†). The bacteria attached initially and remaining on the surfaces after Vc treatment were visualized and quantified using fluorescence microscopy. As shown in Fig. 5a, all of the bacteria on the GNPL–PTLF surface after laser treatment stained red, confirming the excellent bactericidal capability of this surface. Upon treatment with Vc solution, almost all of the bacteria were removed (Fig. 5b). The bacteria release ratios of the PTLF-containing surfaces (Au–PTLF and GNPL–PTLF) were >99%, whereas the surfaces without PTLF (Au and GNPL) showed negligible bacteria-releasing capability (release ratio <20%) (Fig. 5c and Fig. S9, ESI†), confirming that bacterial detachment was due to degradation of the PTLF. The degraded PTLF was easily washed away during the rinsing process leading to the possible loss of anchorage points for bacteria. Besides E. coli and S. aureus, we also tested the antibacterial performance of our GNPL–PTLF surface against a typical MDR bacterial strain, methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA). As shown in Fig. 6, the GNPL–PTLF surface also exhibited excellent photothermal bactericidal activity and Vc-induced bacterial release capability against MRSA, suggesting that the antibacterial performance is independent of the bacterial strains.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) Representative fluorescence images of bacteria on the GNPL–PTLF surface after incubation in a suspension of E. coli at 37 °C: (a) before and (b) after incubation in 100 mM Vc solution for 10 min. (c) Bacterial release ratios of the different surfaces. Error bars represent standard deviation (n = 3). 
 Fig. 6  (a) Photothermal bactericidal activity of different surfaces against methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA) under NIR laser irradiation (2.3 W cm−2, 5 min). (b) Vc-induced bacterial release ability of different surfaces. * indicates killing efficiency <2%. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3). 
As mentioned above, the degradation of the PTLF takes place from the top layer and the extent of degradation is dependent on the concentration of Vc and the treatment time, suggesting that it is possible to “sequentially” degrade the PTLF by adjusting these two variables. These properties may thus be used as the basis for a material that can undergo multiple cycles of “killing and release” of bacteria. To investigate this possibility, we prepared surfaces with thicker PTLFs using multiple coating steps. These surfaces were treated sequentially with Vc solutions of increasing concentration for increasing times. It was found, for example, that the layer thickness on the Au–PTLF surface decreased from 140.8 ± 7.5 nm to 105.1 ± 1.3 nm after incubation with 50 mM Vc for 15 min, then to 74.5 ± 2.3 nm after further incubation with 250 mM Vc for 30 min, and finally to 30.1 ± 3.1 nm after further incubation with 500 mM Vc for 30 min (Fig. S10, ESI†). We then used a GNPL–PTLF surface with the same PTLF thickness to “challenge” E. coli. As shown in Fig. 7, in the first “kill–release” cycle, 99.9% of attached bacteria were killed and 94.3% were released by incubation with 50 mM Vc for 15 min, leaving a virtually clean GNPL–PTLF surface with a thinner PTLF. The same surface was then used in two additional “kill–release” cycles with Vc solution of higher concentration and longer incubation time. The GNPL–PTLF surface maintained high bactericidal activity and bacteria-release capability over three cycles, suggesting that (i) thicker PTLF did not influence the photothermal properties of the GNPL, and (ii) bacterial detachment was strongly correlated with the degradation of the topmost layer of PTLF. It is noted that both the bacteria-killing and bacteria-releasing processes were conducted in a simple and environmental-friendly manner, and the entire process for one “kill–release” cycle took less than 20 min.
 Fig. 7  Changes in antibacterial performance and properties of surfaces coated with a PTLF layer after sequential treatment with Vc of different concentrations and for different incubation times (50 mM Vc, 15 min for Cycle 1; 250 mM Vc, 30 min for Cycle 2; 500 mM Vc, 30 min for Cycle 3). Representative fluorescence images of bacteria on a GNPL–PTLF surface and the corresponding killing efficiency and release ratio over three “kill–release” cycles are shown. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3). 
2.4. Storage stability and broad applicability
Stability is an important requirement for antibacterial surfaces. Antibacterial materials may become increasingly ineffective after continued exposure to air in storage or to physiological conditions in use. To investigate the storage stability and long-term effectiveness of our materials in complex biological medium, a set of GNPL–PTLF surfaces were prepared under identical conditions and then stored (in air or phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH = 7.4)) or incubated (in human plasma or cell culture medium) up to 14 days. They were then tested for antibacterial performances against E. coli. It is found that after a 14 day storage in air or in PBS, the GNPL–PTLF surfaces retained their original bactericidal activity (>99% killing efficiency under NIR laser irradiation) and bacteria-release capability (>90% release ratio under Vc treatment). In addition, after a 14 day incubation in human plasma or cell culture medium, the GNPL–PTLF surfaces showed a slight decrease in bactericidal activity (but still >95% killing efficiency) and a relatively good bacteria-release capability (>70% release ratio) (Fig. S11 and S12, ESI†). Overall, these data indicate that the GNPL–PTLF surface remains stable over long times under appropriate storage conditions and exhibits long-term effectiveness when using this surface in actual application.
“Universality” is also important for any surface modification method, meaning that it should be applicable to diverse substrates having a range of surface chemistries and topographies.63–66 For the present method, it has been demonstrated that both GNPL and PTLF can be deposited on various substrates via a facile chemical plating technique and a simple protein phase-transition process, respectively. It is thus expected that the GNPL–PTLF hybrid film may be applicable not only to model gold surfaces but to other more “practical” materials to endow them with antibacterial activity. To test the broad applicability of the method, several materials used in biomedical engineering applications including silicon (Si), polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and stainless steel (SS) were chosen as substrates to fabricate GNPL–PTLF surfaces as described above. Successful preparation was confirmed by SEM and changes in the water contact angle during each modification step (Fig. S13 and Table S2, ESI†). The photothermal killing efficiency and bacterial releasing ability of these surfaces were evaluated using E. coli. As expected, all of the GNPL–PTLF surfaces exhibited strong bactericidal activity, killing >99.9% of attached bacteria on exposure to NIR laser irradiation. Moreover, the attached dead bacteria were easily removed from the surfaces by treatment with Vc (Fig. 8). Moreover, these GNPL–PTLF surfaces on different substrates also showed storage stability and long-term effectiveness as good as that on the model gold substrate (Fig. S14–S16, ESI†). These data demonstrate that this surface modification method is applicable to diverse materials with different surface properties, and provide evidence of strong potential for its use in a range of practical applications.
 Fig. 8  (a) Typical photographs of E. coli colonies formed on agar plates after detachment from GNPL–PTLF surfaces with/without NIR laser irradiation on different substrates. (b) Representative fluorescence images of bacteria on GNPL–PTLF surfaces fabricated on various substrates before and after incubation in 100 mM Vc solution for 10 min. (c) The corresponding killing efficiency and release ratio of GNPL–PTLF surfaces fabricated on different substrates against E. coli. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3). 
3. Conclusion
In summary, we have developed a widely applicable strategy to endow surfaces with the capability to both kill attached bacteria efficiently and rapidly and remove dead bacteria and debris to maintain antibacterial properties over a long-term. This strategy involves the sequential deposition of a GNPL as a photothermal agent and PTLF as a “sacrificial” layer. A typical surface prepared on the gold substrate was able to kill >99% of attached bacteria under NIR laser irradiation for 5 min. In addition, subsequent incubation of the surface in Vc solution for 10 min removed the killed bacteria and regenerated bactericidal activity. The surface could be used and regenerated in this way through multiple cycles. It was also shown that the modified materials were stable over several days of storage in air or buffer. The method was applied to various substrate materials having a range of surface properties. These antibiotic-free, easily cleaned and regenerated hybrid films offer a viable alternative for the killing and removal of adherent bacteria (particularly multidrug resistant bacteria) on the surfaces of medical devices for in vitro applications.
4. Experimental section
Preparation of the gold nanoparticle layer (GNPL)
Preparation of the GNPL on substrates followed procedures reported previously.54 In brief, the procedures for pretreatment of various substrates (Au, silicon, stainless steel (SS), poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS)) to effect surface amination are described in the ESI.† The amino-functionalized surfaces were placed in the wells of 48-well plates after rinsing with ethanol several times and blow drying. After adjusting to pH ≈ 9 with 2 M NaOH, the plating solution (12 mM HAuCl4·4H2O, 0.5 M KHCO3, and 25 mM glucose) at the desired volume was added to each well and maintained at 37 °C for 6 h to form the GNPL. The surfaces were removed from the solution, rinsed extensively with deionized water, and dried under a nitrogen stream.
Preparation of smooth substrates coated with PTLF and GNPL–PTLF
The fabrication of phase transitioned lysozyme films (PTLF) on the substrates followed the procedures reported previously.47 The phase transition solution was freshly prepared by mixing lysozyme (2 mg mL−1) in stock buffer (10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4) with TCEP buffer (50 mM TCEP in 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 6.2) in a volume ratio of 1:1. Simple immersion is enough to transfer the PTLF efficiently onto the pristine surfaces (Au, Si, PDMS, SS) and the GNPL surfaces to form solid-supported nanofilms. Pristine or GNPL substrates were directly immersed in the freshly prepared phase transition solution, and after 2 h incubation, a conformal PTLF was stably attached. The coated materials were then rinsed with fresh HEPES buffer to remove lysozyme and buffer salts. The coated materials were investigated after vacuum drying.
Surface characterization
Water contact angles and layer thicknesses were measured at room temperature using an SL200C optical contact angle meter (Solon Information Technology Co., Ltd) and an M-88 spectroscopic ellipsometer (J. A. Woollam Co., Inc.), respectively. Six replicates were measured for each surface type. Surface elemental composition was determined using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, UK VG Scientific Ltd), and surface morphology was observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S-4700, Hitachi).
Photothermal properties of the surfaces
Continuous-wave laser light with a wavelength of 808 nm was used throughout. To measure the photothermal properties of the surfaces, completely dry samples were exposed to NIR laser light at a power density of 2.3 W cm−2, and the surface temperature was recorded using an infrared thermal camera (Infrared Cameras. Inc.).
Degradation of PTLF with Vc solution
Degradation of PTLF was evaluated in Vc solutions of different concentration (50, 100, 200 and 500 mM) for different times (5, 10, 15 and 20 min). The water contact angles and layer thicknesses of the surfaces before and after degradation were measured using an SL200C optical contact angle meter (Solon Information Technology Co., Ltd) and an atomic force microscope (AFM) equipped with a multimode Nanoscope V scanning probe microscopy system (Bruker Co., Ltd, USA), respectively. The elemental compositions of GNPL and GNPL–PTLF surfaces before and after Vc treatment were determined using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, UK VG Scientific Ltd).
Biocidal activity assays
Briefly, samples were placed in the wells of a 48-well plate, with the test surface facing up, and incubated in 500 μL of the bacterial suspension at 37 °C for 1 h without stirring. They were then gently rinsed with sterile water to remove loosely attached cells and buffer salts. The samples were then placed in 250 μL PBS and exposed to laser irradiation at a power density of 2.3 W cm−2 for a specified time. The biocidal activity of the samples was assessed using E. coli (1 × 107 cells mL−1 in PBS, pH = 7.4) and S. aureus/MRSA suspensions (1 × 107 cells mL−1 in PBS, pH = 7.4) via live/dead staining assay, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and colony counting assay (see details in ESI†).
Attachment and detachment of bacteria
The attachment and detachment of bacteria were assessed using an E. coli suspension (1 × 107 cells mL−1 in PBS, pH = 7.4). In brief, the samples were incubated in 500 μL of the suspension at 37 °C for 1 h without stirring and then irradiated. They were then gently rinsed with sterile water to remove loosely attached cells and buffer salts. For bacterial detachment, the surfaces with adherent bacteria were immersed in a sterile Vc solution for a specified time and then rinsed with sterile water. The staining assay was then carried out as described in ESI.† The number of bacteria remaining attached on the surfaces was determined using a fluorescence microscope (IX71, Olympus, Japan) with a 40× objective, and the images of 15 randomly chosen fields were captured. Three replicates were examined, and the density of adherent bacteria was determined using Image-Pro Plus software.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFC1100402), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21774086, 21334004, 51673112 and 21374057), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2017M623109), and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD). The authors thank Prof. John Brash for helpful discussions.
References
L. Hall-Stoodley, J. W. Costerton and P. Stoodley, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2004, 2, 95–108 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Katsikogianni and Y. F. Missirlis, Eur. Cells Mater., 2004, 8, 37–57 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Tan, S. C. Chew, M. Givskov and L. Yang, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2014, 26, 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Hadjesfandiari, K. Yu, Y. Mei and J. N. Kizhakkedathu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4968–4978 RSC .
M. Cloutier, D. Mantovani and F. Rosei, Trends Biotechnol., 2015, 33, 637–652 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Jain, L. S. Duvvuri, S. Farah, N. Beyth, A. J. Domb and W. Khan, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 1969–1985 CrossRef PubMed .
G. A. Junter, P. Thebault and L. Lebrun, Acta Biomater., 2016, 30, 13–25 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Rizzello and P. P. Pompa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1501–1518 RSC .
A. Kugel, S. Stafslien and B. J. Chisholm, Prog. Org. Coat., 2011, 72, 222–252 CrossRef .
C. C. Fuglsang, C. Johansen, S. Christgau and J. AdlerNissen, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 1995, 6, 390–396 CrossRef .
M. Bassetti, M. Merelli, C. Temperoni and A. Astilean, Ann. Clin. Microbiol. Antimicrob., 2013, 12, 22 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. Chellat, L. Raguž and R. Riedl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6600–6626 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wilson, J. Appl. Bacteriol., 1993, 75, 299–306 CrossRef PubMed .
P. C. Ray, S. A. Khan, A. K. Singh, D. Senapati and Z. Fan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3193–3209 RSC .
Y. Shi, M. Liu, F. Deng, G. Zeng, Q. Wan, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 194–206 RSC .
Y. Yang, J. Aw and B. Xing, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3698–3718 RSC .
K. C. Black, T. S. Sileika, J. Yi, R. Zhang, J. G. Rivera and P. B. Messersmith, Small, 2014, 10, 169–178 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, M. Ramasamy and D. K. Yi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15078–15085 Search PubMed .
D. G. Meeker, S. V. Jenkins, E. K. Miller, K. E. Beenken, A. J. Loughran, A. Powless, T. J. Muldoon, E. I. Galanzha, V. P. Zharov, M. S. Smeltzer and J. Chen, ACS Infect. Dis., 2016, 2, 241–250 CrossRef PubMed .
C. P. Teng, T. Zhou, E. Ye, S. Liu, L. D. Koh, M. Low, X. J. Loh, K. Y. Win, L. Zhang and M. Y. Han, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 2122–2130 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-C. Wu, A. R. Deokar, J.-H. Liao, P.-Y. Shih and Y.-C. Ling, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1281–1290 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lin, T. Qin, Y. Wang, X. Sun and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1320–1329 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, Z. Li, E. Ju, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 394–398 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Ju, Z. Li, M. Li, K. Dong, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9048–9050 RSC .
A. Gharatape, S. Davaran, R. Salehi and H. Hamishehkar, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 111482–111516 RSC .
A. Bucharskaya, G. Maslyakova, G. Terentyuk, A. Yakunin, Y. Avetisyan, O. Bibikova, E. Tuchina, B. Khlebtsov, N. Khlebtsov and V. Tuchin, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2016, 17, 1295 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Millenbaugh, J. B. Baskin, M. N. DeSilva, W. R. Elliott and R. D. Glickman, Int. J. Nanomed., 2015, 10, 1953–1960 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Norman, J. W. Stone, A. Gole, C. J. Murphy and T. L. Sabo-Attwood, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 302–306 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hu, H. Li, B. Wang, Z. Ye, W. Lei, F. Jia, Q. Jin, K.-F. Ren and J. Ji, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9330–9339 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Kim, E. B. Kang, C. J. Jeong, S. M. Sharker, I. In and S. Y. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15600–15606 Search PubMed .
W. Lei, K. Ren, T. Chen, X. Chen, B. Li, H. Chang and J. Ji, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600767 CrossRef .
Y. K. Kim, E. B. Kang, S. M. Kim, C. P. Park, I. In and S. Y. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 9, 3192–3200 Search PubMed .
L. Mi and S. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1746–1754 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yu, Z. Wu and H. Chen, Acta Biomater., 2015, 16, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wei, Z. Tang, Q. Yu and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37511–37523 Search PubMed .
Z. Cao, L. Mi, J. Mendiola, J. R. Ella-Menye, L. Zhang, H. Xue and S. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2602–2605 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yu, J. Cho, P. Shivapooja, L. K. Ista and G. P. Lopez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9295–9304 Search PubMed .
Q. Yu, W. Ge, A. Atewologun, A. D. Stiff-Roberts and G. P. Lopez, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4371–4378 RSC .
Q. Yu, W. Ge, A. Atewologun, A. D. Stiff-Roberts and G. P. Lopez, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 126, 328–334 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yan, H. Shi, L. Song, X. Wang, L. Liu, S. Luan, Y. Yang and J. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24471–24481 Search PubMed .
Z. Q. Shi, Y. T. Cai, J. Deng, W. F. Zhao and C. S. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23523–23532 Search PubMed .
T. Wei, W. Zhan, Q. Yu and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25767–25774 Search PubMed .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lyu, F. Zhou, Q. Liu, H. Xue, Q. Yu and H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5787–5795 CrossRef .
J. Wu, H. Xue, Z. Lyu, Z. Li, Y. Qu, Y. Xu, L. Wang, Q. Yu and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21593–21598 Search PubMed .
Y. Ha, J. Yang, F. Tao, Q. Wu, Y. Song, H. Wang, X. Zhang and P. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704476 CrossRef .
J. Gu, Y. Su, P. Liu, P. Li and P. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 198–210 Search PubMed .
P. Yang, Macromol. Biosci., 2012, 12, 1053–1059 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu and P. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400401 CrossRef .
A. Gao, Q. Wu, D. Wang, Y. Ha, Z. Chen and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 579–587 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Tao, Q. Han, K. Liu and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13440–13444 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, Y. Ha, J. Gu, Q. Li, L. Zhang and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7414–7423 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gu, S. Miao, Z. Yan and P. Yang, Colloid Interface Sci. Commun., 2018, 22, 42–48 CrossRef .
F. Zhou, L. Yuan, H. Wang, D. Li and H. Chen, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2155–2158 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, K. Liu, X. Yao and L. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8230–8293 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209–217 RSC .
W. Lee, I. Kim, S. W. Lee, H. Lee, G. Lee, S. Kim, S. W. Lee and D. S. Yoon, Macromol. Res., 2016, 24, 868–873 CrossRef .
J. Kennedy, I. S. Blair, D. A. McDowell and D. J. Bolton, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2005, 99, 1229–1235 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, Q. Xu, Z. Ye, H. Liu, Q. Lin, K. Nan, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Qi and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27207–27217 Search PubMed .
T. Wei, Q. Yu, W. Zhan and H. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 449–456 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wu, L. Zhang, L. Huang, S. Xiao, Y. Yang, M. Zhong and J. Yang, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 7160–7168 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yu, L. K. Ista and G. P. Lopez, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4750–4757 RSC .
H. Lee, Y. Lee, A. R. Statz, J. Rho, T. G. Park and P. B. Messersmith, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1619–1623 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wei and R. Haag, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 567–577 RSC .
L. Cao, Y. Qu, C. Hu, T. Wei, W. Zhan, Q. Yu and H. Chen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600600 CrossRef .
T. Wei, W. Zhan, L. Cao, C. Hu, Y. Qu, Q. Yu and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30048–30057 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and methods, statistical analysis, surface morphology, surface elemental compositions, photothermal properties, bactericidal activity evaluated via live/dead staining assay, Vc-induced degradation of PTLF, bactericidal activity evaluated via colony counting assay, antibacterial performance of the GNPL–PTLF surface against a MDR bacterial strain, Vc-triggered bacteria-releasing abilities of the GNPL–PTLF surface, sequential degradation of PTLF, storage stability and long-term effectiveness of the GNPL–PTLF surface, and surface properties and antibacterial performances of GNPL and GNPL–PTLF surfaces on different substrates. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tb01122b‡ These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of a smart antibacterial surface based on a GNPL–PTLF hybrid film with photothermal bacteria-killing capability and Vc-triggered bacteria-releasing ability.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic depicting the procedure for preparation of GNPL–PTLF on a substrate. The surface morphology of the GNPL surface before and after coating with PTLF was observed using SEM.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Comparison of photothermal properties of a smooth, unmodified gold surface, a GNPL surface and a GNPL–PTLF surface under NIR laser irradiation (2.3 W cm−2) in the dry state. (b) Effect of irradiation time on the photothermal biocidal activity of the GNPL–PTLF surface against E. coli evaluated by colony-counting assay. # indicates live bacteria percent <0.5. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Thickness of Au–PTLF and Au–PTLF* surfaces. (b) Water contact angle, and (c) high-resolution XPS Au4s spectra of GNPL, GNPL–PTLF and GNPL–PTLF* surfaces. Au–PTLF* and GNPL–PTLF* represent Au–PTLF and GNPL–PTLF surfaces after incubation in 100 mM Vc solution for 10 min, respectively. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 6).	 

 	Fig. 4  Evaluation of the bactericidal activity of different surfaces with/without NIR laser irradiation (2.3 W cm−2, 5 min). (a) Photothermal bactericidal activity of surfaces against E. coli and S. aureus under NIR laser irradiation evaluated using a colony counting assay. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3). (b) Typical SEM images of attached bacteria on Au and GNPL–PTLF surfaces with/without NIR laser irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Representative fluorescence images of bacteria on the GNPL–PTLF surface after incubation in a suspension of E. coli at 37 °C: (a) before and (b) after incubation in 100 mM Vc solution for 10 min. (c) Bacterial release ratios of the different surfaces. Error bars represent standard deviation (n = 3).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photothermal bactericidal activity of different surfaces against methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA) under NIR laser irradiation (2.3 W cm−2, 5 min). (b) Vc-induced bacterial release ability of different surfaces. * indicates killing efficiency <2%. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3).	 

 	Fig. 7  Changes in antibacterial performance and properties of surfaces coated with a PTLF layer after sequential treatment with Vc of different concentrations and for different incubation times (50 mM Vc, 15 min for Cycle 1; 250 mM Vc, 30 min for Cycle 2; 500 mM Vc, 30 min for Cycle 3). Representative fluorescence images of bacteria on a GNPL–PTLF surface and the corresponding killing efficiency and release ratio over three “kill–release” cycles are shown. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Typical photographs of E. coli colonies formed on agar plates after detachment from GNPL–PTLF surfaces with/without NIR laser irradiation on different substrates. (b) Representative fluorescence images of bacteria on GNPL–PTLF surfaces fabricated on various substrates before and after incubation in 100 mM Vc solution for 10 min. (c) The corresponding killing efficiency and release ratio of GNPL–PTLF surfaces fabricated on different substrates against E. coli. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean (n = 3).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Materials and methods, statistical analysis, surface morphology, surface elemental compositions, photothermal properties, bactericidal activity evaluated via live/dead staining assay, Vc-induced degradation of PTLF, bactericidal activity evaluated via colony counting assay, antibacterial performance of the GNPL–PTLF surface against a MDR bacterial strain, Vc-triggered bacteria-releasing abilities of the GNPL–PTLF surface, sequential degradation of PTLF, storage stability and long-term effectiveness of the GNPL–PTLF surface, and surface properties and antibacterial performances of GNPL and GNPL–PTLF surfaces on different substrates. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tb01122b
‡ These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
