Powering the future of molecular artificial photosynthesis with light-harvesting metallosupramolecular dye assemblies   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35223K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35223K
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1847-1870Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPowering the future of molecular artificial photosynthesis with light-harvesting metallosupramolecular dye assemblies†

        
          
            Peter D. 
            Frischmann
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kingsuk 
            Mahata
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Frank 
            Würthner
          
          
        
      *
      Universität Würzburg, Institut für Organische Chemie and Center for Nanosystems Chemistry, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. E-mail: wuerthner@chemie.uni-wuerzburg.de
Received 
      26th June 2012
    First published on 31st July 2012AbstractChemical ingenuity will play a significant role in solving the greatest challenge currently facing society: providing clean and carbon neutral energy for all of humanity. Molecular artificial photosynthesis is an emerging technology based on principles learned from Nature where individual components perform the essential light-harvesting, charge-separation, and water splitting functions to store solar energy in the form of chemical bonds. This tutorial review focuses specifically on the application of metallosupramolecular self-assembly strategies to interface solar fuel catalysts with photosensitizers and construct light-harvesting antennae capable of achieving panchromatic absorption and directional energy concentration.
Peter D. Frischmann
Peter D. Frischmann completed his BS at Idaho State University (USA) in 2005 and then moved to the University of British Columbia (Canada) where he studied metal-directed self-assembly of metallocavitands and macrocycles under the guidance of Prof. Mark J. MacLachlan. In 2010 he completed his PhD, and after a brief postdoctoral stay at UBC he was awarded an Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship in 2011 to develop supramolecular light-harvesting antennae under the guidance of Prof. Frank Würthner at the University of Würzburg (Germany) where he currently resides. His research interests are focused on the application of self-assembly strategies to develop functional materials for light harvesting, water splitting, and gas storage.
Kingsuk Mahata
Kingsuk Mahata was born in 1982 in Paschim Medinipur (India). He studied chemistry at Midnapore College (India) and received his BSc (honours) degree from Vidyasagar University (India) in 2003. After finishing his MSc from Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur in 2005, he moved to the University of Siegen (Germany) for doctoral research and obtained a PhD for his work on metallosupramolecular chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Michael Schmittel in 2010. Subsequently, he joined the research group of Prof. Frank Würthner at the University of Würzburg (Germany) as an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral fellow. His current research is focused on “metallosupramolecular approaches for artificial photosynthesis”.
Frank Würthner
Frank Würthner received his education in chemistry at the University of Stuttgart (Germany) where he obtained his doctoral degree in 1993 under the guidance of Prof. Franz Effenberger. After a postdoctoral stay at MIT in Cambridge, MA (USA) with Prof. Julius Rebek, Jr, he worked for two years at BASF Central Research (Ludwigshafen, Germany), followed by the habilitation in organic chemistry at the University of Ulm in 2001. Since 2002 he holds a Chair of Organic Chemistry at the University of Würzburg where he has also served as dean of the Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy and as director of the Wilhelm-Conrad Röntgen Research Center for Complex Material Systems. In 2010 he founded the Center for Nanosystems Chemistry which recently became a Bavarian State Key Laboratory for Supramolecular Materials for Solar Energy Conversion. His research interests include dye chemistry, fundamental studies on the self-assembly of molecular nanostructures and the synthesis of supramolecular materials for organic electronics, photovoltaics and artificial photosynthesis.
1 Introduction
Energy consumption shapes the lives of humans and, until a threshold per capita consumption is reached, correlates directly with human development.1 Humans consumed 532 × 1018 J of energy in 2008 with 84% of that energy coming directly from the combustion of fossil fuels.2 As a form of “preserved solar energy”, fossil fuels are being consumed at a rate 500000 times faster than the Earth produces them. Although proven reserves of coal, natural gas, and oil are predicted to last anywhere between 100–2000 years, a rapidly growing population, predicted to reach 9.4 billion by 2050,3 and the potentially drastic effects of increased atmospheric CO2 concentrations on global climates have made it very apparent that it is time human society made a dramatic shift towards more renewable, carbon neutral energy sources.
While all forms of renewable energy will play important roles in sustaining humanity through this transitional period, solar energy is clearly the most viable long-term solution. Each day the sun blankets the earth with roughly 1022 J of insolation, providing society's yearly energy demands in just over an hour.4 With these startling figures in mind the two most imperative questions become, what is the best way to capture solar energy and how can we store it for future use? The diurnal nature of the sun makes the second question especially critical if solar energy strategies are ever to be widely accepted in society as energy demands do not set with the sun.
Since the widespread use of fire until the industrial revolution, humans have relied on the same fuel source as a principle energy supply: photosynthetically produced biomass. In natural photosynthesis, solar energy is captured and stored by oxidizing H2O and fixing CO2 to produce sugars in a series of light and dark reactions. The energy efficiency of natural photosynthesis, defined by Blankenship et al. as the energy content (heat of combustion of glucose to CO2 and liquid H2O at standard temperature and pressure) of the annually harvested biomass divided by the annual solar radiation over the same area,5 is roughly 1% with a theoretical maximum for algal biofuels of <5%.6 At the estimated photosynthetic efficiency of around 1%, nearly 83% of the planet's arable land needs to be dedicated to biofuel production in order to satisfy present energy demands.7 In contrast, photovoltaic energy harvesting and artificial photosynthesis do not require the use of arable land thus avoiding unacceptable conflicts with global food supplies.
Comparing photosynthetic and photovoltaic efficiencies is challenging as the harvested energy is converted to long-term storable chemical bonds or short-term storable electricity, respectively. To enable a more accurate comparison, one must consider the case of photovoltaic-driven electrolysis of H2O resulting in the conversion of harvested solar electricity into storable solar fuels. Most simply, the production of solar fuels involves the splitting of water into H2 and O2 (ΔGo = 1.23 eV), as outlined in eqn (1)–(3), for use in a hydrogen economy; however, reduction of CO2 to CO, methanol, or CH4 is also a viable energy storage strategy being explored.8 Modern alkaline electrolyzers with nickel electrodes produce H2 at around 80% efficiency for the conversion from electricity to chemical energy. A reasonable estimate places the solar to H2 energy efficiency around 10%5 for a standard ca. 18% efficient Si photovoltaic cell coupled to a Ni-based electrolyzer. When considering the theoretical efficiency improvements in 2nd and 3rd generation photovoltaics (thermodynamic limit of 66%),5 the maximum theoretical energy efficiency for photovoltaic-driven electrolysis may be as high as 50%.9 Although these estimates are highly promising and justify any effort in the area of photovoltaic research, solar fuel production is not limited to photovoltaic-driven electrolysis, and emerging technologies may offer more advanced solutions to achieve desirable energy efficiencies. (1) 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−(2) 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2(3)Two alternative water splitting technologies that are less developed but quite promising are photoelectrochemical cells,10,11 where the electrodes also absorb light or are intimately connected to chromophores (like in dye-sensitized solar cells),12 and fully-integrated molecular artificial photosynthetic systems, where supramolecular light-harvesting antennae power solar fuel producing catalysts in a homogenous system. Nocera and co-workers recently reported a water-splitting photoelectrochemical cell with an energy efficiency of 4.7% and proposed a theoretical maximum for their system greater than 10%.13 On the other hand, accurate energy efficiency estimates for molecular artificial photosynthesis are not available since a fully-integrated system has not yet been demonstrated; however, natural photosynthesis utilizes a supramolecular approach and demonstrates remarkably high efficiencies for the light-harvesting (quantum efficiencies >90%; defined as the probability that an excitation leads to charge separation)14 and light-driven water oxidation steps (>80% efficiency under low-light conditions,7in vitro turnover rates for O2 evolution from photosystem II up to 1 × 103 s−1 for microalgae).15 This is promising because in molecular artificial photosynthesis the properties of chromophores and transition metal catalysts are easy to tune by making small synthetic adjustments to the molecular structure.
Metal complexes are ubiquitous in all molecular artificial photosynthetic systems, functioning as catalysts, chromophores, electron relays, and/or structural units. The application of metal complexes as catalysts for solar fuel production is intensely studied and has been the subject of recent reviews;16–22 therefore, this review will not cover catalyst development. Complementary to reviews on metal catalysts, this tutorial review is focused specifically on the role of coordination chemistry in the self-assembly of light-harvesting antennae, photosensitizers, and on the different coordination motifs used to interface light-harvesting antennae with solar fuel catalysts. While many remarkably complex and aesthetically pleasing metallosupramolecular chromophore arrays have been described,23–27 only the examples most relevant to artificial photosynthesis are highlighted here. These examples include simple dyads and triads that photocatalytically perform reactions for solar fuel production and multi-chromophore arrays that exhibit properties desirable for molecular artificial photosynthesis such as wide spectral absorption and efficient, directional energy or electron transfer. General principles to guide the future design of metallosupramolecular light-harvesting antennae and photosensitizers and interface them with catalysts are discussed within.
Throughout this review the terms chromophore, light-harvesting antenna, and photosensitizer are used extensively. To clarify, the term chromophore refers to any molecule absorbing a desired wavelength of light; light-harvesting antenna refers to an organized group of chromophores that enables efficient excitation-energy transfer between the constituent chromophores; and photosensitizer refers to the chromophore(s) specifically involved in charge separation after photoexcitation.
2 Natural photosynthetic light harvesting
A wealth of valuable knowledge for the optimal design of highly efficient light-harvesting antennae has been collected by studying natural light-harvesting apparatus. Despite the low overall energy efficiency of photosynthesis, many aspects of the natural photosynthetic machinery such as light-harvesting and O2 evolution in photosystem II dramatically outperform state of the art synthetic analogues. One of the best understood photosynthetic systems is the light-harvesting apparatus of purple non-sulfur bacteria which typically consists of two pigment–protein complexes, light-harvesting complexes I and II (LHC I and LHC II). X-ray crystallography, electron microscopy, and a variety of spectroscopic techniques have elucidated how the precise arrangement of chromophores and reaction centers leads to inter-complex energy transfer and charge separation at the reaction center (RC) with a quantum efficiency of 95%.28 Various photosynthetic apparatus of most plants, algae, and bacteria operate with light-harvesting quantum efficiencies >90%.14 Although purple non-sulfur bacteria do not produce oxygen during photosynthesis, the light-harvesting apparatus performs the same function as in oxygenic photosynthesis but with lower energy photons incapable of powering water oxidation. Structural diagrams of the purple non-sulfur bacterial LHC I, LHC II, and an overview of the excited state dynamics are highlighted in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the photosynthetic apparatus of purple non-sulfur bacteria highlighting the arrangement of chromophores. (a) LHC II; (b) LHC I and the reaction center; (c) summary of the energy transfer dynamics (green = Bchl 800, red = Bchl 850, yellow = carotenoids, cyan = Bchl 875, purple = reaction center Bchl 870, violet = reaction center BPheo).29 
The elegant cyclic arrangement of pigments in the LHC II of purple non-sulfur bacteria results from the self-assembly of 9 α-apoproteins, 9 β-apoproteins, 27 bacteriochlorophyll a molecules (Bchl a), and 13–14 carotenoids.30 A complete ring composed of 18 overlapping Bchl a molecules (colored in red in Fig. 1a and c) absorbing at 850 nm acts as the core energy accepting site. Metal–ligand interactions between histidine residues of the α- and β-apoproteins and the Mg(II) ions at the center of the Bchl a molecules hold the chromophores in the precise arrangement resulting in strong exciton coupling that enhances energy migration within the cyclic assembly and energy transfer to LHC I and ultimately the reaction center. Positioned further from the central Bchl a chromophores are 9 monomeric Bchl a chromophores (colored in green in Fig. 1a and c) absorbing at 800 nm and also held in place by protein–Mg(II) metal–ligand interactions. Carotenoids (colored in yellow in Fig. 1a and c) are organized by van der Waals interactions and serve a dual purpose, to absorb a complementary part of the visible spectrum around 500 nm and to rapidly quench triplet states generated by Bchl a chromophores preventing singlet oxygen generation and hence oxidative cellular damage.
Similar to LHC II, the 30–32 Bchl molecules (coloured in cyan in Fig. 1b and c) in the LHC I of purple non-sulfur bacteria are rigidly organized into a large oval by protein–metal–ligand interactions also resulting in strong excitonic coupling among the overlapping chromophores. With a maximum absorption well-adjusted at 875 nm, i.e. at slightly lower energy than the Bchl 850 manifold of LHC II, the Bchl molecules of the LHC I readily accept energy from LHC II by Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET). Inside the ring of chromophores is the reaction center consisting of two accessory Bchl molecules, two bacteriopheophytin a (BPheo) molecules, and a special pair of Bchl 870 molecules where charge separation occurs. From the excited state of the special pair of Bchl 870 molecules an electron is transferred to a nearby BPheo and then on to a ubiquinone acceptor. After two photochemical reductions of the ubiquinone, secondary electron transfer from the reduced ubiquinone to cytochrome b/c1 occurs through a break in the oval of Bchl 870 chromophores in LHC I.31 As the electrons pass further down the electron transport chain protons are released, and a proton motive force (PMF) is established that drives production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Rapid, efficient, and directional energy flow from LHC II to LHC I and finally to the reaction center is a product of the intricate 3-dimensional order of these protein–pigment complexes.32 As outlined in Fig. 1c, energy from photons absorbed by Bchl 800 chromophores or carotenoids in LHC II is transferred to the central ring of Bchl 850 chromophores in under 0.7 or 0.2 ps, respectively. The cyclic nature of the excitonically coupled Bchl 850 chromophores enables 360° inter-complex energy transfer where the energy migrates between LHC IIs until being transferred to the excitonically coupled Bchl 875 chromophores located in LHC I. Excitation energy is ultimately funneled to the special pair of BChl 870 molecules at the center of LHC I. The entire process, from the initial photon absorption at LHC II to the charge separation at the reaction center, is complete in fewer than 100 ps.28 A particularly noteworthy feature of this light-harvesting apparatus is the proper adjustment of the lowest energy excited state of BChl a by coordination chemistry and excitonic coupling to neighbouring dyes from 800 nm (1.55 eV) to 875 nm (1.42 eV).
However, the structural aspects that impart excellent light-harvesting quantum efficiency in natural photosynthesis do not directly translate into high energy efficiency. Quantum efficiency in natural photosynthesis is reported based on the probability that an absorbed photon is not wasted but converted into a charge-separated state, ignoring the fact that the available light-harvesting chromophores in most photosynthetic organisms can only absorb the higher energy photons of incident solar irradiation (∼50% of the incident solar energy), i.e. photons with wavelengths up to 700–900 nm depending on the organism.33 Other sizeable energy losses are due to incomplete absorption of photons in the spectral absorption range, relaxation of higher energy excited states to the lowest energy excited states, intra- and inter-complex FRET, and finally the conversion of excitation energy into electrical energy by photoinduced electron transfer reactions.6,33,34 Notably, after light harvesting about 0.60 eV (which is almost half of the remaining photon energy at 875 nm) have to be sacrificed to ensure efficient multistep charge separation across the photosynthetic membrane in both photosystem II (PS II) and purple non-sulfur bacteria.33 Energy losses due to relaxation of higher energy excited states and funneling of energy from light-harvesting complexes to the reaction center in purple non-sulfur bacteria are summarized in the energy level diagram depicted in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Qualitative energy level diagram showing intra- and inter-complex excitation energy transfer in purple non-sulfur bacteria from LHC II to LHC I and finally to the RC resulting in the charge-separated state (CSS) after multiple electron transfer steps (depicted as a single step for simplicity). Energy is lost by energy funneling to the CSS and as heat by relaxation of higher energy excited states (shown at an arbitrary energy level). The energy difference between the ground state and the CSS is available to drive primary photosynthetic reactions. 
Because low energy photons, i.e. those in the near infrared (NIR), are not utilized by natural light-harvesting complexes and absorbed high energy photons ultimately relax to the energy of the charge-separated state, energy harvesting for photosynthetic O2 evolution is indeed in many ways similar to a single-junction solar cell. Additionally, in green plants the conversion of H2O and CO2 to O2 and sugar requires two photosystems and 8 photoexcitations for every 4 electrons/protons transferred, further reducing the energy efficiency by half. Obviously, even for evolutionary optimized photosynthetic apparatus, this high price has to be paid to enable these very challenging chemical conversions. While two-junction tandem photovoltaic cells35 may exhibit higher efficiency by absorbing complementary parts of the solar spectrum, natural photosystems I and II harvest photons of nearly identical energy negating any potential benefits of a natural “tandem cell” configuration. Natural selection has driven the evolution of organisms most successful in adapting to environmental changes and successfully reproducing, not necessarily those capable of exhibiting maximal photosynthetic energy efficiency.
Improvements in the energy efficiency of natural photosynthesis may be realized if chromophores capable of enhancing the range of solar absorption were incorporated into light-harvesting antennae. Light-harvesting for oxygenic photosynthesis is particularly limited to photons in the photosynthetically active region of 400–700 nm by the high energy requirements of water oxidation. Chen and Blankenship recently reported that a 19% increase in usable photon flux may be achieved by simply extending the photosynthetically active region from 700 to 750 nm.36 Although it is unlikely that synthetic light-harvesting systems will rival natural systems in complexity, the latter may act as a blueprint. Thus, improving the efficiency of artificial systems will require precisely organized light-harvesting antennae that exhibit broad spectral absorption and directionally concentrate excitation energy at a reaction center. Like in Nature, metal–ligand coordination directed self-assembly will be the tool of choice for constructing synthetic antennae.37
3 Molecular artificial photosynthesis
3.1 Background
An idealized molecular artificial photosynthetic system consists of five essential components, a light-harvesting antenna, a photosensitized charge separating site, an O2 evolving catalyst, a H2 evolving catalyst, and a membrane isolating the catalysts as outlined in Fig. 3. The process begins when solar radiation is absorbed by the light-harvesting antenna, ideally constructed with a variety of chromophores to maximize absorption from the UV to the IR region and then efficiently funnel the excitation energy to a photosensitizer. At the photosensitizer initial charge separation takes place by generating an electron–hole pair. To maximize the lifetime of this charge-separated state additional donor and acceptor molecules may be included that increase the distance between the electron and hole, preventing unwanted recombination and shuttling the charges to the respective catalysts. Because of the complexity of the idealized system, a fully functional molecular system has yet to be demonstrated. Current research is aimed at optimizing the antennae, photosensitizers, and solar fuel catalysts in isolation before constructing a fully operative integrated system. The oxidation and reduction half reactions are studied in the presence of a sacrificial oxidant or reductant to compensate for the absence of the complementary catalyst. One of the greatest challenges in molecular artificial photosynthesis is the design of catalysts capable of performing multi-electron reactions, in particular for O2 evolution, a four electron process.38 To assess the overall performance of a catalyst the term turnover number (TON), defined as the number of molecules of product generated per catalyst in a set amount of time, is often used and will be referred to later in this review.
 Fig. 3  General concept for artificial photosynthesis. The light-harvesting antenna collects solar energy, then funnels that energy to the photosensitizer where initial charge separation takes place. A donor and an acceptor drive the electron and hole further apart to prevent back electron transfer and shuttle the respective charges to the catalysts. A membrane may also be placed somewhere between the O2 and H2 evolving catalysts to prevent a “short circuit”. When studying half reactions either catalyst may be replaced by a sacrificial reagent (adapted from ref. 39). 
In stark contrast to the hierarchical organization of LHC I and LHC II in natural photosynthesis, the majority of known molecular artificial photosynthetic systems are multi-component without being assembled. Accordingly, the rate of electron transfer between the photosensitizer and the catalyst or the photosensitizer and the sacrificial reagent is under diffusion control. Significant progress has been made with non-assembled multi-component systems and they have some advantages over assembled metallosupramolecular systems such as being able to easily adjust the ratio of the photosensitizer to the catalyst or often being more synthetically accessible. However, reliance on diffusion mediated processes for the crucial electron transfer steps40 severely limits the choice of potential photosensitizers to those photosensitizers that exhibit sufficiently long-lived excited-state lifetimes. Due to the longer lifetime requirement, chromophores with heavy atoms capable of accessing long-lived triplet states by inter-system crossing (ISC) are most often necessary, and the majority of non-assembled multi-component artificial photosynthetic systems function with an essential electron transfer to or from the triplet excited state of the photosensitizer. However, reliance on a triplet excited state creates a number of potentially undesirable features: (1) long-lived excited states provide more time for competitive back-reactions to occur resulting in more deactivation and decomposition pathways; (2) triplet states may generate highly reactive singlet oxygen that also leads to decomposition, in particular via photooxidation of organic ligands; (3) many of the most prevalent triplet sensitizers are coordination complexes of precious metals and thus expensive and of limited availability for global energy technology; and (4) coordination complexes have much lower absorption coefficients than typical organic dyes. It is not surprising that most molecular artificial photosynthetic systems reported to date have limited operating times due to either catalyst or photosensitizer decomposition.
In Nature, singlet states of chlorophyll dyes are utilized for light harvesting, whereas the triplet states of chlorophyll dyes are highly undesirable and have to be rapidly quenched by carotenoids to avoid photooxidative damage by singlet oxygen (formed by photosensitization of molecular oxygen by triplet chlorophyll). Limiting synthetic photosensitizers to only those that access triplet states also dramatically negates one of the great advantages of molecular artificial photosynthesis: the ability to construct antennae that capture a majority of incident solar radiation through judicious matching of different chromophores. Greater organization of the catalyst, photosensitizer, and light-harvesting antenna should alleviate the need for such long-lived excited states, making possible the use of more absorptive, stable, and precious metal free chromophores.
3.2 Light-harvesting chromophores
In principle photosynthesis can operate in the absence of light-harvesting antennae with only the special pair of chlorophylls in the reaction center absorbing sunlight and generating a charge-separated state. However, because catalytic reactions occurring in the reaction center are generally multi-electron processes, a steady supply of excitation energy must be delivered to drive charge separation and catalysis at a rate appreciably faster than charge recombination. Natural light-harvesting antennae ensure the threshold rate of excitation energy is exceeded by enlarging the absorption cross-section for the capture of sunlight (∼100 fold) and efficiently funneling the excitation energy to the reaction center.41 Therefore, the role of antennae is integral to natural photosynthesis and most likely also to artificial photosynthesis.
Generation of an excited state by absorption of solar irradiation is the first step of photosynthesis and most often occurs at the simplest unit of a light-harvesting antenna, the chromophore. Unfortunately there is no “perfect” chromophore exhibiting all desirable light-harvesting properties such as high extinction coefficient, broad spectral absorption, long excited-state lifetime, favourable oxidation and reduction potentials, high photochemical stability, and synthetic tractability. To overcome this limitation natural light-harvesting antennae are typically assembled from multiple chromophores that exhibit complementary absorption profiles and are capable of efficient excitation-energy transfer. Thus, when designing an artificial light-harvesting antenna the choice of chromophores is an important issue to ensure panchromatic absorption and efficient energy transfer.
In natural photosynthesis excitation-energy transfer occurs via two mechanisms, FRET between two different weakly-coupled chromophores (donor and acceptor) and delocalized exciton migration between excitonically-coupled chromophores. The rate of FRET between two chromophores exhibiting transition dipole–transition dipole interactions is expressed by the Förster equation as:42 (4)where κ is the orientation factor associated with the dipole–dipole interaction between the donor and the acceptor, n is the refractive index of the medium, N is Avogadro's number, ϕD is the fluorescence quantum yield and τD is the excited-state lifetime of the donor. The center-to-center separation of the donor and acceptor is described as R, and FRET is observed typically in the range of 1–10 nm.43 Förster spectral overlap I is the spectral overlap between the donor emission spectrum and acceptor absorption spectrum.
Excitation energy may also transfer through chromophores in close contact with overlapping wave functions. Excitonically coupled chromophores such as natural J-aggregates, particularly the rings of Bchl 850 and Bchl 875 in LHC II and LHC I, respectively, undergo excitation-energy transfer at a rate kET according to:42 (5)where V is the dipole coupling between two monomers and J(λ) is the spectral overlap of the area-normalized aggregate absorption and fluorescence spectra. Unlike donor–acceptor FRET, excitation-energy transfer through excitonically coupled systems is possible over significantly larger distances (∼100 nm44).
To approach the efficiency of excitation-energy transfer and charge separation of natural photosynthesis, artificial light-harvesting antennae and photosensitizers must be composed of chromophores well suited for these processes. One major advantage of molecular artificial photosynthesis is the diversity of chromophores available to mix and match to achieve a functional system. A collection of selected chromophores, absorption spectra, and relevant properties are displayed in Fig. 4, Fig. 5, and Table 1, respectively.
 Fig. 4  A selection of chromophores that have been utilized in energy transfer systems. 
 Fig. 5  Incident photon flux solar spectrum (ASTM 1.5 solar output spectra) and UV-Vis spectra of commonly selected chromophores plotted with normalized absorption to help visualize spectral overlap. See Table 1 for extinction coefficients. 
Table 1 Relevant properties of the light-harvesting chromophores depicted in Fig. 4 (absorption maxima, λabs, extinction coefficient, ε, emission maxima, λem, fluorescence quantum yield, ΦF, fluorescence life time, τF, oxidation potential, E° (ox), and reduction potential, E° (red) vs. ferrocene/ferrocenium (Fc) redox couple)




Chromophore

λ
abs/nm (ε/103 M−1 cm−1)

λ
em/nm

Φ
F/%

τ
F/ns

E° (ox)/V (vs. Fc)

E° (red)/V (vs. Fc)
Ref.





a Measured in water and original values (vs. NHE) were converted to the same scale (vs. Fc) according to: E°(dye)Fc = E°(dye)NHE − 0.77 V.
b Measured in organic solvent and original values (vs. SCE) were converted to the same scale (vs. Fc) according to: E°(dye)Fc = E°(dye)SCE − 0.53 V.





Bchl a
781 (92)
791
20







45



Ru(bpy)32+
452 (15)
607




0.49a
−2.03a

46



Ir(ppy)2(bpy)+
265 (36)
585




0.72b
−1.95b

47



SQ-H
870 (205)
890
10







48



SQ-I
900 (274)
922
17







48



ZnTPP
424 (500)
601, 652
6
2.0
0.42
−1.85

27



MgTPP
426 (562)
609, 660
16
8.9
0.12b
−2.10b

49



RuTPP
412






0.30b
−2.01b

50



H2TPP
418 (473)
650, 715
9
10.9
0.53
−1.71

27



ZnPc
672 (282)
690
30
3.6
0.14b
−1.43b

51



MgPc
668 (155)
668




0.18
−1.37

51, 52



RuPc
651 (215)
946




0.26
−1.66

53



H2Pc
692 (166)
702
67
6.1
0.74



51



PBI-H
526 (95)
531
100
3.4
1.29
−1.01

27



PBI-Cl
524 (42)
551
92




−0.87

54



PBI-OAr
585 (51)
614
96
6.5
0.86
−1.15

27



NDI-H
386 (16)
470
95
2.1


−1.12

55



NDI-NHR
620 (23)
650
42
9.7
0.65
−1.41

55, 56





It is immediately obvious that no single chromophore is capable of efficiently powering artificial photosynthesis. For example, Zn(II) tetraphenyl porphyrin (ZnTPP) has a very high extinction coefficient, but it covers only a narrow region of the solar spectrum (Fig. 5). The problem of narrow absorption bands is quite obvious from Fig. 5. One possibility to overcome this problem is to work with dye aggregates,57,58 which owing to excitonic coupling can have much broader absorption ranges. Broadening of absorption bands to cover the whole visible range has been demonstrated for color pigments and applied for efficient organic photovoltaic materials.59 Other classes of dyes such as perylene bisimides (PBIs) have much wider spectral coverage, but the extinction coefficient is lower than that of ZnTPP. PBIs are also valuable candidates for FRET as their fluorescence quantum yields can be very high. Excited-state lifetimes and redox potentials have also been included to aid in the design of metallosupramolecular photosensitizers. Regardless of the obvious challenges, the creative chemist is presented with a nearly limitless molecular toolbox to design and construct multi-chromophore light-harvesting antennae capable of panchromatic light absorption and focused energy transfer to a reaction center.
3.3 Metallosupramolecular light-harvesting antennae
One serious limitation of natural oxygenic photosynthesis is the waste of ∼50% of incident solar radiation, namely in the “green gap” and lower energy IR region of the solar spectrum.33 To truly take advantage of molecular artificial photosynthesis, light-harvesting antennae that absorb over the entire incident solar spectrum are desired. These antennae must be composed of a variety of strongly absorbing chromophores organized for efficient, directional energy transfer to a charge separating photosensitizer. Covalent synthesis has provided excellent models for studying directional energy transfer at fixed distances;60–63 however, self-assembly of easily accessible chromophores into complex architectures in one pot is a more desirable strategy for constructing multi-chromophore light-harvesting antennae. Compared to other non-covalent forces often used in self-assembly such as hydrogen bonding or π–π interactions, metal–ligand interactions can afford supramolecules with high stability, ensuring structural integrity for artificial photosynthesis. Through the prescient design of individual chromophores, metal–ligand interactions have been utilized to self-assemble antennae that exhibit many properties characteristic of an ideal light-harvesting antenna. This section gives examples for the construction of such metallosupramolecular antennae (larger than dyads) and highlights intriguing excitation-energy transfer dynamics relevant to artificial photosynthesis.
Excitation-energy transfer from Zn(II)porphyrin complexes to free-base porphyrin molecules is a well-known phenomenon.64 Based on this concept Hunter and co-workers designed bis-Zn(II)porphyrin 1 and tetra-pyridyl free-base porphyrin 2 that self-assemble in a 2:1 ratio, respectively, forming the quintessential metallosupramolecular antenna 3 as outlined in Scheme 1.65 Cooperative interactions between 1 and 2 due to the multiple binding sites render 3 stable at the low concentrations necessary for photochemical investigation. Rapid excitation-energy transfer was observed from the peripheral Zn(II)porphyrin chromophores to the central free-base porphyrin with a time constant of 490 ps and a quantum yield for energy transfer of 73% resulting in sensitization of the free-base porphyrin emission. Sensitized emission from the central accepting free-base porphyrin unit of two related 2:1 complexes was unexpectedly quenched, presumably due to a competitive photoinduced electron transfer.66,67 A larger nonameric porphyrinic molecular box, assembled from two tri-Zn(II)porphyrin units and three di-pyridyl free-base porphyrins, showed exceptionally efficient excitation-energy transfer (96%) and sensitization of the acceptor emission.68 By replacing the di-pyridyl free-base porphyrins with di-pyridyl PBI linkers electron transfer was favoured over energy transfer.69
 Scheme 1  Self-assembly of penta-porphyrin light-harvesting antenna 3. Alkyl chains and hydrogen atoms have been omitted in 3 for clarity (green = C, blue = N, red = O, yellow = Zn). 
The hexameric porphyrinic molecular box 4a self-assembled from Ru(II) cornered bis-Zn(II)porphyrin squares and di-pyridyl free-base porphyrins was first reported by Alessio and co-workers (Fig. 6).70 Selective photoexcitation of the Zn(II)porphyrin chromophores at 560 nm revealed a strong antenna effect. Excitation-energy transfer to the sensitized central free-base porphyrin linkers was measured with a quantum yield of ∼50% and a time constant of 32 ps.71 Competing electron-transfer pathways are likely responsible for the lower than expected excitation-energy-transfer efficiency. In a complementary study the di-pyridyl free-base porphyrins were replaced by di-pyridyl PBI derivatives with di-pyrrolidinyl or tetra-aryloxy bay substituents to give supramolecules 4b and 4c, respectively.72 Varying the PBI bay substituents significantly alters the electronic states of the chromophores resulting in very different photophysics for 4b compared to 4c. For pyrrolidinyl substituted 4b, singlet excitation-energy transfer from the photoexcited Zn(II)porphyrins to the PBI occurs in 14 ps with a 70% quantum efficiency followed by sensitized emission from the PBI. Competing electron-transfer pathways from the Zn(II)porphyrin to PBI and between the two PBI units drop the efficiency somewhat. However, the lower energy charge-transfer state of 4c quantitatively deactivates the energy-transfer pathway and photoexcitation instead resulted in a short-lived PBI−˙·Zn+˙ state (440 ps). The large cavities found within these metallosupramolecules make them attractive hosts for photo/electro-active guests.
 Fig. 6  Structure of metallosupramolecular boxes 4a–c. 
Pt(II)-pyridyl directed self-assembly of Pt(dppp)(OTf)2 (dppp = 1,3-bis(diphenylphosphino)propane) with PBI 6a, containing four pyrene chromophores covalently linked to the core of a di-pyridyl PBI chromophore, afforded multi-chromophoric molecular square 5a as shown in Fig. 7.73 Williams, Würthner, and co-workers showed that upon photoexcitation highly efficient energy- and electron-transfer processes occur from the pyrene donors to the PBI acceptors in 90 and 94%, respectively. Despite the high efficiency of both processes, electron transfer occurs 100 times faster and quenches the fluorescence of the accepting PBI units. Replacement of the pyrene donor with a 4-dimethylamino-1,8-naphthalimide donor in 6b resulted in self-assembled square 5b. Antenna 5b exhibited 95% efficient excitation-energy transfer to the PBI core and a fluorescence quantum yield of 35%. By switching donors the energy funneling and emission sensitization of the antenna system were dramatically improved.74
 Fig. 7  Structure of metallosupramolecular squares 5a–b assembled from di-pyridyl PBI ligand 6a–b and Pt(dppp)(OTf)2. 
Bäuerle, Janssen, Torres, and co-workers recently reported light-harvesting antennae 7a–c and 8a–c (Fig. 8) based on pyridyl-functionalized dendritic oligothiophenes (DOT) coordinated to a central Ru(II)Pc (Pc = phthalocyanine) for application in bulk-heterojunction solar cells.75 Effective panchromatic absorption is achieved from the UV region out to 650 nm by introducing the DOT units at the Ru(II)Pc core because of the complementary absorption spectra of DOT filling the absorption gap between the Ru(II)Pc B- and Q-bands. Excitation-energy transfer is favoured from DOT to Ru(II)Pc for 7a and 8a, while the larger dendrimers in 7b–c and 8b–c favour electron transfer from the DOT to the Ru(II)Pc.76 The charge-separated state lifetimes are short in each case (>500 ps) and exhibit significant solvent dependence. After blending the complexes with a fullerene acceptor, antennae 7a and 8a exhibited the highest photovoltaic efficiencies (1.5 and 1.6%, respectively). Replacing the carbonyl ligand of 8a–c with a pyridyl functionalized water splitting catalyst could potentially yield an intriguing light-harvesting antenna-photosensitizer-catalyst complex for molecular artificial photosynthesis.
 Fig. 8  Structure of dendritic oligothiophene substituted Ru(II)Pc triads 7a–c and dyads 8a–c. 
Although the majority of metallosupramolecular antennae funnel energy by FRET, exciton coupling allows for excitation-energy transport over longer distances without losing energy by traversing the energy gradient necessary for efficient FRET. Natural chlorosomes found in green sulfur and non-sulfur bacteria harvest light with metallosupramolecular rod-shaped aggregates of specifically tailored chlorophyll dyes (e.g. BChl c,d,e) that self-assemble through π–π interactions, H-bonding, and metal–ligand coordination.77 While the efficiency of chlorosome light harvesting and exciton transport is very high,78 like most plants, chlorosome light-harvesting antennae suffer from poor absorption in the green spectral region (“green gap”). To overcome this limitation for artificial photosynthesis, triad 9 has been designed that self-assembles into rod-shaped artificial chlorosomes which combine broad spectral coverage of sunlight from the UV to 750 nm and high efficiency FRET processes from the peripheral dyes (colored red and blue in Fig. 9) to the central rod antennae (colored green in Fig. 9).79,80
 Fig. 9  (a) Structure of zinc chlorin triad ZnChl–NDINN–NDINO9. (b) Self-assembly of 9 into a zinc chlorin rod antenna with labeled FRET processes and efficiencies from donors NDINO (red) and NDINN (blue) to acceptor ZnChl (green). (c) Absorption spectra of the non-assembled triad 9 (blue, dashed) and the rod-shaped aggregate showing J-type coupling of the ZnChl dye manifold (red, solid). Absorption maxima of the covalently attached NDI dyes are marked in the spectra. The incident solar photon flux is shown in black (adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society). 
As illustrated in Fig. 9 the absorption of the Zn(II) chlorin derivative (ZnChl) at the lower and higher energy edge of visible light was supplemented in the “green gap” by two different covalently tethered core-substituted naphthalene diimide (NDI) dyes, one at the periphery with OR and NR substituents (NDINO) and the other with two NR substituents (NDINN) that link the ZnChl and NDINO chromophores. In THF, ZnChl 9 remains non-aggregated due to the strong coordination of the Lewis basic solvent to the Zn(II) center. However, in methylcyclohexane–CCl4 (1:99) ZnChl 9 self-assembles into rod-shaped aggregates resulting in J-type excitonic coupling81 between ZnChl units that significantly shifts the absorption maximum from λmax = 647 nm to λmax = 731 nm. Both NDINO and NDINN remain in a non-aggregated state after ZnChl self-assembly due to the sterically demanding isopropyl substituents at the imide positions. Exceptionally efficient FRET occurs (≥99%) directly from NDINO and NDINN to the central ZnChl rod antenna with FRET lifetimes of 6 and 4 ps, respectively. After light-harvesting from the NDI chromophores, excitation energy migrates along the self-assembled excitonically-coupled ZnChl rod and could potentially be funneled to a reaction center to drive charge separation. Impressively, by harvesting in the “green gap” aggregates of 9 increase the overall light-harvesting efficiency by 63% compared to a model aggregate consisting of only the ZnChl and no peripheral NDI chromophores.
A variety of transition metal based dendrimers primarily containing Ru(II) and Os(II) coordinated to bpy and 2,3-bis(2′-pyridyl)pyrazine (dpp) ligands that function as light-harvesting antennae has been reported.82 Homo-metallic tetra-Ru(II) dendrimer 10a, shown in Fig. 10, exhibits luminescence behaviour similar to a Ru(bpy)2(dpp)2+ complex suggesting that the central Ru(dpp)32+ undergoes excitation-energy transfer to the peripheral Ru(bpy)2(dpp)2+ units and thus diffuses the excitation energy rather than concentrating it.83 Replacing the central Ru(II) with Os(II) establishes an inward energy-transfer gradient and excitation-energy transfer is observed from the peripheral Ru(bpy)2(dpp)2+ donors to the central Os(dpp)32+ acceptor in 10b.84 Further enhancement of the light-harvesting capabilities and directional excitation-energy funneling was achieved by covalent attachment of pyrene donors to the peripheral bpy ligands as in dendrimer 10c.85 Ultrafast FRET from the pyrene donors to the central Os(dpp)32+ acceptor occurred in less than 45 ps with a quantum yield of ∼100%.86 Sub-picosecond excitation-energy transfer was also observed from the Ru(bpy)2(dpp)2+ donors to the central Os(dpp)32+ acceptor of 10c, possibly through a Dexter transfer mechanism that requires direct orbital overlap between the donor and acceptor and is rarely observed in light-harvesting antennae. Photocatalytic water oxidation was recently reported by Campagna and co-workers for a non-assembled multi-component system with 10a as the light-harvesting antenna, S2O82− as the sacrificial oxidant, and an all-inorganic tetra-ruthenium polyoxometallate O2 evolving catalyst.87
 Fig. 10  Light-harvesting dendrimers 10a–c. 
3.4 Metallosupramolecular photosensitizers
After solar energy is collected by light-harvesting antennae it must be delivered to photosensitizers where charge separation occurs and the problem of back-electron transfer needs to be minimized. Thus, to ensure that each photon delivered by the antenna to the photosensitizer is utilized for conversion into chemical energy, long-lived charge-separated states are desirable.88 By extending the lifetime of the charge-separated state the probability for productive catalytic turnover improves, especially since most relevant solar fuel processes require multiple redox equivalents. In Nature long-lived charge-separated states are achieved with multi-step electron-transfer cascades that rapidly separate the electron and hole over a large distance.38 The increased distance between the electron and hole in the charge-separated state reduces the electronic coupling and thus the rate of recombination. The rate of back-electron transfer may also decrease when the free energy of the reaction is large, resulting in long-lived charge-separated states (Marcus inverted region).89 Based on these concepts, both covalent and non-covalent photosensitizing dyads, triads, and larger assemblies capable of generating sufficiently long-lived charge-separated states have been developed.90 Specifically photosensitizers exhibiting enhanced function upon metallosupramolecular assembly are highlighted here.
As demonstrated in the previous section, coordination of pyridyl donors to the axial sites of metalloporphyrins or phthalocyanines is a reliable and often robust self-assembly strategy. In particular, working with Ru(II)(CO) porphyrins or phthalocyanines provides kinetically inert assemblies with enhanced thermodynamic stability compared to Zn(II) analogues. Based on this knowledge, two related triads 1191 and 12,92 shown in Fig. 11, were designed with a central di-pyridyl PBI linker bridging two Ru(II)(CO) porphyrins or Ru(II)(CO) phthalocyanines, respective, in a side-to-face manner. Because of the nodes located at the imide N-atoms of the PBI linker, the absorption spectra of both triads show little to no ground-state electronic coupling between the different chromophores.
 Fig. 11  Structure of metallosupramolecular triads 11 and 12 and pentad 13. 
Triad 11 exhibits excitation wavelength dependent photophysics. Irradiation at 585 nm selectively photoexcites the di-pyridyl PBI linker resulting in electron transfer to a PBI−˙·Ru+˙ species with a time constant of 5.6 ps followed by quantitative charge recombination with a time constant of 270 ps. When 11 is irradiated at 530 nm roughly 62% of the incident irradiation is absorbed by the Ru(II)(CO)TPP and 38% by the di-pyridyl PBI. Absorption by the Ru(II)(CO)TPP rapidly generates the triplet excited state that undergoes triplet energy transfer to the di-pyridyl PBI with a time constant of 720 ps, followed by slow decay of the PBI triplet state to the ground state with a lifetime of 9.8 μs. No evidence for electron transfer was observed after excitation at 530 nm.
Despite the apparent structural similarities of 11 and 12, where the principle difference is the use of phthalocyanines in place of porphyrins, the photophysics of triad 12 are significantly different. Selective photoexcitation of either the di-pyridyl PBI linker or the Ru(II)(CO)Pc at 355 or 532 nm, respectively, results in the same outcome, electron transfer leading to the PBI−˙·Ru+˙ charge-separated state through the singlet excited state of either chromophore. The lifetime of PBI−˙·Ru+˙ is quite long, i.e. on the order of 115 ± 5 ns, which has been rationalized by the exothermic charge recombination dynamics lying in the inverted region of the Marcus parabola.92 Orthogonal arrangement of the chromophores is also thought to slow the charge recombination by reducing electronic coupling. Assembly of metallosupramolecule 12 results in a long-lived charge-separated state that forms rapidly from the singlet excited states and not from the triplet excited states like most photosensitizers currently in use.
The recently reported pentad 13 is composed of a central tetra-pyridyl PBI axially coordinated to four Ru(II)(CO)Pc.93 In the absence of a node separating the two chromophores, the ground states of both the donor and the acceptor are coupled. This ground state electronic interaction results in a less favoured charge-separated state that competes with ISC to the Ru(II)(CO)Pc triplet excited state. Selective photoexcitation of either chromophore rapidly generates the PBI−˙·Ru+˙ charge-separated state that recombines through the Ru(II)(CO)Pc triplet state with a lifetime of 260 ± 10 ps in toluene.
Metallosupramolecular self-assembly of 14 into cyclic tetramer 144 nicely demonstrates a non-covalent strategy to control charge-transfer dynamics (Scheme 2).94 Wasielewski and co-workers reported covalent triad 14 consisting of a zinc methyl 3-ethylpyrochlorophyllide a (Chl) as the primary electron donor, a pyromellitimide (PI) as the primary electron acceptor, and two naphthalene diimides (NDI) as the secondary electron acceptors. In toluene solutions with 1% pyridine the axial Zn(II) site of Chl is coordinated by free pyridine and 14 remains monomeric; however, in neat toluene 14 exists as the tetramer 144. This simple control over the self-assembly in solutions of nearly identical polarity enabled comparison of the two species' photophysics to evaluate the effects of self-assembly. Both 14 and 144 undergo fast initial charge separation generating Chl+˙·PI−˙·NDI2 followed by a charge shift to Chl+˙·PI·(NDI)NDI−˙ with quantum yields for the final NDI centered radical anion of >56%. The Chl+˙·PI·(NDI)NDI−˙ state is reached from the ground state in under 300 and 900 ps for 14 and 144, respectively. Most fascinating is that the measured lifetimes for charge recombination from Chl+˙·PI·(NDI)NDI−˙ to the ground state for 14 and 144 are 10 ± 1 and 30 ± 1 ns, respectively. Tetramers assembled with a more flexible monomer bearing only a single NDI substituent showed very little lifetime enhancement of the charge-separated state suggesting that the rigidity of 144 afforded by self-assembly may be partly responsible for the three-fold increase in lifetime.
 Scheme 2  Metallosupramolecular self-assembly of covalent triad 14 into cyclic tetramer 144. One monomer of the tetramer is colored by chromophore while the others are colored by element (purple = Chl, blue = PI, red = NDI; green = C, light blue = N, light red = O, yellow = Zn). Hydrogen atoms and the 2-ethylhexyl chains have been omitted from the model for clarity. 
While symmetric chromophore arrays may be advantageous for excitation-energy transfer, non-symmetric structures may be preferable for directional photoinduced charge separation. With this concept in mind, Iengo, Scandola, and co-workers designed chromophores 15, 16, and 17 that undergo metal-directed self-assembly into the photoactive triad 15·16·17 by simple mixing of the constituents in CHCl3 as shown in Scheme 3.95 What is remarkable about this system is the utilization of molecular recognition to obtain a single supramolecular species regardless of the potential for many different products. The axial site of the Al(III) porphyrin exhibits a significantly stronger affinity for carboxylate groups whereas Ru(II)(CO) porphyrins preferentially bind pyridyl ligands resulting in exclusive self-sorting96 into the desired triad.
 Scheme 3  Self-assembly of triad 15·16·17 in CHCl3 (R = tBu, R′ = 4-tBuPh). 
Selective photoexcitation at 590 nm of the central Al(III) porphyrin unit to 15·16*·17 results in the rapid electron transfer from the singlet excited state to the NDI acceptor unit generating 15−˙·16+˙·17 in 3 ps. Similar studies on the model dyad 15·16 showed that charge recombination occurs after 120 ps from the charge-separated state 15−˙·16+˙. Introduction of the Ru(II)(CO) porphyrin donor creates a different scenario where 15−˙·16+˙·17 undergoes a hole shift to 15−˙·16·17+˙ with a faster time constant of 30 ps. Competitive with charge recombination, the hole shift effectively separates the electron–hole pair and extends the lifetime of the long-range charge-separated state to 2–10 ns, i.e. by more than an order of magnitude compared to the dyad 15−˙·16+˙. Using this general strategy based on the photosensitizing Al(III) pyridyl functionalized porphyrin, various donors and acceptors may be introduced to generate a library of triads with energy levels and charge-separated state lifetimes tuned for specific functions.
Trimetallic triad 18 was designed by Hammarström and co-workers with two NDI acceptors, a Ru(bpy)32+ (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) photosensitizer, and a Mn(II) dimer donor that also is a mimic of the O2 evolving complex in photosystem II (Fig. 12).97 After selective excitation of the Ru(bpy)32+ photosensitizer, electron transfer to the intermediate (NDI)NDI−˙·RuIII·Mn2II,II state was observed followed by a rapid hole shift generating the fully charge-separated state (NDI)NDI−˙·RuII·Mn2II,III with a quantum yield of ∼20%. Despite existing in the Marcus normal region, an exceptionally long 600 μs lifetime was observed for the fully charge-separated state and attributed to an unusually large reorganization energy of the Mn2II,III complex.
 Fig. 12  Structure of trimetallic triad 18. 
3.5 Metallosupramolecular photocatalytic H2O oxidation
After photosensitized charge separation the oxidizing and reducing equivalents must be delivered to relevant catalysts where solar energy is ultimately converted into chemical fuels. At the heart of both natural and artificial photosynthesis is the energetically demanding water splitting half reaction that describes the conversion of 2 H2O into O2, four electrons, and four protons (eqn (2)). The potential for 2H2O → O2 + 2H2 (eqn (1)) is E° = −1.23 V, the energy equivalent of photons with λ = 1009 nm. Realistically, an overpotential of at least 0.3 V must be applied to drive the reaction as observed in PS II,38 limiting photo-driven catalysis to photons with a threshold wavelength λ ≤ 800 nm. In addition, four oxidizing equivalents must be delivered at a rate faster than non-productive back-electron transfer in order to drive catalytic turnover. To maximize the efficiency of molecular artificial photosynthesis effective synthetic water oxidation catalysts are necessary. However, current state of the art synthetic water oxidation catalysts generally do not compete with the rate, efficiency, and low overpotential exhibited by the protein supported Mn4Ca water oxidation catalyst (Fig. 13) found in PS II.98,99
 Fig. 13  Structure of the O2 evolving Mn4Ca active site of PS II and the first synthetic molecular O2 evolving catalyst the “blue dimer”. 
The first synthetic molecular water oxidation catalyst was reported by Meyer and co-workers in 1982.100 Known as the “blue dimer”, the bimetallic catalyst has the formula cis,cis-[(bpy)2(H2O)RuIIIORuIII(OH2)(bpy)2]4+ (Fig. 13). This seminal discovery opened avenues to a variety of other catalysts, and contemporary water oxidation catalysts are based on mononuclear Ru, Ir, and Fe as well as dinuclear Ru and Mn and tetranuclear Ru, Mn, and Co active sites. Biomimicry of the Mn4Ca cluster in PS II has also led to the development of promising new catalysts.22,101 To avoid photooxidative decomposition of organic ligands, a common decomposition pathway, tetranuclear Ru and Co oxygen evolving catalysts with robust all-inorganic polyoxometallate ligands were recently introduced.102–104 As stated earlier in this review, water oxidation catalysts have been extensively covered, and the reader is referred to a number of excellent reviews for a more thorough description of catalyst development and mechanistic details.19–22
Because of challenges associated with catalyst design, a limited number of systems performing molecular photocatalytic water oxidation have been described. Studying the photosensitized oxidation half reaction in isolation requires a sacrificial oxidant, most often S2O82−, that effectively removes electrons from the system. The photosensitized process may occur through two different mechanisms, oxidative or reductive quenching, as outlined in Fig. 14. An oxidative quenching mechanism is when the excited state of the photosensitizer (PS in Fig. 14) is quenched by electron transfer to the sacrificial oxidant (Ox in Fig. 14). The oxidized photosensitizer then has a sufficient thermodynamic driving force to oxidize the catalyst (Cat in Fig. 14), regenerating the ground state of the photosensitizer. As water oxidation is a four electron process, this cycle must occur four times without back-electron transfer before productive catalytic turnover is observed. The reductive quenching mechanism (Fig. 14) occurs in a similar fashion; however, the excited state of the photosensitizer is quenched by electron transfer from the catalyst to the photosensitizer followed by oxidation of the reduced photosensitizer by the sacrificial oxidant.
 Fig. 14  Two possible quenching mechanisms for the water oxidation half reaction: (a) oxidative quenching and (b) reductive quenching mechanism. For simplicity the evolution of one equivalent of O2 is shown on the left side of each mechanism. However, in reality O2 evolution requires traversing the light-absorption and charge-separation steps four times, resulting in a 4+ charge buildup on the catalyst, prior to a single catalytic turnover. 
While photocatalytic water oxidation has been demonstrated with non-assembled multi-component systems, a photocatalytically active single-component metallosupramolecular system was reported for the first time in 2012 by Sun and co-workers using the triad 19 shown in Fig. 15.105 Upon visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm) of a H2O:CH3CN (9:1) solution containing 19 and sodium persulfate as the sacrificial oxidant, O2 evolution was observed with a TON of 38 after 70 minutes while the non-assembled multi-component control system exhibited only 8 turnovers. Oxidative quenching of the peripheral pyridyl-substituted Ru(bpy)32+ units in 19 by S2O82−, followed by electron transfer from the central catalyst to the photogenerated Ru(bpy)33+ photosensitizer drives O2 evolution. Dissociation of the pyridyl-substituted Ru(II) photosensitizers from the catalyst results in a slow loss of catalytic activity. Although structurally quite similar to 19, triad 20 showed no activity for O2 evolution under the same conditions. The shorter excited-state lifetime of Ru(tpy)22+ (tpy = 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine) compared to Ru(bpy)32+ potentially limits intramolecular electron transfer rendering 20 inactive.
 Fig. 15  Structure of photosensitizer–catalyst complexes 19–23 designed for photocatalytic O2 evolution. 
Dyad 21, constructed with a bipyridyl-Ru(II) based photosensitizer linked to a polypyridyl-Ru single-site O2 evolving catalyst through a polypyridyl-pyrazine ligand (Fig. 15), was reported by Thummel and co-workers in 2012.106 Irradiating an aqueous solution of the photosensitizer-catalyst dyad 21 and the sacrificial oxidant S2O82− with a blue light-emitting diode (λmax = 472 nm) evolved a significant amount of O2 over a period of 6 h (TON = 134). The non-assembled multi-component system was capable of only 6 turnovers over the same period of time even in the presence of four times greater concentration of the photosensitizer Ru(bpy)32+. The amide linked dyad 22, also constructed with a bipyridyl-Ru(II) based photosensitizer and a polypyridyl-Ru single-site O2 evolving catalyst, was reported by Meyer and co-workers.107 Electrocatalytic O2 evolution by 22 was measured and found to be comparable with the non-assembled catalyst, thus demonstrating that 22 maintains the catalytic properties of the non-assembled catalyst after formation of the photosensitizer-catalyst dyad via amide coupling. Photocatalytic studies with dyad 22 have not yet been reported.
Wasielewski and co-workers synthesized dyad 23 which consists of a PBI photosensitizer coordinated to a known Ir(III) O2 evolving catalyst (Fig. 15).108 Spectroscopic studies revealed that upon photoexcitation of the PBI photosensitizer at 550 nm ultrafast electron transfer occurs from the Ir(III) catalyst to the PBI core in toluene (1.8 ps) with ∼100% quantum yield. However, this charge separation is followed by a quite fast charge recombination (biexponential, 14 and 75 ps), thus leading to a rather short-lived PBI−˙·Ir(IV) state. Although photocatalytic O2 evolution was not tested, electrocatalytic evolution of O2 by a derivative of 23 with the chloride ligand substituted by solvent molecule was observed and holds promise for future photocatalytic studies for structurally related derivatives. Due to the many challenges associated with water oxidation, few systems are capable of photocatalytically performing this demanding reaction. The discovery of long-lived, fast and efficient photocatalytic water oxidation systems is essential for the practical application of molecular artificial photosynthesis.
3.6 Metallosupramolecular photocatalytic H2O and CO2 reduction
In natural photosynthesis the protons and electrons generated during water splitting are used to produce ATP and NADPH, respectively, that provide the chemical driving force for storing solar energy in the form of carbohydrates. Artificial photosynthetic systems are generally designed to catalyze the reduction of protons, thus storing solar energy in the form of H2 (eqn (3)), however, reduction of CO2 is also a feasible process for solar energy capture. The reductive side of artificial photosynthesis generating H2 requires only two reducing equivalents opposed to the four oxidizing equivalents necessary for water oxidation, making photocatalytic H2 evolution a more surmountable task. A large number of robust catalysts have been reported based on mononuclear Co, Ni, Rh, Pd, and Pt and dinuclear Fe active sites. As mentioned before, H2 evolving catalysts have been the subject of recent reviews, and the reader is referred to these excellent reports for detailed descriptions of catalyst development and mechanistic details.16–18 Extensive optimization of non-assembled multi-component systems has resulted in a number of catalysts capable of exhibiting >1000 photocatalytic turnovers. These non-assembled multi-component systems are currently the state of the art photocatalytic H2 evolving systems.
Probing the H2 photocatalytic half reaction in isolation requires a sacrificial reductant that provides a steady supply of electrons to the system. While NR3 derivatives are the sacrificial reductants of choice, in particular triethanolamine (TEOA), other reducing agents such as secondary amines, NADH, cysteine, ascorbic acid, and S2O32− have all been applied in photocatalytic H2 evolution. Both oxidative and reductive quenching of the photosensitizer excited state can lead to productive catalytic turnover as outlined in Fig. 16. In the oxidative quenching mechanism the excited state of the photosensitizer (PS in Fig. 16) is quenched by electron transfer to the catalyst (Cat in Fig. 16) followed by regeneration of the photosensitizer after reduction by a sacrificial reductant (Red in Fig. 16). The reductive quenching mechanism (Fig. 16) initially involves quenching of the photosensitizer excited state by electron transfer from the sacrificial reductant. Electron transfer from the reduced photosensitizer to the catalyst completes the cycle.
 Fig. 16  Two possible quenching mechanisms for the proton reduction half reaction: (a) oxidative quenching and (b) reductive quenching mechanism. For simplicity the evolution of one equivalent of H2 is shown on the right side of each mechanism. However, in reality H2 evolution requires traversing the light-absorption and charge-separation steps two times, resulting in a 2− charge buildup on the catalyst, prior to a single catalytic turnover. 
Promising results from first generation metallosupramolecular photocatalysts composed of a single photosensitizer coordinated to a catalyst show that the coordinated dyads generally outperform non-assembled multi-component control systems in which the photosensitizer and catalyst are not linked. H2 evolving cobaloxime catalysts are ideal platforms to construct dyads because an axial coordination site on Co(II) may be occupied by pyridyl-based ligands without dramatically affecting the catalytic activity. A variety of cobaloxime photosensitizer-catalyst dyads such as those depicted in Fig. 17 has been reported where the photosensitizer is connected to the catalyst through a pyridyl substituent.16
 Fig. 17  Structures of H2 evolving cobaloxime photocatalytic dyads 24–29. 
In 2008 Artero, Fontecave, and co-workers first reported H2 evolution from dyads 24a–b in the presence of Et3N as the sacrificial reductant and Et3NH+ as the proton source (Fig. 17).109 Over a period of 4 h dyads 24a and 24b exhibited 56 and 104 turnovers, respectively. Remarkably, the dyads significantly outperformed non-assembled multi-component Ru(bpy)32+–cobaloxime systems, especially in the presence of a UV cut-off filter where 24a retained half of its activity and the non-assembled multi-component system was nearly inactive. Similar H2 evolution experiments with the organometallic iridium(III) photosensitizer dyad 25 exhibited enhanced catalytic lifetime when compared to a non-assembled multi-component control system.110 Interestingly, initial rates of H2 evolution were the same for both the metallosupramolecular dyad and the non-assembled multi-component system, indicating that electron transfer from the reductive quencher to the photoexcited photosensitizer is likely the rate determining step. The effects of the conjugated bridge between the photosensitizer and the catalyst were investigated by Sun and co-workers by comparing the catalytic activity of dyads 24a, 26, and 27.111 Like dyad 24a, dyads 26 and 27 outperform non-assembled multi-component control systems; however, dyad 27 was more active than both 24a and 26 suggesting that a conjugated bridge may increase unwanted back-electron transfer from the catalyst to the photosensitizer. Counter to these examples, Eisenberg, Holland, and co-workers reported complex 28 with fluorescein coordinated through a pyridyl linkage to the cobaloxime catalyst where the non-assembled multi-component system exhibited a better TON.112 The observation of pyridyl ligand exchange was considered as one of the reasons for the reduced efficiency of the dyad system, emphasizing that the integrity of the pyridine-Co linkage must always be considered for complexes constructed in this fashion.
H2 evolution experiments with noble metal free porphyrin–cobaloxime dyads 29a–b elegantly demonstrate the advantages of metallosupramolecular organization in molecular artificial photosynthetic systems (Fig. 17). Sun and co-workers constructed dyads 29a–b by coordinating a Zn(II) or Mg(II) porphyrin to the cobaloxime catalyst through a pyridyl linkage.113 UV-vis titration experiments showed that the sacrificial reductant, Et3N, coordinates at the axial position only to the Zn(II) in 29a and not to the Mg(II) in 29b. Despite 29b exhibiting a larger thermodynamic driving force for catalyst reduction and a longer singlet excited state lifetime, dyad 29a produces seven times more H2 than 29b (TONs 22 and 3, respectively). Preorganization of the sacrificial reductant with the photosensitizer–catalyst dyad results in more efficient inner-sphere electron transfer from Et3N to the radical cation 29a+˙, limiting back-electron transfer from the cobaloxime catalyst to 29a+˙ and thus improving the overall performance. No H2 was detected from non-assembled multi-component analogues of both 29a and 29b.
Metallosupramolecular assemblies linking photosensitizers to diiron hydrogenase mimics also show promise as photocatalytic H2 evolving systems (Fig. 18).114,115 A modular supramolecular approach reported by Reek and co-workers described the self-assembly of Fe2(μ-pdt)(CO)4{PPh2(4-py)} (pdt = propylene-1,3-dithiolate) with Zn(II) porphyrin derivatives yielding triad 30.116 Surprisingly, after screening a small library of various pyridyl-phenylphosphine ligands and photosensitizers, H2 evolution was only observed in the presence of two different porphyrins. In support of the observation, theoretical studies provided evidence that unsymmetrical diiron complexes may be more active hydrogenase mimics.117 Sun and co-workers introduced a pyridyl substituent on the dithiolate ligand bridging the iron centers enabling self-assembly of dyad 31 in the presence of a Zn(II) porphyrin.118 Flash-photolysis experiments suggested that dyad 31 undergoes photoinduced electron transfer whereas a non-assembled multi-component model system lacking the pyridyl group on the diiron complex did not exhibit photoinduced electron transfer. In agreement, H2 evolution was only observed with metallosupramolecular dyad 31. Although more covalent in nature, dyads 32119 and 33120,121 are linked through Fe–S coordination and also exhibit photoinduced electron transfer from the porphyrin unit to the diiron catalyst. Upon visible light irradiation, 32 and 33 evolve H2 but not catalytically (TON < 1).
 Fig. 18  Structures of diiron hydrogenase mimics 30–33 containing a porphyrin photosensitizer. 
Otsuki and co-workers reported supramolecular photocatalytic H2 evolving systems constructed by in situ self-assembly of cyclometallated Ir(III) photosensitizers bearing a free bpy ligand with Co(II) yielding photosensitizer–catalyst complexes as outlined in Scheme 4.122 When solutions prepared with a 3:1 ratio of photosensitizer 34 to CoCl2 were irradiated with visible light (λ = 400–700 nm) in the presence of TEOA as the sacrificial reductant, complex 35a exhibited the highest activity (TON = 20 with respect to Co(II), 8 h). Non-assembled multi-component control systems with Co(bpy)32+ as the catalyst and Ir(ppy)2(bpy)+ (ppy = 2-phenylpyridine) as the photosensitizer were only half as active under the same conditions providing support for more efficient electron transfer in the metallosupramolecular system. Another advantage of the bpy ligand is the enhanced stability of the photosensitizer–catalyst dyad due to the large association constant for bpy binding with Co(II) thus enabling photocatalysis in aqueous solutions (1:1 H2O:CH3CN).
 Scheme 4  Self-assembly of H2 evolving complexes 35a–dvia in situ coordination of photosensitizers 34a–d to Co(II). 
Complex 36a was reported in 2006 by Sakai and co-workers as the first single-component molecular photocatalytic H2 evolving system (Fig. 19).123 Since then, a variety of functional H2 evolving systems has been described based on derivatives of the Ru(bpy)32+ photosensitizer with a pendent bpy ligand coordinated to Pd(II), Pt(II), or Rh(III) catalysts. Modest TONs are reported for complexes 36a–c (TON < 10), however, the linkage between Ru(II) and Pt(II) is necessary as non-assembled multi-component analogues are inactive unless methyl viologen is introduced as an electron relay. Complexes 36b and 36c, constructed with 2 and 3 catalytic sites, respectively, were more active in aqueous solutions than 36a possibly due to increased reaction path degeneracy.124
 Fig. 19  Structures of photocatalytic H2 evolving dyads and triads 36–41. 
A H2 evolution TON of 56 in CH3CN was reported by Rau and co-workers for dyad 37a, shown in Fig. 19, composed of a tetrapyridophenazine (tpphz) ligand bridging the Ru(tbbpy)22+ (tbbpy = 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridine) photosensitizer and the PdCl2 catalyst.125 Aside from holding the photosensitizer and catalyst in close proximity, the tpphz ligand aids in the directional electron transfer from the photosensitizer to the catalyst. Photo-EPR experiments provided evidence for a pyrazine-based radical and ultrafast time-resolved absorption spectroscopy revealed a stepwise electron-transfer process proceeding from Ru(II) through the phenazine core and ultimately resulting in reduction of Pd(II) in less than 320 ps.126 A maximum TON of 161 was later reported by irradiating specifically near the absorption maximum at 458 nm with the addition of 10 vol% H2O to the solution. Most interestingly, wavelength-dependent H2 evolution experiments showed that enhanced photocatalytic efficiencies were achieved at longer wavelengths where the extinction coefficient is much lower. Through a combination of resonance Raman spectroscopic experiments and time-dependent DFT calculations it was determined that photoexcitation at lower energy wavelengths results in an excited state with more electron density on the bridging tpphz ligand and less on the peripheral tbbpy ligands, emphasizing the importance of directional electron transfer.127 Dyad 37b, with bromo substituents on the 1,10-phenanthroline (phen) unit, exhibited increased localization of the charge-transfer state on the phen unit upon irradiation, reducing the gradient for electron transfer across the bridging ligand and the overall photocatalytic activity.128
Dyad 38, designed by Hammarström and co-workers, photocatalytically evolved H2 in a CH3CN solution with Et3N as the sacrificial reductant;129 however, TEM, XPS, and MS studies provided evidence for photodecomposition of the dyad and formation of Pd colloids, a known heterogeneous H2 evolving catalyst. Although they do not eliminate the possibility of homogeneous H2 evolution from 38, their study highlights the need for careful mechanistic interpretation of photocatalytic supramolecular systems to ensure that molecular and not colloidal species are the active catalysts. Similar photodecomposition of a molecular Pt(II)-based catalyst forming Pt colloids was also reported by Eisenberg and co-workers using a non-assembled multi-component photocatalytic system.130
Unlike complexes 36–38, composed of polypyridyl Ru(II) photosensitizers and group 10 metal based H2 evolving catalysts, complexes 39 and 40 interface polypyridyl Ru(II) photosensitizers with a Rh(III) H2 evolving catalyst. Triad 39a was first reported in 2007 by Brewer and co-workers and exhibited 30 turnovers after 4 h of irradiation in an aqueous CH3CN solution.131 While the phen substituted triad 39b had similar H2 evolving activity to the bpy analogue 39a,132 triad 39c with 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (Ph2phen) ligands was four times more active than the earlier systems.133 Substitution of the chloride ligands with weaker σ-donating bromides further enhanced the driving force for metal–metal charge transfer and resulted in a single-component system capable of exhibiting 870 turnovers after 46 h and 1300 turnovers with continued irradiation. Notably, although dyad 40a undergoes photoinduced electron transfer generating a catalytically active Rh(I) center, evolution of H2 is not observed. Instead, photoreduced 40a dimerizes at the Rh(I) center, effectively deactivating the photocatalyst.134 Introduction of Ph2phen ligands sterically prohibits dimerization, and dyad 40b is catalytically active evolving roughly half as much H2 as triad 39c in agreement with the difference in absorptivity.135 These studies demonstrate the dramatic effects of subtle ligand changes and highlight the importance of careful ligand selection when designing metallosupramolecular photocatalysts.
Coordination of Rh(I) to a bis(diphenylphosphine) substituted derivative of Os(tpy)22+ yielded dyad 41 (Fig. 19), the only example of a single-component photocatalyst with a polypyridyl Os(II) photosensitizer.136 Irradiation of 41 produced H2 with TONs of 87 and 594 after 18 and 240 h, respectively. Non-assembled multi-component model systems showed no activity for H2 evolution.
Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is another highly desirable and challenging reaction relevant to artificial photosynthesis that has been demonstrated with metallosupramolecular complexes. Kimura et al. reported dyad 42, constructed with a polypyridyl Ru(II) photosensitizer and a Ni(II)-cyclam catalyst, as one of the first single-component systems to show higher efficiency than the non-assembled multi-component model system (Fig. 20).137 Irradiation of a solution of 42 in a CO2 saturated ascorbic acid buffered aqueous solution generated nearly three times more CO than the non-assembled multi-component model system over a period of 44 h. Over the first four hours the non-assembled multi-component system outperformed 42. The enhanced stability of complex 42 compared to Ru(phen)32+ was responsible for the better performance.
 Fig. 20  Structure of complexes 42–45 for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO. 
The Re(I) complex fac-[Re(bpy)(CO)3X]+ (X = Cl, Br, P(OEt)3) is a well-known photocatalyst for CO2 reduction operating under UV irradiation. In 2005 Ishitani and co-workers developed the Ru(II)–Re(I) metallosupramolecules 43 and 44 capable of visible light-driven photocatalytic CO2 reduction (Fig. 20).138 In a CO2 saturated DMF:TEOA (5:1) solution charged with 1-benzyl-1,4-dihydronicotinamide as the sacrificial reductant complexes 43 and 44 exhibited 170 and 240 turnovers, respectively, after 16 h of irradiation at λ ≥ 500 nm, whereas non-assembled multi-component model systems exhibited only 101 and 61 turnovers, respectively (based on moles of Ru(dmb)32+, dmb = 4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine). A similar trimetallic complex 45 exhibited a TON of 110, twice the value of the non-assembled multi-component model system.139
As illustrated by the examples in Sections 3.5 and 3.6, more efficient molecular artificial photosynthetic systems are achievable by moving away from diffusion limited non-assembled multi-component systems to self-assembled systems capable of more precise, directional energy and electron transfer. Most often these metallosupramolecular systems involve metal-pyridyl or polypyridyl coordination chemistry to interface the photosensitizer with the catalyst.
4 Conclusions
Securing a sustainable and clean energy supply for all humans is the greatest challenge faced by modern society. While many potential approaches are currently being pursued, at present no single technology is capable of achieving such a lofty goal in the foreseeable future. The field of molecular artificial photosynthesis is relatively young but rapidly developing due to its vast potential. Advanced solar fuel catalysts that split water faster, exhibit higher TON, and operate at lower overpotential are being reported nearly every month. State of the art photocatalytic systems are multi-component where the rate of electron transfer is limited by diffusion. It is impossible to anticipate if non-assembled multi-component systems will continue to dominate the field; however, lessons from Nature suggest that more intimate organization of light-harvesting antennae, photosensitizers, and catalysts is optimal.
Although covalent attachment of catalysts to light-harvesting antennae has yielded a number of exciting photocatalytic systems, the efficiency and self-error checking intrinsic to self-assembly makes supramolecular approaches ideal for constructing complex multi-chromophore antennae and interfacing them with photosensitizers and catalysts. Particularly, metal–ligand coordination affords complex architectures of high integrity. In this direction, we have highlighted a number of metallosupramolecular light-harvesting antennae with emergent properties desirable for artificial photosynthesis such as wide spectral absorption and directional energy transfer. Photosensitizers constructed in a similar fashion exhibit long-lived charge-separated states enhanced by metal–ligand directed organization.
The second half of this review described simple photocatalytic dyads and triads assembled primarily through pyridyl–metal–ligand interactions that are capable of H2 evolution, O2 evolution, or CO2 reduction. In the majority of these reports proof-of-concept metallosupramolecular systems outperform non-assembled multi-component control systems. Nevertheless, all of the systems described so far rely on the presence of a sacrificial reagent and are only suitable to afford either H2 evolution (or CO2 reduction) or O2 evolution but not both. Furthermore, they are not efficient with regard to TON or with regard to harvesting of incident solar irradiation. To improve the overall performance of these prototype photosensitizer-catalyst complexes they must be interfaced with sophisticated light-harvesting antennae that capture a significant portion of incident solar irradiation and funnel excited-state energy to the photosensitizer.
Metallosupramolecular systems consisting of an antenna, a photosensitizer, and a catalyst will likely be demonstrated in the near future, as many of the antennae and photosensitizers described in this review already possess latent functional groups or coordination sites capable of interacting with known solar fuel catalysts. Care must be taken to maintain the desired photophysical and catalytic properties of each component when installing functional groups that direct the self-assembly of the components into a functioning device. Modular systems similar to the photosensitizing triad 15·16·17 may be a good starting point for constructing antenna–photosensitizer–catalyst supramolecules because the individual components may be easily mixed to achieve the desired function. Other supramolecular forces such as electrostatic or π–π interactions may complement metal–ligand interactions in driving the selective self-assembly of the components into specific architectures.
Amongst the significant achievements, a number of challenges still remain for continued improvement of photoactive metallosupramolecules. Most notably, integrating half reactions into fully cyclic systems capable of performing both O2 and H2 evolution synchronously is essential. Systems that function in aqueous environments and maintain acceptable kinetic and thermodynamic stability have also not yet been demonstrated. The photosynthetically relevant components of natural light-harvesting apparatus are ensconced in hydrophobic proteins to circumvent this problem. Innovative development of metallosupramolecular light-harvesting antennae, photosensitizers, and catalysts will help accelerate the transformation of molecular artificial photosynthesis from laboratory curiosity to viable sustainable energy technology.
Acknowledgements
PDF and KM thank the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for postdoctoral fellowships. Generous financial support by the Bavarian State Ministry of Science, Research, and the Arts for the Collaborative Research Network “Solar Technologies go Hybrid” is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
The Human Development Index, published by the United Nations Development Programme, is based on factors such as life expectancy, education level, and GDP per capita as defined by the United Nations Human Development Report; http://hdr.undp.org/en/ (accessed on May 20, 2012).
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA); International Energy Statistics database; http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/ipdbproject/IEDIndex3.cfm (accessed on May 20, 2012).
U.S. Census Bureau; http://www.census.gov/population/international/ (accessed on May 20, 2012).
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, D. Kramer, A. Moore, T. A. Moore and W. Vermaas, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 383–387 CrossRef CAS .
There are roughly 13800000 km2 of arable land and 11500000 km2 are needed to supply the world's energy needs with 1% efficient crop-based biofuels: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; http://www.fao.org/ (accessed on May 20, 2012) and A. W. D. Larkum, in Molecular Solar Fuels, ed. T. J. Wydrzynski and W. Hillier, Royal Society of Chemistry, Energy and Environment Series No. 5, 1st edn,  2012, pp. 1–19 Search PubMed .
A. J. Morris, G. J. Meyer and E. Fujita, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1983–1994 CrossRef CAS .
50% energy efficiency is calculated for 80% efficient electrolyzers coupled to 2nd and 3rd generation photovoltaic cells operating at the theoretical thermodynamic limit of 66% with no mismatch between the voltage required for electrolysis and the photovoltage produced from the photovoltaic cell as outlined in ref. 5.
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Tuner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS .
M. Şener, J. Strümpfer, J. Hsin, D. Chandler, S. Scheuring, C. N. Hunter and K. Schulten, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 518–531 CrossRef .
G. Ananyev and G. C. Dismukes, Photosynth. Res., 2005, 84, 355–365 CrossRef CAS .
V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238–7266 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Esswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022–4047 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Dempsey, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1995–2004 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, L. Tong, Y. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3296–3313 CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. M. Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodríguez, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2842–2852 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Dismukes, R. Brimblecombe, G. A. N. Felton, R. S. Pryadun, J. E. Sheats, L. Spiccia and G.
F. Swiegers, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1935–1943 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aratani, D. Kim and A. Osuka, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1922–1934 CrossRef CAS .
I. Beletskaya, V. S. Tyurin, A. Y. Tsivadze, R. Guilard and C. Stern, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 1659–1713 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kobuke, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 2333–2351 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6130–6143 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. You, R. Dobrawa, C. R. Saha-Möller and F. Würthner, Top. Curr. Chem., 2005, 258, 39–82 CrossRef CAS   and references cited therein.
T. Pullerits and V. Sundström, Acc. Chem. Res., 1996, 29, 381–389 CrossRef CAS .
Graphics were generated using VMD software:   W. Humphrey, A. Dalke and K. Schulten, J. Mol. Graphics, 1996, 14, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
G. McDermott, S. M. Prince, A. A. Freer, A. M. Hawthornthwaite-Lawless, M. Z. Papiz, R. J. Cogdell and N. W. Isaacs, Nature, 1995, 374, 517–521 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Roszak, T. D. Howard, J. Southall, A. T. Gardiner, C. J. Law, N. W. Isaacs and R. J. Cogdell, Science, 2003, 302, 1969–1972 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, A. Damjanović, T. Ritz and K. Schulten, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1998, 95, 5935–5941 CrossRef CAS .

          D. O. Hall and K. K. Rao, Photosynthesis, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 6th edn,  1999 Search PubMed .
M. Hambourger, G. F. Moore, D. M. Kramer, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 25–35 RSC .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347–363 CAS .
M. Chen and R. E. Blankenship, Trends Plant Sci., 2011, 16, 427–431 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, S. Campagna, G. Denti, A. Juris, S. Serroni and M. Venturi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 38, 159–173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dau and I. Zaharieva, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1861–1870 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 1997, 1, 506–513 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rehm and A. Weller, Isr. J. Chem., 1970, 8, 259–271 CAS .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 57–87 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.
K. E. Sapsford, L. Berti and I. L. Medintz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4562–4589 CrossRef CAS .
H. Marciniak, X.-Q. Li, F. Würthner and S. Lochbrunner, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 648–654 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Connolly, E. B. Samuel and A. F. Janzen, Photochem. Photobiol., 1982, 36, 565–574 CrossRef CAS .
A. Juris, V. Balzani, F. Barigelletti, S. Campagna, P. Belser and A. von Zelewsky, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1988, 84, 85–277 CrossRef CAS   and reference cited therein.
The [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ absorption spectrum was kindly provided by Prof. S. Bernhard. 
  (a) J. I. Goldsmith, W. R. Hudson, M. S. Lowry, T. H. Anderson and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7502–7510 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. O. Garces, K. A. King and R. J. Watts, Inorg. Chem., 1988, 27, 3464–3471 CrossRef CAS .
U. Mayerhöffer, B. Fimmel and F. Würthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 164–167 CrossRef .
A. Ghosh, S. M. Mobin, R. Fröhlich, R. J. Butcher, D. K. Maity and M. Ravikanth, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 8287–8297 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. R. Birnbaum, W. P. Schaefer, J. A. Labinger, J. E. Bercaw and H. B. Gray, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 1751–1755 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Allain, S. Favette, L.-M. Chamoreau, J. Vaissermann, L. Ruhlmann and B. Hasenknopf, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 3433–3441 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Chahraoui, P. Valat and J. Kossanyi, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1992, 17, 219–232 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Yu, A. B. P. Lever and T. W. Swaddle, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 4496–4504 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. M. Guldi, I. Zilbermann, A. Gouloumis, P. Vázquez and T. Torres, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18485–18494 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ough, T. Nyokong, K. A. M. Creber and M. J. Stillman, Inorg. Chem., 1988, 27, 2724–2732 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Ishii, M. Shiine, Y. Shimizu, S.-i. Hoshino, H. Abe, K. Sogawa and N. Kobayashi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 3138–3143 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade, M. E. Plonska-Brzezinska, A. J. Athans, E. Carbonell, G. de Miguel, D. M. Guldi, L. Echegoyen and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10484–10496 CrossRef .

  (a) F. Würthner, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1564–1579 RSC ; 
  (b) Z. Chen, M. G. Debije, T. Debaerdemaeker, P. Osswald and F. Würthner, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 137–140 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Andric, J. F. Boas, A. M. Bond, G. D. Fallon, K. P. Ghiggino, C. F. Hogan, J. A. Hutchison, M. A.-P. Lee, S. J. Langford, J. R. Pilbrow, G. J. Troup and C. P. Woodward, Aust. J. Chem., 2004, 57, 1011–1019 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Guo, W. Wu, H. Guo and J. Zhao, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 3933–3943 CrossRef CAS .
C. Röger and F. Würthner, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 8070–8075 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, A. Lohr, C. R. Saha-Möller and F. Würthner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 564–584 RSC .
J. L. McHale, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 587–597 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-X. Xu, V. A. L. Roy, Z.-T. Liu and C. S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 163301–163303 CrossRef .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
T. Weil, T. Vosch, J. Hofkens, K. Peneva and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9068–9093 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Gilat, A. Adronov and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1422–1427 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M.-C. Yoon, H. Yoo, P. Kim and D. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4808–4826 RSC .
D. Holten, D. F. Bocian and J. S. Lindsey, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 57–69 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Haycock, A. Yartsev, U. Michelsen, V. Sundström and C. A. Hunter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3616–3619 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ikeda, N. Aratani and A. Osuka, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4317–4319 RSC .
M. Beyler, V. Heitz, J.-P. Sauvage, B. Ventura, L. Flamigni and K. Rissanen, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 8263–8270 CrossRef CAS .
L. Flamigni, B. Ventura, A. I. Oliva and P. Ballester, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4214–4224 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Oliva, B. Ventura, F. Würthner, A. Camara-Campos, C. A. Hunter, P. Ballester and L. Flamigni, Dalton Trans., 2009, 4023–4037 RSC .
E. Iengo, E. Zangrando, R. Minatel and E. Alessio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 1003–1013 CrossRef CAS .
A. Prodi, C. Chiorboli, F. Scandola, E. Iengo and E. Alessio, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1514–1519 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Indelli, C. Chiorboli, F. Scandola, E. Iengo, P. Osswald and F. Würthner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14495–14504 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sautter, B. K. Kaletaş, D. G. Schmid, R. Dobrawa, M. Zimine, G. Jung, I. H. M. van Stokkum, L. De Cola, R. M. Williams and F. Würthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6719–6729 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. You, C. Hippius, M. Grüne and F. Würthner, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 7510–7519 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. R. Fischer, I. López-Duarte, M. M. Wienk, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, R. A. J. Janssen, P. Bäuerle and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8669–8676 CrossRef CAS .
F. Spänig, I. López-Duarte, M. K. R. Fischer, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, P. Bäuerle, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1395–1403 RSC .
A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, Photosynth. Res., 1994, 41, 225–233 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Prokhorenko, A. R. Holzwarth, M. G. Müller, K. Schaffner, T. Miyatake and H. Tamiaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5761–5768 CrossRef CAS .
C. Röger, M. G. Müller, M. Lysetska, Y. Miloslavina, A. R. Holzwarth and F. Würthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6542–6543 CrossRef .
C. Röger, Y. Miloslavina, D. Brunner, A. R. Holzwarth and F. Würthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5929–5939 CrossRef .
F. Würthner, T. E. Kaiser and C. R. Saha-Möller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3376–3410 CrossRef .
F. Puntoriero, A. Sartorel, M. Orlandi, G. La Ganga, S. Serroni, M. Bonchio, F. Scandola and S. Campagna, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2594–2601 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.
W. R. Murphy, Jr., K. J. Brewer, G. Gettliffe and J. D. Petersen, Inorg. Chem., 1989, 28, 81–84 CrossRef .
S. Campagna, G. Denti, L. Sabatino, S. Serroni, M. Ciano and V. Balzani, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1989, 1500–1501 RSC .
N. D. McClenaghan, F. Loiseau, F. Puntoriero, S. Serroni and S. Campagna, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2634–2635 RSC .
J. Larsen, F. Puntoriero, T. Pascher, N. McClenaghan, S. Campagna, E. Åkesson and V. Sundström, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 2643–2651 CrossRef CAS .
F. Puntoriero, G. La Ganga, A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Bonchio and S. Campagna, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4725–2727 RSC .
D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 22–36 RSC .
R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 24, 966–978 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, D. M. Guldi, K. Tamaki, Y. Yoshida, C. Luo, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6617–6628 CrossRef CAS .
A. Prodi, C. Chiorboli, F. Scandola, E. Iengo, E. Alessio, R. Dobrawa and F. Würthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1454–1462 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade, T. Torres, C. Atienza-Castellanos and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15145–15154 CrossRef .
A. J. Jiménez, B. Grimm, V. L. Gunderson, M. T. Vagnini, S. K. Calderon, M. S. Rodríguz-Morgade, M. R. Wasielewski, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5024–5032 CrossRef .
V. L. Gunderson, A. L. Smeigh, C. H. Kim, D. T. Co and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4363–4372 CrossRef CAS .
E. Iengo, G. D. Pantoş, J. K. M. Sanders, M. Orlandi, C. Chiorboli, S. Fracasso and F. Scandola, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 676–685 RSC .
M. M. Safont-Sempere, G. Fernández and F. Würthner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 5784–5814 CrossRef CAS .
M. Borgström, N. Shaikh, O. Johansson, M. F. Anderlund, S. Styring, B. Åkermark, A. Magnuson and L. Hammarström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17504–17515 CrossRef .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J.-R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
A Ru-based water oxidation catalyst was recently reported that operates at a rate approaching that of PSII, however, not photocatalytically:   L. Duan, F. Bozoglian, S. Mandal, B. Stewart, T. Privalov, A. Llobet and L. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 418–423 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Gersten, G. J. Samuels and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4029–4030 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kanady, E. Y. Tsui, M. W. Day and T. Agapie, Science, 2011, 333, 733–736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Kögerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896–3899 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, R. De Zorzi, S. Geremia, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5006–5007 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yin, J. M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Science, 2010, 328, 342–345 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. Jiang, B. Zhang, F. Huang, Y. Gao and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2417–2420 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kaveevivitchai, R. Chitta, R. Zong, M. El Ojaimi and R. P. Thummel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10721–10724 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Ashford, D. J. Stewart, C. R. Glasson, R. A. Binstead, D. P. Harrison, M. R. Norris, J. J. Concepcion, Z. Fang, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6428–6430 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Vagnini, A. L. Smeigh, J. D. Blakemore, S. W. Eaton, N. D. Schley, F. D'Souza, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig, D. T. Co and M. R. Wasielewski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012 DOI:10.1073/pnas.1202075109  , ASAP.
A. Fihri, V. Artero, M. Razavet, C. Baffert, W. Leibl and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 564–567 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fihri, V. Artero, A. Pereira and M. Fontecave, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5567–5569 RSC .
C. Li, M. Wang, J. Pan, P. Zhang, R. Zhang and L. Sun, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2814–2819 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. McCormick, Z. Han, D. J. Weinberg, W. W. Brennessel, P. L. Holland and R. Eisenberg, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 10660–10666 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, M. Wang, C. Li, X. Li, J. Dong and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8806–8808 RSC .
W. Lubitz, E. J. Reijerse and J. Messinger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 15–31 CAS .
F. Gloaguen and T. B. Rauchfuss, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 100–108 RSC .
A. M. Kluwer, R. Kapre, F. Hartl, M. Lutz, A. L. Spek, A. M. Brouwer, P. W. N. M. van Leeuwen and J. N. H. Reek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 10460–10465 CAS .
J. W. Tye, M. Y. Darensbourg and M. B. Hall, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 1552–1559 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Pan, Y. Na, J. Liu, B. Åkermark and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 8198–8202 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. S. Samuel, D. T. Co, C. L. Stern and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8813–8815 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Song, L.-X. Wang, M.-Y. Tang, C.-G. Li, H.-B. Song and Q.-M. Hu, Organometallics, 2009, 28, 3834–3841 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Song, M.-Y. Tang, F.-H. Su and Q.-M. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1130–1133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jasimuddin, T. Yamada, K. Fukuju, J. Otsuki and K. Sakai, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8466–8468 RSC .
H. Ozawa, M. Haga and K. Sakai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4926–4927 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ajayakumar, M. Kobayashi, S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 3955–3966 RSC .
S. Rau, B. Schäfer, D. Gleich, E. Anders, M. Rudolph, M. Friedrich, H. Görls, W. Henry and J. G. Vos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6215–6218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tschierlei, M. Presselt, C. Kuhnt, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, V. Sundström, M. Karnahl, M. Schwalbe, B. Schäfer, S. Rau, M. Schmitt, B. Dietzek and J. Popp, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 7678–7688 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tschierlei, M. Karnahl, M. Presselt, B. Dietzek, J. Guthmuller, L. González, M. Schmitt, S. Rau and J. Popp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3981–3984 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karnahl, C. Kuhnt, F. Ma, A. Yartsev, M. Schmitt, B. Dietzek, S. Rau and J. Popp, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 2101–2109 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lei, M. Hedlund, R. Lomoth, H. Rensmo, O. Johansson and L. Hammarström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 26–27 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, J. Schneider, F. Li, W. Zhao, U. Patel, F. N. Catellano and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5056–5058 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elvington, J. Brown, S. M. Arachchige and K. J. Brewer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10644–10645 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Arachchige, J. R. Brown, E. Chang, A. Jain, D. F. Zigler, K. Rangan and K. J. Brewer, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 1989–2000 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. White, S. L. H. Higgins, S. M. Arachchige and K. J. Brewer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12209–12213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, T. A. White, S. M. Arachchige and K. J. Brewer, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4451–4453 RSC .
T. A. White, B. N. Whitaker and K. J. Brewer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15332–15334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyake, K. Nakajima, K. Sasaki, R. Saito, H. Nakanishi and Y. Nishibayashi, Organometallics, 2009, 28, 5240–5243 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kimura, X. Bu, M. Shionoya, S. Wada and S. Maruyama, Inorg. Chem., 1992, 31, 4542–4546 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gholamkhass, H. Mametsuka, K. Koike, T. Tanabe, M. Furue and O. Ishitani, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 2326–2336 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Bian, K. Sumi, M. Furue, S. Sato, K. Koike and O. Ishitani, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 10801–10803 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Part of the centenary issue to celebrate the Nobel Prize in Chemistry awarded to Alfred Werner.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Peter D. Frischmann
	Peter D. Frischmann completed his BS at Idaho State University (USA) in 2005 and then moved to the University of British Columbia (Canada) where he studied metal-directed self-assembly of metallocavitands and macrocycles under the guidance of Prof. Mark J. MacLachlan. In 2010 he completed his PhD, and after a brief postdoctoral stay at UBC he was awarded an Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship in 2011 to develop supramolecular light-harvesting antennae under the guidance of Prof. Frank Würthner at the University of Würzburg (Germany) where he currently resides. His research interests are focused on the application of self-assembly strategies to develop functional materials for light harvesting, water splitting, and gas storage.

Kingsuk Mahata
	Kingsuk Mahata was born in 1982 in Paschim Medinipur (India). He studied chemistry at Midnapore College (India) and received his BSc (honours) degree from Vidyasagar University (India) in 2003. After finishing his MSc from Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur in 2005, he moved to the University of Siegen (Germany) for doctoral research and obtained a PhD for his work on metallosupramolecular chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Michael Schmittel in 2010. Subsequently, he joined the research group of Prof. Frank Würthner at the University of Würzburg (Germany) as an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral fellow. His current research is focused on “metallosupramolecular approaches for artificial photosynthesis”.

Frank Würthner
	Frank Würthner received his education in chemistry at the University of Stuttgart (Germany) where he obtained his doctoral degree in 1993 under the guidance of Prof. Franz Effenberger. After a postdoctoral stay at MIT in Cambridge, MA (USA) with Prof. Julius Rebek, Jr, he worked for two years at BASF Central Research (Ludwigshafen, Germany), followed by the habilitation in organic chemistry at the University of Ulm in 2001. Since 2002 he holds a Chair of Organic Chemistry at the University of Würzburg where he has also served as dean of the Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy and as director of the Wilhelm-Conrad Röntgen Research Center for Complex Material Systems. In 2010 he founded the Center for Nanosystems Chemistry which recently became a Bavarian State Key Laboratory for Supramolecular Materials for Solar Energy Conversion. His research interests include dye chemistry, fundamental studies on the self-assembly of molecular nanostructures and the synthesis of supramolecular materials for organic electronics, photovoltaics and artificial photosynthesis.
	(1)
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	(2)
4H+ + 4e− → 2H2	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the photosynthetic apparatus of purple non-sulfur bacteria highlighting the arrangement of chromophores. (a) LHC II; (b) LHC I and the reaction center; (c) summary of the energy transfer dynamics (green = Bchl 800, red = Bchl 850, yellow = carotenoids, cyan = Bchl 875, purple = reaction center Bchl 870, violet = reaction center BPheo).29	 

 	Fig. 2  Qualitative energy level diagram showing intra- and inter-complex excitation energy transfer in purple non-sulfur bacteria from LHC II to LHC I and finally to the RC resulting in the charge-separated state (CSS) after multiple electron transfer steps (depicted as a single step for simplicity). Energy is lost by energy funneling to the CSS and as heat by relaxation of higher energy excited states (shown at an arbitrary energy level). The energy difference between the ground state and the CSS is available to drive primary photosynthetic reactions.	 

 	Fig. 3  General concept for artificial photosynthesis. The light-harvesting antenna collects solar energy, then funnels that energy to the photosensitizer where initial charge separation takes place. A donor and an acceptor drive the electron and hole further apart to prevent back electron transfer and shuttle the respective charges to the catalysts. A membrane may also be placed somewhere between the O2 and H2 evolving catalysts to prevent a “short circuit”. When studying half reactions either catalyst may be replaced by a sacrificial reagent (adapted from ref. 39).	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 4  A selection of chromophores that have been utilized in energy transfer systems.	 

 	Fig. 5  Incident photon flux solar spectrum (ASTM 1.5 solar output spectra) and UV-Vis spectra of commonly selected chromophores plotted with normalized absorption to help visualize spectral overlap. See Table 1 for extinction coefficients.	 


Bchl a	781 (92)	791	20	
	
	
	
45

Ru(bpy)32+	452 (15)	607	
	
	0.49a	−2.03a	
46

Ir(ppy)2(bpy)+	265 (36)	585	
	
	0.72b	−1.95b	
47

SQ-H	870 (205)	890	10	
	
	
	
48

SQ-I	900 (274)	922	17	
	
	
	
48

ZnTPP	424 (500)	601, 652	6	2.0	0.42	−1.85	
27

MgTPP	426 (562)	609, 660	16	8.9	0.12b	−2.10b	
49

RuTPP	412	
	
	
	0.30b	−2.01b	
50

H2TPP	418 (473)	650, 715	9	10.9	0.53	−1.71	
27

ZnPc	672 (282)	690	30	3.6	0.14b	−1.43b	
51

MgPc	668 (155)	668	
	
	0.18	−1.37	
51, 52

RuPc	651 (215)	946	
	
	0.26	−1.66	
53

H2Pc	692 (166)	702	67	6.1	0.74	
	
51

PBI-H	526 (95)	531	100	3.4	1.29	−1.01	
27

PBI-Cl	524 (42)	551	92	
	
	−0.87	
54

PBI-OAr	585 (51)	614	96	6.5	0.86	−1.15	
27

NDI-H	386 (16)	470	95	2.1	
	−1.12	
55

NDI-NHR	620 (23)	650	42	9.7	0.65	−1.41	
55, 56


 	Scheme 1  Self-assembly of penta-porphyrin light-harvesting antenna 3. Alkyl chains and hydrogen atoms have been omitted in 3 for clarity (green = C, blue = N, red = O, yellow = Zn).	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of metallosupramolecular boxes 4a–c.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of metallosupramolecular squares 5a–b assembled from di-pyridyl PBI ligand 6a–b and Pt(dppp)(OTf)2.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure of dendritic oligothiophene substituted Ru(II)Pc triads 7a–c and dyads 8a–c.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Structure of zinc chlorin triad ZnChl–NDINN–NDINO9. (b) Self-assembly of 9 into a zinc chlorin rod antenna with labeled FRET processes and efficiencies from donors NDINO (red) and NDINN (blue) to acceptor ZnChl (green). (c) Absorption spectra of the non-assembled triad 9 (blue, dashed) and the rod-shaped aggregate showing J-type coupling of the ZnChl dye manifold (red, solid). Absorption maxima of the covalently attached NDI dyes are marked in the spectra. The incident solar photon flux is shown in black (adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  Light-harvesting dendrimers 10a–c.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structure of metallosupramolecular triads 11 and 12 and pentad 13.	 

 	Scheme 2  Metallosupramolecular self-assembly of covalent triad 14 into cyclic tetramer 144. One monomer of the tetramer is colored by chromophore while the others are colored by element (purple = Chl, blue = PI, red = NDI; green = C, light blue = N, light red = O, yellow = Zn). Hydrogen atoms and the 2-ethylhexyl chains have been omitted from the model for clarity.	 

 	Scheme 3  Self-assembly of triad 15·16·17 in CHCl3 (R = tBu, R′ = 4-tBuPh).	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of trimetallic triad 18.	 

 	Fig. 13  Structure of the O2 evolving Mn4Ca active site of PS II and the first synthetic molecular O2 evolving catalyst the “blue dimer”.	 

 	Fig. 14  Two possible quenching mechanisms for the water oxidation half reaction: (a) oxidative quenching and (b) reductive quenching mechanism. For simplicity the evolution of one equivalent of O2 is shown on the left side of each mechanism. However, in reality O2 evolution requires traversing the light-absorption and charge-separation steps four times, resulting in a 4+ charge buildup on the catalyst, prior to a single catalytic turnover.	 

 	Fig. 15  Structure of photosensitizer–catalyst complexes 19–23 designed for photocatalytic O2 evolution.	 

 	Fig. 16  Two possible quenching mechanisms for the proton reduction half reaction: (a) oxidative quenching and (b) reductive quenching mechanism. For simplicity the evolution of one equivalent of H2 is shown on the right side of each mechanism. However, in reality H2 evolution requires traversing the light-absorption and charge-separation steps two times, resulting in a 2− charge buildup on the catalyst, prior to a single catalytic turnover.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structures of H2 evolving cobaloxime photocatalytic dyads 24–29.	 

 	Fig. 18  Structures of diiron hydrogenase mimics 30–33 containing a porphyrin photosensitizer.	 

 	Scheme 4  Self-assembly of H2 evolving complexes 35a–dvia in situ coordination of photosensitizers 34a–d to Co(II).	 

 	Fig. 19  Structures of photocatalytic H2 evolving dyads and triads 36–41.	 

 	Fig. 20  Structure of complexes 42–45 for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO.	 
Footnote
† Part of the centenary issue to celebrate the Nobel Prize in Chemistry awarded to Alfred Werner.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
