Graphene hybridization for energy storage applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00871F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00871F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3189-3216Graphene hybridization for energy storage applications

        
          
            Xianglong 
            Li
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Linjie 
            Zhi
          
          
        
      *
      CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: lixl@nanoctr.cn; zhilj@nanoctr.cn
Received 
      14th December 2017
    First published on 7th March 2018AbstractGraphene has attracted considerable attention due to its unique two-dimensional structure, high electronic mobility, exceptional thermal conductivity, excellent optical transmittance, good mechanical strength, and ultrahigh surface area. To meet the ever increasing demand for portable electronic products, electric vehicles, smart grids, and renewable energy integrations, hybridizing graphene with various functions and components has been demonstrated to be a versatile and powerful strategy to significantly enhance the performance of various energy storage systems such as lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors and beyond, because such hybridization can result in synergistic effects that combine the best merits of involved components and confer new functions and properties, thereby improving the charge/discharge efficiencies and capabilities, energy/power densities, and cycle life of these energy storage systems. This review will focus on diverse graphene hybridization principles and strategies for energy storage applications, and the proposed outline is as follows. First, graphene and its fundamental properties, followed by graphene hybrids and related hybridization motivation, are introduced. Second, the developed hybridization formulas of using graphene for lithium-ion batteries are systematically categorized from the viewpoint of material structure design, bulk electrode construction, and material/electrode collaborative engineering; the latest representative progress on anodes and cathodes of lithium-ion batteries will be reviewed following such classifications. Third, similar hybridization formulas for graphene-based supercapacitor electrodes will be summarized and discussed as well. Fourth, the recently emerging hybridization formulas for other graphene-based energy storage devices will be briefed in combination with typical examples. Finally, future prospects and directions on the exploration of graphene hybridization toward the design and construction of viable, high-class, and even newly-featured (e.g., flexible) energy storage materials, electrodes, and systems will be presented.
Xianglong Li
Xianglong Li received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2007 and worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of Hawaii at Manoa (2007–2008) and as a postdoctoral research associate at Los Alamos National Laboratory (2008–2011). In late 2011, he joined the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China (NCNST) as an associate professor and got promoted to be a professor in 2014. His research interests mainly focus on nanoscale carbon–inorganic hybrid materials and their applications in energy storage and sensing.
Linjie Zhi
Linjie Zhi received his PhD in 2000 at the Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Since 2003 he worked with Prof. Klaus Müllen at the Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research for two years before assuming the position of project leader until the end of 2007. Since early 2008, he has been a professor in the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of China. He was recognized as a Thomson Reuters ‘Highly Cited Researcher’ in 2015 and 2016. His research interests focus on carbon-rich nanomaterials and their application in energy-related areas; particularly, he is interested in the preparation and functionalization of well-defined graphene based nanomaterials and their application in energy storage, energy conversion, and catalysis.
1 Introduction
The ability to harness energy is essential for human civilization. The diminishing reserves of fossil fuels and increasing environmental concerns about their utilization urgently require the widespread adoption and use of clean and renewable energy sources (e.g., intermittent solar power and wind energy), as well as massive deployment of electric vehicles toward sustainable transportation. Energy storage is a vital issue to be addressed within this scenario, and electrochemical energy storage systems are undoubtedly a key enabler.1–9 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors (SCs), and other rechargeable batteries (e.g., based upon lithium–sulfur (Li–S), lithium–oxygen (Li–O2), and sodium-ion (Na-ion) chemistries), are the most prominent and fast-growing energy storage devices in view of their high energy and/or power density, long cycle life, and environmental benignity.10–14 A common feature of these energy storage devices is that they all consist of an electrolyte-impregnated separator and two electrodes where electron and ion conduction are highly required for involved electrochemical active materials. Although the energy storage mechanisms are different, exploiting nanostructured electrode materials and electrode systems with excellent electrochemical properties has proven to be critical for tremendous advancements in these energy storage technologies. Note that nanostructured electrode materials hold the desirable advantages of large electrode/electrolyte contact area, short transport lengths for electrons and ions, easy functionalization for electrolyte wettability, and even new reactions, which are not possible with their bulk and/or micro-sized counterparts.15–29 In this context, graphene and graphene hybrids have received considerable attention and have been widely investigated for various energy storage systems.30–63
Some excellent reviews have summarized the synthesis method64–81 of graphene and its use32–35,37–40,42–46,49–52,54,56,59,62,63,80 as the majority for energy storage applications. This review is not intended to cover the entire spectrum of graphene-based energy storage technologies, but rather, it focuses on fundamental principles and emerging strategies of graphene hybridization for various energy storage applications, which is an important realm arguably having the greatest potential for a major impact in addressing the challenges of energy storage technologies. We begin with an introduction of graphene and graphene hybrids, and subsequently categorize graphene hybridization formulas for lithium-ion batteries, and provide the latest progress following such classifications. We then summarize graphene hybridization formulas for supercapacitors and brief similar graphene hybridization formulas for other energy storage devices. Finally, we discuss future prospects and important research directions on the exploration of graphene hybridization toward the design and construction of viable, high-class, newly-featured energy storage materials, electrodes, and systems.
2 Graphene and graphene hybrids
2.1 Graphene
Graphene is a one-atom-thick two-dimensional sheet composed of sp2-bonded carbon atoms that are densely packed in a honeycomb crystal lattice. Its honeycomb network is the basic building block of other important carbon allotropes; it can be wrapped to form zero-dimensional fullerenes, rolled to form one-dimensional carbon nanotubes, and stacked to form three-dimensional graphite.30,31 Due to its unique two-dimensional structure, graphene possesses many extraordinary physical and chemical properties, such as high intrinsic carrier mobility (200000 cm2 V−1 s−1), high thermal conductivity (5000 W m−1 K−1, 10 times better than copper), high optical transmittance of 97.7%, high Young's modulus (1.0 TPa), high tensile strength with excellent flexibility, and extremely high specific surface area (theoretically, 2630 m2 g−1). Thus, graphene is envisioned to be promising for a wide spectrum of applications such as energy conversion and storage, sensing, and drug delivery.
The controllable fabrication of graphene at a large scale is of critical importance for its deployment in practical fields.77,79 Since the demonstration of producing graphene through micromechanical cleavage of natural graphite with a scotch tape, a variety of chemical synthetic methods have been extensively developed to produce single-, few-, and multi-layer graphene materials from various carbon sources/precursors. According to the traditional strategies for synthesizing nanomaterials, these chemical synthetic approaches can be generally classified into two distinct categories: bottom-up and top-down.35 The bottom-up methodology mainly includes epitaxial growth by thermal decomposition of silicon carbide, pyrolysis of polymeric precursors, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) using gaseous carbon precursors such as methane, and organic synthesis from aromatic hydrocarbons with precise chemical structures and functionalities. Among them, the CVD has been demonstrated as a promising method for producing large-area high-quality graphene with controllability over the size, shape, edge, doping state, and layer number of graphene.35,66,73,77,79 Besides, the CVD allows the growth of graphene on various modalities of substrates such as one-dimensional wires, two-dimensional foils and three-dimensional foams, thereby enabling direct fabrication of macroscopic graphene architectures. On the other hand, the top-down methodology involves chemical unzipping of carbon nanotubes toward ribbon-like graphene (or graphene ribbon), oxidative exfoliation and reduction of graphite, and direct exfoliation of natural graphite and/or intercalated graphite in specific solvents (e.g., N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), ionic liquids, and/or surfactant solutions) by using external driving forces such as sonication, electric field, or shearing.64,65,71,72,74–76 Hereof, the oxidative exfoliation of graphite to graphene oxide (GO) followed by the reduction of GO to restore the structure and conductive properties of graphene has been the most currently used method for low-cost and large-scale production of chemically derived or converted graphene.64–72,75,77–79 The reduction of GO to reduced GO (RGO) can be facilely carried out by a variety of well-developed methodologies, for example, by using inorganic and organic reducing chemical agents (e.g., hydrazine hydrate, phenylhydrazine, sodium borohydride, reactive metals or metallic ions, ascorbic acid, hydroiodic acid, ammonia, and other strongly alkaline solutions), thermal annealing, electrochemical treatment, laser irradiation, catalytic reactions, and hydrothermal/solvothermal processing.64,67,72,75,78–80 More notably, GO and/or RGO sheets possess structural defects and oxygenated groups that can be further modified or tailored chemically for desirable dispersion and manipulation in aqueous or organic media, thus enabling their controllable integration with different functional inorganic and organic species, as well as scalable assembly into macroscopic architectures such as three-dimensional porous networks or monoliths.65,68–72,75,78 Although the morphological, structural, interfacial, electrical, and even architectural distinction of graphene materials inherited from different synthetic methods, the term ‘graphene’ in this review refers to single-, few-, and multi-layer graphene, chemically derived or converted graphene materials (e.g., GO, RGO, functionalized graphene), and graphene-based macroscopic structures and ensembles (e.g., graphene fibres, films, membranes, papers, foams, sponges, or networks).
2.2 Graphene hybrids
Graphene composites are generally indexed to multiphase materials, in which graphene is mixed as a filler into a polymeric, ceramic, or metallic matrix by physical processing techniques (e.g., ball milling or shear mixing).68–70 Graphene composites simply use the respective properties of component materials; the filled graphene in the composites is often to mechanically reinforce the matrix or to alter thermal, electrical, and/or barrier properties of the matrix. Although promising demonstration in some specific fields (e.g., lightweight materials and electrically conducting slurries) and even available commercial products, the exploitation of graphene properties in these composites is rather limited, mostly because of the restricted interfacial contact, poor interfacial adhesion, and more notably, heterogeneous distribution of graphene and consequently nonuniform properties.63,68
In contrast to graphene composites, graphene hybrids are constructed through hybridization or combination of graphene with a second phase at the nanoscale.36,41,47,48,53,57,63,81 This can happen either through in situ synthesis of functional nanomaterials on graphene from molecular precursors with and/or without using protecting surfactants or extra linking molecules, or through ex situ assembly of graphene and pre-synthesized functional nanomaterials via well-designed anchoring functionalities, similar to those hybrids incorporated with other carbon nanomaterials.22,82–85 The detailed description of synthetic methods of graphene hybrids can be found in previous reviews.36,41,53,57,67,81 Thanks to this nanoscale hybridization, some unique features exist in the resulting graphene hybrids. First, the hybridization of graphene and a nanoscale functional phase not only increases and regulates accessible specific surface of the involved active compound, but also enlarge and modulate the contact interface between the two phases that facilitates the processes such as charge transfer and charge transport. This indeed results in a so-called synergistic effect, which can enhance the properties of individual components and even confer new properties distinct from those of either building block, thus rendering these graphene hybrids to be highly desirable especially for environmental and sustainable energy applications. Second, the second phase in graphene hybrids generally consists of an active compound and may include inorganic and/or organic species (e.g., metals, semiconductors, and insulators, as well as functional polymers), which thus enables the possibilities of constructing functional hybrid material systems for many more applications than graphene composites. Third, the diversity of synthetic methods, coupled with the two-dimensional flexible feature of graphene, allows the controllable and facile construction of different morphologies of graphene hybrids toward targeted and designated applications such as newly featured energy storage.
2.3 Hybridization principles
Depending on the hybridization scale and the critical role of graphene, graphene hybridization targeting energy storage applications could be divided into five categories as schematically shown in Fig. 1 and further summarized in Table 1. In the first hybridization method, hybrids are constructed by chemical assembly, chemical synthesis, and/or electrochemical deposition of a second phase on graphene at the material scale, in which graphene is used as a material support to enhance electronic and ionic conductivity of a second phase. This not only improves the material utilization, but also promotes the charging/discharging processes and consequently rate capability.58,86–89 As the improvement in both the charge transport effectiveness and efficiency between graphene and a second phase is critically important for such hybridization, the major control parameters generally involve the size, dimension, morphology, porosity, component, and interface of a second phase. In the second hybridization method, graphene is introduced on a second phase mainly by chemical vapor deposition, chemical assembly, and/or physical combination routes, thus functioning as a material mediator to primarily manage the interface of a second phase with other functional phases (e.g., electrolyte involved in nearly all electrochemical energy storage devices).90–92 In this category, interfacial robustness of a second phase with both graphene and other functional phases is equally important for improving the material utilization and prolonging the cycle life. The material structure design as well as involved interphase contact mode and interface mediation are thus major toolboxes for this hybridization. Different from the above two cases, the subsequent three hybridization methods emphasize the construction of graphene hybrids at the electrode scale. In the third method, graphene is processed into macroscopic monoliths by physical filtration, freeze-drying, chemical vapor deposition, and/or chemical assembly, and consequently used as the electrode framework to construct binder-free hybrid electrodes,27,62,93–97 without any sophisticated additives such as binders. This graphene electrode framework holds the ability to create three-dimensional continuous network for fast charge transport ranging from the material scale to the electrode scale, which is highly favorable for substantially improving the rate capability and hence power density. In such hybridization, a series of control parameters related to graphene (for example, structure, morphology, orientation, and so forth) exist toward securing both charge transport effectiveness and efficiency between second phases throughout the electrode. Similarly, the fourth method allows the construction of binder-free bulk electrodes, in which graphene is introduced by chemical vapor deposition and/or chemical transfer, and used as an electrode modifier to improve interfacial robustness of the second phase with other functional phases (typically, electrolyte), and consequently improve the material electrochemical performance such as cycle life.98,99 In the last hybridization case, the method features construction of graphene hybrids based upon diverse hybrid techniques (see Table 1), simultaneously at the material scale and the electrode scale,100,101 in which the potential of graphene is exploited toward enabling charge transport effectiveness and efficiency as well as interfacial robustness of second phases. The methodology thus offers the possibility to integrate the advantages originated from both the material structure design and bulk electrode construction, for example, improved material utilization, enhanced rate capability and prolonged cycle life, especially in a binder-free electrode configuration.
 Fig. 1  Overview of graphene hybridization formulas for energy storage applications. 
Table 1 Comparison of graphene hybridization methods, hybridization principles, primary control parameters, typical hybridization techniques, and major feature for energy storage




Hybridization method
Hybridization scale
Principle/formula
Primary control parameter
Typical involved technique
Major feature for energy storage




(1) Graphene as material support
Material scale
Charge transport effectiveness and efficiency between graphene and a second phase
Size, dimension, morphology, porosity, component, interface of a second phase
Chemical assembly, wet chemical synthesis, electro chemical deposition
Improved material utilization, enhanced rate capability


(2) Graphene as material mediator
Material scale
Interfacial robustness of a second phase with graphene and other functional phases (e.g., electrolyte)
Hybrid structure, interphase contact mode and interface
Chemical vapor deposition, chemical assembly, spray pyrolysis, ball-milling
Prolonged cycle life


(3) Graphene as electrode framework
Electrode scale
Charge transport effectiveness and efficiency between second phases
Structure, morphology, arrangement, orientation of graphene; framework structure of graphene
Physical filtration, freeze drying, chemical vapor deposition, chemical assembly
Binder-free, enhanced rate capability


(4) Graphene as electrode modifier
Electrode scale
Interfacial robustness of second phases with other functional phases (e.g., electrolyte)
Framework structure of second phases
Chemical vapor deposition, chemical transfer
Binder-free, prolonged cycle life


(5) Graphene as combined media
Material/electrode scale
Charge transport effectiveness and efficiency, interfacial robustness for second phases
Structure and interface of both graphene and a second phase; interphase contact mode and interface
Chemical vapor deposition, chemical synthesis, electrochemical deposition, chemical assembly, physical filtration
Binder-free, improved material utilization, enhanced rate capability, and prolonged cycle life




In the next sections, we will discuss various energy storage-directed graphene hybridization principles and formulas from the viewpoint of material structure design, bulk electrode construction, and material/electrode collaborative engineering as categorized above, elaborate on synergistic effects of the resulted graphene hybrids, as well as highlight the most promising applications of these graphene hybrids in energy storage fields including LIBs, SCs and beyond.
3 Graphene hybridization for lithium-ion batteries
Rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, in which lithium ions shuttle between a negative electrode (commonly graphite) and a positive electrode (commonly a layered lithium metal oxide), have revolutionized portable electronic devices such as cell phones and laptops, thanks to their several important advantages such as high energy density, high voltage, no memory effect, long cycle life, and environmental friendliness. However, the current lithium-ion battery technology is approaching its limit especially in terms of specific energy (per weight) and energy density (per volume), incapable of satisfying the ever-increasing demand for diverse applications in expanded fields such as vehicle electrification and renewable energy integration. To relieve this situation, a large amount of electrode (anode and cathode) materials with theoretically high specific capacities have thus far been widely scanned and/or revisited in recent years, where nanomaterials show kinetic advantages over their bulk counterparts because of the significantly shortened lithium ion diffusion length. However, the solid-state diffusion of lithium ions is not the sole major factor affecting the electrochemical reactions involved in the LIBs, and most nanostructured electrode materials still suffer from poor lithium storage capability due to their intrinsically low electronic conductivities, volume-change-induced structural and interfacial instabilities, interparticle connecting issues, low-tap-density problems, and so on.
Benefiting from its structural uniqueness and extraordinary physical and chemical properties, graphene has offered exciting solutions to the limitations and challenges related to these electrode materials for LIBs. In principle, depending on hybridization formulas, the hybridized graphene allows for fundamental performance enhancements over conventional material/electrode formulations by primarily functioning as a material support to improve electronic and ionic conductivity as well as the involved kinetics, as a material mediator to manage the material component interface and the material/electrolyte interface, as an electrode framework to offer three-dimensional continuous conductive channels, as an electrode modifier to stabilize the electrode/electrolyte interface, and/or as a combined media to synergistically modulate material structures and electrode architectures. We thus discuss the recent experimental advances reported on various LIB-directed graphene hybridization formulas that are indexed by the critical role of graphene.
3.1 Graphene as material support
Graphene has been used as a general conductive support or scaffold to anchor various electrochemically active anode materials (e.g., alloying/dealloying semiconductors and metals (e.g., Si,101,102 Ge,103 Sn,104etc.), transition metal oxides (SnO2,104–108 TiO2,109–111 CoO,112,113 Co3O4,114 FeO,115 Fe2O3,116 Fe3O4,117 MnO2,118,119 Mn3O4,120 GeOx,121 CuO,122 NiO,123 ZnO,124 Bi2O3,125 ZnMn2O4,126etc.), transition metal sulfides (SnS2,127 In2S3,128 Ni3S4,129etc.), transition metal nitride (e.g., VN130), and others (e.g., SnSe2,131 Li4Ti5O12,132etc.)) and cathode materials (e.g., V2O5,133 FeF3,134 LiFePO4,135,136 LiMn1−xFexPO4,137 Li2MnSiO4,138 and so forth) to construct graphene-supported hybrid materials with different structures and morphologies for LIB electrodes with improved performances. In this kind of hybrid material designs, the involved synthetic methods could be roughly divided into two categories (ex situ and in situ). In the ex situ approach, the pre-synthesized nanostructured active electrode materials are attached or anchored onto graphene sheets via modification of either graphene sheets or nanostructured active materials using functional groups and/or linking molecules. In the in situ approach, the nanostructured active materials are grown or deposited on graphene sheets, where the nanostructure precursors are first used to interface with graphene sheets and then transformed into desirable nanostructures under well-defined conditions.
For examples, Paek et al.139 developed a simple hybridization approach to ex situ prepare SnO2/GNS hybrids, in which graphene sheets dispersed in the ethylene glycol solution were reassembled in the presence of pre-synthesized rutile SnO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 2a). In the thus-obtained SnO2/GNS hybrids with SnO2 nanoparticles homogeneously anchored on graphene sheets, the introduced graphene sheets dimensionally confined the volume change of SnO2, induced nanopores as buffered spaces, as well as created efficient conductive channels, thus resulting in superior cyclic performances and higher reversible capacities in comparison with the ordinary SnO2. In contrast, Wang et al.140 employed an anionic surfactant-mediated in situ growth approach to synthesize rod-like rutile TiO2 and/or particle-like anatase TiO2 nanostructures on graphene sheets, in which graphene sheets were dispersed with an anionic sulfate surfactant (sodium dodecyl sulfate), and assembled with TiO2 precursors followed by in situ crystallization of the TiO2 precursors to produce the structure-controlled TiO2 nanostructures (Fig. 2b). The thus-resulted TiO2–graphene hybrid materials showed much enhanced lithium ion insertion/extraction kinetics especially at high charge/discharge current rates. The achieved performance enhancement was suggested to be associated with increased electronic conductivity due to the introduction of graphene as the support. In a work reported by Wang et al.,137 the authors developed a two-step chemical solution approach for the synthesis of LiMn1−xFexPO4 nanorods on graphene sheets with well-defined morphologies, in which Fe-doped Mn3O4 nanoparticles were firstly selectively grown onto graphene oxide sheets by controlled hydrolysis of the precursors, and then reacted solvothermally with lithium and phosphate ions and transformed into LiMn1−xFexPO4 on the surface of reduced graphene oxide sheets. The resulting hybrid of LiMn1−xFexPO4 nanorods and graphene sheets showed high specific capacity and unprecedentedly high rate capability for LiMn1−xFexPO4 type of cathode materials; typically, stable specific capacities of 132 and 107 mA h g−1 were obtained at high discharge rates of 20C and 50C, which were 85% and 70% of the capacity at C/2 (155 mA h g−1), respectively. The outstanding power performance was further attributed to the intimate interactions between the nanorods and the underlying graphene sheet supports enhancing the electrical conductivity, as well as the small size and ideal nanorod morphology and crystallographic orientation of the LiMn1−xFexPO4 nanorods benefiting from the use of graphene as a unique support.
 Fig. 2  Examples of graphene-supported electrode materials: (a) ex situ hybridization approach and TEM image of SnO2/GNS. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (b) Anionic surfactant mediated in situ synthesis and TEM image of rod/particle-like TiO2 on graphene. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (c) CVD growth and SEM image of tin-core/carbon-sheath coaxial nanocables on graphene. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2012. (d) Chemical transformation process and SEM image for G–SnS2. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2012. 
Besides, the tin-core/carbon-sheath coaxial nanocables with uniform diameter and high aspect ratio have also been synthesized on graphene sheets via a simple CVD process by using RGO–SnO2 hybrid material as an efficient scaffold (Fig. 2c).141 The electrochemical evaluation revealed that the as-synthesized graphene-supported nanocables exhibited high reversible specific capacities and remarkable high-rate capabilities. In this material design, the interconnectivity of these discrete nanocables through the underlying graphene matrices greatly facilitated electron transfer during charge/discharge cycling processes, thus leading to significantly enhanced lithium storage capability of the material. Such a one-dimensional/two-dimensional hybrid design can also be in situ realized by a simple hydrothermal approach as demonstrated by Liu et al. with a hybrid material of vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) nanowires and graphene sheets.142 In that work, the resulting hybrid material, possessing ultralong V2O5 single crystalline nanowires supported on graphene sheets, exhibited excellent electrochemical properties; when being used as a cathode material of LIBs, the hybrid displayed specific discharge capacities of 412 and 316 mA h g−1 at current rates of 50 and 1600 mA g−1, respectively. The good performance of the hybrid was believed to originate from its unique hybrid structure, where the nanowires offered short lithium ion diffusion pathways as well as prevented the restacking of graphene sheets, and graphene sheets facilitated electron transport in the material in turn. Furthermore, two-dimensional plate-like SnS2 nanostructures were in situ grown on graphene sheets by transforming graphene-supported SnO2 nanoparticles into two-dimensional SnS2 nanoplates via a chemical solution approach combined with a simple CVD process (Fig. 2d).127 When being used as the anode material in LIBs, the resultant graphene–SnS2 two-dimensional/two-dimensional hybrids (namely, G–SnS2) exhibited remarkable electrochemical performance especially in terms of specific capacity and rate capability.
Based on well-defined synthetic methodologies, the anchoring of various compositions and dimensions of active electrode materials on graphene sheets has been realized at a structure and morphology controllable manner. The substantially enhanced electrical conductivity of nanostructured active materials by graphene supports was believed to be responsible for the achieved improvement in the lithium storage capabilities. Recently, there is an ever-increasing focus on the size control of graphene-supported active materials to fully exert the potential of the material involved; in particular, numerous graphene-supported nanostructured active materials with ultra-small sizes have been intensively exploited showing extraordinary lithium storage performances.106–113,115,126,143–145 For instance, Xiong et al.126 prepared ZnMn2O4–graphene hybrids by a facile two-step synthetic approach involving a polyol process followed by thermal annealing, in which well-distributed ultrafine ZnMn2O4 nanocrystals with a mean diameter of about 4–5 nm were uniformly anchored on graphene sheets. Due to the distinct hybrid structure composed of two-dimensional conductive graphene supports and ultrafine ZnMn2O4 nanocrystals, the ZnMn2O4–graphene hybrids exhibited high specific capacity, high rate capability, and excellent cycling stability (typically, ∼650 mA h g−1 over 1500 cycles at 2000 mA g−1). Moreover, when tested in a temperature range of 0–60 °C, the designed hybrid material maintained high discharge capacities from 570 to 820 mA h g−1, indicating great potential as a promising candidate anode material for LIBs. Xu et al.143 synthesized monodisperse ultrathin SnO2 nanorods (2.5–4.0 nm in diameter and 10–15 nm in length) on nitrogen-doped graphene sheets by a one-step hydrothermal strategy. This hybrid exhibited a high reversible specific capacity (803 mA h g−1), superior rate capability and outstanding cycling stability when being used as anode materials for LIBs. The performance enhancement observed was assumed to result from a synergistic effect between graphene sheets and ultrathin SnO2 nanorods and nitrogen-doping, where ultrathin SnO2 nanorods well accommodated the volume expansion of SnO2 during cycling as well as ensured effective electrolyte diffusion and active-site accessibility, graphene sheets conferred high electronic conductivity of the material since strong electronic interaction between graphene sheets and SnO2, and nitrogen doping greatly decreased the energy barrier for lithium penetration.
Uniform mesoporous TiO2/graphene/mesoporous TiO2 sandwich-like nanosheets (denoted as G@mTiO2) have also been synthesized by Li et al. via a general and controllable in situ synthetic approach (Fig. 3).144 In the methodology, graphene oxide sheets were first conformably coated by amorphous TiO2 shells, which were then transformed into the well-defined G@mTiO2 nanosheets by thermal annealing. The small particle size of primary TiO2 nanocrystals (∼6 nm), combined with ultrathin layer nature, high surface areas (∼252 m2 g−1) and uniform mesopores (∼3.4 nm) of TiO2 shells were suggested to significantly increase lithium storage capability by conferring favourable phase boundary energetics, providing short ion diffusion path lengths, and ensuring easy access of individual nanocrystals for the electrolyte. At the same time, the maximized contact areas between graphene and TiO2 nanocrystals, rendered by this controlled assembly method, allowed the effective usage of conductive graphene support surface for electron transfer, thus promoting electrochemical process and leading to a high rate capability and excellent cycling performance (a highly reversible capacity of 237 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 20 mA g−1) when being used as anode materials for LIBs (Fig. 3d). Recently, Wang et al.145 homogeneously anchored uniform ultrasmall (∼3 nm) silicon quantum dots onto graphene sheets by a simple and efficient electrostatic self-assembly strategy (Fig. 4). Such a decent hybrid (namely, SiQD–GNS) exhibited outstanding lithium storage properties including impressively high rate capability (566 mA h g−1 at 20 A g−1) and remarkable cyclic stability (0.004% decay per cycle over 500 cycles), even without sophisticated surface encapsulation and binder/electrolyte optimization (Fig. 4f and g). The achieved performance enhancement was attributed to the synergistic effect of both components within such a hybrid material design. On the one hand, with approaching the downsizing limit of the active material, silicon quantum dots featured extraordinarily fast, surface-controlled lithium storage behaviour mimicking that in supercapacitor materials with pseudocapacitive mechanisms (Fig. 4e), rather than conventional slow, diffusion-controlled mechanisms in most battery materials. On the other hand, graphene sheets functioned as a versatile two-dimensional supporting scaffold to electrically bind every silicon quantum dots together, spatially separate individual silicon quantum dots from each other, and facilitate the access of electrolyte to all the anchored silicon quantum dots, thereby contributing to the surface-controlled lithium storage of such ultrasmall silicon quantum dots.
 Fig. 3  (a) In situ synthetic process of the G@mTiO2 hybrids. (b and c) TEM images and (d) plots of specific capacity and Coulombic efficiency of the G@mTiO2 hybrids as a function of cycle number. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Electrostatic self-assembly, (b–d) TEM images, (e) peak currents for different sweep rates derived from CV curves, (f) cycling performances at 2 A g−1, and (g) rate capabilities of the SiQD–GNS. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015. 
In addition, tailoring the interfacial interactions between nanostructured active materials and graphene sheets indeed represents another powerful dimension for boosting the performance of graphene-supported active materials.123,146–150 For examples, Zhou et al.148 bound SnO2 nanocrystals in nitrogen-doped graphene sheets by Sn–N bonding based on a facile in situ hydrazine monohydrate vapor reduction method (Fig. 5). In the thus-obtained SnO2 nanocrystal/nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide hybrid material (denoted as SnO2 NC@N–RGO), uniform SnO2 nanocrystals were homogeneously bound in nitrogen-doped graphene sheets. This material design not only made SnO2 nanocrystals electrochemically active because the electrons could be rapidly transported to SnO2 nanocrystals via the highly conducting nitrogen-doped graphene sheets, but also conferred micropores between graphene sheets and SnO2 nanocrystals and facilitated rapid diffusion of lithium ions to SnO2 nanocrystals. It was also of note that, the Sn–N bond formed between graphene and SnO2 nanocrystals effectively limited the agglomeration of tin nanoparticle intermediates generated during lithiation, thus improving the stability of the material upon cycling. As a result, when evaluated as an anode material for LIBs, the SnO2 NC@N–RGO displayed the extremely high capacity of 1352 mA h g−1 (1021 mA h g−1 based on the total mass of the hybrid), with excellent rate capability and cycling performance (Fig. 5d).
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM image, (b) TEM image, (c) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey scan, and (d) cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the SnO2 NC@N–RGO. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013. 
In a two-dimensional/two-dimensional hybrid material (namely, Ni NS/graphene) of NiO nanosheets and graphene sheets synthesized by Zhou et al.,123 it was found that NiO nanosheets were covalently bonded to graphene sheets through C–O–Ni bridges, which mainly originated from a strong pinning effect of the residual hydroxyl/epoxy groups of graphene sheets on the Ni atoms of NiO nanosheets (Fig. 6). Based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations, it was indicated that a hollow site was the most energetically favorable site for an isolated Ni adatom on the graphene with an adsorption energy of 1.26 eV. In the case of oxygenated graphene (e.g., with hydroxyl groups), two local minimum adsorption states were observed after full relaxation when an isolated Ni atom approached the hydroxyl groups on the HO–graphene surface (Fig. 6d). The first (diagram a) was where the Ni adatom bonded with two O atoms and pushed aside one H atom to the surface forming a C–H bond, and the second (diagram b) was where the Ni adatom bonded with three O atoms after crowding out two H atoms to form a H2 molecule. The adsorption energies for these two adsorption states were calculated to be 1.22 (diagram a) and 1.37 eV (diagram b), respectively, comparable with that (1.26 eV) on graphene. By using the climbing nudged elastic band method, the energy barrier for an isolated Ni adatom to diffuse from a hollow site to a neighbouring hollow site on graphene was calculated to be 0.19 eV, indicating that an isolated Ni adatom easily diffused and preferred to cluster on the graphene surface. In contrast, the calculated diffusion barriers of the Ni adatom on the oxygenated graphene surface (2.23 and 1.69 eV for graphene with hydroxyl and epoxy) were much larger than that on the graphene (0.19 eV), implying a strong interfacial interaction between the NiO nanosheets and graphene sheets through C–O–Ni bridges (Fig. 6d). The easy binding/difficult dissociating characteristic of Ni adatoms on the oxygenated graphene by oxygen bridges greatly facilitated fast electron hopping from graphene to NiO and thus the reversible lithiation and delithiation of NiO. Furthermore, the unique sheet-on-sheet nanostructure prevented the restacking of graphene, alleviated the volume change effect of NiO, and improved the utilization of NiO since a good adhesion and electrical contact with the underlying graphene sheets, thus rendering highly improved cyclic and rate performances while using the resultant hybrid as the LIB anode material.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image, (b) TEM image, and (c) cycling performance of the NiO NS/graphene hybrids. (d) Local minimum adsorption states of a Ni atom binding with graphene and the minimum energy path for a Ni adatom diffusing on the graphene and oxygenated graphene surface. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 
3.2 Graphene as material mediator
In comparison with graphene sheets as the material support to primarily improve the electrical conductivity of the material, graphene sheets can be introduced onto nanostructured active materials to mediate the interface dominating the transport of both electrons and lithium ions from/to the embedded active materials, and the interface between the active materials and the electrolyte, both of which are critically important especially when the material interface fluctuates and even changes along with the volume change of high-capacity active materials upon cycling.
Tremendous efforts have been devoted to synthesizing graphene-mediated nanostructured active materials with various morphologies, structures, and properties. Among them, a popular hybridization strategy for the construction of graphene-mediated active materials is to assemble negatively charged graphene oxide sheets and positively charged active materials by the mutual electrostatic interactions, followed by reduction of graphene oxide sheets.151–161 For example, Yang et al.153 fabricated graphene-encapsulated metal oxide following this hybridization strategy (Fig. 7a). The thus-resulted hybrids possessed flexible and ultrathin graphene shells that effectively enwrap the oxide nanoparticles. This classical core–shell structured hybrid design suppressed the aggregation of oxide nanoparticles, accommodated the volume change during cycling, and maintained a high electrical conductivity of the active material. As a consequence, graphene-encapsulated electrochemically active Co3O4 nanoparticles exhibited a very high reversible capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 in the first 10 cycles, and over 1000 mA h g−1 after 130 cycles, with excellent cyclic performance, thus showing potential as an anode material for lithium storage. Based on a modified self-assembly method where 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC)/N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) was introduced as the bonding catalyst, Kim et al. designed a microstructure of graphene embedded LiFePO4 nanoparticles (Fig. 7b).154 In such a hybrid structure, high conductive graphene shells provided a fast electron transfer path for the inner LiFePO4 cores, and many pores inside the structure facilitated the lithium-ion diffusion. Thus, the graphene embedded LiFePO4 delivered enhanced cycling performance and rate-capability compared with that of carbon coated LiFePO4 when being used as a cathode material for high power LIBs. By using a one-step evaporation-induced capillary-driven assembly route in aerosol droplets, Luo et al.155 encapsulated silicon nanoparticles with heavily crumpled graphene shells (Fig. 7c). This hybridization method rendered the use of the folds and wrinkles of the crumpled, flexible graphene shells to allow silicon nanoparticles to expand without fracturing the crumpled graphene shells thus effectively protecting the inner silicon nanoparticles from excessive deposition of the insulating solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). Furthermore, the multi-point contact between crumpled graphene sheets and silicon nanoparticles significantly facilitated the electron transport from/to silicon nanoparticles. Compared to the native Si particles, the resulted hybrid capsules thus showed greatly improved performance as LIB anode materials in terms of specific capacity, cyclic stability, and Coulombic efficiency.
 Fig. 7  (a) Electrostatic assembly, SEM image and cycling performance of graphene-encapsulated metal oxides (e.g., Co3O4 nanoparticles). Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2010. (b) Modified assembly, SEM image, and normalized rate capabilities of graphene embedded LiFePO4. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (c) Aerosol-assisted capillary assembly, SEM image and cycling performance of crumpled graphene-wrapped Si nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (d) In situ hydrothermal synthesis, SEM image, cycling performance and rate capability of the graphene-wrapped Li3VO4 microboxes. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (e) Layer-by-layer assembly and reduction process, TEM image, and rate capabilities for graphene wrapped porous silicon nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (f) Ball-milling method, TEM image, and cycling performance for the SnO2–SiC/G hybrid. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2012. (g) CVD process, TEM image, and cycling performance for graphene-wrapped Ge nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2012. 
Besides the direct use of ex situ synthesized nanostructured active materials, various nanostructured active materials can be in situ prepared to construct graphene-mediated hybrids for LIB electrodes, based upon diverse well-defined synthetic methods.156–158 For instance, Shi et al.157 synthesized a hybrid of Li3VO4 and graphene by a rapid one-step in situ hydrothermal method (Fig. 7d). The resultant hybrid possessed a unique morphology, in which homogeneous hollow structured Li3VO4 microboxes with a wall thickness of 40 nm were well wrapped with porous graphene sheets. The hollow and thin-wall structure of Li3VO4 microboxes relaxed the stress/strain of lithium ion insertion/deinsertion, increased the surface area of the material to provide extra sites for the storage of lithium ions, and reduced the effective diffusion distance for lithium ions. More notably, the graphene wrapping allowed for both facile mass transfer and facile charge transfer and good structural stability for the embedded Li3VO4 microboxes. As a result, the graphene-wrapped Li3VO4 microboxes delivered greatly improved capacity, rate capability (e.g., 223 mA h g−1 even at 20C), and cycling stability. Combined layer-by-layer assembly with in situ magnesiothermic-reduction process, Wu et al.158 described the construction of an interconnected network of graphene wrapped porous silicon nanoparticles from silicon precursors (silica particles) (Fig. 7e). Compared with bare silicon spheres, the as-synthesized hybrids exhibited remarkedly enhanced anodic performance in terms of specific capacity, cycling stability, and rate capability, making it a promising anode candidate for LIBs, which was attributed to the structural features containing porous silicon spheres and graphene shells.
In contrast to the mediation of nanostructured active materials with graphene sheets derived from graphene oxide sheets, Chen et al.159 developed a simple ball-milling method to synthesize a SnO2–SiC/graphene core–shell structure (namely, SnO2–SiC/G), in which nanometre-sized SnO2 particles were uniformly dispersed on a supporting SiC core and encapsulated with few-layer graphene coatings by in situ mechanical peeling of graphite (Fig. 7f). In such a core–shell–shell hybrid design, the outer graphene shell, possessing better elasticity and higher electronic conductivity than the generally used amorphous carbon coating, not only accommodated the volume change of the active material during both the alloying and conversion reaction processes, but also provided good electrical contact with the material particles. Furthermore, the nanometre-sized SiC cores acted as rigid supports to tightly pin all the reaction intermediate products (including the Li2O matrix, LixSn alloys, and metallic Sn). Together with the outmost graphene shells, this unique core–shell hybrid structure effectively hindered the movement and aggregation of the reaction products towards each other, prevented Sn agglomeration, and maintained a good contact between Sn and Li2O in the nanoscale matrix, thereby leading to both a highly reversible alloying/dealloying reaction and a reversible conversion reaction. As a result, the SnO2–SiC/G hybrid material delivered a high reversible capacity of 810 mA h g−1 and 83% capacity retention over 150 charge/discharge cycles between 1.5 and 0.01 V at a rate of 0.1 A g−1. Furthermore, graphene sheets could be directly grown onto nanostructured active materials.160,161 As an example, Kim et al.161 grew graphene shells on the surface of Ge nanowires by a CVD process without any metal catalyst involved (Fig. 7g). The resulted graphene-wrapped Ge nanowires exhibited a high specific capacity (1059 mA h g−1) at a high C-rate (4.0C) and a long cycle life (200 cycle) at a high capacity retention (90%). The achieved performance judged by the key parameters was assumed to be related to the encapsulation of Ge nanowires with high purity graphene shells.
For these graphene-mediated hybrid materials constructed by the above-discussed hybrid approaches, there exists a general core–shell or core–sheath structured feature, which is indeed responsible for the improvement in the lithium storage performance of various nanostructured anode and cathode materials. Although offering a good contact between the core and the shell/sheath thereby facilitating the electron and ion transport between the components, such a classical core–shell structured design often becomes inefficient and even inapplicable for high-capacity electrode materials (typically, e.g., Si) highly desirable for high-performance LIBs, because the tremendous volume changes of the inner active materials upon cycling could destroy the outer graphene shells and make the graphene mediation strategy ineffective. Recently, various elegant graphene-mediated hybrid designs have thus been developed particularly toward utilizing high-capacity but large-volume-change electrode materials for LIBs. For examples, Wang et al.162 proposed a wire-in-tube structure to incorporate void spaces for accommodating the volume change of inner active materials while maintaining a robust line-to-line contact between the components (Fig. 8). In the thus-resulted hybrids, silicon nanowires were enveloped within hollow tube-like graphene sheaths by a CVD process. This void-incorporated one-dimensional/one-dimensional hybrid structure (namely, SiNW-d-GT) delivered good rate capability (1200 mA h g−1 at 12600 mA g−1) and remarkable cycling stability (1100 mA h g−1 at 4200 mA g−1 over 1000 cycles) when used as anode materials of LIBs (Fig. 8d). The excellent cycling performance was believed to originate from the unique hybrid material structure design. First, the built-in void spaces in the thus-introduced tube-like graphene sheaths allowed inner silicon nanowires to expand freely without destroying the outer sheaths. Second, the tube-like graphene sheaths acted as a shielding layer to avoid the direct exposure of silicon to the electrolyte, thus improving the stability of the SEI layer and consequently alleviating electrolyte decomposition. Third, the tube-like graphene sheaths provided robust and efficient pathways for fast transport of both electrons and lithium ions from/to inner silicon nanowires since the line-to-line contact between the inner nanowires and the outer sheaths.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image, (b) TEM image, (c) scheme showing electron and ion transport channels, and (d) specific capacity and Columbic efficiency of the SiNW-d-GT. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013. 
Furthermore, the same group163 also described a sandwich structure of graphene-confined tin nanosheets (namely, G/Sn/G), in which two-dimensional Sn nanosheets with an average thickness of only about 10 nm were sandwiched between graphene sheets with a thickness of less than 5 nm (Fig. 9). The thus-prepared two-dimensional/two-dimensional sandwich G/Sn/G hybrids delivered a high reversible capacity as well as superior cycling performance (>590 mA h g−1 after the 60th cycle), exhibiting intrinsic potential as anode materials in LIBs (Fig. 9d). The significantly improved electrochemical performance of the G/Sn/G was believed to be associated with its distinct two-dimensional sandwich structure that offered the following benefits. Frist, the sheet-like nanostructuring of tin phase itself helped alleviate the material pulverization resulted from the volume change of Sn during Li–Sn alloying–dealloying reactions. Second, graphene covers at both sides of Sn nanosheets prevented the adjacent Sn nanosheets from coalescing together and more importantly, created efficient dual channels for fast transport of both electrons and lithium ions in view of their surface-to-surface contact with both sides of Sn nanosheets.
 Fig. 9  (a) Synthetic approach, (b and c) TEM images, and (d) cycling performance of the G/Sn/G. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2012. 
Very recently, Hassan et al.164 proposed and developed a hybrid concept that capitalized on the strong covalent interactions occurring between silicon nanoparticles and sulfur-doped graphene (SG) as well as cyclized polyacrylonitrile (c-PAN) (Fig. 10). In that work, Si adsorption on SG and pristine graphene (G) was investigated based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations (Fig. 10e). For the stable configuration of Si on pristine graphene (Si–G), it was indicated that Si sat at the bridge site with adsorption energy of 0.45 eV. In contrast, two stable configurations for Si adsorption on SG existed including SG–Si(A) and SG–Si(B). In the SG–Si(A), Si was found to bind to S and two ‘saturated’ C atoms with the corresponding binding energy of −2.02 eV; in the SG–Si(B), Si bound to S and two C atoms at the defect sites forming two Si–C and one Si–S bonds, leading to a binding energy of −3.70 eV. The higher binding energy in the latter case indicated that Si would be more energetically favorable to bind to the defect C atoms. Most importantly, the results showed that Si attached on SG had a much higher binding energy than that on pristine G. Besides, the Hirshfeld charge analysis was conducted to evaluate the stability of Si on G and SG. The results showed that Si deposited on SG hold a larger positive charge than that on G, and the C atoms bonded with the Si atom in SG–Si possessed more negative charges than that in G–Si, revealing that the bonding between Si and SG was stronger than that on G. This covalent synergy was verified by the analysis of the projected density of states as well. Furthermore, the theoretical studies on the mobility of adsorbed lithium atom indicated the lithium diffusion on SG–Si with a slightly lower barrier than that found on G–Si, disclosing that SG could boost the mobility for lithium atoms on Si–SG interface. These theoretical results depicted a covalent synergy for the interaction between Si and SG, which not only effectively prevented agglomeration of Si thus maintaining the material stability, but also facilitated the charge transfer.
 Fig. 10  (a) Synthetic approach, (b and c) TEM images, (d) XPS survey spectrum, and (f) cycling performance of sulfur-doped graphene sheet-sandwiched c-PAN-coated silicon nanoparticles. (e) Geometries and binding energy (BE) of the stable Si adsorption configurations on graphene, referred as G–Si, and on sulfur-doped graphene (SG–Si). Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. 
In addition, the cyclized polyacrylonitrile (c-PAN) formed during the sluggish heat treatment (SHT) stuck between the SG sheets, thus constructing a robust structure of sulfur-doped graphene sheet-sandwiched c-PAN-coated silicon nanoparticles. Such a well-defined design not only lowered the direct contact of the electrolyte to the silicon material and even the whole electrode thus stabilizing the SEI, but also constructed efficient transport highways for both electrons and lithium ions. As a result, the thus-fabricated hierarchical hybrid electrode exhibited a high Coulombic efficiency of 99.9% and superior reversible capacity of over 1000 mA h g−1 for 2275 cycles at 2 A g−1 (Fig. 10f), even with a high material loading associated with 3.4 mA h cm−2.
3.3 Graphene as electrode framework
The electrode-scale construction of self-supporting binder-free hybrid films/membranes of graphene sheets and nanostructured active materials, typically via vacuum filtration, has been extensively demonstrated to be a very promising way to confer direct utilization of such hybridized bulk materials as LIB electrodes and the exertion of embedded active materials upon cycling, while the substantial need of additional conductive additives and binders in a conventional electrode configuration unavoidably dilutes the lithium storage capability especially in terms of both gravimetric (specific) capacity and volumetric capacity. A wide range of active anode and cathode materials have thus been incorporated into graphene macroscopic frameworks toward the direct construction of self-supporting binder-free anodes and cathodes for high-performance LIBs.165–178 For examples, Lee et al.179 fabricated a flexible, self-supporting graphene–silicon nanoparticle hybrid electrode with excellent tolerance to structural deformation simply by a one-step vacuum filtration approach, and demonstrated their high lithium storage capacities and cyclic stability. It was also noted that, while silicon nanoparticles were well dispersed between graphene sheets, partial portions of the assembled graphene sheets restacked to form a network to provide high electrical conductivity throughout the electrode. Wang et al.180 developed an anionic sulfonate surfactant-assisted self-assembly approach to prepare paper-like layered hybrid electrodes containing stable, ordered, alternating layers of nanocrystalline metal oxide and graphene sheets or graphene stacks. The resultant free-standing hybrid paper electrode consisted of SnO2 nanocrystals and graphene sheets displayed near theoretical specific energy density for lithium insertion/extraction without significant charge/discharge degradation within the tested charge/discharge cycles. It was believed that a well-controlled electrode architecture with the locally ordered alternating layers of graphene sheets and SnO2 nanocrystals conferred the conductivity and the structural integrity across the length scale from the nanometre material scale to the micrometre electrode scale.
In contrast to the use of zero-dimensional nanostructured active materials, Wang et al.181 demonstrated a one-dimensional/two-dimensional hybrid anode prototype consisting of graphene-sandwiched silicon nanowires via vacuum filtration of an aqueous dispersion of graphene oxide with silicon nanowires followed by thermal annealing. Compared with zero-dimensional/two-dimensional hybrid electrodes with a point-to-point contact between the components, such one-dimensional/two-dimensional hybrid electrode architectures held distinct advantages. The graphene sheets, functioning as interconnecting miniaturized current collectors, formed line-to-line contact with embedded silicon nanowires, and thus created an efficient electrically conducting network throughout the electrode to propel lateral electron transport from/to each embedded nanowire. Furthermore, the embedded silicon nanowires were packed by mechanically robust and flexible graphene sheets, allowing the accommodation of the large volume change of Si and thus improving the cyclic stability. As a result, this binder-free hybrid electrode exhibited high specific capacity and superior cyclic stability even at higher rates in comparison with their counterparts, indicating potential as an anode in LIBs.
Besides the use of paper-like films of densely-packed and aligned graphene sheets, the three-dimensional porous graphene foams fabricated by either CVD growth or chemical assembly have also been utilized as the electrode framework for different nanostructured active materials.182–188 For instance, Li et al.189 demonstrated a thin, lightweight, and flexible lithium ion battery using a three-dimensional flexible and conductive interconnected CVD-grown graphene foam network as both a highly conductive pathway for electrons/lithium ions and a light current collector (Fig. 11). By fabricating the LiFePO4 nanoparticles-decorated graphene foam (LFP/GF) and Li4Ti5O12 nanosheets-decorated graphene foam (LTO/GF) by in situ hydrothermal deposition of active materials on the as-grown graphene foams followed by heating, and using them directly as the cathode and the anode, respectively, the assembled thin, lightweight, and flexible full lithium ion batteries showed good flexibility, high capacity, high rate capability, and long-life cyclic performance even under repeated bending to a small radius of 5 mm (Fig. 11f), giving great potential of such graphene-foam-enabled electrodes in flexible energy applications.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of a flexible battery containing a cathode and an anode made from GF. (b) Photograph, (c) SEM image, and (d) TEM image of the LTO/GF. (e) Photograph and (f) cyclic performance of a LFP/GF and LTO/GF-based full battery lighting a red light-emitting diode (LED) device under bending. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from United States National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2012. 
One major concern of these graphene-based binder-free hybrid electrode architecture design toward practical applications is related to the balance between the material tap/packing density (and consequently volumetric capacity and volumetric energy density) and the lithium ion diffusivity through graphene. For the vacuum filtered graphene paper electrodes, while the compact electrode architecture ensures the high material packing density, the inevitable restacking of edge portions of the densely packed and aligned graphene sheets severely hinders the cross-plane lithium ion transport especially at high areal material mass loading, and thereby results in sluggish lithium ion diffusion kinetics. This scenario limited not only the electrode capacity at high discharge/charge rates, but also the capacity retention especially at an acceptable level of material mass loadings. For graphene foam-enabled binder-free electrodes, although the lithium ion diffusivity can be substantially improved due to their three-dimensional porous network structure, it is critically important to optimize the tap/packing density of the material toward improving the volumetric capacity and thus volumetric energy density, a dominating parameter for commercialization of the material and related electrode. To alleviate the above situation, one promising way has been demonstrated by Zhao et al. (Fig. 12),190 in which a vacuum filtered conductive scaffold composed of graphene sheets with a high density of in-plane, nm-sized carbon vacancies (denoted as deG) was employed to embed silicon nanoparticles. In such a holey defect-enriched graphene-enabled binder-free electrode architecture, the employed deG conferred excellent cross-plane ion diffusivity since in-plane carbon vacancies could function as new diffusion channels for lithium ion diffusion across the aligned graphene sheets. This overcome the characteristic high resistance of vacuum-filtered graphene paper/electrode for lithium ion transport due to their extreme width-to-thickness aspect ratio and inter-sheet aggregation. Combined with additional advantageous features derived from compact aligned graphene sheets, including superior electrical conductivity, high packing density, and tolerance to structural deformation of embedded silicon, this flexible hybrid electrode achieved an unprecedented reversible specific capacity of around 1100 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1, a rate equivalent to full discharge in 8 min, or approximately 3200 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1, repeatable up to 99.9% between cycles for over 150 charge/discharge cycles (Fig. 12d and e), representing an attractive electrode design.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic, (b and c) SEM images, (d) cycling performance, and (e) rate capabilities of the deG-embedded Si nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2011. 
Different from the structural modification of graphene sheets in the electrode, modulating the morphology of graphene sheets represents an attractive strategy to construct high performance binder-free hybrid electrodes for LIBs.191,192 As an example, Kong et al.192 fabricated a mechanically robust, freestanding network electrode, in which graphene sheets rolled up into hollow tubes and thin MoS2 nanosheets uniformly dwelt on the inner surface of the hollow graphene tubes (Fig. 13). When being used as an anode, this hybrid electrode exhibited a remarkedly high specific capacity up to 1150 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, superior rate capability with a capacity of 700 mA h g−1 even at 10 A g−1, and long cycle life (700 cycles with almost 100% capacity retention) (Fig. 13d and e). These impressive results were believed to result from the structural advantages. First, in such an electrode architecture design, the interconnection of graphene-based hollow tubes formed a strong self-supporting skeleton framework and provided efficient transport pathways for both electrons and lithium ions throughout the whole electrode. Second, the nanoscale size and uniform dispersion of the MoS2 nanosheets further accelerated lithium ion diffusion due to the shortened diffusion lengths. Third, the tube walls composed of graphene sheets with good mechanical properties tolerated strain relaxation and accommodated the volume change of MoS2 nanosheets, thus effectively mitigating the stress and protecting the active materials from pulverization upon cycling. Fourth, the unique side-to-surface contact mode between MoS2 nanosheets and graphene sheets avoided the aggregation of the material, as well as allowed for the dominance of 3–5 layers of MoS2 nanosheets and their utilization even when the content of MoS2 was up to 90%.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic, (b) photograph, (c) TEM image, (d) rate capabilities, and (e) cycling performance of MoS2 nanosheets dwelt in the hollow tubes composed of graphene sheets. Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
By engineering the arrangement of graphene sheets, Zhou et al.193 recently proposed an interesting material/electrode design formula (Fig. 14). In that work, an engineered graphene-based self-supporting binder-free electrode configuration (denoted as TCG-Si) was developed, where silicon nanoparticles were embedded within the assemblies of templated carbon-bridged oriented graphene via a modified vacuum filtration process followed by thermal annealing. The thus-obtained engineered graphene bulk assemblies not only fundamentally created a robust bi-continuous network for rapid transport of both electrons and lithium ions from/to impregnated silicon nanoparticles throughout the electrode even at high material mass loading, but also intrinsically allowed achieving a substantially high material tap density (1.3 g cm−3) thanks to the dense packing of the oriented graphene sheets involved. As a result, an exceptional level of combined performances was achieved, attaining high gravimetric capacity (1390 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 with respect to the total electrode weight), high volumetric capacity (1807 mA h cm−3 that is more than three times higher than that of commercialized graphite), superior rate capability (900 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1), excellent cycling stability (0.025% decay per cycle over 200 cycles), and competing areal capacity (as high as 4 and 6 mA h cm−2 at 15 and 3 mA cm−2, respectively) (Fig. 14d–g).
 Fig. 14  (a) Fabrication and electrode design, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image, (d) cycling performance, (e) volumetric capacity comparing with representative reported Si anodes, (f) rate capabilities, and (g) areal capacities with different mass loadings of the TCG-Si. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
3.4 Graphene as electrode modifier
Whilst diverse binder-free nanostructured active material arrays or membranes have been used as the electrodes showing promise for LIBs,17,24 the graphene mediation at the electrode scale could be an effective strategy to further enhance the performance of well-designated electrodes.98 As a representative example, Wang et al.194 developed an attractive hybrid array electrode configuration, in which the well-ordered perforated silicon nanowires were conformally coated with graphene sheets and interconnected through an underlying hinging layer via CVD, thus forming a mechanically robust, free-standing textured hybrid nanowire (namely, t-Si@G NW) arrays (Fig. 15). When being used directly as LIB anodes, the t-Si@G NW arrays exhibited outstanding performances with high volumetric capacity relative to the whole electrode, competing rate capability, and excellent cycling stability (e.g., 1500 mA h cm−3 after 200 cycles) (Fig. 15g). Such a level of lithium storage performance was believed to result from the synergistic effect of both components of the t-Si@G. First, the ordered perforated silicon nanowire arrays rendered a substantially high tap density of silicon, a gauged incorporation of indispensable void space to avoid the failure of the electrode structure and configuration due to the inherent volume expansion of Si, as well as a reduced tortuosity in electronic and ionic transport. Second, the deposited graphene coatings completely mimicked the modality of Si thus improving the silicon interface with the electrolyte, and afforded efficient highways thus promoting lateral transport of both electrons and lithium ions from/to each encapsulated nanowire. Furthermore, the graphene coatings, combined with an underlying hinging layer, enabled the construction and direct utilization of free-standing t-Si@G nanowire array electrodes even without the addition of any other inactive additives or substances.
 Fig. 15  (a) Fabrication progress, (b) photograph, (c) SEM image, (d and e) TEM images, (f) cycling performance, (g) volumetric capacity, and (h) rate capabilities of the t-Si@G. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
Recently, Suresh et al.195 draped a silicon thin-film electrode deposited on a carbon nanotube film current collector with a graphene monolayer. The resultant hybrid electrode exhibited long cycle life (>1000 charge/discharge cycles) with an average specific capacity of ∼806 mA h g−1 and a very high volumetric capacity of ∼2821 mA h cm−3 averaged over 1000 charge/discharge cycles. Moreover, these graphene-draped silicon electrodes were further successfully cycled against commercial cathodes in a full-cell configuration. In such a hybrid electrode architecture, the graphene layer capping the Si was believed to effectively suppress the delamination of the underlying Si and at the same time and stabilize the SEI, thus improving the cyclic stability.
3.5 Graphene as combined media
Hybridizing graphene sheets with various nanostructured active materials at either the nanometre material scale or the macro/bulk electrode scale has been proven to hold great potential to improve the lithium storage performance of the material. While most of the reported hybridization strategies have majorly emphasized one of the functions of graphene sheets at their respective scales, the dual-functional hybridization at both the material scale and the electrode scale, e.g., by employing graphene sheets as combined media or functionalities for nanostructured active materials, could be a more promising way to maximize the potential of graphene and thus substantially boost the material performance. Following this line, Wang et al.196 developed a kind of adaptable, self-supporting, flexible, and binder-free paper-like silicon-based anodes (namely, SiNW@G@RGO), in which silicon nanowires were sheathed with overlapped graphene sheets to form SiNW@G core–sheath nanocables, and were in turn sandwiched between reduced graphene oxide sheets (Fig. 16). Within this architecture, the overlapped graphene sheets functioned as adaptable but sealed sheaths or mediators to synergistically transform with the volume change of embedded silicon nanowires, thus preventing the direct contact of silicon with the electrolyte and enabling the structural and interfacial stabilization of encapsulated silicon nanowire materials during repeated cycling. Meanwhile, the flexible and conductive reduced graphene oxide overcoats acted as a mechanically robust bulk matrix or framework to accommodate the volume change of embedded SiNW@G core–sheath nanocables, thus maintaining the structural and electrical integrity of the bulk electrode. Benefiting from the graphene hybridization at both the nanometre material scale and the bulk electrode scale, the SiNW@G@RGO electrodes exhibited much enhanced lithium storage performance when compared with their counterparts, delivering reversible specific capacity of 1600 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1, 80% capacity retention after 100 cycles, and superior rate capability (500 mA h g−1 at 8.4 A g−1) based on the total electrode weight (Fig. 16d).
 Fig. 16  (a) Fabrication process and electrode design, (b) TEM image, (c) SEM image, and (d) cycling performance of the SiNW@G@RGO. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
Recently, an electrode design of a three-dimensional interconnected porous nitrogen-doped graphene bulk foam encapsulated with Ge quantum dot/nitrogen-doped graphene yolk–shell nanostructures has also been reported by Mo et al.197 This material/electrode collaboratively engineered hybrid design held a series of advantageous features, including a small size of the active materials to alleviate the structural degradation upon cycling, void involvement in the yolk–shell structure to accommodate the volume change of germanium, interfacial modification by the graphene shells to stabilize the SEI layer, creation of electron/ion transport highways throughout the whole electrode, and nitrogen-doping effects (e.g., improving electrical conductivity and surface hydrophilicity of the material). As a result, the thus-fabricated hybrid electrodes exhibited high reversible specific capacity (1220 mA h g−1), long cycling performance (over 96% reversible capacity retention from the second to 1000 cycles) and ultra-high rate capability (over 800 mA h g−1 at 40C).
Very recently, Sun et al.198 developed a two-step approach to fabricate a monolithic three-dimensional, hierarchically porous, free-standing network electrode (denoted as Nb2O5/HGF), in which the as-synthesized Nb2O5 nanoparticles were first anchored on graphene sheets at the material scale and then networked by holey graphene sheets at the electrode scale (Fig. 17). In the thus-resulted Nb2O5/HGF hybrid network electrode, the highly interconnected three-dimensional graphene/holey graphene combined network architecture offered excellent electron transport properties, and its hierarchical porous structure enabled by the holey graphene framework facilitated rapid ion transport even a high mass loading of Nb2O5 nanoparticles. As a result, the Nb2O5/HGF hybrid electrode delivered high areal capacity and high-rate capability at high mass loading. Typically, it exhibited much less capacity degradation induced by mass loading at various C-rates (Fig. 17d), and a capacity of 139 mA h g−1 was maintained with 11 mg cm−2 loading at a high rate of 10C, reflecting the potential of collaborative engineering of graphene hybrids at both the material scale and the electrode scale to promote the development of viable high-performance LIB electrodes.
 Fig. 17  (a) Fabrication process and electrode design, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image, and (d) rate capabilities at different mass loadings of the Nb2O5/HGF. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017. 
4 Graphene hybridization for supercapacitors
Electrochemical capacitors, also known as supercapacitors, hold ultrafast and highly reversible charge storage capability (high power density),11,44 although delivering relatively lower energy density in comparison with lithium-ion and other secondary batteries, as reflected by a chart of specific energy versus specific power, i.e., the Ragone plot. In view of different charge storage mechanisms, supercapacitors can be typically classified into three types: electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLC), pseudocapacitors, and asymmetric capacitors.11,41–45 In EDLC, the capacitance arises from electrostatic interactions via physical accumulation of charges at the electrode/electrolyte interface resulting in a double layer (that is, a non-Faradaic process where active materials are electrochemically stable). Given the dominant EDLC properties of the material, it is generally observed that the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves bear a rectangular shape and galvanostatic charge/discharge curves are nearly linear and symmetrical. As for pseudocapacitors, the capacitance is caused by Faradaic charge transfer that occurs through the fast and reversible Faradaic processes such as redox reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface or near the surface of the electrochemically active electrode material. In this case, along with significant deviations from a rectangular shape, redox couple peaks appear in the CV curves, which is corroborated as well with asymmetric shapes in the charge/discharge curves. In asymmetric capacitors, a combination of both non-Faradaic and Faradaic processes is presented. In general, the performance of supercapacitor electrodes strongly depends on the electrical conductivity, diffusion rate of electrolyte ions, and the active material itself related to the theoretical specific capacitance. So far, different nanostructured electrode materials with theoretically high capacitances have been widely investigated toward promoting the development of high-performance supercapacitors, some of which include transition metal oxides holding the ability to carry out Faradaic redox reactions, and conducting polymers capable of being reversibly electrochemically doped. However, the intrinsic low conductivity of these electrode materials significantly limits their performances. To increase the energy density without sacrificing other characteristic advantages of the supercapacitor such as the power capability, the emerging nanostructured electrode materials have been elaborately hybridized with graphene, typically, by using graphene as a material support and/or material mediator from the viewpoint of the material structure design, as well as by using graphene as an electrode framework from the electrode construction viewpoint. We thus discuss recent experimental results reported on various supercapacitor-directed graphene hybridization formulas that are indexed by the critical role of graphene.
4.1 Graphene as material support
With its superior electrical conductivity and high specific surface area, graphene has been widely used as a general support to improve the capacitive performance of different nanostructured active materials for SCs; representative active materials include metal oxides (e.g., MnO2), metal nitrides (e.g., VN), metal hydroxides (e.g., Ni(OH)2), metal chalcogenides (e.g., WS2, VSe2, Co2CuS4), polymers, and so on. In these graphene-supported hybrid materials, the introduced graphene sheets acted as not only the large-surface-area scaffold for the deposition of nanostructured active materials but also the electronic conductive channels to promote the charging/discharging processes, and the good interfacial contact between graphene sheets and active materials could be of great benefit to the fast electron transfer.199–217
For example, Yang et al.211 proposed a controllable synthetic strategy for preparing edge site-enriched nickel–cobalt sulfide nanoparticles (namely, Ni–Co–S) decorated on graphene sheets to form strongly coupled hybrid nanostructures (Ni–Co–S/G) via an in situ chemically converted method. Based upon the Kirkendall effect-involved anion exchange reaction (e.g., the etching-like effort of the S2− ions), the enriching of Ni–Co–S edge sites in the resultant graphene-supported nanostructures endowed the hybrid material with a high electrochemical activity and strong affinity for the electrolyte ions. Combined with a strong coupling with conductive graphene supports, the resultant Ni–Co–S/G hybrid electrode materials showed a high specific capacitance of 1492 F g−1 at the current density of 1 A g−1, a superior rate capability of 96% when the current density was increased to 50 A g−1, and excellent electrochemical stabilities. An asymmetric supercapacitor fabricated using the edge site-enriched Ni–Co–S/G hybrids as the positive electrode and porous carbon nanosheets as the negative electrode was further demonstrated, delivering a high energy density of 43.3 W h kg−1 at a power density of 0.8 kW kg−1, and retaining an energy density of 28.4 W h kg−1 even at a power density of 22.1 kW kg−1, indicative of the potential as a promising candidate material for high-performance SCs. As another example, Wang et al.212 recently used a two-step synthetic method to prepare mixed-valence manganese oxide nanoparticles anchored to reduced graphene oxide sheets (namely, rGO/MnOx), in which two-dimensional δ-MnO2 nanosheets were first formed on graphene oxide sheets, and then in situ reduced by hydrazine vapor into mixed-valence MnOx nanoparticles evenly distributed on reduced graphene oxide sheets. The thus-obtained rGO/MnOx hybrid material exhibited a high specific capacitance of 202 F g−1 (at mass loading of 2 mg cm−2), a large areal specific capacitance of 2.5 F cm−2 (at mass loading of up to 19 mg cm−2), and a super-long-life stability with 106% capacitance retention after 115000 charge/discharge cycles. The achieved performances were mainly ascribed to the enhanced electrical conductivity by graphene.
Furthermore, it should be noted that the graphene (or reduced graphene oxide) content plays a significant role in regulating the supercapacitor performance of the hybrids. For example, Marri et al.214 synthesized VSe2–RGO hybrids at different concentrations of graphene oxide (i.e., 0.15, 0.3, and 0.75 wt%) by a facile one-step hydrothermal method. The hybrid obtained at 0.3 wt% of GO showed much enhanced supercapacitor performances compared with other hybrids, attaining a specific capacitance of ∼680 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, and retaining ∼81% retention of the initial capacitance even after 10000 cycles of charge–discharge. The performance improvement was attributed to the enhanced synergistic effect of both pseudocapacitance and EDLC arising out of the excellent coordination between VSe2 and RGO.
4.2 Graphene as material mediator
As another hybridization formula, graphene has also been used as a material mediator to encapsulate electrochemically active materials toward improving the capacitive performance. As a representative example, Cao et al.218 developed a two-step synthetic strategy to fabricate RGO wrapped MoO3 nanostructures (referred to as rGO/MoO3), by simply mixing molybdenum-based metal–organic frameworks with graphene oxide sheets followed by thermal annealing. The thus-obtained porous rGO/MoO3 was further used as the electrode material for the fabrication of all-solid-state, flexible, symmetric supercapacitor devices, showing superior rate capability as well as excellent electrochemical and mechanical stabilities. The achieved results were attributed to the structural advantages of such a hybrid design and the involved synergetic effect between the components. First, the incorporation of graphene sheets led to a higher surface area of the hybrid and a smaller size of the MoO3 compared to that without graphene, which not only shortened the ion diffusion length, but also provided more active surface for the redox reaction. Second, the created interspaces between the MoO3 core and the graphene shell served as the electrolyte ion reservoir, leading to rapid ion transport and improved rate capability. Third, graphene shells provided the increased electrical conductivity and charge transfer rate for the rGO/MoO3 hybrid. Fourth, graphene sheets contributed to the additional electrical double-layer capacitance.
4.3 Graphene as electrode framework
Distinct from the conventional SC electrode architecture highly relying on insulating binders and conducting additives, the construction of self-supporting binder-free hybrid films of graphene sheets and various electrochemically active electrode materials is a powerful strategy toward developing high-performance supercapacitor electrodes and devices. This hybridization methodology enables the formation of a three-dimensional continuous conductive network benefiting the utilization of the embedded active materials. A general hybridization way is to combine graphene oxide sheets and nanostructured active materials into a hybrid film by vacuum filtration followed by reduction, during which active nanostructures are sandwiched between reduced graphene oxide sheets.219–222
For example, Wu et al.223 prepared a hybrid film of RGO sheets and polyaniline (PANI) nanofibers by vacuum filtration, in which polyaniline nanofibers were well sandwiched between reduced graphene oxide sheets. The thus-prepared RGO/PANI hybrid films were mechanically stable and held a high flexibility, capable of being bent into large angles or shaped into various desired structures. When being directly used as the electrode, the hybrid films delivered a large capacitance (210 F g−1 at a discharge density of 0.3 A g−1), greatly improved electrochemical stability and rate capability, even without the help of an insulating binder and a low capacitance conducting additive. The impressive performance was mainly attributed to the graphene-enhanced conductivity of the electrode, which favoured the redox reaction of the sandwiched PANI nanofibers. In another study, Yan et al.224 proposed a modified hybridization strategy to prepare flexible and conductive MXene/graphene hybrid film electrodes (Mxene/rGO) by incorporating the filtration process and electrostatic self-assembly between positively-charged RGO sheets modified with poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) and negatively-charged titanium carbide MXene nanosheets (Fig. 18a). Based on the electrostatic assembly, RGO nanosheets were inserted in-between MXene layers. This inserted RGO sheets were believed to function as conductive spacers to effectively prevent self-restacking of MXene nanosheets, thus leading to an increase in interlayer spacing, accelerated ion transport, as well as more accessible electroactive sites. As a result, the thus-fabricated freestanding hybrid film electrodes displayed a high volumetric capacitance of 1040 F cm−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, an impressive rate capability with 61% capacitance retention at 1 V s−1, and long cycle life with almost no capacitance decay after 20000 cycles. Moreover, the fabricated binder-free symmetric supercapacitor showed an ultrahigh volumetric energy density of 32.6 W h L−1.
 Fig. 18  (a) Fabrication process, cross-sectional SEM image, and cyclic performance of the Mxene/RGO. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (b) Fabrication procedure, Nyquist plots showing fast ionic and electronic transport, and rate capabilities of the MnO2/e-CMG. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (c) Fabrication process, SEM image and cyclic performance of the Co3O4/VAGN/CF. Reproduced from ref. 235 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (d) Fabrication process and TEM image of the GPF/NCHP. Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. 
As an alternative, self-supporting porous graphene frameworks can be first constructed in the presence of desirable templates or spacers by vacuum filtration, upon which nanostructured active materials are in situ incorporated or deposited.225,226 For example, Choi et al.226 built a three-dimensional macroporous embossed film consisted of chemically modified graphene (namely, e-CMG) by using polystyrene colloidal particles as a sacrificial template during the filtration process (Fig. 18b). A thin layer of MnO2 layer was additionally deposited onto the e-CMG by a self-limiting reaction. The thus-resulted MnO2/e-CMG hybrid electrodes exhibited excellent electrochemical properties such as a specific capacitance of 389 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 97.7% capacitance retention upon a current density increase to 35 A g−1. Moreover, when the MnO2/e-CMG hybrid electrode was asymmetrically assembled with an e-CMG electrode, the assembled full cell showed the remarkable cell performance with energy density of 44 W h kg−1, power density of 25 kW kg−1, and excellent cycle life. The achieved performance of the MnO2/e-CMG hybrid electrodes was attributed to their three-dimensional porous structure with a large surface area, which greatly facilitated fast ionic transport within the whole electrode while preserving decent electronic conductivity.
Different from the vacuum filtration-based hybridization, the deposition of graphene on specific porous substrates, combined with subsequent in situ synthesis of nanostructured active materials, is a versatile way to produce binder-free hybrid electrode architectures.227–231 As an example, Dong et al.232 demonstrated a facile two-step synthesis route to produce a three-dimensional graphene sheet/Co3O4 nanowire hybrid foam, in which three-dimensional horizontally-lying graphene foams were grown on the nickel foam substrate by CVD, and then in situ decorated with Co3O4 nanowires via a hydrothermal method. In the resulted hybrid foam, Co3O4 nanowires with uniform diameter and high crystallinity formed a dense mesh covering the three-dimensional graphene skeleton. Thanks to the superior mechanical strength and electrically conductive feature of graphene, the hybrid foam was directly used as the supercapacitor electrode, delivering a high specific capacitance of approximately 1100 F g−1 at a current density of 10 A g−1 with excellent cycling stability.
In contrast to classical three-dimensional graphene foams consisting of horizontally-lying random graphene sheets, regulating the graphene orientations and particularly employing vertically-standing graphene frameworks to fabricate hybrid supercapacitor electrodes are receiving increasing attention.233,234 For instance, Liao et al.235 developed a ternary hybrid supercapacitor electrode, in which Co3O4 nanoparticles were in situ grown on vertically-aligned graphene sheets (namely, Co3O4/VAGN/CF) supported by the underneath carbon fabric (Fig. 18c). The introduced vertically-aligned graphene sheets (VAGN) served as an excellent conductive backbone together with the carbon fabric, enhancing the hybrid electrode to a high specific capacitance of 3480 F g−1, approaching the theoretical value (3560 F g−1). In that work, the highly flexible all-solid-state symmetric supercapacitor device was further fabricated by using two pieces of as-fabricated ternary hybrid electrodes, exhibiting a high specific capacitance (580 F g−1), good cyclic stability (86.2% capacitance retention after 20000 cycles), high energy density (80 W h kg−1), and high power density (20 kW kg−1 at 27 W h kg−1). The flexibility and capacitive performance achieved suggested the potential of such a binder-free electrode in flexible supercapacitor applications.
Recently, an attractive self-supporting hierarchical electrode architecture consisting of Ni–Co hydroxide petals (NCHPs) grown on a thin vertically standing graphene petal-based foam (GPF) was also designed and fabricated by Xiong et al. via a two-step process toward practical pseudocapacitive electrode applications (Fig. 18d).236 In the hybrid electrode architecture, the interconnected vertically-standing graphene petals in the GPF not only provided a mechanically robust and electrically conductive network throughout the whole electrode for the pseudocapacitive metal hydroxide, but also significantly increased accessible surface area and accelerated ion diffusion rates, thereby facilitating fast Faradaic charging and discharging of the NCHPs, and further enhancing the cycling stability. The resultant GPF/NCHP hybrid electrodes exhibited volumetric capacitances as high as 765 F cm−3, equivalent to an areal capacitance of 15.3 F cm−2 and high rate capability. Moreover, the asymmetric solid-state supercapacitors fabricated with the GPF/NCHP as the positive electrode exhibited outstanding energy and power densities, with maximum average energy density of about 10 mW h cm−3 and maximum power density of about 3 W cm−3, high rate capability (a capacitance retention of approximately 60% at 100 mA cm−2), and excellent long-term cycling stability (full capacitance retention over 15000 cycles), demonstrating the potential of graphene hybridized electrodes for high-performance SCs.
5 Graphene hybridization for other energy storage devices
Graphene hybridization with various electrode materials has also been extended to the fields of other electrochemical energy storage devices, such as Li–S, Li–O2, and other metal-ion batteries (e.g., Na, Mg, Al, and so on), in which the resulted graphene hybrids have enabled the rapid development of these emerging batteries with large specific capacity, high rate capability and long cycle life.237–249 Although their respective different charge/discharge mechanisms, resembling LIBs and SCs, the design and construction requirements of both the materials and the electrodes for these energy storage devices are generally a robust conductive network to transfer electrons from/to the interfaced active materials, a porous structure to facilitate infiltration, diffusion and transport of reactive ions and/or gases, and a nanostructured active material to not only alleviate the volume change effects but also enhance the electron/ion transport kinetics.
With the intrinsic structural merits, graphene sheets have thus been widely employed as a support and/or a mediator to construct various hybrid electrode materials for these energy storage devices from the material viewpoint.250–258 For example, Wang et al.250 provided a rational graphene mediation strategy and prepared graphene–sulfur hybrid electrode materials for Li–S batteries, in which poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-containing surfactant coated sulfur particles were synthesized and wrapped by carbon black decorated mildly oxidized graphene oxide sheets via a simple assembly process (Fig. 19a). When being used as the cathode material for Li–S batteries, the thus-prepared graphene-coated sulfur particles showed high and stable specific capacities up to ∼600 mA h g−1 over more than 100 cycles. The enhanced performance was believed to result from the unique hybrid structure, where the PEG and graphene coating layers accommodated the volume expansion of the coated sulfur particles during discharge, effectively trapped soluble polysulfide intermediates, and rendered the sulfur particles highly conductive.
 Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis steps and schematic structure of mildly oxidized graphene oxide and PEG-wrapped sulfur particles for Li–S batteries. Reproduced from ref. 250 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (b) Synthetic procedure and cycling performance of the graphene-supported sulfur nanoparticles for Li–S batteries. Reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Li–O2 electrode design, charge/discharge processes, SEM image and cycling performance of the 3D-G–MnO2. Reproduced from ref. 266 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014. (d) Fabrication process, SEM images, and cycling performance of the GVG electrode for Na-ion batteries. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
As an example of using graphene as the electrode material support, Chen et al.255 prepared monodispersed sulfur nanoparticles (with controllable sizes ranging from 150 to 5 nm) uniformly deposited on graphene sheets via the sulfur–amine chemistry (Fig. 19b). It was found that the resultant graphene-supported sulfur nanoparticles exhibited higher specific capacity and better rate performance in Li–S batteries with decreasing the particle size. When the sulfur particle size was down to 5 nm, the specific capacity reached the theoretical specific capacity of 1672 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, and 1089 mA h g−1 even at 4C, and the specific capacity remained at 1017 and 965 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 0.5C and 1C, respectively. The achieved excellent long-term cycling stability was further attributed to the suppression of polysulfide diffusion due to stronger adsorption and large contact interface between small sulfur nanoparticles and conductive graphene sheets.
Graphene hybridization from the viewpoint of the bulk electrode construction has also been demonstrated to be an energetic way for the fabrication of these energy storage electrodes.259–265 For instance, Liu et al.266 subsequently grew graphene and flower-like δ-MnO2 ultrathin nanosheets on a nickel foam substrate, and prepared a binder-free three-dimensional graphene-supported MnO2 air electrode (namely, 3D-G–MnO2) (Fig. 19c). The Li–O2 batteries fabricated with this kind of hybrid electrodes delivered a high discharge capacity of around 3660 mA h g−1 (7500 mA h g−1 with respect to carbon) at a high discharge plateau of around 2.8 V under 0.083 mA cm−2, corresponding to a specific energy density of 9.7 kW h kg−1. When the specific capacity was limited at 492 mA h g−1 (1000 mA h g−1 with respect to carbon), the Li–O2 batteries exhibited a stable cycling of 132 times with low overpotentials at a high current density of 0.333 mA cm−2. The excellent electrochemical performance was attributed to (1) the high oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalyst activity of flower-like δ-MnO2, (2) the unique three-dimensional graphene open framework structure of the 3D-G–MnO2 hybrid electrode that allowed easy oxygen diffusion and electrode wetting, and (3) the three-dimensional electronically conductive graphene network contributing to the enhanced ORR and OER kinetics.
By hybridizing graphene with nanostructured active materials from the viewpoint of both the material structural design and the bulk electrode construction, binder-free hybrid electrodes with dual functionalities of graphene have also been demonstrated for various energy storage devices.267,268 For example, in a recently developed Na-ion battery electrode architecture design by Chao et al.,268 the CVD-grown graphene foam was employed as the substrate to grow VO2 nanobelts via a solvothermal process, which were further coated by a uniform graphene quantum dot layer by an electrophoresis process, thus resulting a graphene foam-supported, graphene quantum dot-coated VO2 array electrode architecture (denoted as GVG) (Fig. 19d). Such a dual graphene-hybridized electrode featured some distinct advantages. First, the use of graphene foam not only acted as a highly conductive framework for electron transport from/to the supported material, but also eliminated the necessity of any conductive additive and binder that could accelerate the deterioration of electrode materials during sodiation. Second, the coating of homogeneous graphene quantum dots effectively separated the VO2 nanobelts from each other and thus avoided the material agglomeration, as well as minimized the dissolution of active materials especially during the long-term cycling. Third, the thin VO2 nanobelt array effectively reduced ion diffusion length and enhanced the electrolyte mobility. With the above merits, upon sodiation the hybrid electrodes exhibited a high capacity of 306 mA h g−1, superior rate capability, and excellent capacity retention (88% after 1500 cycles at 18 A g−1) with a power density of 42 kW kg−1 at an energy density more than 100 W h kg−1, comparable to the present LIBs, showing the potential of GVG as a cost-effective promising electrode candidate for next generation post-lithium batteries.
6 Emerging characterizations
With the intense interest in developing high performance energy storage devices and systems, the exploitation of various electrode materials requires not only ex situ electrochemical experiments and traditional characterization techniques, but also in situ experiments specifically designed to monitor the underlying co-related factors fundamentally dominating the electrochemical performance.23,269 Hereof, in situ high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) experiments have been demonstrated to be an energetic way to deeply understand the interacted dynamic mechanisms among the structures, compositions, and properties of graphene hybrids.270–272 For examples, Li et al.270 synthesized graphene cage-encapsulated silicon for LIBs and revealed the lithiation/delithiation process of such hybrids in situ by using a nanoscale electrochemical cell (Li metal versus graphene cage-encapsulated silicon) inside a piezo-controlled, electrical biasing (transmission electron microscope) TEM-AFM (atomic force microscope) holder. Upon applying a voltage bias, it was observed that the graphene cage clearly preserved its structural integrity throughout the lithiation process, despite occurrence of the abrupt and violent anisotropic expansion and fracture of the interior silicon. Moreover, with the same experimental configuration, it was in situ observed that the graphene cage was able to fully collapse upon an external load and returned to its original structure completely intact after the load was removed. These observations evidenced the mechanical strong and flexible feature of the graphene cage, providing a correlation between the Si volume expansion and dynamic fracture, graphene cage deformation, and the hybrid structural integrity as well as the achieved stable cycling performance. Based on the in situ high-resolution TEM experiments with an external electric field, Han et al.271 demonstrated the lithiation process of graphene-caged SnO2. Upon the lithiation process, it was demonstrated that SnO2 nanoparticles gradually expand to fill the gaps between the particles within the pores of graphene network, and the graphene cage had almost no volume change following lithiation, confirming the existence of enough internal void space in the hybrid to buffer the complete expansion of interior SnO2 and explaining the good cycling stability of such hybrids. Moreover, the phase transformation from the individual SnO2 particle into the amorphous Li–Sn alloy upon lithiation was clearly in situ visualized as well, delivering further understanding of the hybrid electrochemical lithium storage at the nanoscale. Zhang et al.272 fabricated flexible hybrid ‘butter-bread’-like paper electrode made of nitrogen-doped graphene sheets and amorphous phosphorus. Further, they visualized the excellent structural integrity of such hybrids as the Na-ion battery anode during cycling by using in situ HRTEM experiments on a prototype hybrid sheet-based nanobattery device, in which a hybrid sheet-decorated Au wire and another Au wire containing a small piece of Na covered with a thin layer of Na2O were used. Upon applying a potential to initiate the sodiation process, the hybrid nanosheet was observed to immediately expand along both longitudinal and transverse directions without structural degradation, revealing that an effective sodium transport along and across the hybrid sheets really took place. After being desodiated, the hybrid sheet, especially, the edge segment, was observed to perfectly resemble the pristine state, validating that such hybrid structure could effectively buffer the volume expansion/shrinkage during charging/discharging, and thus explaining its very stable cycling performance during the ex situ battery tests. Although these in situ characterizations have shown being useful for unravelling the intrinsic processes and atomic-scale mechanisms occurring in graphene hybrids, it should be noteworthy that other in situ and/or real-time characterization techniques (e.g., in situ AFM, in situ wafer-curvature, in situ transmission X-ray microscopy (TXM), in situ nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)23 and more recently cryo-electron microscopy)273 must be exploited, toward deeply understanding the atomic-scale correlations and interaction mechanisms of the nanoscale structure and the macroscale performance of graphene hybrids and better guiding the development of high performance graphene hybrids for energy storage.
7 Conclusions
In summary, we have outlined the graphene hybridization principles and strategies targeted at energy storage applications including lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors and beyond, from the viewpoint of material structure design, bulk electrode construction, and material/electrode collaborative engineering. Following such classifications of graphene hybridization, the latest representative examples in lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors have been presented, highlighting the synergistic effects in the resultant graphene hybrids that combine the respective merits of the involved components and confer new functions and properties. Specifically, the large specific surface area and high porosity of graphene and also graphene ensembles improve the accessibility of active materials to promote the charge storage capability and energy density, the excellent electrical conductivity of graphene and graphene ensembles facilitates the charge transport from/to the interfaced active materials to enhance the rate capability and power density, and the unique two-dimensional flexible feature of graphene confers the ability to manage the active material interfaces to boost the cycling stability even under the mechanically deformed conditions. Meanwhile, the active materials conversely help alleviate the aggregation and/or restacking of graphene, thus ensuring the exertion of graphene properties and functions. We note that the categorized graphene hybridization principles and formulas are readily applicable to the design and development of other energy storage systems such as lithium–sulfur batteries, lithium–air batteries, sodium-ion batteries, and so forth. The existing graphene hybridization strategies and methodologies have been extensively demonstrated capable of substantially improving the charge/discharge efficiencies and capabilities, energy/power densities, and/or cycle life of these energy storage systems in their respective scales, specifically, with respect to the material, or the electrode, or even the device. It must be noted that, the hybridized graphene-based energy storage techniques are still in early stage, and there are challenging aspects that imperatively need to be further focused and addressed before practical deployment.
(i) Unravelling the structure–property relationships of graphene hybrids in great details will be critical as it will provide the fundamental design guideline for constructing advanced hybrid electrode materials and electrode systems. Hereof, challenges remain in the development of synthetic methodologies and/or assembly strategies to prepare graphene hybrids with atomic precision, and characterization techniques to disclose the dynamic evolution mechanisms of graphene hybrids in well-defined cell prototypes under various charge/discharge conditions. For each graphene hybridization category, the understanding and manipulation of surface functionalities on both graphene sheets and active materials are critically important for controllable construction and performance enhancement of graphene hybrids. Better design, characterization, and modulation of the contact interface between graphene and active materials are equally important to be specially emphasized in the future research.
Meanwhile, theoretical modelling and calculation on the interfacial interactions, dynamic evolution of the structure, interface, volume, charge transport and electrochemical potential upon charging/discharging, and interacted mechanisms on the structural integrity and mechanical stability, as well as electrochemical properties are indispensable for better understanding the structure–property relationships and consequently rationally optimizing the design, construction, and charge storage process of such graphene hybrids. Theoretical analysis and prediction-guided structural control and interfacial modulation at the atomic level will advance the development of advanced hybridized graphene building blocks and/or bulk ensembles with desirable properties for diverse energy storage applications.
(ii) Graphene hybrids need further exploitations especially by expanding graphene hybridization formulas from the viewpoint of collaborative engineering of material, electrode, and even device. Targeting energy storage devices such as representative lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, graphene hybrids have been intensively developed through structure design at the material scale and/or bulk construction at the electrode scale. Specifically, graphene hybrids have been prepared by using graphene as a structural support and/or an interfacial mediator, as well as employing graphene as an electrode framework and/or an electrode modifier as categorized in this review, exhibiting substantial enhancement in some electrochemical properties of the materials or the electrodes. For practical applications of graphene hybrids in energy storage devices, considerable theoretical and experimental efforts must focus on enhancing combined performances of graphene hybrids, especially in terms of gravimetric/volumetric/areal charge storage capability, rate capability, cycle life, and Coulombic efficiency at the same time. Hereof, the collaborative engineering of graphene hybrids from the viewpoint of material, electrode, and even device to bring into better play multiple functions of graphene would be a solution; developing more controllable and efficient methods for collaboratively engineering the material structure and electrode architecture of graphene hybrids should be a prerequisite toward addressing this imperative challenge.
(iii) Another challenge that is important to note is the large-scale production of graphene hybrids, which requires tremendous efforts. As graphene hybrids for energy storage applications have been frequently registered on a laboratory scale, new scalable material design strategies and electrode engineering solutions should come into use to enable high-fidelity graphene hybridization on an industrial scale. Particularly, controlling the structure (including functionalities, defects, and doping) and agglomeration of graphene, and the structural homogeneity and topological distribution uniformity of active materials, as well as the effectiveness and robustness of the contact interface between two components on the electrode scale, is of critical importance for ensuring the property exploitation and performance consistency of graphene hybrids targeted for energy storage applications. Furthermore, elaborately tuning the properties of graphene hybrids produced at large scale to meet specific energy storage application requirements would open new opportunities for bridging the gap between understanding and utilizing graphene hybrids. In addition, in the industry-level production of graphene hybrids for practical energy storage applications, greater attempts must be made to render both the involved starting materials and hybridization techniques to be economically viable and environmentally benign toward a more sustainable development that is indeed a global concern.
(iv) The emerging field of flexible and wearable electronics has necessitated the development of flexible and stretchable energy storage systems that inevitably require materials and electrodes to be bendable, rollable, foldable, and/or stretchable. Although some self-supporting binder-free graphene hybrid ensembles constructed at the electrode scale have been demonstrated capable of sustaining mechanical loading conditions as reviewed here, new graphene hybrid material concepts and electrode configuration designs must be developed toward realizing different fully flexible energy storage systems. At the meantime, it is critical to increase the mechanical strength of hybridized graphene at both the material scale and the electrode scale while maintaining their designated electrochemical functions under different deformed conditions. Toward the development of multifunctional flexible devices to meet the ever-increasing demand of our society, graphene hybrid materials and electrodes, as well as the related material hybridization methods and electrode/device assembling processes, require the compatibility and feasibility of integration with other functional components such as solar cells and sensors.
The coupling of the solutions to address all the above challenges will lead to the large-scale deployment of these hybridized graphene-based energy storage techniques and systems in the urgent fields such as electric vehicles and renewable energy utilization that are indeed heading the list of global challenges. The continuous exploitation of graphene hybrid materials and electrodes of novel features and functions to create revolutionized ‘super, soft, and smart’ energy storage devices and systems could considerably change the mode of industrial production and human lifestyle.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51302045, 51425302) and Youth Innovation Promotion Association (CAS).
Notes and references
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-S. Choi, Z. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, X. Ji, Y.-K. Sun, K. Amine, G. Yushin, L. F. Nazar, J. Cho and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Thackeray, C. Wolverton and E. D. Isaacs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7854 CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Amine, R. Kanno and Y. Tzeng, MRS Bull., 2014, 39, 395 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. V. Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366 CrossRef PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2251 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 28 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mukherjee, R. Krishnan, T.-M. Lu and N. Koratkar, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xin, Y. Guo and L. Wan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. M. Reddy, S. R. Gowda, M. M. Shaijumon and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Mcdowell, S. W. Lee, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mai, X. Tian, X. Xu, L. Chang and L. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Obrovac and V. L. Chevrier, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Ellis, P. Knauth and T. Djenizian, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ.
Sci., 2014, 7, 1307 CAS .
X. Su, Q. Wu, J. Li, X. Xiao, A. Lott, W. Lu, B. W. Sheldon and J. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300882 CrossRef .
Q. Wei, F. Xiong, S. Tan, L. Huang, E. H. Lan, B. Dunn and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602300 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Falko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5983 RSC .
M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668 CAS .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113 CAS .
B. Luo, S. Liu and L. Zhi, Small, 2012, 8, 630 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3112 RSC .
L. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388 CAS .
S. Han, D. Wu, S. Li, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Small, 2013, 9, 1173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, X. Xie, L. Pan, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850 CAS .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei and Z. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300816 CrossRef .
N. Mahmood, C. Zhang, H. Yin and Y. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15 CAS .
J. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Yin, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Xie, C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2559 CAS .
X. H. Xia, D. L. Chao, Y. Q. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 785 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, D. Wu, S. Li, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11528 RSC .
Y. Ma, H. Chang, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luo and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 456 CAS .
X. Wang and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 790 CAS .
J. Ji, Y. Li, W. Peng, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, W. Lv, Y. Tao and Q.-H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1390 CAS .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, R. Xu, M. Lu, R. Ge, J. Iocozzia, C. Han, B. Jiang and Z. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500400 CrossRef .
X. Fan, X. Chen and L. Dai, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 20, 429 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, S. Song, F. Liu and D. Xue, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6230 RSC .
L. Peng, Y. Zhu, H. Li and G. Yu, Small, 2016, 12, 6183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wen, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, P. Meduri, V. Agubra, X. Xiao and M. Alcoutlabi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502159 CrossRef .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Rümmeli, C. G. Rocha, F. Ortmann, I. Ibrahim, H. Sevincli, F. Börrnert, J. Kunstmann, A. Bachmatiuk, M. Pötschke, M. Shiraishi, M. Meyyappan, B. Büchner, S. Roche and G. Cuniberti, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4471 CrossRef .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3311 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666 RSC .
A. Hirsch, J. M. Englert and F. Hauke, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chua and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3222 RSC .
D. Wei, B. Wu, Y. Guo, G. Yu and Y. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, A. D. Todd and C. W. Bielawski, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5288 RSC .
A. Ciesielski and P. Samori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 381 RSC .
Z. Liu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 16 CrossRef .
S. Gambhir, R. Jalili, D. L. Officer and G. G. Wallace, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e186 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, H. Ji, H.-M. Cheng and R. S. Ruoff, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 90 CrossRef .
A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, N. M. Latiff, A. H. Loo, C. H. A. Wong, A. Y. S. Eng, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2458 RSC .
X. Huang, C. Tan, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Eder, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Qin, S. T. Picraux and Z.-X. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7527 RSC .
M. Ding, Y. Tang and A. Star, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Shearer, A. Cherevan and D. Eder, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, L. Lai, Z. Shen and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15423 CAS .
P. Solís-Fernández, M. Bissett and H. Ago, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4572 RSC .
X. Liu, J.-Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601759 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Srivastava, J. Singh, T. Kuila, R. K. Layek, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4820 RSC .
J. Xu, J. Ma, Q. Fan, S. Guo and S. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606454 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. H. Choi, X. Fan, J. Shin, Z. Ma, M. R. Zachariah, J. W. Choi and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601578 CrossRef .
S. Wu, R. Ge, M. Lu, R. Xu and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 379 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cong, H. Xie and J. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601906 CrossRef .
J. Kang, S. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700515 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, L. Li, J. Yan and X. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600382 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816 RSC .
H. Gwon, J. Hong, H. Kim, D.-H. Seo, S. Jeon and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 538 CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Zhou and Y. Lei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502514 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, X. Fan, G. Casillas, Z. Peng, G. Ruan, G. Wang, M. J. Yacaman and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, S. Jin, Q. Liao, H. Cui and C. X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 5, 105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li and L. Zhi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8864 RSC .
K. Evanoff, A. Magasinski, J. Yang and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 495 CrossRef CAS .
D.-J. Xue, S. Xin, Y. Yan, K.-C. Jiang, Y.-X. Yin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, B. Luo, X. Li and L. Zhi, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 544 CrossRef CAS .
L.-S. Zhang, L.-Y. Jiang, H.-J. Yan, W. D. Wang, W. Wang, W.-G. Song, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5462 RSC .
Y. Chen, B. Song, R. M. Chen, L. Lu and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5688 CAS .
Y. Su, S. Li, D. Wu, F. Zhang, H. Liang, P. Gao, C. Cheng and X. Feng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8349 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ding, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7155 RSC .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5780 RSC .
S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, F. Wang, S. Feng, J. Wang, Z. Sun, B. Li, Y. Li, J. Yang, A. A. Elzatahry, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, B. Chen, Y. Qin, S. Yang, C. Li, Y. Zuo, S. Liu and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20794 CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 427 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z.-S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, S. Li, D. Wu, F. Zhang, H. Liang, P. Gao, C. Cheng and X. Feng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, M. Wang, T. Chen, X. W. Lou and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 736 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, A. R. O. Raji and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lv, M. L. Gordin, R. Yi, T. Xu, J. Song, Y.-B. Jiang, D. Choi and D. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1059 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Lu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17916 RSC .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, L.-C. Yin, N. Li, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, J. W. Kim, H. Kim, D. H. Kim, C. Choi, Y. S. Jung and J. Park, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8498 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, L. Ma, G. Niu, X. Li, E. Li, Y. Bai and G. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701635 CrossRef .
P. Xiong, B. Liu, V. Teran, Y. Zhao, L. Peng, X. Wang and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luo, Y. Fang, B. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Song and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5226 CAS .
J. Choi, J. Jin, J. Lee, J. H. Park, H. J. Kim, D.-H. Oh, J. R. Ahn and S. U. Son, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11107 RSC .
N. Mahmood, C. Zhang and Y. Hou, Small, 2013, 9, 1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, H. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, L. Wang, L. Gu, H. Xu, P. Han, S. Dong, C. Zhang, J. Yao, G. Cui and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11916 RSC .
J. Choi, J. Jin, I. G. Jung, J. M. Kim, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5241 RSC .
L. Shen, C. Yuan, H. Luo, X. Zhang, S. Yang and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 572 RSC .
X. Rui, J. Zhu, D. Sim, C. Xu, Y. Zeng, H. H. Hng, T. M. Lim and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4752 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Wan, W. Liu, Z. Ma, S. Ji, J. Wang, Y. Zhou, P. Hodgson and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1969 CAS .
X. Guo, Q. Fan, L. Yu, J. Liang, W. Ji, L. Peng, X. Guo, W. Ding and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11534 CAS .
W. Kim, W. Ryu, D. Han, S. Lim, J. Eom and H. Kwon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4731 CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, L.-F. Cui, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Li, G. Hong, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Wu, J. Li and L. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3856 CAS .
S.-M. Paek, E. Yoo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luo, B. Wang, M. Liang, J. Ning, X. Li and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu and W. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4000 CAS .
C. Xu, J. Sun and L. Gao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5425 RSC .
W. Li, F. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, J. Yang, L. Zhang, A. A. Elzatahry, D. Al-Dahyan, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, L. Hao, M. Zhou, X. Zhang, Z. Fan and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, G. Li, Q. Zhu and Q. Pan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3420 RSC .
Y. Wen, Y. Zhu, A. Langrock, A. Manivannan, S. H. Ehrman and C. Wang, Small, 2013, 9, 2810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, J. E. Yourey and B. M. Bartlett, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, K. Zhao, R. Yu, M. Yan, W. Xu, Y. Dong, W. Ren, X. Xu, C. Tang and L. Mai, Small, 2017, 13, 1603973 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y.-X. Yin, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1086 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, X. Hu, W. Luo and Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Feng, S. Ivanovici and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim, W. Ryu, D. Han, S. Lim, J. Eom and H. Kwon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4731 CAS .
J. Luo, X. Zhao, J. Wu, H. D. Jang, H. H. Kung and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Wu, J. Cheng, N. Zhang, Y. Feng and K. Sun, Small, 2016, 12, 5208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, J.-Z. Wang, S.-L. Chou, D. Wexler, H.-J. Li, K. Ozawa, H.-K. Liu and Y.-P. Wu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, H. Wang, Y. Tang, Y. Zhou and T. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3546 CAS .
Z. Chen, M. Zhou, Y. Cao, X. Ai, H. Yang and J. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 95 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Son, J. H. Park, S. Kwon, S. Park, M. H. Rümmeli, A. Bachmatiuk, H. J. Song, J. Ku, J. W. Choi, J.-M. Choi, S.-G. Doo and H. Chang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, Y. Son, C. Park, J. Cho and H. C. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang, B. Luo, Y. Zhang and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luo, B. Wang, X. Li, Y. Jia, M. Liang and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Hassan, R. Batmaz, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Xiao, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Z. Wang, C. Zhong, S.-L. Chou and H.-K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1467 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9909 RSC .
J. Liang, Y. Zhao, L. Guo and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5742 CAS .
X. Wang, X. Cao, L. Bourgeois, H. Guan, S. Chen, Y. Zhong, D.-M. Tang, H. Li, T. Zhai, L. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2682 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, C. Xu, J. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Gao and C. Lin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6960 RSC .
R. Wang, C. Xu, J. Sun, L. Gao and C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1794 CAS .
J. Chang, X. Huang, G. Zhou, S. Cui, P. B. Hallac, J. Jiang, P. T. Hurley and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, X. Qin, H. Zhang, Y.-B. He, B. Li, L. Ke, W. Lv, H. Du, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 84, 434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, S. Zhang, B. Zhu, Y. Tan, X. Hu, L. Zong and J. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. David, R. Bhandavat, U. Barrera and G. Singh, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Wang, K. Fu, V. A. Danner, J. Dai, S. D. Lacey, Y. Yao and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Zou, L. Tao, Z. Ma, D. Liu, P. Zhou, H. Liu and S. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700758 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gu, B. Li, Z. Du, C. Zhang, D. Zhang and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700840 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, B. Wang, J. Zhu, J. Zhou, Z. Xu, L. Fan, J. Zhu, R. Podila, A. M. Rao and B. Lu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Lee, K. B. Smith, C. M. Hayner and H. H. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2025 RSC .
D. Wang, R. Kou, D. Choi, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, J. Li, L. V. Saraf, D. Hu, J. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, Y. Jia and L. Zhi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1470 RSC .
J. Luo, J. Liu, Z. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Lin, Z. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, S. Yang, Z. Liu, L. Ma, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, S. Yang, S. Li, B. Wang and J. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500289 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, B. Chen, D. H. Seo, Z. J. Han, J. I. Wong, K. Ostrikov, H. Zhang and H. Y. Yang, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e268 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, R. Younesi, R. Pan, C. Liu, J. Zhu, B. Wei and K. Edström, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6797 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Q. Zheng, M. D. Goodman, H. Zhu, J. Kim, N. A. Krueger, H. Ning, X. Huang, J. Liu, M. Terrones and P. V. Braun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Lee, J. W. Lee, J. I. Choi, S. J. Kim, Y.-H. Kim and J. K. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5139 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1079 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, Z. Liu, L. Zhan, D. P. Hashim, L. Ma, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kong, H. He, Q. Song, B. Wang, W. Lv, Q.-H. Yang and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3320 CAS .
M. Zhou, X. Li, B. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Ning, Z. Xiao, X. Zhang, Y. Chang and L. Zhi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, T. Qiu, B. Luo, J. Ning, J. Li, X. Zhang, M. Liang and L. Zhi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suresh, Z. P. Wu, S. F. Bartolucci, S. Basu, R. Mukherjee, T. Gupta, P. Hundekar, Y. Shi, T.-M. Lu and N. Koratkar, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang, B. Luo, M. Jin, M. Liang, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux and L. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mo, D. Rooney, K. Sun and H. Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, L. Mei, J. Liang, Z. Zhao, C. Lee, H. Fei, M. Ding, J. Lau, M. Li, C. Wang, X. Xu, G. Hao, B. Papandrea, I. Shakir, B. Dunn, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 356, 599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Wu, Q. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, D.-W. Wang, W. Ren, J. Zhao, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3595 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. Zhi, G. Ning, T. Li and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2366 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, L. Zhang, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhu and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, H. Xu, J. Sun and L. Gao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11146 RSC .
H. Xia, C. Hong, B. Li, B. Zhao, Z. Lin, M. Zheng, S. V. Savilov and S. M. Aldoshin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 627 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, W. K. Pang, H. Bai, T. Zhou, Y. Liu, S. Li and Z. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, J. Lang, P. Zhang, Z. Lin and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2270 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lim, C. Jo, M. S. Kim, M.-H. Kim, J. Chun, H. Kim, J. Park, K. C. Roh, K. Kang, S. Yoon and J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3711 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, C. Yu, X. Fan, S. Liang, S. Li, H. Huang, Z. Ling, C. Hao and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1299 CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Lai, N. Wang, Z. Jiang, X. Wang, P. Zou, Z. Lin, H. J. Fan, F. Kang, C.-P. Wong and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 941 CAS .
X. Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701592 CrossRef .
S. R. Marri, S. Ratha, C. S. Rout and J. N. Behera, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 228 RSC .
P. Kulkarni, S. K. Nataraj, R. G. Balakrishna, D. H. Nagaraju and M. V. Reddy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22040 CAS .
M. Guo, J. Balamurugan, T. D. Thanh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17560 CAS .
S. Ratha and C. S. Rout, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11427 CAS .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, W. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Rui, B. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kong, C. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Qiao, L. Ling and D. Long, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, C. Guan, G. Feng, Q. Ke, X. Huang and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7291 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, B.-H. Wee and J.-D. Hong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401890 CrossRef .
S. Byun, J. H. Kim, S. H. Song, M. Lee, J.-J. Park, G. Lee, S. H. Hong and D. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7750 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, C. E. Ren, K. Maleski, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701264 CrossRef .
Y. Meng, K. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, L. L. Zhang, H. Ji, Y. Li, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, L. Hu, M. Vosgueritchian, H. Wang, X. Xie, J. R. McDonough, X. Cui, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, R. Holze and P. Gomez-Romero, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Xu, M.-F. Yuen, J. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Chen and W. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6372 CrossRef CAS .
X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, C. Yu, S. Li, J. Yang, Z. Liu, C. Zhao, H. Huang, M. Zhang, X. Han, Y. Niu and J. Qiu, Small, 2017, 13, 1701288 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Xie, X. Xia, Y. Zhong, Y. Wang, D. Wang, X. Wang and J. Tu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601804 CrossRef .
Q. Liao, N. Li, S. Jin, G. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xiong, P. He, D. Wang, Q. Zhang, T. Chen and T. S. Fisher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5460 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Yin, S. Xin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, S.-H. Chung and C. Zu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3018 RSC .
H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang, X.-B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700260 CrossRef .
H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338 CAS .
C. Fang, Y. Huang, W. Zhang, J. Han, Z. Deng, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501727 CrossRef .
D. Kundu, E. Talaie, V. Duffort and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, Y. Zhu, D. Chen, R. S. Ruoff and G. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600025 CrossRef .
S. Chen, C. Wu, L. Shen, C. Zhu, Y. Huang, K. Xi, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700431 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ma, X. Yuan, L. Li, Z.-F. Ma, D. P. Wilkinson, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2144 CAS .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu and X.-B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746 RSC .
M.-C. Lin, M. Gong, B. Lu, Y. Wu, D.-Y. Wang, M. Guan, M. Angell, C. Chen, J. Yang, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nature, 2015, 520, 324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, T. Lee, H.-K. Song, J. Cho and B.-S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4148 CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Q. Huang, X.-F. Liu, Q. Zhang, C.-M. Chen, M.-Q. Zhao, S.-M. Zhang, W. Zhu, W.-Z. Qian and F. Wei, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 314 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J.-Q. Huang, G.-L. Tian, J.-Q. Nie, H.-J. Peng and F. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3410 Search PubMed .
B. Sun, X. Huang, S. Chen, P. Munroe and G. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, P. Kopold, Y.-L. Ding, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, C. Wang, W. Dong, W. Lu, Z. Du and L. Chen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Jeong, J.-B. Park, H.-G. Jung, J. Kim, X. Luo, J. Lu, L. Curtiss, K. Amine, Y.-K. Sun, B. Scrosati and Y. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Brombosz, J. Wen, D. Zhai, Z. Chen, D. J. Miller, Y. S. Jeong, J.-B. Park, Z. Z. Fang, B. Kumar, A. Salehi-khojin, Y.-K. Sun, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nature, 2016, 529, 377 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, D. Luo, X. Wang, M. H. Seo, S. Hemmati, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702562 CrossRef .
X. Guo, P. Liu, J. Han, Y. Ito, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, S. Li, J. Liu, B. Wang and S. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, A. Kushima, J. Chen, Y. Huang and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, Y. Liu, Z. Liang, H.-W. Lee, J. Sun, H. Wang, K. Yan, J. Xie and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, Y. Chen, W. Lv, K. Wen, Z. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Qin and W. He, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pei, L. Lin, D. Ou, Z. Zheng, S. Mo, X. Fang and N. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 482 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lu, N. Zhang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhang, M. Zhou, Z. Tao, L. A. Archer and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Y. Zhu, J. Xie, Y. Huo, H. Y. Yang, T. Zhu, G. Cao, X. Zhao and S. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301960 CrossRef .
G. Hu, C. Xu, Z. Sun, S. Wang, H.-M. Cheng, F. Li and W. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Liang, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Luo, C. Wang, X. Wu, J. Zhang and J. Chu, Small, 2017, 13, 1604259 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Yan, H.-W. Lee, Z. Lu, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15029 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, D. Kong, W. Lv, D.-M. Tang, D. Han, C. Zhang, D. Liu, Z. Xiao, X. Zhang, J. Xiao, X. He, F.-C. Hsia, C. Zhang, Y. Tao, D. Golberg, F. Kang, L. Zhi and Q.-H. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 402 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Liang, X. Liu, Q. Weng, J. Liu, Y. Yang, Z. Dai, K. Ding, Y. Bando, J. Tang and D. Golberg, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Li, A. Pei, K. Yan, Y. Sun, C.-L. Wu, L.-M. Joubert, R. Chin, A. L. Koh, Y. Yu, J. Perrino, B. Butz, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Science, 2017, 358, 506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Xianglong Li
	Xianglong Li received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2007 and worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of Hawaii at Manoa (2007–2008) and as a postdoctoral research associate at Los Alamos National Laboratory (2008–2011). In late 2011, he joined the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China (NCNST) as an associate professor and got promoted to be a professor in 2014. His research interests mainly focus on nanoscale carbon–inorganic hybrid materials and their applications in energy storage and sensing.

Linjie Zhi
	Linjie Zhi received his PhD in 2000 at the Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Since 2003 he worked with Prof. Klaus Müllen at the Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research for two years before assuming the position of project leader until the end of 2007. Since early 2008, he has been a professor in the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of China. He was recognized as a Thomson Reuters ‘Highly Cited Researcher’ in 2015 and 2016. His research interests focus on carbon-rich nanomaterials and their application in energy-related areas; particularly, he is interested in the preparation and functionalization of well-defined graphene based nanomaterials and their application in energy storage, energy conversion, and catalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of graphene hybridization formulas for energy storage applications.	 

(1) Graphene as material support	Material scale	Charge transport effectiveness and efficiency between graphene and a second phase	Size, dimension, morphology, porosity, component, interface of a second phase	Chemical assembly, wet chemical synthesis, electro chemical deposition	Improved material utilization, enhanced rate capability
(2) Graphene as material mediator	Material scale	Interfacial robustness of a second phase with graphene and other functional phases (e.g., electrolyte)	Hybrid structure, interphase contact mode and interface	Chemical vapor deposition, chemical assembly, spray pyrolysis, ball-milling	Prolonged cycle life
(3) Graphene as electrode framework	Electrode scale	Charge transport effectiveness and efficiency between second phases	Structure, morphology, arrangement, orientation of graphene; framework structure of graphene	Physical filtration, freeze drying, chemical vapor deposition, chemical assembly	Binder-free, enhanced rate capability
(4) Graphene as electrode modifier	Electrode scale	Interfacial robustness of second phases with other functional phases (e.g., electrolyte)	Framework structure of second phases	Chemical vapor deposition, chemical transfer	Binder-free, prolonged cycle life
(5) Graphene as combined media	Material/electrode scale	Charge transport effectiveness and efficiency, interfacial robustness for second phases	Structure and interface of both graphene and a second phase; interphase contact mode and interface	Chemical vapor deposition, chemical synthesis, electrochemical deposition, chemical assembly, physical filtration	Binder-free, improved material utilization, enhanced rate capability, and prolonged cycle life

 	Fig. 2  Examples of graphene-supported electrode materials: (a) ex situ hybridization approach and TEM image of SnO2/GNS. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (b) Anionic surfactant mediated in situ synthesis and TEM image of rod/particle-like TiO2 on graphene. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (c) CVD growth and SEM image of tin-core/carbon-sheath coaxial nanocables on graphene. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2012. (d) Chemical transformation process and SEM image for G–SnS2. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) In situ synthetic process of the G@mTiO2 hybrids. (b and c) TEM images and (d) plots of specific capacity and Coulombic efficiency of the G@mTiO2 hybrids as a function of cycle number. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Electrostatic self-assembly, (b–d) TEM images, (e) peak currents for different sweep rates derived from CV curves, (f) cycling performances at 2 A g−1, and (g) rate capabilities of the SiQD–GNS. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM image, (b) TEM image, (c) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey scan, and (d) cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the SnO2 NC@N–RGO. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image, (b) TEM image, and (c) cycling performance of the NiO NS/graphene hybrids. (d) Local minimum adsorption states of a Ni atom binding with graphene and the minimum energy path for a Ni adatom diffusing on the graphene and oxygenated graphene surface. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Electrostatic assembly, SEM image and cycling performance of graphene-encapsulated metal oxides (e.g., Co3O4 nanoparticles). Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2010. (b) Modified assembly, SEM image, and normalized rate capabilities of graphene embedded LiFePO4. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (c) Aerosol-assisted capillary assembly, SEM image and cycling performance of crumpled graphene-wrapped Si nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (d) In situ hydrothermal synthesis, SEM image, cycling performance and rate capability of the graphene-wrapped Li3VO4 microboxes. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (e) Layer-by-layer assembly and reduction process, TEM image, and rate capabilities for graphene wrapped porous silicon nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (f) Ball-milling method, TEM image, and cycling performance for the SnO2–SiC/G hybrid. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2012. (g) CVD process, TEM image, and cycling performance for graphene-wrapped Ge nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image, (b) TEM image, (c) scheme showing electron and ion transport channels, and (d) specific capacity and Columbic efficiency of the SiNW-d-GT. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Synthetic approach, (b and c) TEM images, and (d) cycling performance of the G/Sn/G. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Synthetic approach, (b and c) TEM images, (d) XPS survey spectrum, and (f) cycling performance of sulfur-doped graphene sheet-sandwiched c-PAN-coated silicon nanoparticles. (e) Geometries and binding energy (BE) of the stable Si adsorption configurations on graphene, referred as G–Si, and on sulfur-doped graphene (SG–Si). Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of a flexible battery containing a cathode and an anode made from GF. (b) Photograph, (c) SEM image, and (d) TEM image of the LTO/GF. (e) Photograph and (f) cyclic performance of a LFP/GF and LTO/GF-based full battery lighting a red light-emitting diode (LED) device under bending. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from United States National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic, (b and c) SEM images, (d) cycling performance, and (e) rate capabilities of the deG-embedded Si nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic, (b) photograph, (c) TEM image, (d) rate capabilities, and (e) cycling performance of MoS2 nanosheets dwelt in the hollow tubes composed of graphene sheets. Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Fabrication and electrode design, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image, (d) cycling performance, (e) volumetric capacity comparing with representative reported Si anodes, (f) rate capabilities, and (g) areal capacities with different mass loadings of the TCG-Si. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Fabrication progress, (b) photograph, (c) SEM image, (d and e) TEM images, (f) cycling performance, (g) volumetric capacity, and (h) rate capabilities of the t-Si@G. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Fabrication process and electrode design, (b) TEM image, (c) SEM image, and (d) cycling performance of the SiNW@G@RGO. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Fabrication process and electrode design, (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image, and (d) rate capabilities at different mass loadings of the Nb2O5/HGF. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Fabrication process, cross-sectional SEM image, and cyclic performance of the Mxene/RGO. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (b) Fabrication procedure, Nyquist plots showing fast ionic and electronic transport, and rate capabilities of the MnO2/e-CMG. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (c) Fabrication process, SEM image and cyclic performance of the Co3O4/VAGN/CF. Reproduced from ref. 235 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (d) Fabrication process and TEM image of the GPF/NCHP. Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis steps and schematic structure of mildly oxidized graphene oxide and PEG-wrapped sulfur particles for Li–S batteries. Reproduced from ref. 250 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (b) Synthetic procedure and cycling performance of the graphene-supported sulfur nanoparticles for Li–S batteries. Reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Li–O2 electrode design, charge/discharge processes, SEM image and cycling performance of the 3D-G–MnO2. Reproduced from ref. 266 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014. (d) Fabrication process, SEM images, and cycling performance of the GVG electrode for Na-ion batteries. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
