Metallic anodes for next generation secondary batteries  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60177C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60177C
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9011-9034Metallic anodes for next generation secondary batteries

        
          
            Hansu 
            Kim
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Goojin 
            Jeong
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Young-Ugk 
            Kim
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jae-Hun 
            Kim
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Cheol-Min 
            Park
          
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Hun-Joon 
            Sohn
          
          
        
      *f
aDepartment of Energy Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 133-791, Korea
bAdvanced Batteries Research Center, Korea Electronics Technology Institute, Seongnam, Gyeonggi 463-816, Korea
cBattery Development Team, Samsung SDI Co., LTD., Cheonan, Chungnam 330-300, Korea
dSchool of Advanced Materials Engineering, Kookmin University, Seoul 136-702, Republic of Korea
eSchool of Advanced Materials and System Engineering, Kumoh National Institute of Technology, Gumi, Gyeongbuk 730-701, Republic of Korea
fDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-744, Korea. E-mail: hjsohn@snu.ac.kr;   Tel: +82-2-880-7226
Received 
      31st May 2013
    First published on 16th August 2013AbstractLi–air(O2) and Li–S batteries have gained much attention recently and most relevant research has aimed to improve the electrochemical performance of air(O2) or sulfur cathode materials. However, many technical problems associated with the Li metal anode have yet to be overcome. This review mainly focuses on the electrochemical behaviors and technical issues related to metallic Li anode materials as well as other metallic anode materials such as alkali (Na) and alkaline earth (Mg) metals, including Zn and Al when these metal anodes were employed for various types of secondary batteries.
Hansu Kim
Hansu Kim received his PhD in mineral and petroleum engineering from Seoul National University, Korea, in 2000. He joined the Energy Lab. of Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology as a member of research staff in 2001 and moved to Hanyang University in 2011. Currently he is an associate professor in the Department of Energy Engineering at Hanyang University. His research is mainly focused on nanostructured alloy-type anode materials for next generation lithium secondary batteries and alkali metal(Li/Na) based rechargeable batteries.
Goojin Jeong
Goojin Jeong is a research professional at Advanced Batteries Research Centre, Korea Electronics Technology Institute (KETI). Previously, he was a research professor at the Kumho National Institute of Technology (2010–2011) and a senior researcher at Samsung SDI (2003–2010) for developing advanced Li secondary batteries. He received his PhD from Seoul National University in 2001, and did his postdoctoral work at the Arizona State University (2002–2003). His research interests involve electrochemical behaviour of materials related to energy conversion and storage systems. Recently he is focusing on alternative anode materials for LiB and post-LiB systems for next generation.
Young-Ugk Kim
Young-Ugk Kim received his PhD degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Seoul National University in 2005 under the supervision of Professor Hun-Joon Sohn. He worked as a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Utah studying nanoparticle synthesis using high temperature processes. His research interests are in the secondary battery electrode material development and, since 2006, he has been working as a Senior Researcher of Samsung SDI, the world's leading lithium secondary battery company.
Jae-Hun Kim
Jae-Hun Kim is currently an Assistant Professor at Kookmin University. He received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University (Korea). He did his postdoctoral work at the University of Idaho (2007–2008) and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory of the United States (2008–2010). He also worked as a senior researcher at Korea Electronics Technology Institute (2010–2013). His current research interests are focused on synthesis and electrochemical analysis of key materials for electrochemical energy storage devices such as lithium batteries, flow batteries, and supercapacitors.
Cheol-Min Park
Cheol-Min Park is an assistant professor at the School of Advanced Materials and System Engineering, Kumoh National Institute of Technology (KIT). He received his MS (2005) and PhD (2009) from the Department of Materials Science & Engineering of Seoul National University. He also worked as a researcher at LG Chem. Ltd. Battery Research Institute (2005–2006) and Environmental Energy Technologies Division of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (2009–2010). His research interests are focused on synthesis and investigation of new alternative electrode materials for rechargeable Li-, Na-, and Mg-based battery systems.
Hun-Joon Sohn
Hun-Joon Sohn received his BS and MS degrees in metallurgical engineering from Seoul National University. He also earned PhD from the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, USA, in 1980. He did his postdoctoral work at the same university and joined Seoul National University in 1982. Currently he is a Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at SNU. His research interests involve electrochemical behavior of materials under various conditions and recently he has mainly focused on the development and characterization of anode materials for Li secondary batteries.
1. Introduction
With increasing demands for clean and renewable energy, tremendous efforts have been devoted to developing new materials for solar cells, secondary batteries, fuel cells, and electrical double-layer capacitors. Among these power sources, Li-ion batteries have been successfully implemented in most portable electronic devices, such as cellular phones, computers, and digital cameras. Li-ion battery sales reached more than 11 billion dollars in 2011.1 Although the usage of Li-ion batteries has been expanded into larger units, including several types of electric vehicles (EVs, hybrid, or plug-in EVs), robots, power tools, and electric power storage units, demand is continuously increasing for storage devices with higher gravimetric and volumetric energy density for EVs with long ranges (of approximately 500 km) and large energy storage systems for load-leveling applications. Current Li-ion batteries cannot meet the requirements for these applications. Detailed material and technical issues of the Li-ion batteries related to these applications have been discussed in other works.2–4
Recently, much effort has been devoted to the development of Li–air(O2) or Li–S batteries for EVs and large electricity storage systems, since these batteries have much higher gravimetric and volumetric energy densities than conventional Li-ion batteries. Fig. 1 illustrates the basic principles of metal–air(O2) or metal–S battery systems. Anode materials include Li, Na, Mg, Al, or Zn metals. The cathodes consist of catalysts for O2 reduction or sulfur, both of which include porous networks of conducting/supporting agents. Electrolytes can mainly be divided into two groups: non-aqueous organic or aqueous electrolytes for metal–air(O2) batteries. However, Na–S batteries employ beta alumina solid electrolytes, while liquid Mg–Sb batteries use molten salt electrolytes (MgCl2–KCl–NaCl).
 Fig. 1  Schematic principle of operation for metal–air(O2) or metal–sulfur batteries. 

Fig. 1 shows the Li-ion conducting membrane normally required for aqueous electrolytes to prevent direct contact between the Li metal anode and water in Li–air(O2) batteries. The reaction chemistries involved for O2 and sulfur electrodes vary depending on the electrolytes, and have been discussed in detail in recent reviews.5,6 In principle, Li metal dissolves to form Li ions on the anodic side, which move to the cathodic electrode to react with oxygen to form Li2O2 (Li2O) in organic electrolytes (or LiOH in aqueous electrolytes) for Li–O2 batteries. In Li–S batteries, Li reacts with sulfur to form Li2S as the final product during discharge. A reverse reaction should occur during the charging step. In metal–air(O2) batteries, metal dissolves in the alkaline aqueous electrolyte at the anode, and OH− ions are generated in the cathode due to the reduction of O2. In this case, OH− ions shuttle between the cathode and the anode to form a solid oxide or hydroxide product at the anode as the final phase during discharge.

Table 1 provides the theoretical cell voltage with the specific energy (energy per unit weight) and energy density (energy per unit volume) for various metal–air(O2) or metal–S batteries. At 3582 W h kg−1, the Li–air(O2) battery supplies the highest theoretical specific energy, which is 10 times that of current Li-ion batteries. Zn–air(O2) batteries (which form ZnO as the final product) deliver the largest theoretical energy density of 6091 W h l−1, due to the relatively high density of Zn metal.
Table 1 Theoretical cell voltage with specific energy and energy density for various metal-O2 or metal-sulfur batteries




Battery system
Voltage (V)
Specific energy (W h kg−1)
Energy density (W h l−1)





a Based on the volume of ZnO at the end of discharge.
b Based on the sum of the volume of Li at the beginning and Li2O2 at the end of discharge.
c Based on the sum of the volume of Li + H2O consumed and LiOH at the end of discharge.
d Based on the sum of the volume of Li at the beginning and Li2S at the end of discharge.
e Based on (Na + Na2O2).7
f Based on the sum of the volume of Na at the beginning and Na2S3 at the end of discharge.
g Based on the sum of the volume of 2 moles of Na and NiCl2 at the beginning.
h Based on the sum of the volume of Mg at the beginning and Mg(OH)2 at the end of discharge.
i Based on the result reported in the literature and the sum of the weight/volume of the final composition (Mg0.12Sb0.88) at the end of discharge.





Li-ion5
3.8
387
1015


Zn–air5
1.65
1086
6091a


Li–O2 (organic electrolyte)5
3.0
3505
3436b


Li–O2 (aqueous electrolyte)5
3.2
3582
2234c


Li–S5
2.2
2567
2199d


Mg–air
3.09
2840
3859h


Al–air
2.71
2793
3679


Na–air
2.33
1605e
1661


Na–S
2.1
790
972f


Na–NiCl2
2.57
785
2639g


Mg–Sb(liq.)
0.51i
683i
1006i




In this review, the material problems associated with metallic anodes in metal–air(O2) or metal–S batteries are discussed, since the aforementioned reviews were mainly focused on air(O2) or S electrodes. Perspectives on the next generation of high-energy-density secondary batteries are provided.
2. Metallic lithium (Li) electrode
2.1 Technical issues of Li anode

2.1.1 Problems of Li anode. 
Although metallic Li has the largest theoretical capacity (3860 mA h g−1), Li electrodes suffer some drawbacks as an anode material for Li secondary batteries. It is generally known that electrodeposited Li shows a dendritic/granular morphology when the metallic Li electrode is charged.8,9Fig. 2 shows typical dendritic Li morphology taken from an Li/gel polymer electrolyte/LiMn2O4 cell after one cycle.10 The dendritic Li formed may come into direct contact with the positive electrode, which causes an internal short circuit and spontaneous high-rate discharge of the battery, resulting in rapid heating and explosion of the cell.11–13 Granular forms or aggregates of metallic Li particles can also lead to internal short-circuits of the cell, because some of the aggregates may detach from the Li electrode, and the isolated Li particles in the electrolyte move to the positive electrode. The repeated charge and discharge (Li plating/stripping) of an Li electrode degrades the thermal stability of the battery.8,13
 Fig. 2  Dendritic Li formed in a Li battery after charge at 2.2 mA cm−2 (Science Direct, reprinted with permission)10 
Sacken et al. employed accelerated rate calorimetry (ARC) to a metallic Li electrode battery,12 and Fig. 3 shows the ARC exotherms of a cycled Li–MnO2 AA-size cell. The ARC exotherms indicated that the self-heating rate significantly increased with the cycle number, probably due to the increase in the surface area of the Li electrode. Although the pristine cell has good thermal stability, repeated plating and dissolution of Li metal can make the cell more sensitive to thermal abuse, thus degrading the thermal stability of the cell. Moli Energy, a Canadian company, commercialized rechargeable Li batteries composed of metallic Li as an anode and MoS2 as a cathode in the late 1980s.14,15 Although Li–MoS2 rechargeable battery systems showed high energy density and relatively good cycle performance, safety incidents occurred in the field, eventually resulting in a recall of all cellular phone battery packs.15,16
 Fig. 3  ARC exotherms of cycled Li–MnO2 cells starting from 100 °C: (a) temperature vs. time and (b) the corresponding Arrhenius plot (dT/dt vs. 1000/T) (Science Direct, reprinted with permission).12 
Poor cycling efficiency is another technical issue with metallic Li anodes. Li is a highly active metal that is prone to reacting with non-aqueous solvents and water.17,18 However, electrochemical deposition and dissolution of metallic Li is possible in some non-aqueous electrolytes.19,20 Peled suggested that Li reacts with the electrolyte to form a protective film called the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI), which prevents further reaction of Li metal with the organic electrolyte.21 In general, the SEI thin film formed on the Li surface conducts Li+, but acts as an electronic insulator. Much attention has been devoted to identifying the composition and microstructure of SEIs using various analytical techniques, such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),22–24 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy,25 Raman spectroscopy,26,27 and atomic force microscopy (AFM).28,29 The chemical composition and microstructure of the SEI on an Li electrode are strongly correlated with the composition of the non-aqueous electrolyte, which is made with an organic solvent and Li salt.8,13,30,31 It is generally accepted that the SEI on an Li electrode consists of ROLi (R: alkyl group), ROCOOLi, Li2CO3, and LiX (X: halogen). Aurbach's group extensively studied the SEI formed on the Li surface, and reported that the SEI was composed of multiple layers with various components that depend on the electrolytes, as shown in Fig. 4.30 Reversible Li deposition and dissolution respectively occur during the charge and discharge processes through these multilayered surface films composed of inorganic and organic Li species. However, the SEI cannot endure the shape and volume changes of the Li electrode, which leads to non-uniform Li deposition and dissolution during cycling. This has been considered as one of the main reasons for the dendritic growth of Li. Breakdown of the SEI on the Li electrode during cycling leads to the exposure of fresh Li to the electrolyte, and the formation of a new SEI film. This causes further consumption of the bare Li, which decreases the cycling efficiency of the Li electrode. The cycling efficiencies of an Li electrode in commonly used non-aqueous electrolytes, such as alkyl carbonates and ethers with inorganic Li salts, are too low for use in practical rechargeable batteries.30 Continuous Li consumption during cycling also requires an excess of Li in the battery. For example, the Li–MoS2 cell by Moli Energy was designed to have a 3-fold excess of Li in the battery, which decreases the energy density.15 Therefore, in addition to the safety issues of Li metal electrodes, the poor cycle performance should be solved for the commercialization of Li-metal-based rechargeable batteries.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of surface film formation on the Li electrode in alkyl carbonates and the 1,3-dioxolane electrolyte (Science Direct, reprinted with permission)30 


2.1.2 Key factors for Li electrode. 
In order to use metallic Li electrodes for Li secondary batteries, many have focused on the morphological control of electrodeposited Li to suppress dendritic growth, which is affected by the composition of the electrolyte (salt and solvent) and the magnitude of the current density.32–35
Most metals are electrodeposited in the dendritic form as the current density reaches the limiting current density (iL),36,37 indicating that the roughness development in the electrodeposition of metal is governed by the current distribution on the electrode. Arakawa et al. reported that the amount of needle-like Li increased when the charge current density of Li/amorphous V2O5 cells increased, suggesting that the applied overpotential during the plating of Li was correlated with the morphology of Li.32 Recently, Mayers et al. studied the reductive deposition of Li cations using a coarse-grained simulation model.38 They found that the propensity for dendrite formation increased with the applied electrode overpotential, which confirmed the observations by Arakawa et al. As mentioned previously, the dendritic morphology of Li unfavorably influences both the safety of Li secondary batteries and the cycle performance. These results suggest that the morphology control of the Li electrode is one of the most important factors for determining the cycle life and reliability of Li secondary batteries. However, the roughness control of Li during electrodeposition has not been successful to date. Brissot et al. reported that Li eventually forms dendrites and spreads out on the electrode at any current density after a certain time.39 Therefore, complete control of the roughness of Li during cycling is required for the commercialization of Li-metal-based secondary batteries.
Stability of the interphase between Li metal and the electrolyte is also an essential prerequisite for long-term cycle life and safety of the Li electrode, since the breakdown of the SEI during cycling is one of the major reasons for the dendritic formation of Li and successive electrolyte decomposition in the cell. Considering the severe volume changes of Li during cycling, the surface film of the Li electrode should have mechanically robust properties to accommodate the interfacial volume changes during plating and dissolution of Li. In this regard, a variety of strategies to improve the interfacial stability of Li electrodes were investigated, some of which have demonstrated improvements in the cycling efficiency and capacity retention. 1,3-Dioxolane with an LiAsF6 electrolyte system is one potential approach to significantly improving the interfacial stability of Li electrodes.40 Aurbach et al. reported that the composition of the SEI in this electrolyte consisted of the reduction products of dioxolane, such as HCOOLi and CH3CH2OCH2Li, as well as salt reduction products such as LiF and LixAsFy, and oligomers of polydioxolane, which have been known to form by the partial polymerization of 1,3-dioxolane (Fig. 4).13,30 Since the SEI of a Li electrode contains these elastomers, it can reasonably be expected that the elastomer component renders the interfacial layer more flexible than an SEI composed of fully ionic species from the decomposition reaction of other solvents. Indeed, an Li electrode in 1,3-dioxolane with LiAsF6 showed dendrite-free electroplating and high cycling efficiency during cycling.30 However, in spite of the efficient stabilization of Li electrodes in 1,3-dioxolane with LiAsF6 electrolyte, the prolonged cycling of Li/LixMnO2 full cells did not show sufficient cycle performance at a high charging rate.30
Considering that detached Li electrodes from dead cells have shown uniform smooth surface morphology and good cycle performance again in a fresh electrolyte, failure of the cells might be caused by the depletion of the electrolyte in the cell, which might be attributed to continuous reactions between the Li and solution components under higher charging conditions. Based on these results, the ideal interphase between Li and the electrolyte might be hermetic, which would completely prevent the Li electrode from contacting the electrolyte. Therefore, ceramic and polymeric protective layers are now being considered as a promising stabilization approach for Li electrodes.41–44 However, the possibility of severe volume changes of Li during cycling should also be considered to cause mechanical degradation, which will be discussed in detail in the next section.

2.2 Prior arts for Li metal anode
As described previously, the nature of the surface layers on Li and the morphology of Li deposits are key factors that determine the cell performance of Li metal batteries. So far, numerous studies have been conducted to resolve the problems of interfacial instability in various ways. In this section, prior works on Li metal anodes are reviewed in terms of (i) liquid electrolyte, (ii) additives, (iii) polymer-based electrolyte, (iv) Li-surface coating, and (v) electrode and cell configuration.

2.2.1 Liquid electrolyte: choice of solvent and salt. 
The choice of a solvent and Li salt is an important issue, because the nature of the SEI layer and morphology of Li electrodeposits primarily depend on the type of electrolyte solution used. Basically, an organic solvent for an electrolyte solution must be able to dissolve sufficient amounts of Li salt, and thus it usually contains polar groups such as carbonyl (CO), nitrile (CN), sulfonyl (SO), and ether-linkage (–O–). Various polar organic solvents have been investigated, and carbonate, ether, or ester families have been generally accepted as major solvents for Li batteries.44 In the early stages of Li battery development, propylene carbonate (PC), a cyclic carbonate, attracted much attention because of its high dielectric constant, static stability with Li metal, and Li electrodeposition capability.18,45 However, the cycling efficiency of Li in PC-based electrolytes has been poor, which was attributed to PC reduction on newly deposited Li surfaces and dendritic growth of Li.45,46 Later, another cyclic carbonate, ethylene carbonate (EC), and linear carbonates were investigated, which had a crucial impact on the advancement of Li-ion batteries using Li-intercalation electrode materials. The use of graphitic carbon as an anode in Li-ion batteries was enabled, which brought about successful commercialization.
However, there seem to have been no significant improvements of Li metal anodes regarding the problems of interfacial impedance and the morphology of Li.47 In the years after the investigation of PC, ether-group solvents came to the fore as another candidate to resolve the issues with Li dendrite growth. Ether solvents such as tetrahydrofuran (THF), 2-methyltertrahydrofuran (2-Me-THF), and diethyl ether (DEE) have low viscosity and high ionic conductivity, and could be used to achieve less dendritic Li deposition.48 However, prolonged cycling has still led to dendritic Li deposition, and battery performance has not been satisfactory.49,50 Another problem of ether-based solvents is their limited anodic electrochemical stability.51 Most ether-based solvents start to oxidize at relatively low potential below 4 V, which restricts their use with 4-V-class cathodes, such as LiCoO2, LiNiO2, and LiMn2O4. However, a recent revisiting of the Li–S battery system has aroused new interest in ether solvents, since the charging cut-off potential of an S cathode is below 3 V. The dissolved polysulfide anions are stable in ether-based solvents, but not in carbonate-based ones.52
There are some functional solvents that can improve the performance of Li metal anodes. For example, Yamaki et al.53 investigated a series of partially fluorinated esters as a sole solvent. Compared with the non-fluorinated esters, the partially fluorinated esters showed enhanced cycling performance and thermal stability, which may have been brought about by a robust SEI layer on the Li metal anode. Zhang and Angell54 studied boric acid esters of glycol (BEG) as a possible co-solvent for Li-metal-based batteries. Because of the great propensity for dissolving Li salts, stabilizing Li metal against corrosion, and increasing stability against anodic decomposition, Li metal could remain shiny upon prolonged immersion, even at elevated temperature. Excellent cycling performance was observed in an Li–LiMn2O4 system. A tetramethylene sulfone, known as sulfolane, was suggested as another possible solvent for Li-metal-based batteries. Matsuda et al.55 studied sulfolane as a co-solvent combined with ether-based solvents. They found that the composition of LiPF6 in sulfolane/dimethoxyethane enhanced the Li cycling efficiency, probably due to the stabilized interphase at the Li metal anode.
The Li salts for an electrolyte solution are not as diverse as the solvent material. The major salts which have been qualified for Li batteries include lithium perchlorate (LiClO4), lithium hexafluoroarsenate (LiAsF6), lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6), lithium tetrafluoroborate (LiBF4), lithium trifluoromethanesulfonate (LiOSO2CF3), and lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiN(SO2CF3)2, LiTFSI). Unfortunately, none of the Li salts could completely resolve the problem of Li dendrite formation, but the static interfacial impedance and the degree of Li dendrite formation have differed depending on the kind of Li salt used. It was reported that the chemical composition of the SEI layer on Li metal was not changed significantly when LiClO4 salt was used.47 In addition to organic compounds formed from organic solvents, the weak formation of LiCl was observed, which was possibly due to the chemical reaction between ClO4− anions and the native film and/or fresh Li metal. The LiClO4 is likely to have provided lower SEI impedance compared with LiPF6 or LiBF4. However, it could not suppress the formation of Li dendrites. Also, the high oxidation state of chlorine in perchlorate has been problematic under certain conditions, such as high temperature and high current charge.56 This salt has been regarded as impractical in Li battery applications. LiAsF6 was once widely investigated combined with ether solvents to suppress the formation of Li dendrites. Li metal anodes in electrolytes containing LiAsF6 showed dendrite-suppressed electrodeposition and high cycling efficiency.30 It is known that LiAsF6 reduces at around 1.15 V (vs. Li/Li+),30,57 and produces LiF and LixAsFy at the surface layers, which probably has a positive effect on the interfacial stability of the Li metal anode. However, the morphological behavior of Li has been inconsistent between studies,30,33,47,57 and safety concerns regarding the toxicity of the As element prohibits the use in any commercialized batteries.
LiPF6 is now generally accepted as the most suitable Li-salt, because of its well-balanced properties for various requirements as an electrolyte.44 This salt has successfully been employed in commercialized Li-ion batteries. However, since LiPF6 is hygroscopic and chemically/thermally unstable, it can produce HF as a result of the decomposition of PF6− through chemical reaction with trace water in an electrolyte solution. There is a general consensus that the generated HF can attack oxide-based cathode material, resulting in capacity loss during cycling in Li batteries.58 However, the HF can promote the interfacial stability of the Li metal anode. Takehara20 investigated the effect of LiPF6 salt on SEI layers and the morphology of Li electrodeposits, and identified the formation of a thin LiF layer with good protective ability, which led to smooth Li deposits and improved cycling efficiency. Later, the effect of HF on Li metal was also presented by directly adding a small amount of HF to an electrolyte,59 which was effective for the suppression of Li dendrite formation. LiBF4 was also studied as a possible Li salt for controlling the interfacial properties of Li metal anodes.60 Similar SEI properties to those of LiPF6 were demonstrated, which was expected to improve the performance of the Li metal anode. However, its small dissociation constant, which is associated with relatively low ionic conductivity, hinders its wide use as a main solute in electrolyte solutions. LiOSO2CF3 and LiTFSI are other promising Li salts, and have high dissociation constants, high oxidation and temperature stability, nontoxicity, and insensitivity to moisture. Unfortunately, they seem to have no beneficial effects on Li metal anodes with respect to the interfacial and morphological properties of Li deposits.61 However, another Li imide salt, lithium bis(perfluoroethylsulfonylimide) (LiN(C2F5SO2)2, LiBETI), was found to produce very uniform, thin, and stable SEI layers on Li metal anodes.61 The SEI layer formed in an LiBETI–PC system was hemispherical, and the composition of the film consisted mainly of LiF, which is similar to that in LiPF6–PC systems. The LiBETI–PC system provided a compact and smooth surface morphology during Li deposition–dissolution cycles.
Recently, ionic liquids have attracted much attention as a new class of electrolytes for Li-based batteries. Ionic liquids are less volatile and typically non-flammable, which can enhance the safety of Li batteries. Several studies on the compatibility of ionic liquids with Li metal have been reported,62–67 which suggested that some ionic liquids could suppress the formation of Li dendrites and enhance the cycling performance. It is generally considered that 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium cations are not quite stable enough to be inert toward Li,62 which is probably due to the acidity of the proton in the cation ring. However, the substitution of a proton moiety or a different type of anion could change the behavior.63 Pyrrolidinium-based ionic liquids were identified to show a remarkable increase in reductive stability compared with those based on imidazolium.62,64 Highly reversible deposition–dissolution of Li metal was achieved, and the formation of Li dendrites was suppressed. For example, Howlett et al.64 investigated N-methyl, N-alkyl pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide (P1X(Tf)2N, X = 3,4) for use in Li metal batteries. Uniform Li deposits over many cycles could be achieved at moderate current densities, resulting in cycling efficiency of more than 99%. It was suggested that stable P1X+ cations at a negative potential and SEI layers formed from the anions played an important role in the enhancement. For further advancement of ionic liquids for Li metal, the need for a systematic study to find a highly fluidic ionic liquid with sufficient stability against Li metal and dendrite-free Li deposits remains.


2.2.2 Additives. 
The use of low-concentration additives is an effective and efficient method for controlling the Li metal interface. These additives can modify the physical and chemical properties of the SEI layer, and control the current distribution during Li electrodeposition. The mechanism of the additive function can be classified roughly into three categories: (i) reaction with the Li metal and/or native Li surface film producing uniform and dense SEI layers, (ii) non-reactive additives controlling the current distribution or reducing Li reactivity with bulk electrolyte solution, and (iii) in situ Li-alloy formation affecting electrodeposited Li morphology. Various types of additives have been explored so far, including inorganic compounds,8,20,22,34,59,68–74 organic compounds such as surfactants,18,53,75–84 and gaseous compounds.18,68,85 These additives are summarized in Table 2 with their function. Some noteworthy studies are described.
Table 2 Various additives in an electrolyte solution for the Li metal anode




Additives
Function and effect
Ref.




Inorganic


HF, polysulfides Sx2−, POCl3
SEI modification, suppressed dendrite

20, 22, 34, 59, 68, 69



Mg(ClO4), AlI3, SnI2, MgI2, LiI, AlCl3, Na(CF3SO2)2N
Li-alloy interphase, suppressed dendrite

8, 70–74



CsPF6, RbPF6
Adsorption of non-reactive metal cation, dendrite-free

88







Organic


(C2H5)4NF(HF)4, fluorinated ester, vinylene carbonate, 2-methylfuran, 2-methylthiophene, nitromethane, fluoroethylene carbonate, N-methyl-N-(butyl sulfonate) pyrrolidinium (zwitterion)
Reactive additives, SEI modification, suppressed dendrite

53, 75, 76




18, 77, 78




79



Benzene, decalin, tetraalkylammonium chlorides poly(ethylene glycol) dimethyl ether, dimethyl silicone/propylene oxide copolymer, poly-ether modified siloxanes, tetraethylammonium perfluorooctanesulfonate
Adsorption, less reactive interface, suppressed dendrite

77, 80, 81




82




82




83




84







Gaseous


CO2, SO2, N2O
SEI modification, granular deposit

18, 68, 85





Hydrogen fluoride (HF) was proposed by Kanamura and Takehara as an additive to modify the SEI layers.20,22,34,59 A small amount of HF added to an organic liquid electrolyte caused an acid–base reaction with the native Li surface layers, which were mainly composed of Li2O, LiOH, and Li2CO3, and finally produced an LiF–Li2O bilayer. The LiF-containing SEI showed a less-defective, uniform, and dense layer, and induced an even current distribution during Li deposition and dissolution. Accordingly, smooth hemispherical Li deposits called blue lithium were provided (Fig. 5), indicating the uniformity of the Li deposits, which consequently improved the cycling efficiency of the Li metal anode. These effects of HF on the Li metal anode could be observed in an electrolyte solution containing LiPF6, where the LiPF6 decomposes with trace H2O in the electrolyte and generates HF,22 as well as in the other active fluorine-containing additives, such as (C2H5)4NF(HF)475 and fluorinated ester.53
 Fig. 5  SEM images of Li electrodeposited on a Ni substrate in 1.0 M dm−3 LiClO4/EC + DME (a) without and (b) with HF (The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).59 
To suppress dendritic Li electrodeposits, non-reactive additives have also been investigated. The adsorption of the non-reactive additive at the interface inhibits the reaction between Li metal and electrolyte solution, which maintains the SEI layer as thin and chemically stable by retarding the growth of an undesirable highly resistive SEI layer. The additive can also be expected to affect the mechanism of electrodeposition. The adsorbed additive could promote the two-dimensional nucleation and growth of electrodeposited metal.86 The additive may also act as a levelling agent leading to smooth electrodeposits. The diffusion- or ohmic-controlled current distribution is one of the major causes of uneven or dendritic electrodeposits.86 The adsorbed additive can alter the diffusion- or ohmic-controlled current distribution, which is dominant in Li metal interface systems, to the activation-controlled current distribution87 in the irregular interface situation of Li metal anodes. Therefore, the use of additives to achieve a uniform current distribution may be one approach to solving the problems of dendritic Li deposition. Naoi et al.82 studied the effect of polyether-type surfactants (polyethyleneglycol dimethyl ether and a copolymer of dimethylsilicone and propylene oxide). The adsorption of the surfactants provided a more uniform current distribution, which resulted in a significant suppression of the localized Li deposition. The surfactants also stabilized the surface film, which showed little change in resistance for several days and throughout long cycling. Non-reactive and non-polar substances such as decalin80 and benzene77 compounds were also reported as possible additives for Li metal anodes. They are accumulated, or physically adsorbed, at the Li interface, and probably inhibit the reaction of Li with electrolyte solution, and limit the growth of the undesirable surface film. It provided the Li surface with a more uniform activity, which results in a more uniform and smoother Li deposit.
Another type of additive for suppressing dendritic Li deposits is based on Li-alloying reaction (or co-deposition) with another metal such as Na,74 Mg,70,72 Al,71 and Sn71 from an electrolyte solution containing a small amount of metal salt additive. It was postulated that when metal ions are electrochemically reduced and deposited on the Li metal surface, they produce a thin Li-alloy surface layer, which could ease the irregularity of the Li interface. The improved uniformity of the interface by the Li-alloy formation provides a relatively even current distribution and suppresses dendritic Li deposits, and finally increases the Li cycling efficiency.
Contrary to the Li-alloying mechanism of the above additives, a new concept of electrostatic shield mechanism by another metal cation has been reported by Ding et al.88 The controlled small addition of Cs+ or Rb+ cations led to alteration in their effective reduction potential below the standard reduction potential of Li ions. The adsorption of the metal cations resulted in the formation of a positively charged electrostatic shield around the initial growth tip of the Li deposit without reducing the additives, which forced further uniform and dendrite-free deposition of Li. Although this strategy realized remarkably smooth Li deposits, the still low cycling efficiency of the Li anode (76.5%, cf. 76.6% for the additive-free electrolyte) should be resolved. Also, the morphology of Li deposits at a high charging rate (over 1 mA cm−2) needs to be investigated for application in practical rechargeable Li metal batteries.


2.2.3 Polymer electrolyte. 
As discussed previously, the dendrite formation of Li during charging lowers the cycling efficiency and eventually incurs internal short-circuit, leading to an explosion of the battery in the worst case. Compared with a liquid electrolyte, a continuous or non-porous polymeric electrolyte can mitigate the aforementioned problems to a lesser extent. Also, the polymer-based electrolyte is expected to be less reactive to Li metal due to the solid-like nature and much lower liquid content, which alleviates the formation of a highly resistive passivation layer and/or the self-discharge of Li metal. However, the phenomenon of Li dendrite formation still exists, and the interfacial resistance by the SEI formation should be further improved for practical battery applications.
For a Li-ion conductive polymer electrolyte, several polymer host materials such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly(propylene oxide) (PPO), poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF), poly(vinylidene fluoridehexafluoropropylene) (PVdF-HFP), polysiloxanes (PS), and polyphosphazenes (PPhz) were investigated.89,90 Of these, PEO and PPO have been widely studied because of the more stable complexation with Li salts and higher ionic conductivity. PS and PPhz based polymers were also paid attention due to their high flexibility and conductivity, and enhanced interfacial stability with Li.91,92 To further improve the properties of polymer electrolytes, various materials such as ionic liquids93–97 and/or inorganic fillers95,98–100 were incorporated into the host polymers to produce the composite polymer electrolytes (CPE), which exhibited positive effects on the Li metal electrode. In addition, an organic–inorganic hybrid electrolyte concept was also introduced where the inorganic material strengthened the dimensional stability of electrolytes, maintaining high ionic conductivity.101,102
Imanishi et al.93–95 reported on the behavior of Li dendrite formation in composite polymer electrolytes with an ionic liquid added, such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)–lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) with N-methyl-N-propylpiperidinium-bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (PP13FSI) added. The addition of the ionic liquid, which has been known for its good electrochemical and thermal stability as an electrolyte in Li-metal based cells, resulted in higher ionic-conductivity and lower interfacial resistance than that achieved with the normal PEO–LiTFSI polymer electrolyte. Consequently, the retardation of Li dendrite growth led by the enhanced interfacial stability could be achieved, which was directly confirmed using an in situ optical visualization cell (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Dendrite growth of Li in the Li/PEO18LiTFSI/Li and Li/PEO18LiTFSI-1.44PP13FSI/Li cells at 0.1 mA cm−2 and at 60 °C. (a) Li/PEO18LiTFSI/Li for t = 0 h, (b) Li/PEO18LiTFSI/Li for t = 210 h, (c) Li/PEO18LiTFSI-1.44PP13FSI/Li for t = 0 h, and (d) Li/PEO18LiTFSI-1.44PP13FSI/Li for t = 256 h (Science Direct, reprinted with permission).94 
Another approach is to add a nano-sized ceramic filler powder to a polymer electrolyte. The original reasoning behind the incorporation of a ceramic filler was to enhance the mechanical stability of the polymer electrolyte.103 However, the addition also improved the ionic conductivity and Li/electrolyte interfacial compatibility.90,94 The principle mechanism for the enhanced ionic conductivity has been known as the local formation of the amorphous phase of the polymer around each filler particle, which provides a preferential Li ion pathway.99,104 However, the role of the filler in promoting the Li ion transport still remains to be addressed clearly. As mentioned, the polymer electrolyte with filler added also provided better Li/electrolyte interfacial compatibility, which strongly depended on the particle size8 and/or the nature105 of the filler. The improved interfacial compatibility with the homogeneously distributed filler particles at the interface probably (i) reduced the reactivity of Li with the electrolyte, (ii) supported stiffness and compressibility to suppress Li dendrite growth, and (iii) induced an even current distribution during charging and discharging. These effects would result in less cell impedance and improved cycling performance. For instance, Imanishi's group further improved the performance of Li metal in a composite polymer of PEO–LiTFSI and PP13TFSI by adding nano-SiO2 powder.95 They identified higher ionic conductivity, less interfacial impedance, and the further inhibition of dendrite growth of Li, and suggested the composite as an electrolyte for all solid-state lithium metal batteries, or as a buffer layer between Li metal and the NASICON-type inorganic solid electrolyte for Li–air batteries.
From these beneficial effects of nanosized inorganic particles on the polymer electrolyte, one can reasonably expect that the composite polymer electrolytes with layered silicate106–108 and ordered mesoporous inorganic materials109,110 would be helpful to improve the dimensional stability and interfacial compatibility of the polymer electrolyte with Li metal. In particular, it is expected that nanocomposite polymer electrolytes with a more rigid inorganic framework might show enhanced electrochemical performances against severe volume and shape changes of the Li electrode during cycling.


2.2.4 Surface coating. 
Another approach to stabilize the SEI layer and suppress dendritic Li deposits involves pre-coating the Li metal surface by a relevant substance. A pre-coating substance should be structurally uniform and thin for an even current distribution, and have other properties such as small impedance, chemical stability against the electrolyte, interface-forming ability with good contact, and mechanical durability. Several relevant studies have been conducted on coatings for possible applications, such as silane-based coatings,111–114 polymer-based coatings,115–118 and inorganic Li-ion conductive coatings such as Li3N119 and Li phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON).120 Dunn111 and Vaughey113,114 reported on chlorosilane pre-treatment of the Li metal surface for improving the performance of Li metal anodes. The layer formed by the self-terminating reaction between the chloride substituent and a hydroxyl-terminated layer on the Li metal led to a low initial interfacial impedance, and retarded the corrosion of the Li metal anode. However, the cohesiveness of the coatings was gradually disrupted during cycling, and further development was needed to obtain satisfactory cycle performance.
An ultraviolet-curable semi-interpenetrating polymer network (IPN) was reported as a polymer-based protective layer.118 Pre-coating of the semi-IPN delivered a stabilized interfacial impedance and less dendritic Li deposit than that of the untreated Li anode, leading to improved cycle performance. The result depended on the condition of the cross-linking agent. The reason was not clear, but the uniformity with fewer defects and good contact between coatings and the Li metal may play an important role in the improved performance.


2.2.5 Electrode and cell configuration. 
It has consistently been identified in many studies on Li metal anodes that the morphology of the Li deposit critically depends on the current density, in that as the current density increases, the Li deposit exhibits dendritic formation.37,121–124 Rosso et al.123 have established the relationship between the onset time of dendritic growth of Li and the current densities based on experimental results using an Li/polymer cell. The onset time was delayed as the current density decreased. Monroe and Newman124 developed a model to predict the tip growth rate of Li dendrites, and concluded that it would be decreased when the current density was reduced. The use of Li metal powder instead of Li foil is one technique to lower the effective current density at the Li anode.122,125 The Li metal powder provides higher interfacial area than Li foil, and reduces the effective current density at the anode, resulting in suppressed dendritic formation of the Li deposits and enhanced cycle performance. Recently, the use of a three-dimensional current collector with a high surface area has also been investigated to suppress dendritic Li deposition by lowering the practical current density.9,126,127 A detailed discussion is presented in Section 2.3.3.
Apart from material and electrochemistry approaches, external physical factors such as cell-stacking pressure128,129 and temperature130 can also influence the morphology of Li deposits. Li metal anodes cycled under a certain pressure showed a densely-packed Li deposit layer, where the possibly isolated Li still maintained electrical contact. In an all-solid-state battery, the cell-stacking pressure was one of the factors that determined the cell performance.128 Since the conductivity of the inorganic solid electrolyte was comparable to that of a liquid electrolyte system, the interfacial resistance was a more significant problem in this system. The repeated dissolution and deposition of Li metal can lead to failure of interface formation due to the generation of voids or a resistive surface layer, which results in the degradation of the cell performance. However, the interfacial resistance can be reduced simply by imposing high pressure, which promotes intimate mechanical contact at the interface.

2.3 Recent progress in Li metal anodes
Recently, Li–air(O2) and Li–S batteries have attracted much attention due to their high energy density compared to current Li-ion batteries. The high energy density of both Li batteries basically originates from the use of metallic Li as a negative electrode, as well as the high-capacity positive electrodes. To realize commercial Li–air and Li–S batteries, the technical problems associated with the Li metal anode must be solved. In this section, specific issues of Li metal electrodes in Li–air and Li–S batteries are summarized, and the recent progress in Li metal electrodes is reviewed.

2.3.1 Issues in Li–air batteries. 
Besides suppressing the Li dendrite formation, a major challenge in Li–air batteries is to protect the surface of the Li metal from exposure to water and gases such as oxygen and CO2, which results in electrode degradation and safety problems.5,131–133 In aqueous Li–air systems, the Li metal should be separated from the aqueous electrolyte solutions by Li+-conducting solid membrane materials, as shown in Fig. 7, because metallic Li is very reactive with water. For non-aqueous electrolyte batteries, undesirable reactions of the Li electrodes with the gas molecules in air or gas contaminants in the non-aqueous electrolytes need to be prevented. The overall reaction chemistries involved in each electrolyte can be expressed as131–133 Aqueous electrolyte: 2Li+ + 2e− + (1/2)O2 + H2O ↔ 2LiOH(1) Organic electrolyte: 2Li+ + 2e− + O2 ↔ Li2O2(2)
 Fig. 7  Schematic of a cylindrical Li–air cell employing a glass ceramic protective layer.142 


2.3.2 Issues in Li–S batteries. 
The Li metal anodes of Li–S batteries have different issues from other Li batteries.134–137 During the first discharge process, elemental S is reduced to form soluble Li polysulfides, followed by the final insoluble products such as Li2S. In the later stages of the subsequent charge process, the higher-order polysulfides are generated at the S cathode, and diffuse through the separator into the Li electrode to form the lower-order polysulfides by a parasitic reaction with the Li. These species diffuse back to the S electrode to produce the higher-order polysulfide again. The shuttle process occurs repeatedly, which leads to a decrease of the active mass utilization and the Coulombic efficiency of Li–S cells. The overall reaction chemistry is134 2Li+ + 2e− + S ↔ Li2S(3)


2.3.3 Recent progress. 
Other than dendrite formation, recent research efforts on Li metal electrodes have mainly been devoted to protecting the Li metal surface using various Li-ion conducting materials to prevent undesirable access to gas molecules and Li polysulfides. The application of a protective layer coating for Li metal electrodes has been a typical method for blocking these species, as well as for resisting the formation of dendrites or mossy deposits upon cycling.138,139
Glass ceramic materials such as Li super-ionic conductor (LISICON) are commonly used as protective layers and SEIs. A representative material is Li1+xAlxTi2−xP3−ySiyO12 (LATP), which shows a very high Li-ion conductivity of ∼10–3 S cm–1 at room temperature.140,141 When this material directly contacts Li metal, LISICON is expected to be unstable. Therefore, to avoid undesirable reactions between the two materials, a secondary protection layer is needed. Recently, Visco et al. of the PolyPlus Battery Company demonstrated a multi-layered Li electrode consisting of Li metal, a gel electrolyte (or a non-aqueous liquid electrolyte with a separator), and an Li-ion conducting glass ceramic layer, as shown in Fig. 7.142 In this protective architecture, a gel polymer electrolyte was placed between the Li metal and an LATP glass ceramic layer in order to block the direct contact.
The secondary layer should also have a high Li-ion conductivity, and should be stable when in contact with Li metal. Several materials have been suggested for their high ionic conductivity and stability with Li, such as Li3N, Cu3N, LiPON, and polymer electrolytes.133 A research group at Mie University has actively worked on this topic.143–146 Imanishi et al. reported that LiPON was effective as the buffer layer to prevent the irreversible reaction of LATP with Li metal, although the interfacial resistance required reduction for low-temperature operation.143,144 Zhang et al. also investigated a polymer material of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) with LiN(SO2CF3)2 (LiTFSI) salt as an interlayer,145,146 which had suitable performance. When nanosized BaTiO3 was finely dispersed in the PEO-based polymer, the interfacial resistance with Li metal was greatly reduced.146 An aqueous Li–air prototype cell was demonstrated using this PEO-based interlayer and the LATP glass ceramic protective layer (Fig. 8).147 The cell showed an energy density of 779 W h kg−1, which is about two times larger than that of a conventional graphite/LiCoO2 cell. Although the multi-layered glass ceramic protective architecture appears promising, problems exist. The layer must be prepared as a thin, flat film, and the development of a large-scale production process is required for practical applications. Moreover, the interfacial resistance between the interlayer and Li metal is generally high, and it must be minimized.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of the proposed Li–air system (The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission).147 
A different approach to suppress Li dendrite formation is using three-dimensional (3D) current collectors.9,126,127 By increasing the surface area of current collectors through the use of a 3D architecture, the current density for Li deposition and dissolution can be significantly reduced, which results in dendrite control during Li cycling. Wang et al. investigated the effect of the Ni foam substrate on Li electrodes.9 Li was electrodeposited on the Ni foam, which had a surface area seven times larger than that of Li foil. The interfacial resistance of the foamed Li anode was lower than that of Li foil, and improved cycling performance was obtained by prohibiting the formation of Li dendrites. This can be explained by the decreased effective current density caused by the increased surface area of the foam structure. Spatially heterogeneous carbon-fiber paper was recently introduced as a current collector by Stucky et al.127 Dendrite-free Li metal was observed using 3D current collectors decorated with SiO2 or SiC, even after prolonged cycling. The electrode maintained a constant volume upon deposition, which was afforded by the large porous volume of the current collector. The scaffold-like structure of the carbon paper prevented the disintegration of deposited Li. Zhamu et al. reported the use of graphene sheets as a current collector.126 Graphene material is well known to have a very high surface area that significantly reduces the effective electrode current density. Fig. 9 shows a schematic illustration of the concept. Li–vanadium oxide full cells were tested to investigate the effect of the graphene sheets. After 500 cycles, the cell capacity was well maintained without Li dendrite formation, which could be ascribed to the decreased current distribution by graphene.
 Fig. 9  Structure of a Li–graphene cell before and after the first discharge and plausible mechanisms with which graphene surfaces can capture Li ions at the cathode (The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission).126 
Another method for Li–S batteries involves LiNO3 addition to the electrolyte solution.148–153 Recently, Milkhaylik of Sion Power Corporation patented an additive that includes an N–O bond.148,149 It was reported that the use of LiNO3 as an additive prevented the detrimental shuttle process in Li–S batteries. Aurbach et al. investigated the effect of LiNO3 using electrochemical and spectroscopic analyses.150 When LiNO3 was added to the electrolyte solution in Li–S cells, the reversible capacities were increased. In FT-IR and XPS analyses, it was found that the presence of LiNO3 in the solution had a pronounced impact on the surface chemistry of the Li electrode. LixNOy surface species and various LixSOy surface moieties were formed by the reduction of LiNO3 and the oxidation of sulfur species, respectively. This phenomenon prevented the full charging of the sulfur electrodes in the Li–S cells. Enhancement of the passivation layer on the Li metal diminished the possibility of reactions of the polysulfide species with active Li metal, which resulted in an improvement of the electrochemical properties of Li–S cells. Liang et al. prepared an electrolyte with LiNO3 added, and tested the electrochemical properties of Li–S cells.151 Compared to a cell without LiNO3, the Li–S cell containing the additive exhibited highly improved cycling efficiency and stability up to 50 cycles, which could be attributed to the protective SEI layer formation induced by LiNO3.
Recently, several groups demonstrated the Li metal free Li–S battery system by replacing the Li metal anode with a prelithiated Si electrode.154–157 Since the activity of Li in the Li–Si alloy phase is less than unity, technical problems related with the use of metallic Li can be mitigated, thus showing a promising electrochemical behavior. However, Li-alloy anode materials also have some problems such as mechanical stability and poor cycle performance associated with huge volume changes of Si during cycling.2 It should be noted that a reliable operation process with the additional facility for prelithiation of Li-alloying electrodes might increase the production cost of Li-metal free Li–S battery systems.
An analytical investigation of the formation of Li dendrites and mossy Li was recently performed. Grey et al. reported time-resolved quantitative information about the nature of electrochemically deposited metallic Li using in situ NMR spectroscopy in conjunction with electrochemical cycling.158 They demonstrated that it was possible to quantify the amount of dendritic/mossy Li by analyzing the change in the signal intensity of the Li metal during cycling. Recently, imaging techniques that enable non-invasive visualization and characterization of the changes occurring in electrodes and electrolytes in batteries were introduced.159 The location of the Li-metal deposits could be determined during Li cycling by using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology. Fig. 10 shows two-dimensional 7Li MRI images taken before and after cell charging. The conditions related to the formation of dendritic/mossy Li could be explored and quantified using this imaging technique. The approach could also be extended to investigate the microstructure of other electrode materials.
 Fig. 10  
7Li magnetic resonance and SEM images of Li microstructure formation in a Li bag cell. 7Li two-dimensional MRI x–y images (a) in the pristine state and (b) after charging. SEM images (c) in the pristine state and (d) after charging (Nature Publishing Group, reprinted with permission).159 
Efforts to modify the separators in contact with Li metal have been reported.160,161 Ryou et al. demonstrated that improved cycle behavior of Li metal electrodes could be obtained by using polydopamine-treated polyethylene (PE) separators.160 The polydopamine treatment could make the PE surface hydrophilic, and thus increase the uptake amount of the liquid electrolyte. The enhanced electrolyte uptake could lead to well-distributed Li-ionic flux on the electrode surface, which might lessen the Li dendrite growth. Another suggested reason for the improvement was the strong mussel-inspired catecholic adhesion of polydopamine onto the Li surface, which had a positive influence on the morphological changes of the Li metal. A polypropylene (PP) separator grafted by methyl methacrylate (MMA) was prepared by Ju et al.161 It was found that the MMA functional groups could improve the stability of the interface between the liquid electrolyte and the Li metal anode. A membrane with a three-dimensional ordered macroporous (3DOM) structure was proposed by Kanamura et al.162 The Li electrode with the 3DOM separator exhibited enhanced cycling stability without Li dendrite formation, which could be attributed to the homogeneous current distribution by the 3DOM separator.

3. Metallic magnesium (Mg) electrode
Mg is the fourth most common element on earth (next to iron, oxygen, and silicon), and it is the third most abundant element dissolved in seawater. Also, Mg is a light and relatively cheap metal whose reduction potential is −2.356 V (vs. SHE), and its potential capacity is ca. 2200 mA h g−1 (3833 mA h cm−3). Additionally, Mg is much safer to use and handle than Li, and its compounds are non-toxic. By virtue of the various advantages of Mg, it is a natural candidate as an anode material in high-energy-density battery systems. Several rechargeable Mg-based battery systems have been reported.163–169 Despite its advantages, the application of Mg to rechargeable batteries has had several problems: (i) the relative difficulty of diffusion of a Mg2+ ion in a solid-state electrode compared to a monovalent Li ion, (ii) the growth of a passivating surface film170 composed of MgO, MgCO3, and Mg(OH)2, which cannot transport the Mg2+ ions, (iii) a narrow electrochemical window of electrolytes for Mg-ion dissolution–deposition, and (iv) relatively low specific energy of the Mg-ion battery.
In spite of the problems associated with Mg metal electrodes, the first rechargeable prototype Mg battery system was reported in 2000 by Aurbach's group, which was composed of an Mg foil anode, an MgxMo3S4 cathode, and an organic electrolyte based on Mg organohaloaluminate salts in THF (Fig. 11).164 Since then, much effort has been made to realize high-performance next-generation rechargeable Mg batteries. Most research on rechargeable Mg batteries has focused on high-capacity Mg host cathodes and electrolytes. Possible cathode materials are summarized in Table 3.164,169,171–176 Research has also been concentrated on electrolytes with wide electrochemical windows and reversible Mg dissolution–deposition.167,170,177,178 However, a limited number of papers have been reported on anodes for rechargeable Mg batteries. Mg anode-related issues for rechargeable Mg batteries and Mg-ion batteries are discussed.
 Fig. 11  Typical electrochemical behavior and the basic structure of the MgxMo3S4 cathodes (0 < x < 1) with the electrolyte of 0.25 M Mg(AlCl2BuEt)2 in THF (inset: cyclic voltammogram of Mg insertion–extraction at 0.05 mV s−1) (Nature Publishing Group, reprinted with permission).164 
Table 3 Comparison of electrochemical performances of various positive electrodes for rechargeable Mg batteries.164,169,171–176




Cathode materials
Mg-insertion/formula unit
Specific capacity (mA h g−1)
Potential (V)





a Potential measured vs. Mg/Mg2+.
b Potential measured vs. Li/Li+.





Mo3S4164
1
122
1–1.5a


MoS6Se2169
2
102
0.5–2a


MoS2171
0.66
170
1.5–2.5a


[Hol/AB] MnO2172
0.09–0.39
85–209
1.85–4.75b


TiS2 nanotubes173
0.49
236
0.5–2.0a


V2O5174
2
589
2–4.2b


Mg1.03Mn0.97SiO4175
0.81
253
1.5–2.1a


MgCoSiO4176
1
250 (at 700 °C)
1.2–2.0a




3.1 Rechargeable Mg metal batteries
Incompatibility between Mg and the electrolyte has been thought of as the most difficult issue for rechargeable Mg batteries, since Mg naturally forms surface films upon exposure to oxygen, humidity, or most polar organic solvents. Unlike Li, the surface layer on Mg is a passivation barrier that insulates against both electrons and ionic species. Therefore, reversible Mg dissolution–deposition reactions do not occur in most polar organic electrolytes, such as those common in Li batteries. Mg can be electrochemically deposited and dissolved reversibly in solutions of Grignard reagents (RMgX, where R is an alkyl or aryl group, and X is Cl or Br) in ether,179,180 since Mg electrodes are not passivated in such systems. However, the Grignard reagents cannot be used in battery systems due to their intrinsically strong reducing nature. Since reversible Mg dissolution–deposition reactions in Mg(AlCl2BuEt)2/THF electrolytes were reported in 2000, much enthusiasm has been devoted to finding compatible electrolytes with reversible Mg dissolution–deposition reactions.
In contrast to Li metal anodes, Mg dendrite formation has not been observed during electrodeposition.181,182 Aurbach et al. studied Mg deposition and dissolution processes using various analytical techniques, and demonstrated that the morphology of Mg deposition was strongly dependent on the composition of the electrolyte.181 Also, an electrodeposition process of Mg metal from a Grignard-reagent-based electrolyte was compared with Li electrodeposition at various current densities.182 The obtained Mg deposits did not show any dendritic morphology, as shown in Fig. 12, while all the Li deposits showed dendritic deposits under the same electrochemical conditions. An electrochemical study of the deposition–dissolution process of the Mg showed that the overpotential of Mg deposition had a significant dependency on the electrolyte concentration.
 Fig. 12  SEM images of the electrodeposited magnesium: (a) 500×, 0.5 mA cm−2, (b) 500×, 1.0 mA cm−2, (c) 500×, 2.0 mA cm−2, (d) 5000×, 0.5 mA cm−2, (e) 5000×, 1.0 mA cm−2 and (f) 5000×, 2.0 mA cm−2 (Science Direct, reprinted with permission).182 
Various types of Mg alloys have been investigated as better alternatives to pure Mg metal in rechargeable Mg batteries.183 The performances of Mg-alloys were dependent on the surface treatment prior to assembly. AZ61 alloy (6 wt% Al, 1 wt% Zn) showed good electrochemical performance with the highest Coulombic efficiency and the lowest resistance in coin cells among various Mg alloys. Although the highest resistance was observed with AP65 among these systems (6 wt% Al, 5 wt% Pb), it showed good Coulombic efficiency and reversible dissolution–deposition reaction.
Nanostructured materials for rechargeable batteries provide enhanced kinetics because of their large surface areas, short diffusion lengths, and fast diffusion rates. The search for nanostructured Mg is a highly interesting topic for next-generation rechargeable Mg batteries.171,184 Mg nanoparticles prepared using the ionic liquid-assisted chemical reduction method have been tested for reversibility with a graphite-like MoS2 cathode in Mg(AlCl2Bu)2/THF electrolytes.184 They exhibited high reversibility with a discharge capacity of 170 mA h g−1 due to a decrease in the thickness of the passivating surface films, thus increasing Mg ion diffusion in the anode.
Owing to the metallic properties of Mg, physical modification methods such as ball milling, physical sputtering, and vapor deposition methods are more suitable for the preparation of nanostructured Mg than chemical modification methods. Recently, various physically modified nanostructured forms of Mg have been reported, such as Mg nanoblades185 and 3D prism-like single-crystalline Mg nanostructures.186 Although the nanostructured Mg has not yet been employed in the rechargeable Mg battery field, it could be applicable to secondary batteries for better electrochemical performance.
3.2 Rechargeable Mg-ion batteries
To compensate for the problems of Mg metal anodes, Mg-ion batteries have been suggested as an alternative solution. Matsui et al. reported electrodeposited bismuth (Bi), antimony (Sb), and Bi1−xSbx alloys as anodes for Mg-ion batteries.187 The Bi0.88Sb0.12 and Bi anodes showed good cycling performance over 100 cycles, while Sb showed poor reversibility, regardless of the morphology of the deposit, which suggested the importance of the Mg–M bond strength. Additionally, the reversible Mg2+ insertion–extraction of the Bi electrode in an Mg(N(SO2CF3)2)2/acetonitrile electrolyte demonstrated the compatibility of the Bi anode with conventional Mg-ion battery electrolytes. The following Mg reaction was possible with the Bi electrode: 2Bi + 3Mg2+ + 6e− ↔ Mg3Bi2(4)
Recently, Sn was also suggested as a high-energy-density insertion-type anode material for rechargeable Mg-ion batteries.188 The Sn anode showed higher capacities (903 mA h g−1) and lower Mg2+ insertion–extraction voltages (0.15/0.20 V vs. Mg/Mg2+). The electrochemical reaction between Mg and Sn can be expressed as follows: Sn + 2Mg2+ + 4e− ↔ Mg2Sn(5)
Considering the many other binary Mg-based compounds, searches for higher-energy-density Mg-alloy-based anodes will be an important issue for solving the issues with rechargeable Mg-ion batteries.
3.3 Mg–air batteries
Mg–air batteries show promising properties, such as a high theoretical voltage of 3.09 V (in practice, the open circuit voltage is about 1.6 V) and an energy density of 2,840 W h kg−1. Although the Mg–air batteries have interesting advantages, only a few studies have focused on the development of the batteries. The reaction chemistry of Mg–air batteries in aqueous electrolytes is as follows: Anode: 2Mg + 4(OH)− → 2Mg(OH)2 + 4e− (E0 = −2.69 V vs. SHE)(6) Cathode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4(OH)− (E0 = 0.40 V vs. SHE)(7) Overall reaction: 2Mg + O2 + 2H2O ↔ 2Mg(OH)2 (Ecell = 3.09 V)(8)
The Mg–air batteries can be mechanically recharged, because the Mg electrode can be easily replaced.189,190 The major problems in Mg–air battery systems are a low Coulombic efficiency of the Mg plate electrode, and high polarization during discharge. Therefore, to improve the battery performance in this system, the Mg electrode has to be modified to improve the electrochemical properties. Mg–Li and Mg–Li–Al–Ce alloys were suggested as potential materials for Mg–air battery anodes.190,191 They showed higher electrochemical activity and a lower self-corrosion rate, which contributed to the higher operating voltage, anodic efficiency, and larger capacity than those with Mg and AZ31. Recently, Chen et al. reported on shape-controlled metallic Mg nano/meso-scale structured materials, such as Mg spheres, Mg plates, Mg nanorods, and sea-urchin-like Mg, which were prepared and applied to Mg–air battery systems, as shown in Fig. 13.192 The results showed that Mg sea-urchin-like nanostructure with the highest specific surface area displayed much better electrochemical performance and high energy density.
 Fig. 13  Typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the various nanostructured Mg: (a) Mg spheres, (b) Mg plates, (c) Mg nanorods, (d) sea urchin-like Mg (The John Wiley & Sons, Inc., reprinted with permission).192 
3.4 Mg–Sb liquid metal batteries
An all-liquid Mg–Sb metal battery operating at a high temperature of 700 °C comprising an Mg negative electrode, a molten salt electrolyte (MgCl2–KCl–NaCl), and an Sb positive electrode was proposed and characterized.193 Because of differences in density and immiscibility, the salt and metal phases were divided into three distinct layers (Fig. 14), and the following reaction chemistry was suggested: Anode: Mg → Mg2+ + 2e−(9) Cathode: Mg2+ + 2e− → Mg(Sb)(10) Overall reaction: Mg ↔ Mg(Sb)(11)
At the negative electrode, Mg is oxidized to Mg2+ during discharge, while at the positive electrode, Mg2+ ions in the electrolyte are reduced to Mg, which is deposited onto the Sb electrode to form a liquid metal alloy of Mg(Sb). During the charge step, the reverse reactions occur. Prepared cells were cycled under constant current conditions, and demonstrated high rate capabilities and negligible corrosion of the solid-state cell components over the testing period.
 Fig. 14  Mg∥Sb liquid metal battery operated at 700 °C showing the three stratified liquid phases upon cooling to room temperature. The cell was filled with epoxy prior to sectioning (The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).193 
4. Metallic zinc (Zn) electrode
The Zn electrode is one of the most widely used metallic electrodes. Zn has various advantageous features of abundance, low cost, environmental benignity, ease of handling, relatively low equilibrium potential, stability in aqueous electrolytes, and good electrochemical equivalence of 820 Ah kg−1.165 Therefore, Zn has been a material of choice for battery anodes for more than two centuries. There are several commercial Zn-based battery systems, such as Zn–MnO2, Zn–AgO, Zn–HgO, Zn–air, and Ni–Zn. Each of the systems has its own unique advantages in certain market sectors.165,194 Among these battery systems, Zn–air and Ni–Zn can be used as rechargeable batteries, and research has been conducted to enhance their electrochemical performance. This section focuses on issues related to Zn anodes for rechargeable Zn-based batteries.
4.1 Rechargeable Zn–air(O2) batteries
Zn–air batteries show the highest specific energy density compared with other Zn-based alkaline batteries, which is due to the unlimited supply of oxygen from air. The theoretical specific energy density of Zn–air batteries is 1086 W h kg−1. The overall cell discharge reactions for a Zn–air(O2) rechargeable battery using a Zn anode and an air cathode in KOH electrolyte solution can be summarized as follows:165,194–196 Anode: Zn → Zn2+ + 2e−(12) Zn2+ + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42− + 2e− (E0 = –1.25 V vs. SHE)(13) Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−(14) Cathode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH− (E0 = 0.4 V vs. SHE)(15) Overall reaction: 2Zn + O2 ↔ 2ZnO (Ecell = 1.65 V)(16)
Secondary Zn–air(O2) batteries can be classified into mechanically and electrically rechargeable batteries.165,197 The mechanically rechargeable batteries are designed with a means to remove and replace the discharged anodes or discharge products, and can be recharged externally. This avoids the need for a bi-functional air cathode for charge–discharge, and addresses problems with the shape change of the Zn anode resulting from repeated cycling. In contrast, electrically rechargeable batteries use an air cathode with a bi-functional catalyst, and the charge–discharge process takes place within the battery structure. A satisfactory system with electrical recharging would feature low material cost and high specific energy. However, making electrically rechargeable Zn–air batteries is still challenging.165,194,198 Although a proper bi-functional catalyst is required to charge a Zn–air battery with lower electrical potential, it is also critical for obtaining reversible zinc anodes.
Zn metal undergoes shape change during repeated charge–discharge, which includes the formation of dendrites, non-uniform zinc dissolution, and limited solubility in electrolytes.199–206 To prevent dendrite formation, intensive research has been reported, and has mainly involved three types of methods: separator modification, additives in the electrode/electrolyte, and AC or pulsed charging.207 Among these, additives in the electrode/electrolyte have attracted the most attention, and can be divided into three categories: (i) structural electrode modifiers, (ii) metallic additives, and (iii) organic additives.207–212 As structural electrode modifiers, 3-D structures using poly-tetrafluoroethylene or graphite were reported. These modifiers could help to trap the dissolved Zn species (Zn(OH)42−, Zn2+) in the vicinity of the electrode upon discharge.208–211 The metallic additives include metal or metallic oxide/hydroxide, such as Pb, Sn, Hg, HgO, CdO, PbO, Bi2O3, Ga2O3, Tl2O3, Ca(OH)2, and In(OH)3, which can be reduced to the metal prior to the reduction of zincate (Zn(OH)42−).212–215 These metallic additives increased the polarizability of the electrode, which improved the current distribution and decreased the shape change. The organic additives can be adsorbed on the electrode surface, specifically at the sites of rapid growth (i.e., dendrites).216–221 The adsorbed organic species precluded or slowed down further growth of dendrites. The effects of tetrabutylammonium bromides,217 tetra-alkyl ammonium hydroxides,218 triethanolamine,219 and Triton X-100220 were proposed and tested as inhibitors of Zn-dendrite growth. The use of anions of organic acids, such as phosphoric acid, tartaric acid, succinic acid, and citric acid, was also suggested for suppressing dendrite formation.221
Since Zn has a more negative reduction potential than hydrogen, it spontaneously generates H2 gas evolution reaction (HER) on the surface of Zn particles in an aqueous medium. The HER in an alkaline battery is given below.195,222–225 Zn + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2 + H2↑(17)
The HER on the Zn metal surface deteriorates the efficiency of the Zn, and decreases the cycle life of the Zn–air battery. To solve this problem, several methods were suggested, involving the coating of various additives on the surface of Zn metal, and the alloying of Zn metal with other metals that have a high hydrogen evolution overpotential.226 Although several metals have been demonstrated to alleviate the HER, such as Hg, Pb, and Cd, their uses are prohibited due to environmental issues.226,227 Additives using metal or metal compounds have also been proposed. Environmentally friendly Bi, Ni, and In were effective for increasing the overpotential of HER at the Zn anode, which could replace Hg and Pb in Zn alloy powders.228–230 Metallic Bi incorporated into a pasted Zn electrode also improved the discharge performance by the formation of an electronic conductive material.229 Recently, several Zn–Ni–In alloys were used for the reduction of dendrite formation and hydrogen evolution.230 Gelling agents such as cross-linked carboxymethyl cellulose, starch graft copolymers, cross-linked polyacrylic acid polymer, and organic binders were also suggested to optimize and stabilize Zn electrodes.231–234
During the discharge reaction of a Zn–air battery, Zn(OH)42− is transformed into ZnO, which acts as an insulator. To develop a rechargeable Zn–air battery, the electrochemical behavior of the Zn(OH)42− in alkaline solution has to be clarified.165 To understand the behavior and electrodeposition of the Zn(OH)42− in an alkaline electrolyte, several fundamental studies have been reported.200,203,204,222,235–237 The mechanism of zinc electroplating and the sequential transformation of Zn(OH)2 to Zn(OH)ad and Zn was studied by Peng,237 and Einerhand et al.,222 who demonstrated increased hydrogen evolution with the decreasing concentration of KOH and Zn(OH)42−.
The most practical method for improving the electrochemical performance of the Zn anode is to increase the surface area through the modification of zinc particles, which provides more efficient electrochemical reaction of Zn in the alkaline electrolyte. Several approaches for controlling the morphology of zinc metal, such as Zn-fibers and Zn-dendrites, have been reported, showing enhanced electrochemical performance.238,239 Additionally, porous electrodes with zinc particles of various shape, not just planar zinc electrodes, also showed improved charge–discharge behaviors.240 The preparation of various nanostructured Zn has been reported and applied to several Zn-based battery systems, which showed enhanced cycling behaviors.226,241 Although the nanostructured Zn has not been applied to Zn–air battery systems, it will be helpful for obtaining better performance if applied to Zn–air batteries.
4.2 Rechargeable Ni–Zn batteries
The Ni–Zn battery is an alkaline rechargeable battery system, which has drawn much attention for its high energy density, high power density, high working voltage, wide working temperature range, abundant raw material, and lack of environmental pollution in production and application. Since 2000, the development of a stabilized Zn electrode system has made this technology viable and competitive with other commercial rechargeable battery systems, such as Pb–acid, Ni–Cd, and Ni–MH.151 Although rechargeable Ni–Zn batteries were commercialized by Powergenix,242 intensive research efforts have been conducted to enhance their electrochemical properties. The anodic reactions involved in the alkaline electrolyte would be the same as those in a Zn–air battery (reactions (12)–(14)). The cathodic and overall cell reactions for the Ni–Zn battery using a Zn anode and a Ni cathode in KOH electrolyte solution can be summarized as follows:165,243,244 Cathode: 2NiOOH + 2H2O + 2e− → 2Ni(OH)2 + 2OH− (E0 = 0.48 V vs. SHE)(18) Overall reaction: Zn + 2NiOOH + H2O ↔ ZnO + 2Ni(OH)2 (Ecell = 1.73 V)(19)
ZnO powders show a tendency to dissolve in KOH solution to form a soluble zincate.244 During the discharge process of a Zn electrode, Zn releases electrons to form the zincate by charge transfer reaction. At the same time, the concentration of the zincate in the KOH solution increases, which leads to precipitation of the zincate to form ZnO. In contrast, the reaction of a rechargeable Ni/MH battery involves hydrogen diffusion in the interior of the alloy powder and charge transfer reaction at the alloy powder surface during discharge. The hydrogen atoms are adsorbed at the surface of the alloy powder in the charging process to form adsorbed hydrogen atoms (Hads), which diffuse into the interior of the alloy to become absorbed hydrogen atoms (Habs).
A Zn electrode can be prepared in either charged or discharged states depending on whether the starting material is metallic Zn (charged) or ZnO (discharged). Typically, charged Zn electrodes are used only in primary batteries, while secondary batteries are usually manufactured in the discharged state.165 Therefore, the investigation of the reaction mechanism for the formation of ZnO in rechargeable Ni–Zn batteries is a very important issue to improve its electrochemical performance. The most critical problems of Ni–Zn rechargeable batteries are their relatively low cycle life, self-discharge, and discharge capacity fading, which are attributed to the shape change of the Zn electrode and Zn corrosion.199–206,245–247 These disadvantages are similar to those of a Zn anode in a Zn–air battery system. Research has been carried out to overcome the shape change and dissolution problems of the Zn electrode.
One approach is to add additives to either the electrode or the electrolyte.212,213,248–251 A physical mixture of ZnO and metal or metal oxides, such as Ag,248 Ni,249 SnO2,213 Bi2O3,211 CdO,250 and PbO,251 was suggested to improve the electrochemical performance of Zn electrodes. Enhanced charge–discharge behaviors were demonstrated, because the additives reduced the zincate concentration, provided an improved substrate for Zn electrodeposition, enhanced the electronic conductivity, and enabled a uniform current distribution. Also, the addition of calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2, to the Zn electrode led to a decrease of the zincate concentration and an increase of the cell life.252,253 The reason was that Ca(OH)2 reacted with the discharge product of ZnO to yield calcium zincate, Ca(OH)2·2Zn(OH)2·2H2O.
However, these physical mixtures could not provide a homogeneous mixture and tight contact between the additives and ZnO particles, so the efficiency of the additives was relatively low. In addition, some additives with poor electronic conductivity would increase the internal resistance of the battery, and result in insufficient drainage of charges within the active material during recharging. Recently, several studies for homogeneous and tight contact between additives and ZnO have been reported. Ca(OH)2-coated ZnO and ZnO/conductive-ceramic nanocomposites were prepared by direct precipitation methods,254,255 which showed better cycling stability and higher discharge capacities compared with pure ZnO and physical mixtures of ZnO/additives. TiO2-coated ZnO prepared by the sol–gel method at various temperatures showed improved physicochemical and electrochemical properties, since the passive surface layer effectively reduced the dissolution of Zn, which caused self-discharge and capacity fading. The modified ZnO suppressed the shape change and the formation of dendrites.256 K2CO3 and KF were also suggested as additives in the alkaline electrolytes, which could partially solve the problems of shape change and dendritic shorting of the Zn electrode by reducing the solubility of Zn in the electrolyte.257
Research on nanostructured ZnO has shown the enhancement of the charge–discharge behaviors of Zn electrodes. Acicular crystalline ZnO showed improved cycling behavior, since Zn grains were kept from becoming extremely large, and suppressed the dendrite formation of the Zn electrodes.258 ZnO nanowires and nanoplates were prepared by hydrothermal routes, and improved cycle performance was observed in comparison with conventional ZnO. Conventional ZnO showed distinct dendrite formation after cycling, whereas the ZnO nanoplates and ZnO nanowires did not change their morphology, and Zn dendrites were suppressed effectively after repeated cycling (Fig. 15).259,260 The ZnO nanowires intertwisted readily and decreased the contact resistance among electrode materials. The nanoplate ZnO had excellent plasticity, creep resistance, and the fastest growth in the 〈11−20〉 direction, in addition to impeding dendritic formation.
 Fig. 15  Morphology evolution process of various nanostructured ZnO: (a) conventional ZnO before cycling and (b) after 40 cycles, (c) ZnO nanoplates before cycling and (d) after 67 cycles, and (e) ZnO nanowires before cycling and (f) after 75 cycles (Science Direct, reprinted with permission).259,260 
5. Other battery systems based on metallic anode materials
There have been continuous efforts to make the electric grid more stable and reliable in energy storage systems (ESSs) using rechargeable batteries. ESSs are used to store excess electricity during off-peak hours, which is released during peak hours. ESSs are significantly beneficial for reducing the need for peak generation, as well as strain on transmission and distribution networks. ESSs can also provide critical auxiliary functions to render renewable energy more efficient by frequency regulation and voltage support.
5.1 Na–S battery
Among various ESSs, sodium–sulfur (Na–S) batteries have been intensively explored due to their high energy density, high cycling efficiency, and long-term reliability. An Na–S battery can be fabricated using abundant and inexpensive materials. The first Na–S battery was developed in the 1960s by the Ford motor company.261–263 The Na–S battery consists of an Na anode, an S cathode, and a beta alumina solid electrolyte (BASE), which operates around 300 °C. At such a high temperature, both Na and S exist in a molten state, and S is absorbed in a carbon sponge or graphite felt. During the discharge, molten metallic Na loses an electron, and the Na+ ion migrates to the S container through the BASE. During the charge, the reverse process takes place, and these processes can be expressed as follows with a 2 V cell voltage: Anode: 2Na ↔ 2Na+ + 2e−(20) Cathode: 4S + 2e− ↔ S42−(21) Overall reaction: 2Na + 4S ↔ Na2S4(22)
In a typical structure of a Na–S battery, the molten Na and S are placed in concentric cylindrical containers separated by metals and the BASE, with Na in the center and S on the outside, as shown in Fig. 16. Because of the high reactivity of Na and S, each cell is sealed to prevent leakage.
 Fig. 16  Schematics of the structure and electrochemical reactions of a Na–S battery system (The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).261 
From a material perspective, modification of this type of battery has mainly focused on the solid electrolyte. There are two types of crystal structures in BASE, which are β-Al2O3 (hexagonal; P63/mmc a = 0.559 nm, c = 2.261 nm) and β′′-Al2O3 (rhombohedral; R3m a = 0.560 nm, c = 3.395 nm).264,265 The unit cell of β′′-Al2O3 is 50% larger than that of β-Al2O3, and shows higher Na+ conductivity. The stoichiometry of BASE can be expressed as (Na2O)·11Al2O3. Due to its thermodynamically metastable nature, dopants such as MgO or Li2O are generally used to stabilize the crystal structure.266,267 A highly dense form of BASE is required to achieve high ionic conductivity and mechanical strength, and these properties are closely related to its microstructural characteristics such as the particle size and porosity. The synthesis of conventional BASE is carried out by the solid-state reaction of α-Al2O3 with Na2CO3 and MgO, and/or Li2O as a stabilizer.268 The solid-state reaction, however, had a disadvantage in that a two-phase mixture of β and β′′-Al2O3 was formed, and complex post treatments were often necessary to obtain a single-phase material.
Instead of this conventional method, syntheses of β′′-Al2O3 through soft-chemistry such as sol–gel method,269 co-precipitation,270 and spray-freeze/freeze-drying271 have also been reported. In these methods, single-phase β′′-Al2O3 can be obtained only after post heat treatment for several hours at high temperature, since sintering below 1850 K does not provide the required properties. High-temperature sintering would lead to the loss of Na, resulting in compositional variation with lower conductivity, which is not suitable for solid electrolytes. The solution combustion method272 can yield a single-phase β′′-Al2O3 at much lower temperatures such as 773 K, but a subsequent higher-temperature heat treatment is needed. In order to overcome this problem, microwave synthesis has been employed for simultaneous synthesis and sintering. Subasri et al. demonstrated that a single phase of β-Al2O3 or β′′-Al2O3 could be prepared using microwaves to produce a high-density phase within a short period of time.273
The mechanical strength of BASE is also affected significantly by abnormally grown grains, as well as defects such as voids, cracks, and impurities, which can result in crack generation and propagation sites. The fracture toughness of BASE can also be improved by the incorporation of ZrO2, which leads to an increase of the critical current density, and thus improved battery performance characteristics such as cycle life and rate capability.274 Because ZrO2 is not an Na+ conductor at the battery operating temperature, excessive ZrO2 is harmful to the battery performance.
The Na+ ion conductivity of β′′-Al2O3 is also influenced by the microstructure and impurities.275 As the average particle size decreases, the fracture toughness increases, and the Na+ ion conductivity decreases. Impurities such as Ca and Si form undesirable phases of calcium aluminate and aluminum silicate on the grain boundaries, respectively, resulting in an increase of resistance. Ca also induces incomplete wetting between the liquid Na anode and the electrolyte. Despite considerable technical improvements, the BASE system cannot be adapted for low-temperature applications. To compensate for the drawbacks of BASE, a low-temperature Na+ ion conductor was recently reported. Ceramatec reported the achievement of an Na–S battery system operating at 120 °C, which employed a NASICON-type electrolyte with conductivity on the order of 10−2 S cm−1.276 Hayashi et al. studied an Na3PS4 superionic conductor, which showed Na+ ion conductivity of over 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. They constructed an all-solid-state cell (Na–Sn/Na3PS4/TiS2), which operated as a rechargeable sodium battery at room temperature with an average cell voltage of 1.6 V.277
Although Na–S batteries have been investigated for a long time, they still have some shortcomings. The primary disadvantage is safety. If the BASE electrolyte is broken, an internal short between the anode and the cathode occurs, and the cell may explode. Also, sodium polysulfide is highly corrosive and attacks the container, which requires an effective protective coating. Because of this corrosive environment, it is not possible to fabricate planar cells, and the design is restricted to tubular cells. High-cost conducting components are also needed for the cathode to provide sufficient electronic conductivity due to the insulating nature of the S electrode.
5.2 Na–NiCl2 battery
To overcome these disadvantages of the Na–S battery, another liquid Na-based battery system was invented using Na–NiCl2 in 1978, and was called the ZEBRA battery (Zeolite applied to Battery Research Africa).278 Since the Na–NiCl2 battery employed the same anode and electrolyte as those of the Na–S battery, it operated under almost the same conditions. The reactions at each electrode and the overall cell reactions were as follows with a cell voltage of 2.58 V at 300 °C: Anode: 2Na → 2Na+ + 2e−(23) Cathode: NiCl2 + 2Na+ + 2e− → Ni + 2NaCl(24) Overall reaction: NiCl2 + 2Na→ Ni + 2NaCl(25)
Because the BASE and metal halide in the cathode were in solid states, molten NaAlCl4 was used as an auxiliary electrolyte to enhance the contact between BASE and the cathode, thus promoting Na+ ion transport. Unlike sodium polysulfide, metal halide is not so corrosive, resulting in fewer restrictions on the choice of cell component materials for this system. The Na–NiCl2 battery is relatively safe compared to the Na–S battery. Once BASE is broken, NaAlCl4 reacts with Na to form Al and NaCl, which could seal small cracks. If a crack is large enough and cannot be sealed by NaCl, there would be a soft short-circuit by Al, and the cell voltage drops without cell breaking. Even in this case, the cell still operates. Another advantage of this battery regarding safety is that it protects BASE under overcharge conditions by reacting Ni with NaAlCl4 to form Na and metal halides, 2NaAlCl4 + Ni → 2Na + 2AlCl3 + NiCl2 (E = 3.05 V)(26)
By adding a small amount of NaBr and NaI, Na+ ion transport was enhanced, and cell performance was improved. Al, Fe, and FeS were also helpful for increasing cell performance by stabilizing the cathode.279 Another metal halide cathode such as FeCl2 was also explored, but BASE degradation and overcharge sensitivity had to be solved for adaptation as an alternative to NiCl2 cathodes.280
5.3 Na–air(O2) battery
Recently, Na–air(O2) battery systems have also gained attention as a high-energy-density Na secondary battery for electric vehicle applications.7,281–283 The theoretical cell voltage is 2.33 V (with Na2O2 as a final product), with a theoretical energy density of 1605 W h kg−1, which is much higher than that of currently used Li-ion batteries.7 Peled et al. demonstrated an Na–O2 battery that operates above the melting point of the Na metal anode,281 which showed a working cell voltage of 1.75 V, and required 3.0 V during charging. They stated that the use of a liquid Na anode at elevated temperature had some advantages compared to an Li metal anode, by acceleration of the sluggish cathode reactions, lowering of the cell impedance, elimination of dendrite formation, minimization of the interference by water vapor and CO2, and utilization of light and low-cost hardware materials like aluminum. In order to prove that molten Na could be cycled, the electrochemical performance of a liquid Na metal anode was investigated at 105 °C using a coin cell composed of Na triflate (NaCF3SO3)/polyethylene oxide (PEO) polymer electrolyte/Al. While the liquid Na anode was cycled for over 140 cycles, the Coulombic efficiency of the liquid Na anode during cycling was about 85% for each cycle, which is too low for the commercialization of the battery system. Moreover, there are some technical issues with the use of liquid Na anodes, since liquid Na is highly corrosive, and operation at high temperature is impractical.
In order to address problems related to liquid Na anodes, Sun et al. demonstrated a room-temperature Na–air battery system using an Na metal anode and a diamond-like carbon (DLC) thin film as an air electrode.282 The gravimetric capacities of the Na–air battery operated at room temperature were 1884 mA h g−1 (565 μA h cm−2) at 1/10 C and 3600 mA h g−1 (1080 μA h cm−2) at 1/60 C. Only 56% of the initial capacity was retained after 20 cycles, and this system still suffered from poor cycle performance. Hartmann et al. reported a significant improvement of Na–air batteries by replacing the organic carbonate solvent with diethylene glycol dimethyl ether.7 The Na–air battery system showed reversible charge and discharge with a relatively low overpotential of about 200 mV and current densities as high as 0.2 mA cm−2, even without any catalyst for the air cathode. Better electrochemical kinetics of the Na–air battery system could be obtained compared to that of the Li–air battery system (Fig. 17). It was also shown that crystalline Na superoxide (NaO2) formed in a single-electron transfer step as a solid discharge product, indicating that the reaction mechanism of the Na–air battery differs from that of the Li–air battery system. Even though the capacity retention of the Na–air battery is still poor, these results showed that the Na–air battery system deserves to be regarded as a promising candidate for next-generation battery systems. However, the use of Na metal anodes should be carefully investigated in terms of safety and reliability, because of the low melting point of Na metal (∼98 °C) and its high reactivity. This battery safety issue could be solved by using an alternative battery material that can guarantee safe operation of Na-based secondary batteries, including a Na+ conducting solid-state electrolyte and Na-alloy systems such as Na–Sn alloy.284
 Fig. 17  Electrochemical characterization of Na–O2 (a) and Li–O2 (b) cells with a gas diffusion layer cathode (Nature Publishing Group, reprinted with permission).7 
5.4 Al–air(O2) battery
Al–air(O2) battery systems have been regarded as a promising system for electric vehicles, because of their high theoretical energy density (2793 W h kg−1) with a theoretical cell voltage of 2.71 V.285 In addition, Al anodes have advantages such as low cost, environmentally friendliness, and recyclability. However, there are some problems to be solved for practical use of Al–air battery systems. First of all, the working voltage of Al–air batteries is too low (about 1.3 V) compared to the theoretical value,286 because Al anodes cannot be operated at the equilibrium potential of AL due to unwanted side reactions between Al and H2O. Al–air battery systems using aqueous electrolytes also cannot be recharged, and only mechanical charging (replacing the discharged Al anode with a new Al anode) is possible.
Despite these challenges, Al–air battery systems deserve to be considered as a potential candidate for EV power sources. Yang et al. reported that a cost as low as $1.1 kg−1 could be achieved with Al anodes if the discharge product can be recycled, and the energy efficiency of the Al–air system could be comparable to that of an internal combustion engine through a design analysis of the Al–air battery for EVs, in terms of cost, life-cycle, and energy density.286 They also showed that Al–air battery systems could have a driving range comparable to that of internal combustion engines. Considering that the production cost of a battery and driving range are key success factors for the commercialization of electric vehicles, Al–air battery systems still have potential as a power source for EVs. There are some inherent issues when Al anodes are used, including the reversibility of Al anodes during cycling (reversible electrodeposition and dissolution) and the inhibition of Al corrosion with the electrolyte. Recent progress in electrochemical technology with non-aqueous electrolytes such as room-temperature ionic liquids will be helpful to address the issues with Al anodes for Al–air battery systems.
6. Summary
Recent applications for EVs and large-scale energy storage systems have increased the demand for high-electrochemical-performance materials for anodes, cathodes, and electrolytes with other components in rechargeable batteries. Widespread usage of EVs employing current Li-ion batteries has been delayed due to their insufficient energy density and the high cost of large-scale Li-ion batteries. Secondary batteries employing metallic anode materials generally have higher volumetric and/or gravimetric energy densities, and are promising candidates to replace Li-ion batteries and to increase the driving range of EVs.
However, even though extensive research has been carried out to solve the problems associated with metallic anodes, especially for Li metal, commercialization is still hindered by the many technical issues left to be solved. The poor cycle performance of metallic anode material is one of the most important issues, as well as reliability and safety concerns. In this review, we have presented the closely related unresolved issues such as the underlying reaction mechanism of Li dendrites and the development of physicochemically stable passivation layers for Li electrodes for Li-metal-based secondary batteries. These issues are of the utmost importance for realizing widespread usage of EVs and large-format electricity storage for renewable energy, as well as for the commercialization of Li–air and Li–S batteries. Li metal electrodes with high reversibility and safety would be exploited as anodes for currently used Li-ion batteries, since the theoretical gravimetric energy density of current Li-ion batteries could be almost doubled if Li metal anodes could be successfully adopted. For example, the maximum gravimetric energy density of an Li–MnO2 cell is about 712 W h kg−1, which is 184% larger than that of graphite-LiCoO2 cells. This fact indicates that it is not necessary to modify the currently used Li-ion battery cell configuration, thereby suppressing the increase in the production cost associated with the further installation of assembly lines for newly designed cell configurations such as Li–air batteries. Also prelithiated metallic or Li-containing non-metallic materials should be exploited as anode materials for Li–S and Li–air batteries.
Mg and Zn metallic anodes have gained much attention as anode materials for Zn- and Mg-based secondary batteries, because of their abundance, low cost, and high theoretical energy density, especially for metal–air batteries. Although these electrodes have shown improved electrochemical performance along with the recent progress, there are still many technical issues to be overcome for commercialization. Zn electrodes have shape-change problems, as well as technical problems similar to those of Li electrodes, such as dendritic growth of Zn during cycling, and irreversible chemical reaction with the electrolyte. Even though Mg electrodes do not show severe shape changes during cycling, the use of Mg electrodes as an anode for Mg secondary batteries is still hindered by irreversible chemical reaction of the Mg electrode. Proper design of electrode and electrolyte materials in terms of microstructure, composition, reaction chemistries, and shape control based on comprehensive knowledge of the underlying reaction mechanisms is required to further advance the employment of metallic anode materials for next-generation secondary batteries.
Notes and references
LIB-related Study, Program 2010–2011, Institute of Information Technology, Ltd., Japan, 2011.
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115 RSC .
N. Choi, Z. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, X. Ji, Y.-K. Sun, K. Amine, G. Yushin, L. Nazar, J. Cho and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9994 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jeong, Y.-U. Kim, H. Kim, Y.-J. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1986 CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19 CrossRef CAS .
R. Black, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 801 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hartmann, C. L. Bender, M. Vracar, A. K. Durr, A. Garsuch, J. Janek and P. Adelhelm, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 228 CrossRef CAS .

          J.-I. Yamaki and S.-I. Tobishima, in Handbook of Battery Materials, ed. C. Daniel and J. O. Bessenhard, Wiley-VCH Verlag & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2011, ch. 13 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, D. L. Wang and C. S. Dai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A390 CrossRef CAS .
F. Orsini, A. D. Pasquier, B. Beaudoin, J. M. Tarascon, M. Trentin, N. Langenhuizen, D. E. Beer and P. Notten, J. Power Sources, 1998, 76, 19 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .
U. V. Sacken, E. Nodwell, A. Sundher and J. R. Dahn, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 69, 284 CrossRef .

          D. Aurbach, Nonaqueous Electrochemistry, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
F. C. Laman and K. Brandt, J. Power Sources, 1988, 24, 195 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brandt, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 69, 173 CrossRef CAS .

          L. F. Nazar and O. Crosnier, in Lithium Batteries Science and Technology, ed. G.-A. Nazri and G. Pistoia, Springer, New York,  2009, ch. 4 Search PubMed .
A. N. Dey and E. J. Rudd, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1974, 121, 1294 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Rauh and S. B. Brummer, Electrochim. Acta, 1977, 22, 75 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 1233 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-I. Takehara, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 82 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, S. Shiraishi and Z.-I. Takehara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L108 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, B. Markovsky, A. Schechter, Y. Ein-Eli and H. Cohen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3809 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, I. Weissman, A. Schechter and H. Cohen, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 3991 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, O. Chusid and I. Weissman, Electrochim. Acta, 1996, 41, 747 CrossRef CAS .
M. Odziemkowski, M. Krell and D. E. Irish, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 3052 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2003, 114, 277 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach and Y. Cohen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3525 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Granvalet-Mancini, T. Hanrath and D. Teeters, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 283 CrossRef .
D. Aurbach, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 206 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tasaki, K. Kanda, T. Kobayashi, S. Nakamura and M. Ue, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2192 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arakawa, S.-I. Tobishima, Y. Nemoto and J.-I. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43–44, 27 CrossRef .
K. Kanamura, H. Tamura, S. Shiraishi and Z.-I. Takehara, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 394, 49 CrossRef .
S. Shiraishi, K. Kanamura and Z.-I. Takehara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 1633 CrossRef CAS .
J.-I. Yamaki, S.-I. Tobishima, K. Hayashi, K. Saito, Y. Nemoto and M. Arakawa, J. Power Sources, 1998, 74, 219 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Barkey, R. H. Muller and C. W. Tobias, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 2199 CrossRef CAS .
O. Crowther and A. C. West, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A806 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Mayers, J. W. Kaminski and T. F. Miller, III, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26214 CAS .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J. N. Chazalviel, P. Baudry and S. Lascaud, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 1569 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Y. Gofer and M. Ben-Zion, J. Power Sources, 1992, 39, 163 CrossRef .
Y. Hanyu and I. Honma, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 453 CAS .
K. Okita, K.-I. Ikeda, H. Sano, Y. Iriyama and H. Sakaebe, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2135 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Lee, J. H. Lee, J.-A. Choi, W. Y. Yoon and D.-W. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1019 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303 CrossRef CAS .
R. Selim and P. Bro, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1974, 121, 1457 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, M. L. Daroux, P. W. Faguy and E. Yeager, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 1611 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, A. Zaban, A. Schechter, Y. Ein-Eli, E. Zinigrad and B. Markovsky, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2873 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Koch and J. H. Young, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 1371 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yoshimatsu, T. Hirai and J. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 2422 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham, J. S. Foos and J. L. Goldman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 2197 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Geronov, B. Puresheva, R. V. Moshtev, P. Zlatilova, T. Kosev, Z. Staynov, G. Pistoia and M. Pasquali, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 3338 CrossRef .
J. Gao, M. A. Lowe, Y. Kiya and H. D. Abruna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25132 CAS .
J. Yamaki, I. Yamazaki, M. Egashira and S. Okada, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 288 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang and C. A. Angell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 4047 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsuda, M. Morita, K. Yamada and K. Hirai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 2538 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Newman, R. W. Francis, L. H. Gaines and B. M. Rao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2025 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nanjundiah, J. L. Goldman, L. A. Dominey and V. R. Koch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 2914 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Jang and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3342 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shiraishi, K. Kanamura and Z. Takehara, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 3542 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, H. Tamura, S. Shiraishi and Z. Takehara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 340 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, M. Mori, Y. Naruoka, W. M. Lamanna and R. Atanasoski, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 462 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Macfarlane, M. Forsyth, P. C. Howlett, J. M. Pringle, J. Sun, G. Annat, W. Neil and E. I. Izgorodina, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 1165 CrossRef CAS .
N. Schweikert, A. Hofmann, M. Schulz, M. Scheuermann, S. T. Boles, T. Hanemann, H. Hahn and S. Indris, J. Power Sources, 2013, 228, 237 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and A. F. Hollenkamp, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A97 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Lane, A. S. Best, D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, P. M. Bayley and A. F. Hollenkamp, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 8947 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Appetecchi, G.-T. Kim, M. Montanino, M. Carewska, R. Marcilla, D. Mecerreyes and I. De Meatza, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3668 CrossRef CAS .
A. Basile, A. F. Hollenkamp, A. I. Bhatt and A. P. O'Mullane, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 69 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Besenhard, M. W. Wagner, M. Winter, A. D. Jannakoudakis, P. D. Jannakoudakis and E. Theodoridou, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43–44, 413 CrossRef .

          S. B. Brummer, V. R. Koch and R. D. Rauh, in Materials for Advanced Batteries, ed. D. W. Murphy, J. Broadhead and B. C. H. Steel,  1980, Plenum Press, New York, p. 123 Search PubMed .
S. Yoon, J. Lee, S.-O. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2501 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ishikawa, M. Morita and Y. Matsuda, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 501 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ishikawa, S. Machino and M. Morita, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 473, 279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsuda, M. Ishikawa, S. Yoshitake and M. Morita, J. Power Sources, 1995, 54, 301 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Stark, Y. Ding and P. A. Kohl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1100 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, S. Shiraishi and Z. Takehara, J. Fluorine Chem., 1998, 87, 235 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Lanea, A. S. Best, D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth and A. F. Hollenkamp, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2210 CrossRef .
M. Morita, S. Oki and Y. Matsuda, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 31, 119 CrossRef .
R. Mogi, M. Inaba, S.-K. Jeong, Y. Iriyama, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1578 CrossRef CAS .
N. Byrne, P. C. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2497 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Besenhard, J. Gortler, P. Komenda and A. Paxinos, J. Power Sources, 1987, 20, 253 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirai, I. Yoshimatsu and J. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 2300 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mori, Y. Naruoka and K. Naoi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2340 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inose, S. Tada, H. Morimoto and S. Tobishima, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 550 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Ribes, P. Beaunier, P. Willmann and D. Lemordant, J. Power Sources, 1996, 58, 189 CrossRef .
T. Osaka, T. Momma, Y. Matsumoto and Y. Uchida, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 144, 1709 CrossRef .

          M. Paunovic and M. Schlesinger, in Fundamentals of electrochemical deposition, John Wiley & Sons,  1998, ch. 10 Search PubMed .
R. Akolkar, J. Power Sources, 2013, 232, 23 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ding, W. Xu, G. L. Graff, J. Zhang, M. Sushko, X. Chen, Y. Shao, M. H. Engelhard, Z. Nie, J. Xiao, X. Liu, P. V. Sushko, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4450 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Stephan, Eur. Polym. J., 2006, 42, 21 CrossRef .
F. B. Dias, L. Plomp and J. B. J. Veldhuis, J. Power Sources, 2000, 88, 169 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham and M. Alamgir, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 339 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao and D. D. Macdonald, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and J. Yang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1092 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, N. Imanishi, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2012, 219, 22 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, H. Wang, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and J. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7681 CrossRef CAS .
N.-S. Choi, B. Koo, J.-T. Yeon, K.-T. Lee and D.-W. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7249 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Kim, G. B. Appetecchi, F. Alessandrini and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 861 CrossRef CAS .
F. Croce, G. B. Appetecchi, L. Persi and and B. Scrosati, Nature, 1998, 394, 456 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Agrawal and G. P. Pandey, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 223001 CrossRef .
B. Kumar and L. G. Scanlon, J. Power Sources, 1994, 52, 261 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Kao and C.-L. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 116, 998 CrossRef .
C.-S. Liao and W.-B. Ye, J. Polym. Res., 2003, 10, 241 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Weston and B. C. Steele, Solid State Ionics, 1982, 7, 75 CrossRef CAS .
M. Siekierski, P. Rzeszotarski and K. Nadara, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 2129 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Tambelli, A. C. Bloise, A. V. Rosario, E. C. Pereira, C. J. Magon and J. P. Donoso, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 1677 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Vaia, S. Vasudevan, W. Krawiec, L. G. Scanlon and E. P. Giannelis, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 154 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Fan, C. W. Nan and M. Li, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 369, 698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xi, S. Miao and X. Tang, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8592 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Nan, L. Fan, Y. Lin and Q. Cai, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 266104 CrossRef .
J. Xi and X. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 5293 CrossRef CAS .
F. Marchioni, K. Star, E. Menke, T. Buffeteau, L. Servant, B. Dunn and F. Wudl, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11597 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Sakamoto, F. Wudl and B. Dunn, Solid State Ionics, 2001, 144, 295 CrossRef CAS .
S. Neuhold, D. J. Schroeder and J. T. Vaughey, J. Power Sources, 2006, 206, 295 CrossRef .
R. S. Thompson, D. J. Schroeder, C. M. López, S. Neuhold and J. T. Vaughey, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1369 CrossRef CAS .
N.-S. Choi, Y. M. Lee, J. H. Park and J.-K. Park, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 610 CrossRef CAS .
N.-S. Choi, Y. M. Lee, K. Y. Cho, D.-H. Ko and J.-K. Park, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 1238 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-I. Takehara, Z. Ogumi, Y. Uchimoto, K. Yasuda and H. Yoshida, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43–44, 377 CrossRef .
N.-S. Choi, Y. M. Lee, W. Seol, J. A. Lee and J.-K. Park, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 172, 19 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, Z. Wen, Y. Liu, X. Wang and L. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8091 CrossRef CAS .

          L. C. Dejonghe and S. J. Visco, et al., US20080113261-A1,  2008 Search PubMed .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, H. Teller and P. Dan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1274 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Park and W. Y. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2003, 114, 237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosso, T. Gobron, C. Brissot, J.-N. Chazalviel and S. Lascaud, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 804 CrossRef CAS .
C. Monroe and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1377 CrossRef CAS .
I. W. Seong, C. H. Hong, B. K. Kim and W. Y. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 769 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhamu, G. Chen, C. Liu, D. Neff, Q. Fang, Z. Yu, W. Xiong, Y. Wang, X. Wang and B. Z. Jang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5701 CAS .
X. Ji, D.-Y. Liu, D. G. Prendiville, Y. Zhang, X. Liu and G. D. Stucky, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 10 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kanno, M. Murayama, T. Inada, T. Kobayashi, K. Sakamoto, N. Sonoyama, A. Yamada and S. Kondo, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A455 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pereira, R. Scaffaro, Z. Guo, S. Nieh, J. Arias and H. T. Hahn, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2008, 10, 393 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ishikawa, Y. Takaki, M. Morita and Y. Matsuda, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L90 CrossRef CAS .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 1, 2193 CAS .
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 886 CrossRef CAS .
D. Capsoni, M. Bini, S. Ferrari, E. Quartarone and P. Mustarelli, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 253 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamin, J. Penciner, A. Gorenshtain, M. Elam and E. Peled, J. Power Sources, 1985, 14, 129 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamin, A. Gorenshtain, J. Penciner, Y. Sternberg and E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 1045 CrossRef CAS .
S.-E. Cheon, K.-S. Ko, J.-H. Cho, S.-W. Kim, E.-Y. Chin and H.-T. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A796 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Mikhaylik and J. R. Akridge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1969 CrossRef CAS .

          S. J. Visco and M.-Y. Chu, US Pat., 6 025 094,  2000 Search PubMed .

          M.-Y. Chu, S. J. Visco and L. C. De Jonghe, US Pat., 6 402 795,  2002 Search PubMed .

          J. Fu, US Pat., 5 702 995,  1997 Search PubMed .
J. Fu, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 96, 195 CrossRef CAS .

          S. J. Visco, B. D. Katz, Y. S. Nimon and L. C. De Jonghe, US Pat., 7 282 295,  2007 Search PubMed .
N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, T. Zhang, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1392 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hasegawa, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, J. Xie, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 371 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, A. Hirano, J. Xie, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A965 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, A. Hirano, J. Xie, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A132 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, Y. Shimonishi, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1661 RSC .

          Y. V. Milkhaylik, US Pat., 7 553 590,  2009 Search PubMed .

          Y. V. Milkhaylik, US Pat., 7 842 421,  2010 Search PubMed .
D. Aurbach, E. Pollak, R. Elazari, G. Salitra, C. S. Kelley and J. Affinito, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A694 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, Z. Wen, Y. Lin, M. Wu, J. Jin, H. Zhang and X. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9839 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang and J. A. Read, J. Power Sources, 2012, 200, 77 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 70, 344 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, L. Hu, M. T. McDowell, A. Jackson and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6487 CrossRef CAS .
R. Elazari, G. Salitra, G. Gershinsky, A. Garsuch, A. Pancehnko and D. Aurbach, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 21 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, J. Kim, D.-J. Lee, H.-G. Jung, S.-M. Lee, Y. K. Sun and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, Y.-X. Yin, S. Xin, J. Su, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 58 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhattacharyya, B. Key, H. Chen, A. S. Best, A. F. Hollenkamp and C. P. Grey, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 504 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandrashekar, N. M. Trease, H. J. Chang, L.-S. Du, C. P. Grey and A. Jerschow, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 311 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Ryou, D. J. Lee, J.-N. Lee, Y. M. Lee, J.-K. Park and J. W. Choi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 1, 610 CrossRef .
H. Jin, Z. Li, L. Ju and Y. Xu, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2012, 1, A59 CrossRef .

          K. Sasajima, Y. Yamamoto, H. Munakata and K. Kanamura, 217th Electrochemical Society Meeting, 2010 (Abstract #356).
T. Gregory, R. J. Hoffman and R. C. Winterton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 775 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Z. Lu, A. Schechter, Y. Gofer, H. Gizbar, R. Turgeman, Y. Cohen, M. Moshkovich and E. Levi, Nature, 2000, 407, 724 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Reddy and D. Linden, Linden's Handbook of Batteries, McGraw, Hill, 4th edn,  2011 Search PubMed .
P. Novak, R. Imhof and O. Haas, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 351 CrossRef CAS .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur, A. G. Oliver, T. Sugimoto, M. Matsui, H. S. Kim, G. D. Allred, J. Zajicek and Y. Kotani, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5941 CAS .
E. Levi, Y. Gofer and D. Aurbach, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 860 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, G. S. Suresh, E. Levi, A. Mitelman, O. Mizrahi, O. Chusid and M. Brunelli, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4260 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, A. Schechter, M. Moshkovich and D. Aurbach, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 466, 203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, R. Feng, S. Yang, H. Ma, J. Liang and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rasul, S. Suzuki, S. Yamaguchi and M. Miyayama, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 542 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Tao, L. N. Xu, X. L. Gou, J. Chen and H. T. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2080 RSC .
D. Imamura, M. Miyayama, M. Hibino and T. Kudo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A753 CrossRef CAS .
Y. NuLi, J. Yang, J. Wang and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12594 CAS .
Y. NuLi, Y. Zheng, Y. Wang, J. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12437 RSC .
O. Mizrahi, N. Amir, E. Pollak, O. Chusid, V. Marks, H. Gottlieb, L. Larush, E. Zinigrad and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A103 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, H. Gizbar, A. Schechter, O. Chusid, H. E. Gottlieb, Y. Gofer and I. Goldberg, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A115 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Connor, W. E. Reid and G. B. Wood, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1957, 104, 38 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liebenow, J. Appl. Chem., 1997, 27, 221 CAS .
D. Aurbach, A. Schechter, M. Moshkovich and Y. Cohen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1004 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsui, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7048 CrossRef CAS .

          A. P. Syvertsen, PhD Dissertation, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,  2012 Search PubMed .
B. Peng, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2877 RSC .
F. Tang, T. Parker, H. F. Li, G. C. Wang and T. M. Lu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 3239 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, C. Rossi, C. Tenailleau and P. Alphonse, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063123 CrossRef .
T. S. Arthur, N. Singh and M. Matsui, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 103 CrossRef CAS .
N. Singh, T. S. Arthur, C. Ling, M. Matsui and F. Mizuno, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 149 RSC .

          http://www.magpowersystems.com/
        .
O. Sivakesavam and Y. V. R. K. Prasad, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2002, 323, 270 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, N. Li, D. Li, M. Zhang and X. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2346 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Li, C. Zhou, H. Ma and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 118, 6155 CrossRef .
D. J. Bradwell, H. Kim, A. H. C. Sirk and D. R. Sadoway, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1895 CrossRef CAS .

          D. P. Gregory, Metal–air Batteries, Mills & Boon Limited, London,  1972 Search PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, N.-S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172 RSC .

          J. R. Goldstein and B. Koretz, Proceedings of the 14th International Seminar on Primary and Secondary Battery Technology and Application, Deerfield Beach, Florida, 1995.
C. J. Lan, T. S. Chon, P. H. Lin and T. P. Perng, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2006, 9, 27 CAS .
D. J. Mackinnon and J. M. Brannen, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1982, 12, 21 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. PoPov, M. G. Pavlovic, M. D. Spasojevic and V. M. Nakic, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1979, 9, 533 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frckowiak and M. Kiciak, Electrochim. Acta, 1988, 33, 441 CrossRef .
C. Cachet, U. Stroder and R. Wiart, Electrochim. Acta, 1982, 27, 903 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cachet, B. Saidani and R. Wiart, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 644 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Dirkse, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1412 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Gagnon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 1989 CrossRef CAS .
S. Szpak, C. J. Gabriel and T. Katan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 1063 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Wilcox and P. J. Mitchell, J. Power Sources, 2007, 52, 5407 Search PubMed .
N. A. Hampson and A. J. S. McNeil, J. Power Sources, 1985, 15, 61 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Hampson and A. J. S. McNeil, J. Power Sources, 1985, 15, 245 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Hampson and A. J. S. McNeil, J. Power Sources, 1985, 15, 261 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bass, P. J. Mitchell, G. D. Wilcox and J. Smith, J. Power Sources, 1988, 24, 21 CrossRef CAS .
J. McBreen and E. Gannon, J. Power Sources, 1985, 15, 169 CrossRef CAS .
J. McBreen and E. Gannon, Electrochim. Acta, 1981, 26, 1439 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bass, P. J. Mitchell and G. D. Wilcox, J. Power Sources, 1991, 35, 333 CrossRef CAS .
J. McBreen and E. Gannon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 1980 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Diggle and A. Damjanovic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 65 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Wang, L. Zhang, C. Zhang and J. Q. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 39 CrossRef .
C. J. Lan, C. Y. Lee and T. S. Chin, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5407 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sharma, M. Aziz, J. Yusof and K. Kordesch, J. Power Sources, 2001, 94, 129 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Kan, H. G. Xue and S. L. Mu, J. Power Sources, 1998, 74, 113 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lee, K. Sathiyanarayanan, S. W. Eom, H. S. Kim and M. S. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1474 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. F. Einerhand, W. H. M. Visscher and E. Barendrecht, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1988, 18, 799 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Muralidharan and K. S. Rajagopalan, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1978, 94, 21 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ravindran and V. S. Muralidharan, J. Power Sources, 1995, 55, 237 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chakkaravarthy, A. K. A. Waheed and H. V. K. Udupa, J. Power Sources, 1981, 6, 203 CrossRef CAS .

          L. F. Urry, US Pat., 6,022,639,  1996 Search PubMed .
T. I. Devyatkina, Y. L. Gunko and M. G. Mikhalenko, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2001, 74, 1122 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lee, K. Sathiyaanarayanan, S. W. Eom and M. S. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 1436 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. M. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Q. Zhang and C. N. Cao, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2001, 31, 1049 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dobryszycki and S. Biallozor, Corros. Sci., 2001, 43, 1309 CrossRef CAS .

          T. G. Company, World Pat., WO01/890650,  2002 Search PubMed .

          T. Burchardt, World Pat., WO2006/538111,  2002 Search PubMed .
S. Müller, F. Holzer and O. Haas, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1998, 28, 895 CrossRef .
R. Othman, W. J. Basirun, A. H. Yahaya and A. K. Arof, J. Power Sources, 2001, 103, 34 CrossRef CAS .
I. Arise, Y. Fukunaka and F. R. McLarnon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A69 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hendrikx, A. Van Der Putten, W. Visscher and E. Barendrecht, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 81 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Peng and Y.-Y. Wang, J. Cent. South Univ. Technol., 2007, 14, 37 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 591 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Yang and S.-J. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 174 CrossRef CAS .
G. Coates, N. A. Hampson, A. Marshall and D. F. Porter, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1974, 4, 75 CrossRef CAS .

          N. C. Tang, US Pat., 6,221,527,  1998 Search PubMed .

          http://www.powergenix.com/
        .
A. K. Shukla, S. Venugopalan and H. Hariprakash, J. Power Sources, 2001, 100, 125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Geng and D. O. Northwood, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 633 CrossRef CAS .
H. Iwanaga, M. Fujii and S. Takeuchi, J. Cryst. Growth, 1998, 183, 190 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Abyaneh, J. Hendrikx, W. Visscher and E. Barendrecht, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 2654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Yuan, J. P. Tu, H. M. Wu, B. Zhang, X. H. Huang and X. B. Zhao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1719 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Wu, J. P. Tua, Y. F. Yuan, M. Ma, X. L. Wang, L. Zhang, R. L. Li and J. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 479, 624 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Yuan, J. P. Tu, S. Y. Guo, J. B. Wu, M. Ma, J. L. Yang and X. L. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 5080 CrossRef CAS .
A. Renuka, A. Veluchamy and N. Venkatakrishnan, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1992, 22, 182 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shivkumar, G. Paruthimal Kalaigan and T. Vasudevan, J. Power Sources, 1998, 75, 90 CrossRef CAS .
D. Coates, E. Ferreira and A. Charkey, J. Power Sources, 1997, 65, 109 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. G. Gagnon and Y. M. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 2091 CrossRef .
Y. F. Yuan, J. P. Tu, H. M. Wu, Y. Li, D. Q. Shi and X. B. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 357 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, L. Zhang, W. K. Zhang, Y. P. Gan and H. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 663 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Lee, C.-W. Yi and K. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2572 CAS .
F. R. McLarnon and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 645 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Sanehiro and I. Kenji, Japan Pat., 61,281,461,  1986 Search PubMed .
J. L. Yang, Y. F. Yuan, H. M. Wu, Y. Li, Y. B. Chen and S. Y. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7050 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, J. P. Tu, Y. F. Yuan, X. L. Wang, K. F. Li, F. Mao and Z. Y. Zen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2001, 111, 3577 CrossRef .

          J. Kummer and N. Weber, U.S. Pat., 3,413,150,  1968 Search PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334–928 Search PubMed .
G. Yamaguch and K. Suzuki, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1968, 41, 93 CrossRef .
M. Bettman and C. Peters, J. Phys. Chem., 1969, 73, 1774 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tan, J. Mater. Sci., 1977, 12, 1058 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, S. Bae and M. Kim, Ceramist, 2012, 15–45 Search PubMed .
A. Ray and E. Subbarao, Mater. Res. Bull., 1975, 10, 583 CrossRef CAS .
P. Morgan, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 233 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takahashi and K. Kuwabara, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1980, 10, 291 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pekarsky and P. S. Nicholson, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 1517 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mathews, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2000, 78, 39 CrossRef .
R. Subasri, T. Mathews, O. M. Sreedharan and V. S. Raghunathan, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 158, 199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heavens, J. Mater. Sci., 1988, 23, 3515 CrossRef CAS .
A. Virkar, G. Tennenhouse and R. Gordon, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1974, 57, 508 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Eccleston, M. Robins, S. Bhavaraju, Y. Kim, W. Koh, J. Chae, J. Kim, PRiME 2012, Abstract #, 1875 (2012).
A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda and M. Tatsumisago, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 856 CrossRef .
J. Coetzer, J. Power Sources, 1986, 18, 377 CrossRef CAS .
J. Prakash, L. Redey and D. Vissers, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 502 CrossRef CAS .
P. Moseley, R. Bones, D. Teagle, B. Bellamy and R. Hawes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 1361 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, D. Golodnitsky, H. Mazor and S. Avshalomov, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6835 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, Y. Yang and Z.-W. Fu, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 22 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, S. Xu and L. A. Archer, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 59 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hayashil, K. Noi, A. Sakuda and M. Tatsumisago, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 856 CrossRef .

          J.-G. Zhang, P. G. Bruce and X. G. Zhang, in Handbook of Battery Materials, ed. C. Daniel and J. O. Bessenhard,  2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany, ch. 22 Search PubMed .
S. Yang and H. Knickle, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 162 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Hansu Kim
	Hansu Kim received his PhD in mineral and petroleum engineering from Seoul National University, Korea, in 2000. He joined the Energy Lab. of Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology as a member of research staff in 2001 and moved to Hanyang University in 2011. Currently he is an associate professor in the Department of Energy Engineering at Hanyang University. His research is mainly focused on nanostructured alloy-type anode materials for next generation lithium secondary batteries and alkali metal(Li/Na) based rechargeable batteries.

Goojin Jeong
	Goojin Jeong is a research professional at Advanced Batteries Research Centre, Korea Electronics Technology Institute (KETI). Previously, he was a research professor at the Kumho National Institute of Technology (2010–2011) and a senior researcher at Samsung SDI (2003–2010) for developing advanced Li secondary batteries. He received his PhD from Seoul National University in 2001, and did his postdoctoral work at the Arizona State University (2002–2003). His research interests involve electrochemical behaviour of materials related to energy conversion and storage systems. Recently he is focusing on alternative anode materials for LiB and post-LiB systems for next generation.

Young-Ugk Kim
	Young-Ugk Kim received his PhD degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Seoul National University in 2005 under the supervision of Professor Hun-Joon Sohn. He worked as a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Utah studying nanoparticle synthesis using high temperature processes. His research interests are in the secondary battery electrode material development and, since 2006, he has been working as a Senior Researcher of Samsung SDI, the world's leading lithium secondary battery company.

Jae-Hun Kim
	Jae-Hun Kim is currently an Assistant Professor at Kookmin University. He received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University (Korea). He did his postdoctoral work at the University of Idaho (2007–2008) and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory of the United States (2008–2010). He also worked as a senior researcher at Korea Electronics Technology Institute (2010–2013). His current research interests are focused on synthesis and electrochemical analysis of key materials for electrochemical energy storage devices such as lithium batteries, flow batteries, and supercapacitors.

Cheol-Min Park
	Cheol-Min Park is an assistant professor at the School of Advanced Materials and System Engineering, Kumoh National Institute of Technology (KIT). He received his MS (2005) and PhD (2009) from the Department of Materials Science & Engineering of Seoul National University. He also worked as a researcher at LG Chem. Ltd. Battery Research Institute (2005–2006) and Environmental Energy Technologies Division of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (2009–2010). His research interests are focused on synthesis and investigation of new alternative electrode materials for rechargeable Li-, Na-, and Mg-based battery systems.

Hun-Joon Sohn
	Hun-Joon Sohn received his BS and MS degrees in metallurgical engineering from Seoul National University. He also earned PhD from the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, USA, in 1980. He did his postdoctoral work at the same university and joined Seoul National University in 1982. Currently he is a Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at SNU. His research interests involve electrochemical behavior of materials under various conditions and recently he has mainly focused on the development and characterization of anode materials for Li secondary batteries.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic principle of operation for metal–air(O2) or metal–sulfur batteries.	 


Li-ion5	3.8	387	1015
Zn–air5	1.65	1086	6091a
Li–O2 (organic electrolyte)5	3.0	3505	3436b
Li–O2 (aqueous electrolyte)5	3.2	3582	2234c
Li–S5	2.2	2567	2199d
Mg–air	3.09	2840	3859h
Al–air	2.71	2793	3679
Na–air	2.33	1605e	1661
Na–S	2.1	790	972f
Na–NiCl2	2.57	785	2639g
Mg–Sb(liq.)	0.51i	683i	1006i

 	Fig. 2  Dendritic Li formed in a Li battery after charge at 2.2 mA cm−2 (Science Direct, reprinted with permission)10	 

 	Fig. 3  ARC exotherms of cycled Li–MnO2 cells starting from 100 °C: (a) temperature vs. time and (b) the corresponding Arrhenius plot (dT/dt vs. 1000/T) (Science Direct, reprinted with permission).12	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of surface film formation on the Li electrode in alkyl carbonates and the 1,3-dioxolane electrolyte (Science Direct, reprinted with permission)30	 

Inorganic
HF, polysulfides Sx2−, POCl3	SEI modification, suppressed dendrite	
20, 22, 34, 59, 68, 69

Mg(ClO4), AlI3, SnI2, MgI2, LiI, AlCl3, Na(CF3SO2)2N	Li-alloy interphase, suppressed dendrite	
8, 70–74

CsPF6, RbPF6	Adsorption of non-reactive metal cation, dendrite-free	
88



Organic
(C2H5)4NF(HF)4, fluorinated ester, vinylene carbonate, 2-methylfuran, 2-methylthiophene, nitromethane, fluoroethylene carbonate, N-methyl-N-(butyl sulfonate) pyrrolidinium (zwitterion)	Reactive additives, SEI modification, suppressed dendrite	
53, 75, 76


18, 77, 78


79

Benzene, decalin, tetraalkylammonium chlorides poly(ethylene glycol) dimethyl ether, dimethyl silicone/propylene oxide copolymer, poly-ether modified siloxanes, tetraethylammonium perfluorooctanesulfonate	Adsorption, less reactive interface, suppressed dendrite	
77, 80, 81


82


82


83


84



Gaseous
CO2, SO2, N2O	SEI modification, granular deposit	
18, 68, 85


 	Fig. 5  SEM images of Li electrodeposited on a Ni substrate in 1.0 M dm−3 LiClO4/EC + DME (a) without and (b) with HF (The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).59	 

 	Fig. 6  Dendrite growth of Li in the Li/PEO18LiTFSI/Li and Li/PEO18LiTFSI-1.44PP13FSI/Li cells at 0.1 mA cm−2 and at 60 °C. (a) Li/PEO18LiTFSI/Li for t = 0 h, (b) Li/PEO18LiTFSI/Li for t = 210 h, (c) Li/PEO18LiTFSI-1.44PP13FSI/Li for t = 0 h, and (d) Li/PEO18LiTFSI-1.44PP13FSI/Li for t = 256 h (Science Direct, reprinted with permission).94	 
Aqueous electrolyte: 2Li+ + 2e− + (1/2)O2 + H2O ↔ 2LiOH	(1)
Organic electrolyte: 2Li+ + 2e− + O2 ↔ Li2O2	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of a cylindrical Li–air cell employing a glass ceramic protective layer.142	 
2Li+ + 2e− + S ↔ Li2S	(3)

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of the proposed Li–air system (The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission).147	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure of a Li–graphene cell before and after the first discharge and plausible mechanisms with which graphene surfaces can capture Li ions at the cathode (The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission).126	 

 	Fig. 10  
7Li magnetic resonance and SEM images of Li microstructure formation in a Li bag cell. 7Li two-dimensional MRI x–y images (a) in the pristine state and (b) after charging. SEM images (c) in the pristine state and (d) after charging (Nature Publishing Group, reprinted with permission).159	 

 	Fig. 11  Typical electrochemical behavior and the basic structure of the MgxMo3S4 cathodes (0 < x < 1) with the electrolyte of 0.25 M Mg(AlCl2BuEt)2 in THF (inset: cyclic voltammogram of Mg insertion–extraction at 0.05 mV s−1) (Nature Publishing Group, reprinted with permission).164	 


Mo3S4164	1	122	1–1.5a
MoS6Se2169	2	102	0.5–2a
MoS2171	0.66	170	1.5–2.5a
[Hol/AB] MnO2172	0.09–0.39	85–209	1.85–4.75b
TiS2 nanotubes173	0.49	236	0.5–2.0a
V2O5174	2	589	2–4.2b
Mg1.03Mn0.97SiO4175	0.81	253	1.5–2.1a
MgCoSiO4176	1	250 (at 700 °C)	1.2–2.0a

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of the electrodeposited magnesium: (a) 500×, 0.5 mA cm−2, (b) 500×, 1.0 mA cm−2, (c) 500×, 2.0 mA cm−2, (d) 5000×, 0.5 mA cm−2, (e) 5000×, 1.0 mA cm−2 and (f) 5000×, 2.0 mA cm−2 (Science Direct, reprinted with permission).182	 
2Bi + 3Mg2+ + 6e− ↔ Mg3Bi2	(4)
Sn + 2Mg2+ + 4e− ↔ Mg2Sn	(5)
Anode: 2Mg + 4(OH)− → 2Mg(OH)2 + 4e− (E0 = −2.69 V vs. SHE)	(6)
Cathode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4(OH)− (E0 = 0.40 V vs. SHE)	(7)
Overall reaction: 2Mg + O2 + 2H2O ↔ 2Mg(OH)2 (Ecell = 3.09 V)	(8)

 	Fig. 13  Typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the various nanostructured Mg: (a) Mg spheres, (b) Mg plates, (c) Mg nanorods, (d) sea urchin-like Mg (The John Wiley & Sons, Inc., reprinted with permission).192	 
Anode: Mg → Mg2+ + 2e−	(9)
Cathode: Mg2+ + 2e− → Mg(Sb)	(10)
Overall reaction: Mg ↔ Mg(Sb)	(11)

 	Fig. 14  Mg∥Sb liquid metal battery operated at 700 °C showing the three stratified liquid phases upon cooling to room temperature. The cell was filled with epoxy prior to sectioning (The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).193	 
Anode: Zn → Zn2+ + 2e−	(12)
Zn2+ + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42− + 2e− (E0 = –1.25 V vs. SHE)	(13)
Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−	(14)
Cathode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH− (E0 = 0.4 V vs. SHE)	(15)
Overall reaction: 2Zn + O2 ↔ 2ZnO (Ecell = 1.65 V)	(16)
Zn + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2 + H2↑	(17)
Cathode: 2NiOOH + 2H2O + 2e− → 2Ni(OH)2 + 2OH− (E0 = 0.48 V vs. SHE)	(18)
Overall reaction: Zn + 2NiOOH + H2O ↔ ZnO + 2Ni(OH)2 (Ecell = 1.73 V)	(19)

 	Fig. 15  Morphology evolution process of various nanostructured ZnO: (a) conventional ZnO before cycling and (b) after 40 cycles, (c) ZnO nanoplates before cycling and (d) after 67 cycles, and (e) ZnO nanowires before cycling and (f) after 75 cycles (Science Direct, reprinted with permission).259,260	 
Anode: 2Na ↔ 2Na+ + 2e−	(20)
Cathode: 4S + 2e− ↔ S42−	(21)
Overall reaction: 2Na + 4S ↔ Na2S4	(22)

 	Fig. 16  Schematics of the structure and electrochemical reactions of a Na–S battery system (The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).261	 
Anode: 2Na → 2Na+ + 2e−	(23)
Cathode: NiCl2 + 2Na+ + 2e− → Ni + 2NaCl	(24)
Overall reaction: NiCl2 + 2Na→ Ni + 2NaCl	(25)
2NaAlCl4 + Ni → 2Na + 2AlCl3 + NiCl2 (E = 3.05 V)	(26)

 	Fig. 17  Electrochemical characterization of Na–O2 (a) and Li–O2 (b) cells with a gas diffusion layer cathode (Nature Publishing Group, reprinted with permission).7	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
