Toward mixed-halide perovskites: insight into photo-induced anion phase segregation  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC03885G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03885G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 14626-14644Toward mixed-halide perovskites: insight into photo-induced anion phase segregation

        
          
            Yuxiao 
            Guo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xingtian 
            Yin
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Wenxiu 
            Que
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weiguo 
            Liu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Huan 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *b
aElectronic Materials Research Laboratory, Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, International Center for Dielectric Research, Shaanxi Engineering Research Center of Advanced Energy Materials and Devices, School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, Shaanxi, P. R. China. E-mail: xt_yin@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Thin Film and Optical Manufacturing Technology, Ministry of Education, Xi’an Technological University, Xi’an 710021, Shaanxi, P. R. China. E-mail: liuhuan@xatu.edu.cn
Received 
      15th August 2020
    , Accepted 25th September 2020First published on 29th September 2020AbstractThe tunable bandgap of mixed-halide perovskites (MHPs) makes them suitable for high-performance single-junction photovoltaics (PVs), as well as wide-bandgap components for multi-junction (tandem) structures. However, the composition engineering of halide ions, an effective procedure to adjust the bandgap of MHPs for PVs, result in photoinstability in MHPs due to the photo-induced anion phase segregation (PIAPS) effect. Specifically, MHP materials experience an inevitable phase transition from homogeneous alloys to conjugated lower/higher-bandgap phases, that is, iodide/bromide (I/Br)-rich domains, upon exposure to light. Reasonably, the sub-bandgap trapping states can lead to film inhomogeneity and performance deterioration in PVs. Meanwhile, it has been widely proven that the PIAPS phenomenon, even though it is reversible, may limit the commercial integration of MHPs in tandem applications because of their unstable output. Hence, in this review, initially, we study, analyze, and explore the “fashionable” PIAPS phenomenon systematically. Then, the feasible protocols to stabilize MHP materials, especially based on their correlation with the inherent mechanism of the PIAPS phenomenon, are adequately exhibited to help researchers develop more suitable procedures for its suppression. Finally, we provide some potential research points to study the PIAPS phenomenon and stabilize MHPs for their future commercial applications.
Yuxiao Guo
Y. X. Guo is now a PhD candidate under the supervision of Dr Yin at the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University in China. He received his BS Degree in Electronics Science and Technology from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2016. He is interested in mixed-halide CsPbX3 perovskites, and now focuses on exploring new strategies for obtaining high-quality CsPbX3 perovskites.
Xingtian Yin
X. T. Yin is working as an Associate Professor at the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University in China. He completed his PhD at Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2014 working on wide bandgap oxide semiconductors with nanostructures for solar cell applications. He worked as a visiting scholar at the University of California at Berkeley from 2012 to 2014. Currently, his research interests focus on dopant-free carrier-selective contacts for photovoltaics and nanocomposites for photocatalyst applications.
Huan Liu
H. Liu is currently a Professor at Xi’an Technological University in China. He completed his PhD at Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2013. He worked as a visiting scholar at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology from 2016 to 2017. Currently, his research interests focus on nanostructures for light trapping applications in silicon solar cells.
1. Introduction
By reason of their excellent photovoltaic properties, for instance, high absorption coefficient, long charge diffusion length, long carrier lifetime, and low exciton dissociation energy,1–7 metal-halide perovskites with ABX3 structure (A = CH3NH3+ (MA+), HC(CH2)2+ (FA+), Cs+; B = Pb2+, Sn2+; and X = I−, Br−, Cl−) have emerged as promising semiconductors for photovoltaic (PV) applications.8–18 Since the first attempt by Miyasaka et al., that resulted in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8% in 2009,19 the efficiency of perovskite-based solar cells has experienced an almost seven-fold increase to 25.2%.20 The narrow PCE is now getting closer to the Shockley–Queisser limit of single-junction PVs, greatly depending on the bandgap energy of absorber materials.21 Thus, to go beyond this limit, the perovskite-based multi-junction (tandem) architecture (Fig. 1a) has attracted interest after integration with crystalline silicon (c-Si), copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), and other materials.22–24 Presently, the commercial Si-based technology stands out due its small bandgap (∼1.12 eV), high efficiency, excellent reliability, and low manufacturing cost.25,26 Hence, the next target for researchers is to find suitable perovskite candidates as top cells for perovskite/Si tandem/multi-junction cells (Fig. 1c).27,28
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the multi-junction architecture of photovoltaics. (b) Bandgap energy vs. x (Br content) for FAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (black),32 MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (red),40 CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 (blue),31 and MASn(I1−xBrx)3 (pink)54 perovskites. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (c) Simulated PCE mapping of perovskite–perovskite–silicon triple-junction solar cells with various bandgap combinations for middle and top perovskite absorbers (inset: device structure). Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
Notably, the feature of bandgap tunability is an enormous advantage for ABX3 perovskites, which can be well realized by means of composition engineering.29–31 Based on the combination of halides, mixed-halide (iodide/bromide, I/Br, pair) perovskites (MHPs) with an exact bandgap can be easily achieved (Fig. 1b).29,31,32 However, although halide engineering can help perovskite materials match the popular Si technology, MHPs have been reported to exhibit the limitation of intrinsic photo-induced phase instability.29,31,33–38 To date, the photo-induced anion phase segregation (PIAPS) phenomenon has become a formidable obstacle in the performance of single-junction PVs and commercial application of perovskite/Si tandems. Referring to previous work,29,31,39 MHP films with a specific Br content experienced a reversible PIAPS effect, in which the homogeneous alloys transformed into I/Br-rich domains under light soaking, and then completely recovered after storage in the dark. In practice, photo-induced I-rich phases can act as carrier recombination traps in multi-component films, leading to a red shift in photoluminescence and decline in the photoluminescence quantum yield, thus deteriorating the working performance of PVs. It has been well proven that the photoinstability by the PIAPS effect has a great influence on the performance output of wide-bandgap MHP-based devices,40–42 especially their open-circuit voltage (Voc, Fig. 2).32,40,41,43–48 As is known,47,49–51 the plateau in the Voc of device indicates that the photovoltage does not proportionally increase with the bandgap of perovskites originating from the photo-generated I/Br-rich domains. However, there is also an opposite perspective that the I-rich domains are not the key mechanism for Voc loss, but rather the low radiative efficiency of MHPs.52,53 Briefly, all these findings indicate that the exact impact of phase segregation on the Voc of devices is still not clear, and thus requires further exploration by researchers. Nevertheless, the issue of photoinstability is quite an urgent bottleneck for the future commercial PV applications of wide-bandgap MHP materials.
 Fig. 2  Distribution diagram for some reported device Voc as a function of perovskite bandgap.15,31,32,40,41,45,46,56–60 Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To achieve the commercial integration of wide-bandgap MHPs with superior photostability in the popular c-Si technology, it is urgent for researchers to further study the troublesome PIAPS phenomenon, understand its inherent mechanism, determine its effect on device performance, and develop efficient protocols to suppress and even eliminate this deterioration. As a start, clear and in-depth insight into this phenomenon from previous research is necessary. Then, its inherent mechanism and procedures to suppress its occurrence to achieve stable MHPs should be clearly summarized to determine the most effective approaches. Therefore, in this review, we emphatically summarize the impact factors and corresponding suppression methods for stable MHPs. Furthermore, we present our ideas on the inherent mechanism for the PIAPS phenomenon and its relationship with these suppression procedures. Briefly, this review aims to provide guidance in the search for stable MHPs and their future commercial application.
2. The PIAPS phenomenon of MHPs materials
Evidently, the pure triple-halide MAPbI3 is a perovskite material of great interest; however, it is not the most suitable candidate for record-breaking and commercial single-junction solar cells due to its large bandgap of ∼1.57 eV and low degradation temperature of ∼85 °C.61 Fortunately, a tunable bandgap in the range of ∼1.57 eV to 2.23 eV can be achieved for the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 series (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) through halide substitution, and an even wider range (∼1.3 eV to 2.38 eV) by A/B-site substitution (Fig. 1b). The composition engineering of ABX3 perovskites can provide the appropriate targets for better-matching multi-junction PVs. However, most Br-containing MHPs exhibit inferior phase photostability, which is known as the PIAPS phenomenon.29,31,62 The recent work by Brennan and Knight carefully summarized the PIAPS phenomenon based on the recent literature, which explained the process for the formation and methods for the suppression of this effect.63,64 However, in our review, we aim to explore the main correlation between the impact factors and procedures for the suppression of PIAPS, determine their compatibility, and provide guidance for further research in this area. A schematic diagram of the reversible phase transition between the mixed and I/Br-rich phases is shown in Fig. 3. Under irradiation, directional movement of the halide ions occurs in the perovskite lattice, which leads to the aggregation of I/Br-rich domains embedded in the mixture. The low-bandgap I-rich domain can act as carrier recombination traps for red-shifted photoluminescence (PL), thus resulting in film inhomogeneity. Meanwhile, the original MHP phase can be recovered after storage in the dark. Presently, the PIAPS phenomenon is still under debate, and thus its in-depth exploration is necessary.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of the reversible phase transition between the mixed and I/Br-rich phases. Inset: I-rich domains with the lowest bandgap acting as carrier recombination traps and exhibiting red-shifted PL. 
In Fig. 4a, Samu's group observed the absorption-edge change for the MAPb(I0.5Br0.5)3 perovskite films after 30 min irradiation, in which the evident decrease at 620 nm suggested the diminution in the mixed alloys.65 Meanwhile, the concurrent increase at shorter and longer wavelengths represented the formation of I/Br-rich domains. Moreover, for the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 family (0 ≤ x ≤ 1), the photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS) spectra with superior sensitivity also exhibited the low-bandgap state for perovskites with x = 0.4 and 0.6, as shown in Fig. 4b. Under light soaking, except for the pure tri-halide MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, a coincident phase at ∼1.65 eV occurred for perovskite with x = 0.4 and 0.6, an consistent result with Hoke's work.29 There is also a necessary Br content (0.4 < x < 0.9) for phase segregation in the CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 series.31,39 Simultaneously, the perovskite (x = 0.6, excess halide) film exhibited superior photostability, for which the inherent mechanism will be discussed later (Section 4.2). To further explore the crystalline structure, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the MAPb(I0.4Br0.6)3 film in the presence and absence of light soaking are provided in Fig. 4c.29 Thus, according to Bragg's law: nλ = 2dsinθ(1)the result clearly certified the appearance of both Br-rich and I-rich domains not only I-rich domains from the PL and PDS spectra and the lattice constriction and expansion, respectively. Moreover, the reversible feature of the PIAPS phenomenon is very encouraging for researchers, based on which some feasible procedures may succeed in regaining the original homogeneous alloys for further application. As presented, dark treatment after the removal of light illumination can give rise to the character regeneration (absorption, emission, and crystal structure) as that of the original samples, even after multiple cycles. From our perspective, the segregated I-rich phases may also need further activation energy (i.e., continuous irradiation) to remain stable, and hence storage in the dark can convert them into the original homogeneous alloys.
 Fig. 4  (a) Absorption spectra of MAPb(I0.5Br0.5)3 film before and after irradiation for 30 min (100 mW cm−2), and dark recovery after 3 h. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (b) PDS spectra for MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 films measured before (lines), under (closed symbols), and after (open symbols) light soaking (∼0.2 sun). Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (c) XRD patterns of MAPb(I0.4Br0.6)3 film before (black) and after (red) white-light soaking for 5 min at ∼50 mW cm−2, and after 2 h in the dark (blue). Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the topography-dependent reversible phase segregation of MHPs. (e) and (f) Topography of MAPb(I0.7Br0.3)3 perovskites, and the corresponding PL evolution at different regions (i–iii represent grain centers, and iv–vi grain boundaries). The excitation wavelength was 636 nm with an intensity of 500 W cm−2. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic of CL acquisition and light soaking, and (h) SE, CL, and SE/CL overlay after light soaking for 5 min at 100 mW cm−2. The scale bar is 2 μm. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. CL spectra mapping under an electron beam acceleration voltage of (i) 2 kV and (j) 5 kV and corresponding spectra (k) for the grain interiors, grain boundaries and I-rich phases. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Surface potential map from KPFM measurement for (FA0.85MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 film in the dark (l) and under illumination (m), indicating possible hole accumulation. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, it is necessary for researchers to explore more microcosmic details inside MHPs. Thus far, the mainstream view is the gradual demixing procedure for I-rich domains at the grain boundaries with prolonged illumination, and then a delayed remixing process after the removal of external light, as shown in Fig. 4d.67 Tang and colleagues concluded that the phase segregation process selectively occurs at the grain boundaries for the MAPb(I0.7Br0.3)3 perovskite film, not the grain interiors on the nanoscale (Fig. 4e and f). Meanwhile, Bischak et al.,68 combined scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with cathodoluminescence (CL) to connect the molecular and mesoscopic scales, as shown in Fig. 4g. With prolonged illumination, small “clusters” of I-rich species localized at the grain boundaries were observed, as shown in the secondary electron (SE) image, CL image, and SE/CL overlay (Fig. 4h). When placed in the dark, the demixing phases could return to the original homogeneous phase in a short period. However, there are also some conflicting reports with the evolution of an in-depth exploration, in which the grain boundary is not necessary for the selective aggregation of the I-rich domains.38,42,70 Using polycrystalline perovskite films, Li et al., employed accelerating electron beams with different voltages to detect the surface and inside of the films, as shown in Fig. 4i–k.42 The results suggested that there were sporadic iodide “clusters” inside the film, which is inconsistent with previous works demonstrating aggregation at the grain boundary.67,71 Further, Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) was used to detect the surface potential change during phase segregation (Fig. 4l and m).69 In agreement, a higher photovoltage was caused by a slight downshift in the Fermi level under illumination, which can be attributed to the hole accumulation within the I-rich grains. In brief, the above observations can help provide in-depth insight into the microscopic changes in MHP films during phase segregation.
To clearly demonstrate this, single-crystalline microplates of MHPs with few boundaries were prepared to solve this problem. As shown in Fig. 5a and b,38 the binary-cation Cs0.39MA0.61Pb(I0.15Br0.85)3 plates only exhibited transient clustering upon exposure for less than 1 min, but no further aggregation with illumination for a longer period. Subsequently, in the work by Zhou,72 the PIAPS effect still occurred in few-boundary FAPb(BrxI1−x)3 microplates, but the plate thickness also played an important role, as shown in Fig. 5c–f. Similarly, it was demonstrated that the thickness of the single-crystalline MAPbBrxI3−x microplates has an effect on their phase segregation (discussed later in Section 4.3.2).73 As shown in Fig. 5g and h, the I-rich domains could only be observed at the edges after one-photon laser scanning illumination, but expanded into the interior under a two-photon laser. The difference proved that both the plate thickness and surface traps affected the carrier gradient, and then the halide ion migration during illumination. Besides, Mao also supported this view that the grain boundary is not the only condition for phase segregation through measurements on an MAPb(BrxI3−x)3 single crystal.70 With prolonged exposure, bright emission centers of ∼1 μm in size were formed throughout the crystal, as shown in Fig. 5i–l. Specifically, the dynamic procedure of photo-generated carriers for the illuminated microplates proves that the grain boundary is not a prerequisite for the aggregation of the iodide ions, but a feasible choice.
 Fig. 5  Confocal imaging (blue channel: 500–560 nm and yellow channel: 650–750 nm) of (a) MAPb(I0.14Br0.86)3 and (b) (Cs0.39MA0.61)Pb(I0.15Br0.85)3 after cation exchange. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. Optical images of FAPb(BrxI3−x)3 nanoplatelets with different thicknesses. The height profiles indicate the thickness of (c) 58 nm, (d) 239 nm, and (e) 1.3 μm. (f) Normalized PL of nanoplatelets with different thicknesses excited at 405 nm. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Schematic of the carrier transport and PIAPS process for MAPbBrxI3−x perovskite single crystal microplatelet under one-photon (g) and two-photon (h) illumination. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (i)—(l) Wide-field PL images of MAPb(BrxI3−x)3 single crystal collected over 120 s in the I-rich emission region (660–700 nm). Light irradiation: 400–450 nm, 5 mW cm−2. Scale bar is 5 μm. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3. Exploration of the mechanism of the PIAPS phenomenon
After the clear observation of the PIAPS phenomenon in MHPs, it has been well realized that the photo-generated I/Br-rich domains severely affect the optical and electrical properties of the films, significantly deteriorating the film photostability and PV performance output. However, prior to finding efficient procedures for the inhibition of PIAPS, more attention need to be focused on the inherent mechanism of this phenomenon. To date, numerous creative processes, such as composition engineering, morphology engineering, interface engineering, and environment control, have successfully been demonstrated to inhibit PIAPS (discussed later),15,48,68,71,74–87 but its inherent mechanism and interrelation with these processes are still not completely understood. The inherent mechanism for phase segregation is important to explain the valid procedures and direct further research. In summary, there are three existing models to explain PIAPS based on the literature.33,66,68,80,88,89
(i) Brivio et al., carried out the first attempt to explain phase segregation from the aspect of thermodynamic potential via the generalized quasi-chemical approximation.33 As shown in Fig. 6a–c, these researchers summarized the first phase diagram to explore the stability of the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 alloys using the following equations: ΔUj = Ej − (1 − x)EMAPbI3 − xEMAPbBr3(2) ΔF(x, T) = ΔU(x, T) − TΔS(x, T)(3)where the configuration energy, Ej, was calculated using the Kohn–Sham density functional theory, ΔUj is the mixing energy from the generalized quasi-chemical approximation, ΔS is the configurational entropy of the alloys, and ΔF is the calculated Helmholtz free energy. Accordingly, the asymmetry of the ΔF curve at 200 K originated from the two compositions with a negative ΔUj. The phase diagram indicated that the compositions (0.19 < x < 0.28, 0.58 < x < 0.68) can present metastable phases at 300 K, a target for phase segregation, and further a critical temperature of 343 K for stable alloys.
 Fig. 6  (a) Energy of mixing (top) and entropy of mixing (bottom) as a function of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 alloy. The symbols are the values calculated for each configuration (eqn (3)). The solid lines show the behavior for the alloy at 200 K (blue), 300 K (green) and for a completely random alloy in the high T limit (red) within the generalized quasi-chemical approximation. The dashed line represents the convex hull. (b) Calculated Helmholtz free energy as a function of alloy and temperature as calculated within the generalized quasi-chemical approximation (eqn (4)). (c) Predicted phase diagram of the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 alloy. The purple and pink lines are the binodal and spinodal lines, respectively. The dashed horizontal line shows the miscibility gap at room temperature. A thermodynamically stable solid-solution can be formed in the white region only. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (d) Photo-induced polaron trapping and associated energy scales associated with phase separation. (e) Snapshot of the 99% isosurface of excess charge density taken from the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. (f) Free energies per unit cell for MAPb(IxBr1−x)3 with varying composition in the ground (red) and photoexcited (blue) states, computed from MD simulations (circles) and mean field theory (solid lines). (g) Mean-field theory temperature-composition phase diagram in the ground (red) and photoexcited state (blue) with the path through the phase diagram from the initial state (star) to demixed state (circle) observed experimentally. Areas beneath the red and blue coexistence curves indicate demixed states. (h) Extent of demixing (i.e., purity of demixed regions found by tracing the blue coexistence curve in g) as a function of electron–phonon coupling and temperature computed from mean field theory in the photoexcited state. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (i) Illustration of the ion migration pathways enabled by Schottky defects, Frenkel defects, open space and wrong bonds at the grain boundaries, lattice distortions due to accumulated charges, dissolved impurities, and non-uniform strain caused by the piezoelectric effect, and Soften lattice caused by light illumination-induced bond weakening. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. 
(ii) The second current model is the polaron-induced localized strain in the MHP lattices, as a condition responsible for the low-bandgap I-rich clusters.68 As shown in Fig. 6d–h, the strain-induced phase separation occurs at certain locations of polaron-induced charges and lattice distortions. Thoroughly, the photo-generated charges first deform the lattice by electron–phonon coupling (Fig. 6d), and then the high spatial overlap between the lattice and single-charge density distribution can lead to phase segregation when induced by enough strain (Fig. 6e). According to Fig. 6f and g, the free energy and corresponding phase diagram reveal that the photoexcited states contribute more to the demixed states. Meanwhile, in Fig. 6h, the temperature increase can promote the mobility of the halide, and further phase demixing. As an additive, the less polar Cs+ can be used to reduce the tendency of phase segregation.
(iii) The third explanation is the correlation between film defects and vacancies (Fig. 6i) and the PIAPS phenomenon, which can accelerate the ion migration for phase segregation under illumination.66,89 Barker et al.,66 believed that the ion migration occurs via halide defects for photo-segregated I/Br-rich clusters, in which the carrier generation gradient may play a role. Besides, the suppression of PIAPS in perovskites with excess halide can be ascribed to defect passivation, thus closing the channels for ion migration. As introduced by Yuan et al.,89 the ion migration channels in perovskite films include the bulk defects of Schottky defects and Frenkel defects, grain surface, grain boundary, lattice distortion by accumulated charge, dissolved clusters, piezoelectric effect, and photo-induced lattice softness.
However, although these three models can be applied to demonstrate the cause and process for the phase segregation effect, none of them is completely correct to confirm the photostability of certain MHPs in reality. Hence, the inherent mechanism for the PIAPS phenomenon is still under debate, and needs further exploration for the future application of MHPs. Besides, researchers also speculate whether or not the phase segregation effect occurs in the absence of working light. As is known, the electrical bias is also a crucial factor under working conditions, which can cause the phase degradation because of the accumulation of charge defects. Fortunately, there are also some reports on the electrically-induced phase segregation phenomenon.49,90–93 Specifically, according to the report by Braly and his colleagues,49 the consistent phase segregation process for mixed-halide MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 and (MA0.9Cs0.1)Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 films also appeared in the absence of photoexcitation, besides the application of 1 sun-equivalent carrier densities. By contrast, the (FA0.83Cs0.17)Pb(I0.66Br0.34)3 perovskites could maintain a stable phase even under a higher carrier density. Similarly, Duong's work suggested that phase segregation occurred when the active area was forward biased at 1.2 V, but these was no phase segregation under the condition of −1 V bias or short circuit (dark). It is clear that both the electric field and carrier density also have a great effect on the internal migration of halide ions in MHPs, which is not limited to external photoexcitation. Hence, the external-induced phase segregation phenomenon in MHP materials is a complex process. In our opinion, the both the driving force and migration channels are equally important for the movement of halide ions (phase degradation or segregation) in the perovskite lattice. Thus, to develop stable alloys, it is necessary to try to sever the link between these two factors, even weakening them both, in real application.
4. Efficient procedures for the suppression of PIAPS
Sections 2 and 3 demonstrated the formation process and inherent mechanism of the photo-generated I/Br-rich domains for MHPs. The PIAPS effect can lead to serious film inhomogeneity and carrier recombination traps, resulting in red-shifted PL. Consequently, the PIAPS phenomenon has a deteriorating effect on the photostability and performance output of PVs, thus limiting the application of wide-bandgap MHPs in tandem cells. Hence, it is necessary for researchers to find suitable procedures to suppress and even eliminate the PIAPS effect. To date, the researchers have successfully obtained series of photostable MHPs by means of composition engineering, interface engineering, morphology engineering, and external controlling. Also, the success of suppression procedures can verify the inherent mechanism for the PIAPS phenomenon, and give guidance for further research in this area.
4.1 Composition engineering of A/B/X ions
As is known, all atomic positions of the ABX3 structure have a positive influence on the characteristics of the materials, including morphology, crystallinity, defects, bandgap, photoelectricity, and stability.15,32,40,41,45,46,56,59,94,95 To our knowledge, the composition engineering of A/B/X sites indeed affects the photostability of MHP materials against phase segregation, especially for the I/Br pairs. Therefore, in this review, we comprehensively summary and determine the underlying influence of the A/B/X ions on the striking PIAPS effect, as well as their inherent mechanism.

4.1.1 A cation. 
Referring to the early significant works,29–31 the PIAPS phenomenon is an inevitable and common obstacle for single-cation MA/FA/CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskite films. As confirmed by Hoke's work,29 MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 films with 0.2 < x < 1 were confronted with this novel phenomenon after illumination, resulting in a red-shifted peak at ∼1.68 eV (x = 0.2) independent of the initial bandgap. Barker et al., hypothesized that this value was coincident with a tetragonal-to-cubic phase transition for MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 between x = 0.13 and 0.2.40,66 Similarly, the FAPb(I1−xBrx)3 series (0.3 < x < 0.5), a region for red-shifted targets, also experienced a structural change from tetragonal to cubic.30 Besides, for the more thermostable all-inorganic CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 family, the PIAPS phenomenon also exists for perovskites with x ranging from 0.4 to 1, approximately corresponding to the point from a cubic (x = 0.4) to orthorhombic (x = 0.6) structure. Regarding this discrepancy, Bischak et al., believed that the reduced polarizability of the Cs+ ion could stabilize MHPs against phase segregation.38,51,68 In our opinion, the structure-change point for single-cation MA/FA/CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites can create a great energy barrier to refrain MHPs from further phase segregation.
Furthermore, it is as a matter of course to prepare MHPs with A-cation mixtures for further high-performance solar cells. Accordingly, it is obligatory for us to conclude whether or not the A-cation mixture has a great effect on the troublesome PIAPS effect. In the early report by McMeekin et al.,34 they proposed that the introduction of 17% Cs+ in FAPb(I1−xBrx)3 can inhibit the disturbing phase segregation, accompanied by an optimized bandgap of ∼1.74 eV for perovskite/Si tandems. This conclusion was also proven by a recent work, as shown in Fig. 7a–c.86,96 The addition of alkali Cs+/Rb+ ions into the perovskite lattice is beneficial to prevent photoinstability in MHP films. Meanwhile, the addition of Cs+ can also improve the structural stability and remove the phase change for the perovskite series with 0.3 < x < 0.5.30 In fact, the content of Cs+ ion substitution indeed affects the film photostability for binary-cation (FACs)Pb(I1−xBrx)3 MHPs, as shown in Fig. 7d.76 However, as exhibited in Fig. 7e, excess Cs+ caused the (Cs0.6MA0.4)Pb(I1−xBrx)3 films to still suffer from the PIAPS effect under illumination stress.97 Based on an in-depth exploration into the crystal structure change for the (FACs)Pb(I1−xBrx)3 MHP series, a recent work indicated that no cubic MHPs are photostable, whereas some cubic-tetragonal mixed-phase MHPs are stable.98 Surprisingly, the substitution of too much Cs+ in mixed-phase MHPs could also worsen the phase stability, but the underlying reason for this is unclear. Moreover, for the triple-cation (Cs0.06MA0.15FA0.79)Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3, the MHPs still suffered from phase segregation under irradiation, as measured by PL and PDS measurements in Fig. 7f and g, respectively.99 For triple-cation (Cs0.06FA0.79MA0.15)Pb(I1−xBrx)3 MHPs,78 it is also obvious that the PIAPS effect is quite an inevitable issue. Besides, the same tendency has also been confirmed for the quadruple-cation Rb0.05(Cs0.1MA0.15FA0.75)0.95PbI2Br perovskite.90 Briefly, the composition engineering of the A-cation mixture can help MHPs achieve better photostability against phase segregation, but only for a certain composition series. The features of MHPs such as crystal structure, surface morphology, surface defects, film thickness, grain size, and grain boundary are largely influenced by the A-cation substitution, all of which may influence the phase segregation process (discussed later).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the PIAPS suppression by the addition of Cs+ ions. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. The positive effect of the addition of Cs+ and Rb+ on the phase segregation of MHPs by (b) XRD and (c) PL. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Change of PL photon energy for emission from three different CsyFA(1−y)Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3 films with y = 0.05, 0.20, and 0.60. The films were exposed to continuous illumination over 30 min and excited at 400 nm with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Inset: Spectra change in emission from a Cs0.6FA0.4Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3 film over 30 min of continuous illumination. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Summary of the optical absorption edge and PL peak energy vs. x value for Cs0.6MA0.4Pb(I1−xBrx)3 films before and after illumination. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (f) PL spectra for (Cs0.06MA0.15FA0.79)Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3 film with time under ambient conditions and laser illumination (532 nm laser, ∼60 mW cm−2), and (g) corresponding PDS spectra before (black circle) and after (red square) 30 min of light treatment with a white-light LED source (∼100 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.1.2 B cation. 
As mentioned, the structural change after A-cation substitution may contribute to enhancing the phase photostability of MHPs, and hence we should further explore if B-cation replacement influences phase segregation. Firstly, Yang proved that the Pb/Sn-mixture MA(Pb0.75Sn0.25)(I0.6Br0.4)3 film displayed superior photostability compared to the pure MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 film.15 The transient absorption (TA) spectra of the MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 and MA(Pb0.75Sn0.25)(I0.6Br0.4)3 perovskite films are shown in Fig. 8a and b, respectively. Under low intensity excitation (0.01 sun), similar absorption features (black lines) were observed for both samples. However, two extra peaks for MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 appeared under an increased excitation to 1 sun, which suggested the formation of both I-rich and Br-rich domains. In addition, giving an insight to the crystal lattice, as shown in Fig. 8c and d, both the peak intensity and full width at half maximum of MA(Pb0.75Sn0.25)(I0.6Br0.4)3 were unchanged compared to the reference MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3. Moreover, the suppression of PIAPS for CsPb0.75Sn0.25IBr2 was also discovered (Fig. 8e and f) by Li's group,81 in which there was no obvious phase segregation after the introduction of 25% Sn2+. Further, the hysteresis for the devices was also removed for binary-cation Pb/Sn MHPs, as shown in Fig. 8g and h, where the improvement can be ascribed to the great photostability without low-bandgap recombination traps.42 Consequently, these attempts have promoted the composition engineering of Pb-cation substitution as a promising strategy to impart photostability to the MHP phase. Regarding the inherent mechanism, there is no in-depth explanation for the Pb/Sn mixture, but the structural change for perovskite crystals maybe a research focus in the future.
 Fig. 8  TA spectra of (a) MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 and (b) MA(Pb0.75Sn0.25)(I0.6Br0.4)3 films under different illumination intensities. XRD patterns measured before, during and after illumination for (c) MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 and (d) MA(Pb0.75Sn0.25)(I0.6Br0.4)3 films, respectively. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. PL spectra with illumination time for (e) CsPbIBr2 and (f) CsPb0.75Sn0.25IBr2 films, and current density–voltage (J–V) curves for (g) CsPbIBr2 and (h) CsPb0.75Sn0.25IBr2-based solar cells. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.1.3 X anion. 
By mixing halide anions (I/Br/Cl), the bandgap of MHPs can be successively adjusted in a wide range for photovoltaic application. However, to date, the main focus for MHPs is on I/Br pairs. The motivating factors for I/Br-mixed MHPs are their increased chemical stability and suitable bandgap toward tandems compared to Cl. Further, with respect to the Br/Cl series, as shown in Fig. 9a–d, the study by Byun et al.,100 exhibited that the time-evolution PL spectra of MAPbCl3−xBrx single crystals maintained the bandgap-edge peaks, indicating that the Br/Cl-mixed MHPs never experienced the irksome phase segregation from the (Cs/MA/FA)PbI3−xBrx series. Besides, the ultrasensitive PDS measurement (Fig. 9e) was applied to study the phase stability of MAPbCl3−xBrx materials, consistently exhibiting stable features.101 By introducing experimental and theory results (Fig. 9f),102 it is clear that all the lines revealed a nonlinear increase with an increase in Cl content, and there were no red-shifted domains, which proved the desired photostability for Cl-containing MHPs. For the stability of Cl/Br-mixed MHPs, this can be ascribed to the mobility difference in the lattice between the I− and Cl− ions due to their different bond energies. However, as is known, the large bandgap (>2.4 eV) from the MAPbCl3−xBrx family severely limits their application in perovskite/Si tandems, but not perovskite-based multi-junction PVs.
 Fig. 9  PL spectra for perovskite crystals with different ratios of Cl/Br as a function of irradiation time. (a) Cl/Br 3:0, (b) Cl/Br 5:1, (c) Cl/Br 2:1, and (d) CI/Br 1:1. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (e) PDS spectra showing sharp band edges and a clean bandgap for MAPb(BrxCl1−x)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (f) Experimentally derived bandgap (blue circle), excitonic absorption (red square) and emission (red star) energy together with the calculated bandgap of CsPbBr3−xClx. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4.2 Interface engineering
To date, a series of effective procedures has succeeded in reducing and even eliminating the harmful PIAPS phenomenon for MHP materials. Specifically, the interface engineering of defect passivation and halide vacancy occupation, such as potassium (K+) passivation, excess halide modification, self-assembled long-chain organic ammonium capping material, oxygen passivation, and combination of carrier transport material, can drastically suppress the formation of I-rich domains under external irradiation. As mentioned in Section 3, both the driving force and migration channel contribute to the ion migration in the perovskite lattice. From our perspective, the adopted interface engineering can help close the migration channels for the movement of halide ions and phase segregation, thus resulting in stable alloys.
The surface/bulk defect and halide vacancies in the perovskite lattice contribute expansive channels for the photo-driven migration of halide ions, and consequently, the stable perovskite phase can stand out after passivation engineering. As reported by Zhou,82 the photostability of MHPs, as well as the device performance, can be obviously improved by the grain boundary passivation of FAX (X = I and Br), as shown in Fig. 10a and b. Similarly, the grain passivation by K+ ions has been also been proven to be efficient to eliminate the crystal defects and halide vacancy.78 Herein, Abdi-Jalebi and colleagues employed excess K+ ions to occupy the vacancies to suppress the ion migration pathways. Meanwhile, the excess halide helped stabilize PL emission for x = 0.6 perovskite (Fig. 10c), which is coincident with Zhu's work.103 Further, self-assembled long-chain organic ammonium capping layers were also introduced to stabilize Cs0.6MA0.4Pb(I1−xBrx)3 by Xiao et al.97 As shown in Fig. 10d and e, the incorporation of the surfactant BA(n-butylammonium)I1−xBrx greatly improved the photostability of Cs0.6MA0.4Pb(I1−xBrx)3. Specifically, the resulting defect-healed grain boundary and interior by interface engineering can slow down the movement of the halide ions in the perovskite lattice, and hence suppress the annoying PIAPS phenomenon.
 Fig. 10  (a) PL spectra of the MHP films monitored under continuous irradiation without (a) and with (b) FAX passivation. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) PL spectra from excitation by low-duty cycle (solid line) or high-duty cycle (diamond) light pulses. PL spectra from single halide perovskites are shown with dashed lines for comparison. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (d) Summary of the optical absorption edge and PL peak energy vs. x value, and (e) XRD patterns for BAI1−xBrxCs0.6MA0.4Pb(I1−xBrx)3 films before and after illumination. The illumination process was conducted in an N2 filled glovebox under simulated one sun illumination for 20 min. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of PIAPS phenomenon for MHP films on TiO2 substrate. (g) Time-dependent TA (5 ps) spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 on ZrO2 and TiO2 (387 nm, 500 Hz, air), and absorption-time profile recorded at 630 nm, 530 nm, and 745 nm, respectively. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (h) Normalized PL spectra of MAPb(BrxI3−x)3 films before and after illumination (350 nm, 6 mW cm−2) in pure nitrogen, moisture (N2 + H2O, ∼35% relative humidity), and oxygen environments. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
Besides, the dynamic procedure for TiO2-assisted halide segregation was confirmed by DuBose through femtosecond transient absorption measurements.84 As shown in Fig. 10f and g, the structure of TiO2/MHPs can quickly extract the photo-generated electrons into the TiO2 layer, and scavenged by O2, and hence the residual holes can provide channels and speed up the migration of halide ions for phase segregation. However, Fan et al., proposed the O2 passivation method, as shown in Fig. 10h,104 in which the O2 molecules diffuse into the perovskite crystal and react with photo-generated charge carriers as superoxide species. The superoxide species can hence fill the halide vacancies to suppress the redistribution of the halide ions.105 Hence, the O2 concentration is also an important topic, where a certain value can guarantee the flux into the perovskite lattice for defect passivation. All the above passivation procedures aim at promoting the film quality to stabilize MHPs by reducing the surface/bulk defects and occupying the “vivid” vacancies. Thus, it can be concluded that the passivating agents in the application must be excellent to modify the crystal defects and occupy the vacancies well to achieve a stable phase. However, it should also be noted that the selected additives should at least have no negative effect on the photoelectricity characteristics of the perovskites.
4.3 Morphology engineering

4.3.1 Grain size. 
Inspired by the superior stability of the MHP nanocrystals shown in Fig. 11a,92,106–108 we can speculate that the grain size may influence the migration of halide ions and photostability of films. As an early investigation, Draguta's work exhibited that there was a similar PL red shift for a CsPb(I0.5Br0.5)3 thin film, as shown in Fig. 11b.109 However, there was no obvious change for the nanocrystal-based MHP film after 120 s irradiation, as shown in Fig. 11c. Fig. 11d shows that reducing the grain size can enhance the phase photostability significantly, and accordingly the migration of halide ions can be suppressed in smaller-size nanocrystals. Besides, an efficient method to suppress phase segregation, embedding nanocrystals of CsPbX3 into an endotaxial Cs4PbX6 matrix, was achieved by Wang and co-workers.36 The agreement between the experiments and nucleation model suggested that the size of the nanocrystals and the host–guest interfaces are critical for the photostability of MHPs. A representative polycrystalline thin film is presented in Fig. 11e, and the CsPb(Br0.6I0.4)3 perovskite film presented an unstable state after illumination in Fig. 11g. After the introduction of a non-perovskite matrix by increasing the ratio Cs+ in the precursor, the host–gust structure of CsPb(BrxI3−x)3/Cs4Pb(BrxI3−x)6 was synthesized, as shown in Fig. 11f, in which many tiny crystals with a radius of ∼7.5 nm were embedded in the Cs4Pb(BrxI3−x)6 matrix. As expected, the composite structure exhibited great stability with a longer irradiation time of 5 h, which could almost maintain their initial emission wavelengths (Fig. 11h). This method can be regarded as a suitable way to enhance the photostability of MHPs, but it significantly reduces the electrical properties due to the introduction of the non-conductive Cs4PbX6.
 Fig. 11  (a) Normalized PL spectra taken at 400 nm excitation for a solution of CsPbBr3−xIx (0 ≤ x ≤ 2.75) nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. Time-dependent PL spectra of the CsPb(I0.5Br0.5)3 perovskites (b) thin film and (c) nanocrystal-based film, and (d) corresponding evolution of the PL peak position with illumination time. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. HRTEM images (inset: selected area diffraction patterns) of (e) polycrystalline CsPb(BrxI3−x)3 film and (f) CsPb(BrxI3−x)3/Cs4Pb(BrxI3−x)6 host–guest structure. PL spectra of (g) CsPb(BrxI3−x)3 and (h) CsPb(BrxI3−x)3/Cs4Pb(BrxI3−x)6 before and after 10 min irradiation (0.3 W cm−2). Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (i) Schematic of the formation for MHP films with different grain sizes through an annealing process. (j)–(l) Normalized PL spectra of CsPb(Br0.79I0.21)3 films with different sizes before and after illumination. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
Meanwhile, the results from the work by Draguta demonstrated that there is a correlation between the carrier diffusion length (L) and the rate of segregation (K):109 (4)where Ksat and ρ are the saturated segregation rate and the photo-generated carrier density, respectively. This equation means that the rate of phase segregation, K, can be controlled by adjusting the carrier diffusion length, L, of perovskite materials, suggesting a nanoparticle size threshold for the segregation and non-segregation regions. Simultaneously, the exact threshold of the non-segregation CsPb(BrxI1−x)3 perovskite nanocrystals was further confirmed by Gualdron-Reyes.71 Within a reasonable range, the CsPb(BrxI1−x)3 nanocrystals films exhibited superior phase stability after irradiation, in which the authors employed an annealing progress to form bulk films through nanoparticle agglomeration, as shown in Fig. 11i.107,108,110 Specifically, the annealing time was accurately controlled to adjust the grain size of the target films. Taking the CsPb(Br0.79I0.21)3 perovskite as an example, different annealing times varying from 0 s to 180 s were investigated to achieve different grain sizes ranging from ∼12 nm to 301 nm, as shown in Fig. 11j–l. The results showed that the segregation effect was almost negligible for a grain size below 20 ± 3 nm, but a slight deterioration occurred with a larger grain size. Briefly, it is certain that the phase segregation can be completely retrained by reducing the grain size below an exact threshold, which blocks the movement of halide ions for stable MHPs. However, the massive grain boundaries in nanocrystal-based films also inhibit the carrier migration, and lead to a reduction in device efficiency, just like quantum dot solar cells.111–113


4.3.2 Film thickness. 
As referenced, the physical thickness of MHP films may vary the photo-generated carrier gradient, affect the halide ions migration, and disturb the formation of segregated phases. Herein, as shown in Fig. 12a–d, the work by Hu et al., compared a stable MAPbBr0.8I2.2 film (320 nm) with an unstable film (530 nm) through XRD patterns and PL emission spectra. Based on the explanation by Barker and colleagues,66 the photo-induced migration of halide ions in the lattice requires a concentration gradient of carriers (Fig. 12e). Fundamentally, the driving force for ion migration should be dependent on the film thickness. As shown in Fig. 12f, there was an obvious enhancement in iodide aggregation (red line), but this decreased after light excitation from other side. In theory, the additional excitation from the other side broke the original concentration gradient, which obviously inhibited the fast ion migration. For a clear vison, the PL peak positions of the perovskite films with different thicknesses are shown in Fig. 12g, which directly prove that the thin film with a certain thickness possessed better material photostability. Similar to grain size, there should be also a thickness threshold for MHP films. For FAPb(BrxI3−x)3 in Fig. 12h–k, Zhou et al., concluded that the thin film (58 nm) had no obvious peak shift under continuous illumination, but a red-shifted peak for medium (239 nm) and thick (1.3 μm) films.72 Briefly, it is well recognized that the film thickness influences the PIAPS phenomenon, where a thin film has a more stable perovskite phase compared to thick films of MHPs. On the other hand, besides the concentration gradient, thick films may also possess more surface/bulk defects and halide vacancies for the migration of halide ions and more serious phase segregation than thin films.
 Fig. 12  (a) XRD patterns for MAPbBr0.8I2.2 with different perovskite film thicknesses of 340 nm (top) and 540 nm (bottom) pre- (black) and post-illumination (red), and after recovery (blue) in the dark for 2 h. (b) Gaussian fitting (red) for (200) peak of the 540 nm film after illumination. PL spectra with an interval of 10 s for the (c) 320 nm and (d) 540 nm films, respectively. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic of the reversible PIAPS phenomenon for the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 film. (f) Dependence of sub-bandgap PL growth and mean PL energy on excitation geometry. (g) Dependence of photo-induced changes in PL on film thickness. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. PL spectra taken under 405 nm continuous illumination for nanoplatelets with thicknesses of (h) 58 nm, (i) 239 nm, and (k) 1.3 μm. (j) PL intensity of the two peaks for the medium thickness nanoplatelet as a function of illumination time. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

4.4 External control

4.4.1 Ambient temperature. 
Besides the internal factors, some external working conditions also deeply affect the photostability issue of MHPs. As is known, the working temperature is a key point for the future commercial use of PVs, where photovoltaic materials should remain stable under large temperature changes. Here, Nandi and co-workers proposed that the PIAPS phenomenon only occurs in a narrow temperature range for perovskites with a particular Br content.114Fig. 13a illustrates the relationship mapping for the phase stability of MHPs vs. temperature/Br content. Fig. 13b–d exhibit the temperature-dependent PL spectra of the MHPs with a Br content of 15%, 24%, and 27%, consistent with previous reports for stable perovskites with x < 0.2. Once over/below elevated temperatures, there was almost no phase segregation for the perovskites due to electron–phonon interaction, which contributed to the suppression of halide ion migration. This conclusion can successfully contribute to the higher-temperature application of MHP-based PVs.
 Fig. 13  (a) Relationship mapping for the phase stability of MHPs vs. temperature/Br concentration, and temperature-dependent PL spectra of (b) x = 0.15, (c) x = 0.24, and (d) x = 0.27 thin films collected after 0 s and 4 h of light soaking, represented by black and red sold lines. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. Temperature-dependence PL spectra of triple-cation mixed-halide (MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.83 Br0.17)3 perovskite film in both the mixed and demixed (segregated phase) stages. (e) PL spectra at low excitation power-density (1 mW cm−2) and (f) PL spectra of demixed stage under excitation with high power density (840 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) Photographs of the two separate MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskite films deposited on FTO glass before and after homogenization, in which the two films facing each other were clamped and kept at 100 °C for 1260 min, and (h) absorption spectra of corresponding films. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (i) Bright field images of the polystyrene-coated MHP film before (top) and after 1 minute illumination (bottom) (532 nm, 30 W cm−2). Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. Evolution of (j) absorbance spectra, and (k) and (l) corresponding tracking of the segregation for MAPbBr1.5I1.5 film under irradiation (20 mW cm−2) at different annealing temperatures (23 °C, 60 °C, and 100 °C). Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
Further, Gautam et al., also presented the temperature-dependent PL emission of triple-cation (MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskites for an in-depth understanding.115 As shown in Fig. 13e, the low-energy asymmetry of the PL emission (10 K, 20 K, and 40 K) was related to the bound excitons and shallow energy levels by iodine interstitials defects at a low excitation power-density (<1 mW cm−2). Then, at a high power-density (840 mW cm−2), Fig. 13f shows the presence of two emission peaks located at 1.574 and 1.534 eV at 10 K, where the low-energy emission peak is related to the I-rich phase. Both indicate that the ambient temperature has a great effect on the exciton–phonon coupling, and further the stability of segregated halide domains under photoexcitation. Moreover, Elmelund and colleagues demonstrated the diffusion of the halide species under thermal activation, which was tracked by the absorption changes, as shown in Fig. 13g and h.116 The obvious change for the facing MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 films before and after heat treatment at 100 °C for 21 h exhibited that the mobility of the halide ions in the perovskite was strongly dependent on the ambient temperature, which influenced the ion migration due to the symbiosis of light and heat.
Besides, Vicente introduced a photo-thermal remixing process for the segregated I/Br-rich domain.117 They believed that an increase in temperature enhanced the effect of the entropy (Section 3), which drove the remixing of the I-rich and Br-rich phases. They indirectly estimated the film temperature by using the glass-transition temperature (T = 370 K) of a polystyrene thin film. As shown in Fig. 13i, the top and bottom images represent the bright field images of the MHPs before and after 1 min illumination, respectively, which proved the temperature change after illumination. The thermally activated demixing of halide ions was further clarified by Elmelund's work (Fig. 13j–l).118 The higher temperature contributed a greater driving force to the phase segregation process. Specifically, both the temperature and excitation intensity affected the phase segregation procedure for MHPs.


4.4.2 Light intensity and ambient pressure. 
The light intensity provides activation energy for the migration of ions in the perovskite lattice. The time-dependent PL emissions of MAPbIBr2 films are shown in Fig. 14a–f.119 Similarly, Yoon and co-workers also noted the effect of light intensity on phase segregation, as shown in Fig. 14g–l.120 At a low excitation power-density, the position of the PL spectra remained unchanged even with a longer exposure time, and reasonably, an obvious red shift was observed in the emission peaks under a high excitation power-density. Then, the increase in the PL intensity may be related to an increase in the amount of low-bandgap domains, and the filling of the existing non-radiative traps in the MHP films. In our opinion, the carrier density in MHP films should be sufficient for ion migration, which is provided by external light with a sufficient intensity. Besides light intensity and time, the ambient pressure also affects the phase segregation, as reported by Jaffe et al.121 Their work confirmed that the PL spectra for the sample at 0.2 GPa showed a red shift and increase in intensity with further irradiation, similar to its ambient-pressure behavior. However, at a higher pressure in the range of 0.6 GPa to 0.9 GPa, the original peak dominated the whole emission with prolonged irradiation (Fig. 14m–p). The PL red shift could be mitigated under a pressure of less than 1 GPa, which may alter the ion transport and thermodynamic properties in perovskites. Briefly, the photostability of MHP films is still unclear to date, and a combination of many inducements, not only a single one, together result in ion migration, and further phase segregation in MHPs.
 Fig. 14  (a)–(f) PL spectra of MAPbIBr2 film as a function of laser power (407 nm) over 900 s of illumination under ambient conditions (22 °C, 40% relative humidity). Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. UV-vis absorption spectra of MAPbBr1.3I1.7 film with different power densities (25 mW cm−2 and 636 mW cm−2) or time of laser irradiation (405 nm). (g) and (j) Absorption spectra recorded initially, (h) and (k) after laser irradiation, and (i) and (l) after storing the film 1 h in the dark. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. PL spectra recorded at 8 s intervals for MAPb(Br0.6I0.4)3 showing the PL evolution with light soaking, ranging from 0 s (dark red) to 150 s (purple). Spectra displayed were obtained at (m) 0.2 GPa, (n) 0.6 GPa, (o) 0.7 GPa, and (p) 0.9 GPa. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. 

5. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, a remarkable efficiency improvement to 25.2% has been successfully approached for single-junction MHP-based solar cells in the past decade. Moreover, through halide substitution of I/Br pairs, the bandgap energy of the MHP materials can be precisely tuned between ∼1.3 eV and ∼2.38 eV. The characteristic of bandgap tunability contributes significantly to tandem integration for more competitive and efficient PVs. However, under irradiation, the migration of halide ions in the lattice leads to the photo-induced phase instability of MHPs. This photoinstability results in a reduction of the photo tolerance of films and stable performance output of perovskite-based devices. Results show that the photo-driven migration of halide ions in the crystal lattice gives rise to the formation of I/Br-rich domains. The demixing I-rich phase acts as a sub-bandgap trapping state for carrier radiative recombination, and leads to film heterogeneity and performance deterioration. Herein, we systematically summarized the photo-induced structural change, inherent mechanism, suppression procedures, and their correlation for a thorough understanding of this phenomenon. Certainly, a series of models have been explored to partly explain this effect, including (i) thermodynamic origin, (ii) localized strain, and (iii) vacancies and defects. Thus far, the impact factors, i.e., ABX3 composition, bulk/surface defect and halide vacancy, grain size, film thickness, crystallinity, ambient temperature, light intensity and irradiation time, pressure, and oxygen, have been proven to efficiently affect the abhorrent phase segregation phenomenon for MHP materials. Thus, an increasing number of procedures have successfully been attempted to restrain the above factors to achieve stable perovskite alloys by researchers. Specifically, both the driving force and migration channels are equally important for the directional movement of halide ions (PIAPS phenomenon) in the perovskite lattice.
In the long term, more attention should be focused on the phase segregation process of MHPs for their future application in tandem and multi-junction PVs. The experimentally successful means can still be applied to find other similar procedures for the suppression of PIAPS. Further, it is very important for us to try to sever the link between the driving force and migration channels for the inhibition of PIAPS fundamentally. Herein, we proposed some possible directions for the research of phase segregation to obtain stable MHP alloys.
(i) Further improve the quality of MHPs.
(ii) Find more superior additives for MHPs.
(iii) Find coupled electron/hole transporting materials for MHP-based PVs.
(iv) Confirm the exact role of the I-rich domain on the performance of PVs (Voc).
(v) Explore whether the Br-rich domain has an effect on film property and device performance.
(vi) Study the effect of current, bias, etc., on the phase segregation process.
As an explanation, the film quality should be first continued to be optimized to reduce bulk/surface defects, halide vacancies, residual strain, etc., for high-quality MHPs. This method can cut off the migration channels for halide ions in the perovskite lattice. Besides, it should be noted that the selected additives in the perovskite (surface/bulk) should at least have no negative effect on the photoelectricity characteristics of the treated perovskites. Similar to Wang's work,36 the introduction of an endotaxial Cs4PbX6 matrix can indeed enhance the photostability, but significantly damage the electrical properties due to the non-conductive Cs4PbX6. As mentioned,69,84,122 the aggregated holes contribute significantly to the migration of iodide ions, and hence it is necessary to find suitable electron/hole transporting material pairs to extract photo-generated carriers in working PVs. Further, it should be deeply explored whether and how the I-rich domains influence the device Voc because of the conflicting reports.43,52,53 Moreover, we need confirm the role of the paired Br-rich domain, which may also affect the photoluminescence efficiency and then the device performance. Meanwhile, research on the current/bias-induced phase segregation in the dark may also help us understand the carrier dynamic process of the PIAPS phenomenon in MHPs. Briefly, there is still a huge upside for researchers to develop stable MHPs for the future commercial application of perovskite/Si PVs.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Natural Science Basic Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China (No. 2020JZ-04), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2019M653639), and National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61774122).
References
T. Bu, J. Li, F. Zheng, W. Chen, X. Wen, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, J. Zhong, Y. B. Cheng and F. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4609 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, D. Wang, S. Wang and T. Zhang, Materials, 2018, 11, 778 CrossRef .
D. Yang, R. Yang, K. Wang, C. Wu, X. Zhu, J. Feng, X. Ren, G. Fang, S. Priya and S. F. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3239 CrossRef .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. Il Seo, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, J. Guo, Y. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Pan, H. Zhang, Y. Xia and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605005 CrossRef .
H. Wei, D. DeSantis, W. Wei, Y. Deng, D. Guo, T. J. Savenije, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 826–833 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Anaraki, A. Kermanpur, L. Steier, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3128–3134 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, C. L. Wang, C. R. Grice, N. Shrestha, J. Chen, D. W. Zhao, W. Q. Liao, A. J. Cimaroli, P. J. Roland, R. J. Ellingson and Y. F. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3288–3297 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, C. Wang, H. Lei, X. Zheng, P. Qin, L. Xiong, X. Zhao, Y. Yan and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1658–1666 RSC .
P. Huang, Q. Chen, K. Zhang, L. Yuan, Y. Zhou, B. Song and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6213–6219 RSC .
S. S. Mali, J. V. Patil, H. Arandiyan and C. K. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17516–17528 RSC .
Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, S. B. Jo, C.-C. Chueh, S. Williams, C.-C. Huang, J. K. Katahara, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K. Y. Jen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7739–7747 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abate, Joule, 2017, 1, 659–664 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Gu, P.-W. Qi and Y. Peng, Acta Phys. -Chim. Sin., 2017, 33, 1379–1389 CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. He and J. Min, Acta Phys. -Chim. Sin., 2018, 34, 1221–1238 CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .
Nat. Renewable Energy Lab. NREL Efficiency Chart. https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html (Accessed Sept 20, 2019).
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
K. Masuko, M. Shigematsu, T. Hashiguchi, D. Fujishima, M. Kai, N. Yoshimura, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Ichihashi, T. Mishima, N. Matsubara, T. Yamanishi, T. Takahama, M. Taguchi, E. Maruyama and S. Okamoto, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2014, 4, 1433–1435 Search PubMed .
H. Shen, T. Duong, J. Peng, D. Jacobs, N. Wu, J. Gong, Y. Wu, S. K. Karuturi, X. Fu, K. Weber, X. Xiao, T. P. White and K. Catchpole, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 394–406 RSC .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 3–11 Search PubMed .
Z. C. Holman, A. Descoeudres, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2013, 3, 1243–1249 Search PubMed .
F. Guo, N. Li, F. W. Fecher, N. Gasparini, C. O. Ramirez Quiroz, C. Bronnbauer, Y. Hou, V. V. Radmilovic, V. R. Radmilovic, E. Spiecker, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7730 CrossRef .
S. P. Bremner, M. Y. Levy and C. B. Honsberg, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 225–233 Search PubMed .
J.-C. Liu, F. Tang, F.-Y. Ye, Q. Chen and L.-W. Chen, Acta Phys. -Chim. Sin., 2017, 33, 1934–1943 CAS .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
W. Rehman, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, C. Wehrenfennig, J. L. Boland, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7938–7944 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Beal, D. J. Slotcavage, T. Leijtens, A. R. Bowring, R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 746–751 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 RSC .
F. Brivio, C. Caetano and A. Walsh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1083–1087 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Slotcavage, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1199–1205 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Ling, X. Lian, Y. Xin, K. B. Dhungana, F. Perez-Orive, J. Knox, Z. Chen, Y. Zhou, D. Beery, K. Hanson, J. Shi, S. Lin and H. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 695 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Fu, Y. Tang, H. Wang, C. Zhang, W. W. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and M. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1088 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Bischak, A. B. Wong, E. Lin, D. T. Limmer, P. Yang and N. S. Ginsberg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3998–4005 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Guan, W. Chen, J. Yang, L. Hu, J. Yang, S. Li, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, X. Wen and T. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 38376–38385 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gil-Escrig, A. Miquel-Sempere, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3743–3748 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, M. U. Rothmann, A. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. R. Pascoe, J. Lu, L. Jiang, Y. Chen, F. Huang, Y. Peng, Q. Bao, J. Etheridge, U. Bach and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700946 CrossRef .
E. L. Unger, L. Kegelmann, K. Suchan, D. Sörell, L. Kortec and S. Albrechtd, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11401–11409 RSC .
T. C.-J. Yang, P. Fiala, Q. Jeangros and C. Ballif, Joule, 2018, 2, 1421–1436 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kulkarni, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, N. Mathews and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9221–9225 RSC .
B. Suarez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, T. S. Ripolles, R. S. Sanchez, L. Otero and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1628–1635 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal, R. J. Stoddard, S. B. Jo, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K. Jen, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3985–3993 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, Z. J. Yu, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey, E. J. Wolf, W. Weigand, S. Manzoor, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, J. M. Luther, Z. C. Holman and M. D. McGehee, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Braly, R. J. Stoddard, A. Rajagopal, A. R. Uhl, J. K. Katahara, A. K. Y. Jen and H. W. Hillhouse, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1841–1847 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal, Z. Yang, S. B. Jo, I. L. Braly, P. W. Liang, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702140 CrossRef .
K. A. Bush, K. Frohna, R. Prasanna, R. E. Beal, T. Leijtens, S. A. Swifter and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 428–435 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mahesh, J. M. Ball, R. D. J. Oliver, D. P. McMeekin, P. K. Nayak, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 258–267 RSC .
F. Peña-Camargo, P. Caprioglio, F. Zu, E. Gutierrez-Partida, C. M. Wolff, K. Brinkmann, S. Albrecht, T. Riedl, N. Koch, D. Neher and M. Stolterfoht, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2728–2736 CrossRef .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Hörantner, T. Leijtens, M. E. Ziffer, G. E. Eperon, M. G. Christoforo, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2506–2513 CrossRef .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Pazoki, M. Saliba, K. Schenk, M. Grätzelc and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1706 RSC .
D. Forgács, L. Gil-Escrig, D. Pérez-Del-Rey, C. Momblona, J. Werner, B. Niesen, C. Ballif, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602121 CrossRef .
B. Zhao, M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. Tabachnyk, H. Glass, V. S. Kamboj, W. Nie, A. J. Pearson, Y. Puttisong, K. C. Godel, H. E. Beere, D. A. Ritchie, A. D. Mohite, S. E. Dutton, R. H. Friend and A. Sadhanala, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604744 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D’Haen, L. D’Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, T. H. Thomas, S. E. Dutton, K. C. Goedel, F. C. Hanusch, M. L. Lai, U. Steiner, T. Bein, P. Docampo, D. Cahen and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2501–2505 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Brennan, A. Ruth, P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 282–301 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Knight and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2024–2046 RSC .
G. F. Samu, C. Janáky and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1860–1861 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Barker, A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, M. Gandini, S. P. Senanayak, P. M. Pearce, E. Mosconi, A. J. Pearson, Y. Wu, A. R. Srimath Kandada, T. Leijtens, F. De Angelis, S. E. Dutton, A. Petrozza and R. H. Friend, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1416–1424 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, M. van den Berg, E. Gu, A. Horneber, G. J. Matt, A. Osvet, A. J. Meixner, D. Zhang and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2172–2178 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Bischak, C. L. Hetherington, H. Wu, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, D. T. Limmer and N. S. Ginsberg, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gratia, G. Grancini, J. N. Audinot, X. Jeanbourquin, E. Mosconi, I. Zimmermann, D. Dowsett, Y. Lee, M. Gratzel, F. De Angelis, K. Sivula, T. Wirtz and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15821–15824 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mao, C. R. Hall, A. S. R. Chesman, C. Forsyth, Y. B. Cheng, N. W. Duffy, T. A. Smith and U. Bach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2893–2898 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Gualdron-Reyes, S. J. Yoon, E. M. Barea, S. Agouram, V. Munoz-Sanjose, A. M. Melendez, M. E. Nino-Gomez and I. Mora-Sero, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 54–62 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, Q. Ou, W. Chen, Z. Gan, J. Wang, Q. Bao, X. Wen and B. Jia, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1801107 CrossRef .
W. Chen, W. Mao, U. Bach, B. Jia and X. Wen, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, C. Bi, Y. Yuan, Y. Bai and J. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500301 CrossRef .
B. A. Rosales, L. Men, S. D. Cady, M. P. Hanrahan, A. J. Rossini and J. Vela, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6848–6859 CrossRef CAS .
W. Rehman, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, R. L. Milot, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 361–369 RSC .
W. Zhou, Y. Zhao, X. Zhou, R. Fu, Q. Li, Y. Zhao, K. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4122–4128 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–501 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Balakrishna, S. M. Kobosko and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2267–2272 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Belisle, K. A. Bush, L. Bertoluzzi, A. Gold-Parker, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2694–2700 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Z. Zhu, J. Li, A. K. Y. Jen and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800525 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Y.-H. Jia, H.-H. Fang, M. A. Loi, F.-Y. Xie, L. Gong, M.-C. Qin, X.-H. Lu, C.-P. Wong and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803130 CrossRef .
J. Cho and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 6206–6212 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. DuBose and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5362–5370 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Pan, J. Hu, S. Qiu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, S. Chen, X. Liu, C. J. Brabec, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. Mai and F. Guo, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1386–1395 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Mathew, G. F. Samu, C. Janáky and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1872–1880 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Muscarella, E. M. Hutter, F. Wittmann, Y. W. Woo, Y.-K. Jung, L. McGovern, J. Versluis, A. Walsh, H. J. Bakker and B. Ehrler, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3152–3158 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Tiede, M. E. Calvo, J. F. Galisteo-Lopez and H. Miguez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 4911–4916 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duong, H. K. Mulmudi, Y. Wu, X. Fu, H. Shen, J. Peng, N. Wu, H. T. Nguyen, D. Macdonald, M. Lockrey, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26859–26866 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, E. T. Hoke, G. Grancini, D. J. Slotcavage, G. E. Eperon, J. M. Ball, M. D. Bastiani, A. R. Bowring, N. Martino, K. Wojciechowski, M. D. McGehee, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500962 CrossRef .
P. Vashishtha and J. E. Halpert, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5965–5973 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di Girolamo, N. Phung, F. U. Kosasih, F. Di Giacomo, F. Matteocci, J. A. Smith, M. A. Flatken, H. Köbler, S. H. Turren Cruz, A. Mattoni, L. Cinà, B. Rech, A. Latini, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, A. Di Carlo, D. Dini and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000310 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. Chan Kim, W. S. Yang, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 RSC .
D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. Wang, W. Liao, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, L. Guan, R. J. Ellingson, K. Zhu, X. Zhao, R.-G. Xiong and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17018 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Dang, K. Wang, M. Ghasemi, M.-C. Tang, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin, E. Dauzon, D. Barrit, J. Peng, D.-M. Smilgies, S. De Wolf and A. Amassian, Joule, 2019, 3, 1746–1764 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, L. Zhao, N. L. Tran, Y. L. Lin, S. H. Silver, R. A. Kerner, N. Yao, A. Kahn, G. D. Scholes and B. P. Rand, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6863–6869 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Beal, N. Z. Hagström, J. Barrier, A. Gold-Parker, R. Prasanna, K. A. Bush, D. Passarello, L. T. Schelhas, K. Brüning, C. J. Tassone, H.-G. Steinrück, M. D. McGehee, M. F. Toney and A. F. Nogueira, Matter, 2020, 2, 207–219 CrossRef .
Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, M. Abdi-Jalebi, D. Guo, S. Macpherson, A. Sadhanala, E. M. Tennyson, E. Ruggeri, M. Anaya, K. Galkowski, R. Shivanna, K. Lohmann, K. Frohna, S. Mackowski, T. J. Savenije, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902374 CrossRef .
H. R. Byun, D. Y. Park, H. M. Oh, G. Namkoong and M. S. Jeong, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2813–2820 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sadhanala, S. Ahmad, B. Zhao, N. Giesbrecht, P. M. Pearce, F. Deschler, R. L. Hoye, K. C. Godel, T. Bein, P. Docampo, S. E. Dutton, M. F. De Volder and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6095–6101 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Liashenko, E. D. Cherotchenko, A. P. Pushkarev, V. Pakstas, A. Naujokaitis, S. A. Khubezhov, R. G. Polozkov, K. B. Agapev, A. A. Zakhidov, I. A. Shelykh and S. V. Makarov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 18930–18938 RSC .
W. Zhu, Q. Zhang, D. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Lin, J. Chang, J. Zhang, C. Zhang and Y. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802080 CrossRef .
W. Fan, Y. Shi, T. Shi, S. Chu, W. Chen, K. O. Ighodalo, J. Zhao, X. Li and Z. Xiao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 2052–2058,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.9b01383 .
A. J. Knight, A. D. Wright, J. B. Patel, D. P. McMeekin, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 75–84 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D’Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. J. Grotevent and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5635–5640 CrossRef CAS .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS .
S. Draguta, O. Sharia, S. J. Yoon, M. C. Brennan, Y. V. Morozov, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat, W. F. Schneider and M. Kuno, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 200 CrossRef .
J. B. Hoffman, G. Zaiats, I. Wappes and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9767–9774 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Wheeler, E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, P. Schulz, M. Suri, N. C. Anderson, J. A. Christians, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, T. Kroll, S. P. Harvey, J. J. Berry, L. Y. Lin and J. M. Luther, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10504–10513 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ling, S. Zhou, J. Yuan, J. Shi, Y. Qian, B. W. Larson, Q. Zhao, C. Qin, F. Li, G. Shi, C. Stewart, J. Hu, X. Zhang, J. M. Luther, S. Duhm and W. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900721 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, C. Bi, S. Wang, R. Guo, T. Shen, L. Zhang and J. Tian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906615 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nandi, C. Giri, D. Swain, U. Manju, S. D. Mahanti and D. Topwal, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3807–3814 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Gautam, M. Kim, D. R. Miquita, J. E. Bourée, B. Geffroy and O. Plantevin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002622 CrossRef CAS .
T. Elmelund, R. A. Scheidt, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1961–1969 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Vicente and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1802–1807 CrossRef CAS .
T. Elmelund, B. Seger, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 56–63 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ruan, M.-A. Surmiak, Y. Ruan, D. P. McMeekin, H. Ebendorff-Heidepriem, Y.-B. Cheng, J. Lu and C. R. McNeill, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9326–9334 RSC .
S. J. Yoon, S. Draguta, J. S. Manser, O. Sharia, W. F. Schneider, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, C. M. Beavers, J. Voss, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Samu, A. Balog, F. De Angelis, D. Meggiolaro, P. V. Kamat and C. Janaky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10812–10820 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Yuxiao Guo
	Y. X. Guo is now a PhD candidate under the supervision of Dr Yin at the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University in China. He received his BS Degree in Electronics Science and Technology from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2016. He is interested in mixed-halide CsPbX3 perovskites, and now focuses on exploring new strategies for obtaining high-quality CsPbX3 perovskites.

Xingtian Yin
	X. T. Yin is working as an Associate Professor at the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University in China. He completed his PhD at Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2014 working on wide bandgap oxide semiconductors with nanostructures for solar cell applications. He worked as a visiting scholar at the University of California at Berkeley from 2012 to 2014. Currently, his research interests focus on dopant-free carrier-selective contacts for photovoltaics and nanocomposites for photocatalyst applications.

Huan Liu
	H. Liu is currently a Professor at Xi’an Technological University in China. He completed his PhD at Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2013. He worked as a visiting scholar at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology from 2016 to 2017. Currently, his research interests focus on nanostructures for light trapping applications in silicon solar cells.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the multi-junction architecture of photovoltaics. (b) Bandgap energy vs. x (Br content) for FAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (black),32 MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (red),40 CsPb(I1−xBrx)3 (blue),31 and MASn(I1−xBrx)3 (pink)54 perovskites. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (c) Simulated PCE mapping of perovskite–perovskite–silicon triple-junction solar cells with various bandgap combinations for middle and top perovskite absorbers (inset: device structure). Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Distribution diagram for some reported device Voc as a function of perovskite bandgap.15,31,32,40,41,45,46,56–60 Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of the reversible phase transition between the mixed and I/Br-rich phases. Inset: I-rich domains with the lowest bandgap acting as carrier recombination traps and exhibiting red-shifted PL.	 
nλ = 2dsinθ	(1)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Absorption spectra of MAPb(I0.5Br0.5)3 film before and after irradiation for 30 min (100 mW cm−2), and dark recovery after 3 h. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (b) PDS spectra for MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 films measured before (lines), under (closed symbols), and after (open symbols) light soaking (∼0.2 sun). Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (c) XRD patterns of MAPb(I0.4Br0.6)3 film before (black) and after (red) white-light soaking for 5 min at ∼50 mW cm−2, and after 2 h in the dark (blue). Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the topography-dependent reversible phase segregation of MHPs. (e) and (f) Topography of MAPb(I0.7Br0.3)3 perovskites, and the corresponding PL evolution at different regions (i–iii represent grain centers, and iv–vi grain boundaries). The excitation wavelength was 636 nm with an intensity of 500 W cm−2. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic of CL acquisition and light soaking, and (h) SE, CL, and SE/CL overlay after light soaking for 5 min at 100 mW cm−2. The scale bar is 2 μm. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. CL spectra mapping under an electron beam acceleration voltage of (i) 2 kV and (j) 5 kV and corresponding spectra (k) for the grain interiors, grain boundaries and I-rich phases. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Surface potential map from KPFM measurement for (FA0.85MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 film in the dark (l) and under illumination (m), indicating possible hole accumulation. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Confocal imaging (blue channel: 500–560 nm and yellow channel: 650–750 nm) of (a) MAPb(I0.14Br0.86)3 and (b) (Cs0.39MA0.61)Pb(I0.15Br0.85)3 after cation exchange. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. Optical images of FAPb(BrxI3−x)3 nanoplatelets with different thicknesses. The height profiles indicate the thickness of (c) 58 nm, (d) 239 nm, and (e) 1.3 μm. (f) Normalized PL of nanoplatelets with different thicknesses excited at 405 nm. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Schematic of the carrier transport and PIAPS process for MAPbBrxI3−x perovskite single crystal microplatelet under one-photon (g) and two-photon (h) illumination. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (i)—(l) Wide-field PL images of MAPb(BrxI3−x)3 single crystal collected over 120 s in the I-rich emission region (660–700 nm). Light irradiation: 400–450 nm, 5 mW cm−2. Scale bar is 5 μm. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
ΔUj = Ej − (1 − x)EMAPbI3 − xEMAPbBr3	(2)
ΔF(x, T) = ΔU(x, T) − TΔS(x, T)	(3)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Energy of mixing (top) and entropy of mixing (bottom) as a function of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 alloy. The symbols are the values calculated for each configuration (eqn (3)). The solid lines show the behavior for the alloy at 200 K (blue), 300 K (green) and for a completely random alloy in the high T limit (red) within the generalized quasi-chemical approximation. The dashed line represents the convex hull. (b) Calculated Helmholtz free energy as a function of alloy and temperature as calculated within the generalized quasi-chemical approximation (eqn (4)). (c) Predicted phase diagram of the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 alloy. The purple and pink lines are the binodal and spinodal lines, respectively. The dashed horizontal line shows the miscibility gap at room temperature. A thermodynamically stable solid-solution can be formed in the white region only. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (d) Photo-induced polaron trapping and associated energy scales associated with phase separation. (e) Snapshot of the 99% isosurface of excess charge density taken from the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. (f) Free energies per unit cell for MAPb(IxBr1−x)3 with varying composition in the ground (red) and photoexcited (blue) states, computed from MD simulations (circles) and mean field theory (solid lines). (g) Mean-field theory temperature-composition phase diagram in the ground (red) and photoexcited state (blue) with the path through the phase diagram from the initial state (star) to demixed state (circle) observed experimentally. Areas beneath the red and blue coexistence curves indicate demixed states. (h) Extent of demixing (i.e., purity of demixed regions found by tracing the blue coexistence curve in g) as a function of electron–phonon coupling and temperature computed from mean field theory in the photoexcited state. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (i) Illustration of the ion migration pathways enabled by Schottky defects, Frenkel defects, open space and wrong bonds at the grain boundaries, lattice distortions due to accumulated charges, dissolved impurities, and non-uniform strain caused by the piezoelectric effect, and Soften lattice caused by light illumination-induced bond weakening. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the PIAPS suppression by the addition of Cs+ ions. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. The positive effect of the addition of Cs+ and Rb+ on the phase segregation of MHPs by (b) XRD and (c) PL. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Change of PL photon energy for emission from three different CsyFA(1−y)Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3 films with y = 0.05, 0.20, and 0.60. The films were exposed to continuous illumination over 30 min and excited at 400 nm with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Inset: Spectra change in emission from a Cs0.6FA0.4Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3 film over 30 min of continuous illumination. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Summary of the optical absorption edge and PL peak energy vs. x value for Cs0.6MA0.4Pb(I1−xBrx)3 films before and after illumination. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (f) PL spectra for (Cs0.06MA0.15FA0.79)Pb(Br0.4I0.6)3 film with time under ambient conditions and laser illumination (532 nm laser, ∼60 mW cm−2), and (g) corresponding PDS spectra before (black circle) and after (red square) 30 min of light treatment with a white-light LED source (∼100 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  TA spectra of (a) MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 and (b) MA(Pb0.75Sn0.25)(I0.6Br0.4)3 films under different illumination intensities. XRD patterns measured before, during and after illumination for (c) MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 and (d) MA(Pb0.75Sn0.25)(I0.6Br0.4)3 films, respectively. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. PL spectra with illumination time for (e) CsPbIBr2 and (f) CsPb0.75Sn0.25IBr2 films, and current density–voltage (J–V) curves for (g) CsPbIBr2 and (h) CsPb0.75Sn0.25IBr2-based solar cells. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  PL spectra for perovskite crystals with different ratios of Cl/Br as a function of irradiation time. (a) Cl/Br 3:0, (b) Cl/Br 5:1, (c) Cl/Br 2:1, and (d) CI/Br 1:1. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (e) PDS spectra showing sharp band edges and a clean bandgap for MAPb(BrxCl1−x)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (f) Experimentally derived bandgap (blue circle), excitonic absorption (red square) and emission (red star) energy together with the calculated bandgap of CsPbBr3−xClx. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) PL spectra of the MHP films monitored under continuous irradiation without (a) and with (b) FAX passivation. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) PL spectra from excitation by low-duty cycle (solid line) or high-duty cycle (diamond) light pulses. PL spectra from single halide perovskites are shown with dashed lines for comparison. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (d) Summary of the optical absorption edge and PL peak energy vs. x value, and (e) XRD patterns for BAI1−xBrxCs0.6MA0.4Pb(I1−xBrx)3 films before and after illumination. The illumination process was conducted in an N2 filled glovebox under simulated one sun illumination for 20 min. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of PIAPS phenomenon for MHP films on TiO2 substrate. (g) Time-dependent TA (5 ps) spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 on ZrO2 and TiO2 (387 nm, 500 Hz, air), and absorption-time profile recorded at 630 nm, 530 nm, and 745 nm, respectively. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (h) Normalized PL spectra of MAPb(BrxI3−x)3 films before and after illumination (350 nm, 6 mW cm−2) in pure nitrogen, moisture (N2 + H2O, ∼35% relative humidity), and oxygen environments. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Normalized PL spectra taken at 400 nm excitation for a solution of CsPbBr3−xIx (0 ≤ x ≤ 2.75) nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. Time-dependent PL spectra of the CsPb(I0.5Br0.5)3 perovskites (b) thin film and (c) nanocrystal-based film, and (d) corresponding evolution of the PL peak position with illumination time. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. HRTEM images (inset: selected area diffraction patterns) of (e) polycrystalline CsPb(BrxI3−x)3 film and (f) CsPb(BrxI3−x)3/Cs4Pb(BrxI3−x)6 host–guest structure. PL spectra of (g) CsPb(BrxI3−x)3 and (h) CsPb(BrxI3−x)3/Cs4Pb(BrxI3−x)6 before and after 10 min irradiation (0.3 W cm−2). Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (i) Schematic of the formation for MHP films with different grain sizes through an annealing process. (j)–(l) Normalized PL spectra of CsPb(Br0.79I0.21)3 films with different sizes before and after illumination. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 12  (a) XRD patterns for MAPbBr0.8I2.2 with different perovskite film thicknesses of 340 nm (top) and 540 nm (bottom) pre- (black) and post-illumination (red), and after recovery (blue) in the dark for 2 h. (b) Gaussian fitting (red) for (200) peak of the 540 nm film after illumination. PL spectra with an interval of 10 s for the (c) 320 nm and (d) 540 nm films, respectively. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic of the reversible PIAPS phenomenon for the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 film. (f) Dependence of sub-bandgap PL growth and mean PL energy on excitation geometry. (g) Dependence of photo-induced changes in PL on film thickness. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. PL spectra taken under 405 nm continuous illumination for nanoplatelets with thicknesses of (h) 58 nm, (i) 239 nm, and (k) 1.3 μm. (j) PL intensity of the two peaks for the medium thickness nanoplatelet as a function of illumination time. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Relationship mapping for the phase stability of MHPs vs. temperature/Br concentration, and temperature-dependent PL spectra of (b) x = 0.15, (c) x = 0.24, and (d) x = 0.27 thin films collected after 0 s and 4 h of light soaking, represented by black and red sold lines. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. Temperature-dependence PL spectra of triple-cation mixed-halide (MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.83 Br0.17)3 perovskite film in both the mixed and demixed (segregated phase) stages. (e) PL spectra at low excitation power-density (1 mW cm−2) and (f) PL spectra of demixed stage under excitation with high power density (840 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) Photographs of the two separate MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskite films deposited on FTO glass before and after homogenization, in which the two films facing each other were clamped and kept at 100 °C for 1260 min, and (h) absorption spectra of corresponding films. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (i) Bright field images of the polystyrene-coated MHP film before (top) and after 1 minute illumination (bottom) (532 nm, 30 W cm−2). Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. Evolution of (j) absorbance spectra, and (k) and (l) corresponding tracking of the segregation for MAPbBr1.5I1.5 film under irradiation (20 mW cm−2) at different annealing temperatures (23 °C, 60 °C, and 100 °C). Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a)–(f) PL spectra of MAPbIBr2 film as a function of laser power (407 nm) over 900 s of illumination under ambient conditions (22 °C, 40% relative humidity). Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. UV-vis absorption spectra of MAPbBr1.3I1.7 film with different power densities (25 mW cm−2 and 636 mW cm−2) or time of laser irradiation (405 nm). (g) and (j) Absorption spectra recorded initially, (h) and (k) after laser irradiation, and (i) and (l) after storing the film 1 h in the dark. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. PL spectra recorded at 8 s intervals for MAPb(Br0.6I0.4)3 showing the PL evolution with light soaking, ranging from 0 s (dark red) to 150 s (purple). Spectra displayed were obtained at (m) 0.2 GPa, (n) 0.6 GPa, (o) 0.7 GPa, and (p) 0.9 GPa. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
