Polymeric and ceramic silicon-based coatings – a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA09054H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09054H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1936-1963Polymeric and ceramic silicon-based coatings – a review

        
          
            Gilvan 
            Barroso
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Quan 
            Li
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rajendra K. 
            Bordia
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Günter 
            Motz
          
          
        
      *a
aUniversity of Bayreuth, Ceramic Materials Engineering (CME), Bayreuth, Germany. E-mail: guenter.motz@uni-bayreuth.de
bClemson University, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Clemson, SC, USA
Received 
      17th September 2018
    , Accepted 27th November 2018First published on 29th November 2018AbstractSilicon-based polymers are outstanding materials for coating applications. These compounds have excellent properties, such as strong adhesion to most substrates, and high chemical, thermal and UV resistance. Additionally, they can be converted into ceramic materials (polymer-derived ceramics) by a heat treatment and, in some cases, by chemical reactions or radiation. Hence, ceramic coatings can be obtained after deposition of the polymers by simple lacquer techniques. The properties and composition of polymeric and ceramic coatings can be changed by tailoring the chemical structure of the precursors or by the addition of fillers. This enables the preparation of coatings with a great variety of properties for different applications. In this review paper, the main aspects of the use of silicon polymers for coatings are elucidated. The advantages and disadvantages of these materials, and the processing methods developed are discussed. Finally, a summary of the applications and the prospects for future research are presented.Gilvan BarrosoGilvan Barroso studied chemical engineering at the Federal University of Santa Catarina. In 2017, he received his doctoral degree from the University of Bayreuth for his work on thermal barrier coatings based on the polymer-derived ceramics technique, under supervision of Dr G. Motz and Prof. W. Krenkel. He has been a postdoctoral research associate at the chair of Ceramic Materials Engineering (CME) of the University of Bayreuth since December 2017. His research interests include polymeric and ceramic coatings and composite materials based on silicon polymers.Quan LiQuan Li has been a postdoctoral research associate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of Clemson University since June 2015. He received his PhD in Materials Science from the Northwestern Polytechnical University in March 2015. For his PhD, he worked on the electrical and electromagnetic properties of porous ceramics, polymer derived ceramics and ceramic matrix composites. His current research is on highly porous ceramics, environmental/thermal barrier coatings and functional properties of polymer derived ceramics. He is also exploring additive manufacturing and lithium ion battery anodes based on polymer derived ceramics. He is a member of the American Ceramic Society.Rajendra K. BordiaRajendra K. Bordia is a Professor of the Materials Science and Engineering at Clemson University. His research is at the intersection of materials and mechanics and is currently focused on fundamental and applied studies in the processing and properties of complex material systems for energy and environmental applications. He is a Fellow of the American Ceramic Society; Fellow of the Indian Institute of Metals; an Academician in the World Academy of Ceramics; and recipient of the Humboldt Research award. He is an Associate Editor of the Journal of the American Ceramic Society; and Editor-in-Chief of the Ceramics International.Günter MotzGünter Motz studied chemistry at the University of Leipzig and received his PhD (synthesis and characterization of new silazane compounds) at University of Stuttgart in 1996. Afterwards he joined the University of Bayreuth for a postdoctoral research position. Since 1999 he has been working as the head of the PDC Group and got a permanent position in 2005 at the chair of Ceramic Materials Engineering. His research interests are focused on the development of new preceramic polymers, ceramic fibres, and polymer and ceramic coatings as well as functional ceramics. He is an author of more than 130 peer reviewed publications and patents.
1. Introduction
The constant development of our society pushes the limits of materials to achieve maximum efficiency, lower costs, and durability, and to reduce damage to the environment. Often, the property requirements cannot be met by single material systems, leading to deployment of complex systems containing different types of materials. For many applications, however, a modification of surface properties by suitable coatings is sufficient to obtain significantly improved performance. Coatings may be used to enhance the resistance of the substrate to environmental factors, to give specific functions to the system by changing surface properties or even simply as a design factor.
Coatings may be prepared from polymers, metals, or ceramics and glasses. Polymers have the general advantages of lower material and processing costs, and simpler deposition techniques, but suffer from relatively low hardness and reduced chemical and thermal stability. Metallic coatings have high electrical and thermal conductivity, but processing is usually more expensive and complex than for polymeric coatings, and resistance to corrosion and oxidation is limited. In contrast, ceramic coatings combine a high hardness, wear and temperature resistance, with corrosion and oxidation stability. The main drawbacks of this type of coating, though, are the higher processing costs compared to polymeric and metallic coatings, and the characteristic brittleness of ceramics. Ultimately, the choice of coating material will depend on the desired properties, environmental conditions during application and processing, on the compatibility with the substrate, and on material and processing costs.
Considering these aspects, silicon-based polymers standout as coating material. Coatings based on these compounds have a higher thermal stability and chemical resistance when compared to most organic coatings.1 Moreover, they generate ceramic materials when subjected to thermal, chemical and/or radiative processes – the so-called polymer-derived ceramics (PDCs) technology. This is the reason why these polymers are also known as precursors or preceramic polymers.2 Since conversion from polymer into ceramic takes place only after coating deposition, polymer deposition techniques can be applied to obtain ceramic coatings as well. Thus, in addition to the advantages in the polymer state, silicon polymers enable a simpler preparation of ceramic coatings, reducing processing costs in comparison to other methods, such as physical vapor deposition (PVD), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), thermal spraying and sol–gel techniques.3–5
2. Preceramic polymers
Preceramic polymers are mostly metalorganic compounds, usually based on silicon with additional elements, such as carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, or even metals, like boron or aluminium, in the backbone structure. Side groups, mainly organic, are connected to the backbone. Typical side groups are hydrogen, alkyl, vinyl, aryl, etc.6,7 Properties, such as chemical and thermal stability, solubility, rheological behavior, and optical characteristics of preceramic polymers, and the composition of final PDCs are strongly influenced not only by the backbone structure, but also by the side groups. Moreover, simply the modification or addition of side groups enables the adjustment of precursor's physicochemical behavior, which is critical to cross-linking and polymer-to-ceramic conversion processes.2,7,8
Although silicon-based precursors have been known since the beginning of the 20th century,9–11 industrial production began only in the 1940s, after development of the Müller–Rochow process to produce organochlorosilanes. These halogenosilanes can be converted into silicon polymers or oligomers by reactions, such as hydrolysis, alcoholysis, ammonolysis, aminolysis, etc. The study of Fritz and Raabe,12 published in 1956, is considered to be the initial step on the use of silicon polymers as precursors for ceramic materials. Following their work, other studies in the 1960s, like those of Ainger and Herbert,13 and Chantrell and Popper,14 continued developing the PDC technology. However, it was only in the 1970s that shaping processes were combined with the PDC route to obtain ceramics with defined shapes,15–17 culminating in the breakthrough work of Yajima and colleagues,18,19 who prepared SiC fibers from silicon polymers.
Several precursors have been developed and investigated during the last century. Some representative examples are presented in Fig. 1. The best known group of the preceramic polymers are the polysiloxanes (also called silicones), which contain alternating silicon and oxygen atoms in the backbone. Common polymers in this family are poly(organo)siloxanes – i.e. polysiloxanes with organic substituents. Although called silanes, monomeric silicon-based molecules, such as those used as adhesion promoters in many multilayered systems, are a special category of siloxanes, since they usually contain oxygen attached to the silicon atom.20 Polysiloxanes were first synthesized and studied by Kipping and coworkers as early as 1901.9–11 Since then, silicones have been extensively used in the polymer state as coatings for several applications.21 When thermally treated, siloxanes are converted into SiO2, or SiCO in the case of organosiloxanes. Another important family of precursors is polycarbosilanes, which transform into SiC when thermally treated under inert conditions.22 Finally, silicon polymers containing nitrogen, such as polysilazanes, polycarbosilazanes and polysilylcarbodiimides, have also drawn much attention for coating applications. By a thermal treatment in inert atmosphere, these materials can be converted into Si3N4, in the case of polysilazanes, or SiCN ceramics, in the case of poly(organo)silazanes, polycarbosilazanes and polysilylcarbodiimides.23–29 Modified versions of silicon-based precursors containing boron,30,31 aluminium,32–35 as well as transition metals (e.g. Fe, Co, Ni, Pd, Pt, Cu, Ag and Au)36–40 and fluorine41–44 have been investigated. Geopolymers are another class of silicon-based compounds which can be used to obtain coatings. However, for the sake of brevity, geopolymers are not considered in this review. Comprehensive information on this topic can be found elsewhere.45
 Fig. 1  Examples of common families of silicon-based polymers and their fundamental chemical units.47 
To enable preparation of coatings from silicon polymers, some important requirements must be met, especially if conversion into ceramic is intended. First, precursors must be liquids or have an appropriate solubility in common solvents to enable coating deposition in liquid state. Another requirement, important both for polymeric and ceramic coatings, is a latent reactivity, provided by the presence of specific chemical groups, which induce cross-linking upon exposure to thermal, radiative or chemical stimuli. Due to the cross-linking, the liquid or soluble polymers and oligomers become unmeltable and insoluble thermoset materials. This latent reactivity is normally related to unsaturated organic groups (e.g. vinyl) or to reactive bonds, such as Si–H or N–H.46 Finally, a sufficiently high molecular weight is required, to prevent volatilization of compounds with low molecular weight during cross-linking and conversion into ceramic.2
3. Polymer-to-ceramic conversion
The transformation of precursors into preceramic and ceramic materials is related to a series of reactions, resulting in changes of composition and properties. As already mentioned, a certain latent reactivity is required to obtain highly cross-linked preceramic and ceramic materials from organometallic precursors. This is because precursors are usually mixtures of oligomers and low molecular weight polymers, which may easily volatilize and depolymerize, resulting in low mass yields during conversion processes. To reduce this volatilization, cross-linking is necessary, resulting in an increase of the mass yield during the polymer-to-ceramic transformation.23,48 Cross-linking may be carried out by different techniques, which will be discussed in details in Section 7. These techniques induce condensation and/or addition reactions of certain functional groups – such as Si–H, Si–OH and Si–vinyl2,49,50 – causing the formation of 3D polymeric networks, whereby precursors become unmeltable and insoluble preceramic thermosets.8,51
After cross-linking, if further heat treatments are carried out, usually at temperatures above 300 °C, thermolysis – generally called pyrolysis in PDC technology – leads to an organic-to-inorganic transformation, from a thermoset polymer into an amorphous ceramic.52 This transformation is caused mainly by rearrangements, condensation and radical reactions, which result in cleavage of chemical bonds, formation of new bonds and elimination of organic groups, such as CH4, C6H6, CH3NH2, NH3 and H2.6,50 CO and CO2 can be eliminated as well, especially in an oxidizing environment. For most precursors, conversion into ceramic is complete below 1100 °C.2 A measure of the efficiency of a preceramic polymer regarding the conversion into a ceramic material is the ceramic yield αc = mc/mp, where mp is the initial mass of polymer and mc is the residual mass after complete transformation of the polymer into ceramic. The conversion of suitable preceramic polymers to a ceramic is usually associated with a mass loss in the range of 10–30%.6
Amorphous PDCs may be further heat-treated to convert them to crystalline ceramics. For a great number of applications, crystallization is not necessary or even undesired, and processing is terminated once the amorphous ceramic has been obtained. While most PDCs – especially ceramics containing oxygen – may crystallize at temperatures as low as 1000–1200 °C,6 some materials have the capability of avoiding crystallization at temperatures up to 1700 °C.30Fig. 2 is a representative example of the changes in the mass during the different phases of the conversion of a preceramic polymer to a crystalline ceramic. This figure also highlights the temperature range in which different phases of PDC processing take place.
 Fig. 2  Correlation of the temperature with the processing phases and mass changes occurring during PDC processing of a polycarbosilane under inert atmosphere. Based on Colombo et al.2 and Greil.53 
Ideal conditions for cross-linking and polymer-to-ceramic conversion (ceramization) depend strongly on the chemical structure of the precursor. In fact, by changing conditions for cross-linking and/or ceramization (temperature, heating rate, atmosphere, etc.), materials with different properties may be obtained, even from the same precursor.54,55
In addition to mass loss (see Fig. 2), precursors undergo a densification during the polymer-to-ceramic transformation from a density of about 1 g cm−3 as precursor to >2 g cm−3 as ceramic (Fig. 3). This density increase together with the mass loss implies that the volume of material decreases significantly during the conversion process. These changes in mass and volume have two main effects. The most evident is a shrinkage of the shaped part, which can easily reach values around 40% (linear shrinkage).56 The second effect is the formation of porosity. In early stages of ceramization, the release of gaseous pyrolysis products leads to the formation of open pores, some of which may disappear during thermal treatment, due to the shrinkage of the parts. This type of porosity is referred to as transient porosity. However, some residual porosity may be retained in the final product.6
 Fig. 3  Density increase during conversion of a poly(organo)silazane into a SiCN ceramic (pyrolysis under protective atmosphere). 
The shrinkage of materials during the conversion from polymer to ceramic can lead to significant stresses during processing, if the strains in a differential pyrolysis system are incompatible. Thus, stresses will occur when different parts of the system shrink at different rates. Indeed, overcoming the differential shrinkage issue is the most significant challenge of the PDC technology, especially in the case of coatings. Due to the high creep resistance of the PDCs, stress relaxation, during processing, by viscous flow is insufficient. Moreover, since pyrolysis processes occur rapidly, stress relaxation by diffusional material transport is also unlikely. Hence, stresses due to differential shrinkage may result in formation of cracks, reducing the mechanical stability of the system and sometimes leading to the collapse of the part during pyrolysis.7,53 Because of this behavior, PDC processing of precursors without the addition of fillers is mostly suitable for preparation of ceramics with small dimensions, like fibers, thin coatings, and cellular ceramics (thin cell wall), which have the potential of uniform shrinkage during pyrolysis.2
In contrast to free-standing parts, the geometry of coatings is constrained in two dimensions by the adhesion to the substrate, whereas shrinkage can only occur freely across the thickness. This phenomenon is analogous to the phenomenon of constrained sintering observed in non-PDC glass and ceramic coatings.57–62 For this reason, the thickness of silicon-based coatings has a maximum value known as critical coating thickness, above which extensive cracking and even spallation occurs. This critical coating thickness is usually below 10 μm,63 but depends on properties of both coating and substrate, and on the maximum temperature during conversion and application. To enable preparation of PDCs with larger dimensions, such as dense bulk parts and thicker coatings, shrinkage must be minimized or compensated, which can be achieved by the use of suitable fillers.
4. Particle-filled coatings
In order to extend the range of application of coatings based on silicon polymers, fillers are frequently introduced into coatings. In polymeric systems, fillers can be used to modify appearance, to generate surface structures or to give certain functionalities to the system. In PDC processing, fillers have a more crucial role, since they are an innovative approach to manage the shrinkage of precursors during the polymer-to-ceramic transition, enabling the preparation of thicker ceramic layers. In addition, the microstructure and properties of ceramic coatings can be tailored with fillers.
Coating fillers may be polymers, ceramics, glasses or metals, and are usually added in the form of particles with size ranging from a few nanometers to a few micrometers. These fillers may be subdivided into four basic types, according to their behavior during heat treatment of the system: passive, active, glass (meltable) or sacrificial fillers.
As the name suggests, passive fillers are inert in the system. They maintain their initial composition, mass and particle size (except for thermal expansion) during processing and application. Such fillers are the most common type used in polymeric coatings. Basu and colleagues,64 for example, used silica nanoparticles in polysiloxane coatings to tailor the surface microstructure and wettability, while Tavares et al.65 used TiO2 in polysiloxane coatings to obtain surfaces with photocatalytic activity. In PDC processing, passive fillers reduce coating shrinkage simply by reducing the volume fraction of the shrinking phase, i.e. the preceramic polymer. Günthner66 and Kraus67et al. used this approach to increase the maximum coating thickness of polysilazane-derived ceramic coatings from about 1 μm to more than 10 μm without crack formation (Fig. 4). However, some filler materials are only inert under certain conditions, such as non-oxidative atmosphere or lower temperatures. These conditions are frequently not met during processing and application of PDC coatings. Pyrolysis conditions generally lead to degradation of organic polymers, melting of glasses and oxidation of metals. As a result, passive fillers are, in most cases, ceramic materials.68 Ceramics, such as SiC, Si3N4, ZrO2, TiO2, BN, Al2O3, SiO2 have high temperature stability and melting point, and are either stable oxides or have high oxidation resistance, maintaining a passive behavior over a broad temperature range without requiring a protective atmosphere. Due to their passive behavior, high volume fractions of filler can be added to the coating systems, in order to tailor functionality of the final ceramic. In some cases, precursors might be used simply as temperature-resistant binders for passive filler particles.69,70 Based on this approach, Barroso et al.47,71 used high loads of yttria-stabilized zirconia and a polysilazane-derived PDC as ceramic binder to obtain coatings with low thermal conductivity and high coefficient of thermal expansion, characteristic properties of the selected filler. Although this strategy may avoid completely the macroscopic shrinkage of the coatings caused by precursor densification during ceramization, residual porosity will always remain in the coatings when medium to high volume fractions of passive filler are used. Furthermore, the amount of porosity increases with increasing volume fraction of filler, especially if the fillers have a narrow particle size distribution.56 Despite the reduction of the macroscopic shrinkage, crack formation may still occur due to localized stresses (e.g. around filler particles), especially in thicker coatings.47,71
 Fig. 4  Microstructure of the cross-section of a polysilazane-based coating with hexagonal BN passive filler on steel AISI 304 after pyrolysis in air at 500 °C for 1 h. Adapted with permission.66 Copyright © 2009, John Wiley and Sons. 
Fillers, which undergo chemical reactions during coating processing, are called active fillers. These reactions may occur with the precursor, with gaseous products generated during pyrolysis or with the pyrolysis atmosphere, resulting in new phases. Since these reactions generally require high temperature, active fillers are uncommon in polymeric coating systems. In contrast, they are a common approach to overcome the issues related to precursor shrinkage in PDC coatings. Since many reactions involving active fillers lead to a volume expansion of the filler particles, this strategy can be applied to compensate for precursor shrinkage (Fig. 5). This approach of using volume-expanding fillers in PDCs is called active-filler-controlled pyrolysis (AFCOP).56,72,73 Taking into account changes in mass and volume of precursor and filler, it is possible to estimate the filler loading, which leads to dense PDCs with zero shrinkage during ceramization process. Moreover, active fillers can also be used to introduce new phases into a PDC system, in order to modify functionality and performance. In this case, however, the volume fraction of filler might be limited to smaller values. Indeed, if the reactions of the active filler are associated to a volume increase, a large amount of filler may lead to an excessive expansion of the system, resulting in coating failure. Additionally, active fillers may be used to obtain completely new materials by reactions with precursors.74,75 Since a reactivity is desired, metallic and semimetallic materials, especially Si, B, Al, transition metals from groups 4 to 6 of the periodic table, and the respective silicides and borides, are the most common active fillers.53,68,76 Torrey77 and Wang78et al. used the oxidation of silicide fillers during pyrolysis in air at 800 °C to obtain crack-free polysiloxane-derived coatings with more than 20 μm of thickness. However, as previously mentioned, even carbides, nitrides and oxides may become reactive and behave as active fillers under appropriate conditions. Liu79 and Lenz Leite75et al. used, for example, rare earth oxides as fillers, which upon reaction with the precursors at temperatures above 1000 °C, yield silicate-based coatings (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 5  Coatings based on polysiloxane PHMS with active fillers after pyrolysis in air at 800 °C for 2 h: (left) TiSi2 as active filler (Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright © 2007, Materials Research Society.); (right) ZrSi2 as active filler (Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright © 2011, Elsevier Ltd.). 
 Fig. 6  Formation of silicate phases by reaction of a silazane and yttrium oxide active filler during pyrolysis in air in the temperature range of 1000–1400 °C for 1 h and at 1500 °C for 10 h (★ Y2O3; ● x1-Y2SiO5; □ x2-Y2SiO5). Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright © 2017, Elsevier Ltd. 
The third type of fillers used in PDC coating systems are the meltable ones, which are generally glasses. During pyrolysis and use at high temperatures, glasses may melt or simply soften, sealing porosity and densifying the layer, resulting in an improved protective performance against oxidation and corrosion.63,81 After cooling below the softening point, these fillers enhance the hardness and abrasion resistance of coatings.82 By softening, at high temperatures, they also reduce the Young's modulus of the coating and enable a relaxation of thermomechanical stresses caused by thermal expansion mismatches between substrate and coating, and between fillers and precursor matrix. Using these advantages, Günthner and colleagues63 developed crack-free polysilazane-derived ceramic coatings with thickness of more than 100 μm in a single deposition and pyrolysis process (Fig. 7). In addition to the change in physical state, these fillers may also react with other components in the system, acting also as active fillers.83 The use of meltable fillers requires the selection of suitable materials for each application and a fine-tuning of the thermal treatment. If an unsuitable glass is used, pyrolysis at high temperatures may cause an excessive reduction of the glass melt's viscosity or even crystallization/decomposition of the glass. Low temperatures, in contrast, may not lead to softening/melting, and the glass particles will behave simply as passive fillers.
 Fig. 7  Microstructure of the cross-section of a polysilazane-based coating with ZrO2 passive filler and two types of glass on mild steel after pyrolysis at 700 °C for 1 h in air. Reproduced with permission of the American Ceramic Society.63 
Sacrificial fillers are mostly organic compounds. Such materials can be mixed with the precursors and, after coating deposition and cross-linking, eliminated by thermal decomposition or by dissolution in a solvent. Such fillers are used to generate porosity, e.g. in gas separation membranes.84–86 Form, amount, size and distribution of pores in PDC coatings can be tailored by selecting suitable fillers with specific particle size and shape. The elimination of sacrificial fillers, forming porosity, is also an approach to control stresses in coatings, since porosity reduces the effective elastic modulus of the coating, increasing the strain compliance.87
In addition to their role in processing and microstructure control, fillers may be necessary to obtain the required properties for application. One good example is the thermal expansion behavior of coatings. During processing and use at high temperature, problems may occur if a thermal expansion mismatch exists between substrate and coating. This is the case for almost all PDC coatings on metallic substrates, since most silicon-based materials have a low coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE).88 This issue becomes even more relevant when thicker coatings are required, since the larger thickness increases the likelihood of cracking for the same thermal expansion mismatch.89 The following equation90 (eqn (1)) gives an estimate of thermal stresses arising in coating systems upon change of temperature: σt = Ec(αls − αlc)ΔT(1)where Ec is the effective Young's modulus of the coating, αls and αlc are the linear CTEs of substrate and coating, respectively, ΔT is the change of temperature, and σt is the resulting thermal stress. According to this equation, there are two ways to reduce thermal stresses in coatings. The first and more obvious approach is to reduce the CTE mismatch between coating and substrate. This can be realized by adding fillers with a high CTE – such as ZrO2, MgO and CeO2, or even metallic particles – to the preceramic polymers. The second way is to reduce the effective Young's modulus of the coatings. The Young's modulus is an intrinsic property of materials, and therefore is independent of microstructure. However, there is an effective Young's modulus, which takes into account the Young's modulus of the material and its porosity. Several models describe this correlation,87,91 but all have in common that the effective Young's modulus decreases as porosity increases, fact which is also demonstrated experimentally. Thus, a reduction of the overall Young's modulus of PDC coatings can be realized by introducing sacrificial fillers into coating systems, which generate a controlled amount of porosity during pyrolysis.

Fig. 8 summarizes the types of fillers and their respective effects in the PDC systems. Using one of these types of fillers or combinations thereof, novel coating systems with outstanding properties can be prepared using the PDC processes.
 Fig. 8  Types of fillers and their effects in the precursor-based coating systems.47 
Independent on the type of filler, it is important to achieve a good dispersion of the filler particles in the coating suspension. This will insure a uniform distribution of the fillers in the deposited coatings, improving coating strength and surface quality. Agglomerates in the suspensions may also hinder an adequate coating deposition, especially in the case of spraying due to clogging of the spray nozzle. A good dispersion is usually achieved by using suitable dispersing agents and/or adequate methods for dispersion, such as ultra-sonication, ball-milling and mechanical stirring. However, the reactivity of the precursors must be considered when dispersing fillers. Highly energetic methods, such as ultra-sonication and ball-milling, may cause a premature cross-linking of the polymers. Hence, in some cases it is recommended to first prepare the coating suspensions without the precursor, which is only added after a proper dispersion of the particles. In these cases, homogenization of the suspension with the precursor should be carried out by milder methods, such as low-speed stirring. In addition, the particle size of the fillers has a considerable effect on dispersion. However, the most suitable particle size depends not only on the dispersibility of the particles, but also on the intended properties of the coatings. Typical particle sizes of filler powders remain in the range of a few nanometers to a few micrometers which makes dispersion more challenging due to the tendency of fine particles to agglomerate.
5. Mechanisms of adhesion
In the processing of coatings based on silicon polymers, good wetting and adhesion between the liquid precursor (or precursor solution) and the substrate is required to facilitate film formation. This good adhesion must also be maintained after conversion into a solid coating. Wetting is determined by the surface free energy of the substrate, the surface tension of the liquid coating material, and by the interfacial tension between them. This relationship is given by the Young's equation92 (eqn (2)) as (2)where, θ is the contact angle between the liquid and the solid surface, γSG is the solid's surface free energy at the interface with the surrounding atmosphere, γLG is the surface tension of the liquid in contact with the atmosphere, and γSL is the tension at the interface between solid and liquid. The contact angle is the angle measured between the surface of the solid and the tangent to the contour of a drop placed at the surface, at the triple point (interface between solid, liquid and gas phases), as shown schematically in Fig. 9. One of the important interpretations of eqn (2) is that the contact angle is small when the surface free energy of the solid is high and the surface tension of the liquid is low.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the contact angle of a liquid with a solid surface. 
Another property described by the relations between the surface energy/tension of substrate, coating and interface is the so called work of adhesion WA (eqn (3)). This is a measure of the work, which has to be performed in order to separate a coating from its substrate, if no kind of chemical or mechanical interactions would occur between them. The combination of eqn (2) and (3) yield the so called Young–Dupré equation (eqn (4)), which describes the relationship between work of adhesion and contact angle, thus indirectly between adhesion strength and wetting. As the Young–Dupré equation describes, smaller contact angles lead to higher works of adhesion. As a consequence, coating precursors have generally better adhesion to ceramics, glasses and metals (all with high surface free energies) and poorer adhesion to polymers.93 WA = γSG + γLG − γSL(3) WA = γLG(1 + cosθ)(4)
Although a good wetting in the liquid state is essential to obtain coatings with strong adhesion to the substrates, it does not guarantee it. For solid coatings, adhesion strength is usually determined by mechanical factors and more importantly by chemical interactions.
The mechanical interactions are associated with the surface roughness of the substrate, which may lead to a mechanical interlocking between coating and substrate, depending on its morphology. Since deposition of silicon polymers is carried out mostly in liquid phase, cavities at the surface of the substrate can be filled by the coating material (if surface wetting is sufficient). After solidification, the coating material becomes clamped within the cavity, increasing the adhesion strength.
In general, surface roughness contributes to an increase of adhesion strength, if there is good wetting between the liquid precursor and the substrate, since both the interfacial area and mechanical interlocking increase. In the case of the PDC coatings, however, an inadequate roughness may be detrimental to the overall adhesion of the system, because the accumulation of precursor in a cavity may lead to a coating thickness above the critical value in that area, increasing the probability of cracking and spallation due to coating shrinkage (Fig. 10). Therefore, for PDC coatings, the surface roughness should be well controlled to ensure high interfacial strength. As a guideline, small amplitude (at least an order of magnitude less than the coating thickness) and high wave length surface roughness should provide the optimal adhesion enhancement.
 Fig. 10  SEM images of (a) the surface of a cold-rolled steel grade 441 as received; and (b) of the same steel with a polysilazane coating after pyrolysis at 500 °C in air for 1 h. Coating cracking and spallation on a depression at the substrate's surface is evident.47 
In addition to the mechanical contributions, chemical interactions are primarily responsible for the adhesion of silicon polymers and of the ceramic coatings derived from them to the substrates. During processing of coatings from most organic polymers, electrostatic, intermolecular or acid/base interactions with the substrates are the dominant adhesion mechanisms. For polymer substrates, interactions with polymeric coatings can also lead to interdiffusion between polymers. In contrast, many silicon polymers can adhere to most substrates by chemical bonding, which yields much stronger adhesion.94,95 The chemical bonding between Si-polymer and substrates takes place mostly by hydrolysis/alcoholysis and condensation reactions.96 In the presence of humidity, silanol groups are generated in the polymer, which interact with –OH groups at the surface of substrates and condense to form oxygen bridges between the substrate and the polymer chain upon elimination of water.95,97 Hydrolysis/alcoholysis can be carried out prior to coating deposition, in the case of polymers soluble in water or alcohol, or in situ after evaporation of the organic solvents by reaction with water adsorbed at the surface of the substrate or with moisture from the atmosphere. In general, in situ hydrolysis processes may require much longer times.95 The presence of groups, such as Si–H, is particularly interesting, since they are easily hydrolyzed.50 However, they also increase the sensitivity of the precursor to the environmental conditions, since the silanol groups formed can condense also with each other, causing a premature cross-linking of the polymer upon handling in air. Silazanes have an advantage in comparison to other silicon polymers, because amine groups not only can be hydrolyzed by moisture to form silanols, but also can interact directly with –OH groups at the surface of the substrate, leading to the formation of oxygen bridges, even in the absence of moisture.98 However, some silicon polymers, especially silicone elastomers, may require an adhesion promoter to achieve a suitable adhesion. A base coating with a silane is frequently used to improve adhesion of this class of polymers.95
A prerequisite to obtain a chemical bonding between the silicon polymers and the substrates is the presence of reactive groups at the surface of the substrate. The first step of surface pre-treatment is the removal of any kind of material, which could block the direct interactions between coating and substrate, such as dust, grease, weakly adhered oxide scales (e.g. rust) in the case of metals, and plasticizers in the case of plastics.94 This cleaning process may be carried out by mechanical methods, such as grinding or sandblasting; by chemical methods using solvents, acids or bases; or by other methods, like plasma and corona discharge, ozone, laser, flame, and electrochemistry.94,95
Aside from surface cleaning, metals, glasses and ceramics may not require any additional pre-treatments. In the case of metals, however, the removal of the inhomogeneous natural oxide scale followed by controlled growth of a thin homogeneous oxide scale (e.g. by short oxidation treatment), can improve the reproducibility of the adhesion properties.95,99 In contrast, adhesion to organic polymers is significantly more challenging, due to poor wetting and chemical compatibility problems. Treatments such as oxygen plasma can simultaneously clean the substrate's surface and generate oxygen-containing functional groups, which can lead to a chemical adhesion of silicon compounds.100 In addition, precursors can be functionalized with certain reactive groups capable of reacting with groups in the organic polymer chain, yielding strong adhesion even in the absence of –OH groups at the surface of the substrate.96
6. Deposition methods
All techniques used for deposition of coatings in liquid state, such as dipping, spinning, spraying, screen printing, doctor blade/bar coater, roll coating, curtain coating, and brushing, can be used to apply silicon-based polymer coatings. However, since each technique has its particular characteristics, suitability of the methods to specific systems and applications must be evaluated for each case individually. Moreover, a crucial factor affecting the liquid-state deposition of silicon-based coatings is the rheology of the coating solutions and suspensions. Thus, the rheology of the coating liquids must be carefully controlled to achieve high quality coatings. The required rheology depends on many factors including the deposition technique and the equipment used.101 It is important to mention that, since deposition is carried out in liquid phase, edge effects occur, independently of the selected method. Usually, rounding or chamfering the edges of substrates minimizes such defects.
Deposition of Si-polymer coatings from gaseous or solid states is possible but uncommon, since processing becomes significantly more complicated and costly. Plasma polymerization, plasma-assisted CVD (PA-CVD, also known as plasma-enhanced or PE-CVD), and other types of CVD processes have been used to form coatings from silicon-based precursors.100,102–117 In these cases, plasma is used as energy source to induce polymerization of liquid or gaseous monomers and oligomers directly at the surface of the substrate during deposition, yielding highly cross-linked polymer coatings and, in the case of CVD, even ceramic coatings. Powder coatings have also been developed using Si-polymers,118,119 although in several cases the Si-polymer is used simply as an additive in organic coatings.
Among the great variety of possible deposition techniques from the liquid state, dip, spin and spray coating methods are the most frequently used to prepare coatings of silicon-based polymers. The principle and the main characteristics of these three techniques are summarized in Fig. 11 and discussed below.
 Fig. 11  Principle and main characteristics of dip, spin and spray coating deposition methods.47 
6.1 Dip coating
Dip coating was one of the first coating methods commercially applied120 and, together with spin coating, is the most commonly used method for the development of coatings based on silicon polymers. This deposition technique consists of the formation of a film onto the surface of a substrate while the substrate is withdrawn from a liquid bath.120 Therefore, the film is formed onto all exposed faces of the substrate simultaneously, which is, for some applications, a great advantage. Masking of specific areas enables a selective coating deposition, although the influence of the mask on film formation may affect the quality of the coatings.
The required equipment for dip coating is simple and processing has a small number of parameters. The liquid characteristics, specifically viscosity, density and surface tension, must be optimized. In addition, if fillers are used, then their dispersion in the liquid must be ensured. With suitable slurry characteristics, dip coating is a simple process, in which only the control of immersion time and withdrawal speed yields excellent reproducibility. The technique has the advantage of little waste, whereas the most relevant cause of waste are evaporative losses, which can be reduced by using solution containers with small apertures.121
One of the most significant drawbacks of the technique is the limitation to simple geometries – sheets, plates, cylinders, tubes and slightly irregular shapes – when homogeneity of the coating thickness is needed.122 Although deposition of coatings onto substrates with more complex shapes is possible, changes in the flow of the coating solution during withdrawal leads to inhomogeneous coatings.123 Moreover, edge effects are quite extensive in dip coating, affecting thickness homogeneity. The area affected by these edge effects is usually in the range of 15 to 20 mm inwards from top and bottom edges and of 8 to 15 mm from the side edges.124 These effects become more pronounced with increasing withdrawal speed, but are not affected by the size of the substrate, thus hindering deposition of homogeneous coatings onto small substrates.125 This technique requires large volumes of coating solution relative to the volume that actually forms the film. Considering that several precursors are air and moisture-sensitive, the process may require additional equipment to ensure a constant quality of the coating solution over long periods of time, increasing processing costs. Difficulties also arise when liquids with higher viscosity or those containing fillers must be used, due to inhomogeneous flow of the liquid.
The thickness of the formed film depends on the withdrawal velocity and on properties of the liquid, such as surface tension, viscosity, density and volatility of solvent. A model for the prediction of thickness of coatings deposited by dip coating in a Newtonian fluid without evaporative losses was developed by Landau and Levich.126 According to this model, which was also experimentally validated,127 the coating thickness is proportional to the withdrawal speed. The exact correlation between speed and thickness is then given by the properties of the liquid.122 Layers deposited by a single dip coating procedure usually have a thickness up to about twenty microns. Repeating the process can increase coating thickness, but a re-dissolution of previously applied layers must be avoided. In the case of silicon polymers, at least a cross-linking step between each repetition must be carried out. For the processing of ceramic coatings, even a complete ceramization of each layer might be necessary to avoid excessive overall shrinkage and coating failure.124
6.2 Spin coating
Spin coating is another coating method commonly used for deposition of silicon-based polymers. Industrially, it has been used extensively in the electronic industry for the coating of silicon wafers.128,129 The technique consists of the spreading of the coating solution – usually deposited at the center of the substrate – towards the edges by the centrifugal force generated upon rotating the substrate.130
The spin coating equipment is relatively simple and the process reproducible. When compared to dip coating, the amount of coating solution required to coat a given substrate is significantly smaller. However, considerably more coating solution is wasted during spin coating process.128 Moreover, the technique is mostly suitable for flat or slightly curved surfaces and deposition can be carried only in a single face each time. Additionally, deposition of solutions with higher viscosity is difficult and usually leads to coatings with surface defects.128,131,132 This is a challenge especially for coatings with fillers.
Similarly to dip coating, coating thickness depends on the velocity of rotation and on the properties of the liquid, although in spin coating an increase in the velocity leads to thinner coatings.129 Typical coating thicknesses are in the range of a few nanometers to a few micrometers.131 Like in dip coating, deposition of several consecutive layers may lead to thicker coatings, if a re-dissolution of the previously applied layer is avoided.
6.3 Spray coating
Spray coating is one of the most common ways to apply coatings both at the industrial scale and in research and development. The principle of the technique consists of the atomization and transport of a coating solution towards the substrate, where a film is formed by the impact of the droplets on the surface. Atomization may be realized by pressure (airless), by a pressurized carrier gas (usually air), by a supercritical process, by an electrostatic process or by rotation.133 The most common method used in combination with silicon polymers is the atomization using a pressurized carrier gas, generally air, in which the coating solution is fed into the gas stream exiting the spray nozzle.134 Although inert gases can be used as carrier gas, deposition is carried out in air, preventing the use of highly reactive polymers and the preparation of oxygen-free coatings.
In contrast to dip and spin coating, spray deposition has a large number of parameters, including pressure of the carrier gas, aperture of the spray nozzle, distance between nozzle and substrate, angle of impact, form of the spray jet, and the velocity of the relative movement between nozzle and substrate. On the one hand, this high number of parameters complicates the development of the coating process. On the other hand, it increases the versatility of the method, since parameters can be adjusted to enable deposition of coating solutions with a wide range of properties – viscosity, size of filler particles, and volatility of solvent – and also to control characteristics of the coatings, like thickness and surface structure.128,135
A typical spraying equipment consists of a pressurized gas source, a solution container, the spray nozzle, and an exhaust system, since most coating formulations are solvent-borne and contain filler particles.121 Spray coating can be carried out by free-hand movements using a spray gun. However, in this case, reproducibility and homogeneity will strongly depend on the abilities of the operator. More complex systems with mechanic or electronic control during operation are able to improve the reproducibility of the process (Fig. 12).133 Despite the large amount of waste due to overspray, spray coating requires a relatively low amount of coating solution per area of substrate to deposit coatings.123
 Fig. 12  Stainless steel pipe with PDC-based thermal barrier coating deposited onto the inside face by spray coating using a semi-automatic equipment and pyrolysis at 1000 °C in air for 1 h.47 
7. Curing and ceramization techniques
Section 3 was focused on the chemical and physical changes in the precursor during its conversion from polymer to a ceramic. This section is focused on the techniques used to realize this conversion. In contrast to free-standing ceramics – such as fibers, foams and monoliths – processing of coatings involves also a substrate, which must be subjected to the same conditions as the coatings. Hence, the choice of a conversion method must take not only properties of the coating but also of the substrate into account. Moreover, even when using the same coating material and substrate, different processing methods may yield different types of coatings. Thus, the choice of the processing will also depend on the desired coating properties and intended application.
A number of publications in the field of coatings based on preceramic polymers deal with the development and investigation of new techniques for conversion of coatings, in order to overcome limitations of the commonly used methods. Hence, the following sections are dedicated to a summary of the available techniques, which are divided into common and alternative techniques, where the former are the more general techniques and later the emerging ones, which have been developed and applied for a small number of systems.
7.1 Common techniques
By far, the most common technique used for the conversion of silicon-based polymer coatings into thermosets and ceramics is by thermal treatment. The greatest advantage of this method is its simplicity and the fact that the thermal processing can be carried out batchwise or continuously. However, the presence of a substrate is an important limiting factor. As discussed in Section 3, temperatures up to 400 °C may be required to achieve a complete cross-linking of the coatings, and above that to obtain ceramic coatings. As a consequence, ceramic coatings cannot be prepared on materials with low melting temperature – such as most organic polymers, aluminium and magnesium – by thermal treatment without risk of degradation or deformation of the substrate. Hence, thermal treatment in a furnace is mostly suitable for systems intended for application at higher temperatures, and the thermal treatment is carried out at or above the maximum application temperature. Yet, a thermal treatment at higher temperatures may be interesting also for systems intended for low temperature applications, since higher temperatures lead to a densification of the coating material and to an increase of hardness and Young's modulus (Fig. 13).136 As shown in Fig. 13, although both hardness and the Young's modulus increase as the heat treatment temperature increases, there is a subtle interaction between the coating material and the heat treatment atmosphere. For coatings pyrolyzed to the ceramic state (pyrolysis temperature higher than 600 °C), the coatings pyrolyzed in nitrogen have higher hardness and Young's modulus because oxygen-free silicon-based ceramics have, in general, higher hardness and modulus than the oxygen-containing counterparts. For coatings pyrolyzed to cross-linked thermoset state (pyrolysis temperature less than 400 °C), the coatings pyrolyzed in air have higher hardness and Young's modulus because of the reactivity of these precursors with humidity, leading to a faster cross-linking in air than under nitrogen atmosphere.136
 Fig. 13  Dependency of hardness and Young's modulus with temperature and atmosphere during heat treatment of two polysilazane-based coatings on stainless steel. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright © 2012, Elsevier Ltd. 
In addition to processing temperature, an important factor to be considered during thermal treatment is the atmosphere. For most industrial applications, air is the most desired atmosphere, owing to the lower processing costs. Moreover, the presence of oxygen facilitates the use of active fillers, since conversion of metals and non-oxide ceramics into their respective oxides is usually associated with a volume expansion. However, if the substrate does not have sufficient oxidation stability, a thermal treatment under inert gas (e.g. argon) or vacuum is required. Independent of substrate's oxidation stability, inert atmospheres can also be used to prepare oxygen-free coatings, like SiC and Si3N4.137–139 In this case, however, the use of active fillers is limited to those materials, which react with the precursor or with gaseous products of pyrolysis reactions. Also nitrogen gas can be used as atmosphere to generate oxygen-free coatings and to protect the substrate against oxidation. Since nitriding reactions may occur during pyrolysis, additional active fillers can be used, although these reactions occur slower and require higher temperatures than oxidation.140 Moreover, a reactive ammonia-containing atmosphere during pyrolysis can be used to obtain silicon nitride coatings from nitrogen-free precursors.141 A general limitation of thermal conversion process is the requirement of a chamber large enough to accommodate the coated parts, which may be difficult for very large substrates.
Cross-linking processes are commonly assisted by the use of catalysts and initiators.142–150 In these cases, suitable chemical compounds are mixed with the precursors, reducing the onset temperature of cross-linking reactions, and consequently reducing the evaporation of lighter molecules at higher temperatures. If enough time is provided, cross-linking may occur even at room temperature. In some cases, more reactive silicon polymers may be added to less reactive ones to accelerate cross-linking of the later.151,152 Depending on the onset temperature of the catalyzed cross-linking reactions, the catalysts must be mixed with the precursor just before coating deposition, to avoid premature cross-linking.
To enable the preparation of coatings onto substrates with more limited temperature resistance, several methods for the conversion of precursor-based coatings into ceramic-like materials at low temperatures have been developed. Precursors with a high sensitivity to moisture can be cross-linked at low temperatures under humid atmosphere.29,144,147,148,153–155 An innovative approach of using humid air containing ammonia as catalyst has been established for the conversion of silazane coatings deposited in air into SiOX coatings at temperatures below 200 °C.154,156–164 The presence of humidity leads to hydrolysis of Si–H and Si–N bonds, forming silanol groups. The condensation of these silanol groups is then catalyzed by ammonia, forming the SiOX networks. Humidity can be also used during pyrolysis at higher temperatures to enhance oxygen incorporation.165
Another method extensively investigated to induce cross-linking of silicon-based polymer coatings, especially polysilazanes, is the use of vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) radiation in the presence of oxygen.153,166–176 In this technique, ozone and oxygen radicals formed by the VUV radiation are responsible for oxidation and, thus, conversion of coatings into highly cross-linked materials.167,169 This technique has been developed especially for the preparation of diffusion barriers onto polymer foils, for the encapsulation of electronic devices. A pilot plant for the continuous roll-to-roll deposition and VUV curing of Si-based polymer coatings onto organic polymer foils has already been developed.166
As previously mentioned, although more complex than the other methods, plasma polymerization and CVD techniques, which are methods for simultaneous deposition and conversion of coatings, have also been common approaches to obtain polymeric and ceramic coatings based on silicon.
7.2 Alternative methods
Although the low temperature methods, discussed in Section 7.1, yield highly cross-linked coatings, their performance is still below that of coatings obtained by thermal treatment of the same precursors at higher temperatures, and of SiO2 coatings obtained by sol–gel or conventional CVD.153,156,157,160 Therefore, there is still a need for alternative methods to prepare coatings, especially ceramic ones, without exposing substrates to high temperatures.
One way to introduce energy into coatings without affecting the substrate is by means of radiation. In addition to the VUV technique, several approaches using other types of radiation have been investigated, such as UV/Vis/IR,148,177–184 synchrotron,183 laser,185,186 electron-beam,178,187–189 ions,190–194 and X-rays.178 It is important to mention that some of these techniques can only induce cross-linking, requiring a complementary method, such as a heat-treatment, if a ceramic coating is desired. However, approaches using laser185,186 and ion irradiation,190–194 for example, have been successful at the direct conversion of coatings from silicon-based oligomers and polymers into ceramics (Fig. 14). Moreover, a method called rapid thermal processing of PDC coatings using different types of radiations has been patented.177
 Fig. 14  Cross-section microstructure of a polysilazane-based coating with glass and ZrO2 as passive filler after laser pyrolysis (power = 7.7 W, speed = 14 mm s−1, hatching distance = 30 μm, cw-mode). Adapted with permission.186 Copyright © 2016, Elsevier Ltd. 
Aside from plasma polymerization and plasma-assisted CVD, less common approaches using plasma have been developed. Jeong and colleagues used oxygen plasma to improve conversion into SiO2 of silazane coatings pre-treated at low temperatures.195,196 Similarly, Park et al. studied the effect of a N2O plasma post-treatment onto precursor-derived coatings.197 Moreover, a pyrolysis process assisted by nitrogen plasma has been developed to improve conversion of active fillers in the absence of oxygen with promising results (Fig. 15).140
 Fig. 15  Comparison of the cross-section microstructure of monolithic samples from polysilazane with TiSi2 active filler after treatment at 1150 °C for 2 h by (left) conventional pyrolysis in a furnace under nitrogen atmosphere; and (right) plasma-assisted pyrolysis in cathode configuration under nitrogen plasma. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright © 2016, Elsevier Ltd. 
Finally, preceramic monomers, oligomers and polymers have also been used as feedstock in more traditional techniques for deposition of ceramic coatings, such as CVD,198–204 plasma spraying,205 and cold spraying of powders.206 These approaches are, however, less common, since one of the significant advantages of the PDC method, the simple processing, disappears with these processes.
8. Properties and applications
Owing to the great variety of precursors and processing techniques available, as well as to the tailorability of systems through the addition of fillers, coatings with a wide range of properties can be achieved. Hence, coatings based on silicon polymers have been developed for many different applications. Especially polyorganosiloxanes, i.e. silicones, have been extensively applied in many low temperature coating systems. Although some of these studies are mentioned herein, we encourage readers to refer to further sources, such as the review paper of Eduok and colleagues,21 for more comprehensive information on this topic. Another topic, which, for the sake of brevity, is not extensively considered in this review, is the use of silicon-based compounds, such as silanes, as adhesion promoters.1,20,97,207–209 These are silicon-based molecules with structure X3Si(CH2)nY, where X are hydrolysable groups to provide adhesion with the substrate and Y is a functional group with affinity to the coating material to be applied.94 Since most of these adhesion promoters act only as bridges between substrate and a coating, without necessarily forming a polymeric coating itself, this application was considered beyond the scope of this review paper. For further information, we recommend the review of van Ooij and colleagues.210
One of the most prominent and industrially established applications of coatings from silicon-based precursors are dielectrics for electronic devices. Dielectrics are usually SiO2 layers deposited by CVD, which isolate the different structures of an electronic system. However, miniaturization of circuits with ever increasing power has led to systems with gaps of a few nanometers in width and high aspect ratio between the individual structures (Fig. 16). Due to shadowing effects, such narrow gaps cannot be completely filled by CVD. Since precursors can be deposited in liquid phase, e.g. by spin coating, they are able to fill these tight gaps. A post-deposition treatment then yields the dielectrics. For this reason, such systems are known commercially as spin-on dielectrics. The most common precursor for this application is the perhydropolysilazane (PHPS), which after a treatment under oxidative conditions, yields suitable silica dielectric coatings.147,195–197,211–214
 Fig. 16  Electronic circuit with a polysilazane spin-on dielectric coating (aspect ratio larger than 20). Reproduced with permission of the American Ceramic Society.213 Courtesy of Merck KGaA. 
A second type of application in electronics is related to the encapsulation of devices. Permeation of water vapor and oxygen through the plastic foils commonly used for encapsulation leads to degradation of devices. However, the performance of these foils can be enhanced by gas barrier coatings prepared from silicon-based polymers.104,153,156,166–168,172–175,215 During application in low earth orbit, degradation by atomic oxygen also becomes an issue, which can be hindered by precursor-based coatings.216–218 In addition, coatings have been designed to have functional properties, especially in the case of solar cells. Some examples are the thermal management of solar cells used in space by coating systems with high emissivity,219 passivation on silicon-based solar cells to avoid recombination and increase efficiency,220,221 as well as absorbing coatings to increase the efficiency of solar collectors.222
During the early years of the development of PDC coatings, the preparation of gas separation membranes was one of the most intensively researched topics.84,85,181,187,189,223–233 For such application, PDC coatings with a selective permeability, obtained by a precise control of porosity, are deposited onto porous substrates. This results in composite membranes capable of separating gases, like hydrogen or oxygen, present in a gas mixture.
Currently, the most investigated application of coatings based on silicon polymers are environmental barrier coatings (EBCs). Due to their intrinsic high stability in harsh environments, ceramics are especially well suited for such systems (Fig. 17). Indeed, the PDC route has been applied in many studies to obtain ceramic coatings aiming at prevention of corrosion and oxidation of metallic and ceramic substrates at high temperatures.63,66,67,75,77–82,136,182,234–248 However, protection of substrates at low temperatures has also been targeted by many studies. In these cases, both polymeric and ceramic coating systems based on silicon polymers have been developed focused on corrosion protection against acids, bases and salts.97,144,152,242,249–256 Additionally, coatings with anti-fouling and anti-biofilm formation properties have been developed for marine applications.105,142,152,257–260
 Fig. 17  Protective effect of silicon-based ceramic coatings on metallic substrates: (left) oxidation protection of coatings based on the polysilazane PHPS with and without BN passive filler on mild steel (Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright © 2009, John Wiley and Sons.); (right) protection against hot concentrated sulfuric acid provided by coatings from polysiloxane PHMS and TiSi2 active filler of various thicknesses on stainless steel (Reproduced with permission.242 Copyright © 2014, Elsevier Ltd.). 
Another advantage of ceramic coatings is the high hardness, modulus and strength. For this reason, the PDC route using silicon-based polymers has been proposed as an alternative to CVD, PVD and thermal spraying to generate surfaces with improved wear resistance, with promising results.136,204,261–265
It is well known that the free energy of a surface is determined by its chemical characteristics and its structural features. As mentioned in Section 3, the chemical structure and composition of precursors changes during the polymer-to-ceramic transformation. This can be used to obtain coatings with tailored surface free energy, as has been demonstrated for PHPS coatings after treatment in air at different temperatures (Fig. 18).266 The possibility of tailoring the chemical properties of silicon polymers by manipulating the structure and composition of molecules, together with different methods for surface structuring – such as by fillers, templating, ablation, and others – has led to many coatings with low surface energy, resulting in hydrophobic, anti-icing, self-cleaning, anti-graffiti and anti-sticking surfaces.42,64,106,107,146,213,259,266–274 In addition, coatings with high surface energy can be obtained, which improves the wettability of the surface, e.g. to promote adhesion.184,266,275–277
 Fig. 18  Evolution of the surface free energy of smooth polysilazane PHPS coatings in dependence with the temperature during thermal treatment in air. Reproduced with permission.266 Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, silicon polymers can be used to obtain coatings for many biological and biomedical applications.150,259,278–283 Such coatings can be used to avoid proliferation and adhesion of bacteria and other microorganisms, to increase the biocompatibility of prosthetic materials with the human body, and to protect these materials against premature degradation, e.g. in dentistry.
The liquid phase deposition makes coatings obtained from silicon-based polymers interesting also for the modification of the surface of fibers used as reinforcement in CMCs.284–289 On the one hand, the coatings can protect the fibers against oxidation and degradation during the following steps of the processing of the composites. On the other hand, they can be used to tailor the fiber–matrix interactions, in order to optimize the mechanical behavior and the damage tolerance of the CMCs.
Other applications of silicon-based polymeric and ceramic coatings include photocatalysis,65 radiation shielding,290 thermal barrier coatings,47,71 diffusion barriers,291 surfaces with tailored IR-emissivity for defense and thermal management applications,292–294 strengthening and protection of glass,163,295 strengthening of ceramics,296 photochromism,164,297 light conversion,298 sensors,103,299 fire protection,300 buffer layers for diamond coating,301 cathode material for fuel cells,302 thin-film electrolytes,303 and water adsorption.304
9. Organic–inorganic hybrid polymer coatings
Owing to the ever increasing performance requirements, coatings based on organic polymers have become insufficient for many applications.305 However, despite the many superior properties, silicon-based (inorganic) polymers are in general more expensive than most organic polymers, which is one of the factors limiting their application on a large scale. A way to obtain coatings with enhanced properties when compared to organic coatings and, at the same, lower costs than the purely inorganic systems is to combine both classes in one material, forming organic–inorganic hybrids or interpenetrating polymer networks. Since this is a large field of research, for the sake of brevity this paper offers only an introduction to the technology and applications of organic–inorganic hybrid coating systems.
By far, the most frequently used inorganic component in hybrid materials for coating applications are silicones. As organic component, three main types of polymers stand out: epoxy,305–320 polyurethanes,321–331 and polyacrylates.332–343 In these systems, aside from reducing the overall costs of the materials, the organic component is essentially responsible for an increase of the coating hardness, whereas the inorganic part reduces the surface energy and increases the thermal, chemical and UV resistance of the systems (Fig. 19). Other examples of organic polymers, which have been combined with polysiloxanes for coating applications are polyethyleneglycol,344–346 polyimides,347–350 and polyesters.351 Although much less frequently, organic–inorganic polymers have been synthesized using polysilazane and polysilsesquiazane inorganic polymers as well.352–356
 Fig. 19  Contact angle with water of coatings composed of pure PMMA, pure poly(organo)silazane HTT 1800, and of hybrids composed of 90 wt% PMMA and 10 wt% HTT1800, and 75 wt% PMMA and 25 wt% HTT1800 after treatment at 60 °C for 24 h. Reproduced with permission.353 Copyright © 2015, Elsevier Ltd. 
The vast majority of these hybrid polymeric coating systems were developed aiming at more efficient and resistant anti-corrosion308–312,315,316,319,320,337,338,341,351,353 and anti-fouling307,322,323,330,343–345,355 coatings. However, some systems for other applications, such as photoluminescence,324 IR emissivity,313 protection against atomic oxygen,347 and dielectrics342,352 have also been developed.
10. Topics for further research and prospects
Coatings based on silicon polymers is an expanding field and many systems for different applications have been realized. However, there are still challenges to overcome. A large contribution to the field of coatings based on silicon polymers in the future will likely come from chemistry. The chemical modification of precursors to obtain tailored properties is a promising approach, which has already yielded interesting results. The modification of precursors with metals, for example, can lead to a new class of coatings with catalytic activity, as well as tailored thermal, electric and magnetic properties.
As the properties of silicon polymers become better known and understood, novel organic–inorganic hybrid coatings are expected to be developed. The combination of properties from organic and inorganic polymers is an intelligent strategy to obtain coatings with enhanced properties. This could lead to thick coatings with low surface energy, high chemical, thermal and UV resistance which will extend the range of application and the lifetime of the coatings, when compared to purely organic counterparts.
New coating systems based on silicon polymers are also likely to be further developed aiming at improved corrosion protection. The potential of these coatings as barriers against different corrosive media has been demonstrated. However, performance is still not sufficient for industry requirements. Thus, intensive research on this topic, especially towards smart coatings, is likely to be conducted during the next few years. Such systems are able to respond to different stimuli – like changes in pH, moisture, or mechanical stress – activating corrosion inhibitors or self-healing agents, increasing efficiency and lifetime of coatings and substrates.
Despite the simpler processing, properties of ceramic coatings prepared by PDC technique are, in some cases, still inferior to those of CVD, PVD and thermal-sprayed coatings. One example is the low coating thickness of PDC coatings. Plasma spraying and PVD can yield robust ceramic coatings with more than 300 μm of thickness on metallic substrates for application at temperatures above 1000 °C. PDC coatings, in contrast, are still limited to a few tens of microns. The challenge in this case is to increase the coating thickness and, at the same time, keep the process simple and cost-effective.
Also tribological properties of PDC coatings are still not comparable to those of conventional coating systems, processed e.g. by CVD, PVD or thermal spraying. Intrinsic stresses caused by precursor shrinkage, together with low coefficients of thermal expansion, make PDC coatings on metallic substrates more prone to failure upon mechanical stresses. Strategies to control stress evolution and improve the compatibility between coatings and substrates may lead to coatings with improved tribological properties.
The processing of PDC coatings is also expected to be further addressed in the future. Novel techniques for the conversion of silicon polymers into ceramic coatings without affecting the substrates can lead to a great advance of the PDC technique for coating applications. Ceramic coatings for less heat-resistant metals, such as aluminium and magnesium, as well as for plastics and polymeric composites could find application in many lightweight systems.
11. Conclusions
Silicon-based polymers are materials with outstanding properties, which can be used to prepared polymeric and ceramic coatings. Since most of these compounds are liquids or soluble in common solvents, deposition of coatings can be carried out in liquid state, e.g. by dip, spin or spray coating techniques. A treatment by heat, chemical reaction, radiation or combinations thereof leads to cross-linking of polymer chains, forming unmeltable and insoluble polymeric coatings. These coatings have, in many cases, superior properties than organic coatings. A further treatment, mostly at elevated temperatures (pyrolysis), results in conversion of the polymers into ceramics (polymer-derived ceramics technique). Because of this, such silicon polymers are also known as preceramic polymers or precursors.
A great variety of precursors is commercially available. For coating applications, the most important families of precursors are polysiloxanes, polysilazanes, polycarbosilazanes, polysilylcarbodiimides, polycarbosilanes and polysilanes. Since the composition and chemical structure of the precursors determine the behavior of the polymers during processing, as well as the properties and composition of polymeric and ceramic coatings, many different coating systems are possible. Moreover, by tailoring the chemical structure of precursors, systems with improved properties for specific applications can be realized.
The polymer-to-ceramic conversion is typically associated with a mass loss in the range of 10–30%. Moreover, a significant densification of the material occurs, from about 1 g cm−3 as a polymer to more than 2 g cm−3 as a ceramic. Combination of both effects results in significant shrinkage during pyrolysis. If this shrinkage is inhomogeneous or constrained, stresses can be generated, which may cause cracking and failure of the parts. In the case of coatings, the shrinkage is constrained by the adhesion of the coating to the substrate, leading to large tensile stresses. Because of this, the PDC technology, using unfilled silicon polymers, is limited to ceramics with small dimensions, such as fibers, thin coatings, and cellular ceramics (thin cell wall), which are able to uniformly shrink. A way to control the shrinkage of parts is by the use of fillers. Usually added in the form of particles, fillers (ceramics, metals, polymers or glasses) can, directly or indirectly, reduce the coating shrinkage during pyrolysis. This enables the preparation of thicker coatings. In addition to shrinkage control, fillers are frequently used to add new functionalities to polymeric and ceramic coating systems.
One of the advantages of silicon-based polymers in comparison to the organic counterparts is the strong adhesion to most substrates and fillers. This results from chemical bonding, due to reactions between the precursor molecules and –OH groups at the surface of substrates and filler particles. After deposition, the inorganic polymer layers can be converted into strong adherent ceramic coatings as well.
The variety of precursors available and the tailorability of properties by chemical modification or addition of fillers has led to the development of coatings for several applications, both at low and high temperatures. Especially coatings for corrosion/oxidation protection of many different substrates have been developed, owing to the excellent environmental barrier properties of these coatings. Other applications include encapsulation of electronic devices, gas separation membranes, dielectric coatings, easy-to-clean or self-cleaning coatings, thermal barriers, diffusion barriers, antibacterial surfaces, and biocompatible coatings.
Despite many studies involving coatings using silicon-based polymers, there is still plenty of room for new developments. Modification of polymers, hybrid materials, novel processing techniques and strategies to control stresses arising during conversion into ceramic coatings should lead to advanced coating systems with outstanding properties in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Gilvan Barroso and Günter Motz would like to acknowledge the financial support of the German Research Foundation (DFG), the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD), the Bavarian Research Foundation (BFS), the European Commission, and the Bavarian Ministry of Economic Affairs and Media, Energy and Technology (program New Materials in Bavaria). Quan Li and Rajendra Bordia would like to acknowledge partial financial support from US Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy (DoE-NEUP), grant through Idaho National Laboratory (grant no. 10-918) and from US Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Lab (grant no. DE-FE0023142 and grant no. DE-FE0031281). The authors also thank the companies Merck KGaA and Clariant AG for the scientific collaboration.
References
E. P. Plueddemann, Silane adhesion promoters in coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 1983, 11, 297 CrossRef CAS .
P. Colombo, G. Mera, R. Riedel and G. D. Sorarù, Polymer-derived ceramics, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 1805 CAS .

          M. A. Aegerter and M. Mennig, Sol-gel technologies for glass producers and users, Springer US, USA,  2004 Search PubMed .

          F. Scheffler and J. D. Torrey, Coatings, in Polymer derived ceramics, ed. P. Colombo, R. Riedel, G. D. Sorarù and H.-J. Kleebe, DEStech Publ., Lancaster, PA,  2010, ch. 5.4, pp. 358–368 Search PubMed .

          K. H. Stern, Metallurgical and ceramic protective coatings, Chapman & Hall, London,  1996 Search PubMed .
P. Greil, Polymer derived engineering ceramics, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2000, 2, 339 CrossRef CAS .
R. Riedel, G. Mera, R. Hauser and A. Klonczynski, Silicon-based polymer-derived ceramics, Nippon Seramikkusu Kyokai Gakujutsu Ronbunshi, 2006, 114, 425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bill and F. Aldinger, Precursor-derived covalent ceramics, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 775 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Kipping and L. L. Lloyd, Organic derivatives of silicon. Triphenylsilicol and alkyloxysilicon chlorides, J. Chem. Soc., Trans., 1901, 79, 449 RSC .
F. S. Kipping, XXII.—Organic derivatives of silicon, J. Chem. Soc., Trans., 1907, 91, 209 RSC .
F. S. Kipping, The Bakerian Lecture. Organic derivatives of silicon, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1937, 159, 139 CAS .
G. Fritz and B. Raabe, Bildung siliciumorganischer Verbindungen, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1956, 286, 149 CrossRef CAS .

          F. W. Ainger and J. M. Herbert, The preparation of phosphorus-nitrogen compounds as non-porous solids, in Special Ceramics, ed. P. Popper, Academic Press, New York,  1960, pp. 168–181 Search PubMed .

          P. G. Chantrell and P. Popper, Inorganic polymers and ceramics, in Special Ceramics, ed. P. Popper, Academic Press, New York,  1964, pp. 87–103 Search PubMed .

          W. Verbeek, Germany Pat., DE 2218960 A1,  1972 .

          W. Verbeek and G. Winter, Germany Pat., DE 2236078 A1,  1972 .

          G. Winter, W. Verbeek and M. Mansmann, Germany Pat., DE 2243527 A1,  1972 .
S. Yajima, J. Hayashi and M. Omori, Continuous silicon carbide fiber of high tensile strength, Chem. Lett., 1975, 931 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yajima, J. Hayashi, M. Omori and K. Okamura, Development of a silicon carbide fibre with high tensile strength, Nature, 1976, 261, 683 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Petrie, Silanes as primers and adhesion promoters for metal substrates, Met. Finish., 2007, 105, 85 CrossRef .
U. Eduok, O. Faye and J. Szpunar, Recent developments and applications of protective silicone coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 111, 124 CrossRef CAS .
R. Richter, G. Roewer, U. Böhme, K. Busch, F. Babonneau, H. P. Martin and E. Müller, Organosilicon polymers, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1997, 11, 71 CrossRef CAS .
D. Seyferth and G. H. Wiseman, High-yield synthesis of Si3N4/SiC ceramic materials by pyrolysis of a novel polyorganosilazane, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1984, 67, C-132–C-133 CAS .
R. Riedel, A. Greiner, G. Miehe, W. Dressler, H. Fuess, J. Bill and F. Aldinger, The first crystalline solids in the ternary Si-C-N system, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 603 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dressler and R. Riedel, Progress in silicon-based non-oxide structural ceramics, Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mater., 1997, 15, 13 CrossRef CAS .
R. Riedel, E. Kroke, A. Greiner, A. O. Gabriel, L. Ruwisch, J. Nicolich and P. Kroll, Inorganic solid-state chemistry with main group element carbodiimides, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2964 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ziegler, H.-J. Kleebe, G. Motz, H. Müller, S. Traßl and W. Weibelzahl, Synthesis, microstructure and properties of SiCN ceramics prepared from tailored polymers, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1999, 61, 55 CrossRef CAS .
G. Motz, Synthesis of SiCN-precursors for fibres and matrices, Adv. Sci. Technol., 2006, 50, 24 CAS .
A. Lukacs, Polysilazane precursors to advanced ceramics, Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., 2007, 86, 9301 Search PubMed .
R. Riedel, A. Kienzle, W. Dressler, L. Ruwisch, J. Bill and F. Aldinger, A silicoboron carbonitride ceramic stable to 2,000°C, Nature, 1996, 382, 796 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bill, T. W. Kamphowe, A. Müller, T. Wichmann, A. Zern, A. Jalowieki, J. Mayer, M. Weinmann, J. Schuhmacher, K. Müller, J. Peng, H. J. Seifert and F. Aldinger, Precursor-derived Si-(B-)C-N ceramics, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 15, 777 CrossRef CAS .
F. Berger, M. Weinmann, F. Aldinger and K. Müller, Solid-state NMR studies of the preparation of Si–Al–C–N ceramics from aluminum-modified polysilazanes and polysilylcarbodiimides, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 919 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mori, T. Ueda, S. Kitaoka and Y. Sugahara, Preparation of Si-Al-N-C ceramic composites by pyrolysis of blended precursors, Nippon Seramikkusu Kyokai Gakujutsu Ronbunshi, 2006, 114, 497 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Sorarù, A. Ravagni, R. Campostrini and F. Babonneau, Synthesis and characterization of beta’-SiAlON ceramics from organosilicon polymers, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1991, 74, 2220 CrossRef .
G. Parcianello, E. Bernardo, P. Colombo, Z. Lenčéš, M. Vetrecín, P. Šajgalík, M. Kašiarová and G. Soraru, Preceramic polymer-derived SiAlON as sintering aid for silicon nitride, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 3407 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yajima, T. Iwai, T. Yamamura, K. Okamura and Y. Hasegawa, Synthesis of a polytitanocarbosilane and its conversion into inorganic compounds, J. Mater. Sci., 1981, 16, 1349 CrossRef CAS .
F. Babonneau and G. D. Sorarù, Synthesis and characterization of Si-Zr-C-O ceramics from polymer precursors, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1991, 8, 29 CrossRef CAS .
G. Glatz, T. Schmalz, T. Kraus, F. Haarmann, G. Motz and R. Kempe, Copper-containing SiCN precursor ceramics (Cu@SiCN) as selective hydrocarbon oxidation catalysts using air as an oxidant, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 4231 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zaheer, G. Motz and R. Kempe, The generation of palladium silicide nanoalloy particles in a SiCN matrix and their catalytic applications, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18825 RSC .
M. Zaheer, T. Schmalz, G. Motz and R. Kempe, Polymer derived non-oxide ceramics modified with late transition metals, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5102 RSC .
G. J. Chen and C. Tamborski, Synthesis and reactions of some perfluoroalkyl ether substituted silanes, J. Organomet. Chem., 1985, 293, 313 CrossRef CAS .
P. Furtat, M. Lenz-Leite, E. Ionescu, R. A. F. Machado and G. Motz, Synthesis of fluorine-modified polysilazanes via Si–H bond activation and their application as protective hydrophobic coatings, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 114, 425 Search PubMed .
K. Indulekha, P. K. Behera, R. S. Rajeev, C. Gouri and K. N. Ninan, Polyfluoroalkyl siloxanes with varying trifluoropropyl content, J. Fluorine Chem., 2017, 200, 24 CrossRef CAS .
K. Indulekha, A. Mathew, R. S. Rajeev, K. N. Ninan and C. Gouri, A facile route to fluoroalkylsiloxane polymers having resistance to corrosive acidic conditions, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 97, 94–103 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Davidovits, Geopolymer chemistry and applications, Institut Géopolymère, Saint-Quentin, France, 4th edn,  2015 Search PubMed .
K. J. Wynne and R. W. Rice, Ceramics via polymer pyrolysis, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1984, 14, 297 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Barroso, Thermal barrier coating by polymer-derived ceramic technique for application in exhaust systems, Cuvillier Verlag, Göttingen, Germany, 1st edn,  2018 Search PubMed .
Y. D. Blum, K. B. Schwartz and R. M. Laine, Preceramic polymer pyrolysis, J. Mater. Sci., 1989, 24, 1707 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ichikawa, H. Teranishi and T. Ishikawa, Effect of curing conditions on mechanical properties of SiC fibre (Nicalon), J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1987, 6, 420 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Motz, T. Schmalz, S. Trassl and R. Kempe, Oxidation behavior of SiCN materials, in Design, processing and properties of ceramic materials from preceramic precursors, ed. S. Bernard, Nova Science Publishers Inc, New York,  2012, ch. 2, pp. 15–35 Search PubMed .
R. M. Laine and F. Babonneau, Preceramic polymer routes to silicon carbide, Chem. Mater., 1993, 5, 260 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Sorarù, F. Babonneau and J. D. Mackenzie, Structural concepts on new amorphous covalent solids, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1988, 106, 256 CrossRef .
P. Greil, Active-filler-controlled pyrolysis of preceramic polymers, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1995, 78, 835 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bahloul, M. Pereira, P. Goursat, N. S. Choong Kwet Yive and R. J. P. Corriu, Preparation of silicon carbonitrides from an organosilicon polymer, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1993, 76, 1156 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Strong, S. A. Arreguin and R. K. Bordia, Controlled atmosphere pyrolysis of polyureasilazane for tailored volume fraction Si3N4/SiC nanocomposites powders, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 36, 3663 CrossRef CAS .
P. Greil and M. Seibold, Modelling of dimensional changes during polymer-ceramic conversion for bulk component fabrication, J. Mater. Sci., 1992, 27, 1053 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Bordia and R. Raj, Sintering behavior of ceramic films constrained by a rigid substrate, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1985, 68, 287 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Bordia and A. Jagota, Crack growth and damage in constrained sintering films, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1993, 76, 2475 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jagota and C. Y. Hui, Mechanics of sintering thin films — I, Mech. Mater., 1990, 9, 107 CrossRef .
A. Jagota and C. Y. Hui, Mechanics of sintering thin films — II, Mech. Mater., 1991, 11, 221 CrossRef .
G. W. Scherer and T. Garino, Viscous sintering on a rigid substrate, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1985, 68, 216 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cheng and R. Raj, Flaw generation during constrained sintering of metal-ceramic and metal-glass multilayer films, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1989, 72, 1649 CrossRef CAS .
M. Günthner, A. Schütz, U. Glatzel, K. Wang, R. K. Bordia, O. Greißl, W. Krenkel and G. Motz, High performance environmental barrier coatings, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 31, 3003 CrossRef .
B. J. Basu, V. Dinesh Kumar and C. Anandan, Surface studies on superhydrophobic and oleophobic polydimethylsiloxane–silica nanocomposite coating system, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 261, 807 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. S. Tavares, A. S. F. Santos, I. M. G. Santos, M. R. S. Silva, M. R. D. Bomio, E. Longo, C. A. Paskocimas and F. V. Motta, TiO2/PDMS nanocomposites for use on self-cleaning surfaces, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 239, 16 CrossRef CAS .
M. Günthner, T. Kraus, W. Krenkel, G. Motz, A. Dierdorf and D. Decker, Particle-filled PHPS silazane-based coatings on steel, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2009, 6, 373 CrossRef .
T. Kraus, M. Günthner, W. Krenkel and G. Motz, cBN particle filled SiCN precursor coatings, Adv. Appl. Ceram., 2009, 108, 476 CrossRef CAS .

          J. D. Torrey and R. K. Bordia, Filler systems (bulk components and nano-composites), in Polymer derived ceramics, ed. P. Colombo, R. Riedel, G. D.Sorarù and H.-J. Kleebe, DEStech Publ., Lancaster PA,  2010, ch. 5.2, pp. 329–341 Search PubMed .
S. T. Schwab, C. R. Blanchard and R. C. Graef, The influence of preceramic binders on the microstructural development of silicon nitride, J. Mater. Sci., 1994, 29, 6320 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Schwartz and D. J. Rowcliffe, Modeling density contributions in preceramic polymer/ceramic powder systems, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1986, 69, C-106 CrossRef .
G. S. Barroso, W. Krenkel and G. Motz, Low thermal conductivity coating system for application up to 1000 °C by simple PDC processing with active and passive fillers, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 35, 3339 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Greil and M. Seibold, Active-filler-controlled pyrolysis (AFCOP), in Ceramic Transactions, Vol. 19, Advanced Composite Materials, ed. M. D. Sacks, American Ceramic Society, Westerville, OH,  1991 Search PubMed .
P. Greil, Near net shape manufacturing of polymer derived ceramics, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1998, 18, 1905 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Hennige, J. Hauβelt, H.-J. Ritzhaupt-Kleissl and T. Windmann, Shrinkage-free ZrSiO4-ceramics, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1999, 19, 2901 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lenz Leite, G. Barroso, M. Parchovianský, D. Galusek, E. Ionescu, W. Krenkel and G. Motz, Synthesis and characterization of yttrium and ytterbium silicates from their oxides and an oligosilazane by the PDC route for coating applications to protect Si3N4 in hot gas environments, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2017, 37, 5177 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Torrey, R. K. Bordia, C. H. Henager, Y. Blum, Y. Shin and W. D. Samuels, Composite polymer derived ceramic system for oxidizing environments, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41, 4617 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Torrey and R. K. Bordia, Processing of polymer-derived ceramic composite coatings on steel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 41 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, M. Günthner, G. Motz and R. K. Bordia, High performance environmental barrier coatings, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 31, 3011 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Zhang, F. Hu, J. Yang, L. Cheng and Y. Wang, Polymer-derived yttrium silicate coatings on 2D C/SiC composites, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 33, 433 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Torrey and R. K. Bordia, Phase and microstructural evolution in polymer-derived composite systems and coatings, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 1959 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schütz, M. Günthner, G. Motz, O. Greißl and U. Glatzel, High temperature (salt melt) corrosion tests with ceramic-coated steel, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 159, 10 CrossRef .
A. Schütz, M. Günthner, G. Motz, O. Greißl and U. Glatzel, Characterisation of novel precursor-derived ceramic coatings with glass filler particles on steel substrates, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 207, 319 CrossRef .
C. Ohl, M. Kappa, V. Wilker, S. Bhattacharjee, F. Scheffler and M. Scheffler, Novel open-cellular glass foams for optical applications, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 436 CrossRef CAS .
H. Suda, H. Yamauchi, Y. Uchimaru, I. Fujiwara and K. Haraya, Preparation and gas permeation properties of silicon carbide-based inorganic membranes for hydrogen separation, Desalination, 2006, 193, 252 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, K. Kusakabe and S. Morooka, Pore structure and permeance of amorphous Si-C-O membranes with high durability at elevated temperature, Sep. Sci. Technol., 1997, 32, 1233 CrossRef CAS .
T. Konegger, C.-C. Tsai, H. Peterlik, S. E. Creager and R. K. Bordia, Asymmetric polysilazane-derived ceramic structures with multiscalar porosity for membrane applications, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 232, 196 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kováčik, Correlation between Young's modulus and porosity in porous materials, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1999, 18, 1007 CrossRef .
J. Bai, K. Maute, S. R. Shah and R. Raj, Mechanical design for accommodating thermal expansion mismatch in multilayer coatings for environmental protection at ultrahigh temperatures, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 170 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Evans, M. Rühle, B. J. Dalgleish and P. G. Charalambides, The fracture energy of bimaterial interfaces, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1990, 126, 53 CrossRef .
H. M. Soliman and A. F. Waheed, Effect of differential thermal expansion coefficient on stresses generated in coating, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 1999, 15, 457 CAS .
A. R. Boccaccini and Z. Fan, A new approach for the Young's modulus-porosity correlation of ceramic materials, Ceram. Int., 1997, 23, 239 CrossRef CAS .
T. Young, An essay on the cohesion of fluids, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1805, 95, 65 CrossRef .
Krüss GmbH, Substance Database: Values for the surface free energy of solids, https://www.kruss-scientific.com/services/education-theory/substance-data/solids/, (accessed January 2018).

          A. J. Kinloch, Adhesion and adhesives, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  2010 Search PubMed .
L. Picard, P. Phalip, E. Fleury and F. Ganachaud, Chemical adhesion of silicone elastomers on primed metal surfaces, Prog. Org. Coat., 2015, 80, 120 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li and G. L. Wilkes, The mechanism for 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane to strengthen the interface of polycarbonate substrates with hybrid organic–inorganic sol-gel coatings, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 1997, 7, 203 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. van Ooij, D. Q. Zhu, G. Prasad, S. Jayaseelan, Y. Fu and N. Teredesai, Silane based chromate replacements for corrosion control, paint adhesion, and rubber bonding, Surf. Eng., 2000, 16, 386 CrossRef CAS .
D. Amouzou, L. Fourdrinier, F. Maseri and R. Sporken, Formation of Me–O–Si covalent bonds at the interface between polysilazane and stainless steel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 320, 519 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Rouzmeh, R. Naderi and M. Mahdavian, Steel surface treatment with three different acid solutions and its effect on the protective properties of the subsequent silane coating, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 112, 133 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Muir, H. Thissen, G. P. Simon, P. J. Murphy and H. J. Griesser, Factors affecting the adhesion of microwave plasma deposited siloxane films on polycarbonate, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 500, 34 CrossRef CAS .

          R. R. Eley, Rheology in coatings, principles and methods, in Encyclopedia of analytical chemistry, ed. R. A. Meyers, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2006, p. 65 Search PubMed .
E. Bertaux, E. Le Marec, D. Crespy, R. Rossi and D. Hegemann, Effects of siloxane plasma coating on the frictional properties of polyester and polyamide fabrics, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2009, 204, 165 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boutamine, A. Bellel, S. Sahli, Y. Segui and P. Raynaud, Hexamethyldisiloxane thin films as sensitive coating for quartz crystal microbalance based volatile organic compounds sensors, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 552, 196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Choukourov, A. Grinevich, J. Hanuš, J. Kousal, D. Slavínská, H. Biederman, A. Bowers and L. Hanley, A comparison of polyatomic ion deposited, RF magnetron sputtered and plasma polymer organosilicon films, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 502, 40 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dowling, C. E. Nwankire, M. Riihimäki, R. Keiski and U. Nylén, Evaluation of the anti-fouling properties of nm thick atmospheric plasma deposited coatings, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 205, 1544 CrossRef CAS .
L. Foroughi Mobarakeh, R. Jafari and M. Farzaneh, The ice repellency of plasma polymerized hexamethyldisiloxane coating, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 284, 459 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Marchand, Z. R. Dilworth, R. J. Stauffer, E. Hsiao, J.-H. Kim, J.-G. Kang and S. H. Kim, Atmospheric rf plasma deposition of superhydrophobic coatings using tetramethylsilane precursor, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 234, 14 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Mota, D. Galvão, S. F. Durrant, M. A. B. de Moraes, S. de Oliveira Dantas and M. Cantão, HMDSO plasma polymerization and thin film optical properties, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 270, 109 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. O'Shaughnessy, D. J. Edell and K. K. Gleason, Initiated chemical vapor deposition of a siloxane coating for insulation of neural probes, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 3612 CrossRef .
P. Navabpour, D. Teer, X. Su, C. Liu, S. Wang, Q. Zhao, C. Donik, A. Kocijan and M. Jenko, Optimisation of the properties of siloxane coatings as anti-biofouling coatings, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 204, 3188 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramamoorthy, M. Rahman, D. A. Mooney, J. M. Don MacElroy and D. P. Dowling, Thermal stability studies of atmospheric plasma deposited siloxane films deposited on Vycor™ glass, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2008, 202, 4130 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Ritts, C. H. Liu and Q. S. Yu, SiOx plasma thin film deposition using a low-temperature cascade arc torch, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 4824 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Sachdev and H. S. Sachdev, Characterization of plasma-deposited organosilicon thin films, Thin Solid Films, 1983, 107, 245 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sahli, Y. Segui, S. Hadj Moussa and M. A. Djouadi, Growth, composition and structure of plasma-deposited siloxane and silazane, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 217, 17 CrossRef CAS .
R. Múgica-Vidal, F. Alba-Elías, E. Sainz-García and M. Pantoja-Ruiz, Hydrophobicity attainment and wear resistance enhancement on glass substrates by atmospheric plasma-polymerization of mixtures of an aminosilane and a fluorocarbon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 347, 325 CrossRef .
C. Rau and W. Kulisch, Mechanisms of plasma polymerization of various silico-organic monomers, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 249, 28 CrossRef CAS .
L. Akesso, P. Navabpour, D. Teer, M. E. Pettitt, M. E. Callow, C. Liu, X. Su, S. Wang, Q. Zhao, C. Donik, A. Kocijan, M. Jenko and J. A. Callow, Deposition parameters to improve the fouling-release properties of thin siloxane coatings prepared by PACVD, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 6508 CrossRef CAS .

          A. T. Daly and L. T. Grundowski, US Pat., US 5422396 A,  1995 .
B. Pilch-Pitera, Polyurethane powder coatings containing polysiloxane, Prog. Org. Coat., 2014, 77, 1653 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Brinker, Dip coating, in Chemical solution deposition of functional oxide thin films, ed. T. Schneller, R. Waser, M. Kosec and D. Payne, Springer Vienna, Vienna,  2013, pp. 233–261 Search PubMed .

          OCCAA, Oil and Colours Chemists' Association Australia, Surface coatings, Tafe Educational Books, Australia, 2nd edn,  1987 Search PubMed .
P. Yimsiri and M. R. Mackley, Spin and dip coating of light-emitting polymer solutions, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2006, 61, 3496 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Aegerter, J. Puetz, G. Gasparro and N. Al-Dahoudi, Versatile wet deposition techniques for functional oxide coatings, Opt. Mater., 2004, 26, 155 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Puetz and M. A. Aegerter, Dip coating technique, in Sol-gel technologies for glass producers and users, ed. M. A. Aegerter and M. Mennig, Springer US, USA,  2004, pp. 37–48 Search PubMed .
N. J. Arfsten, A. Eberle, J. Otto and A. Reich, Investigations on the angle-dependent dip coating technique (ADDC) for the production of optical filters, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 1099 CAS .
L. Landau and B. Levich, Dragging of a liquid by a moving plate, Acta Physicochim. URSS, 1942, XVII, 42 Search PubMed .
M. Maleki, M. Reyssat, F. Restagno, D. Quéré and C. Clanet, Landau-Levich menisci, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 354, 359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, Fabrication and processing of polymer solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394 CrossRef CAS .
K. Norrman, A. Ghanbari-Siahkali and N. B. Larsen, Studies of spin-coated polymer films, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2005, 101, 174 RSC .

          D. P. Birnie III, Spin coating technique, in Sol-gel technologies for glass producers and users, ed. M. A. Aegerter and M.Mennig, Springer US, USA,  2004, pp. 49–55 Search PubMed .

          R. G. Larson and T. J. Rehg, Spin coating, in Liquid film coating, ed. S. F.Kistler and P. M. Schweizer, Chapman & Hall, London, 1st edn,  1997, pp. 709–734 Search PubMed .
M. Labrousse, M. Nanot, P. Boch and E. Chassagneux, Ex-polymer SiC coatings with Al2O3 particulates as filler materials, Ceram. Int., 1993, 19, 259 CrossRef CAS .

          K. J. Coeling, Coating methods, Spray, in Processing and finishing of polymeric materials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, USA, 1st edn,  2012, pp. 343–351 Search PubMed .
M. Ichiki, L. Zhang, Z. Yang, T. Ikehara and R. Maeda, Thin film formation on non-planar surface with use of spray coating fabrication, Microsyst. Technol., 2004, 10, 360 CrossRef CAS .
C. Girotto, B. P. Rand, J. Genoe and P. Heremans, Exploring spray coating as a deposition technique for the fabrication of solution-processed solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 454 CrossRef CAS .
M. Günthner, K. Wang, R. K. Bordia and G. Motz, Conversion behaviour and resulting mechanical properties of polysilazane-based coatings, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 32, 1883 CrossRef .
P. Colombo, T. E. Paulson and C. G. Pantano, Atmosphere effects in the processing of silicon carbide and silicon oxycarbide thin films and coatings, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1994, 2, 601 CrossRef CAS .
P. Colombo, T. E. Paulson and C. G. Pantano, Synthesis of silicon carbide thin films with polycarbosilane (PCS), J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 80, 2333 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Loh, X. Bao, M. R. Nangrejo and M. J. Edirisinghe, Coating with amorphous silicon carbide using polymeric precursors, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2000, 19, 587 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seifert, P. Gonçalves, T. Justus, N. Martins, A. N. Klein and G. Motz, A novel approach to develop composite ceramics based on active filler loaded precursor employing plasma assisted pyrolysis, Mater. Des., 2016, 89, 893 CrossRef CAS .
M. Scarlete, N. McCourt, I. S. Butler and J. F. Harrod, Spectroscopic investigation of the synthesis of thin silicon nitride films on silicon single-crystal wafers via ammonia-assisted pyrolysis of organosilicon polymers, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 655 CrossRef CAS .
D. Akuzov, F. Brümmer and T. Vladkova, Some possibilities to reduce the biofilm formation on transparent siloxane coatings, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 104, 303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. D. Blum and D. B. MacQueen, Modifications of hydrosiloxane polymers for coating applications, Surf. Coat. Int., Part B, 2001, 84, 27 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ejenstam, A. Swerin, J. Pan and P. M. Claesson, Corrosion protection by hydrophobic silica particle-polydimethylsiloxane composite coatings, Corros. Sci., 2015, 99, 89 CrossRef CAS .
O. Flores, T. Schmalz, W. Krenkel, L. Heymann and G. Motz, Selective cross-linking of oligosilazanes to tailored meltable polysilazanes for the processing of ceramic SiCN fibres, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15406 RSC .
M. K. N. Hirayama, W. R. Caseri and U. W. Suter, Strongly attached ultrathin polymer layers on metal surfaces obtained by activation of Si–H bonds, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 143, 256 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Je, B.-G. Son, H.-G. Kim, M.-Y. Park, L.-M. Do, R. Choi and J. K. Jeong, Solution-processable LaZrOx/SiO2 gate dielectric at low temperature of 180 degrees C for high-performance metal oxide field-effect transistors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Jung, J.-S. Lee, J.-H. Oh, S.-W. Moon and S.-D. Kim, Method of low-temperature conversion of pehydropolysilazane into amorphous SiOx in aqueous solutions, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2010, 49, 111505 CrossRef .
B.-H. Ryu and D.-E. Kim, Development of highly durable and low friction micro-structured PDMS coating based on bio-inspired surface design, CIRP Ann., 2015, 64, 519 CrossRef .
T. Tanaka, K. Hanaoka, M. Yamaguchi, T. Shindo, K.-H. Kunzelmann and T. Teranaka, Silica film coating method for veneering resin composite, Dent. Mater. J., 2011, 30, 170 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Hulai and Y. A. Serednyts’kyi, Effect of silazane catalysts on properties of organosilicone lacquer coatings, Mater. Sci., 1999, 35, 118 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marceaux, C. Bressy, F.-X. Perrin, C. Martin and A. Margaillan, Development of polyorganosilazane–silicone marine coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2014, 77, 1919 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morlier, S. Cros, J.-P. Garandet and N. Alberola, Structural properties of ultraviolet cured polysilazane gas barrier layers on polymer substrates, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 550, 85 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bauer, U. Decker, A. Dierdorf, H. Ernst, R. Heller, H. Liebe and R. Mehnert, Preparation of moisture curable polysilazane coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2005, 53, 183 CrossRef CAS .
S. Müller, Y. de Hazan and D. Penner, Effect of temperature, humidity and aminoalkoxysilane additive on the low temperature curing of polyorganosilazane coatings studied by IR spectroscopy, gravimetric and evolved gas analysis, Prog. Org. Coat., 2016, 97, 133 CrossRef .
A. Morlier, S. Cros, J.-P. Garandet and N. Alberola, Thin gas-barrier silica layers from perhydropolysilazane obtained through low temperature curings, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 524, 62 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakajima, H. Uchiyama, T. Kitano, H. Kozuka and G. Soraru, Conversion of solution-derived perhydropolysilazane thin films into silica in basic humid atmosphere at room temperature, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 96, 2806 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kozuka, M. Fujita and S. Tamoto, Polysilazane as the source of silica, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2008, 48, 148 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kozuka, K. Nakajima and H. Uchiyama, Superior properties of silica thin films prepared from perhydropolysilazane solutions at room temperature in comparison with conventional alkoxide-derived silica gel films, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kubo and H. Kozuka, Conversion of perhydropolysilazane-to-silica thin films by exposure to vapor from aqueous ammonia at room temperature, Nippon Seramikkusu Kyokai Gakujutsu Ronbunshi, 2006, 114, 517 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kubo, E. Tadaoka and H. Kozuka, Formation of silica coating films from spin-on polysilazane at room temperature and their stability in hot water, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 635 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kubo, E. Tadaoka and H. Kozuka, Preparation of hot water-resistant silica thin films from polysilazane solution at room temperature, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 31, 257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Monti, B. Dal Bianco, R. Bertoncello and S. Voltolina, New protective coatings for ancient glass, J. Cult. Herit., 2008, 9, e143–e145 CrossRef .
A. Yamano and H. Kozuka, Preparation of silica coatings heavily doped with spiropyran using perhydropolysilazane as the silica source and their photochromic properties, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 5769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-G. Lee, The effects of C on the low-temperature formation and the properties of the spin-on dielectric films used for sub-50 nm technology and beyond, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 3003 CrossRef CAS .
L. Prager, U. Helmstedt, H. Herrnberger, O. Kahle, F. Kita, M. Münch, A. Pender, A. Prager, J. W. Gerlach and M. Stasiak, Photochemical approach to high-barrier films for the encapsulation of flexible laminary electronic devices, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 570, 87 CrossRef CAS .
L. Prager, A. Dierdorf, H. Liebe, S. Naumov, S. Stojanovic, R. Heller, L. Wennrich and M. Buchmeiser, Conversion of perhydropolysilazane into a SiOx network triggered by vacuum ultraviolet irradiation: access to flexible, transparent barrier coatings, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 8522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Prager, L. Wennrich, R. Heller, W. Knolle, S. Naumov, A. Prager, D. Decker, H. Liebe and M. R. Buchmeiser, Vacuum-UV irradiation-based formation of methyl-Si-O-Si networks from poly(1,1-dimethylsilazane-co-1-methylsilazane), Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Naganuma, T. Horiuchi, C. Kato and S. Tanaka, Low-temperature synthesis of silica coating on a poly(ethylene terephthalate) film from perhydropolysilazane using vacuum ultraviolet light irradiation, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 225, 40 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Naganuma, S. Tanaka, C. Kato and T. Shindo, Formation of silica coatings from perhydropolysilazane using vacuum ultraviolet excimer lamp, Nippon Seramikkusu Kyokai Gakujutsu Ronbunshi, 2004, 112, 599 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kato, S. Tanaka, Y. Naganuma and T. Shindo, Room temperature photochemical fabrication of silica glass coatings using vacuum ultraviolet excimer lamps, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2003, 16, 163 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morlier, S. Cros, J.-P. Garandet and N. Alberola, Gas barrier properties of solution processed composite multilayer structures for organic solar cells encapsulation, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 115, 93 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohishi, S. Sone and K. Yanagida, Preparation and gas barrier characteristics of polysilazane-derived silica thin films using ultraviolet irradiation, Mater. Sci. Appl., 2014, 05, 105 CAS .
Y. Kobayashi, H. Yokota, Y. Fuchita, A. Takahashi and Y. Sugahara, Characterization of gas barrier silica coatings prepared from perhydropolysilazane films by vacuum ultraviolet irradiation, Nippon Seramikkusu Kyokai Gakujutsu Ronbunshi, 2013, 121, 215 CrossRef CAS .
L. Blankenburg and M. Schrödner, Perhydropolysilazane derived silica for flexible transparent barrier foils using a reel-to-reel wet coating technique, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2015, 275, 193 CrossRef CAS .
T. Scherzer, G. Mirschel, K. Heymann, L. Prager and M. R. Buchmeiser, Determination of the thickness of silazane-based SiO(x) coatings in the submicrometer range by near-infrared reflection spectroscopy, Appl. Spectrosc., 2009, 63, 239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Chandra and T. E. Martin, US Pat., US 5059448 A,  1990 .
M. Schulz, Polymer derived ceramics in MEMS/NEMS, Adv. Appl. Ceram., 2013, 108, 454 CrossRef .
T. A. Pham, P. Kim, M. Kwak, K. Y. Suh and D.-P. Kim, Inorganic polymer photoresist for direct ceramic patterning by photolithography, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4021 RSC .
H.-J. Lee, T.-H. Yoon and D.-P. Kim, Fabrication of microfluidic channels derived from a UV/thermally cured preceramic polymer via a soft lithographic technique, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 2892 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Shelekhin, E. J. Grosgogeat and S.-T. Hwang, Gas separation properties of a new polymer/inorganic composite membrane, J. Membr. Sci., 1991, 66, 129 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Yang, J. Liu, S. Fan and L. cheng, Fabrication of oxidation protective coatings on C/C–SiC brake materials at room temperature, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 207, 467 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schulz, M. Börner, J. Göttert, T. Hanemann, J. Haußelt and G. Motz, Cross linking behavior of preceramic polymers effected by UV- and synchrotron radiation, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2004, 6, 676 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, H. Quan, G. Xu and D.-P. Kim, Polyvinylsilazane layer coating and its application in poly(dimethylsiloxane) microchip electrophoresis, Microchem. J., 2013, 110, 753 CrossRef CAS .
P. Colombo, A. Martucci, O. Fogato and P. Villoresi, Silicon carbide films by laser pyrolysis of polycarbosilane, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 84, 224 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tangermann-Gerk, G. Barroso, B. Weisenseel, P. Greil, T. Fey, M. Schmidt and G. Motz, Laser pyrolysis of an organosilazane-based glass/ZrO2 composite coating system, Mater. Des., 2016, 109, 644 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Wach, M. Sugimoto, A. Idesaki and M. Yoshikawa, Molecular sieve SiC-based membrane for hydrogen separation produced by radiation curing of preceramic polymers, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2007, 140, 81 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Wach, M. Sugimoto and M. Yoshikawa, Development of silicon carbide coating on Al2O3 ceramics from precursor polymers by radiation curing, Key Eng. Mater., 2006, 317–318, 573 CAS .
R. A. Wach, M. Sugimoto and M. Yoshikawa, Formation of silicone carbide membrane by radiation curing of polycarbosilane and polyvinylsilane and its gas separation up to 250°C, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 275 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Pivin and P. Colombo, Ceramic coatings by ion irradiation of polycarbosilanes and polysiloxanes, J. Mater. Sci., 1997, 32, 6163 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Pivin and P. Colombo, Ceramic coatings by ion irradiation of polycarbosilanes and polysiloxanes, J. Mater. Sci., 1997, 32, 6175 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Pivin, P. Colombo and G. D. Sorarù, Comparison of ion irradiation effects in silicon-based preceramic thin films, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 83, 713 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Pivin, P. Colombo and M. Tonidandel, Ion irradiation of preceramic polymer thin films, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 79, 1967 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Pivin, M. Sendova-Vassileva, P. Colombo and A. Martucci, Photoluminescence of composite ceramics derived from polysiloxanes and polycarbosilanes by ion irradiation, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2000, 69–70, 574 CrossRef .
Y. Jeong, C. Pearson, H.-G. Kim, M.-Y. Park, H. Kim, L.-M. Do and M. C. Petty, Optimization of a solution-processed SiO2 gate insulator by plasma treatment for zinc oxide thin film transistors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jeong, C. Pearson, H.-G. Kim, M.-Y. Park, H. Kim, L.-M. Do and M. C. Petty, Solution-processed SiO2 gate insulator formed at low temperature for zinc oxide thin-film transistors, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 36083 RSC .
K.-S. Park, P.-S. Ko and S.-D. Kim, Effects of N2O plasma treatment on perhydropolysilazane spin-on-dielectrics for inter-layer-dielectric applications, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 551, 57 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bouyer, G. Schiller, M. Müller and R. H. Henne, Thermal plasma chemical vapor deposition of Si-based ceramic coatings from liquid precursors, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2001, 21, 523 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Brooks and D. W. Hess, Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition of silicon nitride from 1,1,3,3,5,5-hexamethylcyclotrisilazane and ammonia, Thin Solid Films, 1987, 153, 521 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Chang, C.-Y. Chang and J. Leu, Optical properties of plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposited SiCxNy films by using silazane
precursors, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 636, 671 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Fainer, Y. M. Rumyantsev, M. L. Kosinova, G. S. Yurjev, E. A. Maximovskii and F. A. Kuznetsov, The investigation of properties of silicon nitride films obtained by RPECVD from hexamethyldisilazane, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1997, 113–114, 614 CrossRef .
K. Jhansirani, R. S. Dubey, M. A. More and S. Singh, Deposition of silicon nitride films using chemical vapor deposition for photovoltaic applications, Results Phys., 2016, 6, 1059 CrossRef .
F. Maury, Z. Hatim, A. Reynes and R. Morancho, Pyrolysis of various organosilazanes used as single precursor of SiNxCy, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1989, 17, 67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mukherjee, A. Ranjan, A. K. Saxena, P. K. Das and R. Banerjee, Liquid polycarbosilane derived SiC coating on silicon (111) wafer for enhanced mechanical properties, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 270, 219 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ladwig, S. Babayan, M. Smith, M. Hester, W. Highland, R. Koch and R. Hicks, Atmospheric plasma deposition of glass coatings on aluminum, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2007, 201, 6460 CrossRef CAS .

          U. Krüger and R. Ullrich, Germany Pat., DE 102005031101 B3,  2005 .
M. Esfandeh, S. M. Mirabedini, S. Pazokifard and M. Tari, Study of silicone coating adhesion to an epoxy undercoat using silane compounds, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 302, 11 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lei, J. Shi, X. Wang, D. Liu and H. Xu, Microstructure and electrochemical behavior of cerium conversion coating modified with silane agent on magnesium substrates, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 376, 161 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tashiro, M. Nakaya and A. Hotta, Enhancement of the gas barrier property of polymers by DLC coating with organosilane interlayer, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2013, 35, 7 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. van Ooij, D. Zhu, M. Stacy, A. Seth, T. Mugada, J. Gandhi and P. Puomi, Corrosion protection properties of organofunctional silanes, Tsinghua Sci. Technol., 2005, 10, 639 CAS .
Merck KGaA, https://www.merck-performance-materials.com, (accessed December 2017).
S.-D. Kim, P.-S. Ko and K.-S. Park, Perhydropolysilazane spin-on dielectrics for inter-layer-dielectric applications of sub-30 nm silicon technology, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2013, 28, 35008 CrossRef .
G. Barroso, Q. Li, G. Motz and R. K. Bordia, Polymer-derived ceramic and ceramic-like coatings: Innovative solutions for real problems, Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., 2017, 96, 42 CAS .
P. C. Ricci, G. Gulleri, F. Fumagalli, C. M. Carbonaro and R. Corpino, Optical characterization of polysilazane based silica thin films on silicon substrates, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 265, 470 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohishi, Gas barrier characteristics of a polysilazane film formed on an ITO-coated PET substrate, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2003, 330, 248 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, M. Li, C. Xu and Y. Luo, Perhydropolysilazane derived silica coating protecting Kapton from atomic oxygen attack, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 1063 CrossRef CAS .
S. Duo, Y. Chang, T. Liu and H. Zhang, Atomic oxygen erosion resistance of polysiloxane/POSS hybrid coatings on Kapton, Phys. Procedia, 2013, 50, 337 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and R.-M. Chen, TiO2-Siloxane Thermal Control Coatings for Protection of Spacecraft Polymers, Chin. J. Aeronaut., 2004, 17, 53 CrossRef .
M. Günthner, M. Pscherer, C. Kaufmann and G. Motz, High emissivity coatings based on polysilazanes for flexible Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin-film solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 123, 97 CrossRef .
H. Nagayoshi and C. Hagiwara, Effective liquid source SiO2 passivation on n-type silicon
using perhydropolysilazane, Energy Procedia, 2015, 77, 822 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Yoon, G.-R. Lee and D.-Y. Khang, Contact-printed ultrathin siloxane passivation layer for high-performance Si-PEDOT, Microelectron. Eng., 2017, 170, 1 CrossRef CAS .
B. Orel, H. Spreizer, L. Slemenik Perše, M. Fir, A. Šurca Vuk, D. Merlini, M. Vodlan and M. Köhl, Silicone-based thickness insensitive spectrally selective (TISS) paints as selective paint coatings for coloured solar absorbers (Part I), Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 93 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chao and D.-S. Tsai, Si-Al-C gas separation membranes derived from polydimethylsilane and aluminum acetylacetonate, J. Membr. Sci., 2001, 192, 209 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Chen and D.-S. Tsai, Permeation properties of microporous membranes prepared via coating of evaporated polydimethylsilane, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 237, 163 CrossRef CAS .
B. Elyassi, M. Sahimi and T. T. Tsotsis, Silicon carbide membranes for gas separation applications, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 288, 290 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Lee and D.-S. Tsai, A hydrogen-permselective silicon oxycarbide membrane derived from polydimethylsilane, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1999, 82, 2796 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Lee and D.-S. Tsai, Synthesis and permeation properties of silicon–carbon-based inorganic membrane for gas separation, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2001, 40, 612 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, K. Kusakabe and S. Morooka, Preparation of thermostable amorphous Si-C-O membrane and its application to gas separation at elevated temperature, J. Membr. Sci., 1996, 118, 159 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagano, K. Sato, T. Saitoh and Y. Iwamoto, Gas permeation properties of amorphous SiC membranes synthesized from polycarbosilane without oxygen-curing process, Nippon Seramikkusu Kyokai Gakujutsu Ronbunshi, 2006, 114, 533 CrossRef CAS .
H. Suda, H. Yamauchi, Y. Uchimaru, I. Fujiwara and K. Haraya, Structural evolution during conversion of polycarbosilane precursor into silicon carbide-based microporous membranes, Nippon Seramikkusu Kyokai Gakujutsu Ronbunshi, 2006, 114, 539 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kusakabe, Z. Y. Li, H. Maeda and S. Morooka, Preparation of supported composite membrane by pyrolysis of polycarbosilane for gas separation at high temperature, J. Membr. Sci., 1995, 103, 175 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and S.-T. Hwang, Gas separation by silicon based inorganic membrane at high temperature, J. Membr. Sci., 1992, 66, 119 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and S.-T. Hwang, Preparation and characterization of silicon based inorganic membrane for gas separation, J. Membr. Sci., 1991, 59, 331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Günthner, T. Kraus, A. Dierdorf, D. Decker, W. Krenkel and G. Motz, Advanced coatings on the basis of Si©N precursors for protection of steel against oxidation, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 29, 2061 CrossRef .
J. Bill and D. Heimann, Polymer-derived ceramic coatings on C/C-SiC composites, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 16, 1115 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hasemann, T. Baumann, S. Dieck, S. Rannabauer and M. Krüger, Polymer-derived ceramics as innovative oxidation barrier coatings for Mo-Si-B alloys, Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 2015, 46, 1455 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, S. Hoshii and T. Muto, Characteristics of polysilazane compound and its application as coating for carbon material, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2002, 21, 757 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Yang, L. Cheng and Y. Wang, Fabrication of SiCN–Sc2Si2O7 coatings on C/SiC composites at low temperatures, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 32, 705 CrossRef CAS .
G. Motz, T. Kabelitz and G. Ziegler, Polymeric and ceramic-like SiCN coatings for protection of (light) metals against oxidation and corrosion, Key Eng. Mater., 2004, 264–268, 481 CAS .
F. Riffard, E. Joannet, H. Buscail, R. Rolland and S. Perrier, Beneficial effect of a pre-ceramic polymer coating on the protection at 900 °C of a commercial AISI 304 stainless steel, Oxid. Met., 2017, 88, 211 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, Z. Feng, S. Hu and Y. Zhang, Preparation and anti-oxidation characteristics of ZrSiO4–SiBCN(O) amorphous coating, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 331, 490 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, J. Unger, J. D. Torrey, B. D. Flinn and R. K. Bordia, Corrosion resistant polymer derived ceramic composite environmental barrier coatings, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 34, 3597 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Corral and R. E. Loehman, Ultra-high-temperature ceramic coatings for oxidation protection of carbon–carbon composites, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 1495 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pavese, P. Fino, C. Badini, A. Ortona and G. Marino, HfB2/SiC as a protective coating for 2D Cf/SiC composites, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2008, 202, 2059 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Zhang, Q. Liu, L. Cheng and Y. Wang, Polymer-derived SiOC-barium-strontium aluminosilicate coatings as an environmental barrier for C/SiC composites, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 4148 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Manocha and S. M. Manocha, Studies on solution-derived ceramic coatings for oxidation protection of carbon-carbon composites, Carbon, 1995, 33, 435 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Nguyen, J. W. Bang, A. S. Bin, S.-R. Kim, Y. Kim, K. H. Hwang, V.-H. Pham and W.-T. Kwon, Novel polymer-derived ceramic environmental barrier coating system for carbon steel in oxidizing environments, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2017, 37, 2001 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Torrey and R. K. Bordia, Mechanical properties of polymer-derived ceramic composite coatings on steel, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 28, 253 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sugama and N. Carciello, Pre-ceramic polysilazane coatings for cold-rolled steels, Mater. Lett., 1992, 14, 322 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Beccaria, G. Padeletti, G. Montesperelli and L. Chiaruttini, The effect of pretreatments with siloxanes on the corrosion resistance of aluminium in NaCl solution, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1999, 111, 240 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Y. Cui, S.-D. Gao, P.-P. Li, R.-C. Zeng, F. Zhang, S.-Q. Li and E.-H. Han, Corrosion resistance of a self-healing micro-arc oxidation/polymethyltrimethoxysilane composite coating on magnesium alloy AZ31, Corros. Sci., 2017, 118, 84 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, F. Zhang, L. Song, R.-C. Zeng, S.-Q. Li and E.-H. Han, Corrosion resistance of ceria/polymethyltrimethoxysilane modified magnesium hydroxide coating on AZ31 magnesium alloy, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2017, 328, 121 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. G. Hansal, S. Hansal, M. Pölzler, A. Kornherr, G. Zifferer and G. E. Nauer, Investigation of polysiloxane coatings as corrosion inhibitors of zinc surfaces, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 200, 3056 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lampert, A. H. Jensen, R. U. Din and P. Møller, Hydrogen silsesquioxane based silica glass coatings for the corrosion protection of austenitic stainless steel, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2016, 307, 879 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tiwari and L. H. Hihara, High performance reaction-induced quasi-ceramic silicone conversion coating for corrosion protection of aluminium alloys, Prog. Org. Coat., 2010, 69, 16 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, G.-H. Lv, C. Ji and S.-Z. Yang, Application of plasma polymerized siloxane films for the corrosion protection of titanium alloy, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 2505 CrossRef CAS .
D. Akuzov, T. Vladkova, G. Zamfirova, V. Gaydarov, M. V. Nascimento, N. Szeglat and I. Grunwald, Polydimethyl siloxane coatings with superior antibiofouling efficiency in laboratory and marine conditions, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 103, 126 CrossRef CAS .
I. O. Arukalam, E. E. Oguzie and Y. Li, Fabrication of FDTS-modified PDMS-ZnO nanocomposite hydrophobic
coating with anti-fouling capability for corrosion protection of Q235 steel, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 484, 220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-C. Cho, C.-W. Chang-Jian, H.-C. Chen, K.-S. Chuang, J.-H. Zheng, Y.-S. Hsiao, K.-C. Lee and J.-H. Huang, Robust multifunctional superhydrophobic coatings with enhanced water/oil separation, self-cleaning, anti-corrosion, and anti-biological adhesion, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 314, 347 CrossRef CAS .
N. Filip, A. Pustam, V. Ells, K. M. T. Grosicki, J. Yang, I. Oguejiofor, C. D. Bishop, M. E. DeMont, T. Smith-Palmer and R. C. Wyeth, Fouling-release and chemical activity effects of a siloxane-based material on tunicates, Mar. Environ. Res., 2016, 116, 41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Cross, R. Raj, S. V. Prasad and D. R. Tallant, Synthesis and tribological behavior of silicon oxycarbonitride thin films derived from poly(urea)methyl vinyl silazane, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2006, 3, 113 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Mucalo, N. B. Milestone, I. C. Vickridge and M. V. Swain, Preparation of ceramic coatings from pre-ceramic precursors, J. Mater. Sci., 1994, 29, 4487 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Mucalo and N. B. Milestone, Preparation of ceramic coatings from pre-ceramic precursors, J. Mater. Sci., 1994, 29, 5934 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, Y. Yu, X. Zhao, Y. Song, E. Lopez-Honorato, P. Xiao and D. Lai, Fabrication of silicon carbide (SiC) coatings from pyrolysis of polycarbosilane/aluminum, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2011, 21, 534 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abe, K. Kagayama, N. Takamura, T. Gunji, T. Yoshihara and N. Takahashi, Preparation and properties of polysilsesquioxanes, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2000, 261, 39 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, M. Gunthner, G. Motz, B. D. Flinn and R. K. Bordia, Control of surface energy of silicon oxynitride films, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Kohl, D. M. Malicky and A. M. Jones, Adhesion of epoxy (pseudobarnacles) to glass that has been treated with hydrophobic carbosilane-based coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 107, 1 CrossRef CAS .
R. Múgica-Vidal, F. Alba-Elías, E. Sainz-García and J. Ordieres-Meré, Atmospheric plasma-polymerization of hydrophobic and wear-resistant coatings on glass substrates, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 259, 374 CrossRef .
D. Aslanidou, I. Karapanagiotis and C. Panayiotou, Tuning the wetting properties of siloxane-nanoparticle coatings to induce superhydrophobicity and superoleophobicity for stone protection, Mater. Des., 2016, 108, 736 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. Zeng, H. Li, X. Lai and H. Xie, Effects of calcination temperature on the microstructure and wetting behavior of superhydrophobic polydimethylsiloxane/silica coating, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 445, 111 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Li, L. Ren, K. Zhu, Y. Zhao and X. Yuan, Self-crosslinking coatings of fluorinated polysiloxanes with enhanced icephobicity, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 639, 113 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Xu, K. Ben, Z. Chen, Y. Wang and Z. Guan, Transparent, durable and thermally stable PDMS-derived superhydrophobic surfaces, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 339, 94 CrossRef CAS .
M. Long, S. Peng, W. Deng, X. Yang, K. Miao, N. Wen, X. Miao and W. Deng, Robust and thermal-healing superhydrophobic surfaces by spin-coating of polydimethylsiloxane, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 508, 18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Martin and B. Bhushan, Transparent, wear-resistant, superhydrophobic and superoleophobic poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) surfaces, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 488, 118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kita, N. Kondo, H. Hyuga, Y. Izutsu and H. Kita, Study of modification on alumina surface by using of organosilicon polymer, Nippon Seramikkusu Kyokai Gakujutsu Ronbunshi, 2011, 119, 378 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kita, N. Kondo, Y. Izutsu and H. Kita, Investigation of the properties of SiC membrane on alumina by using polycarbosilane, Mater. Lett., 2012, 75, 134 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kita, N. Kondo, K. Sekine and H. Kita, Silicon carbide coating of the aluminum joined boron carbide by using polycarbosilane, Mater. Lett., 2013, 112, 8 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hoffmann, M. Feldmann and G. Ziegler, Sol–gel and precursor-derived coatings with cover function on medical alloys, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4034 RSC .
L. Biasetto, H. Elsayed, F. Bonollo and P. Colombo, Polymer-derived sphene biocoating on cpTi substrates for orthopedic and dental implants, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2016, 301, 140 CrossRef CAS .
A. Francis, R. Detsch and A. R. Boccaccini, Fabrication and cytotoxicity assessment of novel polysiloxane/bioactive glass films for biomedical applications, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 15442 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bakumov, K. Gueinzius, C. Hermann, M. Schwarz and E. Kroke, Polysilazane-derived antibacterial silver–ceramic nanocomposites, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 27, 3287 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, S. Chen, S. Jiang, Y. Mo, J. Luo, J. Tang and Z. Ge, Study of zwitterionic sulfopropylbetaine containing reactive siloxanes for application in antibacterial materials, Colloids Surf., B, 2011, 85, 323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. K. Lung, D. Liu and J. P. Matinlinna, Surface treatment of titanium by a polydimethylsiloxane coating on bond strength of resin to titanium, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., 2015, 41, 168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gadow and F. Kern, Liquid-phase coating of carbon fibers with pre-ceramic polymer precursors, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2002, 4, 883 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kern and R. Gadow, Liquid phase coating process for protective ceramic layers on carbon fibers, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2002, 151–152, 418 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kern and R. Gadow, Deposition of ceramic layers on carbon fibers by continuous liquid phase coating, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2004, 180–181, 533 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baklanova, L. Zhilitskaya and A. Titov, Organometallic polymer-derived interfacial coatings on carbon and SiC fibers, Prog. Org. Coat., 2009, 64, 216 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Chaudhry, H. Ho, L. T. Drzal, M. Harris and R. M. Laine, Silicon oxycarbide coatings on graphite fibers II, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1995, 195, 237 CrossRef .
M. Harris, T. Chaudhary, L. Drzal and R. M. Laine, Silicon oxycarbide coatings on graphite fibers, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1995, 195, 223 CrossRef .
A. Labouriau, T. Robison, C. Shonrock, S. Simmonds, B. Cox, A. Pacheco and C. Cady, Boron filled siloxane polymers for radiation shielding, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2017, 144, 288–294 CrossRef .
G. Barroso, T. Kraus, U. Degenhardt, M. Scheffler and G. Motz, Functional coatings based on preceramic polymers, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2016, 18, 746 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, G. Xu and X. Shen, Preparation and characteristics of thermal resistance polysiloxane/Al composite coatings with low infrared emissivity, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 486, 371 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, Y. M. Wang, Y. Liu, L. X. Guo, J. H. Ouyang, Y. Zhou and D. C. Jia, Dependence of infrared radiation on microstructure of polymer derived ceramic coating on steel, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 1 CrossRef .
Y. M. Wang, H. Tian, D. L. Quan, L. X. Guo, J. H. Ouyang, Y. Zhou and D. C. Jia, Preparation, characterization and infrared emissivity properties of polymer derived coating formed on 304 steel, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 206, 3772 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Blum, R. M. Platz and E. J. Crawford, Glass strengthening by polymer-derived ceramic coatings, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1990, 73, 170 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kawamura, J. Koga, T. Iwata, S. Yamanaka and M. Ono, Silicon carbide coating on alumina film using polycarbosilane, Nippon Seramikkusu Kyokai Gakujutsu Ronbunshi, 1991, 99, 94 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kinashi, S. Nakamura, Y. Ono, K. Ishida and Y. Ueda, Reverse photochromism of spiropyran in silica, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 213, 136 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. C. Esteves, J. Brokken-Zijp, J. Laven and G. de With, Light converter coatings from cross-linked PDMS/particles composite materials, Prog. Org. Coat., 2010, 68, 12 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, D. Seo, S. J. Lombardo, Z. C. Feng, J. K. Chen and Y. Zhang, Fabrication using filler controlled pyrolysis and characterization of polysilazane PDC RTD arrays on quartz wafers, Sens. Actuators, A, 2012, 175, 53 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gardelle, S. Duquesne, C. Vu and S. Bourbigot, Thermal degradation and fire performance of polysilazane-based coatings, Thermochim. Acta, 2011, 519, 28 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jou, C.-T. Sun and X. Chen, Silicon carbide films from polycarbosilane and their usage as buffer layers for diamond deposition, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2005, 14, 1688 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Lv, J. Xu, D. Peng, Y. Liu, J. Chen, X. Sun, C. Feng and C. Wei, Stainless steel mesh coated with MnO2/carbon nanotube and polymethylphenyl siloxane as low-cost and high-performance microbial fuel cell cathode materials, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 136 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, B. Reeja-Jayan, A. Liu, J. Lau, B. Dunn and K. K. Gleason, iCVD cyclic polysiloxane and polysilazane as nanoscale thin-film electrolyte, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kummer, G. Füldner and S. K. Henninger, Versatile siloxane based adsorbent coatings for fast water adsorption processes in thermally driven chillers and heat pumps, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2015, 85, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad, A. P. Gupta, E. Sharmin, M. Alam and S. K. Pandey, Synthesis, characterization and development of high performance siloxane-modified epoxy paints, Prog. Org. Coat., 2005, 54, 248 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ananda Kumar and T. S. N. Sankara Narayanan, Thermal properties of siliconized epoxy interpenetrating coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2002, 45, 323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ananda Kumar, T. Balakrishnan, M. Alagar and Z. Denchev, Development and characterization of silicone/phosphorus modified epoxy materials and their application as anticorrosion and antifouling coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2006, 55, 207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ammar, K. Ramesh, B. Vengadaesvaran, S. Ramesh and A. K. Arof, Amelioration of anticorrosion and hydrophobic properties of epoxy/PDMS composite coatings containing nano ZnO particles, Prog. Org. Coat., 2016, 92, 54 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kumar, M. Alagar and V. Mohan, Studies on corrosion-resistant behavior of siliconized epoxy interpenetrating coatings over mild steel surface by electrochemical methods, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2002, 11, 123 CrossRef CAS .
G. Canosa, P. V. Alfieri and C. A. Giudice, High-solids, one-coat paints based on aliphatic epoxy resin-siloxanes for steel protection, Prog. Org. Coat., 2014, 77, 1459 CrossRef CAS .
I. Díaz, B. Chico, D. de La Fuente, J. Simancas, J. M. Vega and M. Morcillo, Corrosion resistance of new epoxy–siloxane hybrid coatings. A laboratory study, Prog. Org. Coat., 2010, 69, 278 CrossRef .
M. Echeverría, C. M. Abreu, K. Lau and C. A. Echeverría, Viability of epoxy–siloxane hybrid coatings for preventing steel corrosion, Prog. Org. Coat., 2016, 92, 29 CrossRef .
C. Hu, G. Xu, X. Shen, C. Shao and X. Yan, The epoxy-siloxane/Al composite coatings with low infrared emissivity for high temperature applications, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 3459 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, A. Gu, G. Liang, Q. Guan and L. Yuan, Preparation and properties of novel high performance UV-curable epoxy acrylate/hyperbranched polysiloxane coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2012, 74, 142 CrossRef CAS .
G. Luciano, A. Brinkmann, S. Mahanty and M. Echeverría, Development and evaluation of an eco-friendly hybrid epoxy-silicon coating for the corrosion protection of aluminium alloys, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 110, 78 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qian, A. Mcintosh Soutar, X. H. Tan, X. T. Zeng and S. L. Wijesinghe, Two-part epoxy-siloxane hybrid corrosion protection coatings for carbon steel, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 5237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sangermano, R. Bongiovanni, G. Malucelli, I. Roppolo and A. Priola, Siloxane additive as modifier in cationic UV curable coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2006, 57, 44 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, M. T. Sears and M. D. Soucek, Siloxane modified cycloaliphatic epoxide UV coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 1999, 36, 89 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Yeh, H.-Y. Huang, C.-L. Chen, W.-F. Su and Y.-H. Yu, Siloxane-modified epoxy resin–clay nanocomposite coatings with advanced anticorrosive properties prepared by a solution dispersion approach, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 200, 2753 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, Z. F. Yue, X. Chen, S. F. Wen, L. Li and T. Feng, The protective and adhesion properties of silicone-epoxy hybrid coatings on 2024 Al-alloy with a silane film as pretreatment, Corros. Sci., 2016, 104, 84 CrossRef CAS .
Ł. Byczyński, M. Dutkiewicz and H. Maciejewski, The effect of epoxyurethane modification on surface and thermal properties of fluorinated epoxyfunctional siloxane high-solid coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 112, 118 CrossRef .
R. B. Bodkhe, S. J. Stafslien, J. Daniels, N. Cilz, A. J. Muelhberg, S. E. M. Thompson, M. E. Callow, J. A. Callow and D. C. Webster, Zwitterionic siloxane-polyurethane fouling-release coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2015, 78, 369 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Bodkhe, S. J. Stafslien, N. Cilz, J. Daniels, S. E. M. Thompson, M. E. Callow, J. A. Callow and D. C. Webster, Polyurethanes with amphiphilic surfaces made using telechelic functional PDMS having orthogonal acid functional groups, Prog. Org. Coat., 2012, 75, 38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barletta, S. Pezzola, V. Tagliaferri, F. Trovalusci and S. Vesco, Wear response and mechanical behaviour of silicone-based photoluminescent coatings, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 429, 1 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fu, Z. Yang, Z. Zheng and L. Shen, Properties of alkoxysilane castor oil synthesized via thiol-ene and its polyurethane/siloxane hybrid coating films, Prog. Org. Coat., 2014, 77, 1241 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ge, C. Huang, C. Zhou and Y. Luo, Synthesis of a novel UV crosslinking waterborne siloxane–polyurethane, Prog. Org. Coat., 2016, 90, 304 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ge and Y. Luo, Synthesis and characterization of siloxane-modified two-component waterborne polyurethane, Prog. Org. Coat., 2013, 76, 1522 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kozakiewicz, Polysiloxaneurethanes, Prog. Org. Coat., 1996, 27, 123 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kreider, K. Richter, S. Sell, M. Fenske, C. Tornow, V. Stenzel and I. Grunwald, Functionalization of PDMS modified and plasma activated two-component
polyurethane coatings by surface attachment of enzymes, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 273, 562 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santiago, L. Irusta, T. Schäfer, A. Corres, L. Martin and A. González, Resistance to protein sorption as a model of antifouling performance of poly(siloxane-urethane) coatings exhibiting phase separated morphologies, Prog. Org. Coat., 2016, 99, 110 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santiago, L. Martin, J. J. Iruin, M. J. Fernández-Berridi, A. González and L. Irusta, Microphase separation and hydrophobicity of urethane/siloxane copolymers with low siloxane content, Prog. Org. Coat., 2014, 77, 798 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Christopher, A. Pal, G. Mirchandani and T. Dhar, Synthesis and characterization of polystyrene-acrylate/polysiloxane (PSA/PSi) core shell polymers and evaluation of their properties for high durable exterior coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2014, 77, 1063 CrossRef CAS .
C. Esposito Corcione and M. Frigione, UV-cured siloxane-modified acrylic coatings containing birifrangent calcarenitic stone particles, Prog. Org. Coat., 2011, 72, 522 CrossRef .
C. Esposito Corcione, R. Manno and M. Frigione, Sunlight-curable boehmite/siloxane-modified methacrylic based nanocomposites as insulating coatings for stone substrates, Prog. Org. Coat., 2016, 95, 107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Esposito Corcione, R. Striani and M. Frigione, UV-cured siloxane-modified methacrylic system containing hydroxyapatite as potential protective coating for carbonate stones, Prog. Org. Coat., 2013, 76, 1236 CrossRef CAS .
C. Esposito Corcione and M. Frigione, Factors influencing photo curing kinetics of novel UV-cured siloxane-modified acrylic coatings, Thermochim. Acta, 2012, 534, 21 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hammer, F. C. dos Santos, B. M. Cerrutti, S. H. Pulcinelli and C. V. Santilli, Carbon nanotube-reinforced siloxane-PMMA hybrid coatings with high corrosion resistance, Prog. Org. Coat., 2013, 76, 601 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Harb, B. M. Cerrutti, S. H. Pulcinelli, C. V. Santilli and P. Hammer, Siloxane–PMMA hybrid anti-corrosion coatings reinforced by lignin, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2015, 275, 9 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kan, Q. Yuan, M. Wang and X. Kong, Synthesis of silicone–acrylate copolymer latexes and their film properties, Polym. Adv. Technol., 1996, 7, 95 CrossRef CAS .
J. Khanjani, S. Pazokifard and M. J. Zohuriaan-Mehr, Improving dirt pickup resistance in waterborne coatings using latex blends of acrylic/PDMS polymers, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 102, 151 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Kunst, H. R. P. Cardoso, C. T. Oliveira, J. A. Santana, V. H. V. Sarmento, I. L. Muller and C. F. Malfatti, Corrosion resistance of siloxane–poly(methyl methacrylate) hybrid films modified with acetic acid on tin plate substrates, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 298, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, W. Liu, N. Gao, H. Wang and K. Su, Synthesis and properties of a novel UV-cured fluorinated siloxane graft copolymer for improved surface, dielectric and tribological properties of epoxy acrylate coating, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 284, 683 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Zhang, L. Li and Y. Zhang, Study on the surface structure and properties of PDMS/PMMA antifouling coatings, Phys. Procedia, 2013, 50, 328 CrossRef CAS .
A. Camós Noguer, S. M. Olsen, S. Hvilsted and S. Kiil, Diffusion of surface-active amphiphiles in silicone-based fouling-release coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 106, 77 CrossRef .
A. Camós Noguer, S. M. Olsen, S. Hvilsted and S. Kiil, Field study of the long-term release of block copolymers from fouling-release coatings, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 112, 101 CrossRef .
A. I. Panou, K. G. Papadokostaki, P. A. Tarantili and M. Sanopoulou, Effect of hydrophilic inclusions on PDMS crosslinking reaction and its interrelation with mechanical and water sorption properties of cured films, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 1803 CrossRef CAS .
E. Miyazaki, M. Tagawa, K. Yokota, R. Yokota, Y. Kimoto and J. Ishizawa, Investigation into tolerance of polysiloxane-block-polyimide film against atomic oxygen, Acta Astronaut., 2010, 66, 922 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tiwari, R. Sugamoto and L. H. Hihara, Analysis of molecular morphology and permeation behavior of polyimide-siloxane molecular composites for their possible coatings application, Prog. Org. Coat., 2006, 57, 259 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Tsai, P.-C. Chiang, W.-T. Whang, C.-J. Ko and S.-L. Huang, Synthesis and characteristics of polyimide/siloxane hybrid films for reliability adhesion, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 200, 3297 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Tsai and C.-J. Ko, 
            In situ formation, surface characteristics, and interfacial adhesion of poly(imide siloxane)/tantalum oxide hybrid films, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 201, 4367 CrossRef CAS .
G. Verma, S. K. Dhoke and A. S. Khanna, Polyester based-siloxane modified waterborne anticorrosive hydrophobic coating on copper, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 212, 101 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Lee, K. Park, J.-D. Kim, T. Han, K. H. Ryu, H. S. Lim, D. R. Lee, Y.-J. Kwark and J. H. Cho, Interpenetrating polymer network dielectrics for high-performance organic field-effect transistors, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6968 RSC .
T. Coan, G. S. Barroso, R. A. F. Machado, F. S. de Souza, A. Spinelli and G. Motz, A novel organic-inorganic PMMA/polysilazane hybrid polymer for corrosion protection, Prog. Org. Coat., 2015, 89, 220 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Koo, S. G. Lee, H. Bong, Y.-J. Kwark, K. Cho, H. S. Lim and J. H. Cho, Robust multifunctional superhydrophobic organic–inorganic hybrid macroporous coatings and films, Polymer, 2014, 55, 2661 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Perrin, T. D. H. Nguyen and D. L. Nguyen, Formation, structure and antibacterial activities of silazane networks grafted with poly(ethylene glycol) branches, Prog. Org. Coat., 2015, 88, 92 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. B. Ribeiro, O. Flores, P. Furtat, C. Gervais, R. Kempe, R. A. F. Machado and G. Motz, A novel PAN/silazane hybrid polymer for processing of carbon-based fibres with extraordinary oxidation resistance, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 720 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Gilvan Barroso	Gilvan Barroso studied chemical engineering at the Federal University of Santa Catarina. In 2017, he received his doctoral degree from the University of Bayreuth for his work on thermal barrier coatings based on the polymer-derived ceramics technique, under supervision of Dr G. Motz and Prof. W. Krenkel. He has been a postdoctoral research associate at the chair of Ceramic Materials Engineering (CME) of the University of Bayreuth since December 2017. His research interests include polymeric and ceramic coatings and composite materials based on silicon polymers.
Quan Li	Quan Li has been a postdoctoral research associate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of Clemson University since June 2015. He received his PhD in Materials Science from the Northwestern Polytechnical University in March 2015. For his PhD, he worked on the electrical and electromagnetic properties of porous ceramics, polymer derived ceramics and ceramic matrix composites. His current research is on highly porous ceramics, environmental/thermal barrier coatings and functional properties of polymer derived ceramics. He is also exploring additive manufacturing and lithium ion battery anodes based on polymer derived ceramics. He is a member of the American Ceramic Society.
Rajendra K. Bordia	Rajendra K. Bordia is a Professor of the Materials Science and Engineering at Clemson University. His research is at the intersection of materials and mechanics and is currently focused on fundamental and applied studies in the processing and properties of complex material systems for energy and environmental applications. He is a Fellow of the American Ceramic Society; Fellow of the Indian Institute of Metals; an Academician in the World Academy of Ceramics; and recipient of the Humboldt Research award. He is an Associate Editor of the Journal of the American Ceramic Society; and Editor-in-Chief of the Ceramics International.
Günter Motz	Günter Motz studied chemistry at the University of Leipzig and received his PhD (synthesis and characterization of new silazane compounds) at University of Stuttgart in 1996. Afterwards he joined the University of Bayreuth for a postdoctoral research position. Since 1999 he has been working as the head of the PDC Group and got a permanent position in 2005 at the chair of Ceramic Materials Engineering. His research interests are focused on the development of new preceramic polymers, ceramic fibres, and polymer and ceramic coatings as well as functional ceramics. He is an author of more than 130 peer reviewed publications and patents.

 	Fig. 1  Examples of common families of silicon-based polymers and their fundamental chemical units.47	 

 	Fig. 2  Correlation of the temperature with the processing phases and mass changes occurring during PDC processing of a polycarbosilane under inert atmosphere. Based on Colombo et al.2 and Greil.53	 

 	Fig. 3  Density increase during conversion of a poly(organo)silazane into a SiCN ceramic (pyrolysis under protective atmosphere).	 

 	Fig. 4  Microstructure of the cross-section of a polysilazane-based coating with hexagonal BN passive filler on steel AISI 304 after pyrolysis in air at 500 °C for 1 h. Adapted with permission.66 Copyright © 2009, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  Coatings based on polysiloxane PHMS with active fillers after pyrolysis in air at 800 °C for 2 h: (left) TiSi2 as active filler (Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright © 2007, Materials Research Society.); (right) ZrSi2 as active filler (Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright © 2011, Elsevier Ltd.).	 

 	Fig. 6  Formation of silicate phases by reaction of a silazane and yttrium oxide active filler during pyrolysis in air in the temperature range of 1000–1400 °C for 1 h and at 1500 °C for 10 h (★ Y2O3; ● x1-Y2SiO5; □ x2-Y2SiO5). Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright © 2017, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 7  Microstructure of the cross-section of a polysilazane-based coating with ZrO2 passive filler and two types of glass on mild steel after pyrolysis at 700 °C for 1 h in air. Reproduced with permission of the American Ceramic Society.63	 
σt = Ec(αls − αlc)ΔT	(1)

 	Fig. 8  Types of fillers and their effects in the precursor-based coating systems.47	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the contact angle of a liquid with a solid surface.	 
WA = γSG + γLG − γSL	(3)
WA = γLG(1 + cosθ)	(4)

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of (a) the surface of a cold-rolled steel grade 441 as received; and (b) of the same steel with a polysilazane coating after pyrolysis at 500 °C in air for 1 h. Coating cracking and spallation on a depression at the substrate's surface is evident.47	 

 	Fig. 11  Principle and main characteristics of dip, spin and spray coating deposition methods.47	 

 	Fig. 12  Stainless steel pipe with PDC-based thermal barrier coating deposited onto the inside face by spray coating using a semi-automatic equipment and pyrolysis at 1000 °C in air for 1 h.47	 

 	Fig. 13  Dependency of hardness and Young's modulus with temperature and atmosphere during heat treatment of two polysilazane-based coatings on stainless steel. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright © 2012, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 14  Cross-section microstructure of a polysilazane-based coating with glass and ZrO2 as passive filler after laser pyrolysis (power = 7.7 W, speed = 14 mm s−1, hatching distance = 30 μm, cw-mode). Adapted with permission.186 Copyright © 2016, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 15  Comparison of the cross-section microstructure of monolithic samples from polysilazane with TiSi2 active filler after treatment at 1150 °C for 2 h by (left) conventional pyrolysis in a furnace under nitrogen atmosphere; and (right) plasma-assisted pyrolysis in cathode configuration under nitrogen plasma. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright © 2016, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 16  Electronic circuit with a polysilazane spin-on dielectric coating (aspect ratio larger than 20). Reproduced with permission of the American Ceramic Society.213 Courtesy of Merck KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 17  Protective effect of silicon-based ceramic coatings on metallic substrates: (left) oxidation protection of coatings based on the polysilazane PHPS with and without BN passive filler on mild steel (Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright © 2009, John Wiley and Sons.); (right) protection against hot concentrated sulfuric acid provided by coatings from polysiloxane PHMS and TiSi2 active filler of various thicknesses on stainless steel (Reproduced with permission.242 Copyright © 2014, Elsevier Ltd.).	 

 	Fig. 18  Evolution of the surface free energy of smooth polysilazane PHPS coatings in dependence with the temperature during thermal treatment in air. Reproduced with permission.266 Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Contact angle with water of coatings composed of pure PMMA, pure poly(organo)silazane HTT 1800, and of hybrids composed of 90 wt% PMMA and 10 wt% HTT1800, and 75 wt% PMMA and 25 wt% HTT1800 after treatment at 60 °C for 24 h. Reproduced with permission.353 Copyright © 2015, Elsevier Ltd.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
