Photocatalysis in organic and polymer synthesis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00185H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00185H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6165-6212Photocatalysis in organic and polymer synthesis

        
          
            Nathaniel 
            Corrigan
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Sivaprakash 
            Shanmugam
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiangtao 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Cyrille 
            Boyer
          
          
        
      *ab
aCentre for Advanced Macromolecular Design (CAMD), School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Australia, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: j.xu@unsw.edu.au; cboyer@unsw.edu.au
bAustralian Centre for NanoMedicine, School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Australia, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
Received 
      7th March 2016
    First published on 12th May 2016AbstractThis review, with over 600 references, summarizes the recent applications of photoredox catalysis for organic transformation and polymer synthesis. Photoredox catalysts are metallo- or organo-compounds capable of absorbing visible light, resulting in an excited state species. This excited state species can donate or accept an electron from other substrates to mediate redox reactions at ambient temperature with high atom efficiency. These catalysts have been successfully implemented for the discovery of novel organic reactions and synthesis of added-value chemicals with an excellent control of selectivity and stereo-regularity. More recently, such catalysts have been implemented by polymer chemists to post-modify polymers in high yields, as well as to effectively catalyze reversible deactivation radical polymerizations and living polymerizations. These catalysts create new approaches for advanced organic transformation and polymer synthesis. The objective of this review is to give an overview of this emerging field to organic and polymer chemists as well as materials scientists.
From left to right: Jiangtao Xu, Cyrille Boyer, Nathaniel Corrigan and Sivaprakash Shanmugam
Nathaniel Corrigan was born in Lismore, NSW, Australia in 1991. He completed his Bachelor of Chemical Engineering at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in 2014, with his honors project investigating catalyst-free visible light-induced RAFT polymerizations. He is currently undertaking a PhD under the supervision of A/Prof Cyrille Boyer at UNSW Australia, with his research focusing on photoredox catalysis for polymerization as well as other visible light-induced polymerization.Sivaprakash Shanmugam earned his BS in Biochemistry, with a minor in Chemistry, from Case Western Reserve University in 2013. He is currently a postgraduate student pursuing his PhD in Chemical Engineering at UNSW-Australia under the direction of A/Prof. Cyrille Boyer. His research focuses on the development of spatial, temporal, and sequence control of light-mediated RAFT polymerization.Jiangtao Xu received his PhD in polymer chemistry from Fudan University, China in 2007, where he focused on the kinetics and mechanism of reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization. Following the postdoctoral research in Centre of Advanced Macromolecular Design (CAMD), UNSW Australia from 2008–2010 and the University of Melbourne from 2011, he joined CAMD as research Fellow in 2013 working with A/Prof. Cyrille Boyer. His main research interests are living polymerization (methodology, kinetics and mechanism), green chemistry, photoredox catalysis, supramolecular self-assembly, precision polymer synthesis for nanomedicine and bioengineering applications. He has published over 50 journal articles and attracted over 1300 citations.Cyrille Boyer received his PhD from the University of Montpellier II (Ecole Nationale Superieure de Chimie de Montpellier, France) in 2006. At the end of 2006, he joined the Centre for Advanced Macromolecular Design (CAMD) as a senior research fellow. In 2013, Cyrille was promoted to Associate Professor at the University of New South Wales and received the UNSW Research Excellence Award at the Faculty of Engineering, in 2016 one of the six Prime Minister Prize for Science (Malcolm MacIntosh Prize), was a finalist of NSW innovation award in 2014. Cyrille's research interests mainly cover the use of photoredox catalysts to perform living radical polymerization and polymer post-modification, hybrid organic–inorganic nanoparticles for imaging, and energy storage. Cyrille has published over 150 research articles, including eight patents, which have gathered over 7000 citations.
1. Introduction
Natural photosynthesis is one of the most important and intricate processes used by nature to convert solar energy into chemical energy, which sustains life on Earth. Specifically, in plants, chlorophyll harvests light energy and activates complex chemical reactions allowing the generation of oxygen and synthesis of organic compounds for energy storage via the Calvin–Benson cycle.1 These organic compounds (carbohydrates and natural polymers) provide primary energy sources for other species (humans, animals and microorganisms) living on the planet. Inspired by this process, Ciamician proposed to use light to mediate chemical reactions using photocatalysts in 1912.2 Since then, tremendous efforts of utilizing various metallic and organic catalysts capable of absorbing light and mediating chemical reactions have been made for the production of pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals and advanced materials. Particularly, the recent progress in this area using environment-friendly visible light to mediate organic transformations has been promoted in organic chemistry by MacMillan,3 Stephenson,4 Yoon5 and many other researchers.  
The use of metallic and organic photoredox catalysts has been the subject of extensive research due to their ability to mediate complex reactions with high efficiency and minimum by-product formation. This property is due to these species high efficiency in the photoexcited state to donate or accept an electron from substrates via a photoinduced electron transfer (PET). The usefulness of PET reactions that can occur between photocatalysts and substrates has been demonstrated in a variety of chemical systems, with a large amount of research having been already conducted in the synthesis of organic molecules. Recent examples have shown that such catalysts could effectively mediate reactions which are impossible using conventional catalysts.
The preparation and post-functionalization of polymeric materials through PET and photoredox processes has also started to receive increased attention as the inherent benefits of these systems become known. Systems that utilise light in the visible region (400–800 nm) are cost effective and environmentally benign, and visible light induced systems also have the advantage of minimal side reactions due to the lack of visible light absorbance by organic compounds.
In this review we aim to highlight the advances in the rapid growth field of photoredox catalysis using a range of metallic and non-metallic compounds that can catalyze organic and polymer synthesis via photoinduced outer or inner sphere electron transfer processes. A number of powerful and useful synthetic methodologies will be outlined, which have been implemented with metallic photoredox catalysts as well as some examples of similar reactions that can be performed with organic photoredox catalysts in organic and polymer synthesis. The aim of this review is not intended to be a comprehensive review of photoredox mediated organic transformations, but rather a guide for readers to use the potential of these reactions for the preparation and post-modification of polymers. We have selected reactions catalyzed by these compounds, which could potentially find application in polymer chemistry.
2. General mechanism and photophysical properties of photocatalysts
The first step in photoredox catalysis is the absorption of a photon by the photoredox catalyst around the visible or UV region to promote an electron from a low-lying energy level to a more energetic molecular orbital, producing an excited state molecular species. In the case of ruthenium and iridium polypyridyl complexes, one electron from the metal center of the complex is promoted to a ligand-centered π* orbital (metal-to-ligand charge transfer, MLCT), to give a long-lived photoexcited species (*PCn) that can be reduced or oxidized very easily compared to the ground state species. Similarly, non-metallic photosensitisers absorb light in UV or visible regions to promote electrons from low to high energy molecular orbitals, and generate energetic photoexcited species. For both types of photocatalysts, the photoexcited species is sufficiently long lived (e.g. 1100 ns for *Ru(bpy)32)6,7 and robust to assure that bimolecular electron transfer reactions can compete with fluorescence, phosphorescence and other deactivation pathways.8
After light absorption the second step in photoredox catalysis is the photoexcited species performing redox reactions via two distinct pathways, dependent on the reaction conditions employed and the properties of the sensitizer. The first redox reaction pathways involves the reductive quenching of the excited state *PCn species by an electron donating species to yield PCn−1. The reduced species can undergo oxidation in the presence of suitable electron withdrawing groups to regenerate the original PCn complex and complete the catalytic cycle. The second redox pathway for the photoexcited species is via an oxidative quenching cycle, whereby the *PCn excited species is initially oxidized by an electron withdrawing species to give PCn+1. The oxidized photosensitizer can be reduced by compatible electron donating species to complete the catalytic cycle and regenerate the PCn species.
The utility of photoredox catalysts lies in their ability to act as both a single electron oxidant and single electron reductant for different substrates under disparate conditions. As such, an extremely large variety of ionic and free radical reactions can be initiated and mediated by photoredox catalysts. The photocatalytic cycle for the commonly employed photoredox catalyst tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium dichloride, (Ru(bpy)3Cl2), along with the redox potentials at various points in the cycle, is shown in Scheme 1. The redox potentials of other commonly employed photoredox catalysts employed in organic and polymer synthesis are presented in Table 1.
 Scheme 1  Oxidative and reductive quenching cycles for Ru(bpy)32+. Adapted from ref. 4 with permission from Royal Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Reduction potentials (V vs. standard calomel electrode (SCE)) of photoredox catalysts commonly employed in organic synthesis and polymer synthesis




Catalyst

E
ox* (PC+/PC*)

E
red* (PC*/PC−)

E
ox (PC+/PC)

E
red (PC/PC−)
Ref.




Ru(bpm)32+
−0.21
+0.99
+1.69
−0.91

9



Ru(bpz)32+
−0.26
+1.45
+0.86
−0.80

10 and 11



TPP
−0.40
+0.27
+0.75
−1.32

12



ZnPC
−0.46
+0.25
+0.68
−0.89

12



Rose Bengal
−0.68
+0.99
+1.09
−0.78

13



Chl a
−0.79
+0.22
+0.54
−1.11

12



Ru(bpy)32+
−0.81
+0.77
+1.29
−1.33

6 and 14



ZnTPP
−0.84
+0.27
+0.75
−1.32

12



Ru(phen)32+
−0.87
+0.82
+1.26
−1.36

6 and 14



Ir[dF(CF3)ppy]2(dtbbpy)+
−0.89
+1.21
+1.69
−1.37

15



Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)+
−0.96
+0.66
+1.21
−1.51

15 and 16



Cu(dap)2+
−1.43
—
+0.62
—

17



Eosin Y (EY)
−1.60
+1.18
+0.72
−1.14

18



Fluorescein
−1.61
+1.21
+0.83
−1.23

18




fac-Ir(ppy)3
−1.73
+0.31
+0.77
−2.19

19





The photophysical and photochemical properties of most photoredox catalysts have been thoroughly investigated, and show the ability to be tuned by alteration of the molecular structure. The bromination of the organic dye fluorescein to produce EY, for example, shifts the maximum absorption wavelength from 450 nm to 539 nm, but also reduces the maximum reduction potential.20 In metal porphyrins and phthalocyanines the electropositivity of the metal center contributes to the ease of redox reactions that occur on the ring, with more electropositive metals showing a tendency to be more easily reduced compared to less electropositive metals.21 Moreover, the alteration of peripheral substituents in metal and non-metal porphyrins and phthalocyanines also contributes the redox potentials of these photocatalysts.22–25 The effects of ligands on the redox potentials of transition metals ligated with polypyridyl compounds has been explored, with the trends being well described by Stephenson and Tucker.26 The electron density of both the metal center and the ligand have been shown to play important roles in determining the redox potentials of these materials, with increasing electron density of the metal center decreasing the oxidative ability of the catalyst, while increasing electron density of the ligand increases the reductive power of the complex (Fig. 1). In any case, the excitation of all photoredox catalysts affords these molecules with the additional energy that provides the enhancement of their redox properties, and allows the initiation of many chemical reactions to become more facile.4,20,21,26,27 It is also important to note that the choice of solvent in many photoredox catalysed organic and polymer synthesis systems can play an important role in determining the photoredox properties and, as such, the viability of reactions.27,28
 Fig. 1  Effects of ligands on reduction potential in ruthenium polypyridyl complexes. Reproduced from ref. 26 with the permission from American Chemical Society. 
3. Photoredox catalysis for organic synthesis
The majority of photoredox mediated organic synthetic transformations described in the literature utilise ligated transition metal complexes, especially those with ruthenium and iridium as the transition metal. In part, this is due to the ease of ligand alteration of these complexes and their relatively high redox potentials in the excited state compared with other transition metals (Table 1). The range of organic synthetic transformations that can be achieved with these complexes is vast and varied, but some inherent drawbacks including the cost of rare-earth metals and their toxicity have led to the search for compounds that can enact the same transformations without the associated problems. This section of the review will outline some interesting reactions that have been performed with ruthenium, iridium and other metallic photoredox catalysts as well as some examples of similar reactions that can be performed with organic photoredox catalysts. This section is not intended to be a comprehensive review of photoredox mediated organic transformations, but rather a guide to some reactions that are possible with photoredox catalysts. As polymer chemists, we have tried to highlight reaction manifolds that have been utilized in polymerization in one form or another and other reactions that we think are more interesting from our perspective. For more comprehensive reviews on photoredox mediated organic synthetic transformations, readers are directed to excellent reviews by Macmillan,29 Stephenson4,26 and others.30–33 For consistency, the organic transformations in this section are classified by catalyst type first, and then by the overall change in oxidation state of the substrate, rather than by the redox quenching pathway of the photoredox catalyst.
Ruthenium photoredox catalysts
Ruthenium polypyridyl complexes have been extensively studied for their ability to mediate organic transformations. Some examples of reactions in which the substrate is reduced, oxidized or is subject to a net neutral change in oxidation state are described below, with additional references for similar reaction manifolds provided for the interested reader.

Net reductive reactions. 
The use of photoredox catalysts in organic synthesis was initially coupled with sacrificial electron donors to quench the excited state photocatalyst, and reduce the substrate in so-called net-reductive reactions. Kellogg and coworkers presented one of the earliest photoredox-mediated transformations in 1978, when they reported the accelerated reduction of phenacyl sulfonium salts in the presence of the ruthenium polypyridyl complex, Ru(bpy)32+34,35 (Scheme 2). In deuterated acetonitrile (CD3CN), and with Hantzsch ester (diethyl 1,4-dihydro-2,6-dimethyl-3,5-pyridinedicarboxylate), the phenacyl product was formed in quantitative yield upon visible light irradiation, while the authors reported that neither Hantzsch ester nor sulfonium salt were able to quench the photoexcited *Ru(bpy)32+ species. The proposed mechanism for this reaction relies on the dehydrogenation of Hantzsch ester to a dihydropyridyl radical, which can subsequently reductively quench the excited state ruthenium species. After quenching, the strong oxidant Ru(bpy)3+ is able to reduce the sulfonium salt to an α-carbonyl radical to regenerate the ground state Ru(bpy)32+ species, with subsequent hydrogen abstraction from Hantzsch ester to the α-carbonyl radical completing the photocatalytic cycle. Notably, a similar system using Hantzsch ester was reported by Ohno and coworkers in 1986 for the desulfonylation of β-ketones, where carbon–sulfur bonds were reduced smoothly to carbon–hydrogen bonds via a photoredox mechanism.36
 Scheme 2  Reduction of phenacyl sulfonium salts mediated by Ru(bpy)32+. Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Following the work of Kellogg and coworkers, Pac and coworkers described the reduction of electron deficient olefins also mediated by Ru(bpy)3Cl2.37 Pac and coworkers then found that olefins with other electron withdrawing groups such as arenes, esters, ketones and nitriles were all capable of being reduced in similar net reductive reactions.38,39
In 1990 Fukuzumi and coworkers expanded upon their previous work with ruthenium complexes40,41 by demonstrating that Ru(bpy)32+ could be employed as a visible light photoredox catalyst for the two electron reduction of α-haloacetophenones to acetophenone, using 9,10-dihydro-10-methylacridine as a reductive quencher of the excited state *Ru(bpy)32+ species42 (Scheme 3). The generated oxidant, Ru(bpy)3+, was oxidised back to Ru(bpy)32+ by the one electron reduction of phenacyl bromide to furnish an α-carbonyl radical. This radical is then subject to a second reduction, with hydrogenation providing the product, acetophenone. This system is also of great interest due to the ability to exhibit control over the reductive or oxidative quenching pathway of the photocatalyst, by alteration of the reaction conditions. The addition of perchloric acid to the system allowed Fukuzumi to demonstrate the production of acetophenone via the oxidative rather than reductive quenching pathway of the excited state *Ru(bpy)32+ complex. Oxidative quenching by phenacyl halide, followed by the oxidation of dihydroacridine by Ru(bpy)33+ yields acetophenone, whilst regenerating the photocatalyst.
 Scheme 3  Two electron reduction of α-haloacetophenones to acetophenone via oxidative and reductive quenching of Ru(bpy)32+. 
In 2009, Stephenson and coworkers developed a generalized procedure for photoredox mediated dehalogenation reactions.43 Again Ru(bpy)32+ was used as the photoredox catalyst, with N,N-diisopropylethylamine (i-Pr2NEt) acting as a sacrificial electron donor for the reductive quenching of excited state *Ru(bpy)32+ species. Moreover, i-Pr2NEt was determined to act as the major source of hydrogen for the reduction of alkyl radicals, with formic acid or Hantzsch ester acting as the minor source of hydrogen for more, or less activated halogen substrates respectively. This reaction is characterized by mild reaction conditions, excellent chemo-selectivity and functional group tolerance as well as tolerance to protecting groups including silyl ethers and carbamates. Other groups have also investigated reductive dehalogenations mediated by ruthenium complexes.44
Stephenson and coworkers have also presented a protocol for the radical cyclization of indoles and pyrroles as well as cascade radical cyclization reactions using Ru(bpy)32+ mediated photoredox catalysis under visible light irradiation.45 Photoreductive coupling,46–48 cleavage,49 and other reductive reactions,50–57 as well as energy transfer reactions58,59 using ruthenium complexes have also been recently described by various research groups.


Net oxidative reactions. 
The previous set of reactions relied on the strong reduction potential of ruthenium complexes and an electron donor to initiate chemical reactions, however, with suitable electron acceptors net oxidative reactions can be realised using the same ruthenium complexes. One of the first oxidative reactions described in the literature was the oxidation of benzylic alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes, as outlined by Cano-Yelo and Deronzier in 198460,61 (Scheme 4). Aryl diazonium salts had previously been shown to be effective oxidative quenchers of *Ru(L)32+ species, to produce the strong oxidant Ru(L)33+ and a benzophenone radical (BP˙). Subsequent oxidation of a benzylic alcohol by this Ru(L)33+ species reformed the Ru(L)32+ species and generated the radical cation of benzylic alcohol. Single electron transfer to this radical and deprotonation by basic collidine furnished the final aldehyde. Quantitative yields were produced after irradiation by visible light at λ > 410 nm in exposure times as short as 20 minutes. Some more recent oxidative addition of aryldiazoniums have also been reported by Toste and coworkers.62
 Scheme 4  Oxidation of benzylic alcohols mediated by ruthenium complexes. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
The photocatalytic aerobic oxidation of α-aryl halogen derivatives mediated by Ru(bpy)32+ was shown to effectively produce the corresponding α-aryl carbonyl moieties in yields as high as 75%, by Jiao and coworkers.63 Notably, Jorgensen and coworkers have also utilized molecular oxygen as an oxidant in organic synthesis reactions mediated by ruthenium complexes when they demonstrated the hydroxylation of arylboronic acids in 2012.64
Another net oxidative reaction employing photoredox catalysis is the oxidation of amines to iminium ions (Scheme 5). Amines are generally very good electron donors and will readily donate an electron to a more oxidizing species, such as excited state *Ru(bpy)32+ species. The resultant aminium radical cation has significantly lowered C–H bond dissociation energies α- to the amine position, and direct hydrogen abstraction by a good hydrogen acceptor can produce the required iminium ion. Additionally, single electron oxidation of the initial amine lowers the pKa of the α-hydrogens and deprotonation can yield the iminium ion via an alternative route. These iminium ions are potent electrophiles and may be trapped by nucleophiles for the formation of new bonds at the α-position.
 Scheme 5  Amine oxidation to iminium ions. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission of Beilstein Publisher. 
This reaction mechanism has been utilized for a range of α-functionalization reactions with ruthenium polypyridyl complexes used as the photocatalyst, with products being generated in high yields. In 2010 Rueping and coworkers showed that Mannich products could be formed by the addition of ketones to photocatalytically generated iminium ions in the presence of a Lewis base, and the inclusion of L-proline in the mixture accelerated the reaction and gave the desired product in 87% yield66 (Scheme 6). Moreover, in 2012 Xia and coworkers demonstrated that a range of substituted tetrahydroisoquinolines could be effectively coupled with various enol silanes via this approach to again produce Mannich-type reactions products.67 Both of these systems employed mild reaction conditions, and irradiation with low intensity (1–13 W) light for only 4 hours was sufficient to generate the products in yields as high as 96% in some cases (Scheme 6).
 Scheme 6  Mannich products by trapping iminium ions. Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Iminium ions generated via photoredox catalysis have also been trapped by other substrates such as allylsilanes to produce α-allylamines,68 indoles to generate α-arylated amines,68,69 and others.70,71 Xiao and coworkers reported a variation of this reaction in 2011, for the intramolecular cyclization of diamines to produce highly substituted tetrahydroimidazoles.72 Visible light irradiation of Ru(bpy)32+ in the presence of oxygen, base and the diamine yielded the cyclized tetrahydroimidazole product in high yields (92%) and in a diastereomic ratio of 10:1. Wang and coworkers have also presented an aza-Henry type reaction in 2012, mediated by Ru(bpy)3Cl2.73
The higher reduction potential of amides compared to amines is a critical problem in the production of similar α-functionalized amide products and direct oxidation by commonly employed photoredox catalysts is not possible. Stephenson and coworkers overcame this problem in 2012 by using persulfate as an oxidative quencher of *Ru(bpy)32+ species to generate sulfate as well as a sulfate radical anion, capable of direct hydrogen atom abstraction from the amide.74 Oxidation of this dehydrogenated species by Ru(bpy)33+ was now facile, and Friedel–Crafts nucleophilic addition to the N-acyliminium species furnished the α-functionalized product.
As with net reductive reactions, a host of other ruthenium polypyridyl mediated net oxidative reactions have also been performed by various groups over the past 30 years but only a few are mentioned here in the interests of brevity. Some interesting reactions include the α-acylation of amines as realized through the merger of photoredox catalysis with N-heterocyclic carbine (NHC) catalysis by Rovis and DiRocco in 2012,75 enantioselective biaryl coupling reactions using the chiral ruthenium photocatalyst Δ-Ru-(menbpy)32+ by Ohkubo and coworkers,76,77 and a visible light induced oxidative [3+2] cycloaddition–aromatization sequence as utilized by Xiao and coworkers for the formation of polycyclic adducts using N-phenylmaleimide and other dipolarophiles including acrylates, alkynes and β-nitrostyrenes.78 The synthesis of (±)-tetrabenazine has also been described by Marvin and coworkers,79 and Wang and Li have also recently reported the synthesis of α,β-epoxy ketones from styrenes and benzaldehydes.80 Oxidative coupling81–84 and other oxidative reactions have also been described.85–94


Redox neutral reactions. 
The previous sets of reactions have involved the use of a sacrificial electron donor or acceptor to enact transformations, with the substrates undergoing an overall oxidation state change. The following reactions contrast these net reductive and net oxidative reactions in that the substrate undergoes a single electron oxidation and a single electron reduction at disparate points in the reaction, with the products having no net oxidation state change.
Following the early work of Barton and coworkers,95 Stephenson and coworkers have recently accomplished atom transfer radical addition (ATRA) reactions for a broad range of α-halocarbonyls and haloalkanes to several terminal alkenes, cyclic internal alkenes as well as terminal alkynes.96,97 Excited *Ru(bpy)32+ serves as the electron donor for the initial reduction of the atom transfer reagents, and addition to a π-bond generates a radical which can create the final product via two different pathways. The first pathway is termed radical-polar crossover, where the radical undergoes a single electron oxidation by the strong oxidant Ru(bpy)32+ to generate a carbocation. The halogen anion nucleophile is then able to trap this carbocation to form the final product (Scheme 7).
 Scheme 7  Photoinduced ATRA reactions. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
The alternate route for product formation of is via propagation of the radical with the initial halogen substrate, which also eliminates another radical capable of reaction with the π system. This radical propagation mechanism also relies on a sacrificial electron donor to reduce and thus regenerate the photo-catalyst. Evidence for these alternate reaction pathways have been provided, and both rely on the absence of good hydrogen donors which could provide the undesired product of net reduction.
The limited amount of photo-catalyzed enantioselective bond-forming processes has led the MacMillan group to investigate the merging of organocatalysis with photoredox catalysis following work by Nicewicz and MacMillan in 2008.98 Recognizing that electrophilic radicals readily undergo addition to olefins, the authors predicted that electron deficient radicals generated via photoredox catalysis may couple with electron rich enamines derived from a chiral imidazolidinone catalyst to achieve enantioinduction. Scheme 8 describes this reaction which involves the photocatalytic reductive cleavage of electron deficient alkyl bromide, by Ru(bpy)3+, to yield an electron deficient radical species. Meanwhile, imidazolidinone is capable of alkylating the aldehyde to furnish the enamine, which subsequently couples with the aforementioned electron deficient radical. Single electron transfer from the α-amino radical reductively quenches the excited state *Ru(bpy)32+ and generates an iminium cation. Subsequent hydrolysis releases the desired α-alkylated product and the original imidazolidinone to complete the organocatalytic cycle. Substitution at the β-position on the aldehyde was well tolerated, and alkylation with a range of α-bromocarbonyls including bromomalonates, ketones and esters effectively produced the α-alkylated aldehydes in good yields and with an enantiomeric excess higher than 90% in most cases.
 Scheme 8  Enantioselective alkylation of aldehydes via photoredox organocatalysis. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Many other groups have utilized this photocatalytic reaction manifold for the direct instalment of functional groups in place of simple C–H bonds on aryl compounds, and alteration of reaction conditions, reagents and catalysts has been critical in the realization of a wide array of products. The complete set of these reactions is beyond the scope of this review, but some notable examples have been mentioned for the interested reader.99–103
MacMillan's group has also presented the photoredox mediated trifluoromethylation of arenes and heteroarenes including pyrroles, indoles, furans, thiophenes and notably, more complex substituted arenes such as Lipitor, the drug commonly used to treat high cholesterol.104 The oxygenation of arenes has also been reported by Li and coworkers for a range of anisole derivatives.105 A range of other ruthenium photocatalyzed radical additions to nucleophiles with π systems have been reported, including fluoroalkylations49,106–121 and the arylation of styrenes and enol acetates122 among others.58,123–128 Again, some of these systems rely on the oxidative quenching of excited state *Ru(bpy)32+ by trifluoroiodomethane or an aryl diazonium salt, to produce an electron deficient radical which can undergo addition to the nucleophilic π systems previously mentioned.
Importantly, Yoon's group presented the anti-Markovnikov hydrothiolation of olefins (thiol–ene reaction) using ruthenium photocatalysts in 2012.129 The mechanism for this reaction is shown in Scheme 9 and relies on the strong reduction potential of excited state ruthenium complexes to oxidize a thiol moiety to its corresponding thiyl radical cation. From here the radical cation undergoes deprotonation to generate a thiyl radical which readily adds to alkenes with anti-Markovnikov selectivity. Hydrogen abstraction from the initial thiol substrate furnishes the hydrothiolated product and simultaneously generates another thiyl radical for alkene addition. The high efficiency of bond formation in this reaction was utilized for the production of a range of thiol coupling adducts with high yields. The authors outline the regeneration of the photoredox catalyst through oxidative quenching with oxygen.
 Scheme 9  Visible light mediated thiol–ene reaction. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Radical cyclization is another class of reaction which has been extensively studied since the seminal work of Krische and Bauld, in which they showed that cycloadditions were possible through the utilization of cobalt and copper complexes as catalysts.130–132 These systems were not photoredox catalyzed, but the formation of a radical anion intermediate led Yoon and coworkers in 2008 to experiment with ruthenium based photosensitizers in an effort to replicate the same species.133,134 Du and Yoon expanded on this work in 2009 by introducing a system capable of crossed intermolecular formal [2+2] cycloadditions135 (Scheme 10). The use of an aryl enone as one addition partner was required to accept an electron and form the radical anion intermediate, and the use of more reactive Michael acceptors as the other reaction partner was employed to avoid the undesired homodimerization of the aryl enone. The reaction products showed high yields and chemoselectivity, and were amenable to a range of electron rich or poor substrates, and also those with primary or secondary alkyl substitution at the β-position, but notably not tert-butyl substitution. Yoon's group and a host of others have presented many similar [2+2],136–138 [4+2],139–141 [2+2+2],142 [3+2],143–146 and other cycloadditions mediated by Ru(bpy)32+.147–149 Other net neutral organic transformations mediated by ruthenium complexes have also been described.80,83,150–154
 Scheme 10  Crossed intermolecular [2+2] cycloaddition. 

Iridium photoredox catalysts
Owing to the similar nature of ruthenium and iridium polypyridyl complexes, the range of reactions in organic synthesis that can be induced by excited state iridium complexes mirrors that of ruthenium complexes. For instance, multiple authors have shown that different photoredox catalysts can be utilized for the trapping of iminium ions to generate a vast array of products. In some cases the replacement of the ruthenium complex with a ligated iridium complex has made the organic reaction more facile, although the alteration of ligands on ruthenium complexes should theoretically have the same effect. Some commonly used iridium polypyridyl complexes are presented in Fig. 2 along with their relevant reduction potentials.
 Fig. 2  Reduction potentials (vs. SCE) of some iridium polypyridyl complexes commonly employed in organic synthesis. Adapted from ref. 26 with permission from American Chemical Society. 

Net reductive reactions. 
Stephenson and coworkers presented a reaction protocol for the reduction of unactivated aryl, alkyl and alkenyl iodides, as well as intramolecular cyclizations in 2012.155 The authors have outlined that only the most activated carbon–halogen bonds are able to be reduced by Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)PF6, but the unactivated species can be reduced by selection of transition metal complexes with appropriate ligands, i.e. fac-Ir(ppy)3, owing to its much higher reduction potential. Some products of these reductive radical cyclization reactions are presented in Scheme 11, along with their relevant yields. Notably, the same group has also presented a similar reaction protocol for cascade radical cyclizations utilizing both Ru(bpy)3Cl2 and fac-Ir(ppy)3,156 tandem radical cyclization/sigmatropic rearrangement reactions157 as well as a deoxygenation protocol for primary and secondary alcohols.158 Lee and Kim have also presented similar photocatalytic reductive transformations of organohalides using fac-Ir(ppy)3.159
 Scheme 11  Reductive radical cyclizations of aryl, alkyl and alkenyl iodides. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Following the work of Stephenson, Fensterbank and coworkers showed in 2011 that Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)PF6 could also be used as a photoredox catalyst for the reductive opening and subsequent C–C bond formation of α-ketoeopxides and α-ketoaziridines.160 Although this work as well as previous work by Yoon and coworkers describing photocatalytic reductive cyclization reactions using conjugated ketyl systems have been reported (vide supra), the direct utilization of ketyl radicals was relatively undeveloped until the work of Rueping and coworkers in 2015.161 The authors have outlined the use of tertiary amines (Scheme 12, A) as sacrificial reductants for excited state photoredox catalysts, with the amino radical cation being subsequently used for the formation of a carbonyl umpolung (Scheme 12, D) which renders the activation of ketone and aldehyde substrates less endergonic. Electron transfer from the reduced photoredox catalyst to carbonyl compounds is more facile as a result and the production of a broad range of diols with electron withdrawing and donating substituents was demonstrated with comparatively low (1 mol%) catalyst loading (Scheme 12).
 Scheme 12  Photoredox catalyzed reductive pinacol coupling of aldehydes and ketones. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
An alternate pathway for the activation of the carbonyl substrates through hydrogen bonding from an α-ammonium radical (Scheme 12, C) to the carbonyl oxygen also provided the required decrease in the energy barrier to allow for the facile reduction of the substrate. Moreover, the authors extended the pinacol coupling of aldehydes and ketones to include imines, providing a new route to the production of symmetric diamines. Other photocatalytic reductive organic transformations mediated by iridium complexes have been described.162–166


Net oxidative reactions. 
Ir[dF(CF3)(ppy)2](dtbbpy)PF6 has been used in the oxidative deprotection of para-methoxybenzyl (PMB) ethers, in conjunction with bromotrichloromethane as the stoichiometric oxidant.97 When the heteroleptic iridium complex (i.e. Ir[dF(CF3)(ppy)2](dtbbpy)PF6) is photoexcited, it is capable of reducing the bromotrichloromethane to a trichloromethane radical and bromide ion, as seen in Scheme 13. The resultant higher oxidation state iridium complex is now a strong oxidant and can remove a single electron from the PMB ether to give a radical cation, with subsequent hydrogen donation to the trichloromethane radical providing an oxocarbenium. From here hydrolysis releases the deprotected alcohol as well as the 4-methoxybenzaldehyde by-product.
 Scheme 13  Oxidative deprotection of para-methoxybenzyl (PMB) ethers using a heteroleptic iridium polypyridyl complex. Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
The photocatalytic trapping of iminium ions as previously described was first performed with iridium photocatalysts by Stephenson and coworkers in an aza-Henry type reaction.167 As with ruthenium based photoredox catalysts, a range of other reactions have been performed to trap iminium ions generated through photooxidation by iridium complexes.168–170 Notably Rueping and coworkers have presented an iridium polypyridyl catalysed oxidative Strecker reaction,171 as well as oxidative phosphonylations in 2011.172 A range of other oxidative photoredox transformations have also been achieved with iridium complexes.173–183


Redox neutral reactions. 
The ruthenium mediated intermolecular ATRA reactions described previously have also been performed by iridium polypyridyl photocatalysts, owing to their high redox potentials.96,97,184 Stephenson and coworkers have outlined the use of Ir[(dF(CF3)ppy)2(dtbbpy)]PF6 to functionalize a range of products from simple starting materials, and with outstanding reaction efficiency and atom economy.97 The authors have shown that a wide range of functional groups are well tolerated on the olefin including silyloxy and benzyl ethers, esters, alkyl bromides, enones, carbamates, free alcohols and aromatic rings, and also demonstrated that mono- and 1,1-disubstituted olefins were suitable reaction partners for diethyl 2-bromomalonate. Like previous examples, the final product can be furnished via two different reaction pathways (Scheme 14).
 Scheme 14  Intermolecular ATRA using iridium photoredox catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
In another interesting transformation, Zhu and coworkers have induced direct C–H difluoroalkylations of aldehyde derived hydrazones using iridium based photoredox catalysts.185 While many difluoroalkylations of carbon–carbon π bonds had been previously demonstrated, the authors present for the first time a protocol to access the difluoroalkylation of carbon–nitrogen π bonds through an aminyl radical/polar crossover mechanism (Scheme 15). The proposed mechanism starts with the reduction of the difluoro compound by the excited state iridium complex to generate a difluoro radical capable of reacting with the hydrazone across the carbon–nitrogen double bond. From here the radical adduct can reduce the oxidised iridium complex to regenerate the ground state photocatalyst and produce an aminyl cation, with subsequent tautomerisation and deprotonation of the aminyl cation furnishing the final product. Remarkably, the difluoroalkylation was well tolerated by aliphatic and (hetero)aryl aldehyde derived hydrazones.
 Scheme 15  Difluoroalkylation of hydrazones mediated by photoredox catalysis. Adapted from ref. 185 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Again, due to the similarity of aforementioned reactions, other net neutral reactions possible with iridium photoredox catalysts will only be mentioned here, including fluoro- and chloroalkylation and α-benzylation reactions, as described by MacMillan and coworkers104,186,187 and others,128,188–200 the synthesis of oxindoles201,202 and the tandem alkylation/nucleophilic trapping of imines.203 Some of the radical cyclization reactions similar to those described above also utilize iridium polypyridyl catalysts for transformation.134,204–206 Photogenerated α-amino radicals have been exploited for α-arylation of amines,207 as well as for radical conjugate addition to Michael acceptors.208 Other Michael additions have been described using iridium based photoredox catalysts.209,210 The generation of acyl radicals has also been described by Wallentin and coworkers.211 Moreover, redox neutral transformations using synergistic and other catalytic approaches have also been described.46,212–252

Other metallic photoredox catalysts
Although the majority of photoredox mediated reactions in organic synthesis have been performed by ruthenium and iridium complexes, other transition metals such as copper and palladium have been used either directly, or in conjunction with other photocatalysts, to enact transformations. For example, Cu(dap)2+ was used by Kern and Sauvage in 1987 for the dimerization of 4-nitrobenzyl bromide,17 as well as others.253 By using 2,9-bis(p-anisyl)-1,10-phenanthroline (dap), an encaging ligand which leads to copper(I) complexes with relatively long lived MLCT states, the coupling of nitrobenzyl halides was realised. Cu(dap)2+ has also been used for the allylation of α-halocarbonyls with allylstannanes254 (Scheme 16). The proposed reaction mechanism resembles previous ATRA systems in that the initial photoreduction of the carbonyl substrate produces a halogen anion as well as a carbon centered radical capable of reaction with other reaction components. This method provides an operationally simple alternative for the allylation of carbonyl compounds through nucleophilic addition of the carbon centered radical to the organostannane. The authors outlined the use of small quantities of the photoredox catalyst (1 mol%) for the allylation of a range of α-bromo- and α-chloroketones, as well as the double allylation of α,α-dibromo and α,α-dichloroketones to form the products in yields as high as 85% in a few hours.
 Scheme 16  Cu(dap)2+ mediated α-allylations of α-halocarbonyls. Reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Net neutral ATRA transformations have also been achieved with copper complexes, following an analogous reaction mechanism to that previously described for iridium and ruthenium complexes.254,255 Sanford and Ye have also reported the merger of photoredox catalysis with high-valent copper compounds for the trifluoromethylation of arylboronic acids,256 and other merged photocatalytic cycles have been presented for organic transformations.257–260 The C–H arylation of 2-arylpyridine has been successfully demonstrated by Sanford and coworkers in 2011, through the merger of ruthenium mediated photo-catalysis and palladium catalysis.261 Oxidative coupling for C–H functionalization has recently been reviewed by Lei and coworkers, including some notable photo-catalyzed examples.262 Thiol–ene reactions have also been presented by Robinson and coworkers using a bismuth based photoredox catalyst.263
In another interesting transformation, the dimerization of α-methylstyrene has been achieved by Akita and coworkers through the use of a novel bimetallic photoinitiator.264 The authors have shown that the combination of a photo-sensitizing ruthenium unit with a palladium center leads to the selective photo-catalytic dimerization of α-methylstyrene to yield 2,4-diphenyl-4-methyl-1-pentene. The use of this bimetallic complex suppressed undesired formation of oligomers and polymerization products. Other bi-metallic compounds have also been investigated.265

Metallic porphyrins. 
Porphyrins are a class of macrocyclic organic compounds composed of four modified pyrrole sub-units, interconnected at their α-carbon. Although porphyrins have been extensively studied in medicine, molecular electronics and solar cells, the utilization of electron transfer from excited state metallic porphyrins for organic synthesis and polymerization has garnered significantly less attention. The macrocyclic ring in metallic porphyrins can undergo a range of electron transfer processes, depending on the reaction conditions employed and the nature of the metal center, and also exhibits a greater affinity for both oxidation and reduction in the photoexcited state. However, the oxidation, rather than reduction of substrates by excited state metallic porphyrins has been the subject of the majority of research in this field.
Bartocci and coworkers have demonstrated that hemin can be effectively photoreduced in alcohol containing mixed solvents to produce radicals for further organic transformations.266 Bartocci and coworkers have also presented a photochemical route for the reduction of carbon tetrachloride and simultaneous oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde mediated by iron porphyrin complexes.267 The same group has presented a reaction protocol for the photoreduction of carbon tetrachloride and the selective oxidation of cyclohexane to cyclohexanone, both mediated by iron porphyrins.268 Other work by this group includes the oxidation of alkanes by dioxygen catalyzed by photoactivated iron porphyrins,269 as well as the oxidation of cyclohexene catalyzed by entrapped iron porphyrins,270 and other similar oxidations of cyclohexane.271 Other organic transformations mediated by porphyrins have been investigated by Fu and coworkers.272–274
Since 1985 Inoue and coworkers have investigated a wide range of metallic porphyrins and demonstrated their ability to mediate the synthesis of organic compounds.275–284 Notably, the photochemical epoxidation and oxygenation of alkenes sensitized by metallic porphyrins has been demonstrated in the presence of water, which acts as an oxygen donor, to yield a variety of oxidized products.275,278 The reaction mechanism for the antimony(V) tetraphenylporphyrin (Sb(V)TPP) mediated oxidation of cyclohexene is shown in Scheme 17 and involves the reductive quenching of excited state antimony porphyrin by triphenylphosphine, with single electron transfer from the reduced porphyrin to methyl viologen (MV2+) completing the photocatalytic cycle. The triphenylphosphine radical cation subsequently binds with cyclohexane, and hydrolysis of this intermediate furnishes the final cyclohexanone product. Other systems described by Inoue and coworkers commonly employ methyl viologen as an electron acceptor to regenerate the original porphyrin complex after the initial reductive quenching. Inoue and coworkers have also recently demonstrated that antimony porphyrins are capable of other reactions in organic synthesis, including the dechlorination of 4-chlorophenol to 1,4-benzoquinone.279,285
 Scheme 17  Antimony TPP mediated oxidation of cyclohexene. Adapted from ref. 280 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Suslick and coworkers have demonstrated that manganese porphyrins are suitable agents for the photochemical oxidation of cyclic hydrocarbons.286 A variety of cyclic hydrocarbons were able to be oxidized to epoxides, enones and hydroxylated products in the presence of manganese porphyrins with ClO4 or IO4 as axial ligands acting as the oxygen source. The same group has also presented a protocol for the oxidation of substrates by manganese and iron porphyrins ligated with nitrates and nitrites. Photochemical reduction of the ligated porphyrin species leads to the development of high valent metal–oxo species (OMnIV(TPP)) which are capable of oxidation reactions leading to the production of C–H hydroxylation and other oxidation products.287 Suslick and coworkers have also presented regioselective epoxidations of dienes288 as well as shape selective alkane hydroxylation and epoxidation reactions catalyzed by metalloporphyrins and their dendrimers.289,290 Collman and coworkers have also presented a similar system for shape selective olefin epoxidation using manganese picnic basket porphyrins.291
Suslick and coworkers also demonstrated that halogenated iron(III) porphyrins (FeTPP)(X) can undergo photoexcitation with subsequent ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) leading to the release of the halogen moiety.292 The halide can subsequently deprotonate cumene, ethylbenzene, toluene, cyclohexane and benzene and the formation of HCl and alkyl radicals can interact with other species. In the presence of oxygen the oxidation of hydrocarbon substrates is realized (Scheme 18).
 Scheme 18  Formation of radicals through FeTPP(Cl) photoexcitation. Adapted from ref. 292 with permission from American Chemical Society. 


Metallic phthalocyanines. 
Phthalocyanines are a class of nitrogen substituted porphyrins and as such have some similar properties to porphyrins, including stability in both reduced and oxidized states. The characterization and determination of photophysical and photochemical properties of an extensive range of substituted and unsubstituted phthalocyanines has been performed by many authors,21–24,27,293–295 there is however, only a small amount of literature on phthalocyanines as photoredox catalysts for organic synthesis. The majority of research around phthalocyanines focuses on the production of radical oxygen for photodynamic therapy (PDT). There is some literature on the photoredox quenching of excited state phthalocyanines, which is some indication that these compounds can undergo photoredox processes for the synthesis of organic and other materials.
The photoreduction of CO2 to formic acid has been investigated by Mele and coworkers in composite TiO2/phthalocyanine materials.296 The authors demonstrated that metal (Cu(II) tetrakis [4-(2,4-bis-(1,1-dimethylpropyl)phenoxy)] or Zn(II) tetrakis ([4-(2,4-bis-(1,1-dimethylpropyl)phenoxy)]phthalocyanines) as well as metal-free substituted phthalocyanines loaded over anatase could all effectively catalyze the reduction of CO2 to formic acid in water under UV-Vis irradiation at room temperature. The phthalocyanine composite was deemed more efficient than its corresponding porphyrin analogue, presumably due to a favourable reduction potential. Nykong has also described the photodegradation of 4-nitrophenol in the presence of zinc phthalocyanines to produce 4-nitrocatechol and hydroquinone.297
Kaliya and coworkers have described the potential for metallic phthalocyanines to act as efficient PET agents.25 Owing to the emphasis placed on producing singlet oxygen species for PDT, the authors have outlined the use of oxygen containing moieties, as well as other donor or acceptor compounds, to reduce or oxidize the excited state PC. With the addition of specific substrates some products of oxidation can be produced through radical reactions (Scheme 19). Jain and coworkers have demonstrated this, through the photocatalytic oxidation of thiols to disulfides, using iron phthalocyanine immobilized on a graphene oxide (GO) surface.298
 Scheme 19  Photoinduced electron transfer pathways for excited state phthalocyanines. Adapted from ref. 25 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Although a great many more metallic photoredox catalytic reactions in organic synthesis have been presented by numerous authors,30,251,299–310 they are beyond the scope of this review.


Non-metallic photoredox catalysts. 
Non-metallic macrocyclic compounds that can participate in PET reactions provide an inherent benefit over their metallic counterparts, in terms of both reduced cost and the less stringent need for removal of potentially toxic metals. As such these compounds have been of great interest to organic chemists in the last decade, especially for the synthesis of organic materials via photocatalytic pathways. Among the most promising compounds for PET reactions are organic dyes, due to their typically strong absorbance of visible light and their generally non-toxic nature. A large variety of organic dyes have been investigated for their ability to mediate synthetic procedures but most will only be mentioned here due to the similarity of previously cited reaction manifolds. They include eosin Y (EY), alizarin red,20,311 Nile red,20 methylene blue,312 coumarin,313 pyrromethene dyes,313 pyrylium salts,314 perylene based dyes20,122,315 and others.148,316–325 Similar to the systems that utilize metallic photoredox catalysts already mentioned, oxidative and reductive quenching pathways are available for excited state dyes, depending on the type of dye and the reaction conditions (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Organic compounds investigated as photoredox catalysts in organic synthesis. 1. Fluorescein; 2. Eosin Y (EY); 3. Rhodamine B; 4. Nile Red; 5. 9-mesityl-10-methylacridinium ion (Acr+-Mes); 6. Alzarin Red; 7. 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-p-benzoquinone (DDQ); 8. N,N-Bis(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)perylene-3,4,9,10-bis(dicarboximide) (PDI); 9. 3-Cyano-1-methylquinolinium ion (QuCN+). 


Xanthene dyes. 
Among the dyes investigated as photoredox catalysts for organic synthesis, xanthene dyes, particularly EY, has garnered a great deal of attention. Notably, König and Hari have reviewed EY in organic synthesis,33 but as with most photoredox mediated organic transformations, a host of other reactions have recently been described. In 1978 Kellogg and coworkers described the use of EY to accelerate light induced reductions of phenacyl onium salts34 (vide supra, Scheme 2), Wu and coworkers later presented a protocol for desulfonylation reactions mediated by an EY salt326 and Tung and coworkers have also described the reduction of nitrobenzene in a photocatalytic process mediated by EY.327 Other EY mediated reductive procedures have also been described.328
A range of EY mediated oxidative reactions have also been presented by many authors, some of which have been previously described with ruthenium and iridium polypyridyl complexes. König's group have described the construction of C–C and C–P bonds by the EY mediated photoactivation of C–H bonds on tetrahydroisoquinolines, and subsequent trapping of iminium ions by suitable nucleophiles.329 EY generated iminium ions have also been trapped to produce Mannich330 and other products.331,332 The EY mediated bromination of aliphatic and benzylic C–H bonds has also been successfully demonstrated by Tan and coworkers.333 Yadav and coworkers have presented some EY mediated reactions for organic synthesis, including the cyclization of thioamides,334 the aerobic desulfurization of thioamides to amides,335 and the production of nitriles from aldoximes and primary amides.336 Huang and coworkers have presented a reaction protocol for the visible light promoted organocatalytic aerobic synthesis of α,β-unsaturated carbonyl compounds using EY,337 while other groups have also presented EY mediated photocatalytic aerobic oxidation of substrates.180,338–345
König and coworkers also presented a system for the organic dye mediated photocatalytic formation of C–C bonds through the use of EY in conjunction with aryl diazonium salts346 (Scheme 20). Recognizing the work of Cano-Yelo and Deronzier60 in which aryl diazonium salts were used as oxidative quenchers of excited state ruthenium complexes, the authors proposed a similar system, with EY rather than Ru(bpy)32+ as the photocatalyst for organic transformations. The proposed mechanism for the direct C–H arylation of heteroarenes involves single electron transfer from excited state EY to the aryl diazonium salt, to form an aryl radical capable of addition to a heteroarene to form the intermediate radical. Oxidation of this intermediate by the EY cation completes the photocatalytic cycle and forms the arylated heteroarene carbocation, which can be alternatively formed via reaction of the radical intermediate with the aryl diazonium salt. From here the carbocation is deprotonated to yield the final product, an arylated heteroarene. This reaction was tolerant to a range of functional groups such as nitro-, ester, hydroxyl- and cyano-functionalities.
 Scheme 20  Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic direct C–H arylation of heteroarenes using EY. Reproduced from ref. 346 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Other arylations mediated by EY have been presented by the same347 and other groups including the arylation of benzothiophenes by Zhou and coworkers for the synthesis of phenanthrenes using a [4+2] benzannulation method,348 and by Yan and coworkers for the borylation of aryl diazonium salts349 among others.179,350–353 The utility of EY as a photocatalyst in cooperative catalysis has also been described.20,354 Dehydrogenative coupling and cascade cross-coupling reactions mediated by EY have also been reported.355,356
Another xanthene dye, rose bengal (RB) has been investigated in several organic transformations. The RB catalyzed coupling of 2-phenyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline with nitromethane proceeded to complete conversion after 20 hours irradiation with green LED light in a 5 mol% solution of RB.355 The reaction was performed in the presence of air, as oxygen was determined to be the terminal oxidant. RB and other xanthene dyes have also been investigated by different authors for various organic transformations.64,357–370


Acridinium and other oxidants. 
Acridinium type oxidants have experienced increased attention as photoredox catalysts since initial investigations over a decade ago. A range of photocatalytic oxygenation reactions using the 9-mesityl-10-methylacridinium ion (Acr+-Mes), and other acridinium compounds as photoredox catalysts have been performed by Fukuzumi and coworkers, and others, including a [2+2] cycloaddition of O2 to tetraphenylethylene,371 and oxygenation of anthracene,372p-xylene,372,373 unsubstituted and methyl-substituted naphthalenes,374,375 benzylamines,376 and triphenylphosphine.376
Nicewicz and coworkers have also shown that Acr+-Mes is a suitable agent for the synthesis of highly substituted tetrahydrofurans via a catalytic polar-radical crossover mechanism.377 Acridinium compounds have also been employed for anti-Markovnikov hydroetherification of alkenols,378 redox neutral hydrofunctionalisation reactions of unsaturated amides and thioamides,379 as well as in the synthesis of methylenolactocin and protolichesterinic acid,380 and other synthetic procedures.381–385 Owing to its high reduction and oxidation potentials in the excited state, a range of other reactions mediated by these compounds have been described by Fukuzumi and coworkers, as well as many other groups.58,386–396
Fukuzumi and Ohkubo have also presented a method for the selective photocatalytic oxygenation of benzene to phenol using 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-p-benzoquinone (DDQ) as the photocatalyst.32,397 This system relies on single electron transfer from benzene to the excited triplet state of DDQ, forming a benzene radical cation capable of reaction with water to form an OH-adduct radical. Further reaction of this adduct with the protonated photocatalyst furnishes DDQH2 and also produced phenol in 93% yield (Scheme 21). Under homogeneous ambient conditions 3-cyano-1-methylquinolinium ion (QuCN+) was also shown to be a suitable photocatalyst for this transformation. In this case water acts as the hydroxyl source and molecular oxygen acts to oxidize the dye and complete the catalytic cycle. DDQ and QuCN+ have also been utilized for their oxidative ability in other organic transformations.398–401
 Scheme 21  DDQ mediated oxidation of benzene to phenol. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4. Photoredox catalysis for polymer post-functionalization
The implications of photoredox catalysis in organic transformations extend toward ideas in polymer synthesis due to similar reaction mechanisms, such as electron transfer pathways and generation of the same reactive species (radical, radical ion, and cation). However, the successful implementation of specific organic reactions in operational polymer synthetic transformations, like polymer post-modification or polymerization (polymer growth), generally requires high reactivity and efficiency due to decreased mobility of reactive species in polymer chains. Knowledge of organic reactions between small molecules can provide guidance for their implementation in polymer synthesis and post-modification. In this part of the review, we will try to highlight some links between organic transformation and polymer synthesis, starting from polymer post-modification.
Polymer post-modification has almost the same long history as polymer science. Since nitrocellulose and cellulose acetate were first produced in the middle of 19th century by exposing natural cellulose to nitric acid or acetic anhydride,402 polymer post-modification has been recognized as an attractive approach to fabricate functional materials, both polymeric and hybrid.403 So far, with the emergence of reversible deactivation radical polymerization techniques and photoinduced reactions, polymer chemists have developed a broad portfolio of highly efficient post-modification reactions applicable to polymers, using for example, cycloaddition chemistry (CuAAC reaction,404–412 Diels–Alder413–416 or hetero Diels–Alder417 reactions), enzymatic reactions,418,419 ATRA,96,420 and thiol–ene and –yne reactions,421–425 under UV or visible light irradiation. These approaches have been successfully employed for the synthesis of polymers with complex structures and functionalities, such as dendrimer synthesis, polymer side-chain or end-group modification, and synthesis of block and graft copolymers. Multicomponent reactions (or cascade reactions), demonstrated to be a powerful approach for polymer post-modification, are attracting growing research interests due to its capability of mild conditions and broad variation in functionality.426–432 Visible light catalyzed multicomponent reactions afforded extra benefits to this methodology, which has been demonstrated to be an effective and attractive alternative in organic synthetic transformations.70,363,433 Although implementation in polymer synthesis is still underway, a bright perspective on sustainable choices can be clearly foreseen.
Since the outset of photoredox catalysis in organic transformation and polymer synthesis, the increased tolerance and versatility of different functionalities has afforded photoredox catalysis as an ideal candidate for polymer post-modification with high atom efficiency and the capability of spatiotemporal control. Moreover, this technology provides high compatibility and chemical orthogonality with other synthetic techniques which facilitate polymer post-modification.
The CuAAC reaction is the most popular cycloaddition click reaction to date. Yagci and coworkers took advantage of the selectivity and orthogonality of photoredox catalyzed CuAAC and radical mediated thiol–ene click reactions for building complex polymer architectures in one pot405 (Scheme 22). Azide-functionalized poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was clicked to α-alkynyl-ω-alkenyl-poly(ε-caprolactone) through a CuAAC reaction under UV light to achieve complete conversion. After adding N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) and radical photoinitiator, 2-benzyl-2-dimethylamino-4′-morpholinobutyrophenone (DBMP), the thiol–ene reaction proceeded smoothly under UV irradiation. This synthetic polymer material as matrix was shown to be effective in cell proliferation.
 Scheme 22  Sequential one-pot photoredox catalyzed CuAAC and radical mediated thiol–ene reactions for building complex polymer architectures. Reproduced from ref. 405 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Diels–Alder cycloaddition reactions via photoredox mechanisms are popularly implemented in organic transformation,141 but have not yet been reported in polymerization or polymer post-modification. Most of the current reports for polymer synthesis follow energy transfer mechanisms, and as such, are not discussed in this review.
Another highly powerful tool for organic transformation, ATRA, allows for efficient alkene or alkyne functionalization through the use of radical initiators or transition metal catalysts. Visible light photocatalysts used to develop an ATRA protocol can afford the following attractive features: simple reaction setup, mild reaction conditions, minimal side reactions, optimal catalytic efficiency, and straightforward purification.434 Initially demonstrated by Stephenson and coworkers in organic reactions between haloalkanes (α-halocarbonyls) and olefins using photocatalysts of iridium complexes (Ru(bpy)3Cl2 and [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]PF6, vide supra),435 We employed this approach for post-modification of polymers with side olefins (e.g. polybutadine (PB)) using fac-Ir(bpy)3 as photocatalyst under blue light irradiation.
In the proposed mechanism (Scheme 23), the photocatalyst excited by visible light (Ir(III)*), reduces the halogenated substrate (R–X) through a SET process to produce the oxidized photocatalyst (Ir(IV)) and an electrophilic radical that undergoes addition to the neighboring olefin in the polymer chain. The addition reaction produces a radical that can be oxidized to a carbocation by the oxidized catalyst (Ir(IV)) to complete the catalytic cycle and subsequently generate the ATRA product by nucleophilic trapping of a halide.
 Scheme 23  Proposed mechanism for the post-modification of polymers via visible light-mediated atom transfer radical addition (ATRA). Reproduced with permission from ref. 420. 
Poly(allyl methacrylate-r-methyl methacrylate) (P(AM-r-MMA), Mn = 21000 g mol−1, PDI = 1.16) and polybutadiene (PB, Mn = 4850 g mol−1, PDI = 1.53, 85% 1,2-vinyl, 15% 1,4-addition) were chosen as model polymers. Five alkyl halide compounds (R–X), including diethyl bromomalonate (BrMal), methyl α-bromophenylacetate (MBPA), EBiB, bromoisobutyric acid (BiBA), and 1-iodoperfluorohexane (IPFHex) in Scheme 23 were extensively investigated. However, only BrMal and IPFHex could produce promising yields for both polymers. Model reactions confirmed the efficiency of all investigated halide compounds with allyl alcohol, indicating the highest reactivity of BrMal and IPFHex. The chemical structure of ATRA products in the model reactions were confirmed using 1D and 2D NMR and GPC.
A visible light catalytic thiol–ene “click” reaction has also been elegantly employed to functionalize two model polymers (P(AM-r-MMA) and PB) by us in 2015436 (Scheme 24, top). In the presence of redox mediator (p-toluidine) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) as solvent, a highly efficient reaction was observed, evidenced by nearly complete conversion (∼99%) of side olefin after 20 minutes irradiation with low energy (4.8 W) blue light. Various solvents including DMF, acetonitrile, water and methanol were also evaluated for their compatibility in this thiol–ene reaction, although NMP gave the highest efficiency due to its high polarity index (6.7). The versatility of this visible light photocatalytic thiol–ene reaction was examined with a library of 10 thiol substrates with various functionalities, (Scheme 24, bottom) most of which achieved ≥95% conversion after blue light irradiation for 20 minutes. Additionally, other photoredox catalysts including fac-Ir(ppy)3, EY, and ZnTPP were shown to be inefficient for this thiol–ene reaction, which was attributed to their low oxidation potentials (fac-Ir(ppy)3 and ZnTPP) and short excitation lifetimes. It is interesting to note that this reaction can enable PB to reach high olefin conversion (99%) within 10 min. Most importantly, the reaction can be switched “ON” and “OFF” by turning the light “ON” and “OFF” respectively.
 Scheme 24  Post-modification of poly(allyl methacrylate-r-ethyl methacrylate) (P(AM-r-EMA)) with a variety of thiol compounds in the presence of Ru(bpy)3Cl2 under blue LED light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 436. 
5. Photoredox catalysis in polymerization
This section of the review will be primarily exploring the current state-of-the-art photoredox catalysis for various conventional photopolymerization and “living” photopolymerization techniques. Although the mechanism of some specific cases is not exactly a redox process, but an energy transfer pathway or arguably electron transfer, they will be included as long as the developed photoredox catalysts are employed.
5.1 Conventional photopolymerization by photoredox catalysis
Photopolymerization can be divided into two categories similar to traditional thermal polymerization: chain-growth and step-growth. Chain-growth photopolymerization, generally initiated and modulated by visible or UV light, is more popular than step-growth photopolymerization. In chain-growth photopolymerization, light may be absorbed either directly by reactants, such as monomer or photoinitiator (direct photopolymerization), or by a photosensitizer which absorbs the light and then transfers energy (or an electron) to the surrounding reactive agents such as initiators. The excited or electron-rich initiators generate carbon radicals or ions which then initiate monomer addition. The initiation step differs from that of the ordinary thermal polymerization; however, propagation, termination and chain transfer steps are unchanged.
In the general sense of photoredox catalysis, a single electron reduction or oxidation is engaged in the process between photosensitizer and initiator.437 An initiator can accept a single electron from a photosensitizer (or donate a single electron to a photosensitizer) and then generate carbon radicals (or cations) for subsequent polymerization in the presence of vinyl, epoxy, or cycloester monomers. Schemes 25 and 26 show the simplified pathways and examples for carbon radical and cation generation via photoredox catalysis. Other types of polymerization through energy transfer or multiple electron transfer are not strictly classified as photoredox catalysis and, as such, are excluded in this review.
 Scheme 25  Simplified pathways for carbon radical and cation generation via photoredox catalysis. PC: photoredox catalyst; D: electron donor. R˙ and D+ are the reactive species for radical and cationic polymerizations. 
 Scheme 26  (1) Radical photopolymerization using iridium complex as photocatalyst and alkyl bromide as initiator; Reproduced with permission from ref. 438 (2) cationic photopolymerization using poly(phenylenevinylene)-g-polystyrene (PPV-g-PSt) as macromolecular photocatalyst in the presence of diphenyliodonium hexafluorophosphate. Reproduced from ref. 439 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
In comparison to photosensitizers for reversible deactivation radical polymerizations requiring the capability of a high degree of control over molecular weight and end-group functionality, the photosensitizers for conventional photopolymerization are much more diverse and include benzophenone,440,441 camphorquinone,442 and thioxanthone443–445 derivatives which mainly absorb in the UV part of the electromagnetic spectrum. For irradiation in the visible region, transition metal complexes, organic dyes such as rose bengal, eosin, safranine, and methylene blue,446–448 pyrilium salts449 and semiconductors450–459 are popularly used. The nature of initiators could be either amines,442 ethers,460 thiols,461,462 cationium (iodonium, sulfonium, pyridinium and phosphonium salts) compounds439,463–466 or alkyl halides.438,467,468 Single electron transfer (SET) leads to the formation of one initiating radical and a second radical (or radical ion) which is not an efficient initiating species. It is worth noting that this SET process is usually accompanied by hydrogen atom abstraction (Scheme 27).
 Scheme 27  α-Amino radical generation via photoredox catalysis and hydrogen atom abstraction. PC: photoredox catalyst; EWG: electron withdrawing group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. 

Chain-growth photopolymerization. 
One of the earliest examples employing visible light photoredox catalysis for conventional chain-growth photopolymerization was presented in 2001.469 Three-component systems of dye/amine/bis(trichloromethyl)-1,3,5-triazine were demonstrated to be able to generate carbon radicals for chain-growth polymerization under various light wavelengths, dependent on the dyes that were used (Scheme 28). Since then, a number of photoinitiating systems (type I and type II photoinitiation, macrophotoinitiation, electron donor–acceptor systems) generating different radicals (Scheme 29) based on mechanisms of photoredox catalysis have been developed by Bowman et al.,470–474 Lalevee et al.,438,464,475,476 Yagci et al.439,445,456,477 and other researchers.448,469,478,479 For instance, the introduction of co-initiators (or hydrogen donors) such as NVK, silane and so on, has led to a method of concomitant cationic/radical polymerization of a cationic/radical monomer blend for the manufacture of interpenetrated polymer networks.463,464,476 These examples have been covered elsewhere by several comprehensive reviews referred to in the references.475,480–487 Therefore, these approaches are not included in this review.
 Scheme 28  Three component system of dye/amine/bis(trichloromethyl)-1,3,5-triazine for chain-growth photopolymerization. Reproduced from ref. 469 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
 Scheme 29  Various types of carbon radical generation via photoredox catalysis. PC: photoredox catalyst. 
Ruthenium(II) polypyridine complexes (e.g. Ru(bpy)3Cl2) are extensively used photoredox catalysts due to their strong absorbance in the visible region (centered at the blue region), superior solvent solubility, chemical stability and long excited-state lifetimes. In 2011, a method of free radical polymerization was developed by Choi and coworkers467 on the basis of visible light photoredox catalysis using Ru(bpy)3Cl2, which initiates and controls the polymerization at ambient temperature. In combination with a sacrificial electron donor (primary amines, e.g. N,N-diisopropylethylamine), the α-haloester and benzylic halide can be activated to generate a carbon radical through the Ru(bpy)3+ photoredox cycle under visible light irradiation. The resulting radical species can initiate the free radical polymerization of various methacrylates, proceeding to relatively high conversions. The polymerization was initiated with light but immediately terminated when the light source was switched off. Although the polymerization is not living or controlled, the molecular weight of polymer can be varied by changing the ratio of monomer and initiator. This photocatalytic method showed for the first time, the merits of mild reaction conditions including weak light irradiation, ambient temperature, and lower catalyst loading, and presented an alternative to the traditional thermal or photo-based free radical initiation methods. It is also advantageous over other photopolymerization methods in that the radical initiator is separated from the photosensitizer.
Although promising results for methacrylate were obtained, styrene and acrylates were relatively inefficient under identical reaction conditions. However, more easily activated haloesters such as diethyl 2-bromomalonate can be triggered for the initiation step by in situ generation of a constantly low concentration of carbon radicals. Thus free radical polymerization of acrylates (e.g. MA) is achieved by Ru(bpy)3Cl2 mediated visible-light photoredox catalysis in the presence of tertiary amine (e.g. triethylamine).468 Distinct from reversible deactivation radical polymerizations, this process is not controlled in the chain growth step but rather in the initiation step. By tuning light intensity (23, 46 and 69 W), reaction temperature (−5, 10, 25 and 40 °C) and initiator feed concentration, the molar mass and monomer conversion can be tailored, which is not easily realized in other conventional free radical polymerization systems. It is interesting to note this polymerization can be temporally controlled by switching the light source on and off.


Step-growth photopolymerization. 
In step-growth photopolymerization, absorption of light triggers a coupling (or condensation) reaction between conjugated monomers with two polymerizable sites (e.g. thiophene derivatives or di-functional monomers (AB monomer or AA/BB co-monomers)) to form dimer, then trimer, longer oligomer and eventually long chain polymers. This coupling (or condensation) reaction follows a photoredox mechanism and contains a photoinduced electron transfer process; as such, in the absence of light, de-activation occurs.
The preparation of poly(benzo[c]thiophene) thin films by photopolymerization in the presence of carbon tetrachloride, under 500 W Xe lamp irradiation has been demonstrated by Iyoda and coworkers.488 The carbon tetrachloride acts as an electron acceptor and is able to oxidize photoexcited thiophene, resulting in the formation of corresponding thiophene radical cation species which were then coupled to form dimer, and subsequently polythiophene. In this case, the light-harvesting chromophore is the thiophene group itself, which has its maximum absorption in the UV region. The direct photolysis of cationium (iodonium, sulfonium or pyridium) under UV light generates onium radical cations, from which electron transfer to monomeric thiophene results in subsequence coupling of thiophene radical cations.489–491 Yagci and co-worker reported that highly conjugated thiophene derivatives, such as 5,8-bis(2,3-dihydrothieno[3,4-b][1,4]dioxin-5-yl)-2,3-di(thiophen-2-yl)quinoxaline (DTDQ), is able to trigger cationic epoxy and conjugated polymer formation in the presence of onium salts through a photoredox reaction (Scheme 30),492,493 which can be implemented under sustainable visible light rather than harmful UV light.
 Scheme 30  Photoredox reactions mediated by highly conjugated thiophene derivative under visible light. Reproduced from ref. 492 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
The use of potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7) as photoredox catalyst in aqueous solutions was able to initiate the polymerization of substituted thiophene under visible light irradiation.494 The photoexcited potassium dichromate formed a charge-transfer complex with the thiophene monomer, generating the reactive thiophene radical cation for subsequent polymerization. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles are also popular as photocatalysts for surface initiated step-growth and reversible deactivation radical polymerizations for the preparation of polymer brushes.495 Ravoo and coworkers have developed a novel approach to build linear polyethyleneimine polymer brushes through the reductive/oxidative processes of ethanolamine driven by the photocatalytic action of TiO2.496
So far, the most popular photocatalytic technique for step-growth polymerization is copper(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) and thiol–ene/yne click reactions.497–499 The radical generation is modulated by the photocatalyst and light combination, and affords these processes with a low energy requirement as well as spatio-temporal control at room temperature.
The CuAAC reaction is highly modular and wide in scope, regiospecific, and highly efficient with mild reaction conditions. To generate the active CuI species, there are two photochemical approaches to reduce CuII; by direct UV radiation500,501 and indirect activation502–504 using additional photosensiters. Utilizing its orthogonal reactivity with other methods, such as thiol–acrylate, thiol–ene and ATRP, the CuAAC reaction is able to make precisely controlled polymers with designable functionalities and architectures, through step-growth and/or polymer post-modification. Azides are known to be dangerous and decompose under UV light irradiation, therefore, Bowman and coworkers408,505 designed and synthesized high molecular weight and relative safe bisfunctional azide monomers (Scheme 31). Copolymerizing with trifunctional alkyne monomer under bulk conditions produced crosslinked polymer networks using Irgacure 819 as a radical generating photoinitiator via a photoredox catalyzed step-growth process.
 Scheme 31  Multifunctional azide and alkyne monomers and photoinitiator for CuAAC photopolymerization under bulk conditions. Reproduced from ref. 505 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
The thiol–ene/yne radical generation modulated by photoredox catalysts, such as Ru(bpy)3Cl2436 and fac-Ir(ppy)3,506 afforded low energy requirements (visible light 461 nm and low light intensity <1 mW cm−2) and high reaction rates (complete conversion within minutes) at room temperature.
An elegant approach to a visible light photocatalytic thiol–ene reaction was reported by us for thiol–ene step-growth addition polymerization, to form polythioether polymers employing Ru(bpy)3Cl2 as photoredox catalyst and p-toluidine as redox mediator436 (Fig. 4C). The proposed mechanism for this photoredox catalysis is shown in Scheme 32. The reaction proceeded through a reductive quenching pathway whereby aromatic amine (p-toluidine) transfers an electron to the photoexcited Ru complex (Ru(II)*) to ultimately generate a thiyl radical species via hydrogen atom abstraction. The newly formed thiyl radical reacts with a comparatively electron-rich alkene, which in turn generates a carbon-based radical that was subsequently quenched by a free thiol to yield a new thiyl radical. As opposed to the use of a traditional sacrificial donor (such as tertiary amines), the anilinium species undergoes deprotonation to re-enter the catalytic cycle, while the ground state photocatalyst is regenerated through oxidative quenching by atmospheric oxygen. The combination of Ru(bpy)3Cl2 and p-toluidine with a dithiol and a diene resulted in a photoinitiated step-growth polymerization under blue light irradiation. The polymerization was extremely fast (96% olefin conversion within 3 min), and importantly can be precisely modulated by switching the light ON and OFF (Fig. 4A).
 Fig. 4  (A) On-line FTNIR for “ON/OFF” study of visible light photocatalytic thiol–ene polymerization in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) using Ru(bpy)3Cl2 (25 ppm relative to olefin concentration) as photocatalyst and p-toluidine (0.5% to olefin concentration) as redox mediator. (B) GPC trace and (C) 1H NMR spectrum for final purified product by thiol–ene polymerization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 436. 
 Scheme 32  Proposed mechanism for visible light photocatalytic thiol–ene reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 436. 
Although the molecular weight and resultant polythioether structure was confirmed by GPC and 1H NMR, the α- and ω-end-groups were not extensively characterized and located. Yang and coworkers506 reported the use of fac-Ir(ppy)3 to prepare telechelic polythioether oligomers with well-defined end-groups (α,ω-dithiol or α,ω-divinyl) and controlled molecular weights, by tuning the ratios of dithiol and divinyl monomers. Compared with other thiol–ene initiation systems, such as UV light and thermally initiated thiol–ene oligomerization, visible light thiol–ene reaction provides higher end-group fidelity (Table 2), which was confirmed by the agreement between theoretical and experimental molecular weights and subsequent addition of monomers or conjugation with N-(1-phenyl)maleimide.
Table 2 Polymerization of DEGVE (diethylene glycol divinyl ether) and BDMT (1,4-benzenedimethanethiol) in different initiation systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 506




No.
Initiation type
Photoredox catalyst/initiator
Conversion (%)
[–S–CH2–CH2O–]:[–SH]

M
n,NMR (g mol−1)

M
n,theo (g mol−1)





a Isopropyl thioxanthone.
b Azobisisobutyronitrile.





1
Visible

fac-Ir(ppy)3
75
1:0.33
1163
993


2
UV
—
76
1:0.27
1385
1010


3
UV
ITXa
76
1:0.21
1732
1010


4
Thermal
AIBNb
78
1:0.18
1992
1047





5.2 “Living” polymerization by photoredox catalysis
The “living” polymerization discussed here includes reversible deactivation radical polymerization (RDRP, also named as controlled/”living” radical polymerization), ATRP (atom transfer radical polymerization), RAFT (reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer polymerization), IMP (iodine mediated polymerization), CMRP (cobalt mediated radical polymerization), ROMP (ring-opening metathesis polymerization) and living cationic polymerization. Although nitroxide mediated photopolymerization507–516 has been successfully developed, it will not be included as part of this review as it does not strictly follow a photoredox mechanism. In the cases of CMRP and IMP, current progress on both the energy transfer and electron transfer processes is covered. In addition, as the use of photoinitiators for ATRP has been covered elsewhere,517 this review will focus on the use of photoredox catalysts to modulate the redox states of the copper catalyst for copper-mediated photopolymerization.

Light regulated ATRP with copper catalysts. 
One of the earliest forms of RDRP initiated under UV irradiation involved iniferter (initiator-transfer agent-terminator) polymerization performed using a dithiocarbamate (DC) where various graft copolymers, block copolymers, star polymers, and hyperbranched polymers were synthesized.518–529 This technique provided a huge drawback as the structure and composition of the synthesized polymers were poorly regulated due to inefficient chain transfer leading to broad molecular weight distributions. Realizing the potential of the fast activation of DC in iniferter polymerization for ATRP systems with copper complexes that deactivate propagating radicals, Matyjaszewski and Kwak explored the use of this moiety to perform UV-mediated ATRP, leading to synthesis of well-defined poly(methyl methacrylate) homopolymers and diblock copolymers518 (Scheme 33).
 Scheme 33  General mechanism for ATRP activated by dithiocarbamate (DC) under UV irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 518 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
A similar study was also carried out by Cheng and coworkers where successful polymerization of hydrophobic monomers methyl methacrylate (MMA), n-butyl acrylate (nBA) and styrene (St) as well as hydrophilic monomers (oligo(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate) (OEGMA) and 2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA)), was made possible with iniferter 1-cyano-1-methylethyl diethyldithiocarbamate (MANDC) and the organic catalyst copper(II) acetate (Cu(OAc)2) under UV irradiation at ambient temperature.530 The polymerization demonstrated living characteristics when the amount of Cu(OAc)2 was minimized to 1 ppm which was confirmed by successful chain extension. In this system, the authors proposed that UV irradiation leads to in situ interaction between CuII with the functional moiety of DC (–SC(S)N(CH2CH3)2)2 forming relatively the stable CuIII species, Cu(OAc)2DC. As a result, the presence of CuIII species facilitates the decomposition of CuI, and therefore, establishes dynamic equilibrium between CuII and CuI.531–533
In addition, the use of UV light was further explored by Yagci and coworkers, who initiated ATRP polymerization by in situ generation of CuI complexes from CuII under UV light irradiation without addition of any reducing agent at room temperature. Bulk polymerization of MMA under UV irradiation using ethyl 2-bromopropionate (EtBP) as an initiator was successful in the presence of CuII (EtBP/CuIIBr2/PMDETA/MMA), however, as the bulk conditions led to poor solubility of CuII complexes, heterogeneous polymerization was observed. Furthermore, in the presence of UV light, Yagci and coworkers proposed that photogeneration of CuI from CuII led to the generation of active propagating radicals (P˙) (Scheme 34). The propagation continued in the presence of monomer with the possibility of termination events taking place. The presence of excess CuII/PMDETA due to termination was regenerated to form CuI/PMDETA under UV light irradiation. Subsequent use of methanol helped to overcome the poor solubility of CuII complexes.534 Nevertheless, UV irradiation of CuII/PMDETA led to the formation of CuI/PMDETA and halide radicals, which can be scavenged by methanol to generate hydroxyl methyl (˙CH2OH) radicals and HX (Scheme 35). The ˙CH2OH radicals are able to reduce CuII/PMDETA to CuI/PMDETA leading to the formation of formaldehyde. Additionally, it was found that the presence of small amounts of methanol led to an ideal homogeneous system generating poly(methyl methacrylate) with good control over molecular weights and molecular weight distributions. Moreover, this photoinduced ATRP system was extended to include semiconductor nanoparticles such as neat zinc oxide and iron-doped zinc oxide capable of reducing CuII to CuI under UV light at room temperature.535 In these systems well-controlled polymerization of MMA was observed with good correlation between theoretical and experimental molecular weights and narrow molecular weight distributions.
 Scheme 34  Proposed mechanism for in situ generation of CuI complexes from CuII complexes in the presence of UV light under bulk conditions. Reproduced from ref. 536 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
 Scheme 35  Proposed mechanism for in situ generation of CuI complexes from CuII complexes in the presence of UV light in the presence of methanol. Reproduced from ref. 534 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
One of the limitations of the photo-ATRP system introduced by Yagci and coworkers is the need to use equimolar amounts of copper catalyst and initiator. To overcome this drawback, Mosnáček and Ilčíková reported photochemically mediated ATRP of MMA which can be performed in the presence of ppm amounts of copper(II) bromide (CuBr2) while maintaining good control over molecular weight and distributions.537,538 In this study, polymerization of MMA was studied using two initiators EBiB and 2-bromopropionitrile (BPN) with two ligands PMDETA and tris(2-pyridylmethyl)amine (TPMA) in the presence of 100 ppm (relative to monomer concentration) CuBr2. Polymerization of MMA in the presence of EBiB with either PMDETA or TPMA resulted in an induction period, but a faster polymerization in the former, led to the generation of well-defined polymers with a high degree of livingness. A similar trend was also observed when BPN was used as initiator in the presence of TPMA and PMDETA. This study proposed a similar mechanism to that observed by Yagci and coworkers,534,536 with the addition of the possibility of excited CuI and CuII complexes participating in the activation and deactivation of radicals.
Matyjaszewski and coworkers expanded on photochemically induced ATRP by performing polymerization under visible light and sunlight in the presence of ppm amount of copper catalyst. In this study, EBiB for acrylates and ethyl α-bromophenylacetate (EBPA) for methacrylates was used in the presence of ligands TPMA, PMDETA, and tris((4-methoxy-3,5-dimethylpyridin-2-yl)-methyl) amine (TPMA*). Polymerization of methyl acrylate (MA) in the presence of EBiB and TPMA* was fastest with sunlight, slower with violet (392 nm) and slowest under blue light (450 nm) irradiation with no polymerization observed in red (631 nm). These differences in polymerization rate under different light wavelength irradiation can be ascribed to the ability of CuII complexes to absorb strongly in the UV region, with significant absorption in blue but weaker absorption in red. Effects of ligands using PMDETA for MMA and TPMA for MA were also determined. As expected, polymerization of MMA in the presence of PMDETA was slightly slower compared to TPMA with higher molecular weight distributions in the former. Polymerization of MA was much faster with TPMA* as compared to unsubstituted TPMA. Nevertheless, temporal control over polymerization was introduced allowing for chains to propagate in the presence of light and to return to dormant state in the absence of light. Although initial studies exploited the use of volatile and hazardous organic solvents for polymerization, further studies by Matyjaszewski and coworkers led to successful polymerization in water using excess TPMA ligand in the presence of reduced amount of copper loading (22 ppm) under visible light.539 A slight deviation in the mechanism is proposed in comparison to the previous photo-ATRP system. Instead of in situ generation of CuI in the presence of UV light, the strong absorption in the UV region for copper/ligand complexation was proposed to provide an opportunity for LMCT. The absence of polymerization under red light suggested an inefficient LMCT. As such, suitable irradiation allows for the redox reaction of CuBr2/L to CuBr/L, leading to the generation of bromine radicals to start the polymerization and regeneration of the activator lost in biradical termination reactions. The proposed mechanism is a hybrid of Initiators for Continuous Activator Regeneration (ICAR) ATRP and ARGET (Activators Regenerated by Electron Transfer) ATRP.540
In a later study investigating experimental and kinetic modelling, Matyjaszewski and coworkers demonstrated that the dominant route for photochemically mediated ATRP is consistent with the ARGET ATRP reaction where regeneration of CuI activator species or formation of radicals comes about from reduction of CuII complexes by free amine ligands541,542 (Scheme 36). Nevertheless, some minor contributions from ICAR ATRP for (re)generation reactions through interaction of alkyl halides and ligand, ligand with monomer, and photochemical cleavage of alkyl halide were also noted.
 Scheme 36  Bold lines represent reactions with highest rates, thin solid line represent dominant route for photochemical ATRP, and dashed lines represent reactions with minor contributions towards photochemical ATRP. Reproduced from ref. 541 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
The idea of utilizing an excess of aliphatic tertiary amine ligand (tris[2-(dimethylamino)ethyl]amine, Me6TREN) to initiate UV mediated polymerization was further explored by Haddleton and coworkers.543 As amines have been commonly used as outer-sphere electron donors and photoelectron donors in organic chemistry, the use of tertiary amine (Me6-TREN) was explored for photoactivation of alkyl halides. In the presence of excess Me6-TREN as ligand, excitation under UV light (λmax = 360 nm) allowed for outer-sphere single-electron transfer (OSET) from photoexcited Me6TREN ([Me6TREN]*) to the alkyl halide initiator, leading to homolysis of the alkyl bromide (Scheme 36). Successful polymerization of acrylates was possible with excellent control provided by CuII(Me6TREN)Br2, and with the ability to induce temporal control. By maintaining a ratio of [CuIIBr2]:[Me6TREN] of 1:6, polymerization of a number of acrylates, including ethyl acrylate (EA), nBA, protected/functional acrylates, tert-butyl acrylate (tBA), ethylene glycol methyl ether acrylate (EGA) and oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether acrylate (Mn = 480 g mol−1, OEGA), reached high conversions (92–97%) with narrow polydispersities in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The use of hydroxyl-functional and vic-diol-functional initiators afforded the incorporation of α-functionalities into poly(methyl acrylate). Mechanistic findings by Matyjaszewski and coworkers,541 which emphasized ARGET ATRP as the dominant route for photochemical reaction with Me6TREN, did not provide an overall understanding of how sufficient amounts of initiators can be generated for rapid polymerization of MA, as outlined in the works of Haddleton and coworkers. Further mechanistic understanding was provided by Frick and coworkers with the aid of pulsed-laser polymerization (PLP) to generate short polymer chains while performing photoinitiated free radical polymerization, in conjunction with electrospray-ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) to characterize the exact structure of the polymer and its end-group, and therefore, reveal the nature of the initiating species.544 Upon UV irradiation, homolytic cleavage of the initiator, alkyl bromide, led to the formation of alkyl and bromine radicals with the former initiating the polymerization while the latter interacts with CuBr2. This leads to the formation of CuBr and bromine in the initiation step, with bromine subsequently participating in ATRP. Moreover, this study also acknowledged the co-existence of two processes associated with the amine ligand that may lead to the reduction of CuII. In the first process photoexcited CuBr2/Me6TREN can be quenched by free Me6TREN to form CuBr/Me6TREN and a radical cation of the amine ligand. In the second process, the photoexcited Me6TREN reduces the CuII to CuI species through an electron transfer process. In both processes, the ligand plays the role of the reductant of CuII without generating any new chains. The authors concluded that the mechanism of photo-RDRP must be a complex interaction between UV light and reagents such as initiator, ligand, and copper(II) bromide (Scheme 37).
 Scheme 37  Proposed mechanism for synergetic relationship between alkyl bromide initiator, Me6TREN ligand, and copper(II) bromide for UV mediated polymerization. Reproduced from ref. 544 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
By carrying out polymerization of MA in a tubular milli-flow reactor as well as in a glass-chip based microreactor, Haddleton and coworkers have shown that high monomer conversions (90%), retention of end-group fidelity and well-defined homopolymers and block copolymers can be produced in 20 minutes.545 An expansion of this investigation surveyed the use of different solvents, including ionic liquids,546 for polymerization of a range of hydrophilic, hydrophobic and functional monomers adaptable to this photomediated system.547 In addition, Haddleton and coworkers expanded this approach through the use of copper(II) formate-Me6TREN548,549 and commercially available copper gluconate550 as photocatalysts for photoinduced reversible deactivation radical polymerization of acrylates.
Previous studies by Yagci and coworkers using Cu catalysts with PMDETA and TPMA ligands were consistent with a reductive quenching pathway either by solvent or by excess ligand. In addition, the role of amines as a reductive quencher for photoinduced ATRP was reinforced by Matyjaszewski and coworkers,541,542 and Haddleton and coworkers.543 Poly and coworkers provided further depth to photoinduced ATRP by exploring Cu-based photocatalysis that involves an oxidative quenching mechanism of the excited state CuI complex.551 In this study bis(1,10-phenanthroline)copper(I) (Cu(phen)2+), which has an intense absorption in the visible spectrum, was utilized for polymerization of MMA in the presence of EBPA and low concentrations of catalyst (80 ppm relative to monomer concentration). Upon visible light excitation, the excited state of Cu(I)* undergoes rapid oxidative quenching with alkyl bromide from a dormant chain leading to the generation of propagating radicals (P˙) and deactivator (CuII–Br). Further reaction between the deactivator form of the catalyst with the propagating radical regenerates the CuI complex and the dormant species (Scheme 38). Upon addition of triethylamine (TEA), a lower catalyst loading (20 ppm) was needed for good control over the polymerization, and an accelerated polymerization was observed due to faster regeneration of CuI.
 Scheme 38  Photomediated Cu-based ATRP via an oxidative quenching cycle activated by visible light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 551 with permission American Chemical Society. 


Applications of copper mediated photopolymerization. 
The ability to synthesize polymers with high monomer conversions and with excellent retention of end-group fidelity led to the opportunity to precisely control polymer composition and microstructure.552–556 For instance, Haddleton and coworkers provided a facile approach to synthesizing sequence-controlled multiblock copolymers in one pot552 (Fig. 5). The novelty of this approach stems from the fact that only low concentrations of CuBr2 are needed with an excess of Me6TREN in the absence of a conventional photoredox catalyst and dye-sensitizers. A controlled sequence was introduced by alternating four different acrylate monomers; MA, EA, EGA and solketal acrylate (SA), to build undecablock copolymers with each block consisting of 3 repeating units. The undecablock copolymer was well-defined in terms of molecular weight and was accompanied by narrow polydispersities. For a given polymer chain, upon increasing the number of repeat units, the number of blocks for each chain needed to be reduced in order to maintain good control over molecular weight, dispersity and end-group fidelity. For instance, repeating units of 10, 25 and 100 led to octablock, hexablock, and pentablock copolymers, respectively (Fig. 5). Junkers and coworkers utilized a similar approach for the preparation of decablock acrylate copolymers, consisting of MA, tBA, nBA and EGA repeating units, with perfect sequence control through iterative chain extensions without the need of purification steps.556 The in situ chain extensions were carried out by sequential monomer additions which led to block copolymers with controlled molecular weight and narrow molecular weight distributions. As the decablock copolymer consisted of repeating units of tBA, these units were hydrolyzed to acrylic acid under acidic conditions. The anionic character of poly(acrylic acid) enables the decablock copolymer to exhibit pH responsive character.
 Fig. 5  GPC traces of successive additions of monomers during synthesis of multiblock copolymers consisting of (a) an undecablock copolymer (DPn (degree of polymerization) = 3 per block), (b) an octablock copolymer (DPn = 10 per block), (c) a hexablock copolymer (DPn = 25 per block), and (d) a pentablock copolymer (DPn = 100 per block). Reproduced from ref. 552 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The use of UV-activated polymerization was further extended to include surface-initiated ATRP (SI-ATRP).557–563 For instance, Liu and coworkers have utilized commercially available TiO2 nanoparticles (P25) as photoactive materials to reduce CuII/L to CuI/L complexes under UV irradiation through SET processes, for growing brushes from gold surfaces and TiO2 nanowires561 (Fig. 6). Polymerization with different monomers; 3-sulfopropyl methacrylate potassium salt (SPMA), DMAEMA, N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) and oligo(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate (OEGMA, Mn = 300 g mol−1), was carried out to generate polymer brushes with different thicknesses, with TiO2 acting as the sensitizer and gold as substrate. The growth of polymer chains in terms of thickness, composition and architecture was carefully manipulated by varying the concentration of TiO2 nanoparticles and irradiation intensity. Using TiO2 as sensitizers, Zhou and coworkers were also able to create various patterned surfaces of polymer brushes using photomasks and a nanoporous alumina oxide membrane.560
 Fig. 6  UV-mediated ATRP for growing polymer brushes from gold surfaces using TiO2 as a sensitizer. Reproduced from ref. 561 with permission from American Chemical Society. 


Light regulated ATRP with other metal photocatalysts. 
One of the major disadvantages of photoinitiated systems is that only the initiation step can be photoregulated leading to loss of control over the propagation step. In order to overcome this limitation, Hawker and Fors utilized iridium-based photocatalyst fac-Ir(ppy)3 for the development of a visible light responsive reversible deactivation radical polymerizations through ATRP.564 In the presence of a 50 W fluorescent lamp as the light source, fac-Ir(ppy)3 was excited to an Ir(III)* species that was able to reduce an alkyl bromide initiator to give an alkyl radical and Ir(IV)–Br complex through a PET process (Scheme 39). The alkyl radical was subsequently able to initiate the polymerization of MMA, leading to the formation of propagating polymer radicals. The propagating polymer radical is subjected to several fates: it can either, (a) add to MMA monomers, (b) react with other propagating radicals to generate dead chains, or (c) react with the oxidized Ir(IV)Br species to regenerate a dormant polymer chain with a bromide end-group and the original Ir(III) complex. The cyclic process shown in Scheme 39 continues in the presence of light with the propagation stopping immediately when light is switched off.
 Scheme 39  Photo-ATRP with fac-Ir(ppy)3 as the photoredox catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 564 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition, this photosystem demonstrated perfect temporal control affording no termination events in the absence of light while propagation continued when the light was switched back on. In addition, a “living” polymerization was observed with a linear increase of conversion against molecular weight and a decrease in molecular weight distributions at high conversions. The “living” nature of this technique was further demonstrated through the formation of diblock poly(methyl methacrylate)-b-poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide) copolymer, with controlled molecular weight and molecular weight distributions. Although light mediated reactions offer numerous advantages especially as an external stimulus for polymerization, shallow and uneven penetration of light has always been a source concern. Melker and coworkers highlighted this concern by performing the visible light mediated polymerization of MMA with fac-Ir(ppy)3 in a continuous flow microreactor which resulted in polymers with good control of molecular weight and molecular weight distributions565 (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Polymerization of methyl methacrylate with fac-Ir(ppy)3 in a continuous flow microreactor. Reproduced from ref. 565 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Yang and coworkers expanded the scope of fac-Ir(ppy)3 in polymerizing different methacrylates to generate well-defined polymers, by investigating the effects of solvent and different functional groups.566 Polymerization of MMA under visible light with EBiB as the initiator with three different solvents; anisole, dimethylformamide (DMF), and acetonitrile, revealed that anisole provided better control of molecular weight distributions compared with the other solvents. Anisole was then used as solvent to polymerize functional methacrylates such as OEGMA and DMAEMA to form homopolymers and diblock copolymers with poly(methyl methacrylate) macroinitiator. Polymerization of OEGMA to generate homopolymers and diblock copolymers resulted in better control over molecular weight and molecular weight distributions in comparison to polymerization of DMAEMA. In another recent work, Yang and coworkers have shown that polymerization of propargyl methacrylate, a clickable polymer with acetenyl group, under visible light using fac-Ir(ppy)3 resulted in better control over the polymerization in comparison to thermally activated copper-based ATRP.567 In addition, they successfully synthesized a triblock poly(trifluoroethyl methacrylate)-b-poly(methyl methacrylate)-b-poly(trifluoroethyl methacrylate) copolymer, through one-pot sequential monomer addition with a difunctional initiator, using fac-Ir(ppy)3 as the photocatalyst.568
In order to increase generality and utility of visible light mediated ATRP, an extension of this study with fac-Ir(ppy)3 was carried out to polymerize acrylate monomers, including MA, nBA, and tBA, leading to well defined synthesis of homo-, random, and block copolymers.569 Unlike Cu-based ATRP which is formed in situ through coordination with ligands, fac-Ir(ppy)3 provides stability due to its covalent binding to ppy ligands, leading to tolerance towards acidic groups. The robust nature of the photocatalyst has led to incorporation of carboxylic acid monomers directly at the polymer chain ends. In addition, synthesis of low polydispersity block copolymers of polyacrylate-b-acrylate, polymethacrylate-b-acrylate, and polyacrylate-b-polymethacrylate was made possible with this system, with no monomer sequence requirements.
One of the drawbacks of surface-initiated polymerization (SIP) for fabrication of polymer brushes is the lack of spatial and temporal control leading to reliance on pre-patterned initiator layers. Although it is possible to design patterned and gradient brushes through the use lithographic techniques, designing three dimensional brushes remains a challenge. By exploiting the use of Ir-based photocatalysts from their previous work,564 Hawker and coworkers570 were able to spatially and temporally regulate polymer brush formation from silica substrates with a uniform initiator layer (Fig. 8). By limiting the exposure time, the height of polymer brushes was regulated, and the use of a photomask spatially constrained the growth of polymer brushes to regions subjected to visible light irradiation. By coupling spatial control with intensity modulation to control the molecular weight of polymers, three dimensional polymer brushes were synthesized in a single step. In this investigation, PMMA brushes were successfully grown from a silicon oxide surface functionalized with trichloro-silane-substituted α-bromoisobutyrate-based initiators. By using photomasks, rectangular patterns of different sizes were generated upon visible irradiation. In addition, the use of a grayscale lithography mask afforded different brush architectures including, incline planes, microprisms, gradients, and arrays of microlenses. The presence of bromine end-groups on the PMMA chain ends allowed for further chain extension, with the use of tert-butyl methacrylate (tBMA) providing an opportunity for tuning of surface topography to generate block copolymer brushes.
 Fig. 8  Spatial and temporal regulation of polymer brush formation from silica substrates. Reproduced from ref. 570 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Precise tuning of surface chemistry to generate well-defined patterned surfaces was explored by Yang and coworkers using fac-Ir(ppy)3 to couple SIP with thiol–yne “click” chemistry571 (Fig. 9). In this investigation, bromo-4-hydroxyacetophenone (BHAP) was attached to low density polyethylene (LDPE) film by phenoxy radical coupling under UV irradiation. Propargyl methacrylate was polymerized from the surface of the substrate using BHAP as an initiator under visible light irradiation in the presence of fac-Ir(ppy)3. Additional thiol groups were then introduced to the surface of the substrate through a thiol–yne “click” reaction between the propargyl moiety and pentaerythritoltetra (3-mercaptopropionate), (PETMP). A pyrene fluorescent probe was then conjugated to the grafted polymer. In this approach, three interesting features should be noted. Firstly, a single photocatalyst (fac-Ir(ppy)3) was used to promote the growth of polymer and promote thiol–yne click reaction. Secondly, integrity of the acetenyl moiety was maintained throughout the polymerization without the need for protection. Thirdly, additional thiol groups were able to be introduced through thiol–yne click reactions which can lead to further post-polymerization functionalization.
 Fig. 9  Coupling surface-initiated polymerization with thiol–yne click chemistry using fac-Ir(ppy)3. Reproduced from ref. 571 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Further exploration on precise tuning of surface topography was also explored by Pester and coworkers to generate hydrophilic/hydrophobic diblock polymer brushes through visible light photopatterning leading to chemically and topographically ambiguous anti-biofouling surfaces. Synthesis of poly(ethylene glycol methacrylate)-b-poly(trifluoroethyl methacrylate) (PEGMA-b-PTFEMA), and vice versa, was made possible via lithographic masks with well-defined topographical and chemical patterns. In addition, by combining photoregulated brush formation with copper-mediated ATRP and ATRA, the range of multiblock brushes that can be patterned was greatly expanded.572 The use of visible light mediated surface grafting was also explored in the modification of microporous polypropylene membranes (MPPM), membranes commonly used in microfiltration and ultrafiltration process due to its high porosity and chemical and mechanical stability, in order to hydrophilize and functionalize the membrane surface.573
Apart from iridium, other transition metal complexes such as iron,574–578 niobium,579 ruthenium,580 dinuclear gold581 and zinc-based metal organic framework582 have been used as photocatalysts for light mediated polymerization. A recent study by Matyjaszewski and coworkers proposed a simple yet elegant ATRP approach utilizing iron-based catalytic systems for polymerization of methacrylates in the absence of additional ligands, reducing agents and radical initiators.575 The use of air-stable iron(III) bromide (FeBr3) in the presence of polar solvents, such as acetonitrile and DMF, creates redundancy for addition of ligands, as the polar solvents are able to act as solubilizing ligands. This technique afforded good control over molecular weight and molecular weight distributions for both homopolymers and diblock copolymers of different methacrylates. The authors proposed that the transitions between iron(III) and iron(II) states were due to photoreduction by monomers coupled by photoactivation of iron(II).


Light regulated ATRP with metal-free photocatalysts. 
The use of metal catalysts presents associated metal contamination and the focus of RDRP techniques, especially ATRP, has been leaning towards lowering catalyst loadings583–585 and/or removing residual metals as a result.586–588 Although the reduction of metal catalysts to ppm amounts for ATRP has been made possible, a more viable and practical solution to metal toxicity is to carry out polymerization in metal-free systems.569 The use of a photoorganocatalyst for the reduction of an alkyl bromide to initiate polymerization was first reported by Theriot and Miyake.589 In their investigation, perylene was utilized as a photoorganocatalyst as it is a strong reductant in the excited state capable of undergoing oxidative quenching by transferring an electron to an alkyl bromide (Scheme 40). The generated alkyl radicals from alkyl bromides were able to polymerize methacrylates and styrene under visible light and sunlight irradiation. The generated polymers lacked control of molecular weight and polydispersity with the overall photopolymerization process suffering from poor initiator efficiency. In order to improve the control over metal-free visible light ATRP, Miyake and coworkers utilized computationally directed discovery to investigate a class of photocatalysts with 5,10-diphenyl-5,10-dihydrophenazine core as catalyst for organic ATRP (O-ATRP). In this study they were able to show good control over polymerization, on par with thermal ATRP, by using various substituents (electron donating, neutral and electron withdrawing moieties) on the phenazine core.590
 Scheme 40  Photo-ATRP mediated by perlyene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 589. 
In order to improve the efficiency of photoorganocatalyst, Hawker and coworkers developed a novel metal-free ATRP system using a 10-phenylphenothiazine (PTH) catalyst569 (Scheme 41). The principle mechanism of polymerization is very similar to the polymerization carried out using iridium photocatalysts in the ATRP systems previously discussed. In addition, this metal-free system affords reversible deactivation with light as a trigger, as well as excellent control over molecular weight and molecular weight distributions of poly(methacrylates). The ATRP photopolymerization with PTH afforded high chain end-group fidelity with synthesis of well-defined block and random copolymers. Furthermore, phenothiazine derived PMMA macroinitiator was successfully used to polymerize styrene under traditional ATRP conditions using CuBr. The use of phenothiazine was the expanded to SI-ATRP where fabrication of well -defined polymer brushes was made possible on flat and curved surfaces with a “benchtop setup”.591 Matyjaszewski and coworkers extended the idea of metal-free ATRP by carrying out successful synthesis of polyacrylonitrile with three different phenothiazine derivatives as the photoredox catalyst, which resulted in good control over molecular weight and molecular weight distributions.592 Further mechanistic insights revealed that the activation of alkyl bromide takes place through dissociative electron transfer from phenothiazine derivatives in the excited state to the initiator while deactivation of the propagating radical involves a termolecular encounter leading to associative electron transfer to regenerate the dormant photocatalyst.593 Bergbeiter and Liang expanded the recyclability of phenothiazine photocatalyst by attaching a polyisobutylene polymer support that allows for easy separation of the photocatalyst from the polymer product via biphasic separation process.594 In addition, recent work by Zhu and coworkers highlighted the use of fluorescein in the presence of triethylamine (TEA) for initiation of photo-ATRP through a reductive quenching pathway. Although successful polymerization was made possible in the presence of photoorganocatalyst, poor control over polymerization was observed.595
 Scheme 41  Metal-free ATRP with 10-phenylphenothiazine catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 596 with permission from American Chemical Society. 


Light regulated RAFT polymerization with metal photocatalysts. 
As traditional RAFT polymerization does not require the use of transition metals for polymerization, the use of photoredox catalysts for RAFT polymerization has remained understudied. However, recent years have seen the emergence of RAFT polymerization mediated by ppm amounts of metal photocatalysts that are able to regulate polymerization through external stimulus.196,419,597–604 Drawing inspiration from Hawker and coworkers,564,570,605 We developed photoinduced electron/energy transfer-reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (PET-RAFT) polymerization.597 This technique requires the use of transition metal photocatalysts, such as fac-Ir(ppy)3597–599,606 and Ru(bpy)3Cl2603,604 to activate RAFT agents through a photoinduced electron or energy transfer process (Scheme 42) leading to polymerization of a broad range of conjugated ((meth)acrylate, (meth)acrylamide, and styrene) and unconjugated (vinyl esters, N-vinyl pyrrolidinone, isoprene and dimethyl vinyl phosphonate) monomers (Table 3). In addition, the use of transition metal photocatalysts led to a distinct advantage where we were able to carry out RDRP in the presence of air with a concentration of fac-Ir(ppy)3 as low as 1 ppm.
 Scheme 42  Proposed mechanism for photoinduced electron/energy transfer-reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (PET-RAFT) polymerization in the presence of photocatalyst: (A) electron transfer and (B) energy transfer mechanism. PC: photocatalyst. 
Table 3 Compatibility of PET-RAFT polymerization with different photocatalysts and RAFT agents




Catalyst
RAFT agents
Investigated monomer
Ref.










MMA, MA, MAA, tBMA, tBA, St, DMA, HPMA, NIPAAm, OEGMA, OEGA, EA, 2,2,2-trifluoroethyl acrylate, n-hexyl acrylate, n-pentyl acrylate, 3-oxobutyl acrylate, 3-(trimethylsilyl)prop-2-yn-1-yl acrylate, isoprene, VAc, vinyl pivalate, NVP, dimethyl vinylphosphonate, vinyl benzoate, vinyl carbazole

419, 597–599 and 606









MMA, MA, EA, tBA, nBA, HEA, DMA, NIPAAm, DEGA, OEGMA, OEGA, phenyl acrylate, N,N′-diethylacrylamide

196, 603 and 604









MMA, MA, tBMA, DMA, HPMA, NIPAAm, OEGMA, GMA, HEMA, PFPA, MAA, DMAEMA

601









MMA, GMA, MAA, HEMA, OEGMA, DMAEMA, HPMA, PFPMA

607









MMA, MA

597 and 607









MMA

602









MA, DMA, St, tBA, HEA, OEGA, NIPAAm, DMAEA, isobornyl acrylate, MMA, MA, HEMA, DMAEMA, GMA, HPMA

602









MA, DMA, NIPAAm, tBA, HEA, OEGA, DMAEA

608









MMA, GMA, OEGMA, DMAEMA, tBMA

609









MMA, tBMA, GMA, HEMA, DMAEMA, BzMA

610





Although oxygen can act as radical scavenger that can lead to premature termination, the use of fac-Ir(ppy)3 is proposed to reduce molecular oxygen to inactive species. In addition, the versatility of fac-Ir(ppy)3 to tolerate large volumes of air was tested by carrying out polymerization of vinyl acetate in a glass vial filled with 90% air and 10% of reaction mixture.598 Interestingly, high monomer conversion was achieved although a broader molecular weight distribution was observed. As light acts as an external stimulus for polymerization, temporal control can also be induced in this system where propagation occurs in the presence of light while in darkness the polymerization is halted. Homopolymers with molecular weights of up to 2000000 g mol−1 and decablock copolymers via successive chain extensions were generated with good control over the polydispersity and end-group fidelity. Additionally, in comparison to fac-Ir(ppy)3, Ru(bpy)3Cl2 provided solubility in aqueous conditions, which presented excellent compatibility with biological media for extensive in situ polymer–protein bioconjugation using the PET-RAFT technique.604
Similar to previously proposed mechanisms by Hawker and coworkers, PET-RAFT using fac-Ir(ppy)3 as photocatalyst relies on the ability of the excited state fac-Ir(ppy)3 to reduce thiocarbonylthio compounds (RAFT agents) upon irradiation under blue light (λmax = 460 nm) (Scheme 42A). As the reduction potential of Ir(IV)/Ir(III)* is much lower than the reduction potential of thiocarbonylthio compounds (4-cyanopentanoic acid dithiobenzoate (CPADB) (∼−0.4 V), 2-(n-butyltrithiocarbonate)-propionic acid (BTPA) (∼−0.6 V) and 3-benzylsulfanyl thiocarbonylthiosulfanyl propionic acid (BSTP) (∼−0.9 V)), Ir(III)* was able to reduce these compounds through a PET process. The reduction of RAFT agents led to the production of radical (Pn˙) and Ir(IV) species, with the generated radical either proceeding to react with monomers or be deactivated by Ir(IV) to regenerate Ir(III). Interestingly, according to the proposed mechanism, RAFT agents not only play the role as chain transfer agents but also as initiators of polymerization.
The Ir-based system was successfully employed for the synthesis of poly(N,N-dimethyl acrylamide) stereoregulated isotactic polymers in the presence Lewis acid mediator yttrium(III) trifluoromethanesulfonate (Y(OTf)3), with good control over molecular weight and polydispersity.600 The PET-RAFT approach for tacticity control provides a novel route as lower amounts of Y(OTf)3 can be employed to achieve good control over tacticity under blue light irradiation as compared to thermal methods. In addition, the ability to induce temporal control enabled polymerization to be stopped in the absence of light, and allowed the addition of chemical reagents such as Y(OTf)3 and DMSO for stereoregulation. Upon irradiation, polymerization continued and generated stereoblock polymers such as atactic-block-isotactic and isotactic-block-atactic polymers. In addition, we showed that by adding discrete amounts of DMSO during the course of polymerization in the presence of Y(OTf)3, synthesis of stereogradient polymers with five different stereoblocks of different tacticities was possible.
In an effort to promote green chemistry by reducing reliance on rare earth metal photocatalysts and adapting PET-RAFT for biologically relevant conditions, polymerization with naturally derived photocatalyst, chlorophyll a (Chl a),601 and polymerization in aqueous media with Ru(bpy)3Cl2604 and Ir(ppy)3599 were carried out respectively. Interestingly, Chl a, consisting of a porphyrin with a magnesium core, undergoes PET upon irradiation to release an electron from the aromatic π-electron system of the porphyrin (Scheme 43). Upon excitation, it was proposed that thiocarbonylthio compounds that have a higher reduction potentials than Chl a will be reduced through the PET process leading to the generation of a propagating radical and a π-cation radical of Chl a. The π-electron system provides stability after PET, as the positive charge on the cationic Chl a and spin of the unpaired electron are delocalized extensively on the ring system. The generated propagating radical can either proceed to propagate or be deactivated by addition to the Chl a π-cation radical-thiocarbonylthio complex to regenerate the dormant chain and Chl a. In contrast to previous Ir- and Ru-based photocatalyst systems, the electron does not originate from metal to ligand charge transfer (MLCT) but directly from the π-electron system of the porphyrin.601 Furthermore, by using bacteriochlorophyll a (BChl a), the limits of RAFT photopolymerization was pushed to include far red (λmax = 780 nm) and near-infrared (λmax = 850 nm) irradiation wavelengths.609
 Scheme 43  Proposed mechanism for PET-RAFT polymerization with chlorophyll a (Chl a) as photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 601. 
By exploiting metalloporphyrins such as zinc tetraphenylporphyrin (ZnTPP), we were able to manipulate polymerization kinetics based on the absorption profile of the catalyst.602 As ZnTPP has several absorption peaks at blue, green yellow, orange, and red, polymerization kinetics of MA were investigated at these absorptions. Polymerization rates were highly dependent on molar absorption coefficients of ZnTPP and the fastest polymerization was observed in yellow, followed by green, then orange, and finally blue and red. This is the first example in the literature where polymerization rate constants in RDRP can be tuned via manipulation of different wavelengths with a single photoredox catalyst. We also pushed the boundaries of radical polymerization by carrying out the first open vessel polymerization. Polymerization of MA under fully open conditions proceeded with high livingness as demonstrated by the narrow dispersities of the synthesized polymers.
Merging the remarkable compatibility and selectivity of photoredox catalysis with PET-RAFT technique, an innovative concept of selective photoactivation (Scheme 44) was developed for advanced organic and polymer synthesis. Firstly, a precise single unit monomer insertion (SUMI) reaction was demonstrated by the selective activation of a highly efficient photocatalyst, pheophorbide a (PheoA, a product of chlorophyll breakdown) to CPADB (Scheme 44A). With the SUMI reaction proceeding in the presence of monomers such as acrylates, acrylamides, or styrene, the R group of CPADB transitions from a tertiary carbon to a secondary carbon, resulting in a significant change in the stability of the C–S bond. Owing to this chemical structure change, pure monoadducts can be prepared without (or with minimal) purification in a single step. Secondly, we found that PheoA can selectively activate CPADB for controlled radical polymerization of methacrylates in the presence of trithiocarbonate (such as BTPA). Meanwhile, ZnTPP was found to selectively activate trithiocarbonate with high efficiency while dithiobenzoates are poorly activated (Scheme 44B). By combining this unique selectivity of both ZnTPP and PheoA, a model graft co-polymer ((PMMA-r-BTPEMA)-g-PMMA) was prepared via a one-pot, two-step process and simple light switching.610 In this polymerization, two RAFT agents (CPADB and BTPA) and two monomers (MMA and BTPEMA) (2-(2-(n-butyltrithiocarbonate)-propionate)ethyl methacrylate) were initially introduced into the reaction mixture containing two catalysts ZnTPP and PheoA. Initial polymerization led to the formation of methacrylate copolymers catalyzed by PheoA under red light. Upon reaching complete monomer conversion, MA was then introduced into the reaction pot followed by a switch to green light to activate catalysis by ZnTPP. Consequently, a graft copolymer with polymethacrylate backbone and polyacrylate graft chains was synthesized. In addition, orthogonality of two different reactions was further explored by carrying out simultaneous ring-opening and PET-RAFT polymerizations in a single pot. We were able to successfully carry out ring opening polymerization of ε-caprolactone (CL) catalyzed by diphenyl phosphate and PET-RAFT polymerization of MA catalyzed by Ir(ppy)3 under visible light in a single pot to generate well-defined PCL-b-PMA copolymers. The orthogonality of both reactions afforded simultaneous polymerization to take place with suppression of crossover or side reactions that can lead to poor control over polymerization.606
 Scheme 44  Selective photoactivation of thiocarbonylthio compounds for SUMI reactions (A) and controlled radical polymerization (B) via the PET-RAFT Process. Reproduced from ref. 610 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Light regulated RAFT polymerization with metal-free photocatalysts. 
In an effort to move away from rare earth metal-based photocatalysts and to provide cheaper and less toxic alternatives to light mediated RAFT polymerization, organo-dyes such as fluorescein, EY, methylene blue, Nile red and rhodamine 6G were introduced to mediate PET-RAFT polymerization.607 Of these organo-dyes, only fluorescein and EY were able to activate PET-RAFT polymerization with the efficiency of the latter being much higher than the former. By comparing the efficiency of the previous Ir- and Ru-based photocatalyst systems with this study, it was found that a photocatalyst with a lower reduction potential than that of RAFT agents, lower quantum yields for fluorescence and higher intersystem crossing rates increased the probability of PET from the photocatalyst to a RAFT agent upon excitation by light (Scheme 45). Consideration of these different criteria revealed that EY was a superior dye in comparison to the other tested dyes. By varying the concentration of EY between 10 to 100 ppm relative to monomer concentration, the successful polymerization of MMA, DMAEMA, 2-hydroxylethyl methacrylate (HEMA), pentafluorophenyl methacrylate (PFPMA), glycidyl methacrylate (GMA), OEGMA, and methacrylic acid (MAA) was observed, with good correlation between theoretical and experimental molecular weights and narrow polydispersities. In addition, the polymerization was not only oxygen tolerant but also versatile towards different organic solvents and water. By adding a tertiary amine, TEA, polymerization in the presence of air was made possible through a reductive quenching cycle. In addition, only a slight increase in polymerization rate was observed for polymerization in the absence of oxygen and in the presence of TEA. However, polymerization in the presence of oxygen demonstrated a much higher increase in the polymerization rate upon addition of TEA.
 Scheme 45  Proposed PET-RAFT mechanism using EY as the photoredox catalyst via (a) oxidative quenching cycle and (b) reductive quenching cycle in the presence of triethylamine (TEA). Reproduced from ref. 607 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
We also introduced a metal free donor–acceptor system where a trithiocarbonate was attached to a free base porphyrin to improve of the efficiency of radical generation for polymerization. The conjugation of free base porphyrin to trithiocarbonates (i.e. BTPA and BSTP) reduced catalyst loading from 500 ppm to 100 ppm while allowing successful polymerization of acrylates with well-defined molecular weights and polydispersities.607
The use of photoredox catalyst, 10-phenylphenothiazine (PTH), was reported by Johnson and coworkers to synthesize telechelic poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) with trithiocarbonate iniferter under visible light using compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) bulb.611 A similar mechanism to PET-RAFT was proposed, where upon excitation of the photocatalyst, an electron is transferred from the photocatalyst to the trithiocarbonate, leading to the generation of radical (Pn˙) and cationic PTH (PTH+˙) (Scheme 46). The anionic trithiocarbonate can deactivate the propagating polymer chain to generate polymeric trithiocarbonate and ground state PTH. Extension of this polymerization to include other acrylate and acrylamide monomers, N,N-dimethylacrylamide (DMA), EGA, and tBA, led to synthesis of well-defined polymers with narrow polydispersities.
 Scheme 46  Synthesis of telechelic polymers using 10-phenylphenothiazine (PTH) and trithiocarbonate under visible light. Reproduced from ref. 611 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Qiao and coworkers introduced Pi-RDRP polymerization of methacrylates under UV light irradiation (λmax = 365 nm) utilizing tertiary amine catalyst (TAC) and trithiocarbonate. In this process, photoirradiation led to electron transfer from the tertiary amine to trithiocarbonate, forming a trithiocarbonate radical anion and an amine radical cation. The trithiocarbonate radical anions can reversibly cleave to generate reactive carbon-centered radicals (Pn˙) and resonance stabilized trithiocarbonate radicals612 (Scheme 47). This work was then further expanded to design a recoverable solid state photocatalyst (ssPC) where electron rich DMAEMA was grafted from a solid substrate to act as a reservoir of electrons. Upon UV irradiation, electron transfer from the grafted PDMAEMA to trithiocarbonate generates propagating radical that initiates polymerization. In addition, further versatility of the electron rich ssPC was shown through successful catalysis of copper mediate azide–alkyne cycloaddition.613
 Scheme 47  Pi-RDRP photoactivated by tertiary amine. Reproduced from ref. 612 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Cobalt mediated radical photopolymerization. 
Detrembleur and coworkers carried out an extensive mechanistic study on CMRP of nBA and VAc.614 Initially, polymerization of nBA in the presence of bis(acetylacetonato)cobalt(II) (Co(acac)2) using AIBN as the photoinitiator was carried out at 0 °C which resulted in a high molecular weight polymer with narrow polydispersity. This approach suffered from low initiator efficiency (<1%) which was overcome by substitution of AIBN with conventional photoinitiators such as Irgacure 681 (I681) or Irgacure 819 (I819). Laser flash photolysis (LFP) was also utilized in order to monitor the addition of radicals formed from decomposition of photoinitiators and polyacrylate and poly(vinyl acetate) radical species onto Co(acac)2. This characterization enabled the estimation of the combination rate constant (kdeact) between the radicals and Co(acac)2. The change in oxidation states of Co(II) to Co(III) upon addition of radicals was also observed in absorption spectra. Furthermore, Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) spin-trapping experiments revealed that that the alkyl–cobalt(III) bond can be easily photolyzed under UV irradiation.
Expanding on their previous work,614 Detrembleur and coworkers explored the use of photoinitiated CMRP for the synthesis of α-functional and α,ω-telechelic polymers.615 The initial production of α-hydroxy functionalized poly(N-vinyl pyrrolidone) (PNVP) was carried out using a low temperature azoinitiator initiated under UV irradiation in the presence of Co(acac)2. The Co–C bond of the synthesized polymer was then transformed through homolytic cleavage of this bond followed by addition of a diene unit and recombination of the allyl radical terminated chains. This led the initial α-hydroxy-PNVP-Co(acac)2 to be transformed to α,ω-hydroxy-telechelic PNVP. Ring opening polymerization of ε-caprolactone (CL) was then carried out on α-hydroxy-PNVP with the Co-end group replaced by 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO) and α,ω-hydroxy-telechelic PNVP in the presence of tin octoate (Sn(Oct)2) at 110 °C, leading to the generation of diblock, PNVP-b-PCL, and triblock, PNVP-b-PCL-b-PNVP, copolymers. These amphiphilic block copolymers were found to be able to self-assemble in water to form vesicles, with the triblock copolymer being able to a form flower-like folding morphology.
In addition, similar work was also carried out by Zhu and coworkers using 2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyldiphenylphosphine oxide (TPO) to initiate the polymerization of monomers such as VAc, nBA, MMA, St, MA, NVP, and N-vinylcaprolactam. Co(acac)2 was used under UV irradiation which led to good control over the polymerization.616 The ability to polymerize unconjugated monomers through CMRP was further expanded by Kermagoret and coworkers utilizing alkyl–cobalt(III) in a continuous flow photoreactor to polymerize VAc under UV irradiation.617 The polymerization of VAc in a flow reactor resulted in good control and minimum side reactions. Furthermore, copolymerization of VAc with 1-octene, a less reactive olefin, resulted in copolymers with up to 50 mol% composition of 1-octene.
As high energy UV irradiation has often led to an increase in cost and inconvenience, Fu and coworkers explored the use of visible light in the photolysis of Co–C bond for CMRP of acrylamides.53 In the presence of light, the weak Co–C bond is cleaved to form a persistent metal radical, Co(II), and a propagating carbon radical chain that adds to the monomer. In this investigation, organo-cobalt initiators with different substituent groups such as (TMP-OH)Co-PMA I, (TMP-OH)Co-PDMA II, and (TMP)Co-PMA III were synthesized (Scheme 48). These initiators were then used in the polymerization of different acrylamides, including N,N-dimethylacrylamide (DMA), N,N-diethylacrylamide (DEA) and N-acryloylmorpholine (AMO), in the presence of visible light which afforded good control over molecular weight and molecular weight distributions. In addition, visible light was shown to be able to act as an external stimulus to reversibly activate and deactivate polymerization. The cobalt porphyrin system also afforded reversible switching between photo and thermal initiation which provides an opportunity for synthesis of functional block copolymers composed of monomers with low ceiling temperature.
 Scheme 48  Visible light mediated reversible deactivation radical polymerizations utilizing organo-cobalt porphyrins for polymerization of acrylamides followed by synthesis of block copolymers by reversible switching between thermal and light reactions. Adapted from ref. 618 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
An extension to this study looked into the polymerization of hydrophilic and hydrophobic acrylate monomers mediated by cobalt porphyrins, leading to the generation of novel multiblock copolymers consisting of acrylamide and acrylate segments, at ambient temperature and in the absence of photoinitiators and sacrificial agents.618 In addition to performing cobalt mediated polymerization using a household lamp and sunlight, Fu and coworkers were able to demonstrate temporal control over polymerization through activation under visible light irradiation and deactivation in the absence of light.
Although visible light proved useful in promoting polymerization of acrylates and acrylamides with cobalt porphyrins, this approach posed a limitation in terms of monomer selection, as it was restricted to acrylates and acrylamides. Zhao et al. expanded the limits of the monomer range with a single cobalt based photoinitiator using a methoxycarbonyl–cobalt (salen)Co–CO2CH3 complex.619 The use of (salen)Co–CO2CH3 afforded RDRP with different types of monomers, including acrylamides, acrylates and VAc, with good control of molecular weights and molecular weight distributions. Radical trapping experiments to confirm the ability of (salen)Co–CO2CH3 to act as a photoinitiator were carried out in the presence of a 500 W xenon lamp which resulted in photolysis of (salen)Co–CO2CH3 to form CH3CO2˙, which was trapped by TEMPO. The (salen)Co–CO2CH3 complex played a dual role as an initiator and mediator capable of being activated in the presence of a 500 W xenon lamp, a household fluorescent lamp, or even under sunlight irradiation to afford well-controlled polymerization of acrylates and acrylamides. Although the complex afforded polymerization under visible light for both acrylates and acrylamides, the polymerization rates were rather slow. The addition of TPO as photoinitiator boosted the polymerization efficiency while maintaining good control over polymerization. In addition, the presence of TPO enabled successful polymerization of VAc with good control over molecular weight and molecular weight distributions. Visible light was found to be necessary to initiate polymerization but showed very little effect for the propagation of the radical chains which was attributed to the difference in cobalt–carbon bond energy in (salen)Co–C(sp2) compared to (salen)Co–C(sp3). Polymer structure analysis revealed that the ω-end group of the polymer consisted of (salen)Co while the α-end group of the polymer consisted of –CO2CH3. The ω-end group was functionalized through oxygen insertion followed by hydrolysis to form hydroxyl ω-end group.
Even though the (salen)Co–CO2CH3 photoinitiator allowed for polymerization of monomers with different functional groups, the synthesis of this photoinitiator was tedious with the need for purification.619 In order to overcome this challenge, Fu and coworkers reported a simplified system that requires only the use of commercially available cobalt(II) salen and TPO to initiate polymerization of acrylates, acrylamides and VAc under visible light.620 The generated polymers exhibited controlled molecular weights and narrow molecular weight distributions. The livingness of this system was verified through chain extension experiments. Although TPO is able to generate both phosphorus- and carbon-centered radicals to initiate polymerization, the former has a higher reactivity leading to the majority of polymer chains being capped with phosphorus.


Iodine mediated radical photopolymerization. 
IMP systems have suffered from slow polymerization that eventually leads to termination due to accumulation of iodine (I2). To circumvent this limitation a visible light photoinitiator, Mn2(CO)10, has been utilized, which leads to the generation of Mn˙(CO)5 radicals which abstract iodine from alkyl iodides leading to consumption of iodine, and dominance of the degenerate transfer mechanism. This approach has been used for the polymerization of VAc,621–623 MA,621,623 styrene,621,622 vinylidene fluoride,622,624,625tBA,622 MMA,622 isoprene,622 and acrylonitrile.622 In addition, UV mediated polymerization of VAc in miniemulsion using alkyl iodide macrophotoinitiator was shown to proceed in the absence of an initiator while maintaining a low concentration of I2 in the organic phase, and therefore, suppressing termination.626 Vana and Wolpers have provided mechanistic as well as kinetic insights into UV-driven polymerization of nBMA with an iodo chain transfer agent.627 This UV mediated system was found to provide a better control over molecular weight and molecular weight distributions in comparison to similar thermally initiated systems. The better control can be attributed to perpetual photolysis of C–I bonds and the formation of low amounts of iodine which allows for a reversible termination mechanism to coexist with a degenerate chain-transfer mechanism. Perfect photo-switchability was observed as polymerization only occurred in the presence of light and was terminated in the absence of light. The ability to increase the polymerization rate by increasing temperature, without compromising molecular weight control, was also observed.
Kaji and coworkers developed photoinduced reversible complexation mediated polymerization (photo-RCMP) which can be externally regulated by visible light irradiation.628 In this approach, alkyl iodides acted as the dormant species while amines such as tributylamine (TBA) acted as the catalyst. The authors proposed two mechanistic pathways that can lead to the generation of iodide radical. In the first pathway, the C–I bond of a free “dormant” species is photodissociated to generate I˙ which is captured by the amine catalyst (Scheme 49, (a)). In the second pathway, a complex of dormant species and amine is formed before photodissociation of the C–I bond (Scheme 49, (b)). The generated I˙ radicals are quite unstable leading to coupling to form iodine molecules (I2) and TBA (I2 complex). Furthermore, the alkyl radical (Polymer˙) reacts with I˙ and I2 complexes to generate polymer-I and TBA demonstrating reversible complexation of iodine and catalyst. In addition, polymerization of MMA and functional methacrylates led to good control over molecular weight and molecular weight distributions.
 Scheme 49  Mechanisms of photoinduced reversible complexation mediated polymerization (photo-RCMP). Reproduced from ref. 628 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Kaji and coworkers further expanded photo-RCMP to include photoorganocatalysts that absorb in a wide range of visible light wavelengths.629 The photoorganocatalyst not only complexes with the iodide radical but also acts as an antenna that absorbs light and transfers the energy to the alkyl iodide leading to dissociation of the C–I bond and generation of alkyl radicals to initiate polymerization (Scheme 50). Furthermore, the polymerization can be instantly switched on and off, and the polymerization rate can be easily modulated by altering the photocatalysts and their corresponding absorbing wavelength for irradiation (Scheme 50). The synthesized polymers displayed good control over molecular weight and molecular weight distributions for various functional methacrylates. Block copolymers of MMA and δ-valerolactone were then synthesized in a one-pot method, where reversible deactivation radical polymerizations and ring-opening polymerization were selectively regulated by modulation of irradiation wavelength. In this study a dual initiator, 2-hydroxyethyl 2-iodo-2-phenylacetate, was used as the iodine moiety to initiate the reversible deactivation radical polymerization while the hydroxyl moiety initiated the ring-opening polymerization. The first block segment, consisting of poly(methyl methacrylate), was built under visible wavelength irradiation between 550–750 nm. The irradiation wavelength was then switched to UV light between 350–380 nm to initiate the polymerization of δ-valerolactone leading to the synthesis of well-defined diblock copolymers.
 Scheme 50  Photo-RCMP over a wide range of wavelengths by selecting different photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 629 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Unlike conventional IMPs that require the addition of a photoinitiator, Liu and coworkers extended the seminal works of Hawker and coworkers on the use of fac-Ir(ppy)3 as a photocatalyst for polymerization of MMA in ATRP to include photo-IMP.630 Similar to photo-ATRP, the iridium complex acts as an external trigger for the polymerization of methacrylates in the presence of iodoperfluorohexane (IPFHex). Upon irradiation of visible light, the IrIII complex is proposed to activate the C–I bond through single electron transfer to generate a CF3(CF2)5˙ radical and an iodide radical. The iodide radical combines with the generated IrIV to prevent the formation of iodine which can inhibit polymerization. The generated polymer radical can then abstract the iodide from the IrIV–I complex to re-generate dormant polymer-I which can continue to restart the cycle (Scheme 51). Therefore, successful reversible deactivation radical polymerizations of methacrylate monomers were accomplished, with fair control over molecular weights and distributions.
 Scheme 51  Mechanism of photo-IMP as described by Liu and coworkers. Reproduced from ref. 630 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 


Metal-free ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP). 
A recent work by Boydston and coworkers looked into the development of metal-free ROMP where the one electron oxidation products of vinyl ethers (2a, 2b, 2c) were found to react with norbornene (1) in the presence of a pyrylium salt organophotocatalyst leading to high yields of polymer631 (Scheme 52). One electron oxidation of either 2a, 2b, or 2c forms activated radical cation B which can go on to attack a norbornene monomer to form a [2+2] complex, C. Rapid ring opening of D reduces the ring strain leading to propagation with norbornene monomers. Reversible reductions of structures D and E result in repetitive termination–initiation cycles before finally arriving at structure F. Initial investigation relied on the use of electrochemical approach but suffered from poor solubility of poly(norbornene) in nitromethane and also heterogeneous oxidation of vinyl ether initiators at the electrode surface. To circumvent the drawbacks of the electrochemical approach, 2,4,6-tri-(p-methoxyphenyl)pyrylium tetrafluoroborate was employed as the photoredox catalyst as this catalyst in its excited is a good oxidiser of vinyl ether initiators. The propagating radical cation forms a dynamic redox couple with the reduced pyrylium species. The cation radical chain end can also be reduced to terminate the polymerization in the absence of light, with the ability to reoxidize and reinitate the polymerization in the presence of light signifying temporal control. Initial studies with norbornene were then extended to include endo-dicyclopentadiene (DCPD). In this study, homopolymerization of DCPD led to low conversion (∼20%). In addition, copolymerization with norbornene monomers showed that low conversions are not attributed to the decreased reactivity of the DCPD. Further investigation revealed that it is highly likely that the propagating chain end is syn to the cyclopentene ring leading to a decreased monomer conversion. Moreover, the radical cation intermediate can also undergo unwanted intramolecular reactions and rearrangements that depress overall polymerization efficiency. The synthesized poly(DCPD) was then crosslinked with thiol–ene chemistry in a metal-free approach.
 Scheme 52  Proposed mechanism for redox-initiated metal-free ROMP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 631. 

6. Conclusion and outlook
This contribution gives an overview of the growing field of PET processes for organic and polymer chemistry, including organic transformation, conventional and reversible deactivation radical polymerizations, and polymer post-functionalization. PET processes are creating new opportunities for polymer scientists and organic chemists, as highly efficient photoredox catalysis is implemented under mild reaction conditions instead of high temperatures or pressures, using abundant and low energy light sources instead of harmful UV irradiation. Owing to the utilization of mild reaction conditions and the ever present need to minimize cost and improve environmental sustainability, these processes have garnered greatly increased attention over the past five years, and a large emphasis has been placed on finding suitable conditions to synthesize a diverse library of products. As such, this rapidly growing field is now at the point where the major challenges for the incorporation of photoredox catalyzed reactions into a broader range of areas must be addressed.
First and foremost, a greater mechanistic understanding of PET processes in organic and polymer synthesis needs to be developed. Through the proper identification of electron transfer pathways, as well as more accurate photophysical and photochemical analysis of reaction systems, the scope of photoredox catalyzed reactions should become apparent. Moreover, with more precise data in relation to the properties of PET systems, computationally aided design of more efficient and diverse systems should become facile. This will help in the prediction of specific chemical reactions.
Increasing the industrial viability of PET processes is perhaps the greatest challenge in expanding the scope of potential applications of polymeric and other products formed in photoredox catalyzed reactions. A number of strategies need to be explored in order to realize this goal, with the development of the photoredox catalyst being of the utmost importance. Since the advent of some of the first used photoredox catalysts based on transition metal complexes (including iridium and ruthenium), other organo- or macromolecular photoredox catalysts have emerged as treasured members for the activation of PET processes, and subsequent utilized in material synthesis. Apart from reducing the cost and adverse environmental effects associated with metal photoredox catalysts, many other criteria need to be met to allow the products of PET processes to be easily incorporated into their final applications. A library of photoredox catalysts needs to be developed that work at a range of wavelengths, especially in the far-red and near-infrared regions to improve the scope of bio-applications and light penetration in non-transparent materials, as these wavelengths are less energetic and have the ability to more deeply penetrate materials, including human tissue, without adverse effects. Photoredox catalysts should also be non-toxic to limit the need for their post-reaction removal. Non-toxic and biodegradable photoredox catalysts will increase the scope of applications for the products of PET processes to bio-applications and other applications requiring direct human contact with the final materials. Furthermore, the use of biodegradable and non-toxic photoredox catalysts could simplify the purification step as the catalysts could be kept in the final product. Such innovation could significantly reduce the cost of production.
Improvement of photoredox catalyst design should also take into account the intense color associated with catalysts that absorb in the visible range. Applications of polymeric materials often require the product to be colourless, and as such, the utilization of photoredox catalysts that have the ability to dissipate their colour post-reaction will improve the possibility for PET processes to be commercialized. Furthermore, photoredox catalysts need to be designed that have the ability to control other aspects of organic and polymeric reactions, including reaction kinetics as well as the stereochemistry of final products. The development of such catalysts will open new ranges of applications in organic synthesis and polymer synthesis, as the stereochemistry plays an important role in the final properties of the products, and by consequence on its value. The development of photoredox catalysts that can control multiple aspects of PET processes should lead to the production of complex products through simplified ‘one-pot’ methodologies. Similarly, the development of single photoredox catalyst, or alternatively, the combination of two or more photoredox catalysts, that can utilize multi-photon light to enact multiple PET or other processes simultaneously is needed to simplify the procedures for complex material synthesis.
Other changes to PET processes also need to occur in order to improve the progression of reaction techniques from batch to flow relevant to industrial viability. Although this progression would appear to be relatively non-intensive, a great deal of optimization will need to be performed on new and existing systems to allow for simplistic upscaling if commercialization is to occur. The development of PET processes that are efficient under less stringent reaction conditions is also essential in order to improve economic feasibility. In particular, photoredox catalyzed polymerization systems that can be implemented in the presence of air will provide a distinct advantage over conventional radical polymerization systems in terms of ease of preparation and handling of reagents, as well as the associated reduced costs, due to elimination of expensive deoxygenation protocols. Moreover, the ability to perform organic synthetic transformations and photoredox catalyzed polymerization in a range of conventional solvents, most importantly water, will greatly increase the likelihood of PET processes becoming industrially relevant. The ability to perform synthetic procedures in water is also accompanied by an increase in the biocompatibility of these systems, providing greater opportunity for the implementation of PET processes in nanomedicine and other biological systems.
For PET processes to become industrially competitive with other synthetic techniques, an increase in reaction rate must be realized. In applications such as curing, surface modifications and others, it is often necessary for the reaction to reach complete conversions in minutes or less. These processes suffer from the need to utilize harmful UV light, and the development of techniques which provide a comparable product on the same time scale, under visible light, provides benefits in terms of both cost and safety.
Aside from the need to increase the industrial viability of PET processes, there is an inherent need for increased precision in photoredox catalyzed synthetic procedures. In organic synthetic transformations, it is necessary to improve the reaction yields and stereoselectivity of products, and although a number of examples have demonstrated control over stereochemistry, a great deal more research is needed to broaden the scope of stereoselective synthetic techniques. Likewise, one of the current most challenges for polymer synthesis is precise structural control over monomer sequence and tacticity in a highly regulated manner, to mimic natural polymers, i.e. proteins and nucleic acids. Photoredox catalysis has been demonstrated to have excellent compatibility and stereospecificity in organic chemistry, such as chiral catalysis and asymmetric synthesis and needs to be incorporated into polymeric systems. Moreover, control over macromolecule structure in terms of single unit monomer sequence cannot be understated. The ability to create macromolecules with diverse and precise functionality will lead polymer chemists to be able to mimic complex biological macromolecules, in turn providing exciting new avenues for nanotechnology in medicinal and other biological applications. Combined with existing polymer synthetic tools, photoredox catalysis has great potential in helping us approach this goal.
Clearly, the emergence of PET processes has given organic and polymer chemists, and material scientists an excellent toolbox for the development of innovative and highly technological synthetic procedures. The advancement of photoredox catalysis should see a great increase in the scope of potential applications of this technology, with extension to much broader areas of material science, nanotechnology, biomedical and medicine. By improving PET processes to become more precisely controlled, industrially viable, as well as specifically suitable for biological applications, and with a greater underlying understanding of PET mechanisms, there is no telling the limits of this field. In this regard, a great effort has already been made, but we still have a long way to go.
Abbreviations

Bpm2,2′-Bipyrimidine
bpy2,2′-Bipyridine
bpz2,2′-Bipyrazine
dap2,9-Bis(p-anisyl)-1,10-phenanthroline
dF(CF3)ppy2-(2,4-Difluorophenyl)-5-trifluoromethylpyridine
dtbbpy4,4-Di-tert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridine
dFppy2-(2,4-Difluorophenyl)pyridine
Menbpy4,4′-Dimenthoxycarbonyl-2,2′-bipyridine
PhenPhenanthroline
ppy2-Phenylpyridine
MLCTMetal-to-ligand charge transfer
LMCTLigand-to-metal charge transfer
ppmParts per million
UVUltraviolet
LEDLight-emitting diode
CFLCompact fluorescent lamp
PETPhotoinduced electron transfer
SETSingle electron transfer
TPPTetraphenylporphyrin
ZnTPPZinc tetraphenylporphyrin
FeTPPIron tetraphenylporphyrin
Chl aChlorophyll a
BChl aBacteriochlorophyll a
PheoAPheophorbide a
ATRAAtom transfer radical addition
ATRPAtom transfer radical polymerization
RAFTReversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer
PET-RAFTPhotoinduced electron/energy transfer – reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer
RDRPReversible deactivation radical polymerization
SIPSurface-initiated polymerization
CMRPCobalt mediated radical polymerization
ROMPRing-opening metathesis polymerization
TEMPO2,2,6,6-Tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy
MMAMethyl methacrylate
MAMethyl acrylate
EAEthyl acrylate
MAAMethacrylic acid
HEA2-Hydroxylethyl acrylate
DMAEA2-(Dimethylamino)ethyl acrylate
VAcVinyl acetate
NVP
N-Vinyl pyrrolidone
DMAEMA2-(Dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate

nBA
n-Butylacrylate
StStyrene

tBA
tert-Butyl acrylate

tBMA
tert-Butyl methacrylate
HEMA2-Hydroxylethyl methacrylate
BzMABenzyl methacrylate
EGAEthylene glycol methyl ether acrylate
OEGMAOligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate, Mn = 300 g mol−1
HPMA
N-2-Hydroxylpropyl methacrylamide
PFPAPentafluorophenyl acrylate
PFPMAPentafluorophenyl methacrylate
GMAGlycidyl methacrylate
OEGAOligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether acrylate, Mn = 480 g mol−1
DMA
N,N′-Dimethylacrylamide
NIPAM
N-Isopropylacrylamide
PMDETA
N,N,N′,N′′,N′′-Pentamethyldiethylenetriamine
EBiBEthyl α-bromoisobutyrate
TPMATris(2-pyridylmethyl)amine
TEATriethylamine
EYEosin Y
DMSODimethyl sulfoxide
DMFDimethylformamide
NMP
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
CPADB4-Cyanopentanoic acid dithiobenzoate
BTPA2-(n-Butyltrithiocarbonate)-propionic acid
DDMAT2-(Dodecylthiocarbonothioylthio)-2-methylpropionic acid
CDTPA4-Cyano-4-[(dodecylsulfanylthiocarbonyl)sulfanyl]pentanoic acid
BSTP3-Benzylsulfanyl thiocarbonylthiosulfanyl propionic acid
XanthateMethyl 2-[(ethoxycarbonothioyl)sulfanyl]propanoate
CDBCumyl dithiobenzoate
CPD2-Cyano-2-propyl benzodithioate
GPCGel permeation chromatography
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance

References

          J. A. Bassham, A. A. Benson and M. Calvin, The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,  1950 Search PubMed .
G. Ciamician, Science, 1912, 36, 385–394 CAS .
C. K. Prier, D. A. Rankic and D. W. C. MacMillan, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5322–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. R. Narayanam and C. R. J. Stephenson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 102–113 RSC .
J. Du, K. L. Skubi, D. M. Schultz and T. P. Yoon, Science, 2014, 344, 392–396 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1982, 46, 159–244 CrossRef CAS .
A. Juris, V. Balzani, F. Barigelletti, S. Campagna, P. L. Belser and A. Von Zelewsky, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1988, 84, 85–277 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Guillet, Polymer photophysics and photochemistry: an introduction to the study of photoprocesses in macromolecules, CUP Archive,  1987 Search PubMed .
D. P. Rillema, G. Allen, T. Meyer and D. Conrad, Inorg. Chem., 1983, 22, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haga, E. S. Dodsworth, G. Eryavec, P. Seymour and A. Lever, Inorg. Chem., 1985, 24, 1901–1906 CrossRef CAS .
R. Crutchley and A. Lever, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 7128–7129 CrossRef CAS .
G. Seely, Photochem. Photobiol., 1978, 27, 639–654 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Lambert and I. E. Kochevar, Photochem. Photobiol., 1997, 66, 15–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Juris, V. Balzani, P. Belser and A. von Zelewsky, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1981, 64, 2175–2182 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Lowry, J. I. Goldsmith, J. D. Slinker, R. Rohl, R. A. Pascal, G. G. Malliaras and S. Bernhard, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5712–5719 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Slinker, A. A. Gorodetsky, M. S. Lowry, J. Wang, S. Parker, R. Rohl, S. Bernhard and G. G. Malliaras, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2763–2767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Kern and J.-P. Sauvage, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 546–548 RSC .
X. F. Zhang, I. Zhang and L. Liu, Photochem. Photobiol., 2010, 86, 492–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Flamigni, A. Barbieri, C. Sabatini, B. Ventura and F. Barigelletti, Photochemistry and Photophysics of Coordination Compounds II, Springer,  2007, pp. 143–203 Search PubMed .
M. Neumann, S. Füldner, B. König and K. Zeitler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 951–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. M. Roundhill, Photochemistry and photophysics of metal complexes, Springer Science & Business Media,  1994 Search PubMed .

          F. H. Moser and A. L. Thomas, The Phthalocyanines, Vol. 1. Properties, CRC Press, 1983 Search PubMed.

          F. H. Moser and A. L. Thomas, The Phthalocyanines, Vol. 2. Manufacture and Applications, CRC Press, 1983 Search PubMed.

          K. M. Smith and J. E. Falk, Porphyrins and metalloporphyrins, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1975 Search PubMed .
O. L. Kaliya, E. A. Lukyanets and G. N. Vorozhtsov, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 1999, 3, 592–610 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Tucker and C. R. Stephenson, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Milaeva, G. Speier and A. Lever, The redox chemistry of metallophthalocyanines in solution, DTIC Document,  1992 Search PubMed .
M. Natali, R. Argazzi, C. Chiorboli, E. Iengo and F. Scandola, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 9261–9271 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Prier, D. A. Rankic and D. W. MacMillan, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5322–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xuan and W. J. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6828–6838 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Nicewicz and T. M. Nguyen, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 355–360 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukuzumi and K. Ohkubo, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 6059–6071 CAS .
D. P. Hari and B. König, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6688–6699 RSC .
D. M. Hedstrand, W. H. Kruizinga and R. M. Kellogg, Tetrahedron Lett., 1978, 19, 1255–1258 CrossRef .
T. J. Van Bergen, D. M. Hedstrand, W. H. Kruizinga and R. M. Kellogg, J. Org. Chem., 1979, 44, 4953–4962 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakamura, M. Fujii, H. Mekata, S. Oka and A. Ohno, Chem. Lett., 1986, 87–88 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pac, M. Ihama, M. Yasuda, Y. Miyauchi and H. Sakurai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 6495–6497 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pac, Y. Miyauchi, O. Ishitani, M. Ihama, M. Yasuda and H. Sakurai, J. Org. Chem., 1984, 49, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ishitani, M. Ihama, Y. Miyauchi and C. Pac, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1985, 1527–1531 RSC .
S. Fukuzumi, N. Nishizawa and T. Tanaka, J. Org. Chem., 1984, 49, 3571–3578 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukuzumi, S. Koumitsu, K. Hironaka and T. Tanaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 305–316 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukuzumi, S. Mochizuki and T. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 722–726 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Narayanam, J. W. Tucker and C. R. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8756–8757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee and S.-I. Mho, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 3309–3314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Tucker, J. M. Narayanam, S. W. Krabbe and C. R. Stephenson, Org. Lett., 2009, 12, 368–371 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Uraguchi, N. Kinoshita, T. Kizu and T. Ooi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13768–13771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Lackner, K. W. Quasdorf, G. Pratsch and L. E. Overman, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 6012–6024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu and Y. Chen, Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 1352–1355 RSC .
E. Speckmeier, C. Padié and K. Zeitler, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4818–4821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Tasker and T. F. Jamison, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9531–9534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Lin, B.-C. Hong, W.-C. Chang and G.-H. Lee, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 2314–2317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Lackner, K. W. Quasdorf and L. E. Overman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15342–15345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cai, S. Zhang, Y. Zhao and D. Z. Wang, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 2660–2663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, R. Qian, X. Zheng, Y. Zeng, J. Sun, Y. Chen, A. Ding and H. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 54–57 RSC .
J. Xuan, Z.-J. Feng, J.-R. Chen, L.-Q. Lu and W.-J. Xiao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fu, M. Zhu, F. Xu, Y. Fu, C. Xu and D. Zou, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 17226–17229 RSC .
L. Wang and Z. Yan, Synlett, 2016 DOI:10.1055/s-0035-1561404 .
J. Xuan, X.-D. Xia, T.-T. Zeng, Z.-J. Feng, J.-R. Chen, L.-Q. Lu and W.-J. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5653–5656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Brachet, T. Ghosh, I. Ghosh and B. Konig, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 987–992 RSC .
H. Cano-Yelo and A. Deronzier, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1984, 1093–1098 RSC .
H. Cano-Yelo and A. Deronzier, Tetrahedron Lett., 1984, 25, 5517–5520 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. Rojas-Martin and F. D. Toste, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 85–88 RSC .
Y. Su, L. Zhang and N. Jiao, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 2168–2171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Zou, J. R. Chen, X. P. Liu, L. Q. Lu, R. L. Davis, K. A. Jørgensen and W. J. Xiao, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 808–812 CrossRef .
J. Hu, J. Wang, T. H. Nguyen and N. Zheng, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2013, 9, 1977–2001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rueping, C. Vila, R. M. Koenigs, K. Poscharny and D. C. Fabry, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2360–2362 RSC .
G. Zhao, C. Yang, L. Guo, H. Sun, C. Chen and W. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2337–2339 RSC .
D. B. Freeman, L. Furst, A. G. Condie and C. R. Stephenson, Org. Lett., 2011, 14, 94–97 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-Q. Wang, M. Hu, X.-C. Huang, L.-B. Gong, Y.-X. Xie and J.-H. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 8705–8711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rueping, R. M. Koenigs, K. Poscharny, D. C. Fabry, D. Leonori and C. Vila, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5170–5174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, D. Cheng, B. Guan, W. Mao, X. Xu and X. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 7212–7219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xuan, Y. Cheng, J. An, L.-Q. Lu, X.-X. Zhang and W.-J. Xiao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8337–8339 RSC .
S. Cai, X. Zhao, X. Wang, Q. Liu, Z. Li and D. Z. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8050–8053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai, F. Meschini, J. M. Narayanam and C. R. Stephenson, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 4425–4431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. DiRocco and T. Rovis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8094–8097 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hamada, H. Ishida, S. Usui, Y. Watanabe, K. Tsumura and K. Ohkubo, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 909–911 RSC .
T. Hamada, H. Ishida, S. Usui, K. Tsumura and K. Ohkubo, J. Mol. Catal., 1994, 88, L1–L5 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Zou, L. Q. Lu, L. Fu, N. J. Chang, J. Rong, J. R. Chen and W. J. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7171–7175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Orgren, E. E. Maverick and C. C. Marvin, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 12635–12640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and D. Z. Wang, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 5260–5263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, C. Liu, H. Yi, Q. Meng, C. Bian, H. Chen, J.-X. Jian, L.-Z. Wu and A. Lei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9273–9280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, H. Wu and F. D. Toste, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1194–1198 RSC .
D. Shi, C. He, B. Qi, C. Chen, J. Niu and C. Duan, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1035–1042 RSC .
X.-W. Gao, Q.-Y. Meng, M. Xiang, B. Chen, K. Feng, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2013, 355, 2158–2164 CrossRef CAS .
X.-z. Shu, M. Zhang, Y. He, H. Frei and F. D. Toste, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5844–5847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Schneider, Y. Mekmouche, P. Rousselot-Pailley, A. J. Simaan, V. Robert, M. Réglier, A. Aukauloo and T. Tron, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3048–3051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Morris, T. H. Nguyen and N. Zheng, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 2311–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Iqbal and E. J. Cho, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 2187–2192 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bu, T. F. Niu and C. Cai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 830–834 CAS .
H. Sun, C. Yang, R. Lin and W. Xia, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 2775–2780 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, J. D. Parrish and T. P. Yoon, Tetrahedron, 2014, 70, 4270–4278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao and W.-F. Fu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 306–310 RSC .
Y. Zhao, S. Cai, J. Li and D. Z. Wang, Tetrahedron, 2013, 69, 8129–8131 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Yang, G.-L. Gao and W. Xia, Synlett, 2016 DOI:10.1055/s-0035-1561393 .
D. H. Barton, M. A. Csiba and J. C. Jaszberenyi, Tetrahedron Lett., 1994, 35, 2869–2872 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Wallentin, J. D. Nguyen, P. Finkbeiner and C. R. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8875–8884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Nguyen, J. W. Tucker, M. D. Konieczynska and C. R. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4160–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Nicewicz and D. W. MacMillan, Science, 2008, 322, 77–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qin and S. Yu, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 1894–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-C. Hong, C.-W. Lin, W.-K. Liao and G.-H. Lee, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 6258–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Welin, A. A. Warkentin, J. C. Conrad and D. W. C. MacMillan, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 9804–9808 CrossRef .
C. Wang and Z. Lu, Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 179–190 RSC .
A. Gualandi, L. Mengozzi, J. Giacoboni, S. Saulnier, M. Ciardi and P. G. Cozzi, Chirality, 2014, 26, 607–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Nagib and D. W. C. MacMillan, Nature, 2011, 480, 224–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rao, P. Wang and C. J. Li, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2012, 6503–6507 CAS .
P. V. Pham, D. A. Nagib and D. W. MacMillan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6119–6122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei, J.-R. Chen, X.-Q. Hu, X.-C. Yang, B. Lu and W.-J. Xiao, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4464–4467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Noto, K. Miyazawa, T. Koike and M. Akita, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3710–3713 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, C. Yang, Z. Xu, F. Gao and W. Xia, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 5730–5736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dagousset, A. Carboni, E. Magnier and G. Masson, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 4340–4343 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Su, Y. Hou, F. Yin, Y.-M. Xu, Y. Li, X. Zheng and X.-S. Wang, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 2958–2961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Oh, Y. R. Malpani, N. Ha, Y.-S. Jung and S. B. Han, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 1310–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carboni, G. Dagousset, E. Magnier and G. Masson, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 1240–1243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rueda-Becerril, O. Mahé, M. Drouin, M. B. Majewski, J. G. West, M. O. Wolf, G. M. Sammis and J.-F. Paquin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2637–2641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Asano, R. Tomita, T. Koike and M. Akita, J. Fluorine Chem., 2015, 179, 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Woo and D. Y. Kim, J. Fluorine Chem., 2015, 178, 214–218 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sahoo, J.-L. Li and F. Glorius, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11577–11580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, J. M. Joo and E. J. Cho, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 4093–4097 CrossRef CAS .
M. Akita and T. Koike, C. R. Chim., 2015, 18, 742–751 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Douglas, H. Albright, M. J. Sevrin, K. P. Cole and C. R. J. Stephenson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14898–14902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-B. Wu, G.-P. Lu, B.-J. Zhou, M.-J. Bu, L. Wan and C. Cai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5965–5968 RSC .
P. Schroll, D. P. Hari and B. König, ChemistryOpen, 2012, 1, 130–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, G. Zhang, L. Gong, S. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2280–2283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-F. Niu, L. Li, B.-Q. Ni, M.-J. Bu, C. Cai and H.-L. Jiang, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 5775–5780 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xuan, T.-T. Zeng, J.-R. Chen, L.-Q. Lu and W.-J. Xiao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 4962–4965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Prasad Hari, T. Hering and B. König, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 725–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Yadav, V. P. Srivastava and L. D. S. Yadav, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24498–24503 RSC .
B. Hu, H. Chen, Y. Liu, W. Dong, K. Ren, X. Xie, H. Xu and Z. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13547–13550 RSC .
E. L. Tyson, M. S. Ament and T. P. Yoon, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 78, 2046–2050 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-G. Baik, A. L. Luis, L.-C. Wang and M. J. Krische, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5112–5113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-C. Wang, H.-Y. Jang, Y. Roh, V. Lynch, A. J. Schultz, X. Wang and M. J. Krische, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9448–9453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, D. F. Cauble, A. J. Berro, N. L. Bauld and M. J. Krische, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 7979–7984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ischay, M. E. Anzovino, J. Du and T. P. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12886–12887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, L. R. Espelt, I. A. Guzei and T. P. Yoon, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 2115–2119 RSC .
J. Du and T. P. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14604–14605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ischay, M. S. Ament and T. P. Yoon, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2807–2811 RSC .
M. A. Ischay, Z. Lu and T. P. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8572–8574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Tyson, E. P. Farney and T. P. Yoon, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 1110–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, C. E. Padilla, M. A. Ischay and T. P. Yoon, Tetrahedron Lett., 2012, 53, 3073–3076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Hurtley, M. A. Cismesia, M. A. Ischay and T. P. Yoon, Tetrahedron, 2011, 67, 4442–4448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, M. A. Ischay, C. G. Fry and T. P. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19350–19353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Parrish, M. A. Ischay, Z. Lu, S. Guo, N. R. Peters and T. P. Yoon, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 1640–1643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maity, M. Zhu, R. S. Shinabery and N. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 222–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, M. Shen and T. P. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1162–1164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Ren, H. Xie and Z. Lu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 9676–9680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Amador, E. M. Sherbrook and T. P. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4722–4725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Yoon, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 895–902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kan, S. Huang, H. Zhao, J. Lin and W. Su, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 1329–1333 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, X. Liu, S. Liu, H. Xie, W. Liu, J. Zeng and P. Cheng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 89009–89014 RSC .
W.-C. Lin and D.-Y. Yang, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 4862–4865 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fu, F. Xu, Y. Fu, M. Zhu, J. Yu, C. Xu and D. Zou, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 12202–12206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Zhang and X. Lei, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 10682–10688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Lebée, M. Languet, C. M. Allain and G. R. Masson, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 1478–1481 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lenhart, A. Bauer, A. Pöthig and T. Bach, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 6519–6523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Nguyen, E. M. D'Amato, J. M. Narayanam and C. R. Stephenson, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 854–859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Tucker, J. D. Nguyen, J. M. Narayanam, S. W. Krabbe and C. R. Stephenson, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4985–4987 RSC .
J. W. Tucker and C. R. Stephenson, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 5468–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Nguyen, B. Reiß, C. Dai and C. R. Stephenson, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4352–4354 RSC .
H. Kim and C. Lee, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 12469–12472 CrossRef .
M. H. Larraufie, R. Pellet, L. Fensterbank, J. P. Goddard, E. Lacôte, M. Malacria and C. Ollivier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4463–4466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nakajima, E. Fava, S. Loescher, Z. Jiang and M. Rueping, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8828–8832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Qin, X. Shen, R. Riedel, K. Harms and E. Meggers, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 695–698 CrossRef .
L. Chu, J. M. Lipshultz and D. W. C. MacMillan, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 8040–8044 CrossRef .
A. Singh, J. J. Kubik and J. D. Weaver, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 7206–7212 RSC .
X. Gu, P. Lu, W. Fan, P. Li and Y. Yao, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2013, 11, 7088–7091 CAS .
P. Lu, T. Hou, X. Gu and P. Li, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 1954–1957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Condie, J. C. González-Gómez and C. R. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1464–1465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yoo and S. Kobayashi, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2438–2442 RSC .
Z.-J. Feng, J. Xuan, X.-D. Xia, W. Ding, W. Guo, J.-R. Chen, Y.-Q. Zou, L.-Q. Lu and W.-J. Xiao, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 2037–2040 CAS .
J. Xie, H. Jin, P. Xu and C. Zhu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 36–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rueping, S. Zhu and R. M. Koenigs, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12709–12711 RSC .
M. Rueping, S. Zhu and R. M. Koenigs, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8679–8681 RSC .
M. S. Oderinde, A. Varela-Alvarez, B. Aquila, D. W. Robbins and J. W. Johannes, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 7642–7651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, T. Chatterjee, W. J. Choi, Y. You and E. J. Cho, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4796–4802 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shin, S.-W. Park and S. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8584–8592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Lang, K. M. O'Nele and J. A. Tunge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13606–13609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, T. Xiao, S. Xiong, X. Dong and L. Zhou, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 3264–3267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Corcé, L.-M. Chamoreau, E. Derat, J.-P. Goddard, C. Ollivier and L. Fensterbank, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 11576–11580 CrossRef .
M. Majek and A. Jacobi von Wangelin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2270–2274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-D. Xia, Y.-L. Ren, J.-R. Chen, X.-L. Yu, L.-Q. Lu, Y.-Q. Zou, J. Wan and W.-J. Xiao, Chem. – Asian J., 2015, 10, 124–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-H. Deng, Y.-Q. Zou, L.-Q. Lu, Z.-L. Tang, J.-R. Chen and W.-J. Xiao, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 2432–2435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lin, H. Sun, C. Yang, W. Shen and W. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 399–401 RSC .
N. Iqbal, S. Choi, Y. You and E. J. Cho, Tetrahedron Lett., 2013, 54, 6222–6225 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakajima, Q. Lefebvre and M. Rueping, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3619–3622 RSC .
P. Xu, G. Wang, Y. Zhu, W. Li, Y. Cheng, S. Li and C. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 55, 2939–2943 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Nagib, M. E. Scott and D. W. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10875–10877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Shih, M. N. Vander Wal, R. L. Grange and D. W. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13600–13603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Iqbal, S. Choi, E. Ko and E. J. Cho, Tetrahedron Lett., 2012, 53, 2005–2008 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yasu, T. Koike and M. Akita, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 9705–9709 CrossRef .
B. Wang, D.-C. Xiong and X.-S. Ye, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 5698–5701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, M. Huang, C. Liu, J.-C. Xiao, Q.-Y. Chen, Y. Guo and Z.-G. Zhao, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4714–4717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huo, C. Wang, K. Harms and E. Meggers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9551–9554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, W. Fu, G. Zou, C. Xu and Z. Wang, J. Fluorine Chem., 2015, 180, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tomita, T. Koike and M. Akita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12923–12927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, W.-L. Jia, L. Wang and Q. Liu, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 6817–6821 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yeow, J. Xu and C. Boyer, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 984–990 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jung, E. Kim, Y. You and E. J. Cho, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 2741–2748 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Z.-T. Huang and Q.-Y. Zheng, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 9337–9340 CAS .
N. Iqbal, J. Jung, S. Park and E. J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 539–542 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, X. Yuan, A. Abdukader, C. Zhu and J. Ma, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 1768–1771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Xiao, X.-D. Xia, L.-Q. Lu, W.-Q. Liu, D.-Z. Chen, Y.-H. Zheng and L.-Z. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016 DOI:10.1002/chem.201600871 .
X. Ju, Y. Liang, P. Jia, W. Li and W. Yu, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2012, 10, 498–501 CAS .
T. Courant and G. Masson, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 423–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mühmel, D. Alpers, F. Hoffmann and M. Brasholz, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 12308–12312 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, F.-P. Zhu, X.-L. Jin, X.-J. Wang, H. Chen and L.-Z. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10326–10329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Hurtley, Z. Lu and T. P. Yoon, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 9137–9140 CrossRef .
A. McNally, C. K. Prier and D. W. MacMillan, Science, 2011, 334, 1114–1117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kohls, D. Jadhav, G. Pandey and O. Reiser, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 672–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-Z. Wang, R. Shang, W.-M. Cheng and Y. Fu, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4830–4833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Nawrat, C. R. Jamison, Y. Slutskyy, D. W. C. MacMillan and L. E. Overman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11270–11273 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bergonzini, C. Cassani and C. J. Wallentin, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 14272–14275 CrossRef .
I. Karakaya, D. N. Primer and G. A. Molander, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3294–3297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ventre, F. R. Petronijevic and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5654–5657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Noble, S. J. McCarver and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 624–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X.-J. Wei, W.-L. Jia, J.-J. Zhong, L.-Z. Wu and Q. Liu, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 5842–5845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Tang, C. S. Thomoson and W. R. Dolbier, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 4594–4597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qin and S. Yu, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 3504–3507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Terrett, M. D. Clift and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6858–6861 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Allen, P. J. Cabrera, M. Lee and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5607–5610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zuo and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5257–5260 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Petronijević, M. Nappi and D. W. C. MacMillan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18323–18326 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Rono, H. G. Yayla, D. Y. Wang, M. F. Armstrong and R. R. Knowles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17735–17738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, P. Lu, X. Gu and P. Li, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 5646–5649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gu, H. Zhang, P. Xu, Y. Cheng and C. Zhu, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 3057–3063 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and N. Zheng, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 11586–11589 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, J. Huang and L. Zhou, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 2479–2484 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vila, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1790–1793 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Cuthbertson and D. W. C. MacMillan, Nature, 2015, 519, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hoffmann, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 393–394 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xuan, T.-T. Zeng, Z.-J. Feng, Q.-H. Deng, J.-R. Chen, L.-Q. Lu, W.-J. Xiao and H. Alper, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 1645–1648 CrossRef .
J. Jin and D. W. C. MacMillan, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 1585–1589 CrossRef .
Y. Li, K. Miyazawa, T. Koike and M. Akita, Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 319–323 RSC .
C. Qu, P. Xu, W. Ma, Y. Cheng and C. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13508–13510 RSC .
Y. Li, B. Liu, X.-H. Ouyang, R.-J. Song and J.-H. Li, Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 1457–1467 RSC .
S. Paria, V. Kais and O. Reiser, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 2853–2858 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyake, Y. Ashida, K. Nakajima and Y. Nishibayashi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 6120–6125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, Y. You, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi and W. Nam, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 1463–1474 RSC .
Y.-Q. Zou, W. Guo, F.-L. Liu, L.-Q. Lu, J.-R. Chen and W.-J. Xiao, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3787–3795 RSC .
C. K. Prier and D. W. C. MacMillan, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4173–4178 RSC .
J. Xie, P. Xu, H. Li, Q. Xue, H. Jin, Y. Cheng and C. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5672–5674 RSC .
K. Miyazawa, Y. Yasu, T. Koike and M. Akita, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7249–7251 RSC .
Y. Miyake, K. Nakajima and Y. Nishibayashi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7854–7856 RSC .
M. Tobisu, T. Furukawa and N. Chatani, Chem. Lett., 2013, 42, 1203–1205 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Q. Zou, J.-R. Chen and W.-J. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11701–11703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Hopkinson, B. Sahoo and F. Glorius, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 2794–2800 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, X. Gu and P. Li, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 2664–2667 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yoo, T. Tsukamoto and S. Kobayashi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6587–6590 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and S. Yu, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4272–4275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Beatty and C. R. J. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10270–10273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Wei, D.-T. Yang, L. Wang, T. Song, L.-Z. Wu and Q. Liu, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 6054–6057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Oderinde, M. Frenette, D. W. Robbins, B. Aquila and J. W. Johannes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1760–1763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, B. Liu, R. J. Song, Q. A. Wang and J. H. Li, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 1219–1228 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Rabet, G. Fumagalli, S. Boyd and M. F. Greaney, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 1646–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pirtsch, S. Paria, T. Matsuno, H. Isobe and O. Reiser, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7336–7340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Knorn, T. Rawner, R. Czerwieniec and O. Reiser, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5186–5193 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9034–9037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gualandi, M. Marchini, L. Mengozzi, M. Natali, M. Lucarini, P. Ceroni and P. G. Cozzi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5927–5931 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huo and E. Meggersa, CHIMIA International Journal for Chemistry, 2016, 70, 186–191 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kumar, P. Kumar, C. Joshi, M. Manchanda, R. Boukherroub and S. L. Jain, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 59 CrossRef .
M. Jouffroy, G. H. Davies and G. A. Molander, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 1606–1609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kalyani, K. B. McMurtrey, S. R. Neufeldt and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18566–18569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Yuan, M. Gao, S. Tang, W. Li, R. Shi and A. Lei, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12138–12204 CrossRef CAS .
O. O. Fadeyi, J. J. Mousseau, Y. Feng, C. Allais, P. Nuhant, M. Z. Chen, B. Pierce and R. Robinson, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 5756–5759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Inagaki, S. Edure, S. Yatsuda and M. Akita, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5468–5470 RSC .
Y. Shiba, A. Inagaki and M. Akita, Organometallics, 2015, 34, 4844–4853 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bartocci, F. Scandola, A. Ferri and V. Carassiti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 7067–7072 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bartocci, A. Maldotti, G. Varani, P. Battioni, V. Carassiti and D. Mansuy, Inorg. Chem., 1991, 30, 1255–1259 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maldotti, R. Amadelli, C. Bartocci, V. Carassiti, E. Polo and G. Varani, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1993, 125, 143–154 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maldotti, C. Bartocci, R. Amadelli, E. Polo, P. Battioni and D. Mansuy, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1991, 1487–1489 RSC .
E. Polo, R. Amadelli, V. Carassiti and A. Maldotti, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1992, 192, 1–3 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maldotti, C. Bartocci, G. Varani, A. Molinari, P. Battioni and D. Mansuy, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 1126–1131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Liu, Z. Wang and X. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11896–11898 RSC .
J. Zhang, B. B. Wayland, L. Yun, S. Li and X. Fu, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 477–483 RSC .
J. Zhang, S. Li, X. Fu and B. B. Wayland, Dalton Trans., 2009, 3661–3663,  10.1039/B904414K .
S. Funyu, T. Isobe, S. Takagi, D. A. Tryk and H. Inoue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5734–5740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Inoue, S. Funyu, Y. Shimada and S. Takagi, Pure Appl. Chem., 2005, 77, 1019–1033 CrossRef CAS .
H. Inoue, T. Okamoto, Y. Kameo, M. Sumitani, A. Fujiwara, D. Ishibashi and M. Hida, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1994, 105–111 RSC .
T. Shiragami, K. Kubomura, D. Ishibashi and H. Inoue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6311–6312 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shiragami, J. Matsumoto, H. Inoue and M. Yasuda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2005, 6, 227–248 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takagi, T. Okamoto, T. Shiragami and H. Inoue, J. Org. Chem., 1994, 59, 7373–7378 CrossRef CAS .
H. Inoue, M. Sumitani, A. Sekita and M. Hida, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 1681–1682,  10.1039/C39870001681 .
H. Inoue, T. Okamoto, M. Komiyama and M. Hida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1992, 65, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
H. Inoue, K. Chandrasekaran and D. G. Whitten, J. Photochem., 1985, 30, 269–284 CrossRef CAS .
T. Okamoto, S. Takagi, T. Shiragami and H. Inoue, Chem. Lett., 1993, 687–690 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shiragami, Y. Shimizu, K. Hinoue, Y. Fueta, K. Nobuhara, I. Akazaki and M. Yasuda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 156, 115–119 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Suslick, F. V. Acholla and B. R. Cook, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 2818–2819 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Suslick and R. A. Watson, Inorg. Chem., 1991, 30, 912–919 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Suslick and B. R. Cook, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 200–202 RSC .
B. R. Cook, T. J. Reinert and K. S. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 7281–7286 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bhyrappa, J. K. Young, J. S. Moore and K. S. Suslick, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1996, 113, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Collman, X. Zhang, R. T. Hembre and J. I. Brauman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 5356–5357 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Hendrickson, M. G. Kinnaird and K. S. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 1243–1244 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ghani, J. Kristen and H. Riegler, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2012, 57, 439–449 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nyokong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 1707–1722 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ogunsipe, D. Maree and T. Nyokong, J. Mol. Struct., 2003, 650, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mele, C. Annese, A. De Riccardis, C. Fusco, L. Palmisano, G. Vasapollo and L. D'Accolti, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 481, 169–172 CrossRef CAS .
E. Marais, R. Klein, E. Antunes and T. Nyokong, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 261, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, G. Singh, D. Tripathi and S. L. Jain, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 50331–50337 RSC .
D. P. Shelar, T.-T. Li, Y. Chen and W.-F. Fu, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 1541–1546 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sagadevan, A. Ragupathi and K. C. Hwang, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 14102–14107 CrossRef .
S. Protti, M. Fagnoni and D. Ravelli, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1516–1523 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Choi, S. Choi, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, E. J. Cho and Y. You, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1454–1464 RSC .
T. Toyao, N. Ueno, K. Miyahara, Y. Matsui, T.-H. Kim, Y. Horiuchi, H. Ikeda and M. Matsuoka, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16103–16106 RSC .
S. Gazi, W. K. Hung Ng, R. Ganguly, A. M. Putra Moeljadi, H. Hirao and H. S. Soo, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 7130–7142 RSC .
K. Suzuki, F. Tang, Y. Kikukawa, K. Yamaguchi and N. Mizuno, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5356–5360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC .
M. Okada, T. Fukuyama, K. Yamada, I. Ryu, D. Ravelli and M. Fagnoni, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2893–2898 RSC .
A. C. Hernandez-Perez and S. K. Collins, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 12928–12932 CrossRef .
M. Majek and A. Jacobi von Wangelin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5919–5921 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Tang, C. S. Thomoson and W. R. Dolbier, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3528–3531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, J. Zhao and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4697–4700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Pitre, C. D. McTiernan, H. Ismaili and J. C. Scaiano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13286–13289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sundararajan and D. E. Falvey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8000–8001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Riener and D. A. Nicewicz, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2625–2629 RSC .
I. Ghosh, T. Ghosh, J. I. Bardagi and B. König, Science, 2014, 346, 725–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fagnoni, D. Dondi, D. Ravelli and A. Albini, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2725–2756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Discekici, N. J. Treat, S. O. Poelma, K. M. Mattson, Z. M. Hudson, Y. Luo, C. J. Hawker and J. R. de Alaniz, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11705–11708 RSC .
J.-B. Xia, C. Zhu and C. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17494–17500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, X. Ye, F. Bureš, H. Liu and Z. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 11605–11609 CrossRef .
S. Samanta and P. Biswas, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 84328–84333 RSC .
X.-J. Dai, X.-L. Xu, D.-P. Cheng and X.-N. Li, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2014, 25, 545–548 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Kee, K. F. Chin, M. W. Wong and C.-H. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8211–8214 RSC .
J.-B. Xia, C. Zhu and C. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11701–11704 RSC .
S. Guo, R. Tao and J. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36131–36139 RSC .
Y. Zhao, C. Zhang, K. F. Chin, O. Pytela, G. Wei, H. Liu, F. Bures and Z. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 30062–30067 RSC .
D. T. Yang, Q. Y. Meng, J. J. Zhong, M. Xiang, Q. Liu and L. Z. Wu, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2013, 7528–7532 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Yang, B. Chen, L.-Q. Zheng, L.-Z. Wu and C.-H. Tung, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1082–1086 RSC .
J. Davies, S. G. Booth, S. Essafi, R. A. W. Dryfe and D. Leonori, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 14223–14227 CrossRef .
D. P. Hari and B. König, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 3852–3855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. N. Li, H. H. Zhang, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 620–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-Y. Meng, J.-J. Zhong, Q. Liu, X.-W. Gao, H.-H. Zhang, T. Lei, Z.-J. Li, K. Feng, B. Chen and C.-H. Tung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19052–19055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xuan, Z.-J. Feng, S.-W. Duan and W.-J. Xiao, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4065–4068 RSC .
C. W. Kee, K. M. Chan, M. W. Wong and C. H. Tan, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2014, 3, 536–544 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Srivastava, A. K. Yadav and L. D. S. Yadav, Synlett, 2013, 465–470 CAS .
A. K. Yadav, V. P. Srivastava and L. D. S. Yadav, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 4119–4124 RSC .
A. K. Yadav, V. P. Srivastava and L. D. S. Yadav, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 4181–4186 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. Liu, Z. Yang and Y. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11662–11664 RSC .
Z. Li, W. Zhang, Q. Zhao, H. Gu, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 468–474 CrossRef CAS .
A. Talla, B. Driessen, N. J. W. Straathof, L.-G. Milroy, L. Brunsveld, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Singh, R. Chawla and L. D. S. Yadav, Tetrahedron Lett., 2015, 56, 653–656 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Yadav and L. D. S. Yadav, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 2065–2069 CrossRef CAS .
T. Keshari, V. K. Yadav, V. P. Srivastava and L. D. S. Yadav, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3986–3992 RSC .
L. Wang, Z.-G. Ma, X.-J. Wei, Q.-Y. Meng, D.-T. Yang, S.-F. Du, Z.-F. Chen, L.-Z. Wu and Q. Liu, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3752–3757 RSC .
T. Xiao, L. Li, G. Lin, Q. Wang, P. Zhang, Z.-w. Mao and L. Zhou, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2418–2421 RSC .
X. Liu, T. Cong, P. Liu and P. Sun, J. Org. Chem., 2016 DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.6b00097 .
D. P. Hari, P. Schroll and B. König, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2958–2961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Hari, T. Hering and B. König, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 5334–5337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xiao, X. Dong, Y. Tang and L. Zhou, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354, 3195–3199 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, L. Zhang and G. Yan, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354, 2625–2628 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mitra, M. Ghosh, S. Mishra and A. Hajra, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 8275–8281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kundu, S. Ahammed and B. C. Ranu, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 1814–1817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cantillo, O. de Frutos, J. A. Rincón, C. Mateos and C. O. Kappe, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 896–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Z. Tan, Q. Gui, L. Hu, J. Liu, J. Wu and G. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 6218–6222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. Zhang, H. Tan and D. Z. Wang, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 2522–2525 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, C. W. Kee, L. Chen and C.-H. Tan, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2682–2685 RSC .
J.-J. Zhong, C.-J. Wu, Q.-Y. Meng, X.-W. Gao, T. Lei, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 2846–2852 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Jiang, Y. Li, X. Wu, J. Xiao, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8779–8783 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, S. Wang, C. W. Kee, E. Dubuisson, Y. Yang, K. P. Loh and C.-H. Tan, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3341–3344 RSC .
W. Fu, W. Guo, G. Zou and C. Xu, J. Fluorine Chem., 2012, 140, 88–94 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vila, J. Lau and M. Rueping, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2014, 10, 1233–1238 CrossRef .
C. WeeáKee, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 953–956 RSC .
K. Fidaly, C. Ceballos, A. Falguières, M. S.-I. Veitia, A. Guy and C. Ferroud, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1293–1297 RSC .
M. Rueping, C. Vila and T. Bootwicha, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Garlets, J. D. Nguyen and C. R. J. Stephenson, Isr. J. Chem., 2014, 54, 351–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fan, Q. Yang, F. Xu and P. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 10588–10592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Gu, Y. Li and P. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1897–1900 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Dong, G. Deng and L. Zhou, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 1–4,  DOI:10.1007/s11426-015-5513-8 .
F. K.-C. Leung, J.-F. Cui, T.-W. Hui, K. K.-Y. Kung and M.-K. Wong, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2015, 4, 533–536 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, S. Zhong, L. Xin, J.-P. Wan and C. Wen, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1478–1482 CrossRef CAS .
M. Daniel, L. Fensterbank, J.-P. Goddard and C. Ollivier, Org. Chem. Front., 2014, 1, 551–555 RSC .
K. Ohkubo, T. Nanjo and S. Fukuzumi, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 4265–4268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kotani, K. Ohkubo and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15999–16006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ohkubo, K. Mizushima, R. Iwata, K. Souma, N. Suzuki and S. Fukuzumi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 601–603 RSC .
H. Kotani, K. Ohkubo and S. Fukuzumi, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 77, 317–324 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Griesbeck and M. Cho, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 611–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ohkubo, T. Nanjo and S. Fukuzumi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 79, 1489–1500 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. M. Grandjean and D. A. Nicewicz, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 4059–4063 CrossRef .
D. S. Hamilton and D. A. Nicewicz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18577–18580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Morse and D. A. Nicewicz, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 270–274 RSC .
M. A. Zeller, M. Riener and D. A. Nicewicz, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 4810–4813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Romero, K. A. Margrey, N. E. Tay and D. A. Nicewicz, Science, 2015, 349, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Griffin, M. A. Zeller and D. A. Nicewicz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11340–11348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Ramirez, I. Bosque and J. C. Gonzalez-Gomez, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4550–4553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-T. Zeng, J. Xuan, W. Ding, K. Wang, L.-Q. Lu and W.-J. Xiao, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4070–4073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, X. Xie, P. Li, J. Guo and L. Wang, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 1546–1549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, C. Meng, X. Yuan, X. Jia, X. Qian and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11864–11867 RSC .
C. Cassani, G. Bergonzini and C.-J. Wallentin, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 4228–4231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ohkubo, R. Iwata, T. Yanagimoto and S. Fukuzumi, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3139–3141 RSC .
K. Ohkubo, R. Iwata, S. Miyazaki, T. Kojima and S. Fukuzumi, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 6079–6082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ohkubo, K. Mizushima, R. Iwata and S. Fukuzumi, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 715–722 RSC .
D. J. Wilger, N. J. Gesmundo and D. A. Nicewicz, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3160–3165 RSC .
A. J. Perkowski and D. A. Nicewicz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10334–10337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, Y. You, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi and W. Nam, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 13331–13335 CrossRef .
T. M. Nguyen and D. A. Nicewicz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9588–9591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, H. Li, L. Zhang, M.-T. Zhang, J.-P. Cheng and S. Luo, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 14723–14727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chinzei, K. Miyazawa, Y. Yasu, T. Koike and M. Akita, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21297–21300 RSC .
K. Ohkubo, A. Fujimoto and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5368–5371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ohkubo, T. Kobayashi and S. Fukuzumi, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 8811–8814 CrossRef .
K. Ohkubo, T. Kobayashi and S. Fukuzumi, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A360–A365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ohkubo, A. Fujimoto and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 10719–10725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shen, J. Dai, J. Xiong, X. He, W. Mo, B. Hu, N. Sun and X. Hu, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 3031–3038 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rustemeyer, Macromol. Symp., 2004, 208, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Günay, P. Theato and H.-A. Klok, Functional Polymers by Post-Polymerization Modification: Concepts, Guidelines, and applications,  2013, pp. 1–44 Search PubMed .
P. L. Golas and K. Matyjaszewski, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1338–1354 RSC .
S. Doran, E. Murtezi, F. B. Barlas, S. Timur and Y. Yagci, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 3608–3613 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Agard, J. A. Prescher and C. R. Bertozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15046–15047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Doran and Y. Yagci, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 946–952 RSC .
B. J. Adzima, Y. Tao, C. J. Kloxin, C. A. DeForest, K. S. Anseth and C. N. Bowman, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 256–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Song, W. J. Hu and Q. Lin, Angew. Chem., 2009, 121, 5434–5437 CrossRef .
G. Delaittre, N. K. Guimard and C. Barner-Kowollik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1296–1307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Oyman Eyrilmez, S. Doran, E. Murtezi, B. Demir, D. Odaci Demirkol, H. Coskunol, S. Timur and Y. Yagci, Macromol. Biosci., 2015, 15, 1233–1241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Alzahrani, D. P. Nair, D. J. Smits, M. Saed, C. M. Yakacki and C. N. Bowman, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5303–5309 CrossRef CAS .
M. Glassner, K. K. Oehlenschlaeger, T. Gruendling and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4681–4689 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gruendling, K. K. Oehlenschlaeger, E. Frick, M. Glassner, C. Schmid and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 807–812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Blasco, B. Yameen, A. S. Quick, P. Krolla-Sidenstein, A. Welle, M. Wegener and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 8718–8728 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Hirschbiel, W. Konrad, D. Schulze-Sünninghausen, S. Wiedmann, B. Luy, B. V. K. J. Schmidt and C. Barner-Kowollik, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 1062–1066 CrossRef CAS .
B. Vonhören, M. Langer, D. Abt, C. Barner-Kowollik and B. J. Ravoo, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 13625–13631 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Fu, L. Tao, Y. Zhang, S. Li and Y. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9062–9064 RSC .
C. Fu, J. Xu, L. Tao and C. Boyer, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 633–638 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, A. Atme, A. F. Marques Martins, K. Jung and C. Boyer, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 3321–3325 RSC .
A. B. Lowe, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 17–36 RSC .
C. E. Hoyle and C. N. Bowman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1540–1573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hoogenboom, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3415–3417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Tyson, Z. L. Niemeyer and T. P. Yoon, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 1427–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Tyson, M. S. Ament and T. P. Yoon, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 2046–2050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Theato, Multi-Component and Sequential Reactions in Polymer Synthesis, Springer,  2015 Search PubMed .
R. Kakuchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 46–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Moldenhauer and P. Theato, in Multi-Component and Sequential Reactions in Polymer Synthesis, ed. P. Theato, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2015, pp. 133–162 DOI:10.1007/12_2015_312 .
O. Kreye, T. Tóth and M. A. R. Meier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1790–1792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Solleder and M. A. R. Meier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 711–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y.-Z. You, D.-C. Wu and C.-Y. Hong, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 3414–3421 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, Y. Zhao, Y. Wei, C. Fu and L. Tao, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 8233–8239 RSC .
M. Rueping and C. Vila, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 2092–2095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Nguyen, J. W. Tucker, M. D. Konieczynska and C. R. J. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4160–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Wallentin, J. D. Nguyen, P. Finkbeiner and C. R. J. Stephenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8875–8884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu and C. Boyer, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 520–529 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Prier, D. A. Rankic and D. W. MacMillan, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5322–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lalevée, M.-A. Tehfe, F. Dumur, D. Gigmes, N. Blanchard, F. Morlet-Savary and J. P. Fouassier, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 286–290 CrossRef .
S. Erdur, G. Yilmaz, D. Goen Colak, I. Cianga and Y. Yagci, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 7296–7302 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Timpe and K. P. Kronfeld, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1989, 46, 253–267 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sangermano, N. Razza and J. V. Crivello, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2014, 299, 775–793 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jakubiak, X. Allonas, J. P. Fouassier, A. Sionkowska, E. Andrzejewska, L. Å. Linden and J. F. Rabek, Polymer, 2003, 44, 5219–5226 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tar, D. Sevinc Esen, M. Aydin, C. Ley, N. Arsu and X. Allonas, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 3266–3272 CrossRef CAS .
G. Temel, N. Arsu and Y. Yagci, Polym. Bull., 2006, 57, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dadashi-Silab, H. Bildirir, R. Dawson, A. Thomas and Y. Yagci, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4607–4614 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Monroe and G. C. Weed, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 435–448 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Fouassier, X. Allonas and D. Burget, Prog. Org. Coat., 2003, 47, 16–36 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aguirre-Soto, C.-H. Lim, A. T. Hwang, C. B. Musgrave and J. W. Stansbury, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7418–7427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Miranda and H. Garcia, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 1063–1089 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dadashi-Silab, A. M. Asiri, S. B. Khan, K. A. Alamry and Y. Yagci, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 1500–1507 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Hoffman, G. Mills, H. Yee and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 5546–5552 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Strandwitz, A. Khan, S. W. Boettcher, A. A. Mikhailovsky, C. J. Hawker, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8280–8288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, J. Yang, S. Bao, Q. Wu and Q. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1399 Search PubMed .
S. Dadashi-Silab, Y. Yar, H. Yagci Acar and Y. Yagci, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 1918–1922 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kiskan, J. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and Y. Yagci, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 546–549 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Wang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 3559–3562 RSC .
S. Beyazit, S. Ambrosini, N. Marchyk, E. Palo, V. Kale, T. Soukka, B. Tse Sum Bui and K. Haupt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8919–8923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Anyaogu, X. Cai and D. C. Neckers, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9000–9003 CrossRef CAS .
H. Akat, B. Gacal, D. K. Balta, N. Arsu and Y. Yagci, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 2109–2114 CrossRef CAS .
F. Courtecuisse, J. Cerezo, C. Croutxé-Barghorn, C. Dietlin and X. Allonas, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2013, 51, 635–643 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. O'Brien, N. B. Cramer and C. N. Bowman, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 2007–2014 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. Frigoli, F. Dumur, P. Xiao, L. Ronchi, B. Graff, F. Morlet-Savary, J. P. Fouassier, D. Gigmes and J. Lalevée, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 2811–2819 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lalevee, N. Blanchard, M.-A. Tehfe, M. Peter, F. Morlet-Savary, D. Gigmes and J. P. Fouassier, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1986–1991 RSC .
J. V. Crivello and J. H. W. Lam, Macromolecules, 1977, 10, 1307–1315 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Crivello, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1999, 37, 4241–4254 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, I. Y. Song, K. H. Ahn, T. Park and W. Choi, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7594–7599 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Hu, D. Xu, Y. Yu, X. Tang and H. Guo, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2015, 216, 1055–1060 CrossRef CAS .
C. Grotzinger, D. Burget and P. J. J. P. Fouassier, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2001, 202, 3513–3522 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gong, B. J. Adzima and C. N. Bowman, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7950–7952 RSC .
J. W. Chan, J. Shin, C. E. Hoyle, C. N. Bowman and A. B. Lowe, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4937–4942 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Bowman, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 238 Search PubMed .
S. K. Reddy, R. P. Sebra, K. S. Anseth and C. N. Bowman, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 2134–2144 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatani, T. Gong, B. A. Earle, M. Podgorski and C. N. Bowman, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 315–318 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dietlin, S. Schweizer, P. Xiao, J. Zhang, F. Morlet-Savary, B. Graff, J.-P. Fouassier and J. Lalevee, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 3895–3912 RSC .
J. Lalevée, M.-A. Tehfe, A. Zein-Fakih, B. Ball, S. Telitel, F. Morlet-Savary, B. Graff and J. P. Fouassier, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 802–806 CrossRef .
M. A. Tasdelen, N. Moszner and Y. Yagci, Polym. Bull., 2009, 63, 173–183 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Tarzi, X. Allonas, C. Ley and J. P. Fouassier, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 2594–2603 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, H. Wang, X. Jiang and J. Yin, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2006, 207, 1752–1763 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, J. Zhang, F. Dumur, M. A. Tehfe, F. Morlet-Savary, B. Graff, D. Gigmes, J. P. Fouassier and J. Lalevée, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 41, 32–66 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dadashi-Silab, C. Aydogan and Y. Yagci, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6595–6615 RSC .
P. Xiao, J. Zhang, D. Campolo, F. Dumur, D. Gigmes, J. P. Fouassier and J. Lalevée, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 53, 2673–2684 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shao, Y. Huang and Q. Fan, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4195–4210 RSC .
S. Chatani, C. J. Kloxin and C. N. Bowman, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2187–2201 RSC .
S. Dadashi-Silab, S. Doran and Y. Yagci, Chem. Rev., 2016 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00586 .
M. A. Tasdelen and Y. Yagci, Aust. J. Chem., 2011, 64, 982–991 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yagci, S. Jockusch and N. J. Turro, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6245–6260 CrossRef CAS .
T. Iyoda, M. Kitano and T. Shimidzu, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1991, 1618–1619 RSC .
Y. Yagci, F. Yilmaz, S. Kiralp and L. Toppare, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2005, 206, 1178–1182 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yagci, S. Jockusch and N. J. Turro, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4481–4485 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Temel, G. Yilmaz and Y. Yagci, Phosphorus, Sulfur Silicon Relat. Elem., 2015, 190, 1352–1365 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aydogan, Y. Yagci, L. Toppare, S. Jockusch and N. J. Turro, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 7829–7834 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aydogan, A. S. Gundogan, T. Ozturk and Y. Yagci, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6300–6302,  10.1039/B914953H .
S. A. Piletsky, E. V. Piletska, K. Karim, F. Davis, S. P. J. Higson and A. P. F. Turner, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2222–2223,  10.1039/B408387C .
N. Ayres, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 769–777 RSC .
F. Kettling, B. Vonhoren, J. A. Krings, S. Saito and B. J. Ravoo, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1027–1030 RSC .
N. B. Cramer, J. P. Scott and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 5361–5365 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Cole, K. C. Jankousky and C. N. Bowman, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1167–1175 RSC .
W. Xi, S. Pattanayak, C. Wang, B. Fairbanks, T. Gong, J. Wagner, C. J. Kloxin and C. N. Bowman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14462–14467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Tasdelen, G. Yilmaz, B. Iskin and Y. Yagci, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 56–61 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sandmann, B. Happ, J. Vitz, M. D. Hager, P. Burtscher, N. Moszner and U. S. Schubert, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 3938–3942 RSC .
G. Demirci and M. A. Tasdelen, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 66, 282–289 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arslan, G. Yilmaz and Y. Yagci, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 8168–8175 RSC .
H. B. Song, A. Baranek and C. N. Bowman, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 603–612 RSC .
T. Gong, B. J. Adzima, N. H. Baker and C. N. Bowman, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2024–2028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, D. Chen, L. Liu, Y. Ma, L. Wang, C. Zhao and W. Yang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 54, 740–749 CrossRef .
J. Su, X. Liu, J. Hu, Q. You, Y. Cui and Y. Chen, Polym. Int., 2015, 64, 867–874 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoshida, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2010, 288, 7–13 CAS .
E. Yoshida, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2010, 288, 1027–1030 CAS .
E. Yoshida, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2011, 289, 1127–1132 CAS .
E. Yoshida, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2011, 289, 1625–1630 CAS .
E. Yoshida, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2011, 289, 837–841 CAS .
E. Yoshida, Polymers, 2012, 4, 1580 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoshida, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2012, 290, 1087–1091 CAS .
E. Yoshida, Polymers, 2012, 4, 1125 CrossRef .
J. Morris, S. Telitel, K. E. Fairfull-Smith, S. E. Bottle, J. Lalevee, J.-L. Clement, Y. Guillaneuf and D. Gigmes, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 754–763 RSC .
S. Dadashi-Silab, M. Atilla Tasdelen and Y. Yagci, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 2878–2888 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kwak and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 5180–5183 CrossRef CAS .
T. Otsu and M. Yoshida, Makromol. Chem., Rapid Commun., 1982, 3, 127–132 CrossRef CAS .
T. Otsu, M. Yoshida and T. Tazaki, Makromol. Chem., Rapid Commun., 1982, 3, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Otsu and A. Matsumoto, in Microencapsulation Microgels Iniferters, ed. S. DiMari, W. Funke, M. A. Haralson, D. Hunkeler, B. Joos-Müller, A. Matsumoto, O. Okay, T. Otsu, A. C. Powers, A. Prokop, T. G. Wang and R. R. Whitesell, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,  1998, ch. 3, vol. 136, pp. 75–137 Search PubMed .
T. Otsu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2000, 38, 2121–2136 CrossRef CAS .
T. Otsu and A. Kuriyama, Polym. J., 1985, 17, 97–104 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kroeze, B. de Boer, G. ten Brinke and G. Hadziioannou, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 8599–8605 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamashita, K. Ito, H. Tsuboi, S. Takahama, K. Tsuda and T. Otsu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1990, 40, 1445–1452 CrossRef CAS .
J. Higashi, Y. Nakayama, R. E. Marchant and T. Matsuda, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 2080–2088 CrossRef CAS .
B. de Boer, H. K. Simon, M. P. L. Werts, E. W. van der Vegte and G. Hadziioannou, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 349–356 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishizu and A. Mori, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2000, 21, 665–668 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishizu, H. Katsuhara and K. Itoya, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 3321–3327 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, H. Jiang, L. Zhang, Z. Cheng and X. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 31657–31663 RSC .
Y. Zhang, K. Schröder, Y. Kwak, P. Krys, A. N. Morin, T. Pintauer, R. Poli and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 5512–5519 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, L. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Bao, Z. Cheng and X. Zhu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1332–1339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, C. Tian, L. Zhang, Z. Cheng and X. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52430–52437 RSC .
M. A. Tasdelen, M. Uygun and Y. Yagci, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 2271–2275 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dadashi-Silab, M. Atilla Tasdelen, A. Mohamed Asiri, S. Bahadar Khan and Y. Yagci, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 454–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Tasdelen, M. Uygun and Y. Yagci, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mosnáček and M. Ilčíková, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 5859–5865 CrossRef .
J. Mosnacek, A. Eckstein-Andicsova and K. Borska, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 2523–2530 RSC .
X. Pan, N. Malhotra, A. Simakova, Z. Wang, D. Konkolewicz and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15430–15433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Konkolewicz, K. Schröder, J. Buback, S. Bernhard and K. Matyjaszewski, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 1219–1223 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Ribelli, D. Konkolewicz, S. Bernhard and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13303–13312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Ribelli, D. Konkolewicz, X. Pan and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6316–6321 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anastasaki, V. Nikolaou, Q. Zhang, J. Burns, S. R. Samanta, C. Waldron, A. J. Haddleton, R. McHale, D. Fox, V. Percec, P. Wilson and D. M. Haddleton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1141–1149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Frick, A. Anastasaki, D. M. Haddleton and C. Barner-Kowollik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6889–6896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wenn, M. Conradi, A. D. Carreiras, D. M. Haddleton and T. Junkers, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 3053–3060 RSC .
A. Anastasaki, V. Nikolaou, G. Nurumbetov, N. P. Truong, G. S. Pappas, N. G. Engelis, J. F. Quinn, M. R. Whittaker, T. P. Davis and D. M. Haddleton, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 5140–5147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anastasaki, V. Nikolaou, A. Simula, J. Godfrey, M. Li, G. Nurumbetov, P. Wilson and D. M. Haddleton, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 3852–3859 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anastasaki, V. Nikolaou, F. Brandford-Adams, G. Nurumbetov, Q. Zhang, G. J. Clarkson, D. J. Fox, P. Wilson, K. Kempe and D. M. Haddleton, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5626–5629 RSC .
V. Nikolaou, A. Anastasaki, F. Brandford-Adams, R. Whitfield, G. R. Jones, G. Nurumbetov and D. M. Haddleton, Polym. Chem., 2015, 7, 191–197 RSC .
V. Nikolaou, A. Anastasaki, F. Alsubaie, A. Simula, D. J. Fox and D. M. Haddleton, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 3581–3585 RSC .
Q. Yang, F. Dumur, F. Morlet-Savary, J. Poly and J. Lalevée, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 1972–1980 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anastasaki, V. Nikolaou, G. S. Pappas, Q. Zhang, C. Wan, P. Wilson, T. P. Davis, M. R. Whittaker and D. M. Haddleton, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3536–3542 RSC .

          A. Athina, N. Vasiliki, A. Fehaid, S. Alexandre, W. Christopher, J. L. Danielle, G. Jamie, N. Gabit, Z. Qiang, W. Paul, K. Kristian and M. H. David, Controlled Radical Polymerization: Materials, American Chemical Society,  2015, ch. 3, vol. 1188, pp. 29–45 Search PubMed .
J. Vandenbergh, G. Reekmans, P. Adriaensens and T. Junkers, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5753–5761 RSC .
Y.-M. Chuang, B. Wenn, S. Gielen, A. Ethirajan and T. Junkers, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6488–6497 RSC .
Y.-M. Chuang, A. Ethirajan and T. Junkers, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 732–737 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hua, Y. Xiong, C. Fu and N. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 39273–39279 RSC .
E. Larsson, S. A. Pendergraph, T. Kaldeus, E. Malmstrom and A. Carlmark, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 1865–1874 RSC .
J. Laun, M. Vorobii, A. de los Santos Pereira, O. Pop-Georgievski, V. Trouillet, A. Welle, C. Barner-Kowollik, C. Rodriguez-Emmenegger and T. Junkers, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 1681–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, B. Yu and F. Zhou, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1287–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, B. Li, F. Zhou and W. Liu, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 592–596 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, S. Ma, Q. Wei, Q. Ye, B. Yu, J. van der Gucht and F. Zhou, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 6186–6196 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, T. Chen, I. Amin and R. Jordan, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4790–4796 RSC .
B. P. Fors and C. J. Hawker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8850–8853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Melker, B. P. Fors, C. J. Hawker and J. E. Poelma, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 53, 2693–2698 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, H. Chen, Y. Ma, C. Zhao and W. Yang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2014, 215, 1012–1021 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, D. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Ma, C. Zhao and W. Yang, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl.Chem., 2015, 52, 761–769 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. Zhao, Y. Ma, H. Chen and W. Yang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 2624–2631 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Treat, B. P. Fors, J. W. Kramer, M. Christianson, C.-Y. Chiu, J. R. d. Alaniz and C. J. Hawker, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 580–584 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Poelma, B. P. Fors, G. F. Meyers, J. W. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6844–6848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, C. Zhao, R. Li, Y. Ma, L. Liu and W. Yang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2014, 215, 1378–1387 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Pester, J. E. Poelma, B. Narupai, S. N. Patel, G. M. Su, T. E. Mates, Y. Luo, C. K. Ober, C. J. Hawker and E. J. Kramer, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 54, 253–262 CrossRef .
J. Meng, J. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Ma, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 455, 405–414 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bansal, P. Kumar, C. D. Sharma, S. S. Ray and S. L. Jain, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 53, 2739–2746 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, N. Malhotra, J. Zhang and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 6948–6954 CrossRef CAS .
S. Telitel, F. Dumur, D. Campolo, J. Poly, D. Gigmes, J. Pierre Fouassier and J. Lalevée, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 54, 702–713 CrossRef .
G.-X. Wang, M. Lu, Z.-H. Hou, Y. Gao, L.-C. Liu and H. Wu, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl.Chem., 2014, 51, 565–571 CrossRef CAS .
S. Telitel, F. Dumur, D. Campolo, J. Poly, D. Gigmes, J. Pierre Fouassier and J. Lalevée, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2016, 54, 702–713 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, D. Yang and J. Liu, Polymer, 2015, 61, 198–203 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Alfredo, N. E. Jalapa, S. L. Morales, A. D. Ryabov, R. Le Lagadec and L. Alexandrova, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 8135–8146 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nzulu, S. Telitel, F. Stoffelbach, B. Graff, F. Morlet-Savary, J. Lalevee, L. Fensterbank, J.-P. Goddard and C. Ollivier, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 4605–4611 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. Chen, X. Li, Z. Yu, Q. Xia, D. Liang and H. Xing, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1475–1481 RSC .
Y. Kwak, A. J. D. Magenau and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 811–819 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. D. Magenau, N. C. Strandwitz, A. Gennaro and K. Matyjaszewski, Science, 2011, 332, 81–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gnanou and G. Hizal, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 351–359 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matyjaszewski, T. Pintauer and S. Gaynor, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 1476–1478 CrossRef CAS .
S. Munirasu, R. Aggarwal and D. Baskaran, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4518–4520,  10.1039/B908118F .
Y. Shen and S. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 8603–8609 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Miyake and J. C. Theriot, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 8255–8261 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Theriot, C.-H. Lim, H. Yang, M. D. Ryan, C. B. Musgrave and G. M. Miyake, Science, 2016 DOI:10.1126/science.aaf3935 .
E. H. Discekici, C. W. Pester, N. J. Treat, J. Lawrence, K. M. Mattson, B. Narupai, E. P. Toumayan, Y. Luo, A. J. McGrath, P. G. Clark, J. Read de Alaniz and C. J. Hawker, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 258–262 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, M. Lamson, J. Yan and K. Matyjaszewski, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 192–196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, C. Fang, M. Fantin, N. Malhotra, W. Y. So, L. A. Peteanu, A. A. Isse, A. Gennaro, P. Liu and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2411–2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang and D. E. Bergbreiter, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 2161–2165 RSC .
X. Liu, L. Zhang, Z. Cheng and X. Zhu, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 689–700 RSC .
N. J. Treat, H. Sprafke, J. W. Kramer, P. G. Clark, B. E. Barton, J. Read de Alaniz, B. P. Fors and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16096–16101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, K. Jung, A. Atme, S. Shanmugam and C. Boyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5508–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shanmugam, J. Xu and C. Boyer, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4930–4942 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jung, J. Xu, P. B. Zetterlund and C. Boyer, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 1139–1143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shanmugam and C. Boyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9988–9999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shanmugam, J. Xu and C. Boyer, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1341–1349 RSC .
S. Shanmugam, J. Xu and C. Boyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9174–9185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, K. Jung and C. Boyer, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4217–4229 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, K. Jung, N. A. Corrigan and C. Boyer, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3568–3575 RSC .
F. A. Leibfarth, K. M. Mattson, B. P. Fors, H. A. Collins and C. J. Hawker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 199–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fu, J. Xu, M. Kokotovic and C. Boyer, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 444–449 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, S. Shanmugam, H. T. Duong and C. Boyer, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 5615–5624 RSC .
J. Xu, S. Shanmugam and C. Boyer, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 926–932 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shanmugam, J. Xu and C. Boyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1036–1040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, S. Shanmugam, C. Fu, K.-F. Aguey-Zinsou and C. Boyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3094–3106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, M. J. MacLeod and J. A. Johnson, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 566–569 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, T. G. McKenzie, S. Tan, E. Nam and G. G. Qiao, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 5362–5368 RSC .
Q. Fu, T. G. McKenzie, J. M. Ren, S. Tan, E. Nam and G. G. Qiao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Detrembleur, D.-L. Versace, Y. Piette, M. Hurtgen, C. Jerome, J. Lalevee and A. Debuigne, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 1856–1866 RSC .
A. Debuigne, M. Schoumacher, N. Willet, R. Riva, X. Zhu, S. Rutten, C. Jerome and C. Detrembleur, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12703–12705 RSC .
X. Miao, W. Zhu, Z. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Zhu and J. Zhu, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 551–557 RSC .
A. Kermagoret, B. Wenn, A. Debuigne, C. Jerome, T. Junkers and C. Detrembleur, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 3847–3857 RSC .
Y. Zhao, M. Yu, S. Zhang, Y. Liu and X. Fu, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6238–6245 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, M. Yu, S. Zhang, Z. Wu, Y. Liu, C.-H. Peng and X. Fu, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 2979–2988 RSC .
Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, Z. Wu, X. Liu, X. Zhao, C.-H. Peng and X. Fu, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 5132–5139 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koumura, K. Satoh and M. Kamigaito, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7359–7367 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Simpson, O. I. Adebolu, J.-S. Kim, V. Vasu and A. D. Asandei, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 6404–6420 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koumura, K. Satoh and M. Kamigaito, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 1343–1353 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Asandei, O. I. Adebolu and C. P. Simpson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6080–6083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. S. Christopher, I. A. Olumide, K. Joon-Sung, V. Vignesh and D. A. Alexandru, Controlled Radical Polymerization: Mechanisms, American Chemical Society,  2015, ch. 11, vol. 1187, pp. 183–209 Search PubMed .
J. Tonnar, E. Pouget, P. Lacroix-Desmazes and B. Boutevin, Macromol. Symp., 2009, 281, 20–30 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolpers and P. Vana, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 954–963 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ohtsuki, A. Goto and H. Kaji, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 96–102 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ohtsuki, L. Lei, M. Tanishima, A. Goto and H. Kaji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5610–5617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Ma, C. Zhao and W. Yang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Ogawa, A. E. Goetz and A. J. Boydston, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1400–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

From left to right: Jiangtao Xu, Cyrille Boyer, Nathaniel Corrigan and Sivaprakash Shanmugam
	Nathaniel Corrigan was born in Lismore, NSW, Australia in 1991. He completed his Bachelor of Chemical Engineering at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in 2014, with his honors project investigating catalyst-free visible light-induced RAFT polymerizations. He is currently undertaking a PhD under the supervision of A/Prof Cyrille Boyer at UNSW Australia, with his research focusing on photoredox catalysis for polymerization as well as other visible light-induced polymerization.
	Sivaprakash Shanmugam earned his BS in Biochemistry, with a minor in Chemistry, from Case Western Reserve University in 2013. He is currently a postgraduate student pursuing his PhD in Chemical Engineering at UNSW-Australia under the direction of A/Prof. Cyrille Boyer. His research focuses on the development of spatial, temporal, and sequence control of light-mediated RAFT polymerization.
	Jiangtao Xu received his PhD in polymer chemistry from Fudan University, China in 2007, where he focused on the kinetics and mechanism of reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization. Following the postdoctoral research in Centre of Advanced Macromolecular Design (CAMD), UNSW Australia from 2008–2010 and the University of Melbourne from 2011, he joined CAMD as research Fellow in 2013 working with A/Prof. Cyrille Boyer. His main research interests are living polymerization (methodology, kinetics and mechanism), green chemistry, photoredox catalysis, supramolecular self-assembly, precision polymer synthesis for nanomedicine and bioengineering applications. He has published over 50 journal articles and attracted over 1300 citations.
	Cyrille Boyer received his PhD from the University of Montpellier II (Ecole Nationale Superieure de Chimie de Montpellier, France) in 2006. At the end of 2006, he joined the Centre for Advanced Macromolecular Design (CAMD) as a senior research fellow. In 2013, Cyrille was promoted to Associate Professor at the University of New South Wales and received the UNSW Research Excellence Award at the Faculty of Engineering, in 2016 one of the six Prime Minister Prize for Science (Malcolm MacIntosh Prize), was a finalist of NSW innovation award in 2014. Cyrille's research interests mainly cover the use of photoredox catalysts to perform living radical polymerization and polymer post-modification, hybrid organic–inorganic nanoparticles for imaging, and energy storage. Cyrille has published over 150 research articles, including eight patents, which have gathered over 7000 citations.

 		 

 	Scheme 1  Oxidative and reductive quenching cycles for Ru(bpy)32+. Adapted from ref. 4 with permission from Royal Chemical Society.	 

Ru(bpm)32+	−0.21	+0.99	+1.69	−0.91	
9

Ru(bpz)32+	−0.26	+1.45	+0.86	−0.80	
10 and 11

TPP	−0.40	+0.27	+0.75	−1.32	
12

ZnPC	−0.46	+0.25	+0.68	−0.89	
12

Rose Bengal	−0.68	+0.99	+1.09	−0.78	
13

Chl a	−0.79	+0.22	+0.54	−1.11	
12

Ru(bpy)32+	−0.81	+0.77	+1.29	−1.33	
6 and 14

ZnTPP	−0.84	+0.27	+0.75	−1.32	
12

Ru(phen)32+	−0.87	+0.82	+1.26	−1.36	
6 and 14

Ir[dF(CF3)ppy]2(dtbbpy)+	−0.89	+1.21	+1.69	−1.37	
15

Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)+	−0.96	+0.66	+1.21	−1.51	
15 and 16

Cu(dap)2+	−1.43	—	+0.62	—	
17

Eosin Y (EY)	−1.60	+1.18	+0.72	−1.14	
18

Fluorescein	−1.61	+1.21	+0.83	−1.23	
18


fac-Ir(ppy)3	−1.73	+0.31	+0.77	−2.19	
19


 	Fig. 1  Effects of ligands on reduction potential in ruthenium polypyridyl complexes. Reproduced from ref. 26 with the permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  Reduction of phenacyl sulfonium salts mediated by Ru(bpy)32+. Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 3  Two electron reduction of α-haloacetophenones to acetophenone via oxidative and reductive quenching of Ru(bpy)32+.	 

 	Scheme 4  Oxidation of benzylic alcohols mediated by ruthenium complexes. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 5  Amine oxidation to iminium ions. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission of Beilstein Publisher.	 

 	Scheme 6  Mannich products by trapping iminium ions. Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 7  Photoinduced ATRA reactions. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 8  Enantioselective alkylation of aldehydes via photoredox organocatalysis. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Scheme 9  Visible light mediated thiol–ene reaction. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 10  Crossed intermolecular [2+2] cycloaddition.	 

 	Fig. 2  Reduction potentials (vs. SCE) of some iridium polypyridyl complexes commonly employed in organic synthesis. Adapted from ref. 26 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 11  Reductive radical cyclizations of aryl, alkyl and alkenyl iodides. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 12  Photoredox catalyzed reductive pinacol coupling of aldehydes and ketones. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 13  Oxidative deprotection of para-methoxybenzyl (PMB) ethers using a heteroleptic iridium polypyridyl complex. Adapted from ref. 29 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 14  Intermolecular ATRA using iridium photoredox catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 15  Difluoroalkylation of hydrazones mediated by photoredox catalysis. Adapted from ref. 185 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 16  Cu(dap)2+ mediated α-allylations of α-halocarbonyls. Reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 17  Antimony TPP mediated oxidation of cyclohexene. Adapted from ref. 280 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 18  Formation of radicals through FeTPP(Cl) photoexcitation. Adapted from ref. 292 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 19  Photoinduced electron transfer pathways for excited state phthalocyanines. Adapted from ref. 25 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  Organic compounds investigated as photoredox catalysts in organic synthesis. 1. Fluorescein; 2. Eosin Y (EY); 3. Rhodamine B; 4. Nile Red; 5. 9-mesityl-10-methylacridinium ion (Acr+-Mes); 6. Alzarin Red; 7. 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-p-benzoquinone (DDQ); 8. N,N-Bis(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)perylene-3,4,9,10-bis(dicarboximide) (PDI); 9. 3-Cyano-1-methylquinolinium ion (QuCN+).	 

 	Scheme 20  Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic direct C–H arylation of heteroarenes using EY. Reproduced from ref. 346 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 21  DDQ mediated oxidation of benzene to phenol. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 22  Sequential one-pot photoredox catalyzed CuAAC and radical mediated thiol–ene reactions for building complex polymer architectures. Reproduced from ref. 405 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 23  Proposed mechanism for the post-modification of polymers via visible light-mediated atom transfer radical addition (ATRA). Reproduced with permission from ref. 420.	 

 	Scheme 24  Post-modification of poly(allyl methacrylate-r-ethyl methacrylate) (P(AM-r-EMA)) with a variety of thiol compounds in the presence of Ru(bpy)3Cl2 under blue LED light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 436.	 

 	Scheme 25  Simplified pathways for carbon radical and cation generation via photoredox catalysis. PC: photoredox catalyst; D: electron donor. R˙ and D+ are the reactive species for radical and cationic polymerizations.	 

 	Scheme 26  (1) Radical photopolymerization using iridium complex as photocatalyst and alkyl bromide as initiator; Reproduced with permission from ref. 438 (2) cationic photopolymerization using poly(phenylenevinylene)-g-polystyrene (PPV-g-PSt) as macromolecular photocatalyst in the presence of diphenyliodonium hexafluorophosphate. Reproduced from ref. 439 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 27  α-Amino radical generation via photoredox catalysis and hydrogen atom abstraction. PC: photoredox catalyst; EWG: electron withdrawing group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65.	 

 	Scheme 28  Three component system of dye/amine/bis(trichloromethyl)-1,3,5-triazine for chain-growth photopolymerization. Reproduced from ref. 469 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 29  Various types of carbon radical generation via photoredox catalysis. PC: photoredox catalyst.	 

 	Scheme 30  Photoredox reactions mediated by highly conjugated thiophene derivative under visible light. Reproduced from ref. 492 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 31  Multifunctional azide and alkyne monomers and photoinitiator for CuAAC photopolymerization under bulk conditions. Reproduced from ref. 505 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) On-line FTNIR for “ON/OFF” study of visible light photocatalytic thiol–ene polymerization in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) using Ru(bpy)3Cl2 (25 ppm relative to olefin concentration) as photocatalyst and p-toluidine (0.5% to olefin concentration) as redox mediator. (B) GPC trace and (C) 1H NMR spectrum for final purified product by thiol–ene polymerization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 436.	 

 	Scheme 32  Proposed mechanism for visible light photocatalytic thiol–ene reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 436.	 


1	Visible	
fac-Ir(ppy)3	75	1:0.33	1163	993
2	UV	—	76	1:0.27	1385	1010
3	UV	ITXa	76	1:0.21	1732	1010
4	Thermal	AIBNb	78	1:0.18	1992	1047

 	Scheme 33  General mechanism for ATRP activated by dithiocarbamate (DC) under UV irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 518 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 34  Proposed mechanism for in situ generation of CuI complexes from CuII complexes in the presence of UV light under bulk conditions. Reproduced from ref. 536 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 35  Proposed mechanism for in situ generation of CuI complexes from CuII complexes in the presence of UV light in the presence of methanol. Reproduced from ref. 534 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 36  Bold lines represent reactions with highest rates, thin solid line represent dominant route for photochemical ATRP, and dashed lines represent reactions with minor contributions towards photochemical ATRP. Reproduced from ref. 541 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 37  Proposed mechanism for synergetic relationship between alkyl bromide initiator, Me6TREN ligand, and copper(II) bromide for UV mediated polymerization. Reproduced from ref. 544 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 38  Photomediated Cu-based ATRP via an oxidative quenching cycle activated by visible light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 551 with permission American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  GPC traces of successive additions of monomers during synthesis of multiblock copolymers consisting of (a) an undecablock copolymer (DPn (degree of polymerization) = 3 per block), (b) an octablock copolymer (DPn = 10 per block), (c) a hexablock copolymer (DPn = 25 per block), and (d) a pentablock copolymer (DPn = 100 per block). Reproduced from ref. 552 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  UV-mediated ATRP for growing polymer brushes from gold surfaces using TiO2 as a sensitizer. Reproduced from ref. 561 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 39  Photo-ATRP with fac-Ir(ppy)3 as the photoredox catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 564 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  Polymerization of methyl methacrylate with fac-Ir(ppy)3 in a continuous flow microreactor. Reproduced from ref. 565 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Spatial and temporal regulation of polymer brush formation from silica substrates. Reproduced from ref. 570 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  Coupling surface-initiated polymerization with thiol–yne click chemistry using fac-Ir(ppy)3. Reproduced from ref. 571 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 40  Photo-ATRP mediated by perlyene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 589.	 

 	Scheme 41  Metal-free ATRP with 10-phenylphenothiazine catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 596 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 42  Proposed mechanism for photoinduced electron/energy transfer-reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (PET-RAFT) polymerization in the presence of photocatalyst: (A) electron transfer and (B) energy transfer mechanism. PC: photocatalyst.	 



	

	MMA, MA, MAA, tBMA, tBA, St, DMA, HPMA, NIPAAm, OEGMA, OEGA, EA, 2,2,2-trifluoroethyl acrylate, n-hexyl acrylate, n-pentyl acrylate, 3-oxobutyl acrylate, 3-(trimethylsilyl)prop-2-yn-1-yl acrylate, isoprene, VAc, vinyl pivalate, NVP, dimethyl vinylphosphonate, vinyl benzoate, vinyl carbazole	
419, 597–599 and 606



	

	MMA, MA, EA, tBA, nBA, HEA, DMA, NIPAAm, DEGA, OEGMA, OEGA, phenyl acrylate, N,N′-diethylacrylamide	
196, 603 and 604



	

	MMA, MA, tBMA, DMA, HPMA, NIPAAm, OEGMA, GMA, HEMA, PFPA, MAA, DMAEMA	
601



	

	MMA, GMA, MAA, HEMA, OEGMA, DMAEMA, HPMA, PFPMA	
607



	

	MMA, MA	
597 and 607



	

	MMA	
602



	

	MA, DMA, St, tBA, HEA, OEGA, NIPAAm, DMAEA, isobornyl acrylate, MMA, MA, HEMA, DMAEMA, GMA, HPMA	
602



	

	MA, DMA, NIPAAm, tBA, HEA, OEGA, DMAEA	
608



	

	MMA, GMA, OEGMA, DMAEMA, tBMA	
609



	

	MMA, tBMA, GMA, HEMA, DMAEMA, BzMA	
610


 	Scheme 43  Proposed mechanism for PET-RAFT polymerization with chlorophyll a (Chl a) as photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 601.	 

 	Scheme 44  Selective photoactivation of thiocarbonylthio compounds for SUMI reactions (A) and controlled radical polymerization (B) via the PET-RAFT Process. Reproduced from ref. 610 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 45  Proposed PET-RAFT mechanism using EY as the photoredox catalyst via (a) oxidative quenching cycle and (b) reductive quenching cycle in the presence of triethylamine (TEA). Reproduced from ref. 607 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 46  Synthesis of telechelic polymers using 10-phenylphenothiazine (PTH) and trithiocarbonate under visible light. Reproduced from ref. 611 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 47  Pi-RDRP photoactivated by tertiary amine. Reproduced from ref. 612 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 48  Visible light mediated reversible deactivation radical polymerizations utilizing organo-cobalt porphyrins for polymerization of acrylamides followed by synthesis of block copolymers by reversible switching between thermal and light reactions. Adapted from ref. 618 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 49  Mechanisms of photoinduced reversible complexation mediated polymerization (photo-RCMP). Reproduced from ref. 628 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 50  Photo-RCMP over a wide range of wavelengths by selecting different photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 629 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 51  Mechanism of photo-IMP as described by Liu and coworkers. Reproduced from ref. 630 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Scheme 52  Proposed mechanism for redox-initiated metal-free ROMP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 631.	 
Bpm	2,2′-Bipyrimidine
bpy	2,2′-Bipyridine
bpz	2,2′-Bipyrazine
dap	2,9-Bis(p-anisyl)-1,10-phenanthroline
dF(CF3)ppy	2-(2,4-Difluorophenyl)-5-trifluoromethylpyridine
dtbbpy	4,4-Di-tert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridine
dFppy	2-(2,4-Difluorophenyl)pyridine
Menbpy	4,4′-Dimenthoxycarbonyl-2,2′-bipyridine
Phen	Phenanthroline
ppy	2-Phenylpyridine
MLCT	Metal-to-ligand charge transfer
LMCT	Ligand-to-metal charge transfer
ppm	Parts per million
UV	Ultraviolet
LED	Light-emitting diode
CFL	Compact fluorescent lamp
PET	Photoinduced electron transfer
SET	Single electron transfer
TPP	Tetraphenylporphyrin
ZnTPP	Zinc tetraphenylporphyrin
FeTPP	Iron tetraphenylporphyrin
Chl a	Chlorophyll a
BChl a	Bacteriochlorophyll a
PheoA	Pheophorbide a
ATRA	Atom transfer radical addition
ATRP	Atom transfer radical polymerization
RAFT	Reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer
PET-RAFT	Photoinduced electron/energy transfer – reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer
RDRP	Reversible deactivation radical polymerization
SIP	Surface-initiated polymerization
CMRP	Cobalt mediated radical polymerization
ROMP	Ring-opening metathesis polymerization
TEMPO	2,2,6,6-Tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy
MMA	Methyl methacrylate
MA	Methyl acrylate
EA	Ethyl acrylate
MAA	Methacrylic acid
HEA	2-Hydroxylethyl acrylate
DMAEA	2-(Dimethylamino)ethyl acrylate
VAc	Vinyl acetate
NVP	
N-Vinyl pyrrolidone
DMAEMA	2-(Dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate

nBA	
n-Butylacrylate
St	Styrene

tBA	
tert-Butyl acrylate

tBMA	
tert-Butyl methacrylate
HEMA	2-Hydroxylethyl methacrylate
BzMA	Benzyl methacrylate
EGA	Ethylene glycol methyl ether acrylate
OEGMA	Oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate, Mn = 300 g mol−1
HPMA	
N-2-Hydroxylpropyl methacrylamide
PFPA	Pentafluorophenyl acrylate
PFPMA	Pentafluorophenyl methacrylate
GMA	Glycidyl methacrylate
OEGA	Oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether acrylate, Mn = 480 g mol−1
DMA	
N,N′-Dimethylacrylamide
NIPAM	
N-Isopropylacrylamide
PMDETA	
N,N,N′,N′′,N′′-Pentamethyldiethylenetriamine
EBiB	Ethyl α-bromoisobutyrate
TPMA	Tris(2-pyridylmethyl)amine
TEA	Triethylamine
EY	Eosin Y
DMSO	Dimethyl sulfoxide
DMF	Dimethylformamide
NMP	
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
CPADB	4-Cyanopentanoic acid dithiobenzoate
BTPA	2-(n-Butyltrithiocarbonate)-propionic acid
DDMAT	2-(Dodecylthiocarbonothioylthio)-2-methylpropionic acid
CDTPA	4-Cyano-4-[(dodecylsulfanylthiocarbonyl)sulfanyl]pentanoic acid
BSTP	3-Benzylsulfanyl thiocarbonylthiosulfanyl propionic acid
Xanthate	Methyl 2-[(ethoxycarbonothioyl)sulfanyl]propanoate
CDB	Cumyl dithiobenzoate
CPD	2-Cyano-2-propyl benzodithioate
GPC	Gel permeation chromatography
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
