Research on photocatalytic CO 2 conversion to renewable synthetic fuels based on localized surface plasmon resonance: current progress and future pers ...  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CY01967A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CY01967A
(Perspective)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2023, 13, 1932-1975Research on photocatalytic CO2 conversion to renewable synthetic fuels based on localized surface plasmon resonance: current progress and future perspectives

        
          
            Jinhe 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Guan
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Xingze 
            Wu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yujun 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiangfeng 
            Guo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zeren 
            Ma
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shibo 
            Bao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xing 
            Jiang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kaiyou 
            Shu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hongtao 
            Dang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zelong 
            Guo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zekai 
            Li
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhen 
            Huang
          
        
      
Key Laboratory for Power Machinery and Engineering of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Dongchuan Road No. 800, Min Hang District, Shanghai 200240, P.R. China. E-mail: guanbin@sjtu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 21 34205553;   Tel: +86 21 34206859
Received 
      18th November 2022
    , Accepted 29th January 2023First published on 9th March 2023AbstractClimate change is one of the major challenges the society is facing today, and has become a global non-traditional security issue that seriously threatens human survival and sustainable development. Therefore, the search for renewable and clean fuel is an important challenge for sustainable development of society. Herein, we discuss the application of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) plasmonic nanoparticles (PNPs) in the carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR) regarding their basic principles, activation mechanisms and catalytic applications. The basic principles include the mechanism and activation process of LSPR with charge carriers. Activation mechanisms involve three main pathways including thermal charge carrier transfer, optical near-field enhancement and photothermal effect. Their catalytic applications contain differently modified and designed plasmonic photocatalysts. It is hoped that this review will help readers understand the complex catalytic mechanisms and provide new ideas for the design of LSPR photocatalysts. Moreover, hopefully this research can provide support for the development of Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage (CCUS).
1. Introduction
1.1. Research background
Nowadays, the increasing concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has led to a large number of environmental problems, among which the greenhouse effect is the main one. As shown in Fig. 1, the steady increase in CO2 content has led to an increase in the Earth's surface temperature and sea level, threatening human production and life.1–3 Therefore, if CO2 emissions are not controlled, mankind will face a huge disaster in the upcoming decades. In this case, efforts are being devoted to control and reduce the CO2 concentration globally. Simultaneously, with the increasing consumption of traditional fossil energy, the world is also facing an energy crisis to some extent. According to the concept of Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage (CCUS), the conversion of CO2 into renewable synthetic fuels can realize a closed carbon dioxide cycle.4,5 In this case, the production of fuel needed to maintain industry and life, while reducing environmental pollution can simultaneously solve the environmental and energy crisis.6 Therefore, the design and preparation of catalysts with high yield, high selectivity, high stability, and adjustable properties have become the focus of research in recent years.
 Fig. 1  (A) CO2 concentrations. (B) Global-mean air surface temperature. (C) Sea-level change.1,3 
At present, the catalytic reduction of carbon dioxide can be divided into several categories including thermal catalysis, electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and biochemical catalysis.7–10 Among them, photocatalysis does not require an external energy input because the source of energy is continuous sunlight, which is in line with the concept of green production. The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O into renewable fuels through solar energy is considered artificial photosynthesis (Fig. 2), eventually achieving the production of solar fuels and high-value chemicals.11,12 In the past few years, significant efforts have been devoted to creating effective, semiconductor-based photocatalysts;13 however, most of the existing catalysts are limited by their low charge separation rate, poor solar absorption and other problems, resulting in poor product yield, low selectivity, unsatisfactory stability, and other challenging problems14 because CO2 needs to be reduced using photocatalysts that are effective.15–17 Therefore, accelerating the development of artificial photosynthesis and revealing the underlying mechanism for the photocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide and water into precious hydrocarbon fuels are necessary but a challenging problem. In this case, surface plasmon resonance, as an excellent physical phenomenon, can be used in the field of semiconductor photocatalysis, which can optimize the catalytic performance of catalysts to a large extent, and thus has a good development prospect.
 Fig. 2  (A) Natural photosynthesis. (B) Artificial photosynthesis.11 
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) in metal nanostructures under light excitation endows them with many unique optical properties, which can greatly enhance the interaction between light and matter, enabling their application in physical, chemical, biological, materials, and many other fields. Plasmon/plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer (PRET/PIRET) refers to the transfer of plasmon energy to nearby exciton systems such as semiconductors and molecules through dipole–dipole interactions.18–20 Resonance energy transfer is a common and very important process. For example, the transfer of light energy from the light capture antenna to the reaction center in photosynthesis occurs through the efficient resonance energy transfer process,21,22 as well as the resonance between fluorescently labeled molecules.23,24 On the one hand, plasmons can be used to control the resonance energy transfer process of semiconductor quantum dots and fluorescent dye molecules.25–28 On the other hand, the PRET process in plasmon-to-exciton systems has been reported to enhance photocatalytic energy conversion20,29 and enable high-sensitivity molecular sensing and imaging.18,19,30 Due to the strong light-harvesting ability of plasmons, the PRET process has great potential for enhancing energy conversion and utilization efficiency, and thus merits further research and development.
As environmentally friendly technology, photocatalysis has attracted an increasing amount of attention in recent years. Photocatalysis usually refers to the generation of electron–hole (e−/h+) pairs due to the absorption of photons by catalyst materials, which can diffuse to the surface of the material to participate in redox reactions before the electrons and holes recombine. In 1972, Fujishima and Honda31 reported the water splitting reaction on TiO2 electrodes under light conditions. Subsequently, studies on the photocatalytic reactions of semiconductor materials have received extensive attention.32–35 The use of solar energy to generate photogenerated charges to participate in chemical reactions and their conversion into chemical energy simulates the natural photosynthesis process, which has great potential for solving the increasingly serious energy and environmental problems on a global scale. However, although semiconductor materials have excellent optical properties and chemical catalytic activity, they also exhibit similar problems as photocatalysts. Firstly, the spectral response range of semiconductors is limited by their band gap. For example, the band gap of TiO2 is 3.0–3.2 eV, which is only sensitive to ultraviolet light.33–35 Secondly, improving the light absorption efficiency, inhibiting recombination, and enhancing the chemical and catalytic activity on the surface of semiconductor catalyst materials are important issues to improve the energy conversion efficiency.
Accordingly, the unique optical properties of SPR can improve the photocatalytic efficiency of these materials by solving the above-mentioned problems.36–40 By constructing metal–semiconductor composite nanostructures, the localized field enhancement effect induced by metal surface plasmons can be improved, which can also improve the light absorption of adjacent semiconductor materials. Besides, due to the strong local effect of field enhancement, the spatial distribution of photogenerated electron–hole pairs inside the semiconductor material can be regulated and the distance for charge diffusion to the surface can be shortened, thereby inhibiting the charge recombination and improving the charge separation efficiency. Also, SPR has extremely large light absorption and light scattering cross-sections, and the light-trapping effect caused by plasmonic light scattering can increase the path of light in semiconductor materials, thereby enhancing their light absorption. Alternatively, plasmonic light absorption makes the metal nanostructure itself an efficient light-trapping center. If the light energy captured by plasmons can be effectively utilized, the energy conversion efficiency can be greatly improved. Accordingly, a deep understanding of the excitation and relaxation processes of plasmons is required, including plasmon localized electromagnetic field enhancement and far-field scattering enhancement, as well as plasmon non-radiation caused by resonance energy transfer and hot electron relaxation process.
Starting from plasmon resonance energy transfer, herein, we introduce the physical mechanisms of plasmonic thermal charge carrier transfer, optical near-field enhancement, and photothermal effect, as well as the research progress of using these energy transfer and charge transfer processes to enhance photocatalysis. It is hoped that by understanding the plasmon energy relaxation mechanism and dynamic process, the application of the plasmon enhancement effect in the energy and environment fields will be further deepened and expanded.
1.2. Scope of review and convention
LSPR is an exciting phenomenon that has attracted extensive attention in various fields. Consequently, there are numerous reports in the literature on this subject, covering the fundamentals of LSPR, its dependence on morphology, size, and material, and methods for adjusting the optical properties.41–47 Thus, reviews on the synthesis of nanomaterials with specific shapes are important for achieving LSPR performances.48–53 In addition, related reviews have been published on the applications of PNPs,54 which include solar energy harvesting and conversion,55–57 water splitting,39,58–61 surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy,62 sensing,63–65 and treatment in plasmonics. Some of the specific applications of enhanced catalysis have also been highlighted. In recent years, intensive research has been carried out in this area, especially with regard to the rationalization of the related mechanisms. This justifies an updated summary of the advances in this field.
This review is divided into three parts. In section II, we summarize the mechanism of LSPR to meet the needs of the organic chemistry community. In section III, we introduce three key catalysis-related properties of LSPRs in detail, namely, thermal charge carrier transfer processes, optical near-field enhancement effects, and photothermal effects. Then, the efforts by researchers to design nanoparticles (NPs) as plasmonic-enhanced catalysts are introduced in section IV, which are described in terms of the diverse modification strategies. Finally, the summary and prospects are presented in the concluding remarks. It is hoped that this layout will not only help researchers to clearly understand the complex mechanism and strong function of the LSPR effect, but also facilitate the selection of specific catalyst species and modification strategies for experiments.
1.3. Basic concepts of plasmons
If the incident light contains a fluctuating electromagnetic field, the free conduction electron cloud of the metal will be impacted by the periodic force and exhibit periodic motion. When the frequency of the incident light and the oscillation frequency of the metal electron cloud coincide, plasmon resonance occurs, and the plasmon frequency can be described by eqn (1),66 as follows: (1)where n represents the electron density, e represents the electron charge, m represents the effective mass, and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity.
Notably, unlike the LSPR of metal NPs, the plasmonic resonance of bulk metals is unaffected by the restoring force. The ability of the freely conducting electron cloud of the metal to quickly adapt to the incident-changing electromagnetic field determines whether the bulk metal may produce plasmon resonance. If the frequency of incoming light is greater than the plasmonic frequency, it will either pass through the metal unaffected or be absorbed during the interband transition.67 The electrons of metals fluctuate when the incoming frequency of light is lower than the plasma frequency, which causes the majority of the light to be reflected. The dielectric constant of a metal determines whether its free conducting electrons can react quickly to a change in the electromagnetic field. Typically, the dielectric constant of a material must have a big absolute negative real portion and a positive value with a tiny imaginary part to produce collective oscillations.67 Consequently, several metallic materials, including Au, Ag, Cu, Pt, and Al, have the ability to produce the plasmonic phenomenon. Furthermore, the requirements for plasmonic oscillation (Fig. 3), the frequency of the SPR (determined by eqn (2)), and the newly provided interface are all constrained if the metal is transformed into a two-dimensional thin film.68,69 (2)where εs is the permittivity of the surrounding medium. Thus, when the surrounding medium changes, εs changes, and the frequency of the plasmon resonance changes accordingly. Specifically, this property endows SPR with many excellent applications in a large area.
 Fig. 3  Light irradiation-induced plasma oscillation.70 
In the case of 0D metal NPs, the conditions of SPR will be different. The oscillations of the electron clouds of metal NPs are commonly referred to as LSPR.63 When the diameter of a metal nanoparticle (NP) is smaller than the wavelength of the incident light, the electron cloud of the metal NP is displaced by a constant incident electromagnetic field, while the restoring force from the positively charged metal core pulls the displaced electron cloud back. This restoring force causes the electron cloud on the surface of the metal NP to oscillate periodically. LSPR is very different from SPR (Fig. 4) because it only occurs when the electromagnetic field is confined to a small area of the metal surface, i.e., if the lateral dimensions of the interface are much smaller than the surface plasmon propagation distance, such as in spherical nanoparticles, then it is defined as LSPR.63Fig. 4(a) shows a snapshot of the resonance of an NP excited below this frequency, where the carriers change with the direction of the electric field. Excitation is caused by the incident electric field, while the recovery electric field is caused by the uneven surface charge and the damping caused by the ion network. When the external field oscillates at this frequency in the resonant mode of the particle, it greatly enhances the total field in and around the particle. Fig. 4(b) clearly compares the electron cloud to a harmonic oscillator, such as a spring driven by a force, which always responds with a restorative force as it expands or contracts. In this process, the friction with the support surfaces produces damping.71
 Fig. 4  (a) Dynamics of a PNP during irradiation. (b) Simplified model of the electron cloud.71 
In LSPR, the enhanced electric field is strongest at the surface and decreases sharply with distance. The extinction cross-section (Cext) of a particle reaches the maximum at the plasmon resonance frequency, which can be obtained using eqn (3)63 for a metal NP, as follows: (3)where εr = −2εs, and on reaching the resonance condition, this frequency can be calculated using eqn (4),36,63 as follows: (4)
Because metal NPs can absorb and convert solar energy and be excited in the visible light range, they are widely used as photocatalysts. Due to the wide band gap of traditional photocatalysts such as TiO2, only the high energy of ultraviolet light can be excited, which only accounts for 5% of the solar energy,72 limiting the practical application of these catalysts. In the photocatalytic cracking of water, photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide, and photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants, it is common for a single semiconductor photocatalyst to show very low catalytic activity, which is caused by the easy recombination of photogenerated charges, while the conversion of plasmonic energy also suffers from the same defect. Thus, to solve this problem, suitable heterojunctions are constructed between metal NPs and photocatalytic semiconductors.73 In addition, other modification methods based on catalysts with the LSPR effect are being extensively investigated.
2. Basic principles and catalytic mechanism of plasmonic nanomaterials
LSPR allows NPs to collect light and concentrate it near their surface, and subsequently the light energy is used to generate excited charge carriers and heat. Consequently, plasmonic catalysts utilize these energizing charge carriers and heat to induce chemical reactions on their surfaces. The basic principles of plasmonic catalysis are covered in this review, together with how it is used to transform CO2 into fuels and chemicals. Based on the dielectric function, charge carrier production, and relaxation pathways, initially we introduce the basic principles of LSPR and the process of plasmonic photocatalysis. Subsequently, the activation of different charge carrier-mediated molecules is discussed, and then how charge carrier extraction is crucial in plasmonic catalysis. Examples of photocatalytic CO2 reduction reactions are presented according to three main pathways, as follows: (i) thermal charge carrier transfer processes; (ii) optical near-field enhancement effects; and (iii) photothermal effects.
2.1. LSPR generation and relaxation mechanism
Due to the LSPR effect, light waves are trapped in nanoparticles (NPs), which are smaller than the wavelength of the light being trapped. Consequently, the surface electrons collectively oscillate in response to incoming light due to the interactions between light and free electrons in the conduction band (CB) of NPs. When the LSPR gathers photons, excited carriers and heat are produced. These two byproducts may be employed to fuel chemical processes. In general, high-temperature reaction conditions are necessary for heterogeneous catalysis on metal NPs because they supply the energy required to activate the chemical bonds for chemical reactions on the surfaces of metal NPs. However, thermal deposition in different reaction coordinates leads to the activation of adverse reaction pathways, resulting in the formation of various by-products, which seriously affect the selectivity of catalytic reactions. In contrast, during plasmonic catalysis, the transfer of photoexcited carriers from metal NPs to the reactants results in a chemical reaction, where the electron excitation is specifically guided, and thus only the required chemical pathways are active.74
Due to LSPR, metal NPs show a large extinction cross-section (σext), depending on the dielectric function of the metal, as follows: , where ε1 represents the real part, ε2 represents the imaginary part, and εm represents the dielectric function. In this formula, when the denominator is close to zero, the cross-section (σext) will be the maximum. Therefore, when ε1 = −2εm and ε2 is small, plasmonic excitation occurs. The relative propensity of the electron cloud to be deformed from its normal shape by an external electric field due to charge distribution is known as polarizability, which is the real component of the dielectric function. Also, for metals, ε1 = −2εm at various light wavelengths in the air because their real part is usually negative.74
The probability that a single electron will be excited in a metal when exposed to light determines the probability of photon absorption, which is the imaginary portion of the dielectric function. It causes either interband excitation from full d states to empty s states or intraband excitation from filled s levels to empty s states above the Fermi level (Fig. 5a). Charge carriers require a change in momentum to allow the forbidden s–s transitions, which is provided by plasmons (Fig. 5b). The wavelength of light absorption for the interband d–s transitions depends on the location of the d state in relation to the Fermi level. However, visible light cannot generate d–s excitation in materials where the d-band is much lower than the Fermi level such as Ag. Alternatively, this may occur in materials where the d-band moves to a higher energy level, while remaining below the Fermi level, such as Au and Cu. Therefore, the imaginary portion (ε2) of Ag, Au and Cu ranges from tiny to medium, but the actual part (ε1) of the metals is typically negative. Accordingly, Ag, Au, and Cu can display LSPR in the visible range due to the combination of ε1 = −2εm and tiny ε2.37,74–79
 Fig. 5  (a) Location of d and s bands and possible d–s and s–s transitions. (b) Energy (E) of s–s and d–s transitions.80 
Plasmonic excitation results in the confinement of light energy near the surface of metal NPs, which is in the form of an elevated electric field. This enhancement in intensity is up to a factor of 102 of the strength from the incident electromagnetic field and further enhanced by a factor of 104 at the corners/edges and 104 to 106 at two or more closely located gaps, which are called NP hotspots.74 Therefore, the light absorption and photon scattering effects of NPs are enhanced by an amplification in the electric field.
The energy stored in LSPR can be consumed in two ways, as follows: (i) radiative photon scattering and (ii) non-radiative absorption by NPs, followed by the generation of charge carriers via transitions. Electron–phonon coupling produces thermal energy, heats the metal NPs, and is eventually transferred to the outside environment.37,74–79
2.2. Activation process on plasmonic nanocatalyst surface
In plasmonic catalysis, the activation energy to activate chemical bonds comes from high-energy carriers. Upon exposure to light, the reactant molecules adsorbed on the surface of NPs are excited to a higher potential energy level using plasmonic energy. Because of this extra energy in the plasma, the excited molecules recombine. Consequently, the reactants cannot react in this excited state because of their short lifetime, and then they change into the excited vibrational dynamic state with a relatively long lifetime. Accordingly, the short-life reactant molecules relax to the exciting dynamic state through the excited metal reaction, and the chemical reaction can take place with the help of the long-life vibrational thermal state.74
Transient electronic excitation followed by the indirect transfer of energy or direct transfer of energy may result in an enhancement in the rate of plasmonic catalysis (Fig. 6). In the case of indirect energy transfer, the resulting high-energy charge carriers collide with other carriers, thus resulting in a charged or thermal Fermi–Dirac distribution. The indirect or direct transfer of energy resulted from transient electron excitation may lead to an increase in the rate of plasmonic catalysis. Then, the hot carriers transfer from the NP surface to the unfilled state of the reactants adsorbed on the metal surface (Fig. 6a). The efficiency of charge transfer in this process is determined by both the position of the reaction state and the Fermi level. Alternatively, in direct energy transfer, the adsorption of reactants on the metal surface gives rise to new interfacial electronic states, which are directly excited by the LSPR energy (Fig. 6b). In the process of 18O2 and 16O2 dissociation by thermal and optical irradiation, Linic et al.81 explored the kinetic isotope effects under thermal and optical conditions, which were 1.06 and 1.48, respectively, proving that the plasma-induced charged carriers could enhance the O dissociation process. Furthermore, Halas et al.82 observed the catalytic dissociation of H2 in AuNPs at room temperature upon exposure to light, but no H2 dissociation when thermal energy was used. It was found that the photocatalytic H dissociation rate is proportional to the plasmonic intensity, and this finding confirms the role of high-energy charge carriers in the catalytic process.82
 Fig. 6  Reactant transient electronic excitations by two ways: (a) indirect energy transfer and (b) direct energy transfer.80 
2.3. Activation energy and extraction of charge carriers
Jain and colleagues investigated the reduction in the activation energy in plasmonic catalysis.83 They answered the following questions: (i) do catalytic reactions follow different mechanistic pathways under light excitation? (ii) During the photocatalytic reaction, how much photon energy is actually used as the chemical potential? (iii) Does photoexcitation only generate a photothermal effect or also activates some other processes.
Specifically, to answer the above-mentioned questions, they employed the Au-catalyzed conversion of ferricyanide (Fe(CN)63−) to ferrocyanide (Fe(CN)64−) under visible light, and then investigated the effect of light on the activation barrier. Generally, NaBH4 transfers e− to metal NPs, which then inject electrons in the ferricyanide ions, consequently reducing ferricyanide Fe3+ to ferrocyanide Fe2+. As shown in Fig. 7, the Au NPs excited by visible light replace NaBH4, while the hot electrons in the plasmonic Au NPs reduce Fe3+ to Fe2+, and the remaining pores are replaced by pore scavengers (ethanol) or the oxidation of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP).83
 Fig. 7  Reaction of ferricyanide to ferrocyanide via activation enthalpy of one-electron reduction.83 
By comparing the activation enthalpy of light activation with that under dark reaction conditions, the role of plasmonic Au NPs in the electron transfer activation process can be clearly shown. It is worth noting that the photoreaction rate and activation enthalpy depend on the intensity of the light. This is due to the fact that stronger photon absorption leads to higher e−/h+ pair generation rates. The transition state in this reaction is the state of electron transfer when Fe3+ is reduced to Fe2+ without reorganization of the solvation shell (counter ions and water molecules around K+ ions). Subsequently, this solvation shell is reorganized, producing a solvated ferricyanide complex. It was also found that compared to the condition without light, the chemical potential of the ferricyanide ion increased under light excitation. Due to the fast (1 ps) non-radiative relaxation, it is established by clearing holes, thus blocking the electron relaxation path by regrouping, reducing the difficulty of achieving steady-state charging. This mechanism leads to the accumulation of photoexcited electrons and increases the chemical potential of the reaction, eventually lowering the activation barrier.83 Furthermore, Jain et al.83 found that the reduction of the activation barrier is not only related to the hole scavenger but also the photoexcitation power (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Lowering of activation energy barrier in plasmonic catalysis.83 
To determine if it is possible to transfer excited charge carriers from metal NPs to reactant molecules, they formed methylene blue (MB) ion radicals using Ag nanocubes (NCs) and Ag–Pt core–shell NCs and further explored this electron transfer process (Fig. 9).84
 Fig. 9  Surface-enhanced Raman spectra (SERS) showing anti-Stokes (black) and Stokes (red) spectra for MB/Ag at pH 7 using (a) 532 nm and (b) 785 nm laser and for MB/Ag–Pt at pH 7 using (c) 532 nm and (d) 785 nm laser.84 
Consequently, only specific wavelengths could directly activate the electrons on the MB/Ag surface. In contrast to Ag, MB produced MB ion radicals on Ag–Pt after electron reduction. At the higher pH of 12, the free energy of the OH scavenger changes and lower energy holes can be recovered, and thus the reduction of MB is also possible on the surface of Ag. The metal–adsorbate interaction offers a novel route for energy transmission, which can only be achieved at 785 nm rather than at 532 nm light (Fig. 10), suggesting a specific energy transfer mechanism on the MB/Ag surface.84
 Fig. 10  Heating of MB/Ag vibrations via plasmonic stimulation with light.74 
We presented the basic principles and catalytic mechanism of plasmonic nanomaterials, and catalytic reactions involving plasmonic photocatalysts are shown in Table 1. It can be easily seen that the LSPR effect can be applied in many catalytic reactions, achieving a significantly improved catalytic performance. Accordingly, the capture of solar energy by activating small molecules through LSPR effects shows great promise. Significant progress has been achieved in determining the mechanism of plasmonic energy transfer from a plasmonic metal to the attached catalyst. Firstly, the tunable wavelength properties associated with the size and shape of the plasmonic segment allow researchers to exploit larger regions of the solar spectrum, especially the visible and near-infrared (NIR) regions, which cover more than 90% of sunlight. In addition, the catalytic fragments can be selected from a variety of materials, including pure metals, semiconductors and molecular catalysts, which can carry out a series of small molecule activation reactions with different efficiencies and selectivities under a wide range of reaction conditions. The appropriate guidance of photo-generated holes and electrons to additional catalytic nanostructures can optimize the rate and pathway of catalytic reactions. Simultaneously, it is worth mentioning that catalysts under the LSPR effect usually exhibit excellent cyclic stability, but given that this is not closely related to the mechanism we discussed, detailed data on stability testing are not provided herein.
Table 1 Evolution of viable plasmon-catalyst hybrids for photocatalytic small-molecule activation reactions




Catalytic system
Plasmonic material
Reaction
Ref.




Pristine AuNPs
AuNPs
Water splitting (2H2O ⇌ 2H2 + O2)

85



Pristine AgNPs
AgNPs
CO2 to CH3OH

86



Pristine AgNPs
AgNPs
O2 reduction to O2 and subsequent oxidation of ethylene, CO, NH3

81



PVP-coated AuNPs
AuNPs
CO2 reduction to CH4, C2H6

87



CuNPs/graphene oxide
CuNPs
CO2 reduction to CH3OH, CH3CHO

88



CuNPs/CdS
CuNPs
CO2 reduction to CH4, C2H6, C3H8

89



CuNPs/Cu2O
CuNPs
Benzyl alcohol + CO2 → benzyl acetate

90



Dendritic plasmonic colloidosome, black gold
AuNPs
CO2RR, alcohol oxidation, hydrosilylation

91



AgNPs/N-doped TiO2
AgNPs
O2 evolution from H2O

92



AuNPs/TiO2
AuNPs
O2 evolution from H2O

93, 94


AuNPs/SiO2/TiO2
AuNPs
Methylene blue degradation

95



Au–Ag/TiO2
Au–Ag
H2 evolution and dye degradation

96



AuNRs/CoO
AuNRs
O2 evolution from H2O

97



Cu0.4Ag0.6
AgNPs
Methanolysis (H3NBH3 + 4CH3OH → NH4 B(OCH3)4 + 3H2)

98



AuNPs/TiO2 core shell hollow sphere
AuNPs
CO2 reduction to CH4, C2H6

99



AuNPs/ZIF-67
AuNPs
CO2 reduction to CH3OH, C2H5OH

100



AuNPs/WO3
AuNPs
Water splitting (2H2O ⇌ 2H2 + O2)

101



AlNPs/Al2O3@Pd
AlNPs
C2H2 reduction by H2

102, 103


AlNPs@Ir
AlNPs
Nitrous oxide splitting (2N2O ⇌ 2N2 + O2)

104



AuNRs@Pd
AuNRs
Suzuki coupling

105



Ag@SiO2/Pt
AgNPs
CO oxidation

106



AgNP–Pdx alloy
AgNPs
CH3OH oxidation

107



Au triangular nanoprisms (TNP)/cobaloxime
AuTNPs
O2 evolution from H2O

108





3. Application of plasmon effect in CO2 catalytic reduction of renewable synthetic fuels
As shown in Fig. 11, plasmonic photocatalysts can assist CO2 reduction through three main ways, as follows:
 Fig. 11  (A) Plasmon-enhanced nanocatalysis to organic transformations.77 (B) Plasmon-derived hot carriers reduce the activation barrier.109 (C) Core–shell–satellite plasmonic photocatalyst and main enhancement mechanisms.110 
(i) Direct transfer of hot carriers to reactant molecules;
(ii) Enhanced photon absorption by optical near-field enhancement; and
(iii) Providing heat to reactant molecules through the photothermal effect.
Plasmonic nanostructures are excellent candidates for developing synthetic photosynthesis processes because of their characteristics. In this section, we emphasize the routing mechanism for CO2 reduction using plasmonic nanostructures. Also, we present some typical catalyst examples for further description for an easier understanding.
3.1. Thermal charge carrier transfer
The direct injection of thermal charge carriers has been reported for H dissociation catalyzed by Au NPs supported on TiO2 (Fig. 12A).82 TiO2 speeds up the adsorption of H2 molecules, giving the hot electrons from the Au NPs enough time to reach the antibonding orbitals of H2 and create dissociative molecular resonances. After the catalyst was excited by a supercontinuum laser, it showed a great increase in the formation rate of HD (Fig. 12B). The photocatalytic activity increased as the Au loading increased (Fig. 12C), which highlights the crucial role played by Au NPs in catalysis. The activity was reduced as the Au NP size increased from 8.6 to 16 nm because larger particles have a lower surface area than smaller particles (Fig. 12D). The results showed a linear relationship between the photocatalytic activity and light intensity and reflected that electrons were transported from the AuNPs to H2/D2 molecules.
 Fig. 12  (A) Hot electron generation and H2 dissociation on Au NPs. (B) Production rate of HD. (C–E) HD formation rate.82 
Density functional theory (DFT) and embedded correlation wave function calculations were used to determine the charge and the related potential energy of the ground and excited states of the H molecule on the Au surface. To explain the photocatalytic dissociation of H, they proposed that (Fig. 13A–C) at the Au NPs, electrons are first optically stimulated to reach the surface, and subsequently plasmonic quantum decay produces e−/h+ pairs (Fig. 13A). Next, Auger scattering is used to thermalize the heated electrons (Fig. 13B). Once the H2 molecule is in the antibonding state, electrons with enough energy are transported to it, creating a transient state with a negative charge, which moves along the potential energy surface of the excited state, lengthening the bond in the H2 molecule. Subsequently, it returns the electron to the Au NPs, causing H2 to dissociate (Fig. 13C).82 This study shows that the strong non-polarizable H–H bond may be dissociated at ambient temperature with a bond dissociation enthalpy of 436 kJ mol−1 using plasmonic nanostructures. By adjusting the plasmonic characteristics of catalysts and breaking strong chemical bonds at ambient temperature, this study shows a novel method for controlling chemical reactions by photoexcitation.
 Fig. 13  (A) e−/h+ generation in AuNPs. (B) Distribution of hot electrons and their transfer to the antibonding state of H2. (C) Dissociation of H2 on AuNPs.82 
Subsequently, Jain et al. investigated this active electron transport mechanism. For CO2 reduction, they used isopropanol (IPA) as a sacrificial agent to fill the holes in the Au NPs and electron transfer from the plasmonic Au NPs to convert CO2 to hydrocarbons (Fig. 14). Firstly, e−/h+ are transferred to the adsorbed CO2 molecules on the surface of AuNPs to form CO2˙− (Fig. 14C), which then undergoes several electron–proton transfer stages to produce CH4 and C2H6 (Fig. 14D and E). The two radicals have enough time to unite to create C–C bonds because the rate of CO2˙− production is higher than the rate of CO2 desorption (Fig. 14E). It was found that CH4 could be formed even at a lower energy, whereas C2H6 could only be formed at higher energies (Fig. 14B). The LSPR intra-band transition in Au occurs at 532 nm, whereas the photon inter-band transition occurs at 488 nm. During intra-band transitions, the holes and electrons are both in the same sp band and have a shorter lifetime. Consequently, the rate of CO2 radical formation is higher for high-energy photons, which enhances the dimerization of CO2 radicals to produce C2H6 (Fig. 14E).87
 Fig. 14  (A) C–C coupling and the formation of C2H6 caused by the large hot-electron-transfer rate. (B) CH4 and C2H6 formation. (C) Electron transfer process. Schematic of the formation of (D) CH4 and (E) C2H6.87 
Subsequently, a concept was developed to increase the electron transfer rates. Jain et al.111 proposed a novel technique to accelerate the electron transfer rate from Au NPs to CO2. When CO2 molecules and 1-ethy-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIM-BF4) interact, they created a complex with a geometry similar to that of the CO2˙− anion radical (Fig. 15A–C). Compared to employing CO2 alone, the shape of the EMIM˙–CO2 complex is similar to that of the CO2˙− radical, which increases the efficiency of the electron transfer process (Fig. 15E and D). Additionally, according to DFT calculations, EMIM+ can stabilize the CO2˙− radicals generated on the surface of Au (Fig. 15F), boosting the likelihood of C–C coupling and the synthesis of higher hydrocarbons with ∼50% C2+ selectivity under ideal conditions. Additionally, the EMIM concentration affects the overall output of different hydrocarbons (Fig. 15G and H). One of the key advantages of this method is that it employs simply water as the proton source.111 However, it should be noted that the ionic liquid may also serve this purpose, which needs further investigation. Ionic liquids were used to show the possibility of increasing the charge transfer rate from Au NPs to CO2 in the absence of sacrificial agents. Thus, to stabilize the charged intermediates in various photocatalytic processes, the use of ionic liquids should be further investigated.
 Fig. 15  (A) Ionic liquid-assisted Au NPs in the CO2RR. (B and C) DFT optimized geometry. (D–F) DFT-computed free energy cost. (G) Turnover frequency. (H) Selectivity of different products.111 
Xiong et al.112 investigated a different way to speed up electron transmission. Similar to ionic liquids,111 they demonstrated that this can be achieved by coating Au nanoclusters with organic ligands, which are subsequently coupled to transition metal ions, functioning as catalysts for CO2 reduction (Fig. 16A), and thus the electron transfer efficiency can be adjusted. To increase the photocatalytic activity, they proposed the transfer of the hot electrons produced on the AuNPs to metal cation centers, which will serve as catalytic centers. Triethanolamine (TEOA) was used as a sacrificial agent during the photocatalytic studies on the CO2RR, which showed that neither Au–GSH nor Auc–C was catalytically active. Subsequently, they become catalytically active for the reduction of CO2 (Fig. 16B and C). Ni displayed the strongest activity, while Co2+ demonstrated the best reduction of CO2, with the dominant generation of H2 generation (Fig. 16D). This is due to the PL through the metal ions in the case of Auc–C–Cu, Auc–C–Co, and Auc–C–Ni (Fig. 16E). In the case of Auc–C–Co, additional evidence of electron transfer was obtained by ESR with a strong signal at g = 1.99 (Fig. 16F), indicating that the reduced spin state was caused by the hot electron reduction of Co2+. The PL and DFT analyses (Fig. 16G) showed that the activities of Auc–C–Fe and Auc–C–Cu are constrained by the low electron transfer efficiency. Generally, the d-band should reside near the Fermi level to efficiently transport electrons from the metal to the antibonding orbital of the CO2 molecule. In addition, they calculated the CO2 adsorption modes (Fig. 16H), energies of CO formation, desorption, and dissociation on the surface of Auc–C–Co (Fig. 16I), and the Auc–C–Co structure of CO formed on the surface (Fig. 16J), and concluded that the poor activity of Auc–C–Ni is caused by the weaker CO2 adsorption on its surface compared to the other metals. This work demonstrated how the ligands (linkers) linked to transition metals112 can be used to control the electron transport rates. They observed CO2 reduction in the absence of ligands, which is interesting because Jain et al.87 reported that they did not observe catalytic activity without ligands and metals. Thus, further research on these contradictions is needed.
 Fig. 16  (A) Au–C–M-catalyzed CO2RR. (B) Production rates with different amounts of Co2+. (C) Mass spectrum of 13CO. (D) Production rates with 4 μmol Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+ or Cu2+. (E) Time-resolved transient fluorescence spectra. (F) ESR spectra. (G) Projected density of states of the d-orbitals. (H) Possible CO2 adsorption. (I) Energy profiles. (J) Calculated structures.112 
By choosing which molecules to excite, plasmonic catalysis can selectively direct reactions toward particular routes, hopefully resulting in the desired chemical changes. This special quality of plasmonic catalysts can be investigated and applied in diverse reactions once the intermediate steps in the plasma-assisted chemical reaction process have been thoroughly and clearly understood. This insight was attained by Jain et al.,113 who used single-NP plasmonic Ag NPs to probe the kinetics of visible-light-driven CO2 reduction. They used in situ surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy to record the CO2 adsorption and product formation events (Fig. 17a), and with the aid of DFT calculations, they investigated how plasmonic excitation results in the formation of multi-electron reduction products and the variables that affect the reaction selectivity. The inverse half-reaction is the oxidation of water adsorbed on the Ag surface in the form of –OH under alkaline conditions using a 514.5 nm laser in gas-phase CO2. The Raman peaks (Fig. 17d–g) that randomly appeared and disappeared were attributed to various intermediates and products (Fig. 18). Subsequently, these species were modeled using DFT (Fig. 19). At a distance of 3.4 Å from the surface of Ag, CO2 physisorption was seen. Given that the interband damping of Ag is not dominant, the in-band damping of LSPR in Ag leads to the formation of e−/h+ pairs, which can be transferred to the physically adsorbed CO2. A new state of CO2–Ag complex was formed when the 14.03 eV for the gas-phase CO2 shifted to the 3.5 eV Ag state of the physisorbed CO2 state (Fig. 20a). Consequently, the CO2/Ag complex is excited by direct energy transfer from the dampening of the LSPR caused by the change in the HOMO–LUMO gap, which results in the transfer of electrons from Ag to CO2 and the separation of charge on the CO2/Ag interface. To create the HOCO˙ intermediate, the CO2 anion radical absorbs the H2 created from the oxidation of H2O (Fig. 20b).113 Subsequently, this intermediate is further processed to produce other products. In situ single NPSERS spectroscopy and the ability to identify surface species (HOCO˙) produced during CO2 reduction were both demonstrated in this study. The efficiency of this procedure can be enhanced based on the understanding of the precise mechanics of plasma-mediated chemical processes presented in this study.
 Fig. 17  (a) In situ SERS measurement. (b) Three types of catalytic NPs. (c) Dark-field scattering image. (d and e) Waterfall plot of in situ SERS spectra. (f–h) SERS spectra.113 
 Fig. 18  Different intermediate species formed during the CO2RR.113 
 Fig. 19  DFT-computed Raman spectra of intermediate species. (a) Physisorbed CO2. (b) CO2δ− anion with both O atoms facing the Agδ+ surface. (c) CO2δ− anion bound to the Agδ+ surface via both a C and an O atom. (d) HOCO* intermediate bound to the Ag surface via both a C and an O atom. (e) HOCO* intermediate bound to the Ag surface via a C atom. (f) Surface-bound CO* and OH* formed from dissociation of an HOCO* intermediate with both O atoms facing the Ag surface. (g) HCOOδ− bound to the Agδ+ surface via the two O atoms. (h) HCOOH adsorbed on the Ag surface. (i) Schematic model of a possible pathway for CO2 photoreduction on an Ag surface.113 
 Fig. 20  Photocatalytic CO2RR mechanism based on DFT calculations. (a) Highest occupied molecular orbital and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of admixture states of CO2 physisorbed on a model Ag surface. (b) Possible reaction pathways for photocatalytic CO2RR on Ag.113 
3.2. Optical near-field enhancement
A powerful electric field is created when the energy contained in LSPR dissipates through the radiative route close to NPs. TiO2, ZnO, CdS, and GaP semiconductors are frequently utilized as photocatalysts, absorbing light energy to produce charge carriers, which fuel reactions.114,115 The electron–hole charge carrier recombination rate decreases when metallic NPs are loaded on semiconductors. By converting the separation mode of charge carriers from spontaneous to field-conducting mode, the LSPR of these metallic NPs, if they are plasmons, can create a powerful electric field surrounding the surface of the NPs and assist in the charge separation process. The ensuing strong electric field may increase the formation of e−/h+ pairs by accelerating the semiconductor transition rate and increasing the steady-state concentration of charge carriers.114 Hueso et al. demonstrated this concept experimentally. In the investigations by Cronin et al., the plasma-enhanced photocatalytic oxidation of n-hexane was accomplished using an Ag/CuO hybrid catalyst. AuNP/TiO2 composites were used for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.116 Then, Cronin et al. carried out studies at four distinct wavelengths to distinguish the plasmonic impact from the electronic changes in Au (two in the visible range and two in the ultraviolet range). Au/TiO2 produced only methane when a 532 nm laser was employed, whereas TiO2 produced very little, and no CH4 was observed when Au alone was used (Fig. 21A). Only enough electron energy was produced under 532 nm light to convert CO2 to CH4 (Fig. 21B). The stronger local field produced by the plasmonic AuNPs connecting the light from the far field to the near field with defect states on the TiO2 surface was responsible for the increased Au/TiO2 activity. When 254 nm light was employed, compared to TiO2, the same increase in Au/TiO2 activity was not seen. In this situation, the reaction was driven only by interband transitions, and given that the wavelength of the light is related to the mode of the plasmonic resonance of Au, no plasmonic mode was triggered. The reduction potential values were used to determine the product distribution (Fig. 21D). The generated electron energy under a 254 nm photolaser not only exceeds the reduction potential of CO2 to CH4, but also the reduction potential of other products, creating a variety of compounds (HCHO, CH3OH, and C2H6). The charge and electric field at the Au/TiO2 contact were studied using FDTD modeling (Fig. 21E–I). This study demonstrated the active role of plasmonic enhancement in enhancing the activity of TiO2 for the CO2RR, which is caused by the strong electric field of the LSPR effect of Au NPs, resulting in a much higher excitation rate of TiO2 for the generation of e−/h+ pairs. The rate of charge carrier formation in TiO2 is many orders of magnitude faster due to the powerful electric field of Au NPs than that under regular photoexcitation. Thus, the catalytic activity is ultimately improved by this improvement.
 Fig. 21  (A–D) Product yield and energy band alignment under different experimental conditions. (E) TEM image. (F and G) Electric field intensity. (H and I) Voltage and current density across Au–TiO2.116 
The plasmonic characteristics of Cu supported on TiO2 and ZnO were studied by Horn et al.117 and Cocero et al.,118 respectively. In their investigation on the relationship among Cu loading, structure and CH4 production, Horn et al.117 discovered that at the optimal length, the CH4 production increased 160-fold compared to the naked TiO2. The best conditions achieving the highest CH4 production were also found after optimization.118
3.3. Photothermal effect
A key parameter of any chemical is the reaction temperature, where variations in this parameter can have an impact on the reaction rate. The final thermal energy release from the LSPR of NPs causes heat to be released to the environment on the picosecond time scale. Consequently, PNPs have the potential to operate as nanoheaters, speeding up chemical reactions in their immediate surroundings. Furthermore, this heating technique avoids the energy losses associated with the conventional heating of the complete reaction vessel, offerings a more environmentally friendly chemical reaction. Buskens et al. investigated photothermal strategies for energizing chemical bonds.119 For photothermal CO2 methanation, they took advantage of the plasmonic characteristics of rod-like Ru catalysts supported on γ-Al2O3. RuO2 nanocrystals were formed on a γ-Al2O3 substrate during the preparation of the catalyst using a wet impregnation approach. At 1 sun intensity and 150 °C, hydrogen was used to reduce CO2 with a high CH4 conversion efficiency (Fig. 22A). After two cycles, the CH4 yield increased as a result of the high temperature environment reducing RuO2 to Ru (Fig. 22B). They produced RuO2 with H2 at 250 °C for 2 h to further explore the in situ reduction of RuO2 to Ru, and this catalyst increased the CH4 production by 1.6 times (Fig. 22C). To distinguish the thermal and non-thermal effects, the temperature of the catalyst was monitored. After exposure to light, an increase in the catalyst temperature was observed (Fig. 22D). At 189 °C, the photoactivity was primarily caused by thermal effects (Fig. 22E). At higher catalyst temperatures, athermal effects began to operate. The rate of the reaction increased under light by 1.93, 2.12, and 2.73 times, respectively, compared to the reaction in the dark. Additionally, CO2 reduction was done without heating the reactor conventionally, at Treactor = 25 °C and 8.5 insolation. Consequently, RuO2 produced the product at a rate of 15.5 mmol CH4 gRu−1 h−1 (Fig. 22F and G). Spherical RuNPs were used as catalysts to better understand the process, and it was discovered that the rod-like RuNPs consistently had stronger CO2 reduction activity than the spherical NPs (Fig. 22H). Further examination of the optical characteristics of the catalyst revealed that although the spherical RuNPs only have dipolar plasmonic modes, the rod-like RuNPs exhibit broadband light absorption properties as a result of the excitation from various plasmonic bands of randomly distributed spherical and non-spherical Ru NPs (Fig. 22I). It was determined that the wide light absorption of Ru, which results from the stimulation of numerous plasmonic modes, and finally produces a powerful photothermal effect, is essential for the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 22  CO2 methanation using a non-activated catalyst under different experimental conditions. (A) Solar methanation (○) vs. methanation in dark (•) using a nonactivated catalyst. (B) Seven sequential solar methanation runs using a nonactivated catalyst. (C) Solar methanation (○) vs. methanation in dark (•) using an activated catalyst. (D) Measured catalyst temperatures upon illumination. (E) Arrhenius plot displaying observed reaction rates for the methanation at various reactor temperatures and light intensities. Photomethanation at Treactor = 25 °C: (F) Initial rates for the production of methane as a function of light intensity (○) compared to initial rates in dark at the same catalyst temperature (●), and (G) produced amount of CH4 gRu−1 using the preactivated Ru catalyst at 10.1 sun light intensity as a function of reaction time. (H) Reactivity and comparison of photon-to-methane efficiency and Tcat using rodlike vs. spherical Ru-catalysts. (I) Solar spectrum coverage of the experimental Ru catalyst (blue), of the modeled single spherical Ru nanoparticle (red patterned filling), and of the modeled Ru nanorod (red nonpatterned filling) as compared to the AM 1.5 solar spectrum used in the work for sunlight-fueled CO2 methanation (gray).119 
3.4. Synergistic effect
As previously introduced, PNPs can catalyze reactions through many paths. In fact, these pathways can all be active simultaneously and play a synergistic promotion role. Li et al.120 performed atomic layer deposition of Al2O3 between metal Au and TiO2, creating plasmonic catalysts adorned with AuNPs on TiO2. They discovered that the improved CO2 reduction activity with this catalyst was caused by both electron injection and near-field enhancement. To investigate the mechanism of AuNP-assisted light-induced CO2 reduction, the Al2O3 layer thickness and AuNP size were modified in this study. Using pure TiO2 and AuyTiO2 (y denotes the size of AuNPs) as a photocatalyst, they first reduced CO2 with H2O serving as the proton source. When TiO2 was exposed to only visible light, CO was only produced in the case of Au/TiO2 and not with pure TiO2 under UV-vis irradiation, which was the only condition under which it was synthesized in the highest yield (Fig. 23b). Because the smaller AuNPs have a bigger contact surface with TiO2, electron injection is more practical, and Au10/TiO2 produced the greatest amount of CO. Additionally, TiO2 may form charges under UV light, and therefore the CO output was larger under UV-visible light than under visible light. The catalytic activity was both negatively and favorably affected by the addition of an Al2O3 layer (Fig. 23c). Al2O3 slowed down the rate of charge carrier recombination, which is a beneficial impact. Alternatively, it delayed the charge transfer to the surface and blocked near-field enhancement, which is a negative effect. The ideal Al2O3 layer thickness for each catalyst was determined to be 5. These findings imply that the photocatalytic activity of the catalysts is significantly influenced by the near-field amplification of AuNPs. The near-field increase in AuNPs was verified by FDTD simulations (Fig. 23d). The computed results are consistent with the experimental findings, where the larger the AuNP, the better its enhancing effect. Finally, the AuNPs facilitated the reaction by supplying hot electrons, assisting charge separation, and enhancing the near-field effect.
 Fig. 23  (a–c) CO and CH4 yield under different experimental light conditions. (d) FDTD result. (e) Effects of PNPs on photocatalytic CO2RR.120 
The photocatalyst Rh/TiO2, which is known to display both thermal and athermal effects on plasmonic excitation, was also studied by Liu et al.121 to determine its thermal impact on CO2 methanation. In this type of investigation, suppressing other non-thermal processes to enable the evaluation of only the impacts of thermal mechanisms is the key issue. This was accomplished utilizing the idea of direct and indirect illumination (Fig. 24A). Under indirect illumination, the UV LED is exposed to the catalyst straight from the top. The total impacts including thermal, photothermal, and athermal effects were all considered in the measured CH4 production. Consequently, only thermal contributions from illumination and external heating were seen in the case of direct illumination, which only caused thermal effects at the top submicron depth. The top of the catalyst was coated with a photothermal substance that is inert for the reaction when exposed to indirect light. Ti2O3 was the substance employed, which absorbs all light, but is opaque to UV, visible, and NIR light, and solely generates photothermal effects. An accurate temperature profile of the catalyst was obtained in both situations using a multi-thermocouple arrangement. They discovered that light and heat combine to accelerate CH4 synthesis in the low to moderate temperature range. Due to the exothermic nature of CO2 methanation, a reverse reaction was observed beyond a certain temperature (about 350 °C). They discovered that the creation of CH4 initially grew exponentially, but that as the temperature increased, the opposite reaction was dominant (Fig. 24B). Information on non-thermal effects was obtained from calculations of the thermal components at low to moderate temperatures. This distinct approach can be used to investigate a wide range of additional thermal and atmospheric consequences of plasmonic catalysis.
 Fig. 24  CO2 methanation on Rh/TiO2. (A) Schematic representation of photocatalytic CO2RR under direct and indirect illumination. (B) Production rates of methane.121 
4. Plasmonic nanocatalysts for CO2 photocatalytic reduction
In the previous content, we introduced the mechanism of LSPR in the catalytic CO2 reduction process in detail. In the following section, we elaborate the specific application of the LSPR effect in catalyst preparation and modification. To make the content clearer and facilitate a better understanding and selection of catalyst modification strategies by researchers according to the data provided herein, we introduce the classification according to different catalyst substrates.
4.1. TiO2
To reduce the negative consequences of greenhouse gas emissions, while satisfying future energy demands, research is needed to develop efficient, sustainable, and carbon-neutral energy technologies.122,123 Technologies for CO2 capture and utilization must be developed and implemented to meet this objective.124 In this case, employing sunlight to produce fuels and chemicals through artificial photosynthesis is one of the greatest scientific challenges of our time.125,126 Consequently, focusing on building effective photocatalysts that can successfully manage photons and electrons, improve light absorption across the solar spectrum, and boost charge separation and transport processes is important to achieve this work and increase the current quantum yields.127–129
Numerous heterogeneous CO2 reduction photocatalysts have been developed in the last few years.34,130 Among them, TiO2 has received the greatest attention, appearing in more than half of the literature in this field. TiO2 nanostructures such as nanorods (NRs), nanotubes (NTs), nanofibers (NFs), and nanowires (NWs) have garnered significant attention recently from a morphological standpoint, mostly due to their intriguing characteristics and wide range of potential applications (such as solar cells,131 gas sensors,132,133 semiconductor applications,134 and others135). In the exploration of TiO2 nanostructures with the best catalytic performance, several studies134,136,137 have reported significantly better photocatalytic efficiencies with their use. However, TiO2 exhibits several drawbacks, such as absorption in a small portion of the solar spectrum, hindering its wide application. Its other disadvantages include poor conductivity, high recombination of photoinduced charges, and UV-matched bandgaps. Thus, to overcome these limitations, methods such as band structure engineering, doping, sensitization, use of auxiliary catalysts, and formation of heterojunctions with other semiconductors have been applied.128,138,139
Accordingly, when metal NPs act as co-catalysts, the plasmon-induced photocatalytic process is characterized by photoactivation tunability, extended light absorption in the visible spectral range, enhanced charge separation lifetime, improved conversion, and controlled selectivity, which have attracted much attention.116,140–142
Several theories have been proposed to explain the role of interfacial charge dynamics in photocatalytic reactions driven by metal NP/semiconductor systems, which include hot electron injection, resonance energy transfer, plasmonic coupling, field nanoconfinement, and direct electron injection.143–146 However, a complete understanding of each step in the entire reaction is still needed to provide a conclusive explanation, particularly for non-model and actual catalysts.147
Metals are preferred as plasmonic materials because of their high electrical conductivity. Among the plasmonic metals such as Au, Ag and Cu,148,149 Au is one of the most studied due to its high stability and tunable visible light absorption, which has been used in NIR negative index refraction materials, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) research, fabrication of plasmonic waveguides, and LSPR sensors. Also, different structures of Au such as NPs, single atoms, and clusters, have been extensively studied as plasmonic materials.
Hou et al.116 thoroughly explored the photoreduction mechanism of CO2 and water vapor catalyzed by Au NPs/TiO2 in a broad wavelength range. They observed a 24-fold increase in photocatalytic activity in the visible light spectrum when the photon energy was matched to the resonance of the Au NPs. This was caused by the surface plasmon of Au NPs, which in TiO2 excites local electron–hole pairs at rates several orders of magnitude higher than the usual incident light. These potent electromagnetic fields increased the sub-bandgap absorption of TiO2, consequently increasing its visible light photocatalytic activity (Fig. 25A). The production of other reaction products including C2H6, CH3OH, and formaldehyde occurs via a different mechanism when the photon energy is high enough to activate the d-band electronic transition in Au in the UV region. This is because the additional reaction products CO2/C2H6, CO2/CH3OH, and CO2/HCHO have redox potentials that are greater than the energies of the d-band excited electrons (Fig. 25B). In the experiments, the plasmonic excitation process at the Au NP/TiO2 interface was simulated via the finite difference time domain (FDTD), which can enable thorough characterization of the electric field and charge at the interface.
 Fig. 25  (A) Photocatalytic product yields. (B) Energy band alignment.116 (C) UV-light-driven CO2 photoreduction over Au/TiO2 catalysts.140 
In bare TiO2, CO and H2 were found to be the primary products with light as the energy source. Different Au-supported TiO2 catalysts were fabricated by Collado et al.140 using the deposition–precipitation process, and their photocatalytic activity for the CO2RR in the gas phase under the influence of UV and visible light was examined. The reduction of CO2, which is mostly reduced to methane and C2+ hydrocarbons, was found to be quantitatively enhanced by the deposition of tiny Au NPs on TiO2 when exposed to UV light. According to the data from transient absorption spectroscopy, the increased CH4 generation was caused by the higher charge separation as a result of the electron transfer between TiO2 and the AuNPs.
Ganguly et al.150 investigated the hydrogenation of CO2 to CH3OH, the chemisorption of hydrogen on the Au {1 1 1} surface of Au20, and the hydrogenation of pyridine to 1,2-dihydropyridine (Fig. 26). The results showed that chemisorbed hydrogen on the Au {1 1 1} surface has unrealized potential to produce hot electrons through photoexcitation, hence boosting the internal energy for hydrogenation, similar to NADPH. According to quantum chemical calculations, Au20 clusters can activate H2 when exposed to UV light and chemisorption of H occurs via the conical intersection between the S0 and S1 electronic states. These chemisorbed hydrogens can be utilized to drive numerous internal energy hydrogenation processes, such as Py reduction and CO2 hydrogenation to CH3OH, without the need for sacrificial reagents because they have greater chemical potentials. The corresponding activation barriers are extremely low when these processes function at noticeable rates at room temperature, consequently promoting the catalytic performance.
 Fig. 26  Proposed catalytic reduction of CO2 to methanol and Py to 1,2PyH2 by AuNP/AuNP{H}2 redox couple and Gibbs free-energy profile of the conversion of CO2.150 
Khatun et al.151 used an easy electrochemical deposition technique and a straightforward experimental setup to successfully trigger the synthesis of Au-doped TiO2 NTs (Fig. 27A). The LSPR behavior of the AuNP-deposited NTs dramatically improved the visible light absorption, which greatly improved the photocatalytic CO2 conversion performance of TNTs. Additionally, the Au–TNT photocatalyst showed good photocatalytic activity for the conversion of CO2 to CH4 under visible light irradiation because the integration of Au NPs in TNTs resulting in a low e−/h+ recombination rate. This opens up many opportunities for 1D NT-plasmonic metal junctions to function as effective visible-light photocatalysts (VLP), particularly for photocatalytic CO2RR to produce renewable synthetic fuels.
 Fig. 27  (A) Conversion of CO2 to CH4 with enhanced SPR effect of Au NPs in TNTs.151 (B) (a) Energy band alignment. (b) Photocatalytic CO2RR with H2 over MMT-dispersed Au/TiO2.156 
It is worth mentioning that different Au-modified TiO2 photocatalysts exhibit different photocatalytic activity for the conversion of CO2 to CH4 owing to their different microstructures. Therefore, the rational control of the catalyst microstructure and morphology is also one of the key points to improve the catalyst performance.151–155 By using a simple sol–gel technique, Tahir et al.156 developed and created structured montmorillonite (MMT)-distributed Au/TiO2 nanocomposites (Fig. 27B). The amount of CO generated was 24-times greater when using a cordierite monolithic support to support the catalyst for better photoactivity and reusability in the CO2RR and 68-times higher when using the bare TiO2 catalyst. CH4 and C2H6 were the other products that were found in significant amounts under UV light because of the interband transition of Au in the catalyst composite. The LSPR effect of Au in the MMT/TiO2 samples was responsible for the increased photoactivity for CO2 reduction to CO under simulated solar radiation. The interaction between the MMT transition metal and the Au ions as well as the quicker adsorption–desorption process resulted in significantly improved dynamic CO2 reduction to CO. In addition, the current catalyst design endows the catalyst with increased stability.
Presently, Au/TiO2 is a well-known catalyst for the photo/thermal catalytic conversion of CO2. However, under dark and photothermally coupled reaction conditions, the reaction mechanisms are still unknown. These mechanisms were clarified in the study by Wang et al.157 by combining isotope-labeled spectroscopy with computational analysis. It was determined that the hot electron-promoted formation of oxygen vacancy (VO) at the interface is the plasmon-enhanced mechanism. In this experiment, the plasmon increased the CO production rate at 200 °C above Au/TiO2 by about 318%, and the major channel for CO2 hydrogenation to CO was demonstrated to be the redox mechanism. The spontaneous dissociation of CO2 at the VO site of Au/TiO2 was demonstrated by DRIFTS studies (Fig. 28A). Then, inverse H/D kinetic isotope effects showed that the RDS is responsible for VO production. As shown in Fig. 28B, the creation of VO results from the heterolytic H2 dissociation at the perimeter site of Au/TiO2. Besides, it was determined that the plasmon-thermo coupling process resulted in the hot-electron-accelerated production of VO.
 Fig. 28  (A) The operando-DRIFT spectra of Au/TiO2 during SSITKA experiments under (a) dark, (d) green light with 60% power and (g) green light in full output, 200 °C. The corresponding time-resolved IR peak intensity decays of 12HCO3, 12CO3 in (b) dark, (e) 60% output green light and (h) full power green light. The corresponding 12CO MS signal decays in (c) dark, (f) 60% power green light and (i) full power green light. 12CO MS signal is measured with m/z = 28.0 min represents the moment 12CO2 is switched to 13CO2. (B) DFT calculated reaction profiles of (a) Au/TiO2 reduction by H2 with VO formation and (b) CO2 conversion to CO via redox or carboxyl pathways. (c) pCOHP bonding analyses between O in H2O* at VO site and two adjacent Ti atoms in TiO2 slab. The corresponding configuration is shown in (e). (d) pCOHP bonding analyses of CO in  at VO site of Au/TiO2. The corresponding configuration is shown in (f).157 
The development of photocatalysts the work under visible light and reduce CO2 to form energy-rich hydrocarbons is important for the manufacture of solar fuels, considering that the multi-step nature of CO2 to hydrocarbons represents a considerable kinetic bottleneck. Based on this, Yu et al.87 showed that plasmonic Au NP photocatalysts can utilize visible light to reduce CO2 by multiple electrons and multiple protons to form C1 (methane) and C2 (ethane) hydrocarbons and the selectivity for C1 and C2 is influenced by their photoexcitation characteristics (Fig. 29). The observed trends in activity and selectivity are consistent with the Poisson distribution for electron capture. Higher photon energy and fluxes encourage the simultaneous capture of multiple electrons from the photocharged Au NP catalyst, inducing C–C coupling, which is necessary for the production of C2. These discoveries set the groundwork for the management of chemical bond formation through photoexcitation and explain the nature of plasmonic photocatalysis, which requires strong light-matter coupling.
 Fig. 29  Mechanism for plasmon-assisted CO2RR to C1 and C2 hydrocarbons. (a) Hot-electron-transfer process. (b) Formation of a radical ion intermediate. (c) Simultaneous activation of two CO2 adsorbates.87 
For photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Ohno et al.158 employed brookite TiO2 nanorods with large {2 1 0} and small {2 1 2} exposed facets. Under UV light, the primary byproduct of CO2 reduction on the brookite TiO2 nanorods was CH3OH. Compared to commercial spherical brookite TiO2, the brookite TiO2 nanorods had greater photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction, and additionally the brookite TiO2 nanorods with a larger aspect ratio exhibited greater photocatalytic activity than that with a smaller aspect ratio. This implies that due to the separation of redox sites, the larger {2 1 0} and smaller {2 1 2} exposed facets reduce the reverse reaction to some extent and enhance the multi-electron reduction process. The CH3OH generation was boosted by Au or Ag supported on the decreased crystal planes of the brookite TiO2 nanorods as they were initially manufactured. However, the mechanism by which the metal loading enhances the activity may be different. Au loading increased the selectivity for CH3OH generation to some extent. Alternatively, Ag loaded with suitable properties led to a larger increase in CH3OH formation than that of Au, although Ag is not selective for CH3OH formation.
In fact, in addition to Au NPs, TiO2 modified by Ag NPs also has the same plasmonic effect and has been widely studied by researchers in the past few years. To date, numerous studies have successfully used the wet deposition approach to modify TiO2 with Ag NPs. Handoko et al.159 designed a catalyst that has a mixture of Ag0 and Ag1+ species and an anatase crystal structure. In the visible region, the loaded Ag initiates prolonged absorption. Additionally, compared to pure TiO2, the inclusion of Ag increases the photocatalytic CO2 reduction efficiency. The increased effectiveness can be attributed to the interaction between the SPR phenomena of the Ag NPs on the TiO2 surface and electron trapping.
Cheng et al.160 reported a green, simple, and effective two-step production technique for the modification of TiO2 arrays on FTO glass surfaces with AgNPs. Specifically, Ag NPs with an average diameter of 5.8 nm were uniformly deposited on the substrate surface using atmospheric pressure dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) cold plasma as the reducing agent, realizing the complete and quick conversion of Ag+ to Ag0. Notably, under visible light, the Ag/TiO2 nanocomposite displayed the action of highly active AgNPs reducing CO2 to CO and CH4 due to LSPR (Fig. 30a). The functions of the plasmonic AgNPs are both helping to separate photogenerated electron–hole pairs and preventing their recombination in TiO2 and absorbing visible light energy for increased photocatalytic activity (Fig. 30b). This shows that atmospheric pressure DBD cold plasmonic reduction has a wide range of potential applications in the ecologically friendly synthesis of supported metal catalysts and metal NPs.
 Fig. 30  Schematic of (a) enhanced photocatalytic activity of AgNPs decorated TiO2 and (b) gaseous-phase photocatalysis of CO2 + H2O.160 
The impact of charge dynamics at the plasmonic metal/semiconductor interface on CO2 photoreduction has also been shown by some researchers. To ascertain what is still unclear about photoinduced interfacial charge dynamics and the function of the intermediates and oxygen in the reaction mechanism of CO2 photoreduction over Ag/TiO2 photocatalysts, Collado,147 for instance, combined novel in situ techniques, time-resolved optoelectronic characterization, and theoretical calculations. In this case, H2O was exposed to UV and visible light, while serving as an electron donor. The remarkable CO2 photoreduction performance of Ag/Ti under UV and visible light irradiation was demonstrated (Fig. 31B), and operational spectroscopic data and theoretical insights presented. According to the experimental findings, there is strong interfacial dielectric coupling between plasmonic metal NPs and TiO2, which results in the formation of surface sub-bandgap states. This is a crucial step in facilitating the effective separation of photogenerated charge carriers, which raises the standards for high electronic products. Under UV light, Ag/TiO2 is very selective for CH4. The electron-scavenging capacity of Ag NPs, which results in a three-orders of magnitude increase in carrier lifetime compared to bare TiO2, is responsible for this improvement in methane reactivity. In situ research confirmed both this charge transfer and the carbene-mediated production of C-H intermediates in the methane pathway (Fig. 31A). Ag NPs are also necessary for photoactivity induced by visible light, which primarily targets CH3OH. These findings show that photogenerated electron transitions from the intraband gap surface state are induced by the strong interfacial Ag–TiO2 contact, permitting the creation of e−/h+ pairs close to the surface. It is possible that fewer charge carriers are created, as seen by the shorter-lived transient absorbance decay under visible-light stimulation. This can explain the decrease in photoactivity and the shift in selectivity to products with low electron demands, such CH3OH. This study advances the understanding of the CO2 photoreduction plasmonic photoinduced charge transfer process at the metal/semiconductor interface. The main elements that control the photoactivity of Ag NPs under UV and visible light irradiation were successfully identified through the successful integration of in situ surface and time-resolved spectroscopic techniques with DFT calculations. The use of this connected technique will encourage the emergence of a variety of emergent materials and reactions that can control light.
 Fig. 31  (A) In situ NAP-XPS spectra of (a) C1s and (b) O1s signals. (B) Charge dynamic processes in Ag/TiO2 under (a) UV and (b) visible light.147 
Notably, LSPR metals can also be combined with heterojunctions to give full play to the advantages of the plasmonic resonance effect and heterojunction to improve the reduction of CO2 and synthesis of renewable synthetic fuels. Accordingly, Dai et al.161 created an S-scheme type of AgVO3/Ag/TiO2-NW heterojunction composite photocatalyst for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 (Fig. 32). The best S-scheme AgVO3/Ag/TiO2-NW photocatalysts produced methanol at a rate of 9561.3 μmol g−1 h−1 with 25 wt% AgVO3. The performance of the S-scheme AgVO3/Ag/TiO2-NW photocatalyst was improved by the increased efficiency for the separation of electron–hole pairs. The photocatalytic activity of AgVO3/Ag/TiO2-NWs was enhanced by Ag, which can be explained in terms of the LSPR effect. This effect boosted the efficiency of the photocatalyst and improved its light absorbance. The findings suggest that the S-scheme heterojunction and LSPR can significantly boost the photocatalytic rate of the CO2RR. Thus, this study shows a promising method for the creation of heterostructures with strong CO2 photo-conversion that are dimension-matched.
 Fig. 32  (a) TEM. (b) Band energy positions after charge transfer. (c) Charge transfer mechanism.161 
The photogenerated charge separation and reactant adsorption characteristics of photocatalysts determine the selective conversion of CO2 to chemically energy-rich CH4 molecules in artificial photosynthesis. Zhao et al.162 described a novel method for the fabrication of a Pt/TiO2-nanocrystal photocatalyst with a core–shell shape that is encased in sheets of reduced graphene oxide (rGO). Photogenerated charges are produced by ultrafine anatase TiO2 nanocrystals with co-exposed {0 0 1} and {1 0 1} facets. When placed on TiO2, Pt NPs can collect and transfer excited electrons coming from the anatase TiO2 nanocrystals. The TiO2-nanocrystal (core)–Pt (mediator)–rGO (shell) nanojunctions in the all-solid-state electron multiple transport (EMT) system not only facilitated the vector electron transfer of TiO2 → Pt → rGO but also improved the photogeneration of electrons. Additionally, the remaining hydroxyl groups and elongated bonds on the surface of the wrapped rGO sheets can enhance the capacity for the adsorption and activation of the reactant CO (Fig. 33). In the multi-electron process of selective photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CH4, (Pt/TiO2)@rGO performs admirably. Among the catalysts that were already prepared, (Pt/TiO2)@rGO-2 exhibited the best photocatalytic activity and selectivity for converting CO2. The creation of core–shell structured (Pt/TiO2)@rGO will stimulate more concepts for photochemical energy conversion as a heuristic method.
 Fig. 33  CO2 photoreduction to CH4 over (Pt/TiO2)@rGO-n catalysts.162 
In addition to the above-mentioned noble metals, Pd as both a noble metal and LSPR metal can be studied by researchers in terms of catalytic reduction of CO2. When utilizing solar energy, high temperature and insufficient solar energy use are obstacles that are confronted by the thermochemical and photochemical conversion techniques, respectively. Xu et al.163 reported photo-thermochemical cycling (PTC) for CO2 reduction and improved TiO2 (PNT) by adding palladium NPs to lower the temperature in thermochemistry and enhance the solar energy consumption (Fig. 34). PNTs can enhance the use of light by enhancing the absorption of visible light and red-shifting the photoresponse range of LSPR. More readily available carriers will result in the formation of more photoinduced vacancies in the photoreaction, which are essential for PTC, and photoinduced electron and hole pairs (EHPs) are simpler to separate. Additionally, during a thermal reaction, Pd can facilitate the absorption of CO2 and produce Pd–CO2 and Pd–CO2–VO on the defect surface. The results showed that the photothermal coupling factor can increase CO generation, and based on theoretical calculations and experimental data, a reaction mechanism for the entire cycle was presented.
 Fig. 34  (A) Photothermal coupling factor achieving CO2RR based on Pd-NP-loaded TiO2. (B) Processes of (a) LSPR excitation and (b) hot electron reaction. (C) Reaction process.163 
In most cases, precious metals have a better LSPR effect in CO2 reduction than non-precious metals. However, due to practical production problems, non-precious metals are undoubtedly a higher priority in terms of cost. Therefore, it is of great significance to study the mechanism of non-precious metals in the LSPR catalytic CO2 reduction of renewable synthetic fuels, and it is also critical to further improve the design of catalysts to improve their performance. In contrast to noble metals, which are more expensive, some other more affordable metals, such as Cu, have produced similar LSPR phenomena.164,165 Cu has the second best electrical conductivity among metals (after Ag) and exhibits promising LSPR properties. In fact, the imaginary part of the dielectric constant of Cu is comparable to that of Au in the range of 600–750 nm. Considering the cost of Ag and Au, if its performance is acceptable, Cu will be a good alternative to Ag and Au. However, the fabrication of materials using Cu is challenging because it readily oxidizes to form Cu2O and CuO. Nevertheless, using Cu NPs with LSPR behavior in photocatalytic systems, and subsequently the field of CO2 photoreduction, constitutes a fresh strategy. Tan et al.165 proposed a novel photocatalyst for the photoreduction of CO2 to CH4 with a high yield of 2.91 ppm gcat−1 h−1. In this novel photocatalyst, TiO2 nanorod thin films were combined with Cu NPs with the LSPR effect due to their ability to provide strong CO2 adsorption and photogenerated electron diffusivity. The experimental results showed that the deposition of plasmonic CuNPs facilitates the separation of photogenerated e− and h+, and the positively charged plasma of the metal NPs attracts electrons in the CB of TiO2, enhancing the photoreduction performance. In addition, it was found that the photoreduction properties of CuNPs were closely related to the deposition time during the electrodeposition process.
In addition to a single metal acting as an LSPR metal, composite metal/alloys can sometimes play a superior synergistic role of two metals to achieve a better LSPR effect. Tahir et al.166 successfully fabricated Au/Ag-NP-co-decorated TiO2 NWs using a facile thermal and photo-deposition method. The Au/Ag NPs loaded on TiO2 NWs exhibited remarkably improved visible light photocatalytic activity for CO evolution compared to TiO2 NWs with only single metal deposition. The enhanced photocatalytic activities through the co-deposition of Au/Ag NPs were attributed to the synergistic effects based on LSPR excitation and electron sink of Au/Ag NPs (Fig. 35A). It was concluded that the synergistic effect between charger transfer and plasmon excitation of Au/Ag-NPs can greatly enhance the performance of TiO2 NWs. Besides, as is widely known, Cu/TiO2 is a popular photocatalyst for the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to methane. Due to their greater energy density and economic worth, C2+ products such as ethane and ethanol are more intriguing than methane, although C–C bond formation is currently the principal obstacle to CO2 photoreduction. Therefore, it is important to update technology to address the technological bottleneck of CO2 catalytic reduction into long carbon chains. The primary C2 product, ethane, was studied by Vahidzadeh et al.167 utilizing TiO2 in the gas-phase photoreduction of CO2. Without the use of sacrificial agents or hole scavengers, nanotube arrays (TNTA) are adorned with large-sized Ag and Cu NPs. AgCu–TNTA exhibited the greatest overall hydrocarbon production rate (methane + ethane), The neighboring adsorption sites in this experimental photocatalyst resulted in asymmetric charge distributions because of the quadrupole resonance in the big metal NPs and the multipole resonance in the Ag–Cu heterodimer (Fig. 35B). The adsorbate–adsorbate repulsion was reduced by this asymmetric charge distribution, which also makes it easier for chemical intermediates to couple with each other. Ethane is substantially more difficult to create from CO2 than methane because it requires 14 electrons, whereas methane just needs 8 electrons. Methane is produced when protons react with . Alternatively, the dimerization of two  radicals may result in the formation of ethane (Fig. 35C). The findings demonstrate that Ag–TNTA samples can produce ethane by CO2 photoreduction more selectively than the Cu–TNTA samples, which offers important empirical proof that Ag may also produce ethane by stabilizing methyl radicals. Meanwhile, the best selectivity for ethane by the AgCu–TNTA sample evidenced that the AgCu bimetallic cocatalyst synergistic interaction with Cu can increase the stability of methyl radicals.
 Fig. 35  (A) Photocatalytic process for CO2RR by H2 to CO on Au/Ag-NPs/TiO2 NWs.166 (B) LSPR effects from AgCu–TNTA and (C) carbene pathway.167 
4.2. g-C3N4
Compared with TiO2, g-C3N4 has a more suitable semiconductor band edge position, which can meet the chemical reaction kinetics requirements of many photocatalytic reactions, and therefore has been widely studied. In 2009, Wang et al. successfully demonstrated that graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is a potential photocatalyst for converting solar energy,168 and in 2012, Dong and Zhang found that g-C3N4 can photoreduce CO2 to CO.169 Subsequently, g-C3N4 has become one of the most popular photocatalysts in recent years.
g-C3N4 is a conjugated polymer with an intermediate bandgap of ∼2.7 eV and a greater CB potential than CO2 reduction potential, suggesting that it has the ability to photoreduce a variety of fuels.170 The g-C3N4 material is a promising photocatalyst due to its many clear benefits, including non-toxicity, low cost, ease of manufacture, and excellent stability.171 Alternatively, pure g-C3N4 has limited light absorption, a tiny specific surface area, and quick photoexcited e−/h+ pair recombination, resulting in an unsatisfactory photoreduction performance.170,171 Accordingly, numerous strategies, including elemental doping,172 crystal structure control,173 defect modification,174 morphology tuning,175 and metal/semiconductor interaction,176 have been used to overcome the aforementioned problems.
Among them, customizing the graded morphology of g-C3N4 is one of the best methods given that it not only offers a significant specific surface area but also makes light harvesting easier.157,158 Another efficient way to increase the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 is to coat its surface with noble metals including Au, Ag, and Pt. Consequently, a Schottky barrier will be formed in the contact region when the noble metal is fixed to the g-C3N4 surface.177 This promotes photoexcited electron–hole pair separation and prevents their recombination by converting noble metals into electron sinks.170 Furthermore, by producing the LSPR phenomenon, noble metal particles can enhance the absorption of visible light. Metal NPs also produce strong electric fields on their surfaces.143 However, the research on linking noble metals with morphological tweaking to enhance their photocatalytic activity for the CO2RR is scarce.
Wang et al.178 presented a biomimetic nanostructuring approach, where the intricate hierarchical structure and accompanying light-harvesting activities of Troides helena butterfly wings were specifically incorporated in g-C3N4/Au composites using a biological templating approach (Fig. 36A). Employing triethanolamine as a sacrificial agent and UV-vis excitation, the resulting g-C3N4/Au composite demonstrated significant photocatalytic efficiency. The yields of CO and CH4 were 36- and 88-times higher than that of pure g-C3N4 under the same conditions, respectively. Extensive research and finite-difference time-domain techniques led to the conclusion that the exceptional photocatalytic activity should be attributed to the distinct periodic hierarchical structure, which also plays a role in light absorption, and LSPR, more effective CO2 diffusion, and a larger specific surface area, while resonance also makes it easier to separate charges. This research opens up a new path for the design and improvement of photocatalysts based on biological structures that are not typically made in the lab. Li et al. prepared Au-deposited CN catalysts with different molar ratios of Au and CN via the NaBH4 reduction method (Fig. 36B).179 The introduction of AuNPs in CN significantly enhanced their catalytic activity for the photoreduction of CO by H2O, especially the directional conversion of CO2 to CH4. It was found that the addition of AuNPs induced the SPR effect and not only prevented the recombination of photogenerated carriers, but also boosted the visible light absorption and stimulated the creation of hot electrons.
 Fig. 36  (A) Mechanism of photocatalytic CO2RR by bio-templated g-C3N4/Au.178 (B) CO2 photoreduction over Au-CN catalysts.179 
Broad light absorption properties and efficient carrier separation are necessary conditions for the preparation of excellent photocatalytic materials. Wei et al.180 prepared a g-C3N4 quantum dot and Au NP co-modified CeO2/Fe3O4 microflora photocatalyst. They showed that the heterojunction between the CN quantum dots and Au NPs can greatly improve the carrier separation ability and light utilization efficiency of the photocatalysts. In addition, the strong LSPR of Au NPs results in a large number of hot electrons, which can directly take part in CO2 photoreduction, and the good electron transport characteristics of the Au NPs offer particular pathways for electron transport (Fig. 37). The photocatalytic activity of the photocatalyst could be further improved by the synergistic interaction between CN-QDs and Au-NPs. Also, the coating of the CeO2/Fe3O4 MF photocatalysts with both CN quantum dots and Au NPs was responsible for the enhancement.
 Fig. 37  CO2 photoreduction mechanism of 3-CACeF hybrid photocatalyst.180 
Besides noble metals, similar to TiO2, some non-noble metals also have the same and even greater effect to form LSPR. Meanwhile, because they are cheap and easier to achieve mass production, non-noble LSPR catalysts have gotten more attention from researchers. Some of the notable achievements are presented here. Yoshii et al.181 described a new core–shell structured nanocomposite catalyst for LSPR-enhanced photocatalytic CO2 conversion, in which single-site co-catalytic species were immobilized in g-C3N4 on Au NRs. The results demonstrated that the g-C3N4 layer did not inhibit the absorption of visible light by the Au NRs. The nanocomposite effectively catalyzed the conversion of CO2 to CO via the SPR of Au-NRs when exposed to visible light. The better catalytic activity of the core–shell structure compared to an analogous polymerization catalyst suggests that the former facilitates effective electron transfer from the Au NRs to the catalytically active Co species. To address poor performance of g-C3N4 in the photoreduction of CO2, Humayun et al.182 prepared noble metal: Pt- and Au-modified Sr-doped g-C3N4 photocatalysts via a simple calcination and photodeposition method (Fig. 38). UV–vis absorption spectroscopy and DFT studies showed that the addition of Sr considerably lowered the band gap of g-C3N4 from 2.7 to 2.54 eV. Under visible light, the catalysts exhibited a great yield, conversion efficiency and stability for CH4 and CO. The enhanced light absorption, better charge separation, strontium-doped intermediate bandgap states, and LSPR effect brought on by the noble metal NPs were all responsible for the improved CO2 conversion efficiency. This research will open up new possibilities for enhancing the catalytic performance of g-C3N4 for the effective synthesis of solar fuel.
 Fig. 38  (A) Self-assembled core–shell nanocomposite catalysts by single-site Co-coordinated g-C3N4 and Au NRs for plasmon-enhanced CO2RR.181 (B) Energy band-structure, charge separation and transfer and the surface redox reactions over the Pt/0.15Sr-CN catalyst.182 
Zhu et al.183 focused on the creation of effective, reliable, and affordable catalysts for CO2 photocatalytic conversion (Fig. 39). Non-precious plasmonic titanium nitride (TiN) NPs were added to the surface of g-C3N4 nanosheets to help mitigate the high recombination rate and limited photocatalytic activity, which are intrinsic drawbacks of g-C3N4. A strong basis for effective CO2 collection and conversion was set by the porous shape of the g-C3N4 nanosheets, which dramatically enhanced the CO2 adsorption and significantly increased the number of surface active sites. Meanwhile, the spectral response range was greatly widened and the transfer of photogenerated carriers was improved when TiN NPs exhibiting the LSPR effect were modified. The size and catalytic effectiveness of the TiN NPs were closely correlated. Consequently, the improved photocatalyst showed a higher product yield and stability throughout the process than that of bulk and porous g-C3N4.
 Fig. 39  Enhancing photocatalytic CO2RR performance of g-C3N4-based catalysts with non-noble plasmonic NPs.183 
The synergistic effect of LSPR and heterojunctions can enhance the photocatalytic performance. In the study by Li et al.,184 the Z-scheme ZnO/Au/g-C3N4 hybrid photocatalyst was studied for the photoreduction of CO2 into CO. According to the photoreduction tests, 3-ZAC outperformed the pure ZnO MN film in terms of photocatalytic activity, reusability, and material stability. After an 8 h reaction period, the total CO production reached 689.7 mol m−2, which was 4.5-times higher than that by the pure ZnO MN film when exposed to UV-vis light. According to the DFT investigations, the built-in electric field from g-C3N4 to ZnO effectively increased the transfer efficiency of photogenerated electrons in this Z-scheme interfacial band structure (Fig. 40A). Additionally, the results from FDTD simulations demonstrated that the Au NPs function as an electron transfer bridge across the semiconductor surface and LSPR excited source to speed up the separation of the photogenerated e−/h+ pairs in semiconductors (Fig. 40B). The high photoreduction performance is due to the synergistic interaction between the localized electric field of the Au NPs and the built-in electric field of the interfaces, which effectively optimizes the transmission efficiency of photogenerated electrons in 3-ZAC. This study supports the development of LSPR-enhanced heterojunction photocatalytic materials and their applications in the field of energy conversion.
 Fig. 40  (A) Proposed photoreduction mechanism and (B) FDTD simulation results of 3-ZAC with excited light-wavelength at 380 nm (a) and 550 nm (b). (c) The localized electromagnetic field enhancement (|E|/|E0|) of 3-ZAC nano-structure excited by the light with 550 nm wavelength.184 
4.3. Metal–organic frameworks
As an emerging class of porous crystalline materials, possessing a tunable pore size, topology, and high specific surface area, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have been shown to be promising materials for various applications, especially in the photoreduction of CO2.185–187
In fact, several recent studies have demonstrated the great potential of MOF-based materials as photocatalysts for CO2 reduction. For example, Li and co-workers first reported the use of an MOF structure doped with different metal elements for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to HCOO− under visible light irradiation.188–190 Besides, Qin et al.191 reported CO2 photoreduction using an [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 complex and Co-MOF as a photosensitizer and cocatalyst, respectively, yielding ∼40 μmol of CO after 100 min of visible light irradiation. The cocatalyst could support charge transfer and enhance the photocatalytic CO2 conversion activity. However, due to the degradation of [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 during the reaction and their recycling in practice, the addition of other materials on the surface of photocatalysts to enhance their solar light absorption and charge separation is one of the best approaches. Furthermore, although some solutions to the above-mentioned problem have been reported, the reactivity of the MOFs in these systems is largely limited by their poor light absorption, low electron transfer efficiency, and fewer sources of active sites.192,193
Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), a subclass of MOFs, have gained popularity in the field of photocatalysis. ZIFs, which are made from imidazolate linkers and metal ions,15 are regarded as a rising star in a variety of photocatalytic applications. It has been proven that the inherent and unique qualities of ZIFs can considerably improve the photocatalytic performance for CO2 reduction.194–196 For instance, Meng et al.197 investigated the photoreduction of CO2 utilizing ZIF-67 and graphitic g-C3N4 under sunlight illumination to produce 50 μmol h−1 of very stable and selective ethanol. In the study by Wu et al.,198 ZIF-67 (Co as the metal ion) intercalated into the polymer was used to explore the separation of CO2, and a better CO2 separation selectivity was obtained compared to ZIF-8. In particular, ZIF-67 has characteristics that may be more encouraging and suited for CO2 photoreduction in comparison to other ZIFs, such as a larger concentration of Lewis acid sites, a greater specific surface area, and chemical stability.199 However, they still exhibit a low photocatalytic performance and efficiency, which is caused by their inadequate ability to separate electron–hole pairs and absorb solar radiation.196 Despite the scientific efforts to use different engineering techniques such as doping, co-catalysts, and Z-schemes,200–202 as the main strategy in the current study, they seem insufficient.15,203 The combination of semiconducting and plasmonic NPs increases the efficiency of solar energy conversion by enhancing solar energy harvesting.13 However, despite this, the loss of hot electrons through ultrafast electron–electron scattering limits the effectiveness of devices based on this approach.13,53
It was found that the interface between PNPs and MOFs exhibits novel chemical and physical properties, which has attracted widespread attention. For example, metal NPs embedded in the cavities of MOFs exhibited enhanced gas storage and novel catalytic behaviors compared to MOFs alone.149,204,205 Therefore, one strategy to improve the catalytic efficiency of MOFs is the incorporation of metal NPs such as Ag, Au, and Cu in the MOF structure.206,207 In NP/MOF composites, NPs can not only provide more catalytically active sites but also increase the light absorption due to their LSPR effect.208
Becerra et al.100 reported a novel synthetic route for an efficient plasmonic Aux@ZIF-67 photocatalyst. By using PVP as a capping agent, Au NPs were produced and stabilized with the necessary size (Fig. 41). This method enables PVP-coated Au NPs to be equally distributed and exposed on the ZIF-67 surface. Under sunlight irradiation, this plasmonic Aux@ZIF-67 system could eliminate CO2 with excellent selectivity in the presence of H2O. The methanol/ethanol photocatalytic activity was significantly enhanced. Au PNPs with a size of 30–40 nm increased the absorption of visible light, improved the charge separation, and were crucial for selectivity. Alternatively, when Au PNPs were deposited simultaneously, volcano-related Au PNPs with the generation of methanol and ethanol were discovered. The total yields were 2.5 mmol g−1 h−1 methanol and 0.5 mmol g−1 h−1 ethanol, which are the highest reported in the literature to date.
 Fig. 41  (A) Plasmonic Au NPs incorporated in ZIF-67. (B) Mechanism using Aux@ZIF-67.100 
Choi et al.187 systematically controlled the density of Ren-MOF in the framework (n = 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, and 24 complexes/unit cell), and then its photocatalytic activity. Structural analysis of Ren-MOFs revealed that for the synergistic enhancement of photocatalytic activity, a close and delicate balance between photoactive centers is required, where the optimal number of Re complexes per unit cell should achieve the highest activity (Fig. 42a). Based on the structure–activity relationship of Ren-MOFs, Re3-MOF was encapsulated in Ag NCs (Ag ⊂ Re3-MOF) to spatially confine the photoactive Re center to the surface of Ag NCs with an enhanced near-surface electric field, resulting in the conversion of CO2 to ions under visible light (Fig. 42b).
 Fig. 42  Structures of (a) Ren-MOF and (b) Ag ⊂ Ren-MOF.187 
The majority of studies concentrated on manipulating the shape and size of metal NPs; however, investigations on how the size of MOFs impacts the catalytic process are rare.209–211 Considering that the MOFs in these catalysts play a significant role in photocatalytic reactions,212,213 exploring the size-dependent characteristics of MOF hybrid materials in solar-driven CO2RR is of great significance. The particle size-tuning photocatalytic activity of noble metals such as Pt has been recognized. However, this is not applicable to MOFs. In the work by Guo et al.,214 nanoscale MOF MIL-101(Cr)–Ag NP hybrids possessing different sizes and the effect of their size on photocatalytic CO2 reduction under visible light were investigated (Fig. 43A). The results showed that when the size of MIL-101(Cr)–Ag was reduced to 80 nm, the hybrid catalyst showed the highest CO2 photocatalytic reduction activity, which is one of the most efficient hybrid catalysts (Fig. 43B). The high density of unit cells on the catalyst corners and edges, which promote photocatalytic electron transfer reduction in CO2 and are supported by a complementary combination of photochemical and electrochemical techniques, is responsible for the high catalytic activity of small-scale hybrid catalysts.
 Fig. 43  (A) Size engineering of MIL-101(Cr)–Ag hybrids for photocatalytic CO2RR. (B) Electron transfer process.214 
MOFs are three-dimensional networks made up of organic connecting molecules with diverse themes and inorganic nodes.215,216 Numerous chemicals and topologies that can affect chemical reactivity and molecular adsorption behavior can be realized through controlled alterations.217–219 This adaptability presents prospects for solar fuel power generation and solar energy harvesting,220,221 and the techniques encouraging organic linkers to behave as chromophores include adjusting photoactive node locations, post-synthesis adjustments, and using MOF cavities or linkers to deliver the catalyst.222,223 By incorporating molecular catalysts in MOFs, researchers can better understand how active species behave in particular chemical environments, which can be influenced by their cage properties. This can help prevent undesirable deactivation and aggregation mechanisms from occurring.222 The majority of studies on the incorporation of molecular catalysts in MOFs concentrated on complexes created either via bottom-up or post-synthetic covalent tethering of MOFs.224–226 However, for the synthesis of MOF linkers from molecular catalysts without altering their electrical properties, these techniques are restricted to the currently used post-synthesis techniques and requirements. Additionally, the modifications performed before the framework synthesis may make it harder for MOFs to crystallize. Accordingly, encapsulation in a bottle, in which distinct molecules and colloids are encased by the MOF host, can overcome these limitations.227 However, although it has been studied for a few chemical compounds, NPs, and enzymes, its use in solar fuel power generation species is in its infancy.227–231
Stanley et al.232 reported that an MOF-embedded molecular catalyst could enhance the photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity. The benchmark photocatalyst fac-ReBr(CO)3(4,4′-dcbpy) and photosensitizer Ru(bpy)2(5,5′-dcbpy)Cl2 were synergistically encapsulated in non-toxic and inexpensive MIL-101-NH2(Al) cages via non-covalent host–guest interactions. Compared with the photocatalytic CO2 reduction conditions, the heterogeneous material improved the stability of the Re catalyst. We demonstrated and assessed the impact of environmental modulation of the reaction in MOF cages functioning as nanoreactors by adjusting the ratio of immobilized catalyst to photosensitizer. Also, the precise correlation among the size of the molecular complex, MOF pore window, and the number of hostable molecules per cage was demonstrated (Fig. 44). This shows the optimal effectiveness of two photosensitizers and one catalyst per cage. In contrast to usual homogeneous systems, photosensitizer degradation (rather than catalyst) was shown to be the primary performance-limiting factor, offering an opportunity to increase turnover numbers going forward through wise parameter selection.
 Fig. 44  Mechanism for the CO2RR to CO by ReX(CO)3(4,4′-dcbpy) in (a) Re@MIL and (b) Re–Ru@MIL. (c) Studied MIL-101-NH2(Al) and molecular complexes for photocatalytic CO2RR.232 
4.4. Metal oxides/sulfides
In addition to the three above-mentioned substrates, metal oxides and sulfides can be used to support LSPR metal NPs in many cases. From this point of view, there is no law to interlink different specific catalysts. Sayed et al.233 developed a chemical reduction method to prepare plasmonic Cu–Cu2O octahedra. The experimental results showed that the activities of Cu2O-1, Cu2O-2, and Cu2O-3 are 2.2-, 1.7-, and 1.6-times higher than that of the bare Cu2O octahedra, respectively. This strategy relies on the ability of surface-attached carbon on CuO to partially reduce Cu ions, allowing the direct growth of Cu NPs. The energy-level coupling of Cu and Cu2O supports a direct hot electron transfer mechanism, i.e., PICTT from plasmonic CuNPs to Cu2O, which contributes to the enhanced CO2RR activity. The photogenerated hot holes at the plasmonic Cu NPs are used to participate in water oxidation (Fig. 45) and this PICTT mechanism can efficiently transfer hot electrons without significant energy loss. It is hoped that this developed method can be a fruitful protocol for designing other artificial photosynthesis systems.
 Fig. 45  Photogenerated charge carrier pathways and CO2RR mechanism over Cu–Cu2O by (a) excitation of Cu2O CB and (b) Cu LSPR.233 
Wu et al.234 demonstrated novel plasma-induced facilitation in conventional CO2 hydrogenation in a modified continuous-flow fixed-bed photothermal reactor. The CO2 conversion was significantly increased by up to 200%, boosting the industrial methanol production by CO2 hydrogenation under light, low-pressure conditions. More importantly, the experimental results demonstrated that the visible region of the spectrum is the main factor contributing to the significant enhancement, with visible light being identified as the main contributor (>90%) and the LSPR effect of Pd considered to be the main reason for the photothermal synergy in CO2 hydrogenation.
Confirmation of the photoconversion of 13CO2 to 13C product is essential for the production of solar fuels. However, the role of light in this reaction still needs to be clarified because the overall reactant and charge flow reaction mechanism is complicated. Starting from unspecified C, Zhang et al.235 selected Ag–ZrO2 photocatalysts and used gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and FTIR to monitor the surface reactants, products, and intermediates, while Debye-by in situ extended X-ray absorption fine structure was used to monitor the temperature and Ag concentrations. By choosing the photoactivation wavelength, the CO2 photoconversion contribution was separated by charge at the ZrO2 bandgap (λ < 248 nm) of 70%, at the Ag LSPR (330 < λ < 580 nm) of 28%, and is characterized as 2% with the thermal energy of 295 K. To effectively supply the bicarbonate species with activated H species, the LSPR on the Ag surface is converted to heat at temperatures of up to 392 K. This process combines the separated electrons with the pores above ZrO2 to produce CO at a rate of 0.66 μmol gcat−1 h−1, which is roughly zero-order kinetics. The use of moisture in 13CO2 photoconversion is also feasible (Fig. 46). In addition, the addition of Mg2+ to the trap, which traps surface CO2 to produce CO, successfully suppressed the side reaction of H2 generation over Ag.
 Fig. 46  Proposed intermediate species starting from CO2 and H2 to CO during CO2 exchange and photocatalytic CO2RR.235 
DFT technology also plays a key role in calculating and analyzing the LSPR. Employing this technology, the mechanism and reaction path of the chemical reaction can be explored more clearly and accurately. This facilitates a better understanding of the catalytic process and provides a theoretical basis for the subsequent design of enhanced catalysts. Le et al.236 applied DFT calculations to gain insight into the plasmon-induced CO2 dissociation directly on the Al@Cu2O core–shell structure observed in a previous experimental study (Fig. 47). According to experiments, when Cu2O and CO2 interact, an antibonding state is created, which can be detected by the adsorbed CO2. We discovered that the effective reaction barrier for CO2 dissociation under photon excitation can be decreased by 2 eV, although the intrinsic activation barrier for direct CO2 dissociation is as high as 3.6 eV. The experimental results further demonstrate that the strong hybridization of the dissociated species with Cu2O causes the charge transfer to be more apparent in the dissociated final state. Therefore, these results are visible-light-induced direct CO2 dissociation at relatively low temperature and ambient pressure.
 Fig. 47  Plasmon-induced CO2 conversion on Al@Cu2O: a DFT study.236 
To achieve the best efficiency in large-scale chemical processes, while minimizing the energy consumption and cost, highly active photocatalysts need to be developed. Metal NPs with LSPR capabilities have recently made significant progress in photocatalytic efficiency.20,36,40,55,81,144,237–240 In recent years, Ag and Au have been primarily used in photo-driven chemical transformations on plasmonic nanostructures. However, due to their high price, poor availability, and low reactivity, the practical use of noble metals as photocatalysts is ultimately constrained. Alternatively, Al also demonstrates remarkable plasmonic optical characteristics, including highly tunable LSPR effect, which cover the ultraviolet and visible spectra.241 Al has been demonstrated to behave as a photocatalyst for chemical reactions mediated by plasmons102 and has recently been used in the creation of heterometallic antenna reactor photocatalysts as a plasmonic antenna.102,103 Due to its low cost, abundant reserves, LSPR, and high catalytic activity, Al is an excellent choice for the practical production of plasmonic photocatalysts.
Zhao et al.242 found that Cu2−xS exhibits LSPR at NIR wavelengths, which originates from the light-induced stimulation of the collective oscillations of a large number of carriers. In addition, nanostructured copper chalcogenides have become a unique platform for the study of exciton–plasmon interactions because of their ability of to simultaneously exhibit excitonic and plasmonic resonances.243 Cu2S has been shown to reduce CO2. Also, its band gap width can be tuned upward by introducing copper vacancies. This leads to nonstoichiometric direct band gap Cu2−xS, which additionally exhibits LSPR in the NIR region.242,243
Rabkin et al.244 found that the LSPR peak position can be controlled by varying the degree of crystallinity of the capping surfactant layer. Owing to their complicated structures and complexities of their preparation, the research on quaternary metal sulfide photocatalysts is rare. Raza et al.170 synthesized the Cu2ZnSnS4/Pt/g-C3N4 compound and applied it for the photocatalysis of the CO2RR. The multiple charge carrier transfer channels, LSPR, and electron sink of Pt together promoted charge separation and surface site activation, exhibiting superior CO/CH4 yields, which are 3.31- and 5.56-folds higher than that of g-C3N4. Zhang et al.245 investigated a greatly sensitive plasmonic material based on nanostructured CuS, which exhibited the ideal LSPR effect for surface-enhanced IR absorption (SEIRA). It was concluded that the CuS thin film showed significant SEIRA for 100 ppm CO2 with a 104 enhancement factor. Based on the properties of LSPR, Li et al.246 regulated the S vacancies to achieve a desirable carrier density. Owing to the excitation of LSPR, the plasma e− on the semiconductor surface was elevated to a higher energy state. Consequently, e− could overcome the energy barrier and transferred directly to the CB as the donor, which may lead to greater hydrogen generation.
4.5. Others
In fact, in addition to TiO2, g-C3N4, MOFs, and metal oxides/sulfides, there are many other catalyst structures exhibiting the LSPR effect, which have been extensively explored by researchers. In this case, they do not necessarily have uniform structures and rules, but each has its own characteristics. In this section, we summarize and give a brief introduction on some of them.
For effective CO2 photoreduction, it is still difficult to find semiconductor photocatalysts with good visible light absorption and quick surface/interface charge transfer kinetics. Liu et al.247 prepared MoO3−x quantum dots (QDs) immobilized on acid-modified palygorskite (H-Pal) nanocomposites as powder photocatalysts for CO2 conversion (Fig. 48A). The effect of different mass fractions of MoO3−x on CO2 reduction was investigated. The results showed that the MoO3−xQDs possess a high LSPR effect induced by Ov, which not only could effectively capture NIR photons but also establish an S-type heterostructure with Ov-mediated H-Pal for enhanced charge carrier separation and maintain a high redox potential. In addition, Ov acts as an active site to facilitate the adsorption and activation of CO2. In the study by Liu,248 ultrathin BiOBr nanosheets were linked with Au NPs, which served as hot electron donors and “electron sinks”, allowing effective charge carrier separation (Fig. 48B). Additionally, the created heterostructure (Au/BiOBr) exhibited LSPR, which improved the absorption of visible light and created a quick charge transport channel at the surface of the Au and BiOBr interface. Consequently, by using in situ FTIR spectroscopy, it was discovered that the formation of ˙COOH was a crucial step in the conversion of CO2 to CO. This research offers a practical method for developing a multi-electron transfer strategy for effective photocatalytic CO2RR.
 Fig. 48  (A) Proposed photocatalytic reduction mechanism based on MoO3−x/H-Pal composite under (a) solar light and (b) NIR light irradiation.247 (B) (a) In situ FT-IR spectra of Au/BiOBr. (b) Photocatalytic mechanism of Au/BiOBr.248 
By using electron doping, Lu et al.249 successfully created plasmonic Bi2WO6 with robust LSPR. In this process, to produce Bi2WO6–V1 with LSPR and Bi2WO6–V2 with defect absorption, the Ov on WOW (V1) and Bi–O–Bi (V2) sites were carefully regulated. DFT calculations suggested that the V1-induced energy states contribute to long-lived photoelectron collection, leading to the LSPR of Bi2WO6. Single-particle photoluminescence (PL) measurements showed the presence of photoelectrons on the V1 site, and a PL quenching efficiency of 93% was noted. The strong LSPR caused Bi2WO6–V1 to have a highly selective CO2RR methane production rate of 9.95 μmol g−1 h−1, which is 26-times greater than that of 0.37 μmol g−1 h−1 by BiWO3–V2 under UV-vis irradiation. The various photocatalytic results of plasmonic Bi2WO6 confirm the LSPR-dependent methanogenesis with tunable LSPRs and distinct photoexcitation (Fig. 49), which provides valuable enlightenment for obtaining nonmetallic plasmonic materials by electron doping. By using a solvothermal technique, Wan et al.250 created Ag-modified SrTiO3 nanocomposites (ASTO). The created ASTO nanocomposite displayed a noticeable visible light photocatalytic CO2 reduction and H2 release performance, as well as broad plasmon resonance absorption. The exceptional photocatalytic reduction performance should be due to the improved electron extraction and transfer between Ag and STO in the ASTO nanocomposite as well as the improved visible light absorption via LSPR. Indeed, the copious reactive electrons in the ASTO nanocomposites enabled effective photocatalytic CO2 reduction and H2 release under visible light.
 Fig. 49  (A) Constructing SPR on Bi2WO6 to boost high-selective CO2RR for CH3OH.249 (B) Photocatalytic CO2RR mechanism over Ag-decorated SrTiO3.250 
A plasmonic Au/TiO2/RuCY hybrid photocatalyst was created for the conversion of CO2 to formic acid, which was triggered by visible light, in the study by Jun et al. (Fig. 50A).251 RuCY is intended to have effective CO2 reduction, excellent formate selectivity (94.7%), long-term stability, and reusability due to the solid Ti-phosphonate bond. The plasmonic heterostructures efficiently separated the charges at the Schottky junction to enable multi-electron transport to the catalyst. Two phosphonate groups effectively immobilized the ruthenium complex on the heterostructure, and a bidentate π-back bond supported the catalytic core. This well-designed photocatalyst achieved an outstanding performance for the reduction of CO2 to formic acid under ambient conditions, with a TOF of 1200 h−1 and TON of 11700, which will hopefully stimulate further investigations into heterogeneous molecular catalysts for photocatalytic CO2 conversion and offer new perspectives on catalyst design. By using hydrothermal and sol–gel procedures, Zhu et al.252 successfully synthesized Pd–Au/TiO2–WO3 NPs, and subsequently used them to photoreduce CO2 under UV-vis light. The greatest yields of CH4 and CO among the produced Pd–Au/TiO2–WO3 NPs were 39.1 μmol g−1 h−1 and 271.3 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively. The higher specific surface area and low recombination rate of photogenerated e−/h+ pairs may be responsible for this great enhancement (Fig. 50B). Based on these findings, this study described a logical CO2 photoreduction process employing as-synthesized Pd–Au/TiO2–WO3. For possible use in the field of photocatalysis, TiO2 has special photophysical and chemical characteristics. However, it is still difficult to manage TiO2 in terms of phase, form, morphology, and particularly the nanoscale production of TiO2 particles. MOFs containing Ti, such as MIL-125, can be utilized as sacrificial precursors to produce TiO2 materials with various phase compositions, morphologies, sizes, and surface areas. Ti/O clusters serve as secondary structural units (SBUs) in MIL-125, which are connected by 1,4-phthalate (bdc). In the study by Khaletskaya,253 solvothermal synthesis was used to deposit pre-formed and surfactant-stabilized Au NPs on the surface of amino-functionalized NH2-MIL-125. Then, the GNP/NH2-MIL-125 nanocrystals were pyrolyzed to create the target Au/Ti nanocomposites. The modification of TiO2 with GNPs considerably increased the photocatalytic activity of the MOF-derived TiO2 materials for CO2 reduction to CH4 in comparison to the TiO2 reference samples such as P-25 and AUROlite (Au/TiO2). Dagger-axe-like Cu@Co core–shell bimetal, one of the numerous plasmonic bimetals, has strong photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity. In the study by Lai et al.,254 a core–shell structure was created when a Co layer was incorporated in a Cu matrix, which may accelerate the CO2 adsorption/activation process by increasing the CO2 adsorption capacity of Cu. Rapid interfacial charge-transfer dynamics can also be realized by the electronic interaction of Co and Cu (Fig. 50C). Without a photosensitizer or cocatalyst, the Cu@Co sample exhibited increased catalytic activity for the conversion of CO2 to CO and it produced CO at a rate of 11043.33 μmol g−1. Additionally, Cu@Co demonstrated extremely high CO selectivity (98%) and stability (48 h), which is rare in the published literature. The rapid migration of photoinduced charge carriers formed from the Co layer resulted in the enhanced photocatalytic activity, which was accompanied by high activity and ultra-high selectivity.
 Fig. 50  (A) Illustrations of (a) structure and (b) band diagram of the photocatalyst.251 (B) CO2 photoreduction over the fabricated Pd–Au/TiO2–WO3.252 (C) Photocatalytic CO2RR on Cu@Co sample.254 
The achievement of efficient catalysis only in the laboratory is insufficient, and only when the reaction conditions become more suitable and the cost is appropriate, can mass production and industrial production be realized. Wang et al.255 proposed the conversion of CO2 to CO using the earth-abundant elements Al and carbon at low CO2 partial pressure at room temperature. Due to the low cost and broadband LSPR response of aluminum NPs in the ultraviolet band, they were chosen the LSPR source. This approach demonstrated that the reverse Boudouard reaction (CO2 + C → 2CO) directly initiated by LSPR has a high turnover at room temperature and low CO2 partial pressure. In addition, because of its low cost and ease of implementation, it is easier to achieve a mass production-scale, paving the way for efficient storage of solar energy in carbon fuel production. Photocatalytic CO2RR to usable molecules is an extremely efficient but very difficult way to achieve artificial photosynthesis. Yu et al.256 constructed the SrTiO3(LaCr)/Cu@Ni/TiN (STO/Cu@Ni/TiN) (Fig. 51a), and then replaced the noble metals with non-noble metallic elements including Cu, Ni, and TiN to enhance the LSPR effect and efficiently absorb solar whole spectrum energy. The hot electrons generated by Cu NPs and TiN NPs may enhance the number of photogenerated carriers in the composite photocatalyst. TiN NPs were capable of producing photogenerated electrons and have strong photothermal conversion capacity. Cu, Ni, and TiN NPs may promote light absorption because of the LSPR effects. According to TPD, Cu@Ni NPs may enhance the adsorption of CO2. The C2H5OH pathway was further supported by DFT simulations and a 13C isotope experiment (Fig. 51b).
 Fig. 51  (a) Structure of STO/Cu @ Ni/TiN. (b) Free energy diagram for CO2RR to C2H5OH and C2H4 at the Cu@Ni interface. (c) Free energy diagram for the CO2RR to C2H5OH and C2H4 on the Cu {1 0 0} surface.256 
The above-mentioned classification introduces many LSPR catalysts. Then, to better understand the role of LSPR in the promotion of the CO2 photocatalytic reduction of renewable synthetic fuels, the following table summarizes the CO2 reduction performance of some catalysts under LSPR and non-LSPR effects. By comparing the data, it is not difficult to see that due to the excellent performance of LSPR, as described herein, the catalytic activity of catalysts with LSPR modification was significantly improved, such as product yield and apparent quantum efficiency (AQE). Therefore, it can be concluded that a more ideal catalytic performance can be achieved by improving the design of the original catalytic system and active species. This also justifies the fundamental purpose and profound significance of researching LSPR technology in the field of photocatalytic CO2RR into renewable synthetic fuel. This technology will undoubtedly continue to be a hot topic of research in the future (Table 2).
Table 2 Renewable synthetic fuel performance for photocatalytic CO2RR before and after LSPR




Catalyst
Light source and reaction conditions
Products
Production rate (μmol g−1 h−1, without LSPR)
Production rate (μmol g−1 h−1, with LSPR)
Activity enhancing factor
AQE (%, with LSPR)
Ref.




Au/TiO2 film

λ = 532 nm, H2O vapor
CH4
0.06
1.49
Twenty four
2.1 × 10−5

116



Au/TiO2
Full spectrum, H2O vapor
CH4
1.33
2.52
1.89



99



C2H6
0
1.67




Au/TiO2

λ > 420 nm, H2O vapor
CH4
≈0
0.039





257



CO
≈0
0.049


Au/TiO2/MMT
Full spectrum, CO2/H2 1:1
CH4
1.10
12
10.91



156



CO
51
1223
23.99


(Au–Cu)/TiO2
Full spectrum, H2O vapor
CH4
0
44
8



258



H2
2
16


Au/TiO2

λ > 455 nm, H2O vapor
CH4
≈0
0.107





140



CO
≈0
0.017


Ag/TiO2

λ > 420 nm, H2O vapor
CH4
0.4
7.6
19



259



Ag/TiO2

λ > 400 nm, H2O liquid
CH3 OH
14.37
135.07
9.4



260



Ag/TiO2
Visible light, CO2/H2 1:1
CH4
2.66
9.73
3.66
0.006

261



CO
9
983
109.22
0.150


CH3 OH
≈0
13


0.01


Cu/TiO2

λ > 420 nm, H2O liquid
CH3 OH
0.28
1.8
6.43



262



Cu/TiO2 film

λ = 365 nm, H2O vapor
CH4
1.45
2.91
2.0



165



Pd/TiO2
400 nm < λ < 780 nm, H2O vapor
H2
≈0
0.18





263



CO
≈0
0.32


(Au–Pt)/TiO2
Full spectrum, H2O vapor
CH4
0.01
0.19
19



264



CO
0.02
0.08
4


(Au, Cu)/SrTiO3/TiO2
Full spectrum, N2H4·H2O vapor
CH4
≈8.5
15.49
≈1.82
2.51

265



CO
≈12
138.6
≈11.55




(Pd–Cu)/TiO2

λ < 400 nm, H2O vapor
CH4
0.66
19.60
29.70



266



CO
0.94
1.90
2.02


H2
1.00
1.45
1.45


Ag/LDHs

λ > 400, CO2/H2 1:9.4
CH3 OH
Total 0.13
0.22
1.69



267



CO


AgCl/Ag

λ ≥ 400 nm, NaHCO3 aqueous solution
CH3OH


37.74


0.893

86



Ag/Ag2SO3

λ > 400 nm, H2O vapor
CO
≈0
1.24


0.258

268



CH4
≈0
3.01


Au/ZnO

λ = 532 nm, CO2/H2 1:3
CO


≈4.00


0.03

269



CH4
≈0.22


Au/g-C3N4
Full spectrum, H2O vapor
CO
10.47
13.17
1.26



179



CH4
0.34
3.10
9.12


Al/Cu2O
400 < λ < 850 nm, CO2/H2 1:1
CO
≈18
360
20
0.35

270



Ag/AgBr/g-C3N4
Visible light, H2O vapor
CH4
0.26
1.09
4.19



271



Au/CdS/TiO2
Full spectrum, H2O vapor
H2
4.3
41.6
9.67



272



CO
4.6
0.6
0.13


CH4
1.8
41.6
23.11


r-GO–Au NPs
Visible light, H2O liquid
HCOOH
0.2
1.52
7.6
1.52

273



(Rh–Au)/SBA-15
490 nm < λ < 550 nm, CH4/CO2 1:1
CO


4050





274



H2
3700


Rh/Al2O3

λ = 365 nm, CO2/H2 1:5.5
CH4
≈0
≈5.97





275



CO
≈0
≈0.2


Fe/SiO2
Full spectrum, CO2/H2 1:1
CO
≈0
5546





276



Ag/Ren/MOF

λ > 400 nm, acetonitrile/triethylamine 20:1
CO
≈0.013
≈0.091
7



187



Ni/Al2O3
300 nm < λ < 800 nm, CH4/CO2 1:1
H2


≈122


19.0

277



CO
≈130


(Pd–Au)/Al2O3

λ > 420 nm, CH4/CO2 1:1
CO
≈1900
≈2100
1.11



278



H2
≈1740
≈1830
1.05




5. Summary and Prospect
An emerging subject that offers tremendous potential for harnessing solar energy through chemical bonding is the activation of tiny molecules via plasmonic photocatalysis. The investigation of the mechanism of plasmonic energy transmission from plasmonic metals to connected catalyst analogues has advanced significantly. The modular design of plasmonic catalyst hybrid structures gives flexibility to regulate their activity in two different directions. Firstly, the size- and shape-dependent adjustable wavelength properties of the plasmonic segments allow the exploration of a variety of solar spectrum areas, notably the visible and NIR regions, which together make up more than 90% of solar energy. Alternatively, a wide range of materials, including pure metals, semiconductors, and molecular catalysts, may be used to create catalytic fragments. These substances can carry out some small-molecule activation reactions with different efficiencies and selectivities under various reaction conditions. The rate and course of this photocatalytic process are often controlled by the proper direction of photogenerated hole and electron migration into further catalytic nanostructures.
In this review, we briefly explained the LSPR phenomenon and its attractive catalytic properties.
(1) In chapter 2, we discussed the mechanism of LSPR, some basic properties, and then the mechanisms of plasmonic photocatalysis. The discussion focused on how PNPs activate chemical bonds and reduce the activation energy, and how the carrier extraction process is critical for efficient plasmonic catalysis.
(2) In chapter 3, we illustrated the application of the LSPR effect in the catalytic reduction of CO2 into renewable synthetic fuels. Under photoexcitation, PNPs exhibit unique behavior due to three main pathways, i.e., thermal charge carrier transfer, metal/semiconductor hybrid optical near-field enhancement, and photothermal effect. These LSPR-induced features have been used to promote catalytic reactions, and the mechanisms by which they drive organic reactions were all described in detail herein.
(3) In chapter 4, we proposed that the careful design of nanocatalyst properties is expected to maximize the efficiency of plasma-mediated transformations. Subsequently, we demonstrated the plasmonic nanostructures formed on a variety of substrates, which greatly enhanced the performance of photocatalytic CO2 reduction for the synthesis of renewable fuels.
Plasmonic catalysts enable the development of novel and more specialized reaction pathways by driving chemical reactions on their surfaces with high-energy carriers and heat. The hot electrons produced by LSPR can preferentially steer the process towards particular products, while minimizing the activation energy, which is not possible in thermocatalysis, which is just one advantage that plasmonic photocatalysis has over thermocatalysis. Plasmonic catalysis also offers the chance to control the reaction selectivity, carry out the reaction using light, and activate strong bonds at low temperatures.
However, the actual use of these special modular plasmonic catalysts depends on four fundamental characteristics, namely, efficiency, stability, cost, and scalability. Despite the present advancements in this multidisciplinary field of study, the following difficulties have surfaced, which demand attention from the research community:
(1) Lack of comprehension of plasmonic catalytic pathways: the many processes behind plasmonic-driven activation of small molecules are still not well understood, making it difficult to use computational models to probe these systems.
(2) Zero condition optimization: plasmonic catalysis is sensitive to a number of variables, including the size, shape, and composition of nanomaterials, the electromagnetic radiation wavelength, and the properties of the reaction medium. Consequently, catalytic condition tuning often requires a lot of time. Therefore, high-throughput catalytic optimization procedures may aid in advancing this research.
(3) Bridging the gap between lab-based and commercial applications: although the study of plasmonic catalysis is in its infancy, it has potential for practical applications. However, this study is constrained by the very low degree of technology readiness because of the high capital expenditures and costly maintenance of complicated reactors (TRL). Therefore, further study is required to assure cost-effective manufacturing of commercially viable goods, design user-friendly reactors, and to establish safe access to materials for mass production.
Consequently, the research in this area is still advancing toward investigating and comprehending different catalytic reaction processes. The issues in this sector that need to be resolved as soon as possible include the high input of light energy, low yield, and poor stability. Due to its inherently complicated nature, the research presents both significant potential and obstacles. Understanding the mechanism of these plasma-assisted chemical processes is essential for developing selective and effective plasmonic catalysts. This may be done in situ using a variety of spectroscopic methods. Unlike thermocatalysis, plasma-assisted chemistry enables the precise regulation of the selectivity of processes. To achieve selectivity, it is necessary to modify the interactions at the molecular/metal interface, which may be accomplished by creating various hybrid heterostructures. However, it is not sufficient to modify the size and shape of metal NPs. To further maximize the product selectivity, high productivity, good tunability, and new material design methodologies are needed.
One unmet objective is the efficient conversion of CO2 into liquid fuels. Metal-based photocatalysts, particularly noble metal NPs, permit strong visible-wavelength plasmonic excitation with CO2 surface activation, and thus are novel and promising CO2RR photocatalysts, which have the ability to produce C1 and C2+ hydrocarbons using solar energy according to preliminary experiments. However, non-metallic NPs have a greater application prospect due to their lower cost. Therefore, improving the plasmon resonance effect of non-noble metal NPs, thus improving the product yield, selectivity, controllability, etc., has become the main research direction. To gain basic knowledge and provide direction for logical design procedures for effective, selective, and stable plasma-assisted CO2RR catalysts, a systematic information base is required. In plasmonic CO2RR, the catalytic activity, reaction route, and selectivity may be influenced by photoexcitation-related factors in addition to the characteristics of the metal and metal/adsorbate interactions. The reaction pathways and important intermediates in the CO2RR under plasmonic stimulation may differ from that in thermocatalytic and electrocatalytic CO2RR because the plasmonic resonance represents a potent type of light/matter interaction. However, the nature of plasmonic excitation and whether it possesses special qualities to fuel various electron transfer events in the CO2RR are unanswered and important subjects. Regardless of the response to this query, it is anticipated that fundamental mechanistic and theoretical investigations into plasma-assisted CO2RR will provide new information regarding the function of light and the close interaction between photoexcited states and surface adsorbates.
In addition, in the field of plasmonic catalysis, there is still a broader prospect to be explored. CCUS is not to overtake on corners, but to change the track. By greatly optimizing the utilization of CO2, exploration of the potential effects of light/matter interactions is conducive to the development of artificial photosynthesis and the improvement of CCUS technology, which makes plasmonic CO2RR fundamentally more meaningful and promising. Thus, we firmly believe that the development in the field of plasmonic photocatalysis can provide great hope to mankind for the utilization of solar energy and CO2 to solve the energy and environmental problems in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was Sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52076134, 51676127, 51436005, and 51176118), the National Key Research and Development Plan (2016YFC0205200, 2016YFC0208000, and 2017YFB0103501), the Oceanic Interdisciplinary Program of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SL2022MS006), the Open Research Program of State Key Laboratory of Engines, the National Engineering Laboratory for Mobile Source Emission Control Technology (NELMS2017A07), the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Young Scientists (51306115), the Low Speed Marine Engine Project (CDGC01-KT1203), and the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars of State Education Ministry.
References
M. Meinshausen, N. Meinshausen, W. Hare, S. C. B. Raper, K. Frieler, R. Knutti, D. J. Frame and M. R. Allen, Nature, 2009, 458, U1158–U1196 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Solomon, G. K. Plattner, R. Knutti and P. Friedlingstein, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 1704–1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vermeer and S. Rahmstorf, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21527–21532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Chaudhary, T. W. Woolerton, C. S. Allen, J. H. Warner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 58–60 RSC .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, J. P. Jones, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7995–8048 RSC .
Y. Houndonougbo, C. Signer, N. He, W. Morris, H. Furukawa, K. G. Ray, D. L. Olmsted, M. Asta, B. B. Laird and O. M. Yaghi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10326–10335 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazabal and J. Perez-Ramirez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112–3135 RSC .
C. S. Song, Catal. Today, 2006, 115, 2–32 CrossRef CAS .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 191–205 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, M. Llorente, J. Froehlich, T. Dang, A. Sathrum and C. P. Kubiak, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 541–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 445–453 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhu and D. W. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700841 CrossRef .
N. N. Vu, S. Kaliaguine and T. O. Do, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901825 CrossRef .
S. Sato, T. Arai, T. Morikawa, K. Uemura, T. M. Suzuki, H. Tanaka and T. Kajino, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15240–15243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hayashi, A. P. Cote, H. Furukawa, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 501–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Grills, M. Z. Ertem, M. McKinnon, K. T. Ngo and J. Rochford, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 374, 173–217 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Waller, F. Gandara and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 3053–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Liu, Y. T. Long, Y. Choi, T. Kang and L. P. Lee, Nat. Methods, 2007, 4, 1015–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Choi, Y. Park, T. Kang and L. P. Lee, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 742–746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Li, S. K. Cushing, F. K. Meng, T. R. Senty, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 601–607 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Engel, T. R. Calhoun, E. L. Read, T. K. Ahn, T. Mancal, Y. C. Cheng, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2007, 446, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mirkovic, E. E. Ostroumov, J. M. Anna, R. van Grondelle, Govindjee and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 249–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Selvin, Nat. Struct. Biol., 2000, 7, 730–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Clapp, I. L. Medintz and H. Mattoussi, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 47–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, J. Lee and N. A. Kotov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 125308 CrossRef .
X. R. Su, W. Zhang, L. Zhou, X. N. Peng and Q. Q. Wang, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 6516–6521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. R. Su, W. Zhang, L. Zhou, X. N. Peng, D. W. Pang, S. D. Liu, Z. K. Zhou and Q. Q. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 043106 CrossRef .
M. Lunz, V. A. Gerard, Y. K. Gun'ko, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach and A. L. Bradley, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3341–3345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. T. Li, F. K. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. J. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Choi, T. Kang and L. P. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 85–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Serpone and A. V. Emeline, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 673–677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hashimoto, H. Irie and A. Fujishima, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2005, 44, 8269–8285 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. L. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 169–189 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Liu, X. N. Zhang, L. F. Yang, L. T. Ren, D. F. Wang and J. H. Ye, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 4, 761–780 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 RSC .
S. Linic, U. Aslam, C. Boerigter and M. Morabito, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 744–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Giannini, A. I. Fernandez-Dominguez, S. C. Heck and S. A. Maier, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3888–3912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W. S. Chang, S. Link and P. Nordlander, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3913–3961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Hartland, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3858–3887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ringe, B. Sharma, A. I. Henry, L. D. Marks and R. P. Van Duyne, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4110–4129 RSC .
R. W. Yu, L. M. Liz-Marzan and F. J. G. de Abajo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6710–6724 RSC .
G. V. Hartland, L. V. Besteiro, P. Johns and A. O. Govorov, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1641–1653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xia, Y. J. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, P. X. Zhao and D. Astruc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1756–1789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Y. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Tao, S. Habas and P. D. Yang, Small, 2008, 4, 310–325 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grzelczak, J. Perez-Juste, P. Mulvaney and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1783–1791 RSC .
H. J. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. F. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679–2724 RSC .
D. J. de Aberasturi, A. B. Serrano-Montes and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 602–617 CrossRef .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ueno, T. Oshikiri, Q. Sun, X. Shi and H. Misawa, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2955–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 865–865 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Tee, K. Y. Win, W. S. Teo, L. D. Koh, S. H. Liu, C. P. Teng and M. Y. Han, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600337 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Mubeen, X. L. Ji, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5014–5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, T. Wang and J. L. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5328–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gelle and A. Moores, Pure Appl. Chem., 2017, 89, 1817–1827 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Cardinal, E. V. Ende, R. A. Hackler, M. O. McAnally, P. C. Stair, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3886–3903 RSC .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. F. Turner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3184–3196 RSC .
K. Saha, S. S. Agasti, C. Kim, X. N. Li and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2739–2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 12516–12520 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee, W. J. Liu, C. H. Naylor, J. Park, S. C. Malek, J. S. Berger, A. T. C. Johnson and R. Agarwal, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4541–4547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Lakowicz, Plasmonics, 2006, 1, 5–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dostalek and W. Knoll, Biointerphases, 2008, 3, Fd12–Fd22 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Y. Liu, Q. Kang, Z. C. Xie, L. H. Lu, K. Dai and G. Dawson, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2021, 55, 043002 CrossRef .
K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Wu, S. Yin, Q. Dong, B. Liu, Y. H. Wang, T. Sekino, S. W. Lee and T. Sato, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2918 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Q. Wu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2679–2696 RSC .
U. Aslam, V. G. Rao, S. Chavez and S. Linic, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 656–665 CrossRef .
N. N. Vu, S. Kaliaguine and T. O. Do, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3967–3991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Zhang, C. Y. Zhang, H. R. Zheng and H. X. Xu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2506–2515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gelle, T. Jin, L. de la Garza, G. D. Price, L. V. Besteiro and A. Moores, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 986–1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yu, A. J. Wilson, G. Kumari, X. Q. Zhang and P. K. Jain, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2058–2070 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhan, X. J. Chen, J. Yi, J. F. Li, D. Y. Wu and Z. Q. Tian, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 216–230 CrossRef .
R. Verma, R. Belgamwar and V. Polshettiwar, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 574–598 CrossRef CAS .
P. Christopher, H. L. Xin and S. Linic, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 467–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, F. Libisch, N. Large, O. Neumann, L. V. Brown, J. Cheng, J. B. Lassiter, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, D. D. Torres and P. K. Jain, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3399–3407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. G. Rao, U. Aslam and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Tian, Q. Lei, B. Tian, W. X. Zhang, Y. X. Cui and Y. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1845–1848 RSC .
C. H. An, J. Z. Wang, W. Jiang, M. Y. Zhang, X. J. Ming, S. T. Wang and Q. H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5646–5650 RSC .
S. Yu, A. J. Wilson, J. Heo and P. K. Jain, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2189–2194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Shown, H. C. Hsu, Y. C. Chang, C. H. Lin, P. K. Roy, A. Ganguly, C. H. Wang, J. K. Chang, C. I. Wu, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6097–6103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, H. H. Ou, A. J. Colussi and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 4658–4666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, M. T. Wang, Y. T. Ma, Y. Y. Li, J. Y. Cai and Z. H. Li, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2218–2223 RSC .
M. Dhiman, A. Maity, A. Das, R. Belgamwar, B. Chalke, Y. Lee, K. Sim, J. M. Nam and V. Polshettiwar, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6594–6603 RSC .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202–5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Liu, W. B. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lu, W. Dong, Z. Chen, A. Pors, Z. L. Wang and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Kumar, S. Krishnamoorthy, L. K. Tan, S. Y. Chiam, S. Tripathy and H. Gao, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 300–308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Negrin-Montecelo, M. Comesana-Hermo, L. K. Khorashad, A. Sousa-Castillo, Z. M. Wang, M. Perez-Lorenzo, T. Liedl, A. O. Govorov and M. A. Correa-Duarte, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 395–402 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ghosh, A. Kar, S. Khandelwal, D. Vyas, A. Mir, A. L. Chakraborty, R. S. Hegde, S. Sharma, A. Dutta and S. Khatue, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 5795–5803 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Tong, X. Z. Liang, Z. Y. Wang, Y. Y. Liu, P. Wang, H. F. Cheng, Y. Dai, Z. K. Zheng and B. B. Huang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 10814–10823 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Tu, Y. Zhou, H. J. Li, P. Li and Z. G. Zou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14232–14236 RSC .
J. Becerra, D. T. Nguyen, V. N. Gopalakrishnan and T. O. Do, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 7659–7665 CrossRef CAS .
R. Solarska, K. Bienkowski, S. Zoladek, A. Majcher, T. Stefaniuk, P. J. Kulesza and J. Augustynski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14196–14200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Q. Zhao, L. A. Zhou, A. E. Schlather, L. L. Dong, M. J. McClain, D. F. Swearer, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6677–6682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Swearer, H. Q. Zhao, L. N. Zhou, C. Zhang, H. Robatjazi, J. M. P. Martirez, C. M. Krauter, S. Yazdi, M. J. McClain, E. Ringe, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 8916–8920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Swearer, H. Robatjazi, J. M. P. Martirez, M. Zhang, L. N. Zhou, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8076–8086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, C. H. Li, H. J. Chen, R. B. Jiang, L. D. Sun, Q. Li, J. F. Wang, J. C. Yu and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5588–5601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, N. J. Hogan, M. J. Kale, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander and P. Christopher, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3710–3717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, J. S. Zou, J. Y. Ye, Z. Y. Zhou, Z. Lin, X. W. Kang, P. K. Jain and S. W. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8794–8798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Q. Mir, G. Joshi, P. Ghosh, S. Khandelwal, A. Kar, R. Hegde, S. Khatua and A. Dutta, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2428–2435 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cortes, Science, 2018, 362, 28–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, J. L. Yang, W. M. Yang, H. L. Zhong, J. S. Lin, P. M. Radjenovic, L. Sun, H. Zhang, J. Xu, Z. Q. Tian and J. F. Li, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 69–76 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu and P. K. Jain, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2022 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Cui, J. Wang, B. Liu, S. Ling, R. Long and Y. J. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16514–16520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kumari, X. Q. Zhang, D. Devasia, J. Heo and P. K. Jain, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8330–8340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Y. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou, W. H. Hung, P. Pavaskar, A. Goeppert, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, S. In and M. W. Horn, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 565, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Munoz, A. Navarrete, A. Martin, R. Dittmeyer and M. J. Cocero, Materials, 2018, 11, 2134 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Sastre, C. Versluis, N. Meulendijks, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, J. Sweelssen, K. Elen, M. K. Van Bael, T. den Hartog, M. A. Verheijen and P. Buskens, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 7369–7377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Zhao, X. Y. Zheng, X. H. Feng and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18949–18956 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Li, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1906–1911 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Armstrong, C. Wolfram, K. P. de Jong, R. Gross, N. S. Lewis, B. Boardman, A. J. Ragauskas, K. Ehrhardt-Martinez, G. Crabtree and M. V. Ramana, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15020 CrossRef .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Senftle and E. A. Carter, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 472–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 527–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Su and L. Vayssieres, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 121–135 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vogt, E. Groeneveld, G. Kamsma, M. Nachtegaal, L. Lu, C. J. Kiely, P. H. Berben, F. Meirer and B. M. Weckhuysen, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 163–163 CrossRef .
W. B. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Xie, Q. H. Zhang, G. D. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 35–59 RSC .
W. Kim, E. Edri and H. Frei, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1634–1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, C. A. Grimes and K. G. Ong, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 398–402 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, X. P. Yang, J. Kendig, M. Paulose, K. F. Zeng, C. Palmer, K. G. Ong and C. A. Grimes, Sens. Lett., 2006, 4, 120–128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Hsu, T. L. Hsiung, H. P. Wang, Y. Fukushima, Y. L. Wei and J. E. Chang, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 2008, 57, 873–876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Grigorieva, E. A. Goodilin, K. L. Dubova, T. A. Anufrieva, L. E. Derlyukova, A. S. Vyacheslavov and Y. D. Tretyakov, Solid State Sci., 2010, 12, 1024–1028 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, N. N. Zhao and E. Kumacheva, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 656–671 RSC .
S. Bai, W. J. Yin, L. L. Wang, Z. Q. Li and Y. J. Xiong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, S7446–S7463 Search PubMed .
W. G. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Collado, A. Reynal, J. M. Coronado, D. P. Serrano, J. R. Durrant and V. A. de la Peña O'Shea, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 178, 177–185 CrossRef CAS .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Meng, L. Q. Liu, S. X. Ouyang, H. Xu, D. F. Wang, N. Q. Zhao and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6781–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 632–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Yu and B. B. Huang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tan, A. Argondizzo, J. D. Ren, L. M. Liu, J. Zhao and H. Petek, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 806–812 CrossRef CAS .
L. Collado, A. Reynal, F. Fresno, M. Barawi, C. Escudero, V. Perez-Dieste, J. M. Coronado, D. P. Serrano, J. R. Durrant and V. A. D. O'Shea, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4986 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Lu, S. Z. Li, Z. Guo, O. K. Farha, B. G. Hauser, X. Y. Qi, Y. Wang, X. Wang, S. Y. Han, X. G. Liu, J. S. DuChene, H. Zhang, Q. C. Zhang, X. D. Chen, J. Ma, S. C. J. Loo, W. D. Wei, Y. H. Yang, J. T. Hupp and F. W. Huo, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 310–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Pham, L. N. Le, H. N. Nguyen, T. T. K. Luong, T. N. Pham, H. Nguyen and T. K. Nguyen, Polyhedron, 2018, 148, 171–177 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ganguly, M. Sultana and A. Paul, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 15326–15332 CrossRef CAS .
F. Khatun, A. Abd Aziz, L. C. Sim and M. U. Monir, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 103233 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Su, C. Y. Chen and R. J. Wu, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 96, 409–418 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Jiao, Y. C. Wei, Y. L. Zhao, Z. Zhao, A. J. Duan, J. Liu, Y. Y. Pang, J. M. Li, G. Y. Jiang and Y. J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 228–239 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Jiao, Y. C. Wei, Z. Zhao, W. J. Zhong, J. Liu, J. M. Li, A. J. Duan and G. Y. Jiang, Catal. Today, 2015, 258, 319–326 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, B. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 356, 1289–1299 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 329–343 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, M. Cao, J. Lu, Y. Lu, C. H. Lau, Y. Zheng and X. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 296, 120341 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, T. Higo, N. Murakami, H. Saito, Q. Zhang, Y. Yang and T. Tsubota, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152–153, 309–316 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Handoko, A. Huda, M. D. Bustan, B. Yudono and F. Gulo, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2019, 1282, 012098 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, P. Dong, Z. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, X. Nie and X. Zhang, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Dai, C. Y. Li, W. H. Ting and J. M. Jehng, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 108045 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Wei, X. Wu, H. Zheng, Z. Zhao, J. Liu and J. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 360–372 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, W. Huang, Z. Li, B. Deng, Y. Zhang, M. Ni and K. Cen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6582–6593 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, I. Sinha, A. K. Singh and R. K. Mandal, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 384, 668–674 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Y. Tan, Y. Fernandez, D. Liu, M. Maroto-Valer, J. C. Bian and X. W. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 531, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, B. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 548–560 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vahidzadeh, S. Zeng, A. P. Manuel, S. Riddell, P. Kumar, K. M. Alam and K. Shankar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7248–7258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Dong and L. Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1160–1166 RSC .
A. Raza, H. L. Shen and A. A. Haidry, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119239 CrossRef CAS .
F. Raziq, J. X. He, J. T. Gan, M. Humayun, M. B. Faheem, A. Iqbal, A. Hayat, S. Fazal, J. B. Yi, Y. Zhao, K. Dhanabalan, X. Q. Wu, A. Mavlonov, T. Ali, F. Hassan, X. Xiang, X. T. Zu, H. H. Shen, S. A. Li and L. Qiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118870 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, L. Q. Ye, R. Wang, J. F. Yang, Y. X. Zhang, R. Guan, L. H. Tian and X. B. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4001–4009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Martin, K. P. Qiu, S. A. Shevlin, A. D. Handoko, X. W. Chen, Z. X. Guo and J. W. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9240–9245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Tang, X. Y. Kong, B. J. Ng, Y. H. Chew, A. R. Mohamed and S. P. Chai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 2335–2343 RSC .
S. N. Talapaneni, G. Singh, I. Y. Kim, K. AlBahily, A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, A. S. Karakoti, E. Tavakkoli and A. Vinu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Zhao, J. R. Guan, J. Z. Li, X. Li, H. Q. Wang, P. W. Huo and Y. S. Yan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 537, 147891 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Liu, J. X. Huang, L. L. Wang, X. H. Yu, J. F. Sun and H. Tang, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000504 CrossRef CAS .
Q. T. Wang, Z. X. Fang, X. K. Zhao, C. L. Dong, Y. Li, C. P. Guo, Q. L. Liu, F. Song and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 59855–59866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Gao, Z. Xiong, C. Liao and K. Shih, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 552–559 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Wei, X. Li, Y. L. Zhang, Y. S. Yan, P. W. Huo and H. Q. Wang, Renewable Energy, 2021, 179, 756–765 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshii, K. Tamaki, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 52 Search PubMed .
M. Humayun, H. Ullah, L. Shu, X. Ao, A. A. Tahir, C. Wang and W. Luo, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, Y. Xuan, K. Zhang and K. Chang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 120440 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. P. Jiang, C. C. Ma, Z. Zhu, X. H. Song, H. Q. Wang, P. W. Huo and X. Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 283, 119638 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, J. H. Guo, P. Wang, Y. S. Kang, Y. Liu, J. Zhao and W. Y. Sun, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 4834–4838 RSC .
S. Yuan, L. Feng, K. C. Wang, J. D. Pang, M. Bosch, C. Lollar, Y. J. Sun, J. S. Qin, X. Y. Yang, P. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. F. Zou, Y. M. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, Y. Fang, J. L. Li and H. C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704303 CrossRef PubMed .
K. M. Choi, D. Kim, B. Rungtaweevoranit, C. A. Trickett, J. T. D. Barmanbek, A. S. Alshammari, P. D. Yang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Fu, D. R. Sun, Y. J. Chen, R. K. Huang, Z. X. Ding, X. Z. Fu and Z. H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Sun, Y. H. Fu, W. J. Liu, L. Ye, D. K. Wang, L. Yang, X. Z. Fu and Z. H. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 14279–14285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Wang, R. K. Huang, W. J. Liu, D. R. Sun and Z. H. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4254–4260 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Qin, S. B. Wang and X. C. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 476–482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Kang, Y. Lu, K. Chen, Y. Zhao, P. Wang and W. Y. Sun, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 378, 262–280 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Zhang, J. Wei, J. C. Dong, G. G. Liu, L. Shi, P. F. An, G. X. Zhao, J. T. Kong, X. J. Wang, X. G. Meng, J. Zhang and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14308–14312 Search PubMed .
A. F. Abdel-Magied, H. N. Abdelhamid, R. M. Ashour, X. D. Zou and K. Forsberg, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 278, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chakraborty, D. A. Islam and H. Acharya, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 269, 566–574 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Kong, J. F. Liao, Y. J. Dong, Y. F. Xu, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2656–2662 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Meng, L. X. Zhang, H. F. Jiu, Q. L. Zhang, H. Zhang, W. Ren, Y. Sun and D.
T. Li, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2019, 95, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wu, W. Liu, H. Wu, X. Zong, L. X. Yang, Y. Z. Wu, Y. X. Ren, C. Y. Shi, S. F. Wang and Z. Y. Jiang, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 548, 309–318 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhou, B. Mousavi, Z. X. Luo, S. Phatanasri, S. Chaemchuen and F. Verpoort, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 952–957 RSC .
J. T. Li, D. L. Luo, C. J. Yang, S. M. He, S. C. Chen, J. W. Lin, L. Zhu and X. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 203, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sadeghi, S. Sharifnia and T. O. Do, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18031–18035 RSC .
K. Zhou, S. Chaemchuen and F. Verpoort, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 79, 1414–1441 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, W. Zhang and K. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705512 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Butburee, Z. X. Sun, A. Centeno, F. Xie, Z. F. Zhao, D. X. Wu, P. Peerakiatkhajohn, S. Thaweesak, H. Q. Wang and L. Z. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 426–433 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Nasir, G. R. Yang, I. Ayub, S. Wang, L. Wang, X. J. Wang, W. Yan, S. J. Peng and S. Ramakarishna, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117855 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5414–5445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang and W. B. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
K. Kneipp, H. Kneipp and J. Kneipp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 443–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Wang, X. K. Gu, X. S. Zheng, H. B. Pan, J. F. Zhu, S. Chen, L. N. Cao, W. X. Li and J. L. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaat6413 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Cao, F. Tao, Y. Tang, Y. T. Li and J. G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4747–4765 RSC .
W. Xia, J. H. Zhu, W. H. Guo, L. An, D. G. Xia and R. Q. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11606–11613 RSC .
Y. Q. Han, H. T. Xu, Y. Q. Su, Z. L. Xu, K. F. Wang and W. Z. Wang, J. Catal., 2019, 370, 70–78 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Wang, J. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Z. Dong, S. L. Li, Y. H. Kan, D. S. Li and Y. Q. Lan, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1726–1732 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, S. Z. Yang, Y. Liu, P. Wang, J. Huang and W. Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8464–8470 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Betard and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1055–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. M. Liu and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13222–13234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O'Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Zhong, M. Ghorbani-Asl, K. H. Ly, J. C. Zhang, J. Ge, M. C. Wang, Z. Q. Liao, D. Makarov, E. Zschech, E. Brunner, I. M. Weidinger, J. Zhang, A. V. Krasheninnikov, S. Kaskel, R. H. Dong and X. L. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. So, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. E. Mondloch, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3501–3510 RSC .
J. G. Santaclara, F. Kapteijn, J. Gascon and M. A. van der Veen, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 4118–4125 RSC .
M. B. Majewski, A. W. Peters, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 598–611 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Wang, L. Li, D. Li and J. H. Ye, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900547 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Yan, B. Ma, S. R. Li, J. X. Liu, R. Chen, M. H. Du, S. Y. Jin, G. L. Zhuang, L. S. Long, X. J. Kong and L. S. Zheng, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 976–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Feng, Y. H. Pi, Y. Song, C. Brzezinski, Z. W. Xu, Z. Li and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 690–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Z. G. Xie, K. E. deKrafft and W. L. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Chae, D. Y. Siberio-Perez, J. Kim, Y. Go, M. Eddaoudi, A. J. Matzger, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 2004, 427, 523–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, F. M. Wisser, J. Canivet, M. Fontecave and C. Mellot-Draznieks, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3315–3322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Garlyyev, K. Kratzl, M. Ruck, J. Michalicka, J. Fichtner, J. M. Macak, T. Kratky, S. Gunther, M. Cokoja, A. S. Bandarenka, A. Gagliardi and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9596–9600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Chen, P. Li, J. W. Zhou, C. T. Buru, L. Dordevic, P. H. Li, X. Zhang, M. M. Cetin, J. F. Stoddart, S. I. Stupp, M. R. Wasielewski and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1768–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Choluj, A. Zielinski, K. Grela and M. J. Chmielewski, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6343–6349 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Stanley, C. Thomas, E. Thyrhaug, A. Urstoeger, M. Schuster, J. Hauer, B. Rieger, J. Warnan and R. A. Fischer, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 871–882 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sayed, L. Y. Zhang and J. G. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125390 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Wu, K. X. Deng, B. Hu, Q. Y. Lu, G. L. Liu and X. L. Hong, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1598–1601 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Zhang, T. Itoi, T. Konishi and Y. Izumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6292–6301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Le, Y. H. Shao and B. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 6108–6115 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Robatjazi, S. M. Bahauddin, C. Doiron and I. Thomann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6155–6161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Robatjazi, S. M. Bahauddin, L. H. Macfarlan, S. D. Fu and I. Thomann, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4546–4553 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Kramer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Knight, N. S. King, L. F. Liu, H. O. Everitt, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 834–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhao, H. C. Pan, Y. B. Lou, X. F. Qiu, J. J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4253–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, C. Y. Jiang, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, R. D. Schaller, D. V. Talapin, E. da Como and J. Feldmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1583–1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rabkin, O. Friedman and Y. Golan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 457, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Zhang, X. Y. Chong, H. Sun, M. M. Kedir, K. J. Kim, P. R. Ohodnicki, A. X. Wang and C. H. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 3069–3078 RSC .
M. Li, J. X. Sun, B. W. Cong, S. Y. Yao and G. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 415, 128868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Liu, C. Y. Zhang, A. Q. Shi, S. X. Zuo, C. Yao, C. Y. Ni and X. Z. Li, Powder Technol., 2022, 396, 615–625 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, L. Wang, X. Chen, X. Zhu, B. Wang, X. Xu, Z. Chen, W. Zhu, H. Li and J. Xia, Green Chemical Engineering, 2022, 3, 157–164 CrossRef .
C. H. Lu, X. R. Li, Q. Wu, J. Li, L. Wen, Y. Dai, B. B. Huang, B. J. Li and Z. Z. Lou, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3529–3539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Wan, M. Q. Chen, M. Ou and Q. Zhong, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 33, 357–364 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jun, S. Choi, M. Y. Yang and Y. S. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17254–17260 RSC .
Z. Zhu, W. R. Huang, C. Y. Chen and R. J. Wu, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 28, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khaletskaya, A. Pougin, R. Medishetty, C. Rosler, C. Wiktor, J. Strunk and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7248–7257 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Lai, W. J. Xiao, Y. S. C. Wang, T. Song, B. Long, S. H. Yin, A. Ali and G. J. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 129295 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, W.-C. D. Yang, A. Bruma and R. Sharma, Microsc. Microanal., 2019, 25, 2024–2025 CrossRef .
H. Yu, C. Sun, Y. Xuan, K. Zhang and K. Chang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132940 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Q. T. Han, Y. Zhou, P. Li, W. G. Tu, L. Q. Tang and Z. G. Zou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 81510–81516 RSC .
S. Neatu, J. A. Macia-Agullo, P. Concepcion and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15969–15976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Feng, M. Wang, Y. Zhou, P. Li, W. G. Tu and Z. G. Zou, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 104416 CrossRef .
E. Z. Liu, L. M. Kang, F. Wu, T. Sun, X. Y. Hu, Y. H. Yang, H. C. Liu and J. Fan, Plasmonics, 2014, 9, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, B. Tahir, N. A. S. Amin and Z. Y. Zakaria, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 18, 250–260 CrossRef CAS .
E. Z. Liu, L. L. Qi, J. J. Bian, Y. H. Chen, X. Y. Hu, J. Fan, H. C. Liu, C. J. Zhu and Q. P. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 68, 203–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhu, Z. X. Xu, W. Y. Jiang, S. X. Zhong, L. H. Zhao and S. Bai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2619–2628 RSC .
Z. Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. W. Cao and C. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25939–25947 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Kang, T. Wang, P. Li, L. Q. Liu, K. Chang, M. Li and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 841–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long, Y. Li, Y. Liu, S. M. Chen, X. S. Zheng, C. Gao, C. H. He, N. S. Chen, Z. M. Qi, L. Song, J. Jiang, J. F. Zhu and Y. J. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4486–4492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kawamura, M. C. Puscasu, Y. Yoshida, Y. Izumi and G. Carja, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 504, 238–247 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Yu, Z. P. Zhang, H. Y. Fang, J. M. Chen, Z. Q. He and S. Song, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2016, 23, 18369–18378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Wang, O. Ranasingha, S. Natesakhawat, P. R. Ohodnicki, M. Andio, J. P. Lewis and C. Matranga, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6968–6974 RSC .
H. Robatjazi, H. Q. Zhao, D. F. Swearer, N. J. Hogan, L. N. Zhou, A. Alabastri, M. J. McClain, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 27 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Marschall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2421–2440 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. K. Putri, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 530–543 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar, A. Lee, T. Lee, M. Lim and D. K. Lim, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1760–1767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Liu, X. G. Meng, T. D. Dao, H. B. Zhang, P. Li, K. Chang, T. Wang, M. Li, T. Nagao and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11545–11549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Q. Li, D. Zhang, N. Q. Su, W. T. Yang, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Zhang, T. Wang, J. J. Wang, H. M. Liu, T. D. Dao, M. Li, G. G. Liu, X. G. Meng, K. Chang, L. Shi, T. Nagao and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Liu, T. D. Dao, L. Q. Liu, X. G. Meng, T. Nagaoa and J. H. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 183–189 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Liu, M. Li, T. D. Dao, Y. Y. Liu, W. Zhou, L. Q. Liu, X. G. Meng, T. Nagao and J. H. Ye, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 398–404 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) CO2 concentrations. (B) Global-mean air surface temperature. (C) Sea-level change.1,3	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Natural photosynthesis. (B) Artificial photosynthesis.11	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Light irradiation-induced plasma oscillation.70	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Dynamics of a PNP during irradiation. (b) Simplified model of the electron cloud.71	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Location of d and s bands and possible d–s and s–s transitions. (b) Energy (E) of s–s and d–s transitions.80	 

 	Fig. 6  Reactant transient electronic excitations by two ways: (a) indirect energy transfer and (b) direct energy transfer.80	 

 	Fig. 7  Reaction of ferricyanide to ferrocyanide via activation enthalpy of one-electron reduction.83	 

 	Fig. 8  Lowering of activation energy barrier in plasmonic catalysis.83	 

 	Fig. 9  Surface-enhanced Raman spectra (SERS) showing anti-Stokes (black) and Stokes (red) spectra for MB/Ag at pH 7 using (a) 532 nm and (b) 785 nm laser and for MB/Ag–Pt at pH 7 using (c) 532 nm and (d) 785 nm laser.84	 

 	Fig. 10  Heating of MB/Ag vibrations via plasmonic stimulation with light.74	 

Pristine AuNPs	AuNPs	Water splitting (2H2O ⇌ 2H2 + O2)	
85

Pristine AgNPs	AgNPs	CO2 to CH3OH	
86

Pristine AgNPs	AgNPs	O2 reduction to O2 and subsequent oxidation of ethylene, CO, NH3	
81

PVP-coated AuNPs	AuNPs	CO2 reduction to CH4, C2H6	
87

CuNPs/graphene oxide	CuNPs	CO2 reduction to CH3OH, CH3CHO	
88

CuNPs/CdS	CuNPs	CO2 reduction to CH4, C2H6, C3H8	
89

CuNPs/Cu2O	CuNPs	Benzyl alcohol + CO2 → benzyl acetate	
90

Dendritic plasmonic colloidosome, black gold	AuNPs	CO2RR, alcohol oxidation, hydrosilylation	
91

AgNPs/N-doped TiO2	AgNPs	O2 evolution from H2O	
92

AuNPs/TiO2	AuNPs	O2 evolution from H2O	
93, 94
AuNPs/SiO2/TiO2	AuNPs	Methylene blue degradation	
95

Au–Ag/TiO2	Au–Ag	H2 evolution and dye degradation	
96

AuNRs/CoO	AuNRs	O2 evolution from H2O	
97

Cu0.4Ag0.6	AgNPs	Methanolysis (H3NBH3 + 4CH3OH → NH4 B(OCH3)4 + 3H2)	
98

AuNPs/TiO2 core shell hollow sphere	AuNPs	CO2 reduction to CH4, C2H6	
99

AuNPs/ZIF-67	AuNPs	CO2 reduction to CH3OH, C2H5OH	
100

AuNPs/WO3	AuNPs	Water splitting (2H2O ⇌ 2H2 + O2)	
101

AlNPs/Al2O3@Pd	AlNPs	C2H2 reduction by H2	
102, 103
AlNPs@Ir	AlNPs	Nitrous oxide splitting (2N2O ⇌ 2N2 + O2)	
104

AuNRs@Pd	AuNRs	Suzuki coupling	
105

Ag@SiO2/Pt	AgNPs	CO oxidation	
106

AgNP–Pdx alloy	AgNPs	CH3OH oxidation	
107

Au triangular nanoprisms (TNP)/cobaloxime	AuTNPs	O2 evolution from H2O	
108


 	Fig. 11  (A) Plasmon-enhanced nanocatalysis to organic transformations.77 (B) Plasmon-derived hot carriers reduce the activation barrier.109 (C) Core–shell–satellite plasmonic photocatalyst and main enhancement mechanisms.110	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Hot electron generation and H2 dissociation on Au NPs. (B) Production rate of HD. (C–E) HD formation rate.82	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) e−/h+ generation in AuNPs. (B) Distribution of hot electrons and their transfer to the antibonding state of H2. (C) Dissociation of H2 on AuNPs.82	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) C–C coupling and the formation of C2H6 caused by the large hot-electron-transfer rate. (B) CH4 and C2H6 formation. (C) Electron transfer process. Schematic of the formation of (D) CH4 and (E) C2H6.87	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Ionic liquid-assisted Au NPs in the CO2RR. (B and C) DFT optimized geometry. (D–F) DFT-computed free energy cost. (G) Turnover frequency. (H) Selectivity of different products.111	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Au–C–M-catalyzed CO2RR. (B) Production rates with different amounts of Co2+. (C) Mass spectrum of 13CO. (D) Production rates with 4 μmol Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+ or Cu2+. (E) Time-resolved transient fluorescence spectra. (F) ESR spectra. (G) Projected density of states of the d-orbitals. (H) Possible CO2 adsorption. (I) Energy profiles. (J) Calculated structures.112	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) In situ SERS measurement. (b) Three types of catalytic NPs. (c) Dark-field scattering image. (d and e) Waterfall plot of in situ SERS spectra. (f–h) SERS spectra.113	 

 	Fig. 18  Different intermediate species formed during the CO2RR.113	 

 	Fig. 19  DFT-computed Raman spectra of intermediate species. (a) Physisorbed CO2. (b) CO2δ− anion with both O atoms facing the Agδ+ surface. (c) CO2δ− anion bound to the Agδ+ surface via both a C and an O atom. (d) HOCO* intermediate bound to the Ag surface via both a C and an O atom. (e) HOCO* intermediate bound to the Ag surface via a C atom. (f) Surface-bound CO* and OH* formed from dissociation of an HOCO* intermediate with both O atoms facing the Ag surface. (g) HCOOδ− bound to the Agδ+ surface via the two O atoms. (h) HCOOH adsorbed on the Ag surface. (i) Schematic model of a possible pathway for CO2 photoreduction on an Ag surface.113	 

 	Fig. 20  Photocatalytic CO2RR mechanism based on DFT calculations. (a) Highest occupied molecular orbital and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of admixture states of CO2 physisorbed on a model Ag surface. (b) Possible reaction pathways for photocatalytic CO2RR on Ag.113	 

 	Fig. 21  (A–D) Product yield and energy band alignment under different experimental conditions. (E) TEM image. (F and G) Electric field intensity. (H and I) Voltage and current density across Au–TiO2.116	 

 	Fig. 22  CO2 methanation using a non-activated catalyst under different experimental conditions. (A) Solar methanation (○) vs. methanation in dark (•) using a nonactivated catalyst. (B) Seven sequential solar methanation runs using a nonactivated catalyst. (C) Solar methanation (○) vs. methanation in dark (•) using an activated catalyst. (D) Measured catalyst temperatures upon illumination. (E) Arrhenius plot displaying observed reaction rates for the methanation at various reactor temperatures and light intensities. Photomethanation at Treactor = 25 °C: (F) Initial rates for the production of methane as a function of light intensity (○) compared to initial rates in dark at the same catalyst temperature (●), and (G) produced amount of CH4 gRu−1 using the preactivated Ru catalyst at 10.1 sun light intensity as a function of reaction time. (H) Reactivity and comparison of photon-to-methane efficiency and Tcat using rodlike vs. spherical Ru-catalysts. (I) Solar spectrum coverage of the experimental Ru catalyst (blue), of the modeled single spherical Ru nanoparticle (red patterned filling), and of the modeled Ru nanorod (red nonpatterned filling) as compared to the AM 1.5 solar spectrum used in the work for sunlight-fueled CO2 methanation (gray).119	 

 	Fig. 23  (a–c) CO and CH4 yield under different experimental light conditions. (d) FDTD result. (e) Effects of PNPs on photocatalytic CO2RR.120	 

 	Fig. 24  CO2 methanation on Rh/TiO2. (A) Schematic representation of photocatalytic CO2RR under direct and indirect illumination. (B) Production rates of methane.121	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Photocatalytic product yields. (B) Energy band alignment.116 (C) UV-light-driven CO2 photoreduction over Au/TiO2 catalysts.140	 

 	Fig. 26  Proposed catalytic reduction of CO2 to methanol and Py to 1,2PyH2 by AuNP/AuNP{H}2 redox couple and Gibbs free-energy profile of the conversion of CO2.150	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) Conversion of CO2 to CH4 with enhanced SPR effect of Au NPs in TNTs.151 (B) (a) Energy band alignment. (b) Photocatalytic CO2RR with H2 over MMT-dispersed Au/TiO2.156	 

 	Fig. 28  (A) The operando-DRIFT spectra of Au/TiO2 during SSITKA experiments under (a) dark, (d) green light with 60% power and (g) green light in full output, 200 °C. The corresponding time-resolved IR peak intensity decays of 12HCO3, 12CO3 in (b) dark, (e) 60% output green light and (h) full power green light. The corresponding 12CO MS signal decays in (c) dark, (f) 60% power green light and (i) full power green light. 12CO MS signal is measured with m/z = 28.0 min represents the moment 12CO2 is switched to 13CO2. (B) DFT calculated reaction profiles of (a) Au/TiO2 reduction by H2 with VO formation and (b) CO2 conversion to CO via redox or carboxyl pathways. (c) pCOHP bonding analyses between O in H2O* at VO site and two adjacent Ti atoms in TiO2 slab. The corresponding configuration is shown in (e). (d) pCOHP bonding analyses of CO in  at VO site of Au/TiO2. The corresponding configuration is shown in (f).157	 

 	Fig. 29  Mechanism for plasmon-assisted CO2RR to C1 and C2 hydrocarbons. (a) Hot-electron-transfer process. (b) Formation of a radical ion intermediate. (c) Simultaneous activation of two CO2 adsorbates.87	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic of (a) enhanced photocatalytic activity of AgNPs decorated TiO2 and (b) gaseous-phase photocatalysis of CO2 + H2O.160	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) In situ NAP-XPS spectra of (a) C1s and (b) O1s signals. (B) Charge dynamic processes in Ag/TiO2 under (a) UV and (b) visible light.147	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) TEM. (b) Band energy positions after charge transfer. (c) Charge transfer mechanism.161	 

 	Fig. 33  CO2 photoreduction to CH4 over (Pt/TiO2)@rGO-n catalysts.162	 

 	Fig. 34  (A) Photothermal coupling factor achieving CO2RR based on Pd-NP-loaded TiO2. (B) Processes of (a) LSPR excitation and (b) hot electron reaction. (C) Reaction process.163	 

 	Fig. 35  (A) Photocatalytic process for CO2RR by H2 to CO on Au/Ag-NPs/TiO2 NWs.166 (B) LSPR effects from AgCu–TNTA and (C) carbene pathway.167	 

 	Fig. 36  (A) Mechanism of photocatalytic CO2RR by bio-templated g-C3N4/Au.178 (B) CO2 photoreduction over Au-CN catalysts.179	 

 	Fig. 37  CO2 photoreduction mechanism of 3-CACeF hybrid photocatalyst.180	 

 	Fig. 38  (A) Self-assembled core–shell nanocomposite catalysts by single-site Co-coordinated g-C3N4 and Au NRs for plasmon-enhanced CO2RR.181 (B) Energy band-structure, charge separation and transfer and the surface redox reactions over the Pt/0.15Sr-CN catalyst.182	 

 	Fig. 39  Enhancing photocatalytic CO2RR performance of g-C3N4-based catalysts with non-noble plasmonic NPs.183	 

 	Fig. 40  (A) Proposed photoreduction mechanism and (B) FDTD simulation results of 3-ZAC with excited light-wavelength at 380 nm (a) and 550 nm (b). (c) The localized electromagnetic field enhancement (|E|/|E0|) of 3-ZAC nano-structure excited by the light with 550 nm wavelength.184	 

 	Fig. 41  (A) Plasmonic Au NPs incorporated in ZIF-67. (B) Mechanism using Aux@ZIF-67.100	 

 	Fig. 42  Structures of (a) Ren-MOF and (b) Ag ⊂ Ren-MOF.187	 

 	Fig. 43  (A) Size engineering of MIL-101(Cr)–Ag hybrids for photocatalytic CO2RR. (B) Electron transfer process.214	 

 	Fig. 44  Mechanism for the CO2RR to CO by ReX(CO)3(4,4′-dcbpy) in (a) Re@MIL and (b) Re–Ru@MIL. (c) Studied MIL-101-NH2(Al) and molecular complexes for photocatalytic CO2RR.232	 

 	Fig. 45  Photogenerated charge carrier pathways and CO2RR mechanism over Cu–Cu2O by (a) excitation of Cu2O CB and (b) Cu LSPR.233	 

 	Fig. 46  Proposed intermediate species starting from CO2 and H2 to CO during CO2 exchange and photocatalytic CO2RR.235	 

 	Fig. 47  Plasmon-induced CO2 conversion on Al@Cu2O: a DFT study.236	 

 	Fig. 48  (A) Proposed photocatalytic reduction mechanism based on MoO3−x/H-Pal composite under (a) solar light and (b) NIR light irradiation.247 (B) (a) In situ FT-IR spectra of Au/BiOBr. (b) Photocatalytic mechanism of Au/BiOBr.248	 

 	Fig. 49  (A) Constructing SPR on Bi2WO6 to boost high-selective CO2RR for CH3OH.249 (B) Photocatalytic CO2RR mechanism over Ag-decorated SrTiO3.250	 

 	Fig. 50  (A) Illustrations of (a) structure and (b) band diagram of the photocatalyst.251 (B) CO2 photoreduction over the fabricated Pd–Au/TiO2–WO3.252 (C) Photocatalytic CO2RR on Cu@Co sample.254	 

 	Fig. 51  (a) Structure of STO/Cu @ Ni/TiN. (b) Free energy diagram for CO2RR to C2H5OH and C2H4 at the Cu@Ni interface. (c) Free energy diagram for the CO2RR to C2H5OH and C2H4 on the Cu {1 0 0} surface.256	 

Au/TiO2 film	
λ = 532 nm, H2O vapor	CH4	0.06	1.49	Twenty four	2.1 × 10−5	
116

Au/TiO2	Full spectrum, H2O vapor	CH4	1.33	2.52	1.89	
	
99

C2H6	0	1.67	

Au/TiO2	
λ > 420 nm, H2O vapor	CH4	≈0	0.039	
	
	
257

CO	≈0	0.049
Au/TiO2/MMT	Full spectrum, CO2/H2 1:1	CH4	1.10	12	10.91	
	
156

CO	51	1223	23.99
(Au–Cu)/TiO2	Full spectrum, H2O vapor	CH4	0	44	8	
	
258

H2	2	16
Au/TiO2	
λ > 455 nm, H2O vapor	CH4	≈0	0.107	
	
	
140

CO	≈0	0.017
Ag/TiO2	
λ > 420 nm, H2O vapor	CH4	0.4	7.6	19	
	
259

Ag/TiO2	
λ > 400 nm, H2O liquid	CH3 OH	14.37	135.07	9.4	
	
260

Ag/TiO2	Visible light, CO2/H2 1:1	CH4	2.66	9.73	3.66	0.006	
261

CO	9	983	109.22	0.150
CH3 OH	≈0	13	
	0.01
Cu/TiO2	
λ > 420 nm, H2O liquid	CH3 OH	0.28	1.8	6.43	
	
262

Cu/TiO2 film	
λ = 365 nm, H2O vapor	CH4	1.45	2.91	2.0	
	
165

Pd/TiO2	400 nm < λ < 780 nm, H2O vapor	H2	≈0	0.18	
	
	
263

CO	≈0	0.32
(Au–Pt)/TiO2	Full spectrum, H2O vapor	CH4	0.01	0.19	19	
	
264

CO	0.02	0.08	4
(Au, Cu)/SrTiO3/TiO2	Full spectrum, N2H4·H2O vapor	CH4	≈8.5	15.49	≈1.82	2.51	
265

CO	≈12	138.6	≈11.55	

(Pd–Cu)/TiO2	
λ < 400 nm, H2O vapor	CH4	0.66	19.60	29.70	
	
266

CO	0.94	1.90	2.02
H2	1.00	1.45	1.45
Ag/LDHs	
λ > 400, CO2/H2 1:9.4	CH3 OH	Total 0.13	0.22	1.69	
	
267

CO
AgCl/Ag	
λ ≥ 400 nm, NaHCO3 aqueous solution	CH3OH	
	37.74	
	0.893	
86

Ag/Ag2SO3	
λ > 400 nm, H2O vapor	CO	≈0	1.24	
	0.258	
268

CH4	≈0	3.01
Au/ZnO	
λ = 532 nm, CO2/H2 1:3	CO	
	≈4.00	
	0.03	
269

CH4	≈0.22
Au/g-C3N4	Full spectrum, H2O vapor	CO	10.47	13.17	1.26	
	
179

CH4	0.34	3.10	9.12
Al/Cu2O	400 < λ < 850 nm, CO2/H2 1:1	CO	≈18	360	20	0.35	
270

Ag/AgBr/g-C3N4	Visible light, H2O vapor	CH4	0.26	1.09	4.19	
	
271

Au/CdS/TiO2	Full spectrum, H2O vapor	H2	4.3	41.6	9.67	
	
272

CO	4.6	0.6	0.13
CH4	1.8	41.6	23.11
r-GO–Au NPs	Visible light, H2O liquid	HCOOH	0.2	1.52	7.6	1.52	
273

(Rh–Au)/SBA-15	490 nm < λ < 550 nm, CH4/CO2 1:1	CO	
	4050	
	
	
274

H2	3700
Rh/Al2O3	
λ = 365 nm, CO2/H2 1:5.5	CH4	≈0	≈5.97	
	
	
275

CO	≈0	≈0.2
Fe/SiO2	Full spectrum, CO2/H2 1:1	CO	≈0	5546	
	
	
276

Ag/Ren/MOF	
λ > 400 nm, acetonitrile/triethylamine 20:1	CO	≈0.013	≈0.091	7	
	
187

Ni/Al2O3	300 nm < λ < 800 nm, CH4/CO2 1:1	H2	
	≈122	
	19.0	
277

CO	≈130
(Pd–Au)/Al2O3	
λ > 420 nm, CH4/CO2 1:1	CO	≈1900	≈2100	1.11	
	
278

H2	≈1740	≈1830	1.05

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
