Nanostructured hematite: synthesis, characterization, charge carrier dynamics, and photoelectrochemical properties  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE00001F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE00001F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6682-6702Nanostructured hematite: synthesis, characterization, charge carrier dynamics, and photoelectrochemical properties

        
          
            Damon A. 
            Wheeler
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gongming 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yichuan 
            Ling
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yat 
            Li
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jin Z. 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA. E-mail: yatli@ucsc.edu; zhang@ucsc.edu;   Tel: +1 (831) 459-3776  Tel: +1 (831) 459-1952
Received 
      1st January 2012
    , Accepted 6th March 2012First published on 16th April 2012AbstractAs one of the most prevalent metal oxides on Earth, iron oxide, especially α-Fe2O3 or hematite, has been the subject of intense research for several decades. In particular, the combination of a relatively small bandgap and related visible light absorption, natural abundance, low cost, and stability under deleterious chemical conditions has made it ideal for many potential applications. However, the short charge carrier lifetime or diffusion length has limited its applicability. Nanostructures of hematite offer the possibility of overcoming some of the limitations through control of the structures and thereby its optical and electronic properties. In this review, we provide an overview of recent progress on the synthesis and characterization of nanostructured hematite, with an emphasis on the charge carrier dynamics and photoelectrochemical properties. Both current challenges and future opportunities are also discussed.Damon A. WheelerDamon A. Wheeler is currently a 3rd year PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at UC Santa Cruz. He received his BS degree in chemical engineering from New Mexico Tech in 2007 and is currently a PhD candidate in Prof. Jin Zhang's laboratory. His recent research focuses on the optical and dynamic properties of metal, metal oxide, and semiconductor nanomaterials and their applications in solar energy conversion and photothermal ablation therapy. He is a member of the ACS and AAAS.Gongming WangGongming Wang earned his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2008. He joined the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department at University of California, Santa Cruz, in the fall of 2008. He is currently a PhD candidate in Professor Yat Li's group. His research focuses on nanostructured metal oxides for photoelectrochemical applications.Yichuan LingYichuan Ling is currently a 3rd year PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at UC Santa Cruz. He received his BS degree in chemistry from Fudan University, Shanghai, in 2009. His recent research focuses on metal oxide nanomaterials and their applications in solar energy conversion, and group III–V semiconductor synthesis under the guidance of Prof. Yat Li.Yat LiYat Li received his BS and PhD in chemistry from the University of Hong Kong. Following a postdoctoral appointment in the group of Prof. Charles Lieber at Harvard University, he joined the University of California, Santa Cruz, as Assistant Professor of Chemistry in 2007. His research focuses on design and synthesis of semiconductor metal oxide nanowires and investigation of their fundamental properties and explores their potentials for solar energy conversion.Jin Z. ZhangJin Zhong Zhang is a professor of chemistry and biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC). He received his BSc degree in chemistry from Fudan University, Shanghai, and PhD in physical chemistry from the University of Washington. His PhD work focused on experimental and theoretical studies of molecular reaction dynamics in the gas phase. He was a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of California, Berkeley, from 1989 to 1992, where he studied reaction dynamics in solutions using ultrafast laser and computer simulation techniques. In 1992, he joined the faculty at UCSC, where he is currently full professor of chemistry and biochemistry. Zhang's recent research interests focus on design, synthesis, characterization, and exploration of applications of advanced materials including semiconductor, metal oxide, and metal nanomaterials, with emphasis on their optical properties and dynamic properties as well as applications in solar energy conversion and biomedical detection/therapy. He has authored over 200 publications and two books. He is a fellow of AAAS, APS, and ACS, and has served as senior editor for JPC since 2004.

Broader context
Because of the ever-growing demand for cleaner and more environmentally benign sources of energy, hydrogen has emerged as a leading candidate as an alternative clean fuel to help reduce our current dependency on fossil fuels due to its low density, high energy density, and favorable side-products upon burning. To that end, photoelectrochemical water splitting represents a promising method to achieve sustainable and appealing solar-to-hydrogen energy conversion. A key challenge related to photoelectrochemical water splitting is the quest to identify and characterize suitable photoelectrode materials that will readily facilitate hydrogen generation from water splitting. From this, nanostructured hematite (α-Fe2O3) has shown itself to be an excellent candidate due to its abundance, low cost, chemical stability, and favorable bandgap energy. This review provides an overview of the fundamentals of photoelectrochemical water splitting, the synthesis of a variety of shapes, sizes, and morphologies of hematite, its optical characterization, charge carrier dynamics, and photoelectrochemical properties.

1. Introduction
The rapid increase in population has resulted in an ever-growing demand for energy. Over the years, we have met our energy needs by exploiting two main sources: natural gas and crude oil. However, this is not a recipe for the successful and continuous growth of the world. Because of this, seeking renewable and sustainable energy sources is the defining problem of our time. Many varieties of sustainable energy sources exist, including solar, wind, hydropower, and geothermal. Efficient conversion of solar energy into useful forms is particularly important due to the huge amount of energy available. The solar energy flux reaching the Earth's surface each year is about 125000 TW. The successful harvesting of merely 0.04% of the solar energy in order to produce 50 TW of energy would be sufficient to cover global energy needs.
Solar energy can be converted into electrical energy or provide access to chemical energy stored in fuels such as hydrogen. When compared to fossil fuels, hydrogen represents a potentially high-efficiency and environmentally benign fuel.1–4 Owing to its low density (∼0.089 g L−1), the energy density of hydrogen is much higher than that of other fuel sources, such as gasoline. In fact, it is well-known that on a per-gram basis, hydrogen can produce approximately four times more energy than methane. Furthermore, hydrogen is a chemical fuel that can react with oxygen in a hydrogen fuel cell to produce electricity, with water as a side product. Therefore, production of hydrogen in an environment-friendly and effective way is highly desirable.
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting represents a promising and environmentally benign method for solar hydrogen generation, and has been studied for decades. More importantly, water splitting is a clean reaction that would not produce undesired carbon-based byproducts. Water splitting is known to be a thermodynamically uphill or endothermic process and is represented by:H2O(l) → H2(g) + ½O2(g) (ΔG ≈ 237.2 kJ mol−1, E0 = 1.23 V vs. NHE)
A minimal potential of 1.23 V is needed for the reaction to proceed. In this regard, a PEC cell consisting of at least one semiconductor photoelectrode that can directly harvest solar energy for water splitting is necessary. A key challenge for PEC water splitting is identification of a suitable photoanode that can satisfy several key criteria, including favorable bandgap energy, bandedge positions, chemical stability, raw material, and fabrication cost.
The utilization of metal oxide semiconductors as photoelectrode materials was borne out through the work of Fujishima and Honda in 1972.5 Since then, research has exploded, utilizing WO3,6–10 ZnO,11–13 and TiO214–20 as metal oxides of choice for PEC applications. Furthermore, the rapid development in the synthesis of nanomaterials and nanodevice fabrication has opened up new opportunities in the field. The use of nanomaterial-based photoelectrodes for water-splitting dates back to the work by Fitzmaurice et al., who used a nanostructured TiO2 membrane sensitized with ruthenium-based complexes.21 Nanomaterials including zero-dimensional (OD) and one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures (e.g., nanoparticles, nanowires and nanotubes) with unique structural morphology and size-associated properties offer potential advantages over their bulk counterparts in several different manners. First, nanostructures provide a large semiconductor–electrolyte interface wherein the redox reactions can take place, which could facilitate the charge separation. Second, nanostructures provide a short diffusion length for minority carriers, compared to planar structures. Third, the quantum size confinement in nanomaterials can be potentially used to manipulate the bandgap energy of the semiconductor, as compared to bulk materials.
Among the many metal oxide semiconductors that have been studied for usage as a PEC anode, hematite (α-Fe2O3) has received considerable attention due to its abundance, low cost, excellent chemical stability, and favourable bandgap energy of 1.9–2.2 eV. However, hematite has a very short excited state lifetime (∼1 ps)22–24 and a small hole diffusion length (∼2 to 4 nm)25 that significantly limits its efficiency in charge separation and collection as a PEC anode. In addition, the conduction band of hematite lies below the H2 evolution potential, and therefore an external bias is required for PEC hydrogen generation at the cathode. These intrinsic material limitations of hematite result in a much lower solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency compared to the theoretical value. Therefore, the utilization of hematite materials for efficient, cost-effective and sustainable PEC water splitting still represents significant challenges at both the conceptual and device levels.
Various strategies have been developed to overcome the aforementioned limitations of hematite photoanodes, two of which are the promising approaches of utilizing nanostructured materials and elemental doping to manipulate their structural, electronic and optical properties. In this review, we will focus primarily on the recent progress in the synthesis and characterization of nanostructured and element-doped hematite, as well as their implementation as PEC photoanodes with particular emphasis on their charge carrier dynamics and photoelectrochemical properties.
2. Synthesis
In the last few years, enormous efforts have been made to develop highly photoactive, nanostructured hematite photoanodes. Here we provide a brief overview of several recent synthetic methods for nanostructured hematite materials. This section is meant to provide a good overview of recent advances in synthetic methodology for hematite nanostructures and is not meant to be wholly thorough.
2.1 Solution phase synthetic methods
The solution-based method is a facile and scalable method to fabricate nanostructures. α-Fe2O3, with different morphologies such as nanoparticles,26 nanowires,27–29 nanotubes,30–34 hollow spheres,35–38 and nanoflowers,39–41 has been fabricated via solution-based methods42–44 such as hydrothermal,27,45,46 solvothermal40,47,48 and sol–gel49–51 routes. For example, Zhong et al. utilized a solvothermal method to synthesize 3D flower-like hematite nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 1a, by using an ethylene glycol-mediated self-assembly process.40 Vayssieres et al. grew porous α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays (Fig. 1b) on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conducting glass via a hydrothermal method.28 These methods demonstrated that morphological control of α-Fe2O3 can be achieved by using different solvents. The sol–gel method is another simple and economical method to fabricate hematite nanostructures.50,51 Woo et al. reported the growth of α-Fe2O3 nanorods with a very small size of 7–24 nm50 by the sol–gel method involving the sol–gel reaction in reverse micelles followed by crystallization in reflux.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM image of 3D flower-like a-Fe2O3 nanostructure synthesized via a solvothermal method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. (b) SEM image of α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays synthesized by a hydrothermal method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. 
2.2 Vapor phase deposition methods
Gas deposition synthesis includes physical vapor evaporation, chemical vapor deposition, atomic layer deposition, and reactive sputtering. Gas deposition methods have been extensively applied in various nanostructured and thin film fabrications, including hematite and others.52–56 α-Fe2O3, with different morphologies such as nanowires, nanorod arrays, nano-dendritic structures and thin films, has been achieved using gas phase deposition.54,55,57–62 For example, Wu et al. recently reported the growth of vertically aligned α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays on a silicon substrate using metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).57 The as-prepared α-Fe2O3 nanorods were single crystalline. Furthermore, Cesar et al. fabricated perpendicularly oriented dendritic silicon-doped α-Fe2O3 nanostructures (Fig. 2) using atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD).59 The as-prepared dendritic α-Fe2O3 nanostructures exhibit large surface area, and good contact between the α-Fe2O3 and the growth substrate, which is critical for charge carrier transfer. Moreover, atomic layer deposition is a unique method to fabricate tunable ultra-thin films with high crystal quality. Lin et al. used ALD to deposit a high-quality, ultra-thin α-Fe2O3 film on TiSi2 nanonets (Fig. 3).55 The film thickness is comparable to the diffusion length of minority carriers. TiSi2 nanonets were used as templates for the deposition of α-Fe2O3 film and served as a conducting network to facilitate the charge transport.
 Fig. 2  Cross-sectional SEM images of 500 nm thick mesoporous Si-doped α-Fe2O3 films grown by APCVD on a FTO conducting glass. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the designed core–shell Fe2O3–TiSi2 nanonets. (b and c) TEM and HRTEM images of Fe2O3–TiSi2 core@shell structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. 
Reactive sputtering is another commonly used method for thin film materials. Hahn et al. used a reactive ballistic deposition method to fabricate α-Fe2O3 thin films. The film morphology can be tuned by deposition angles by taking advantage of ballistic shadowing.63 Gas-based methods can also be used to fabricate nanostructures in combination with templates. For example, hematite nanotube arrays were prepared by deposition of hematite onto ZnO nanowire arrays or on anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) templates, followed by the removal of ZnO or AAO.64
Although high quality nanostructured hematite films have been prepared by vapor phase deposition methods, each technique has its own drawbacks. For example, the iron precursors used in MOCVD and APCVD methods are typically flammable and highly toxic. While ALD is able to grow ultrathin single-crystal hematite films, it comes with a higher fabrication cost compared to solution-based methods.
2.3 Thermal oxidation and thermal pyrolysis
Thermal oxidation and pyrolysis are important approaches for the synthesis of nanostructured α-Fe2O3. Thermal oxidation of iron metal is the most direct approach to obtain α-Fe2O3.65–73 By controlling the oxidation parameters, different morphologies of α-Fe2O3 have been synthesized, including nanoparticles, nanowires, and nanoflakes.65,72 For example, Rao and Zheng used a flame synthesis technique to fabricate densely aligned α-Fe2O3 nanoflake arrays.65 The morphologies of α-Fe2O3 can be manipulated with the end result being differences in nanoflake widths and lengths by changing various synthetic parameters, such as annealing temperature and atmosphere. Furthermore, hematite thin films can be prepared by thermal pyrolysis. For example, spray pyrolysis is one of the most common methods to deposit thin films. By spraying an iron precursor solution such as FeCl3 or iron organic precursors such as iron acetylacetonate on a heated substrate,74 the iron precursor decomposes during thermal treatment in air to form hematite. Duret and Gratzel further extended this approach to fabricate mesoscopic α-Fe2O3 leaflet films by using ultrasonic spray pyrolysis resulting in films with higher photoactivity relative to conventional spray pyrolysis techniques.71 Wang et al. used a deposition–annealing process to deposit α-Fe2O3 film onto FTO glass, as shown in Fig. 4a.75 Particle sizes and thicknesses of the thin films can be tuned by controlling deposition cycle numbers and precursor concentrations in this process. While the preparations of α-Fe2O3 nanostructures with different morphologies such as nanowires and nanorod arrays have been demonstrated by using vapor phase and solution-based methods, thermal pyrolysis methods have mainly been used for the growth of nanoparticle thin films.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of deposition–annealing method for α-Fe2O3. (b–f) SEM images of mesoporous α-Fe2O3 films prepared by using various FeCl3 concentrations in a range of 5–80 mM; scale bars are 500 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. 
2.4 Electrochemical methods
Electrochemical methods have been used extensively to fabricate nanostructure by electrochemical deposition and electrochemical anodization. A typical example is electrochemical deposition of nanorod arrays into anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) templates. AAO templates exhibit ordered and vertically aligned 1D channel structures after which the AAO template can be easily removed using acidic or basic solutions. Mao et al. have recently used an electrochemical deposition method to deposit iron into AAO template channels and subsequently removed the AAO template using a NaOH solution, followed by thermal oxidation converting the as-prepared iron nanorod arrays into Fe2O3.76,77
Without using AAO templates, electrochemical deposition has been used for forming hematite nanoparticle thin films.78–81 Additionally, electrochemical anodization has been used in the synthesis of hematite nanotube arrays.82–84 α-Fe2O3 nanotube arrays were prepared by anodization of iron foil in an ethylene glycol electrolyte solution containing NH4F and deionized water at a voltage of 30–60 V.84Fig. 5 shows the as-prepared α-Fe2O3 nanotube arrays fabricated by the electrochemical anodization.84 The anodization technique has also been employed for making nanoporous Ti–Fe–O materials from a Ti–Fe alloy foil.83 Although a variety of impressive hematite nanostructures can be obtained by electrochemical methods, they are typically polycrystalline materials.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) Top view and side view of α-Fe2O3 nanotube arrays synthesized by electrochemical anodization methods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. 
3. Structural and morphological properties
Owing to their small particle size, nanostructured iron oxides are typically examined by TEM and SEM. While SEM provides a 3D image and information regarding morphology and nanotopographical data, TEM provides a 2D image and is applied to very small crystals. High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) provides additional structural information and is used to follow phase transformations.85,86
In relation to α- and γ-Fe2O3, EM shows that flame-spray pyrolysis-synthesized particles transformed from spherical (∼7 nm particles) to irregularly edged particles (∼10 nm) and finally to hexagonal and octagonal particle shapes (13–53 nm).87 For smaller particles, the lack of well-defined crystal edges is a direct result of the minimization of surface energy. However, as the particle size increases, proper growth of lattice planes can occur and is governed by the tendency to assume minimal surface energy and growth kinetics of each plane. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterning supports this by showing sharper and an increasing number of diffraction pattern rings with increasing particle size. Finally, EM shows that for particles of at least 53 nm, twinning occurs since bulk crystal defect sites grow in, suggesting an acute change in the direction of crystal growth. AFM can also bring forth interesting structural information in Fe2O3. For platelet growth, for example, the small axial ratio of tapping mode AFM can corroborate thin (4.5 nm) structures despite broad (57 nm) platelet diameters. More importantly, the homogeneous thickness (ranging from 2–8 nm) suggests a 2D preferential growth of flame-spray pyrolysis particles. The EM and AFM images are shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  (a–d, top) Bright field TEM images of Fe2O3 particles of various sizes. The insets show electron diffraction patterns. (a and b, middle) Single-crystal selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns and their corresponding bright field HRTEM images for Fe2O3 of 53 nm size. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Red images: AFM images of iron oxide sourced from various iron precursors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. 
High-resolution analysis of α-Fe2O3 nanowires in another study89 shows two interesting findings. First, the effect on high-temperature sintering yields a previously unseen roughness in nanowires. The nanowires, before sintering, were seen to be dense and smooth. High-temperature treatment afforded an abrupt change to a porous and polycrystalline form. Second, high-temperature treatment decreases crystallite size to the 4–5 nm range. It is possible that this is toward the lower end of crystallite size, considering the relatively high temperature of 350 °C. In addition to these findings, fundamental structural properties are noticed, including the lattice spacing of hematite: 2.3 Å for the (006) plane and 2.5 Å for the (110) plane. These images are shown in Fig. 7. Furthermore, recent HRTEM analyses of hematite nanowires show that the [110] direction is the preferred growth direction for hematite nanowires and corresponds to a thermal mechanism of growth arising from the compaction of precursor Fe powder.90
 Fig. 7  Low resolution (a and b) and high resolution (c and d) TEM images of Fe2O3 nanowires. Note the porous nature of the nanowire as well as the high degree of polycrystallinity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. 
Besides phase identification, XRD provides information regarding crystal size, quality, structural parameters, and isomorphous substitution of Fe by other trivalent cations. A full account of the theory and practice of XRD is provided elsewhere.91,92 This section, therefore, will provide a brief account of features relevant for the characterization of iron oxides. The strongest XRD peaks for the different iron oxides are presented in Table 1.93
Table 1 Strongest XRD peaks for various iron oxides




Mineral name/formula
Hematite α-Fe2O3
Maghemite γ-Fe2O3
Goethite α-FeOOH
Akaganeite β-FeOOH
Magnetite Fe3O4


Crystal system
Trigonal
Cubic or tetragonal
Orthorhombic
Monoclinic, β = 90.24°
Cubic


Most intense XRD spacings, nm
0.270, 0.368, 0.252
0.252, 0.295
0.418, 0.245, 0.269
0.333, 0.255, 0.7467
0.253, 0.297




Deviations from the unit cell parameters obtained from an X-ray diffractogram of a pure phase may be used to quantify the extent of Fe substitution by other cations, provided the ionic radius of the foreign cations differs sufficiently from that of Fe3+ and the level of substitution is not too low. If, however, the crystals are small (typically below 100 nm) or show structural disorder, the broadening of the reflection becomes great. For example, the plate structure of small hematite crystals is reflected by broad hkl lines.94 Non-isodimensional structures (plates and rods) tend to show preferred orientation which changes the relative intensities of the peaks. From such changes, information regarding the shape of the iron oxide crystals may be obtained.94
Hematite structures studied using XRD have shown interesting results.94 Non-uniform broadening of peaks is suggested to be due to shape anisotropy of the particles. Another possible explanation is that, since the effect diminishes with increasing temperature, there is a correlation to some crystal imperfections, strains, or faults which occur at low temperatures. However, anisotropy of the material should lead to large differences in crystallite size, dependent upon the orientation of the diffracting planes. Additionally, in hcp structures, stacking faults are known to occur in the c-direction, such that line broadening occurs from fault domains. Therefore, non-uniform broadening can be related to stacking faults attributed to the packing of oxygen layers. Nevertheless, the good correlation between particle shape and non-uniform broadening in hematite suggests that – even at low temperature – the effect of particle shape anisotropy is predominant. Other studies have conducted XRD characterization on hematite nanowires and found peaks that can be unambiguously indexed to rhombohedral hematite with a = 5.038 Å and c = 13.772 Å.90
With respect to iron oxide, Raman spectra can also provide information regarding the sample quality, presence of any dopants, and crystallographic orientation. Typical Raman peaks for various iron oxides are presented in Table 2, where the bold and underlined refer to the strongest and next strongest bands, respectively.95
Table 2 Typical Raman peaks for hematite iron oxide as well as some of its precursor iron oxides, ferrihydrite and δ-FeOOH. The bold and underlined values refer to the strongest and next strongest bands, respectively93




δ-FeOOH
297; 392; 


Ferrihydrite
; 510; 710


Hematite
; 245; 292; 411; 497; 612




In particular, the spectra of the iron oxides are compatible with octahedrally coordinated Fe3+.95 Interestingly, this study showed that 2-line ferrihydrite and schwertmannite transform to hematite via a maghemite intermediate under heating from a HeNe laser source; yet, 6-line ferrihydrite transforms directly to hematite with no intermediate formation. This suggests that the disordered component of the 2-line ferrihydrite transforms to maghemite. For the schwertmannite scenario, the loss on heating of the sulfate entails the simultaneous conversion of OH− ions to O2−. It had been previously established that one end point of the crystallization of 2-line ferrihydrite is a cubic stacking of close packed oxide–hydroxide layers. From this, it is understandable that, upon heating, a transformation to maghemite occurs since it is tetrahedrally coordinated.
4. Optical and electronic properties
4.1 Optical absorption in near UV to near IR
The optical absorption properties of hematite have been well studied.96–103 A typical optical absorption spectrum of α-Fe2O3 is shown in Fig. 8. Four absorption regions can be classified as follows. The absorption bands in region 1 (250–400 nm) are due to the LMCT transitions (direct transitions) with combined contributions from the Fe3+ ligand field transitions 6A1(6S) to 4T1(4P) at 290–310 nm, 6A1(6S) to 4E(4D) and 6A1(6S) to 4T1(4D) at 360–380 nm.104 Region 2 (400–600 nm) is assigned to the pair excitation processes 6A1(6S) + 6A1(6S) to 4T1(4G) + 4T1(4G) at 485–550 nm, and is most likely overlapped by the contributions of 6A1(6S) to 4E, 4A1(4G) ligand field transitions at 430 and the LMCT transition band tail.96,97 Region 3 (600–780 nm) corresponds to the 6A1(6S) to 4T2(4G) ligand field transition at about 640 nm, while region 4 (750–900 nm) is the 6A1(6S) to 4T1(4G) ligand field transition at about 900 nm.96,97 Among these interband transitions, the double exciton process (6A1(6S) + 6A1(6S) to 4T1(4G) + 4T1(4G)) yields the strongest absorption band at around 535 nm; thus, it is primarily responsible for the red color of hematite.
 Fig. 8  (a) Absorption and (b) reflectance spectra of the α-Fe2O3 nanocrystals of different sizes, where α-12, α-23, and α-48 express particle size is 12 nm, 23 nm and 48 nm, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. 
4.2 Size and shape effect on optical transition
The apparent color of hematite nanostructures depends significantly on the phase, size, and the shape of the structure.105–111 Wang et al. found that polyhedral hematite particles with an approximate size of 0.3 μm had a maroon color, while platelet particles of 3 nm in diameter showed a purple color.105 Recently, Chen et al. performed a systemic investigation on apparent color change of a variety of hematite nanocrystals from bloody brown to dark brown.106 The intensity of reflectance was highly shape-dependent due to some specific surface planes that possess higher reflectance ability than other surface planes.106 The difference of intensity of reflection in a range of wavelengths will dominate the apparent color of hematite. The spectra show a very low reflectance of hematite particles from 400 to 550 nm, and a sharp increase at around 550 nm indicated that the bandgap was around 2.2 eV. Wang and co-workers also reported the optical properties of hydrothermally synthesized hematite particles studied using diffuse reflectance spectroscopy.105 In the near-infrared region (700–1200 nm), the band at ∼850 nm was attributed to the 6A1 to 4T1 ligand field transition.105 The bands in the visible spectrum region from 400 to 700 nm were believed to result from spin-forbidden ligand field transition together with the spin-flip transition among the 2t2g states.105 The weak absorption bands in the ultraviolet region from 200 to 400 nm were attributed to ligand-to-metal charge transfer between the O(2p) orbitals and the Fe3+ 2t2g and 3eg orbitals.112
Later, He et al. investigated the size-dependent optical absorption of α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles with crystal sizes of 5, 12, and 48 nm dispersed in SiO2 powders.97 The result showed a blue-shift with a relative intensity reduction of absorption in the pair excitation process region (400–600 nm) with reducing particle size: the absorption band shifted from 533 nm for 48 nm nanoparticles, 510 nm for 12 nm nanoparticles, to 488 nm for 5 nm nanoparticles. This blue-shift was in agreement with the earlier reports that the absorption edge blue-shifted with decreasing size for hematite nanoparticles.113,114
The similar size-dependent blue-shift of this band (400–600 nm) was also observed in a recent work of shape-controlled single-crystalline hematite nanotubes.99 These hollow hematite nanocrystals exhibited two bands at ∼450 nm and ∼550 nm in the measured region (300–1000 nm). The band at ∼450 nm was blue-shifted to ∼385 nm as the length of hollow nanocrystals was reduced with a morphology change from nanotube to nanoring.99 These results were attributed to the finite size effect.115 Moreover, the blue-shift of the absorption band due to pair excitation is shape-dependent as well when the particle size is comparable with the incident wavelength. The shape-induced optical properties were also observed in the absorption of CuO shuttle-like nanoparticles,96 and in the polarized Raman spectroscopy and anisotropic electron–phonon coupling of CdS nanowires.116 The absorption band shift of different-shaped hematite structures could be attributed to the anisotropic effects as the distribution of dipole and electric fields together with the finite size effect will be changed with the aspect ratio of hematite nanotubes.99
4.3 Photoluminescence
It is well-known that bulk Fe2O3 does not show photoluminescence (PL) due to the local forbidden d–d transition, resonant energy transfer between cations, and efficient lattice and magnetic relaxations.117 However, PL from the self-trapped states can be observed in hematite nanostructure due to their size-associated optical properties.118 The quantum confinement effect results in the delocalization and quantization of the electronic state in the nanostructures and relaxes the forbidden rule for d–d transitioning,119 and, thus, the optical transition is partially allowed. The magnetic relaxations will also become much weaker within hematite nanoparticles due to more 3d–4sp hybridization and quantization,118 leading to long-lived-excited states. Finally, the hematite nanoparticle has a local collapse of the Fe magnetic moment and strong local lattice distortion in the strong antiferromagnetic background, which could generate luminescence after photoexcitation.118
Zou and coworkers observed strong PL from hematite nanoparticles with sizes of <20 nm either in the form of a hydrosol suspended in water or in the form of organosol-capped nanoparticles with surfactants suspended in toluene.118,120 Hematite nanoparticles in water showed the dominant bandedge emission around 575 nm, while the capped nanoparticles exhibit broader Gaussian-fit emissions around 590 nm. The shift of emission wavelength was attributed to a stronger 3d–4sp hybridization in capped nanoparticles in toluene than in nanoparticles in water.117
Additionally, Cherepy et al. observed an emission band at ∼400 nm (excited at 300 nm) from spindle-shaped hematite nanostructures with a dimensionality of 1 × 5 nm.113 It is intriguing because such an emission (400 nm) above the bandgap energy of hematite was rarely detected. The ∼400 nm emission band was attributed to the ligand-to-metal charge-transfer (LMCT) transitions (direct transitions)113 since there was no measurable emission induced by the Fe3+ ligand field and exciton pair transitions (indirect transitions)96 in the visible region.
The examples show that the absorption and emission properties of hematite are closely related to their size and morphology. The absorption bands in the UV to near IR of hematite are due to the Fe3+ ligand field transitions, pair exciton transitions, and the ligand-to-metal charge-transfer (LMCT) transitions. The quantum size effect results in the delocalization and quantization of the electronic state in the nanostructures, resulting in a change in the absorption and photoluminescence (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Absorption (s) and emission spectra excited at 300 nm () and excited at 390 nm () of (a) γ-Fe2O3 (maghemite) and (b) α-Fe2O3 (hematite). The pump wavelength of 390 nm used in the ultrafast measurements is also shown. Two absorption spectra are shown for each sample; the samples with OD ≈ 1 were used in the pump–probe experiments, while the spectra for the dilute samples are used to show the absorption line shape. The inset shows the excitation spectrum for emission detected at 400 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. 
4.4 XPS and EXAFS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) involves detection and analysis of the photoelectrons produced by interaction of X-rays with matter. The kinetic energy is measured by plotting the measured photoelectron intensity as a function of the binding energy. Each element has its own characteristic set of binding energies and therefore spectral lines. The iron oxides have characteristic Fe(2p3/2) and (2p1/2) lines as well as the O(1s) line which are the most commonly scanned.121–123 For iron oxides, the main use of this technique is to provide information regarding the oxidation and structural state parameters and to determine the surface composition to a depth of ∼10 nm. The spectra gave peak maxima for Fe(2p3/2) at 711.5 ± 0.1 eV and for O(1s) at 530.0 ± 0.1 eV along with shoulders at 531.3 ± 0.1 eV. For iron oxides (other than FeOOH), the O(1s) peaks do not vary and the Fe peaks are so closely spaced that unambiguous differentiation between oxides in a mixture is difficult. The technique, however, is useful for the investigation of adsorbed species on the oxide surfaces, having been used before for the identification of silicates,124 phosphates, sulfates, and selenites.125 Elemental investigations for zinc have also been conducted.126 XPS spectra have been used in combination with AFM to probe the growth of hematite on silica substrates, showing that the hematite grew in an island-formation manner, regardless of deposition temperature.127
For extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements, synchrotron radiation is used to ionize the core electrons of a target atom. Absorption spectra are collected by continuously increasing the energy of the incident photons. The outgoing electrons are backscattered by neighboring atoms; interference of these electrons with the outgoing ones produces a fine structure in the spectrum at energies greater than the absorption edge. EXAFS spectra reflect the local environment around the ionized atoms and provide information about the number and identity of nearest and next-to-nearest neighbors and their distances from each other.
Manceau et al. carried out much of the initial EXAFS work on iron oxides with focus on the identification and structural characterization as well as the transformation of ferrihydrite to more crystalline phases.128–131 In addition, EXAFS has been used recently to characterize adsorbates on iron oxide surfaces, in particular adsorbed cations of toxic elements and oxyanions of Se, Cr, and As.132–135
4.5 Theoretical studies of electronic band structure
Theoretical studies of the electronic band structure of hematite have been carried out before.136–142 For example, Thimsen studied pristine hematite which was modeled using a 30-atom unit cell (hexagonal: a = 5.038 Å, c = 13.772 Å; R-3C symmetry group). Calculations were performed using a 5 × 5 × 1 k-point set. For α-Fe2O3, the calculated bandgap was between the Fe 3dL and Fe 3dU levels with a value of 2.1 eV. The authors were careful to mention that the bandgap values calculated by density functional theory (DFT) are systematically underestimated due to a failure of exchange correlation functionals to cancel out the electronic self-interaction energy. They mention that while other methods, such as DFT + U or the usage of exact Hartree exchanges can overcome this, they tend to introduce additional complexities and difficulties in the computations relative to DFT calculations.
Periodic density functional theory calculations of bulk goethite have also been reported before using the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP).143 In this study, calculations of the bulk material accurately reproduced the observed crystal structure and vibrational frequencies which lend credence to the usage of this computational methodology for modeling purposes. Energy-minimized structures of bare, hydrated, and solvated surfaces were modeled for unit cells. The calculated a, b, and c unit cell parameters were 9.95, 3.00, and 4.60 Å, respectively (as compared to 9.95, 3.01, and 4.62 Å, respectively, for experimental results) while vibrational frequencies spanning many various bond frequencies were calculated to be extremely similar to experimentally observed energies. Because of this, the propensity for iron oxides to be accurately modeled is seen to be strong, which has positive implications for future endeavors with regard to calculation of bandgaps, unit cell parameters, and vibrational frequencies.
5. Charge carrier dynamics in hematite
5.1 Background on time-resolved studies of nanostructures
The study of charge carrier dynamics in nanomaterials allows for a deeper and more fundamental understanding of their properties. First, by being a dynamic measurement, it provides information that is complementary to that from static measurements. Second, the dynamic information can guide the design, synthesis, and implementation of nanomaterials for a wide variety of applications, such as photocatalysis, photoelectrochemistry, and photovoltaics. Time-resolved laser spectroscopy has been established as a versatile and powerful technique for the investigation of charge carrier dynamics in nanomaterials.144–148
One commonly used technique in time-resolved studies is transient absorption (TA). In TA measurements, a short, usually femtosecond (fs) duration, optical pulse (the “pump”) excites the sample and, after a temporal delay, a second short pulse (the “probe” pulse) is used to interrogate the excited population of charge carriers. Changes in the detected signal of the probe pulse, with the accompanying time delay, provide information of the dynamics of the excited carriers being probed.145 Since the assignment of the observed signal is complex, the determination of the origin of the TA signal is often accompanied by careful control experiments and other information, e.g. theoretical modeling and simulations. Because the time resolution is determined only by the cross-correlation of the pump and probe pulses, TA measurements provide valuable temporal resolution that few other techniques can afford.
Because of its versatility, TA has been used to study many various systems, including metal nanoparticles,149–151 semiconductors,152–154 and metal oxide materials.155–157 In particular, the interest in charge carrier dynamics in Fe2O3 nanostructures has gained significant attention recently.
5.2 Carrier dynamics of hematite nanostructures
The first ultrafast study of Fe2O3 nanostructures was first reported in 1998, and the charge carrier relaxation was dominated by processes with lifetimes on the order of less than 1 ps to a few ps.23,113,158,159 Along with subsequent studies, these relaxation processes have been attributed to thermalization, trapping, and non-radiative recombination of the charge carriers.23,113,158,159 In comparison to other metal oxide nanomaterials, Fe2O3 seems to exhibit the shortest charge carrier lifetimes, indicative of a high density of trap states, which has significant implications in its utilization for applications.

5.2.1. Dependence of charge carrier dynamics on crystal structure and surface. 
Time-resolved studies of hematite with different morphologies, shapes, sizes, and dopants have been studied to gain insight into its fundamental charge carrier dynamics. Cherepy et al. conducted the first study of the ultrafast charge carrier dynamics of Fe2O3 using femtosecond (fs) pump–probe laser spectroscopy.23 Both the γ- and α-phases of Fe2O3 nanostructures were studied with a 390 nm pump and various probe wavelengths (660, 720, 790, and 850 nm). From this, several interesting findings were elucidated. First, both the α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles, which were spindle-shaped nanoparticles with a dimensionality of 1 × 5 nm, and the γ-Fe2O3, which were spherical nanoparticles with an average diameter of 1–2 nm, exhibited similar transient absorption decay profiles and were best fit with a triple exponential with time constants of 0.36, 4.2, and 67 picoseconds (ps). The fast overall decay, in concert with weak fluorescent signals, suggests that extremely efficient non-radiative relaxation is related to the dense band structure, the high density of trap states, or strong coupling between trap states. Second, the decay dynamics were independent of pump power. The samples were pumped with 0.4, 0.6, and 1.2 mJ per pulse cm2, from which a linear correlation between pump powers was found; i.e., there was no change in either the time constants or the relative amplitudes of the decay components regardless of peak power. Third, their transient absorption decay profiles did not change with varying probe wavelengths. The authors reasoned that the carriers were likely thermalized within the laser pulse (∼150 fs) since no spectral shift was correlated with cooling. Similar findings have been reported later.160 The explanation was that the electron relaxation kinetics were the same over the entire probe spectrum via the capture of electrons by oxygen-deficient centers of Fe3+. Fourth, the role of surface species on the transient absorption profiles was investigated by altering the pH in the range of 3–6. The change in pH did not affect the transient absorption decay profile. Finally, the authors incorporated varying elemental dopant materials, including Zn, Co, Cr, and Cu, each at an amount of 10 mol% relative to the Fe. In each case, the transient absorption decay profile was unchanged (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Ultrafast transient absorption decay profiles of γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles. (A) 0–8.3 ps, (B) 0–48 ps, and (C) 0–230 ps. Fitting incorporated a nonlinear least-squares algorithm to a triple exponential decay convolved with a Gaussian representing the cross-correlation of the 390 nm pump and the 720 nm probe pulses. Time constants τ1, τ2, and τ3 were calculated to be 0.36, 4.2, and 67 ps, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. 


5.2.2. Size dependence. 
Later, Fu et al. conducted an intensive investigation into the size-dependent relaxation times for hematite161 with particle sizes of 4 and 10 nm using pump–probe laser spectroscopy with 355 nm pump and varying probe wavelengths. Smaller (4 nm) hematite hydrosol particles were found to have longer time constants than larger particles (10 nm). The results were fit well with a biexponential decay and showed a drastic change in decay profiles for a given size of an hematite particle. The lifetime derived for a 4 nm hematite hydrosol was 0.12 ps and 4.6 ps for the short and long component, respectively, while a 10 nm hematite hydrosol had time constants of 0.054 ps and 1.7 ps. The difference in time constants was ascribed to itinerant carriers in the extended band that contain Fe 4sp and O 2p orbitals that show strong steady state absorption with a strong size dependence. They could, in principle, combine to the d–d transition through hybridization of the 3d–4sp orbitals, which is reflected in the femtosecond scale with the long-lived component.


5.2.3. Nanoparticle shape dependence. 
As discussed in Section 2, Fe2O3 nanomaterials can be synthesized with different shapes that allows the study of possible shape dependence of the charge carrier dynamics.99 Fan et al. successfully synthesized three different hematite-based samples: nanotubes (98 nm outer diameter) and nanorings (74 and 150 nm outer diameters), and measured their femtosecond spectra. In all three cases, the lifetimes were fit to a triple exponential decay. This fastest decay component was ultimately attributed to the relaxation of hot electrons at the bottom of the conduction band via three different paths: (i) direct recombination, both radiative and non-radiative, (ii) trapping into intrinsic low-lying electronic states through d–d “hopping,” and (iii) trapping into surface defect states. In all, the first and third paths are relatively small contributions due to the overall high efficiency of d–d hopping. Thus, the fast decay component is attributed to the relaxation of hot carriers at the bottom of the conduction band through trapping into a high density of trap states (Fe3+ ligand states) within the bandgap. On the scale of tens to hundreds of ps, the slow decay was also essentially the same for all samples and is due to the slower relaxation of trapping electrons. Likewise, in all three cases, the lifetime components were essentially unchanged regardless of morphology of the sample.


5.2.4. Effect of crystallinity. 
A notorious difficulty in the synthesis of nanostructured particles has been obtaining single crystalline materials. Joly et al. successfully synthesized and obtained the transient reflective femtosecond laser dynamics of epitaxially grown single-crystalline α-Fe2O3.159 Following an excitation pulse of 407 nm, a white light continuum-derived probe beam monitored the reflective transient absorption of the single-crystalline Fe2O3. Their time constant results are in general agreement with the other studies presented here, with a triple exponential fit containing time constants of 0.300 ps, 2.5 ps, and a slow component of hundreds of ps. The slow component, which extends to hundreds of picoseconds, differs from Cherepy's result. Joly et al. attribute this mainly to the weaker electron–phonon coupling of the thin films, as compared to the solution-based samples that Cherepy et al. measured. Nevertheless, Joly et al. noticed that single-crystalline Fe2O3 materials have a comparatively shorter lifetime than polycrystalline materials. They attributed the differences to the different nature of the defect states within the single crystal. These trap states may have much stronger absorptions in long wavelength regions of the spectrum, and thus will show up strongly in the transient response. Most interestingly, Joly et al. found that at longer lifetimes, the single-crystalline Fe2O3 displayed low-frequency oscillations at all probe wavelengths at or below the bandgap.159 The frequency of the oscillation, 68 GHz, was believed to be due to the optical excitation of longitudinal acoustic phonons, the generation of which is due in part to the elastic deformation caused by local heating following strong absorption of ultrafast laser pulses.162,163


5.2.5. Effect of doping. 
Various doping of hematite has been the focus of recent research. It is hoped that the doping of hematite would extend the lifetime of the excited state of hematite beyond its fastest component of approximately a third of a ps. It is this fast component that has been one of the major obstacles in the implementation of hematite in applications such as solar technology. As previously mentioned, Cherepy et al. attempted the implementation of various elemental dopants, including Zn, Co, Cr, and Cu, each at an amount of 10 mol% relative to the Fe.23 The doping did not yield any noticeable increase in excited state lifetimes.
Other dopants have been attempted later, including Ti-doped hematite in which Ti4+ substitution occurred at Fe3+ sites in α-Fe2O3. The overall charge carrier dynamics were very fast, being fitted to a triple exponential with time constants of 0.34, 2.3, and 71 ps compared to 0.33, 2.2, and 71 ps for undoped α-Fe2O3. The very fast decay was attributed to a high density of electronic states in the bandgap caused by both internal and surface defects, indicating that the early time dynamics are dominated by intrinsic properties of the α-Fe2O3. Although the time constants between the Ti-doped and undoped samples were essentially the same, the absorption decay profile of the Ti-doped sample had a slightly higher amplitude than that of the undoped sample and is indicative of reduced electron–hole recombination on the time scale measured (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Normalized ultrafast transient absorption decay profiles of undoped and Ti-doped Fe2O3 films in 0–10 ps (inset) and 0–300 ps windows. They were fit simultaneously using a nonlinear least squares fitting algorithm to a triple exponential decay convolved with a Gaussian, representing the cross-correlation of the 440 nm pump and 620 nm probe pulses. The solid lines are fitted curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. 
Sn-doping158 in which Sn4+ substitution at Fe3+ sites occurred164 has also had its charge carrier dynamics measured experimentally. As with the Ti-doping and the doping reported by Cherepy et al.,23 the reported lifetime of the Sn-doped material did not significantly differ from pristine α-Fe2O3, with reported decay constants of 0.36, 2.45, and 73 ps. The similar dynamics of Sn-doped α-Fe2O3 with pristine α-Fe2O3 indicates that the presence of Sn does very little, if anything, to alter the photoexcited electron dynamics of α-Fe2O3 on the picosecond time scale. Despite that, the Sn-doped α-Fe2O3 has a different morphology from that of pristine α-Fe2O3, the decay profiles of the two samples were essentially the same in both 0–10 and 0–200 ps windows, indicating that morphological changes and Sn-doping have a negligible effect on charge carrier dynamics. Clearly, further study of doping of Fe2O3 with different dopants is needed to determine if the charge carrier dynamics can be affected, ideally lengthened, by the appropriate dopant (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Ultrafast transient absorption decay profiles of hematite nanowires: (a) the 0–10 ps, (b) the 0–40 ps, and (c) the 0–200 ps windows are fit simultaneously using a nonlinear least-squares fitting algorithm to a triple exponential decay convolved with a Gaussian representing the cross-correlation of the 540 nm pump (100 nJ per pulse cm2, attenuated with neutral density filters) and 620 nm probe pulses. The transient absorption has a pulse width limited rise time and is best fit to a triple exponential with 0.362, 2.451, and 73.37 ps and 0.351, 2.304, and 67.4 ps time constants for 650 and 800 °C samples, respectively. (d) Normalized ultrafast transient absorption decay profiles (0–200 ps) of hematite nanowires sintered at 650 °C, prepared in the solution with (red line) and without (green line) ethanol. Inset: the same decay profiles in 0–10 ps window. The 3D plot is a plot of the Sn-doped Fe2O3. A pulse-width-limited (<130 fs) rise is followed by a triple exponential fast decay and illustrates the probe wavelength-dependence of the transient absorption kinetic decay processes across part of the visible spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. 
The effect of compositing Fe2O3 with other metal oxides has also been recently examined. Kronawitter et al.165 examined the effect that WO3 compositing would have on the early time dynamics of Fe2O3. It was found that a fast (∼1 ps) and slower (∼10 ps) decay occurred over the entire white light probe spectrum, indicating that a common physical process was occurring, namely, the capture of electrons by oxygen-deficient centers of Fe3+. The same results were found with samples that had been doped with the WO3, indicating that the ultrafast physical processes occur irrespective of the presence of dopant. On longer time scales, it was observed that WO3-composited Fe2O3 decayed at a faster rate than for pristine Fe2O3 at a probe wavelength of 580 nm. It was furthermore observed that that same trend was not noticeable for redder probe wavelengths (e.g., 675 nm). From this, it was thought that the introduction of the WO3 enhanced the trapping rate of electrons within a particular wavelength band. Because trapped electrons have a low extinction coefficient, the observed signal will have a smaller absorbance. This is corroborated when considering that Fe2O3 has many mid-bandgap trap states which can explain the relaxation of conduction band electrons to both shallow and deep traps. The fact that redder probe wavelengths did not display an absorbance-dependent decay profile is explainable by the fact that associated recombination events evolve over the probe spectrum. In fact, it was observed that as the probe energies approached the bandgap energy, an increasingly large signal difference between WO3-composited Fe2O3 and pristine Fe2O3 was seen. Based on a previous study indicating that the removal of surface-trapped holes from Fe2O3 equates to a decay in 580 nm absorption after excitation, this suggests that modification of Fe2O3 with WO3 promotes the extraction of surface-trapped holes on picosecond time scales (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy for hetero-nanostructure electrodes: (a) transient difference absorbance spectra for α-Fe2O3–WO3 before excitation (black squares) and 500 fs after excitation (blue circles). Transient absorption signals for α-Fe2O3 (black) and α-Fe2O3–WO3 (red) at the picosecond time scale for 579.31 nm probe (b) and 674.23 nm probe (c) and the sub-nanosecond time scale for 579.31 nm probe (d) and 674.23 nm probe (e). The 3D plot is a plot of the WO3-doped Fe2O3. A pulse-width-limited (<130 fs) rise is followed by a triple exponential fast decay and illustrates the strong probe wavelength-dependence of the transient absorption kinetic decay processes across part of the visible spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. 
Another study investigated charge carrier dynamics in TixOy-doped Fe2O3.166 A biexponential decay was observed with time constants of ∼2 ps and a slower event persisting to 100 ps and beyond. As with WO3-composited Fe2O3,165 the magnitude of the decay processes depended largely on the probe wavelength used. Over the temporal range investigated, the maximum TA signal was seen for a probe wavelength of 570 nm, very near the bandgap of Fe2O3 as well as near the bandedge of the heteronanostructure array. The TA signals were attributed primarily to absorption from trapped electrons. The decay from these trap states is known to be primarily nonradiative23 and is mediated by further, lower-lying midgap states. However, the signal nearer to the bandgap of Fe2O3 (e.g. 580 nm) is thought to be dominated by contributions from surface-trapped holes.167 Despite these claims, a confident assignment of the TA signal is challenging. In particular, the high density of localized d-levels which are associated with numerous optical transitions, a high density of intrinsic and surface-defect-induced trap states, as well as the known quantum confinement effect in Fe2O3168 can all influence and contribute to the signal observed (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  (a) Transient absorbance spectra before (black circles) and 500 fs (blue squares) after excitation. Normalized transient absorption signals for four representative probe wavelengths at ∼1 ps (b) and ∼10 ps (c) time regimes. (d) Transient absorption (averages of signals from 70 to 100 ps) after ultrafast excitation of TixOy–Fe2O3 array at various probe wavelengths (blue squares). Also included is the normalized steady-state absorption (black solid line), indicating the correlation of the transient data with the bandedge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. 
A particularly interesting point arises when considering the decay profiles of the variously doped or composited iron oxides in relation to size and quantum confinement effects. Extensive doping in hematite nanostructures has yielded no discernible difference in charge carrier lifetimes. Additionally, reported lifetimes do not seem to be affected to any large degree by morphological changes. For example, in both the Sn-doped nanocorals, with a large surface-to-volume ratio, and the WO3-composited nanorods, charge carrier lifetimes were dominated by a fast, ∼1 ps feature independent of dopant. This is interesting because the two systems are seemingly entirely different – both in shape and in chemical constituents. Yet despite the similar charge carrier lifetimes, regardless of doping and morphology in the two hematite systems, the decay profiles of the transient absorption in the two systems were different and are related to the size differences. Investigation of the Sn-doped material showed an average particle size of ∼60 nm, in direct comparison to that of the WO3-composited nanostructures which were 3–5 nm single crystals. Inspection of the data shows that, in general, the larger particles (e.g., the Sn-doped hematite) tend to have a fast component that dominates the signal. Along the same line, the smaller particles (e.g., the WO3-composited hematite) have an amplitude of the fast component that comprises a smaller proportion of the overall signal relative to the larger particles. Quantitatively, in the WO3-composited material, the amplitude of the fast component comprises ∼50% of the overall signal intensity across the probed wavelengths. Meanwhile, the Sn-doped Fe2O3 material had a fast component of a larger amplitude, with the fast component being ∼80% of the overall signal intensity. A possibility is that the contribution to the signal intensity by the fast component may be related to quantum confinement or surface-to-volume ratio, both of which are expected to be more significant for smaller particle or feature sizes.


5.2.6. Charge carrier kinetics of α-Fe2O3 for water oxidation. 
Recently, transient absorption spectroscopy has been applied to study the kinetics of photogenerated holes in nanocrystalline hematite photoanodes under applied bias. For hematite in PEC applications, a positive electrical bias is required for water oxidation to occur efficiently, which has the effect of facilitating proton reduction. A recent work by Pendlebury et al.167 probed the transient absorption decay profiles of α-Fe2O3 films on the μs–s timescale, thought to be the temporal domain in which water oxidation occurs. More specifically, they investigated the dynamics of photogenerated holes under positive bias conditions. Following UV excitation, and at an applied bias of −0.1 V, or approximately an open-circuit condition, the transient absorption profile displayed relaxation on the μs timescale. However, upon the application of a positive bias of 0.4 V, the decay profile greatly increased with a decay that was fit with a stretched exponential of 3 ± 1 s, which decreased to 400 ± 100 ms in the presence of methanol. Their data suggest that the application of a positive, small bias results in long-lived holes which do not undergo the characteristically fast recombination. The usage of methanol as a hole scavenger decreased the lifetime of the decay process, which further indicates that surface oxidation kinetics play a large role in the long lifetime seen, indicating that holes at the surface of the film are the primary species being probed. Two possible explanations can be given for the long lifetimes seen under bias. The first is that a positive bias can have the effect of increasing the width of the depletion layer and facilitating removal of electrons, thereby decreasing the possibility for electron–hole recombination. The second explanation is that a positive bias decreases electron density throughout the film. Either way, the net result is that a positive bias can significantly increase the lifetime of the photogenerated holes. This is clearly important for a material such as α-Fe2O3 since it has a fairly high electron donor density.
The factors underlying the observation of long-lived holes were further explored.169 It was noted that the slow decay (on the μs–s timescale) has an amplitude dependence upon the applied bias; that an increasingly positive bias will increase the amplitude of the transient signal. As the positive bias increases, the width of the space charge layer increases, thereby generating more holes within the space charge layer. It should also be noted that the particle size also plays a role in these studies. For very small particles, where charge carrier transport relies on diffusion primarily, a positive bias can effectively lower the Fermi level, which can decrease the electron donor density. As mentioned previously, this can have the effect of diminishing the electron–hole recombination, thereby resulting in longer lifetimes.
The charge carrier dynamics studies have yielded some interesting results as well as useful information to guide the design of new hematite nanostructures with improved properties. Hematite itself has been shown to have a fast electron–hole recombination time of ∼1 ps. This fast recombination limits the efficiency of charge transfer desired for applications such as solar hydrogen generation. This fast recombination is dominant in hematite systems, largely independent of doping, morphology, crystallinity, shape, surface, and phase. One potentially important factor to manipulate is the physical size of the nanostructure. By reaching the quantum confined regime, one may be able to enhance electron–hole separation or reduce recombination by taking advantage of the short diffusion distance and low density of states. The short diffusion distance can facilitate electron–hole separation but may also increase trapping of charge carriers. A lower density of electronic and phonon states usually results in a weaker overlap of carrier and phonon wave functions or spectra, leading to slower electron and hole relaxation and recombination.170

6. Photoelectrochemistry of Fe2O3
Hematite as a photoanode material for PEC water oxidation has attracted significant attention due to its suitable bandgap for light absorption, excellent chemical stability, natural abundance, and environmental compatibility.171–179 In this article, we will briefly review the recent advancement, limitations and challenges of hematite photoanodes. The working mechanism of a PEC cell using α-Fe2O3 photoanode is illustrated in Fig. 15.180 n-Type hematite is used as the photoanode where water oxidation occurs; simultaneously, water reduction occurs on the cathode. At the semiconductor–electrolyte interface, a space charge layer (depletion layer) is formed due to ion absorption. Upon irradiance, photoexcited electrons (e−) are separated at the space charge layer and further transferred to a counter-electrode to reduce water, resulting in hydrogen evolution. Simultaneously, photoexcited holes (h+) travel to the photoanode surface which are driven by a space charge field to oxidize water, thereby resulting in oxygen evolution:180Counter cathode: 2H+(aq) + 2e− → H2(g)Photoanode: 2H2O(l) + 2h+ → 4H+(aq) + 2e− + O2(g)
 Fig. 15  Energy diagram of n-type hematite photoanode and schematic illustration of photoelectrochemical water splitting on photoanode and cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. 
α-Fe2O3 has a bandgap of 2.0–2.2 eV,56,181 with a maximum solar energy conversion efficiency of 14–16.8%.182 However, the reported solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of α-Fe2O3 is notoriously lower than the predicted value, mainly due to its very short excited state lifetime (<10 ps)183,184 and short hole diffusion length (∼2 to 4 nm).185–187 The majority of photoexcited electrons in α-Fe2O3 are typically lost via different electron–hole recombination processes within the first few picoseconds, and only holes created close enough to the semiconductor/electrolyte interface can be used for water oxidation. In this regard, very thin α-Fe2O3 films are required to be used for facilitating transport/collection of electrons and holes. Nanostructures with small grain sizes provide large surface areas and short hole diffusion distances, which can potentially address short hole diffusion limitations. For instance, Lin et al. used an ALD method to obtain ultra-thin single crystal α-Fe2O3 (∼25 nm) on TiSi2 nanonets, as shown in Fig. 3.55 This core–shell structure has two primary advantages over the bulk structures: (i) α-Fe2O3/TiSi2 nanonets have larger surface areas and TiSi2 acts as a highly conductive net which is beneficial for charge transport to the back contact and (ii) single crystal and shorter hole diffusion distances could reduce charge carrier loss through electron–hole recombination. As expected, the α-Fe2O3/TiSi2 core–shell nanostructures exhibit much better PEC performance than the planar structures. Fig. 16 shows the comparative PEC studies of α-Fe2O3/TiSi2 heterostructures and α-Fe2O3 planar films in 1.0 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte.55 α-Fe2O3/TiSi2 nanonets show a three-fold enhanced photocurrent density compared to the planar films. Additionally, the nanonets achieved 2.7 mA cm−2 at 1.53 V vs. RHE as well as 1.6 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE, which are currently the best values for undoped pristine α-Fe2O3. Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) shows that the photoactivity has been enhanced in the entire absorption range. Importantly, absorbed photon conversion efficiency (APCE) is almost the same as IPCE, indicating the excellent efficiency of charge separation and collection (quantum yield). It proves the advantage of using ultra-thin α-Fe2O3 film for water oxidation.
 Fig. 16  (a) Comparison of photocurrent-potential curves of planar Fe2O3 and Fe2O3/TiSi2 heterostructures. (b) UV-vis absorption of Fe2O3 films. (c) IPCE comparison of planar and heterostructures at 1.53 V vs. RHE. (d) APCE of heterostructured Fe2O3/TiSi2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. 
Although ultrathin films are beneficial for charge collection, α-Fe2O3 is an indirect bandgap semiconductor and thus requires a relatively thick layer of active material for the complete absorption of solar light. However, thicker films will result in severe electron–hole recombination and lower conversion efficiencies due to the short hole diffusion length.
Poor electrical conductivity is another major hurdle for hematite to be used as photoanode, as it will limit the charge transport.188,189 Elemental doping is a promising method to potentially address this limitation.58–60,68,190–192 Various elemental doping methods have been developed for hematite. Elemental doping with electron donors such as Si, Sn, and Ti can significantly enhance hematite's conductivity by increasing its donor density.58–60,75,191,193 For example, Ling et al. recently reported the preparation of Sn-doped hematite nanostructures via a hydrothermal method.27 Sn doping can be achieved through Sn diffusion from an FTO substrate induced by thermal treatment or intentionally mixing the iron with Sn precursor during hydrothermal growth.27,192,194,195 Si-doping has been developed by spray pyrolysis and APCVD techniques58,59,61,62,71,191 in which the best PEC performance was achieved.59,61 At 1.23 V vs. Ag/AgCl, the photocurrent density reached a maximum value of 2.3 mA cm−2 without catalyst. The enhanced PEC properties observed in these doped α-Fe2O3 are believed to be due to the increased conductivity.59,60,75,191
Wang et al. doped Ti into α-Fe2O3 mesoporous films via a deposition–annealing method.75 The PEC performance of α-Fe2O3 has been enhanced by doping of different elements. Fig. 17 shows that Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 by deposition–annealing exhibits a two-fold enhancement and approximately 0.2 V negative shift of onset of photocurrent.75 The IPCE spectrum shows significant enhancement in the whole absorption range. Another important example is Si-doped dendritic α-Fe2O3 nanostructures synthesized by APCVD. For example, Ti-doping was reported to increase the conductivity of α-Fe2O3 by several orders of magnitude.196 The increase of conductivity can be characterized by donor densities derived from electrochemical impedance measurements. Wang et al. found that Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 has a nearly two-order-magnitude enhancement in donor density as compared to undoped Fe2O3 mesoporous films.75
 Fig. 17  (a) Comparison of photocurrent densities of undoped and Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 films. (b) IPCE spectra collected at 1.02 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. 
In addition to improve α-Fe2O3 PEC performance through controlled manipulation of morphology and elemental doping, research efforts have also been focused on addressing the slow kinetics of water oxidation on the α-Fe2O3 surface, which result in a large overpotential and a low conversion efficiency.61 The solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency is defined by the equation: (1)where V is the applied bias vs. RHE, I is the photocurrent density at the measured bias, and Jlight is the irradiance intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G). A large overpotential will result in a large applied bias and thereby a low STH conversion efficiency. Modification of the α-Fe2O3 surface with oxygen evolution catalysts could reduce surface overpotential and negatively shift photocurrent onset potential.197Fig. 18 shows the effect of IrO2 catalyst on the PEC performance of Si-doped α-Fe2O3. The photocurrent onset potential negatively shifted. Other oxygen evolution catalysts such as cobalt ions and cobalt phosphate have also been developed and used to modify α-Fe2O3 anodes for PEC water oxidation.59,197,198 Zhong et al. reported different methods such as photoassisted electrodeposition and electrochemical deposition to modify α-Fe2O3 with cobalt phosphate based catalysts.197,198
 Fig. 18  Photoelectrochemical performance of an unmodified hematite photoanode (solid black trace) and the same photoanode modified with IrO2 nanoparticles (solid gray trace). Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. The dashed trace was the previously reported best PEC data for Fe2O3 without usage of a catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. 
α-Fe2O3 has also been used for other PEC applications such as hydrogen evolution with a hole scavenger and photoelectrochemical solar cells.199–202 The most common hole scavengers used in the reactions are H2O2, CH3OH, I−, and Na2S. Instead of water oxidation, hole scavengers will be oxidized on the photoanode surface. PEC solar cells use regenerated redox couples such as I−/I3− and K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 in the electrolyte.201,202 For example, Somekawa et al. used α-Fe2O3 films prepared by laser ablation for solar cell application.202Fig. 19 shows the I–V curves obtained from α-Fe2O3 electrode prepared at different calcination temperatures. Although α-Fe2O3 can be used as photoelectrode for solar cells, the efficiency is relatively low (∼0.03%).202 Similar solar conversion efficiency was obtained for α-Fe2O3 electrode by using K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 redox pair as electrolyte.201 The low efficiency of the α-Fe2O3 based solar cell is due to its shorter lifetime of excited carriers and short hole diffusion distance.
 Fig. 19  Calcination-temperature dependence of I–V curves collected for α-Fe2O3 based solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202. 
7. Conclusion
This review has covered several interesting and important aspects of nanostructured iron oxide, specifically hematite. Specifically, its synthesis and optical characterization have been discussed, with particular emphasis on the charge carrier dynamics and photoelectrochemical properties. Hematite is a unique material due to its small bandgap for visible light absorption, extreme abundance, low cost, and chemical stability. However, due to its intrinsic short charge carrier lifetime or short carrier diffusion length, its photoelectrochemical performance has been limited. Several different strategies, e.g. doping, reducing physical size, and using heterostructures, have been explored to overcome some of the limitations. While there is some encouraging progress, further research is clearly needed to both better understand the fundamental properties and exploit various technological applications of nanostructured iron oxide. The complex nature of the system requires combined experimental and theoretical studies at the advanced level.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the BES Division of the U.S. DOE (DE-FG02-ER46232) (JZZ) and NSF (DMR-0847786) (YL) for financial support.
References
J. M. Ogden, Prospects for building a hydrogen energy infrastructure, Annu. Rev. Energ. Environ., 1999, 24, 227–279 CrossRef .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Photo-electrochemical hydrogen generation from water using solar energy. Materials-related aspects, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CrossRef CAS .

DoE Office of Basic Energy Sciences Basic Research Needs for the Hydrogen Economy, ed. M. S. Dresselhaus, G. W. Crabtree and M. V. Buchanan,  2003, p. 178 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Grimes, O. K. Varghese and S. Ranjan, Light, Water, Hydrogen: The Solar Generation of Hydrogen by Water Photoelectrolysis, Springer, New York,  2008 Search PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bedja, S. Hotchandani and P. V. Kamat, Photoelectrochemistry of quantized tungsten trioxide colloids: electron storage, electrochromic, and photoelectrochromic effects, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 11064–11070 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bedja, S. Hotchandani, R. Carpentier, K. Vinodgopal and P. V. Kamat, Electrochromic and photoelectrochemical behavior of thin WO3 films prepared from quantized colloidal particles, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 247, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
I. Saeki, N. Okushi, H. Konno and R. Furuichi, The photoelectrochemical response of TiO2–WO3 mixed oxide films prepared by thermal oxidation of titanium coated with tungsten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2226–2230 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, T. Lindgren, J. He, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, Photolelectrochemistry of nanostructured WO3 thin film electrodes for water oxidation: mechanism of electron transport, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 5686–5696 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolcott, T. R. Kuykendall, W. Chen, S. Chen and J. Z. Zhang, Synthesis and characterization of ultrathin WO3 nanodisks utilizing long-chain poly(ethylene glycol), J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25288–25296 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Ahn, Y. Yan, S.-H. Lee, T. Deutsch, J. Turner, C. E. Tracy, C. L. Perkins and M. Al-Jassim, Photoelectrochemical properties of N-incorporated ZnO films deposited by reactive RF magnetron sputtering, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B956–B959 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Ahn, S. Shet, T. Deutsch, C.-S. Jiang, Y. Yan, M. Al-Jassim and J. Turner, Enhancement of photoelectrochemical response by aligned nanorods in ZnO thin films, J. Power Sources, 2008, 176, 387–392 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, K.-S. Ahn, S. Shet, T. Deutsch, M. Huda, S. H. Wei, J. Turner and M. M. Al-Jassim, Band gap reduction of ZnO for photoelectrochemical splitting of water, Proc. SPIE, 2007, 6650, 66500H Search PubMed .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, A review and recent developments in photocatalytic water-splitting using for hydrogen production, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao, G. Oskam, G. J. Meyer and P. C. Searson, Electron transport in porous nanocrystalline TiO2 photoelectrochemical cells, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 17021–17027 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stergiopoulos, I. M. Arabatzis, G. Katsaros and P. Falaras, Binary polyethylene oxide/titania solid-state redox electrolyte for highly efficient nanocrystalline TiO2 photoelectrochemical cells, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1259–1261 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, D. Jiang, S. Zhang and W. Wen, Photoelectrocatalytic oxidation of organic compounds at nanoporous TiO2 electrodes in a thin-layer photoelectrochemical cell, J. Catal., 2007, 250, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, High density n-Si/n-TiO2 core/shell nanowire arrays with enhanced photoactivity, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 410–415 CrossRef .
A. Wolcott, W. A. Smith, T. R. Kuykendall, Y. Zhao and J. Z. Zhang, Photoelectrochemical water splitting using dense and aligned TiO2 nanorod arrays, Small, 2009, 5, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Novel carbon-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays with high aspect ratios for efficient solar water splitting, Nano Lett., 2005, 6, 24–28 CrossRef .
R. Hoyle, J. Sotomayor, G. Will and D. Fitzmaurice, Visible-light-induced and long-lived charge separation in a transparent nanostructured semiconductor membrane modified by an adsorbed electron donor and electron acceptor, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10791–10800 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bjoerksten, J. Moser and M. Graetzel, Photoelectrochemical studies on nanocrystalline hematite films, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 858–863 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Cherepy, D. B. Liston, J. A. Lovejoy, H. Deng and J. Z. Zhang, Ultrafast studies of photoexcited electron dynamics in γ- and α-Fe2O3 semiconductor nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 770–776 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Joly, J. R. Williams, S. A. Chambers, G. Xiong, W. P. Hess and D. M. Laman, Carrier dynamics in α-Fe2O3 (0001) thin films and single crystals probed by femtosecond transient absorption and reflectivity, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 053521 CrossRef .
J. H. Kennedy and J. K. W. Frese, Photooxidation of water at alpha-Fe2O3 electrodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709–714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. X. Ma, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Morphology-controlled synthesis of hematite nanocrystals and their facet effects on gas-sensing properties, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 10143–10151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Ling, G. M. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Sn-Doped hematite nanostructures for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, N. Beermann, S. E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Controlled aqueous chemical growth of oriented three-dimensional crystalline nanorod arrays: application to iron(III) oxides, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 233–235 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Fu, H. Zhang and C. Kisielowski, Bicrystalline hematite nanowires, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12245–12249 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Jia, L. D. Sun, Z. G. Yan, L. P. You, F. Luo, X. D. Han, Y. C. Pang, Z. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Iron oxide nanotubes – single-crystalline iron oxide nanotubes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4328–4333 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mao, K. Shin, J. K. Kim, D. H. Wang, G. Y. Han and J. H. Park, Controlled synthesis of vertically aligned hematite on conducting substrate for photoelectrochemical cells: nanorods versus nanotubes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1852–1858 CAS .
W. Wu, X. Xiao, S. Zhang, J. Zhou, L. Fan, F. Ren and C. Jiang, Large-scale and controlled synthesis of iron oxide magnetic short nanotubes: shape evolution, growth mechanism, and magnetic properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16092–16103 CAS .
Z. Zhang, M. F. Hossain and T. Takahashi, Environmental self-assembled hematite (α-Fe2O3) nanotube arrays for photoelectrocatalytic degradation of azo dye under simulated solar light irradiation, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 423–429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Li, H. Fan, Z. Zhu, J. Jiang, R. Ding, Y. Hu and X. Huang, Iron oxide-based nanotube arrays derived from sacrificial template-accelerated hydrolysis: large-area design and reversible lithium storage, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 212–217 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Cavalieri, N. Muller, T. Uphues, V. S. Yakovlev, A. Baltuska, B. Horvath, B. Schmidt, L. Blumel, R. Holzwarth, S. Hendel, M. Drescher, U. Kleineberg, P. M. Echenique, R. Kienberger, F. Krausz and U. Heinzmann, Attosecond spectroscopy in condensed matter, Nature, 2007, 449, 1029 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Fan, G. J. You, Y. Li, Z. Zheng, H. R. Tan, Z. X. Shen, S. H. Tang and Y. P. Feng, Shape-controlled synthesis of single-crystalline Fe2O3 hollow nanocrystals and their tunable optical properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9928–9935 CAS .
Z. Wu, K. Yu, S. Zhang and Y. Xie, Hematite hollow spheres with a mesoporous shell: controlled synthesis and applications in gas sensor and lithium ion batteries, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11307–11313 CAS .
C. Hu, Z. Gao and X. Yang, Hematite hollow spheres with excellent catalytic performance for removal of carbon monoxide, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 1288–1289 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Zeng, K. B. Tang, T. W. Li, Z. H. Liang, D. Wang, Y. K. Wang, Y. X. Qi and W. W. Zhou, Facile route for the fabrication of porous hematite nanoflowers: its synthesis, growth mechanism, application in the lithium ion battery, and magnetic and photocatalytic properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4836–4843 CAS .
L. S. Zhong, J. S. Hu, H. P. Liang, A. M. Cao, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Self-assembled 3D flowerlike iron oxide nanostructures and their application in water treatment, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2426 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zeng, K. Tang, T. Li, Z. Liang, D. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Qi and W. Zhou, Facile route for the fabrication of porous hematite nanoflowers: its synthesis, growth mechanism, application in the lithium ion battery, and magnetic and photocatalytic properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4836–4843 CAS .
S. Z. Li, H. Zhang, J. B. Wu, X. Y. Ma and D. R. Yang, Shape-control fabrication and characterization of the airplane-like FeO(OH) and Fe2O3 nanostructures, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 351–353 CAS .
L. P. Zhu, H. M. Xiao and S. Y. Fu, Template-free synthesis of monodispersed and single-crystalline cantaloupe-like Fe2O3 superstructures, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 177–182 CAS .
S. K. Ramchandra, C. Min-Seung, Y. Kwi-Sub, K. Tae-Sin and P. Chan-Jin, Catalytic characteristics of MnO2 nanostructures for the O2 reduction process, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 395402 CrossRef .
L. Zhenmin, L. Xiaoyong, W. Hong, M. Dan, X. Chaojian and W. Dan, Direct hydrothermal synthesis of single-crystalline hematite nanorods assisted by 1,2-propanediamine, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 245603 CrossRef .
D. C. Golden, D. W. Ming, R. V. Morris and T. G. Graff, Hydrothermal synthesis of hematite spherules and jarosite: implications for diagenesis and hematite spherule formation in sulfate outcrops at Meridiani Planum, Mars, Am. Mineral., 2008, 93, 1201–1214 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Kim, K.-I. Choi, A. Pan, I.-D. Kim, H.-R. Kim, K.-M. Kim, C. W. Na, G. Cao and J.-H. Lee, Template-free solvothermal synthesis of hollow hematite spheres and their applications in gas sensors and Li-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6549–6555 RSC .
J. Li, X. Lai, C. Xing and D. Wang, One-pot synthesis of porous hematite hollow microspheres and their application in water treatment, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 7707–7710 CrossRef CAS .
L. Armelao, G. Granozzi, E. Tondello, P. Colombo, G. Principi, P. P. Lottici and G. Antonioli, Nanocrystalline α-Fe2O3 sol–gel thin films: a microstructural study, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1995, 192–193, 435–438 CrossRef .
K. Woo, H. J. Lee, J. P. Ahn and Y. S. Park, Sol–gel mediated synthesis of Fe2O3 nanorods, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1761 CrossRef CAS .
A. Watanabe and H. Kozuka, Photoanodic properties of sol–gel-derived Fe2O3 thin films containing dispersed gold and silver particles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 12713–12720 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Xiang, F. Qian, S. Gradecak, Y. Wu, H. Yan, H. Yan, D. A. Blom and C. M. Lieber, Dopant-free GaN/AlN/AlGaN radial nanowire heterostructures as high electron mobility transistors, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1468–1473 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qian, S. Gradecak, Y. Li, C. Y. Wen and C. M. Lieber, Core/multishell nanowire heterostructures as multicolor, high-efficiency light-emitting diodes, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2287–2291 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Glasscock, P. R. F. Barnes, I. C. Plumb and N. Savvides, Enhancement of photoelectrochemical hydrogen production from hematite thin films by the introduction of Ti and Si, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16477–16488 CAS .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, Nanonet-based hematite heteronanostructures for efficient solar water splitting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2398–2401 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, X. Liu, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, TiO2/TiSi2 heterostructures for high-efficiency photoelectrochemical H2O splitting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2772–2773 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu, Y. L. Lee, H. H. Chiang and D. K. P. Wong, Growth and magnetic properties of oriented α-Fe2O3 nanorods, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18108–18111 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Zhang, W. J. Luo, Z. S. Li, T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Improved photoelectrochemical responses of Si and Ti codoped α-Fe2O3 photoanode films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 3 Search PubMed .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Gratzel, New benchmark for water photooxidation by nanostructured α-Fe2O3 films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, K. Sivula, A. Kay, R. Zboril and M. Graetzel, Influence of feature size, film thickness, and silicon doping on the performance of nanostructured hematite photoanodes for solar water splitting, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 772–782 CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Light-Induced water splitting with hematite: improved nanostructure and iridium oxide catalysis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Gratzel, WO3–Fe2O3 photoanodes for water splitting: a host scaffold, guest absorber approach, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Hahn, H. C. Ye, D. W. Flaherty, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Reactive ballistic deposition of alpha-Fe2O3 thin films for photoelectrochemical water oxidation, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1977–1986 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, C. C. Wang, C. C. Kei, Y. C. Hsueh, W. H. Cho and T. P. Perng, Photocatalysis of Ag-loaded TiO2 nanotube arrays formed by atomic layer deposition, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9498–9502 CAS .
P. M. Rao and X. L. Zheng, Rapid catalyst-free flame synthesis of dense, aligned α-Fe2O3 nanoflake and CuO nanoneedle arrays, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3001–3006 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang and J. A. Turner, Characterization of hematite thin films for photoelectrochemical water splitting in a dual photoelectrode device, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, F173–F178 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Sartoretti, B. D. Alexander, R. Solarska, W. A. Rutkowska, J. Augustynski and R. Cerny, Photoelectrochemical oxidation of water at transparent ferric oxide film electrodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13685–13692 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saremi-Yarahmadi, K. G. U. Wijayantha, A. A. Tahir and B. Vaidhyanathan, Nanostructured α-Fe2O3 electrodes for solar driven water splitting: effect of doping Agents on preparation and performance, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4768–4778 CAS .
D. Perednis and L. J. Gauckler, Thin film deposition using spray pyrolysis, J. Electroceram., 2005, 14, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Ingler and S. U. M. Khan, Photoresponse of spray pyrolytically synthesized copper-doped p-Fe2O3 thin film electrodes in water splitting, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 821–827 CrossRef CAS .
A. Duret and M. Gratzel, Visible light-induced water oxidation on mesoscopic α-Fe2O3 films made by ultrasonic spray pyrolysis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17184–17191 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Nasibulin, S. Rackauskas, H. Jiang, Y. Tian, P. R. Mudimela, S. D. Shandakov, L. I. Nasibulina, J. Sainio and E. I. Kauppinen, Simple and rapid synthesis of α-Fe2O3 nanowires under ambient conditions, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 373–379 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, P. Kashkarov and H. Zhang, Monte Carlo study for the growth of α-Fe2O3 nanowires synthesized by thermal oxidation of iron, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 524–528 RSC .
J. B. Mooney and S. B. Radding, Spray pyrolysis Processing, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1982, 12, 81–101 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Facile synthesis of highly photoactive α-Fe2O3-based films for water oxidation, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mao, G. Y. Han and J. H. Park, Synthesis and photoelectrochemical cell properties of vertically grown α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays on a gold nanorod substrate, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2247–2250 RSC .
M. Aiming, P. Nam-Gyu, H. Gui Young and P. Jong Hyeok, Controlled growth of vertically oriented hematite/Pt composite nanorod arrays: use for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 175703–175707 CrossRef .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, M. N. Huda, A. Walsh, Y. F. Yan, G. D. Stucky, Y. S. Hu, M. M. Al-Jassim and E. W. McFarland, Electrodeposited aluminum-doped α-Fe2O3 photoelectrodes: experiment and theory, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 510–517 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Spray and K. S. Choi, Photoactivity of transparent nanocrystalline Fe2O3 electrodes prepared via anodic electrodeposition, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3701–3709 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, D. Hazen, J. N. Park and E. W. McFarland, Pt-doped α-Fe2O3 thin films active for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3803–3805 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y. S. Hu, A. J. Forman, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Electrodeposition of α-Fe2O3 doped with Mo or Cr as photoanodes for photocatalytic water splitting, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15900–15907 CAS .
H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, Synthesis and photoelectrochemical properties of nanoporous iron(III) oxide by potentiostatic anodization, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4285–4291 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Vertically oriented Ti–Fe–O
nanotube array films: toward a useful material architecture for solar spectrum water photoelectrolysis, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2356–2364 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. LaTempa, X. J. Feng, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Temperature-dependent growth of self-assembled hematite (α-Fe2O3) nanotube arrays: rapid electrochemical synthesis and photoelectrochemical properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16293–16298 CAS .
R. Giovanoli and R. Brütsch, Kinetics and mechanism of the dehydration of γ-FeOOH, Thermochim. Acta, 1975, 13, 15–36 CrossRef CAS .
F. Watari, J. Van Landuyt, P. Delavignette and S. Amelinckx, Electron microscopic study of dehydration transformations. I. Twin formation and mosaic structure in hematite derived from goethite, J. Solid State Chem., 1979, 29, 137–150 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, W. Y. Teoh, C. Selomulya, R. C. Woodward, P. Munroe and R. Amal, Insight into microstructural and magnetic properties of flame-made γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4876–4884 RSC .
J. Q. Lu, N. Moll, Q. Fu and J. Liu, Iron nanoparticles derived from iron-complexed polymethylglutarimide to produce high-quality lithographically defined single-walled carbon nanotubes, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2237–2240 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, X. Gou, J. Horvat and J. Park, Facile synthesis and characterization of iron oxide semiconductor nanowires for gas sensing application, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15220–15225 CAS .
C. Diaz-Guerra, L. Perez, J. Piqueras and M. F. Chioncel, Magnetic transitions in α-Fe2O3 nanowires, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 104302–104304 CrossRef .

          H. P. Klug and L. E. Alexander, X-Ray Diffraction Procedures, J. Wiley and Sons Inc, New York,  1974 Search PubMed .

          G. W. Brindley and G. Brown, Crystal Structures of Clay Minerals and Their X-Ray Diffraction, Min. Soc., London,  1980 Search PubMed .

          U. Schwertmann, R. M. Cornell, Iron Oxides in the Laboratory: Preparation and Characterization, Wiley VCH, Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2000 Search PubMed .
P. H. Duvigneaud and R. Derie, Shape effects on crystallite size distributions in synthetic hematites from X-ray line-profile analysis, J. Solid State Chem., 1980, 34, 323–333 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mazzetti and P. J. Thistlethwaite, Raman spectra and thermal transformations of ferrihydrite and schwertmannite, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2002, 33, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Sherman and T. D. Waite, Electronic spectra of Iron(III) oxides and oxide hydroxides in the near IR to near UV, Am. Mineral., 1985, 70, 11–12 Search PubMed .
Y. P. He, Y. M. Miao, C. R. Li, S. Q. Wang, L. Cao, S. S. Xie, G. Z. Yang, B. S. Zou and C. Burda, Size and structure effect on optical transitions of iron oxide nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 125411 CrossRef .
T. Hashimoto, T. Yamada and T. Yoko, Third-order nonlinear optical properties of sol–gel derived α-Fe2O3, γ-Fe2O3, and Fe3O4 thin films, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 3184–3190 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Fan, G. J. You, Y. Li, Z. Zheng, H. R. Tan, Z. X. Shen, S. H. Tang and Y. P. Feng, Shape-controlled synthesis of single-crystalline Fe2O3 hollow nanocrystals and their tunable optical properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9928 CAS .
W. Zhu, X. Cui, L. Wang, T. Liu and Q. Zhang, Monodisperse porous pod-like hematite: hydrothermal formation, optical absorbance, and magnetic properties, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 1003–1006 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Galuza, A. B. Beznosov and V. V. Eremenko, Optical absorption edge in α-Fe2O3: the exciton–magnon structure, Low Temp. Phys., 1998, 24, 726–729 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Marra, A. Blanco, S. Fonti, A. Jurewicz and V. Orofino, Fine hematite particles of Martian interest: absorption spectra and optical constants, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2005, 6, 132 CrossRef CAS .
J.-B. Shi, C.-W. Lee, J.-W. Guo, M.-J. Cheng, C. Wu, C.-J. Chen, Y.-C. Chen, Y.-T. Lin and C.-C. Chang, Optical and magnetic properties of elliptical hematite (α-Fe2O3) nanoparticles coated with uniform continuous layers of silica of different thickness, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 5268–5270 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jorand Sartoretti, B. D. Alexander, R. Solarska, I. A. Rutkowska, J. Augustynski and R. Cerny, Photoelectrochemical oxidation of water at transparent ferric oxide film electrodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13685–13692 CrossRef .
J. Wang, W. B. White and J. H. Adair, Optical properties of hydrothermally synthesized hematite particulate pigments, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 3449–3454 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, X. Yang, J. Chen, J. Liu, H. Wu, H. Zhan, C. Liang and M. Wu, Continuous shape- and spectroscopy-tuning of hematite nanocrystals, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 8411–8420 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hund, Inorganic pigments: bases for colored, uncolored, and transparent products, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1981, 20, 723–730 CrossRef .
N. P. Ryde and E. Matijevic, Color effects of uniform colloidal particles of different morphologies packed into films, Appl. Opt., 1994, 33, 7275–7281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamanoi, S. Nakashima and M. Katsura, Temperature dependence of reflectance spectra and color values of hematite by in situ, high-temperature visible micro-spectroscopy, Am. Mineral., 2009, 94, 90–97 CrossRef CAS .
J. Torrent and V. Barrón, The visible diffuse reflectance spectrum in relation to the color and crystal properties of hematite, Clays Clay Miner., 2003, 51, 309–317 CrossRef CAS .
N. Galvez, V. Barron and J. Torrent, Preparation and properties of hematite with structural phosphorus, Clays Clay Miner., 1999, 47, 375–385 CAS .
L. A. Marusak, R. Messier and W. B. White, Optical absorption spectrum of hematite, α-Fe2O3 near IR to UV, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1980, 41, 981–984 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Cherepy, D. B. Liston, J. A. Lovejoy, H. Deng and J. Z. Zhang, Ultrafast studies of photoexcited electron dynamics in γ- and α-Fe2O3 semiconductor nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 770 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatterjee, S. Sarkar and S. N. Bhattacharyya, Size effect in the photochemical generation of hydrogen from water by colloidal Fe2O3 particles, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 72, 183–187 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, L. Li, X. Wang and G. Li, Understanding of the finite size effects on lattice Vibrations and electronic transitions of nano α-Fe2O3, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17151–17156 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Fan, X. F. Fan, Z. H. Ni, Z. X. Shen, Y. P. Feng and B. S. Zou, Orientation-dependent Raman spectroscopy of single wurtzite CdS nanowires, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1865–1870 CAS .

          N. Tsuda, K. Nasu, A. Yanase and K. Siratori, Electronic Conduction in Oxide (Springer Series in Solid State Science 94), Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1991 Search PubMed .
B. Zou, W. Huang, M. Y. Han, S. F. Y. Li, W. Xiaochun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Pengfei and R. Wang, Anomalous optical properties and electron-phonon coupling enhancement in Fe2O3 nanoparticles coated with a layer of stearates, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1997, 58, 1315–1320 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Tolbert and A. P. Alivisatos, Size dependence of a first order solid–solid phase transition: the wurtzite to rock salt transformation in CdSe nanocrystals, Science, 1994, 265, 373–376 CAS .
B. S. Zou and V. Volkov, Surface modification on time-resolved fluorescences of Fe2O3 nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2000, 61, 757–764 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Brundle, T. J. Chuang and K. Wandelt, Core and valence level photoemission studies of iron oxide surfaces and the oxidation of iron, Surf. Sci., 1977, 68, 459–468 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Harvey and R. W. Linton, Chemical characterization of hydrous ferric oxides by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Anal. Chem., 1981, 53, 1684–1688 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wandelt, Photoemission studies of adsorbed oxygen and oxide layers, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1982, 2, 1–121 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Vempati, R. H. Loeppert, D. C. Dufner and D. L Cocke, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy as a tool to differentiate silicon-bonding state in amorphous iron oxides, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 1989, 54, 695–698 CrossRef .
R. R. Martin and R. S. C. Smart, X-ray photoelectron studies of anion adsorption on goethite, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 1987, 51, 54–56 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Harvey and R. W. Linton, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) op adsorbed zinc on amorphous hydrous ferric oxide, Colloids Surf., 1984, 11, 81–96 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yubero, A. R. González-Elipe and S. Tougaard, Determination of growth mechanisms by X-ray photoemission and ion scattering spectroscopies: application to thin iron oxide films deposited on SiO2, Surf. Sci., 2000, 457, 24–36 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manceau and J. M. Combes, Phys. Chem. Miner., 1988, 15, 283 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manceau and V. A. Drits, Local structure of ferrihydrite and feroxyhite by EXAFS spectroscopy, Clay Miner., 1993, 28, 165–184 CAS .
J. M. Combes, A. Manceau, G. Calas and J. Y. Bottero, Formation of ferric oxides from aqueous solutions: a polyhedral approach by X-ray absorption spectroscdpy: I. Hydrolysis and formation of ferric gels, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1989, 53, 583–594 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Combes, A. Manceau and G. Calas, Formation of ferric oxides from aqueous solutions: a polyhedral approach by X-ray absorption spectroscopy: II. Hematite formation from ferric gels, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1990, 54, 1083–1091 CrossRef CAS .
L. Charlet and A. A. Manceau, X-ray absorption spectroscopic study of the sorption of Cr(III) at the oxide–water interface: II. Adsorption, coprecipitation, and surface precipitation on hydrous ferric oxide, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1992, 148, 443–458 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manceau, L. Charlet, M. C. Boisset, B. Didier and L. Spadini, Sorption and speciation of heavy metals on hydrous Fe and Mn oxides. From microscopic to macroscopic, Appl. Clay Sci., 1992, 7, 201–223 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. O'Day, M. Newville, P. S. Neuhoff, N. Sahai and S. A. Carroll, X-ray absorption spectroscopy of strontium(II) coordination: I. Static and thermal disorder in crystalline, hydrated, and precipitated solids and in aqueous solution, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 222, 184–197 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sahai, S. A. Carroll, S. Roberts and P. A. O'Day, X-ray absorption spectroscopy of strontium(II) coordination: II. Sorption and precipitation at kaolinite, amorphous silica, and goethite surfaces, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 222, 198–212 CrossRef CAS .
E. Thimsen, S. Biswas, C. S. Lo and P. Biswas, Predicting the band structure of mixed transition metal oxides: theory and experiment, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2014–2021 Search PubMed .

          L. M. Sandratskii, M. Uhl and J. Kübler, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, Band theory for electronic and magnetic properties of ##IMG## [http://ej.iop.org/images/0953-8984/8/8/009/toc_img1.gif%5D],  1996, 8, 983 Search PubMed.
G. Rollmann, A. Rohrbach, P. Entel and J. Hafner, First-principles calculation of the structure and magnetic phases of hematite, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 165107 CrossRef .
T. Droubay, K. M. Rosso, S. M. Heald, D. E. McCready, C. M. Wang and S. A. Chambers, Structure, magnetism, and conductivity in epitaxial Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 hematite: experiment and density functional theory calculations, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 104412 CrossRef .
G. Rollmann, P. Entel, A. Rohrbach and J. Hafner, High-pressure characteristics of α-Fe2O3 using DFT + U, Phase Transitions, 2005, 78, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alvarez-Ramírez, J. M. Martínez-Magadán, J. R. B. Gomes and F. Illas, On the geometric structure of the (0001) hematite surface, Surf. Sci., 2004, 558, 4–14 CrossRef .
M. Blanchard, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri and E. Balan, First-principles calculation of the infrared spectrum of hematite, Am. Mineral., 2008, 93, 1019–1027 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kubicki, K. Paul and D. Sparks, Periodic density functional theory calculations of bulk and the (010) surface of goethite, Geochem. Trans., 2008, 9, 4 CrossRef .
J. Z. Zhang, Ultrafast studies of electron dynamics in semiconductor and metal colloidal nano-particles: effects of size and surface, Acc. Chem. Res., 1997, 30, 423–429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Zhang, Interfacial charge carrier dynamics of colloidal semiconductor nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 7239–7253 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov and D. W. McBranch, Femtosecond high-sensitivity, chirp-free transient absorption spectroscopy using kilohertz lasers, Opt. Lett., 1998, 23, 277–279 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kaiser, Ultrashort Laser Pulses: Generation and Applications, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1993 Search PubMed .
S. Backus, C. G. Durfee III, H. C. Kapteyn and M. M. Murnane, High power ultrafast lasers, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1998, 69, 1207–1223 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Roberti, B. A. Smith and J. Z. Zhang, Ultrafast electron dynamics at the liquid–metal interface: femtosecond studies using surface plasmons in aqueous silver colloid, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 102, 3860–3866 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link, C. Burda, B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, How long does it take to melt a gold nanorod? A femtosecond pump-probe absorption spectroscopic study, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 315, 12–18 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, Optical properties and ultrafast dynamics in metallic nanocrystals, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 331–366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Zhang, R. H. O'Neil, T. W. Roberti, J. L. McGowen and J. E. Evans, Femtosecond studies of photoinduced electron dynamics at the liquid–solid interface of semiconductor nano-particles in water, Springer Ser. Chem. Phys., 1994, 60, 316–317 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Lupo, F. Della Sala, L. Carbone, M. Zavelani-Rossi, A. Fiore, L. Luer, D. Polli, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Lanzani, Ultrafast electron-hole dynamics in core/shell CdSe/CdS dot/rod nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4582–4587 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peng, D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, J. C. Johnson, A. P. Alivisatos and R. J. Saykally, Femtosecond spectroscopy of carrier relaxation dynamics in type II CdSe/CdTe tetrapod heteronanostructures, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1809–1813 CrossRef CAS .
C.-K. Sun, S.-Z. Sun, K.-H. Lin, K. Y.-J. Zhang, H.-L. Liu, S.-C. Liu and J.-J. Wu, Ultrafast carrier dynamics in ZnO nanorods, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 023106 CrossRef .
J. M. Rehm, G. L. McLendon, Y. Nagasawa, K. Yoshihara, J. Moser and M. Gratzel, Femtosecond electron-transfer dynamics at a sensitizing dye-semiconductor (TiO2) interface, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 9577–9578 CrossRef .
T. A. Heimer, E. J. Heilweil, C. A. Bignozzi and G. J. Meyer, Electron injection, recombination and halide oxidation dynamics at dye-sensitized TiO2 interfaces, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4256–4262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Sn-Doped hematite nanostructures for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Joly, J. R. Williams, S. A. Chambers, G. Xiong, W. P. Hess and D. M. Laman, Carrier dynamics in α-Fe2O3 (0001) thin films and single crystals probed by femtosecond transient absorption and reflectivity, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 053521 CrossRef .
V. A. Nadtochenko, N. N. Denisov, V. Y. Gak, F. E. Gostev, A. A. Titov, O. M. Sarkisov and V. V. Nikandrov, Femtosecond relaxation of photoexcited states in nanosized semiconductor particles of iron oxides, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2002, 51, 457 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fu, Z. Wu, X. Ai, J. Zhang, Y. Nie, S. Xie, G. Yang and B. Zou, Time-resolved spectroscopic behavior of Fe2O3 and ZnFe2O4 nanocrystals, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 3406 CrossRef CAS .
C. Thomsen, H. T. Grahn, H. J. Maris and J. Tauc, Surface generation and detection of phonons by picosecond light pulses, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 34, 4129 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Grahn, H. J. Maris and J. Tauc, Picosecond Ultrasonics, IEEE J. Quant. Electron., 1989, 25, 2562 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Y. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Facile synthesis of highly photoactive α-Fe2O3-based films for water oxidation, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, L. Vayssieres, S. Shen, L. Guo, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang, B. R. Antoun and S. S. Mao, A perspective on solar-driven water splitting with all-oxide hetero-nanostructures, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3889–3899 CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, J. R. Bakke, D. A. Wheeler, W.-C. Wang, C. Chang, B. R. Antoun, J. Z. Zhang, J. Guo, S. F. Bent, S. S. Mao and L. Vayssieres, Electron enrichment in 3d transition metal oxide hetero-nanostructures, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3855–3861 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, K. Sivula, J. Tang, M. Gratzel, D. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Dynamics of photogenerated holes in nanocrystalline α-Fe2O3 electrodes for water oxidation probed by transient absorption spectroscopy, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 716–718 RSC .
L. Vayssieres, C. Sathe, S. M. Butorin, D. K. Shuh, J. Nordgren and J. Guo, One-dimensional quantum-confinement effect in α-Fe2O3 ultrafine nanorod arrays, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2320–2323 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, J. Ye, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug, J. Tang and J. R. Durrant, Correlating long-lived photogenerated hole populations with photocurrent densities in hematite water oxidation photoanodes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6304–6312 CAS .

          J. Z. Zhang, Optical Properties and Spectroscopy of Nanomaterials, World Scientific Publishing Co., Hackensack, NJ,  2009 Search PubMed .
N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Photoelectrochemical studies of oriented nanorod thin films of hematite, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2456–2461 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Desai, H. M. Pathan, S.-K. Min, K.-D. Jung and O. S. Joo, FT-IR, XPS and PEC characterization of spray deposited hematite thin films, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252, 1870–1875 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Satsangi, S. Kumari, A. P. Singh, R. Shrivastav and S. Dass, Nanostructured hematite for photoelectrochemical generation of hydrogen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 312–318 CrossRef CAS .
S. Boumaza, A. Boudjemaa, S. Omeiri, R. Bouarab, A. Bouguelia and M. Trari, Physical and photoelectrochemical characterizations of hematite α-Fe2O3: application to photocatalytic oxygen evolution, Sol. Energy, 2010, 84, 715–721 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and J. A. Turner, Characterization of hematite thin films for photoelectrochemical water splitting in a dual photoelectrode device, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, F173–F178 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Ahmed, J. Leduc and S. F. Haller, Photoelectrochemical and impedance characteristics of specular hematite. 1. Photoelectrochemical parallel conductance, and trap rate studies, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 6655–6660 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, F. Le Formal, M. Cornuz, J. Brillet, N. Tetreault, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Cathodic shift in onset potential of solar oxygen evolution on hematite by 13-group oxide overlayers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2512–2515 CAS .
P. Hiralal, S. Saremi-Yarahmadi, B. C. Bayer, H. Wang, S. Hofmann, K. G. Upul Wijayantha and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Nanostructured hematite photoelectrochemical electrodes prepared by the low temperature thermal oxidation of iron, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1819–1825 CrossRef CAS .
R. Morrish, M. Rahman, J. M. D. MacElroy and C. A. Wolden, Activation of hematite nanorod arrays for photoelectrochemical water splitting, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 474–479 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Gratzel, Solar water splitting: progress using hematite α-Fe2O3 photoelectrodes, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Controlling photoactivity in ultrathin hematite films for solar water-splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1099–1107 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Efficiency of solar water splitting using semiconductor electrodes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999–2017 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Joly, J. R. Williams, S. A. Chambers, G. Xiong, W. P. Hess and D. M. Laman, Carrier dynamics in α-Fe2O3 (0001) thin films and single crystals probed by femtosecond transient absorption and reflectivity, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 6 CrossRef .
N. J. Cherepy, D. B. Liston, J. A. Lovejoy, H. M. Deng and J. Z. Zhang, Ultrafast studies of photoexcited electron dynamics in gamma- and α-Fe2O3 semiconductor nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 770–776 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Stojic, M. P. Marceta, S. P. Sovilj and S. S. Miljanic, Hydrogen generation from water electrolysis – possibilities of energy saving, J. Power Sources, 2003, 118, 315–319 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, A monolithic photovoltaic-photoelectrochemical device for hydrogen production via water splitting, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese, Photooxidation of water at α-Fe2O3 electrodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, C130 CrossRef .
G. Goodlet, S. Faty, S. Cardoso, P. P. Freitas, A. M. P. Simoes, M. G. S. Ferreira and M. D. Belo, The electronic properties of sputtered chromium and iron oxide films, Corros. Sci., 2004, 46, 1479–1499 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Glasscock, P. R. F. Barnes, I. C. Plumb, A. Bendavid and P. J. Martin, Structural, optical and electrical properties of undoped polycrystalline hematite thin films produced using filtered arc deposition, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 1716–1724 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy, R. Shinar and J. P. Ziegler, α-Fe2O3 Photoanodes doped with silicon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2307–2309 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. G. Martinez and M. Gratzel, Translucent thin film Fe2O3 photoanodes for efficient water splitting by sunlight: nanostructure-directing effect of Si-doping, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582–4583 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Decoupling feature size and functionality in solution-processed, porous hematite electrodes for solar water splitting, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4155–4160 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y. S. Hu, J. Lefton, S. Sharma, A. J. Forman and E. McFarland, Oriented Ti doped hematite thin film as active photoanodes synthesized by facile APCVD, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1020–1028 CAS .
K. Sivula, R. Zboril, F. Le Formal, R. Robert, A. Weidenkaff, J. Tucek, J. Frydrych and M. Gratzel, Photoelectrochemical water splitting with mesoporous hematite prepared by a solution-based colloidal approach, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7436–7444 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Lukowski and S. Jin, Improved synthesis and electrical properties of Si-doped α-Fe2O3 nanowires, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12388–12395 CAS .
F. J. Morin, Electrical properties of α-Fe2O3 and α-Fe2O3 containing titanium, Phys. Rev., 1951, 83, 1005–1010 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Graetzel and D. R. Gamelin, Photo-assisted electrodeposition of cobalt-phosphate (Co-Pi) catalyst on hematite photoanodes for solar water oxidation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 CAS .
D. K. Zhong, J. W. Sun, H. Inumaru and D. R. Gamelin, Solar water oxidation by Composite Catalyst/α-Fe2O3 photoanodes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6086 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pendlebury, M. Barroso, A. Cowan, K. Sivula, J. Tang, M. Gratzel, D. Klug and J. Durrant, Dynamics of photogenerated holes in nanocrystalline α-Fe2O3 electrodes for water oxidation probed by transient absorption spectroscopy, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 716–718 RSC .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, A. Rothschild and S. Warren, Probing the photoelectrochemical properties of hematite (α-Fe2O3) electrodes using hydrogen peroxide as a hole scavenger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958–964 CAS .
B. M. Klahr, A. B. F. Martinson and T. W. Hamann, Photoelectrochemical investigation of ultrathin film iron oxide solar cells prepared by atomic layer deposition, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 461–468 CrossRef CAS .
S. Somekawa, Y. Kusumoto, M. Abdulla-Al-Mamun, M. Muruganandham and Y. Horie, Wet-type Fe2O3 solar cells based on Fe2O3 films prepared by laser ablation: drastic temperature effect, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2150–2152 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Damon A. Wheeler	Damon A. Wheeler is currently a 3rd year PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at UC Santa Cruz. He received his BS degree in chemical engineering from New Mexico Tech in 2007 and is currently a PhD candidate in Prof. Jin Zhang's laboratory. His recent research focuses on the optical and dynamic properties of metal, metal oxide, and semiconductor nanomaterials and their applications in solar energy conversion and photothermal ablation therapy. He is a member of the ACS and AAAS.
Gongming Wang	Gongming Wang earned his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2008. He joined the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department at University of California, Santa Cruz, in the fall of 2008. He is currently a PhD candidate in Professor Yat Li's group. His research focuses on nanostructured metal oxides for photoelectrochemical applications.
Yichuan Ling	Yichuan Ling is currently a 3rd year PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at UC Santa Cruz. He received his BS degree in chemistry from Fudan University, Shanghai, in 2009. His recent research focuses on metal oxide nanomaterials and their applications in solar energy conversion, and group III–V semiconductor synthesis under the guidance of Prof. Yat Li.
Yat Li	Yat Li received his BS and PhD in chemistry from the University of Hong Kong. Following a postdoctoral appointment in the group of Prof. Charles Lieber at Harvard University, he joined the University of California, Santa Cruz, as Assistant Professor of Chemistry in 2007. His research focuses on design and synthesis of semiconductor metal oxide nanowires and investigation of their fundamental properties and explores their potentials for solar energy conversion.
Jin Z. Zhang	Jin Zhong Zhang is a professor of chemistry and biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC). He received his BSc degree in chemistry from Fudan University, Shanghai, and PhD in physical chemistry from the University of Washington. His PhD work focused on experimental and theoretical studies of molecular reaction dynamics in the gas phase. He was a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of California, Berkeley, from 1989 to 1992, where he studied reaction dynamics in solutions using ultrafast laser and computer simulation techniques. In 1992, he joined the faculty at UCSC, where he is currently full professor of chemistry and biochemistry. Zhang's recent research interests focus on design, synthesis, characterization, and exploration of applications of advanced materials including semiconductor, metal oxide, and metal nanomaterials, with emphasis on their optical properties and dynamic properties as well as applications in solar energy conversion and biomedical detection/therapy. He has authored over 200 publications and two books. He is a fellow of AAAS, APS, and ACS, and has served as senior editor for JPC since 2004.

Broader context
Because of the ever-growing demand for cleaner and more environmentally benign sources of energy, hydrogen has emerged as a leading candidate as an alternative clean fuel to help reduce our current dependency on fossil fuels due to its low density, high energy density, and favorable side-products upon burning. To that end, photoelectrochemical water splitting represents a promising method to achieve sustainable and appealing solar-to-hydrogen energy conversion. A key challenge related to photoelectrochemical water splitting is the quest to identify and characterize suitable photoelectrode materials that will readily facilitate hydrogen generation from water splitting. From this, nanostructured hematite (α-Fe2O3) has shown itself to be an excellent candidate due to its abundance, low cost, chemical stability, and favorable bandgap energy. This review provides an overview of the fundamentals of photoelectrochemical water splitting, the synthesis of a variety of shapes, sizes, and morphologies of hematite, its optical characterization, charge carrier dynamics, and photoelectrochemical properties.

H2O(l) → H2(g) + ½O2(g) (ΔG ≈ 237.2 kJ mol−1, E0 = 1.23 V vs. NHE)

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM image of 3D flower-like a-Fe2O3 nanostructure synthesized via a solvothermal method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. (b) SEM image of α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays synthesized by a hydrothermal method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cross-sectional SEM images of 500 nm thick mesoporous Si-doped α-Fe2O3 films grown by APCVD on a FTO conducting glass. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the designed core–shell Fe2O3–TiSi2 nanonets. (b and c) TEM and HRTEM images of Fe2O3–TiSi2 core@shell structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of deposition–annealing method for α-Fe2O3. (b–f) SEM images of mesoporous α-Fe2O3 films prepared by using various FeCl3 concentrations in a range of 5–80 mM; scale bars are 500 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Top view and side view of α-Fe2O3 nanotube arrays synthesized by electrochemical anodization methods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–d, top) Bright field TEM images of Fe2O3 particles of various sizes. The insets show electron diffraction patterns. (a and b, middle) Single-crystal selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns and their corresponding bright field HRTEM images for Fe2O3 of 53 nm size. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Red images: AFM images of iron oxide sourced from various iron precursors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88.	 

 	Fig. 7  Low resolution (a and b) and high resolution (c and d) TEM images of Fe2O3 nanowires. Note the porous nature of the nanowire as well as the high degree of polycrystallinity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89.	 
Mineral name/formula	Hematite α-Fe2O3	Maghemite γ-Fe2O3	Goethite α-FeOOH	Akaganeite β-FeOOH	Magnetite Fe3O4
Crystal system	Trigonal	Cubic or tetragonal	Orthorhombic	Monoclinic, β = 90.24°	Cubic
Most intense XRD spacings, nm	0.270, 0.368, 0.252	0.252, 0.295	0.418, 0.245, 0.269	0.333, 0.255, 0.7467	0.253, 0.297
δ-FeOOH	297; 392; 
Ferrihydrite	; 510; 710
Hematite	; 245; 292; 411; 497; 612

 	Fig. 8  (a) Absorption and (b) reflectance spectra of the α-Fe2O3 nanocrystals of different sizes, where α-12, α-23, and α-48 express particle size is 12 nm, 23 nm and 48 nm, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97.	 

 	Fig. 9  Absorption (s) and emission spectra excited at 300 nm () and excited at 390 nm () of (a) γ-Fe2O3 (maghemite) and (b) α-Fe2O3 (hematite). The pump wavelength of 390 nm used in the ultrafast measurements is also shown. Two absorption spectra are shown for each sample; the samples with OD ≈ 1 were used in the pump–probe experiments, while the spectra for the dilute samples are used to show the absorption line shape. The inset shows the excitation spectrum for emission detected at 400 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23.	 

 	Fig. 10  Ultrafast transient absorption decay profiles of γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles. (A) 0–8.3 ps, (B) 0–48 ps, and (C) 0–230 ps. Fitting incorporated a nonlinear least-squares algorithm to a triple exponential decay convolved with a Gaussian representing the cross-correlation of the 390 nm pump and the 720 nm probe pulses. Time constants τ1, τ2, and τ3 were calculated to be 0.36, 4.2, and 67 ps, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23.	 

 	Fig. 11  Normalized ultrafast transient absorption decay profiles of undoped and Ti-doped Fe2O3 films in 0–10 ps (inset) and 0–300 ps windows. They were fit simultaneously using a nonlinear least squares fitting algorithm to a triple exponential decay convolved with a Gaussian, representing the cross-correlation of the 440 nm pump and 620 nm probe pulses. The solid lines are fitted curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164.	 

 	Fig. 12  Ultrafast transient absorption decay profiles of hematite nanowires: (a) the 0–10 ps, (b) the 0–40 ps, and (c) the 0–200 ps windows are fit simultaneously using a nonlinear least-squares fitting algorithm to a triple exponential decay convolved with a Gaussian representing the cross-correlation of the 540 nm pump (100 nJ per pulse cm2, attenuated with neutral density filters) and 620 nm probe pulses. The transient absorption has a pulse width limited rise time and is best fit to a triple exponential with 0.362, 2.451, and 73.37 ps and 0.351, 2.304, and 67.4 ps time constants for 650 and 800 °C samples, respectively. (d) Normalized ultrafast transient absorption decay profiles (0–200 ps) of hematite nanowires sintered at 650 °C, prepared in the solution with (red line) and without (green line) ethanol. Inset: the same decay profiles in 0–10 ps window. The 3D plot is a plot of the Sn-doped Fe2O3. A pulse-width-limited (<130 fs) rise is followed by a triple exponential fast decay and illustrates the probe wavelength-dependence of the transient absorption kinetic decay processes across part of the visible spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158.	 

 	Fig. 13  Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy for hetero-nanostructure electrodes: (a) transient difference absorbance spectra for α-Fe2O3–WO3 before excitation (black squares) and 500 fs after excitation (blue circles). Transient absorption signals for α-Fe2O3 (black) and α-Fe2O3–WO3 (red) at the picosecond time scale for 579.31 nm probe (b) and 674.23 nm probe (c) and the sub-nanosecond time scale for 579.31 nm probe (d) and 674.23 nm probe (e). The 3D plot is a plot of the WO3-doped Fe2O3. A pulse-width-limited (<130 fs) rise is followed by a triple exponential fast decay and illustrates the strong probe wavelength-dependence of the transient absorption kinetic decay processes across part of the visible spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Transient absorbance spectra before (black circles) and 500 fs (blue squares) after excitation. Normalized transient absorption signals for four representative probe wavelengths at ∼1 ps (b) and ∼10 ps (c) time regimes. (d) Transient absorption (averages of signals from 70 to 100 ps) after ultrafast excitation of TixOy–Fe2O3 array at various probe wavelengths (blue squares). Also included is the normalized steady-state absorption (black solid line), indicating the correlation of the transient data with the bandedge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166.	 
Counter cathode: 2H+(aq) + 2e− → H2(g)
Photoanode: 2H2O(l) + 2h+ → 4H+(aq) + 2e− + O2(g)

 	Fig. 15  Energy diagram of n-type hematite photoanode and schematic illustration of photoelectrochemical water splitting on photoanode and cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Comparison of photocurrent-potential curves of planar Fe2O3 and Fe2O3/TiSi2 heterostructures. (b) UV-vis absorption of Fe2O3 films. (c) IPCE comparison of planar and heterostructures at 1.53 V vs. RHE. (d) APCE of heterostructured Fe2O3/TiSi2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Comparison of photocurrent densities of undoped and Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 films. (b) IPCE spectra collected at 1.02 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 18  Photoelectrochemical performance of an unmodified hematite photoanode (solid black trace) and the same photoanode modified with IrO2 nanoparticles (solid gray trace). Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. The dashed trace was the previously reported best PEC data for Fe2O3 without usage of a catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 19  Calcination-temperature dependence of I–V curves collected for α-Fe2O3 based solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
