Chalcogenide-based, all-dielectric, ultrathin metamaterials with perfect, incidence-angle sensitive, mid-infrared absorption: inverse design, analysis ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR02814F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR02814F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 11455-11469Chalcogenide-based, all-dielectric, ultrathin metamaterials with perfect, incidence-angle sensitive, mid-infrared absorption: inverse design, analysis, and applications

        
          
            Roy 
            Avrahamy
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Benny 
            Milgrom
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Moshe 
            Zohar
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Mark 
            Auslender
          
        
      a
aSchool of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.B 653, Beer-Sheva 8410501, Israel. E-mail: roiav@post.bgu.ac.il
bSchool of Electrical Engineering, Jerusalem College of Technology, P.O.B 16031, Jerusalem 9372115, Israel. E-mail: milgromb@gmail.com
cElectrical and Electronics Engineering Department, Shamoon College of Engineering, P.O.B. 950, Beer Sheva 8410802, Israel. E-mail: moshezo@ac.sce.ac.il
Received 
      3rd May 2021
    , Accepted 27th May 2021First published on 28th May 2021AbstractThe demand for miniature, low-cost, utmost efficient optical absorbers triggered ongoing research efforts to minimize the overall design thickness, particularly the photo-active layer, while still maintaining a high optical absorptance. In this study, we present all-dielectric nanophotonic metamaterials of optimized, fabrication compatible and tolerant, architecture for perfect mid-wave infrared absorptance. Overall sub-vacuum-wavelength thick designs are intended to couple and confine light inside an ultrathin 100 nm PbTe photo-absorbing film. Three application-oriented structures, with dimensions inversely designed to provide diverse requirements, are introduced: a two-dimensional metasurface embedded design for unpolarised wide-band absorption and two, one-dimensional metasurface embedded designs for s-polarised wide-band and non-polarised narrow-band absorption. A comprehensive study of the structures’ spectral absorptance under normal- and oblique-incidence irradiation is performed. The conical-mounting absorptance analysis elucidates that the high absorption can be continuously spectrally tuned with the azimuthal component of the incidence angle. To the best of our knowledge, this property is discussed for the first time for all-dielectric metamaterials. Also, the ranges of geometrical tuning of the peak absorptance are investigated in detail, and usage of another prospective semiconductor absorber is explored. To unfold the mutual, and essentially different, physical mechanisms that fuel the perfect absorptance, an elaborated analysis is presented. The electromagnetic power transport, portrayed by the Poynting vector, displays three-dimensional singular flows around points, such as vorticity centers, saddles, sinks, and spirals. The potential mid-infrared applications which can benefit from the peculiar properties of the designed structures, such as spectroscopy, sensing, thermal radiation manipulations, and communication, are also discussed.
1. Introduction
Perfect optical absorption devices are in high demand for various applications, from heat storage and photovoltaic solar cells to photodetectors (PDs). PDs are indispensable components in optical imaging arrays and sensors, on-chip photonic interconnects, and communication systems. Many PD setups require photoactive layers with very high absorptance, broad/narrow-band, and polarised/non-polarised spectral features and low-noise operation, including that at room-temperature, to attain the target performance, subject to the particular setup and detection scheme. In large imaging arrays, the enhanced efficiency of embedded PDs is crucial to avoid high-density packaging faults. On-chip integrated circuits (ICs) require thin, compatible with current planar IC technology, PDs of high operation speed and room-temperature signal-to-noise ratio, approached by reducing the junction capacitance, transit time, and dark noise, respectively. The latter can benefit from thinning the photoactive layer, but this reduces accordingly the efficiency of monolithic PDs in which light traverses the layer once. It would be desirable to meet in one design all the above challenges and also the minimum weight and material usage, though the approaches developed to this end until recently struggled for that with limited or partial success.
Increasing the impact of thin absorbers so as to approach topmost PD efficiencies was achieved with the technology of resonant cavity enhanced (RCE) PDs.1 There, the active layer is enclosed between two multilayers, each of which contains a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) and a layer adjacent to the active one, so that the adjacent layers form an optical cavity. In RCE-PDs, under cavity-resonance conditions1 light traverses the active layer many times, by which most of the incident power can be absorbed. This enables a much more efficient (and faster in photodiodes) response and higher-temperature operation with a much thinner absorber than in monolithic PD counterparts, but these benefits may be traded off against a smaller spectral bandwidth. The RCE-PDs’ application succeeded mostly with A3B5 semiconductors for ranges up to visible inclusive. Yet, with the absorbers for infrared (IR) ranges, e.g., Si for near IR (NIR), and lead-tin chalcogenide (LTC) Pb1−xSnxX (X = S, Se, Te) and mercury-cadmium telluride (MCT) Hg1−xCdxTe2 for mid-wave IR (MWIR), the topmost-efficiency RCE-PDs, due to bounds imposed by tailoring the round-trip phase and DBR's reflectance,1 should contain a so large number of layers that it would get over a technology-defined critical value. Besides thickening, this introduces growth defects that impair the DBRs’ optics making the performance at goal unreachable. Thus in the IR ranges, the RCE design approach can hardly meet at once the high-efficiency and small-thickness demands in one PD design.
With the advent of metasurface (MS) and metamaterial (MM) concepts, great hope arose for upgrading known devices, which operate in different electromagnetic (EM) spectrum ranges, to make them thinner while retaining high efficiency. With nearly flat designer structures, MSs proved operative to implement a diversity of functions which seemed unfeasible with conventional EM designs. But as for the perfect absorption, the earliest, to our knowledge, overview3 discussed the corresponding MS applications only for RF, GHz, and few THz ranges. Only a few comments in ref. 3 are devoted to optical-frequency MSs and MMs, for which the absorption, if any, is due to the surface plasmon (SP) effect. Though the field of optical MSs and MMs has steadily matured over the last decade,4–9 the attention has been paid mostly to MSs and MMs for perfect achromatic meta-optics,4,10 light phase- and polarization-control,9,10 impedance-matching, micro- and nano-antennas,5–7 and complex optical beam generation.10–12 A lot of research has been reported on tuning the MSs’/MMs’ performance, by varying their geometry and physical properties of their active constituent thermally, electrically, or optically. Yet, few references to the perfect-absorption MSs/MMs for the IR and visible ranges are found, including two and three ones about flat-layered MMs and periodically-patterned metal MSs on lossy dielectrics, respectively, and graphene,4–6 and two recent ones involving polaritonic and phase-change absorbers.13,14 The cited5 books on photovoltaic (PV) and thermo-PV devices briefly discuss light-trapping in solar cells by DBRs and ±1-st order dielectric gratings, which are not MSs in the adopted sense, and spectral-selective radiation sourcing with heated metal gratings, respectively.
The MS assisted, perfect MWIR, absorbers reported4–6,13,14 so far can serve as thermal-signature, in particular bolometric, PDs. The presence of metal MSs and back contacts in them limits their use in the applications, the market of which is dominated by photoconductive (PC) and PV PDs. In this regard, just the RCE-PD design would offer a chance to minimize the contact area, but, as outlined above, its deployment in the IR range proves impractical in many cases. Therefore, it is desirable to redesign using dielectric MSs7–9 a parent IR RCE-PD to make from it a PD of reduced complexity, much thinner, and yet perfectly absorptive.
In this quest, we proposed an upgrade replacing the front DBR in RCE-PDs with a one-dimensional (1D) grating-on-layer (GL) MS, and reported15,16 proof-of-concept tolerant designs of ∼100% efficient MWIR MCT-PDs with a back DBR twice as thin as compared to that of an optimal RCE-PD comprising the same materials. Yet, with the back DBR, the lower bounds on the cavity and DBR thicknesses, inherent to the RCE PDs, remain, due to which further thinning without impairing the performance is not possible. For this reason, the GL-DBR design of NIR Si-PDs still needs too many layers. To overcome those bounds, we suggested replacing the back DBR with some GL also, thus wrapping the cavity-absorber layout with two MSs. We have validated this idea by the design of ∼100% absorptive MWIR MCT- and NIR Si-based, a few vacuum-wavelengths thick MMs.17,18
To our knowledge, the above route to highly thin the PC and PV PDs with the dielectric MSs is novel and, as we believe, promising. In this study, we aspire to offer a new leap towards this aim, allowing for thinning a perfect MWIR absorber down to the sub-vacuum wavelength scale, which will eventually overcome the lower-bound limitation in the device thickness. We realize this, employing a combined micro/nanocavity19 and MS-assisted EM near-field light confinement, with which we succeed in designing several ultrathin highly efficient photo-absorbing MMs to operate in the MWIR range. The main article content is organized into five sections. Section 2 discusses the materials and architecture of the MMs we consider for topmost photo-absorption, and implementations for their designs and performance simulations. For the needed functionality, in subsection 1 we suggest embedding periodically patterned MSs and present a nanophotonics viewpoint on light confinement in such structures; in 2 we detail the numerical simulation methods and principles of optimizing the MMs’ performance. Section 3 reports and discusses the most important results: subsection 1 presents the optimized MMs and their highly peaked normal spectral absorptance; subsections 2 and 3 describe the angular absorptance and internal EM field related quantities, respectively; and subsection 4 presents the MMs’ spectral-angular absorptance patterns. Section 4 addresses the naturally arising inquiry to what extent the designed MMs remain highly absorptive at connected sets of wavelengths (λ), tolerating variations in the structural dimensions or allowing some other light absorbers. In section 5, potential applications of the designed MMs are suggested, and section 6 concludes the study.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Structures’ materials and architecture
The choice of a material for bare photo-absorption depends on the application, spectral range and above-noted structural and operational demands. But in practical electronic PDs, these are by and far well-explored semiconductors. For the MWIR range, which is of interest in this study, the narrow, composition-tunable, bandgap LTC and MCT competed until the early 1990s20 to be the key photo-absorber. LTC has advantages over MCT in part due to the orders-of-magnitude smaller Auger-recombination coefficient, weakly varying with the temperature in the 77 K–295 K range.21–23 Similar comparison holds also as regards some A3B5 with comparable bandgaps.24,25 Though MCT won the technological race,20,26 attempts to fabricate reliable LTC thin films never ceased (see e.g. ref. 27–29 and references therein), and today interest in LTC for uncooled MWIR PDs is steadily growing. For example, very efficient RCE PbTe PDs30,31 and monolithic room-temperature PbSe32,33 and PbTe34 PDs have been reported. Also, PbSe thin film PDs have been assessed for use in optical communication35 and IR imaging.36 Thus, reevaluating LTC for MWIR applications seems relevant and timely. For this reason, but not only this, we chose PbTe (with a band gap of 0.32 eV at 300 K) as the photo-absorbing material in the structures under study. The other reason, which will be argued later, is that the refractive index (RI) of PbTe is one of the largest among RIs of well technologically available and usable optical materials. PbTe has a lattice mismatch with Si and Ge, so it can be grown in the microelectronics fab with only buffer layers, for which the best materials are BaF2 and CaF220 (for an on-chip CaF2/Si bi-layer PD, see e.g. ref. 37).

Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the considered enhanced MWIR photo-absorption MM. It comprises (top down): an air-Ge/Ge GL, in which the grating is, in general, a two-dimensional (2D) cuboid-mesa pattern with Λx,y and Wx,y being the lateral periods and inter-mesa distances, respectively; a PbTe layer is sandwiched between two CaF2 layers, and a Si layer is beneath on a substrate, via which light is coupled to the structure.
 Fig. 1  The proposed and studied enhanced MWIR photo-absorption structure, showing the frame and incidence angles. The structure's schematic, materials, dimensions, and irradiation mode are described in the text. 
Let us argue the proposed design practicality. The layers’ stack prior to the grating can be fabricated using bottom-to-top growth on the substrate and layers’ deposition. Si on SiO2-glass (SOG) wafers with overall thickness in excess of 250 μm are commercially available (Plan Optik AG) in few forms. The SOG wafers differ from those grown with mature silicon-on-insulator (SOI) technology in which SiO2 is the bulk in the former, as we need, whereas, such is Si in the latter. Raw SOG wafers, with the crystalline Si thickness down to 20 μm (Plan Optik AG, https://planoptik.com/products/substrate-wafers), meet well the demands of our design. As with SOI, the device layer should be thinned to a required thickness by wasting an excess Si. Due to the similar structure and small lattice parameter mismatch (∼0.03 Å) of CaF2 and Si, their heteroepitaxy is well available for a long time and has been improving.38 Such well-known methods of thin-film growth as molecular- and hot wall-beam epitaxies apply well to the growth of PbTe on CaF2/Si stacks; this and the previous steps can also be successive parts of the unified epitaxy process, see ref. 20 and citations therein. Depositing photosensitive polycrystalline PbTe films with thermal evaporation on few materials, including CaF2, was successfully probed,27,29 which can be also a method of choice for our design. The electrical contacts to the PbTe layer, needed in PDs, can be elaborated just as done for the PbTe RCE-PDs.30,31
Coating the II–VI compounds with CaF2, patented long ago,39 and reported independently, e.g., for Pb1−xSnxTe as the routine step of complex fabrication,40 can be applied to finalize enclosing the PbTe layer. Furthermore, depositing the Ge layer on the upper CaF2 layer can be performed with a B-type heteroepitaxy developed in ref. 41. Eventually, the Ge-air/Ge GL can be obtained with the long-standing dry, in particular reactive-ion, etching techniques via specially designed masks,42 and the emergent technologies of choice such as direct-write lithography (DWL), pattern-transfer, and hybrid-patterning lithography,43 etching-assisted femtosecond laser machining44 and various parallel DLW methods.45
The GL in Fig. 1 is a simplest dielectric MS that, with the designed dimensions, as argued further, is a resonant MS.7,8 This and a multilayer it covers build up an MM. In our short paper,46 the MM architecture shown in Fig. 1 was considered only with an 1D GL MS, at normal incidence and with no concern about the absorption spectrum width and shape. The present study fundamentally and substantially extends46 as regards this concept using 2D GL MSs, tailoring spectral bandwidths/shapes and revealing unprecedented incidence angle tunability capabilities.
It has been argued46 that the MM shown in Fig. 1 and the RCE PD1 are graphically similar, but use different mechanisms of light–matter interaction enhancement. The mechanism in the MMs studied here is an EM field re-circulation in micro/nanocavities, which may confine light to the sub-wavelength (SW) dimensional micro/nano-scale volumes,19 due to their feature sizes, and so could yield designs much thinner than the RCE,30,31 GL-DBR,15,16 and dual GL17,18 ones. Such a near-field enhanced (NFE) resonant confinement appears to adequately describe the optical response for the MMs under study. They are periodic assemblies of identical vertical (top-to-substrate) cutouts, which are cuboids of the micro-scale cross section area ΛxΛy, and their heights are equal to the overall MM thickness t (see Fig. 1). In the 1D GL limit, which we also consider, these are rectangles with sides Λx, t. By this logic, we will view each cutout as a “microcavity” (quotes indicate its notional nature), which was also the concept substantiated in ref. 46. A standalone MS line/mesa is an optical resonator at dmin ∼ λ/n, where dmin and n are its minimum feature size and RI, respectively. With this and the further interplay of the inter-line/mesa distance/s, patterning period/s, and cladding thickness, one can engineer a MS, as a whole, to be a resonant one.5–8 In turn, a resonant MS may serve as a near-field retro-reflector to assist the “microcavity” resonance, and hence the above noted NFE light confinement and absorption.

Table 1 displays RIs of the selected materials at the set central-design wavelength (CDW) λ0 = 3.5 μm. Prerequisites for a strongly confining microcavity19 and resonant MS5–8 are high in-depth and in-plane RI contrasts, respectively. Table 1 shows that the material assembly we chose meets this demand very well due to the above-noted RI's superiority of PbTe, and high RIs of Ge and Si. Also, of the compounds unique to interface PbTe, CaF2 was chosen for its lower RI. Thus, it turns out that the PbTe deposition's complication, that is, the buffer layers’ demand, can benefit the MM's design since the layers have a rather low RI. Another absorber option will be considered in section 4.
Table 1 The RIs n + ik of the materials at the CDW, λ0 = 3.5 μm




SiO2
Si
CaF2
PbTe
Ge




1.406
3.432
1.414
6.162 + i0.154
4.035




2.2. Methods
All the simulations were performed with an in-house improved version of rigorous coupled wave analysis (RCWA), coded using MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc.). This includes: (i) an in-layer S-matrix propagation algorithm,47 which furnishes unconditional numerical stability; (ii) Fourier-factorization rules recast to achieve convergence with increasing truncation order, due, respectively, to line and zigzag inverse Laurent rules47–51 and to the normal-vector method.52–54 These codes are integrated with trial-and-error automated multi-start optimization routines55,56 implemented in the MATLAB Optimization Toolbox.57 This integration makes it possible for us to perform real-time computer-aided design of the multi-layered grating structures with a predefined optimal response. A graphical user interface, built in the MATLAB environment, runs the entire software package, while managing the input/output. The optimized objective function in this study is, as in ref. 46, the spectral normal-incidence optical absorptance A(λ) under backside plane-wave irradiation, but extended to the general polarisation. Though the PV/PC response of a semiconductor layer does not always correlate positively with its absorptance as occurs, e.g., in films with many grain boundaries, the PV and PC PDs are fabricated with epitaxial and high-quality polycrystalline photo-absorbing layers. For these, assessing the internal quantum efficiency via A(λ) has widespread use in archetypal designs, and complementing electron-device simulations comply well with the optical modeling, see e.g. ref. 1, 30 and 31.
The optimal design aims at maximizing an array of A(λ) samples, for which the sampling is taken at wavelengths λ0 and λi symmetrically around λ0. If a wide A(λ) spectrum is the objective, the array is expanded until the optimization attains A(λi) > 95%, A(λ0) ≃ 100%; otherwise the array is shrunk and narrow spectra, peaked at λ0, result. This design works with the emerging and fast-developing inverse nanophotonics approach.58 The optimizations are performed for: the xz or yz incidence plane (IP); and s- and p-polarised incident light (in which the electric field E is perpendicular to and parallel to the IP, respectively). Due to the prescribed normal incidence, the xz IP s- and p-polarised irradiation and the yz IP p- and s-polarised irradiation are pairwise equivalent. Also, we performed post-design simulations and analysis of the spectral-angular absorptance A(λ,θ,φ), over appropriate ranges of λ, and the polar (θ) and azimuth (φ) incidence angles, which is an enhancement of the treatment in ref. 46.
In what follows, we consider two cases of the structure shown in Fig. 1, where MS contains: (i) a x-periodic lamellae grating, i.e. Wy = 0,Λx = Λ; and (ii) an equally x- and y-periodic square-cuboid mesas grating Λx = Λy = Λ, Wx = Wy. In the designs, we maintain a constant PbTe thickness of ta = 0.1 μm, verified by successful fabrication of the PbTe RCE-PDs.30 All other dimensions in Fig. 1, viz. the MS-related ones – Λ, W, etch depth tg and Ge cladding thickness tGe, as well as the thicknesses of the front and back CaF2 buffers – df and db, respectively, and of the Si layer – tSi, are the optimal design variables. Two general constraints are kept throughout: one is the SW grating, which bounds ΛnCaF2 from above by the lowest explored wavelength, and suppresses the normal-incidence non-specular diffraction orders; the other is t < λ0, which results in ultrathin MMs, as explained below.
In order to ensure that the optimization would not be blind, we assessed reliable ranges for start values of the optimized parameters. For tSi, our choice was a quarter of the CDW in Si, i.e. λ0/(4nSi) ≈ 0.255 μm, which maximizes the reflection from the Si layer, which is between semi-infinite SiO2 and CaF2. Although such a requirement is typical of RCE designs,1 all our optimizations do not move the tSi away from the above-noted start value. The MS parameter range estimations are guided by a phase-control-led design of MSs,4–8 the simplest case of which is our GL as a standalone. This should be made highly reflective for the radiation incident from the semi-infinite CaF2. To this end, one first optically homogenizes a 1D grating in a simple way, while memorizing its periodicity by considering the effective bi-layer to also support the lowest-order diffracted waves. Then, one tunes tg and tGe in order to adapt the bi-layer to meet light-wave guiding feasibility by matching the diffracted waves to the guided modes. The interference between the non-diffracted wave and the guided waves is just the physical mechanism for the MS's high resonant reflectance (see extended up-to-date reviews59). Finally, the ranges for df and db are guessed in compliance with the constraint on t. The dimensions obtained for an optimal 1D MS based MM structure are further plugged as trial dimensions into the optimization of the 2D MS one.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Designed MMs and their normal absorptance spectra
For any 2D MS-capped structure, as shown in Fig. 1, the normal s- and p-polarised spectral absorptances, A(s)(λ) and A(p)(λ), respectively, are equal due to the adopted IP and high symmetry, which also holds for the reflectance and transmittance. Henceforth, a MM of this type, resulting from the optimal design aimed at obtaining a wide A(λ) spectra, is termed a 2D-GL. In the 1D MS case, we chose xz IP for definiteness, for which the s- and p-polarisations are the transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) ones, respectively. With the wide-spectrum prescription, we designed a 1D MS-capped structure, dubbed a 1D-GL-TE, having A(s)(λ0) ∼ 100% and an absorption spectrum very similar to that of a 2D-GL, see below. For the p-polarisation, however, this type of optimization does not converge to any design, as will be explained at the end of sub-subsection 2. In the 1D MS case, when waiving the wide-spectrum goal, the optimization converges to two reported46 different designs for the s- and p-polarisation, which show ultra-narrow A(ν)(λ) (ν = s,p) spectra with A(ν)(λ0) ∼ 100%. Finally, the optimization, under the concurrently maximal s- and p-polarised absorptance peak goal, reproduces reported design NFE-TEM,46 which displays narrow A(ν)(λ) spectra with A(s)(λ0) ≈ A(p)(λ0) ∼ 100%, though A(s)(λ) ≠ A(p)(λ) for this type of MS in general. Due to peculiar, yet not studied, properties of  for that design, we will revisit it here, calling ad hoc 1D-GL-TEM.
The dimensions of the designed MMs, along with the CDW peak polarised absorptances A(ν)(λ0) = A(ν)max, and the corresponding A(ν)(λ) lines in the range of 3 μm–4 μm, are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 2, respectively. Table 2 shows that for a 2D-GL, A(s)max = A(p)max as expected, and df = 0. However, should the fabrication considerations require df ≠ 0, a few-nanometers thick front CaF2 buffer layer could be added to the structure without affecting the other dimensions and performance. All three MMs in Table 2 are of thickness much less than λ0 and, except for the 1D-GL-TE with expectedly low A(p)max, are ∼100% absorptive at the CDW. With the data of Tables 1 and 2, the simplest MM homogenization yields effective RIs neff, and λeff = λ0/neff, for which t/λeff equals about: 1.07 (2D-GL), 1.55 (1D-GL-TEM) and 1.30 (1D-GL-TE). Such MMs, for which λeff is the physical length scale closest to t, are classified by some authors as MSs,7 but we do not adopt this view here. Resorting to our MSs, we see that their dmin values are well comparable to λ0/nGe ≈ 0.867 μm, retrieved from Table 1, so they may be resonant, as shown in subsection 3. As seen in Fig. 2, due to an additional absorption peak around 3.25 μm, there emerges a wide sub-range where the 2D-GL's absorption is, on average, highest. However, at λ > 3.3 μm the A(s)(λ) spectrum of the 1D-GL-TE is, overall, widest. While these two MMs demonstrate the wide and flattop spectra, the 1D-GL-TEM shows much narrower and peaked A(s)(λ) and A(p)(λ) spectra, closely coalescent to each other in the range of 3.35 μm–3.55 μm.
 Fig. 2  Normal absorptance spectra of the designed GL-based structures, the parameters of which are shown in Table 2. The structure and irradiation polarisation are indicated with correspondingly colored arrows. 
Table 2 Parameters of the NFE photo-absorption structures designed with the PbTe layer of thickness ta = 0.1 μm, as outlined in the text: A(s)max and A(p)max are the peak absorptances for s- and p-polarisation, respectively, and t is the thickness of the structure excluding the substrate. Other thicknesses are described in the text and shown in Fig. 1. All dimensions are in microns. Our choice for tSi was a quarter of the CDW in Si, i.e., λ0/(4nSi) ≈ 0.255 μm




Structure

d
b


d
f


t
Ge


t
g


Λ


W

x



W

y



A
(s)max


A
(p)max


t





2D-GL
0.075
0–0.02
0.145
0.650
1.766
0.671
0.671
0.99
0.99
1.220


1D-GL-TEM
0.349
0.045
0.279
0.554
1.572
1.098
0
0.985
0.986
1.582


1D-GL-TE
0.140
0.140
0.125
0.630
2.036
1.013
0
0.995
0.229
1.395




The narrow sharp-peaked A(ν)(λ) spectra of the 1D-GL-TEM (blue lines in Fig. 2) imply manifestation of the bound-state-in-continuum (BIC) resonances.60 Following this insight, the wide flattop absorptance spectra of the 2D-GL for the s- and p-polarisations and of the 1D-GL-TE for the s-polarisation (red and black lines in Fig. 2, respectively) may be considered to be an engineered merger of several BICs by the prefabrication computer-aided parameter tuning.
3.2. Angular absorptance patterns at CDW
The peak performance of the designed structures vs. the spatial incidence angle  components is shown in Fig. 3, where θ and φ are measured along the radii and circumference of a unit circle, respectively, and the  patterns are displayed with color maps. Due to the symmetry, the patterns are 90° and 180° periodic in φ for 2D-GL (Fig. 3a and d) and 1D-GL-TE/TEM (Fig. 3b, c and e), respectively. They are also mirror-symmetric relative to the φ radii dividing the circle into octants and quadrants for 2D-GL and 1D-GL-TE/TEM, respectively. For 2D-GL, the  patterns with ν = s and ν = p are shown in Fig. 3a and d, respectively. Due to 90°-rotational symmetry, the 2D-GL shows the highest spatial and polarisation performance. For the 2D-GL,  at θ < 8°, ∀φ; and  at φ = 45°, θ < 80° (see Fig. 3a). Yet,  proves more robust for this structure (see Fig. 3d), with its highest values at φ = 0° and a notable gain over the s-polarisation pattern that appears at 15° < θ < 30°. As revealed, for the p-polarisation in this θ range, the component Ex is strongly confined, and |Ex|2 is ∼5 times larger than that for the s-polarisation, for which this component is zero in the incident wave. In the latter case, the symmetry does not permit such a confined and dominant Ex, which is the physical reason for the much weaker absorption.
 Fig. 3  Simulated angular polarised absorptance color maps at CDW. 2D-GL: (a) s- and (d) p-polarisations; 1D-GL-TEM: (b) s- and (e) p-polarisations; 1D-GL-TE: (c) s-polarisation. The  and absorptance benchmarks are described in the text. The lower-left corner inset: a 1D-GL based MM mounted on the rotating stage as described in the text, under oblique illumination. For illustration, basic rotations around the x and z-axes are sketched. 
Despite the fact that the A(s)(λ) spectrum of 1D-GL-TEM is the narrowest one (see in Fig. 2), its peak has good angular stability at 0° < θ < 14°, with values A(s)(λ0) > 54%, when rotating the structure (or IP) around the normal by 90°. This is due to the confinement and predominance of the Ex component, which emerges with the rotation. Yet, under the p-polarised irradiation the structure does not display such a stability for small tilts, while A(p)(λ0) falls below 50% at 5° < θ < 45° and almost all φ, (see Fig. 3e). Although Ex also persists there, the structure no longer confines and enhances it inside the absorber, as it does in the s-polarisation case. Instead, most of the incident EM power is either reflected or transmitted. Still, a closer observation around this θ range reveals a narrow line-width X-shaped absorptance pattern adjacent to φ = 90°, which inspired the extended spectral-azimuthal inquiry, and the novel tuning mechanism discussed in subsection 4.
As seen in Fig. 3e, the angular pattern of  for this structure displays a drastic drop in performance, down to small values, starting from small θ, but, uniquely, the high performance is restored in lacunae of the circular cutout θ > 45°, 30° < φ < 150°. In this case, |Ey|, stimulated by the IP twist, is also confined and contributes to the high absorptance. It appears that, since the CDW absorptance of this structure was optimized for s- and p-polarisation, both |Ex| and |Ey| can be confined inside the absorber and contribute to the above high angular performance.
The angular performance of the 1D-GL-TE is shown in Fig. 3c. This structure displays A(s)(λ) ∼ 100% over a wide band around λ0, but fails to perform so under p-polarised irradiation (see in Fig. 2). Thus, it is not surprising that for any θ its A(s)(λ0,θ,0°) is superior over all . This A(s)(λ0, θ, 0°) drops to 82% with increasing θ more sharply than that of the 2D-GL, dropping to 90.7% in the same θ range. However, the 1D-GL-TE maintains A(s)(λ0, θ, 0°) > 54% for θ up to 20°, which correlates well with the very wide A(s)(λ) spectrum. Increasing φ towards 90° results, as expected, in performance degradation at any θ < 15°. However, at 25° < a < 42° a confinement of |Ex| emerges, which maintains rather high . In practice, the irradiation direction is fixed. Therefore, to track  at the  variations considered above, the MM should be rotated so, given λ, to achieve desired instant θ,φ. This can be made with a commercially available sample-mounting stage, see the inset of Fig. 3, with variable plane orientation, defined by the Euler angles α, β, γ. Such stages are equipped with a step motor for varying γ and two knobs for adjusting α, β manually.
3.3. Resonant EM field confinement and power density flow
Previously, we only noted some relevant features of E. This subsection reports in detail simulations, visualisation and analysis of the EM fields and power density flows (portrayed by the Poynting vector) at λ = λ0 inside the designed structures, and, hence, discusses the physics underlying the NFE absorption phenomenon.

3.3.1. Outline. 
As noted in subsection 1, the considered NFE photo-absorption structures may be treated as periodic assemblies of identical vertical cuts, each termed above “microcavity”. Advancing the work reported in our previous study,46 in addition to studying the  performance, we simulated and analyzed E, the magnetic field H, and the Poynting vector (EM power density) S ∝ Re(E* × H) at the CDW over dense grids in the “microcavities”. The latter are 0 ≤ x ≤ Λ, ∀y and 0 ≤ x ≤ Λ, 0 ≤ y ≤ Λ for 1D and 2D GL based structures, respectively, while 0 ≤ z ≤ t for both. We focus on the 1D-GL-TE and 2D-GL structures with normal s-polarised irradiation. Then, in the 1D-GL-TE E = (0, Ey, 0), H = (Hx, 0, Hz) and S = (Sx,0,Sz), where the nonzero components depend on x,z, whereas in the 2D-GL all the components of E, H and S are nonzero functions of x,y,z. In the subsequent visualization of the simulation results, we use the normalized lateral coordinates x/Λ and x/Λ, y/Λ in the cases of 1D and 2D metasurfaces, respectively. Also, to gain a good idea of how the EM power density flow directions are distributed, we visualize the unit vectors in the direction of S or of some its projections.


3.3.2. The 1D-GL-TE structure. 
For this structure, Ey and S = (Sx,Sz) are simulated over the corresponding “microcavity” in the xz plane, with a 2 nm × 1 nm cell grid. For visualization, in Fig. 4 we display |Ey|2via a colored 2D contour plot and s = S/|S| via an arrow quiver map, the former shown in the background and the latter at the front of the figure.
 Fig. 4  In the background and at the front – contour plot of |Ey|2 and quiver (arrow map) of the normalized Poynting vector, s (defined in the text), respectively, for 1D-GL-TE at s-polarised irradiation. Dashed lines – the material interface xz projections; dashed-dotted line limited area on the left – the grating mesa's x–z projection. 
As seen in Fig. 4, |Ey|2 is highly peaked and strongly confined inside the PbTe absorber layer, which provides the A(s)(λ0) ∼ 100% peak. In more detail, |Ey|2 displays four sharp peaks centred on the PbTe layer's mid-line z = 0.45 μm at x/Λ = 0, 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75. The peak seen in Fig. 4 at x/Λ = 1 is not counted since, due to the periodicity of |Ey|2 in x, this and the above-noted peak at x/Λ = 0 can be treated as one, symmetrically split between the vertical “microcavity” boundaries. Of the peaks, the split, third and fourth ones are very intense, whereas the peak at x/Λ = 0.25 is inferior to them in intensity. This peak is connected via the vertical line x/Λ = 0.25 with two peak lobes, one lying in the Si layer and the other in the grating line. Also, the fourth peak is vertically connected to a less intense satellite one inside the Ge layer, at x/Λ = 0.75. In the CaF2 (cavity) regions, |Ey|2 is relatively small and zeroes at singular points. Such a quasi-modal composition of |Ey|2 suggests a sort of wave guiding in layers except the cavity, but a final conclusion can be drawn by studying the s flow map. Fig. 4 also shows a smeared |Ey|2 peak in the Ge–air grating lamella, much weaker than the peaks discussed above. Thus, the MS of this MM is resonant, mostly due to the Ge-cladding layer.
The s quiver in Fig. 4 displays vortex- and waveguide-like flows, depending on the range. The vortices circulate the s clockwise or counterclockwise around singular points, and saddle points manage the S, guiding by a conversion of its flow from a vertical to a lateral one and back. Overall, the flow consists of the two following parts: (i) three pairs of clockwise and counterclockwise vortices, pairwise in the two cavities and Ge layers, all located near the material interfaces; and (ii) three saddle points. The vortices’ centers within each pair are on the left and the right of the closest |Ey|2 peak, symmetrically with respect to x. Of the saddle points two are located on the absorber's layer midline z = 0.45 μm, at x/Λ = 0, 0.5, and the third one lies laterally at x/Λ = 0.25 and vertically at z in the front cavity near its interface with the absorber. Altogether, the existence of the above singular flows61 and their unique locations, determined by the optimal structural dimensions, provide 90° bending of the input vertical EM power density flow to a predominant lateral one guided by the absorber, at 0.4 μm < z < 0.5 μm. Since ta is ∼20 times less than the “microcavity” absorber length Λ (Table 2), the above-noted bending seems highly efficient and crucial for supporting perfect resonant optical absorption. Note that for the p-polarised incidence, the above 90° bending of the s flow seems more difficult to achieve with the chosen design materials. Indeed in this case, max|Sx|/max|Sz| = |Ez|/|Ex|, so inside the absorber it is required that |Ex| ≪ |Ez| for the effective bending and |Ex|2 + |Ez|2 is simultaneously large enough for high A(p)(λ0). But physically, |Ez|/|Ex| ∝ [nPbTe(λ0)]−2 ≈ 0.0263 there and ∝ [nCaF2(λ0)]−2 ≈ 0.5 in the cavity, so a |Ez|2 confinement and the bending assisted waveguide flow is more likely to occur in the lossless CaF2 layers rather than in the PbTe one.


3.3.3. The 2D-GL structure. 
For the 2D-GL, we performed full-vector computations of E, H and, hence, S. It appears that, at the normal s-polarised irradiation which inputs only Ey, the structure maintains low Ex, and Ey is dominant over the absorber layer, x/Λ,y/Λ ∈ [0,1], z ∈ (zmin,zmax), where zmin = 0.325 μm; zmax = zmin + ta = 0.425 μm. Since this domain is of primary interest, |Ey|2 is visualized there. For ease of visualization, we compute three separate averages of |Ey|2 – over y, x and z (1)
The averages  and  are shown in the contour plots vs. x,z and y,z in Fig. 5a and b, respectively; the contour plot of vs. x,y is shown in Fig. 5a.
 Fig. 5  The averages of |Ey|2 for 2D-GL at s-polarised irradiation: (a) ; (b) , as defined by eqn (1). Dashed lines – the respective material interface projections; dashed-dotted lines on the left limit the respective grating mesa's y–z projection areas. 
Comparing the contour plots in Fig. 4 and 5a, we conclude that in the xz projection of the absorber layers of the 1D-GL-TE and the 2D-GL, the peak structures of |Ey|2 and , respectively, are fairly similar topologically. Namely,  in Fig. 5a, like |Ey|2 in Fig. 4, is sharply confined about four peak points in the xz projection of the absorber layer. It appears that, for both structures, the peak abscissas fit well the progression xk/Λ = x0/Λ + k/4, k = 0, 1, 2, 3 with x0/Λ = fx,y/2 − 1/4, where fx,y = 1 − W/Λ are equal mesa filling factors in the x- and y-directions. Similar expression for the 1D grating will be denoted by fx, see in section 4. Table 2 shows that, while x0/Λ = 0 for the 1D-GL-TE, and thus the boundary-split peak of |Ey|2 emerges, x0/Λ = 0.06 for the 2D-GL, so that the peaks of  are all internal, located at xk/Λ = 0.06, 0.31, 0.56, 0.81.

Fig. 5b shows the contour plot of , which, however, is specific for the s-polarised light-irradiated 2D-GL. Only one peak of  is seen in the yz projection of the absorber layer, which is weaker than the most intense ones in Fig. 4 and 5a, and is much more smeared in the y direction. Also, Fig. 5b shows a very strong concentration of  in the Ge–air grating mesa, which demonstrates that the MS of this MM is resonant mostly on account of the Ge cuboids. The  plot shown in Fig. 6a points at four confinement domains of |Ey|2 in the absorber. These, on average over z, appear as disjoint ellipsoid-like areas in the xy stripe above the 1D grating pattern along the x axis, centred at the same xk/Λ as noted in connection with Fig. 5a.
 Fig. 6  Electric field and Poynting vector visualization for 2D-GL at s-polarised irradiation over the xy projection of the absorber layer within the normalized grating cell: (a) contour plot of , defined by eqn (1); (b) quiver map of s⊥, defined in the text, – the arrows’ colors represent the color map of Sz. Dashed-dotted lines on the left limit the x–y projected grating mesa's area. 
The quasi-modal concentration of  and , seen in Fig. 5a and 6a, respectively, around the points with the same abscissas, suggests that the propagation in the absorber streams mostly within the xz plane. Fig. 6b shows a quiver map of  and a color map of Sz upon the s⊥ arrows, at the absorber middle-plane section z = 0.375 μm, from which it can be learned that the above suggestion is fairly correct. It clearly states the crucial dominance of |Sx| over |Sy| in most of the studied area, but also small subareas of very different behavior are seen. Two of the subareas are 0.02Λ width vertical stripes around the lines x = x1,x = x3 (with the above-defined xk), along which Sx = 0. In the stripes, a 90° bending of the s⊥ flow occurs at the points on the lines: (x1,y1), (x1,y3), (x3,y1), (x3,y3), where yk = xk. Apart from these, a less sharp, ∼±45° bending, i.e. that with |Sx| ∼ |Sy|, is observed. Several, not essentially wider, areas of the ∼±45° bending of the s⊥ flow are also noticeable and are marked by green arrows in Fig. 6b.
Two other features of Fig. 6b are also noteworthy. The first is that Sz, the out-of-plane component of S, represented by the arrows’ colors, persists over all the visualization, but the subareas with nearly zero Sz (green arrows) are also notable. The second concerns the S flow singularities. While the above lines x = x1, x = x3 in Fig. 6b are continuum analogues of the saddle points in Fig. 4, two points similar to the latter are located on the horizontal line y = y3 at the two abscissas on the left and right of x = x1 symmetrically. In addition, two very weak inclined vortices are seen in Fig. 6b on the xy projected mesa's boundary, at (x0,0.62Λ) and (x2,0.62Λ).
Our simulations predict that in the upper half sections of the absorber (0.375 μm < z < 0.425 μm), the vortex patterns nearly disappear, whereas in the lower half section (0.325 μm < z < 0.375 μm) they strengthen, but only contribute a little to the EM power density flow in the absorber. In all other aspects of the flow, Fig. 6b is well representative of the entire absorber.

3.4. The spectral – azimuth-angular absorptance patterns
For 1D-GL-TEM, the λ–φ color maps of  at 3 μm ≤ λ ≤ 4 μm, 0° ≤ φ < 180° and several θ's are shown in Fig. 7. The φ range is chosen due to the ab initio π periodicity of the absorptance in the azimuthal angle, and θ's, designated in the titles of subplots (a–h) of Fig. 7, are those displaying noticeable performance variations. The λ–φ patterns in Fig. 7, similarly to the appropriate θ–φ ones, are mirror-symmetric, ad hoc relative to the line φ = 90°. Then, the patterns are virtually subdivided into three vertical sections with φ below 45°, above 135° and in between these angles. At the incidence, |Ex/Ey| > 1 in the lower/upper section and |Ex/Ey| < 1 in the intermediate section, which we conditionally term as p- and s-polarisation dominance sections, respectively.
 Fig. 7  
λ–φ color maps of  for 1D-GL-TEM at θ's shown in the sub-figures’ titles. The plot inset, related to the map in sub-figure (c), shows a sequence of the absorptance spectra for a span of the azimuthal angles displayed in the legend, as described in the text. 
As stated at the beginning of this section, the normal s- and p-polarised CDW absorptances of the 1D-GL-TEM are by design ∼100%. When examining the pattern in Fig. 7a, we observe that A(p)(λ0,0°,φ) nearly maintains such a performance level throughout the whole φ range. When changing φ, while holding θ = 0°, one rotates the IP around the normal, which is equivalent to a respective counter rotation of the structure. Thus, the p-polarised absorptance stability against a change in φ is the same as that against the above structure's rotation. Fig. 7b shows that a small tilt by θ = 3° enables φ-assisted absorptance tuning. At this θ, the peak of A(p)(λ,θ,φs), where φs = 90° is the middle of the s-polarisation dominated range, is still located very close to λ0. When φ deviates from φs, the peak splits into two, symmetrically around λ0, composing a flat X-shaped sub-pattern that covers approximately a 150 nm spectral range at 45° < φ < 135°. Similar absorptance peaks in the p-polarisation dominated sections remain, but gradually attenuate towards 45° and backwards to 135°.
Additional spectral tuning with an increase of θ is seen in Fig. 7c–h. As θ increases, the X-shaped sub-pattern around φs broadens spectrally, enabling wider spectral tuning coverage, and its central wavelength (at the X sub-pattern center) gradually decreases. The φ = 0°, 180° peaks vanish in Fig. 7c, reappear in Fig. 7d and disappear again in the rest of the sub-figures. It is clear from Fig. 7e–g that, overall, the pattern widens spectrally and angularly around φs. As seen in Fig. 7h, the structure still exhibits high absorptance around the CDW at θ = 89°. These properties are in accordance with the performance at CDW displayed in Fig. 3e, and due to mechanisms similar to those discussed in subsection 2. Let us focus on the color map in Fig. 3c, where the X-shaped pattern seems most pronounced. One of its quarters, corresponding to the range 3.24 μm ≤ λ ≤ 3.48 μm, 66° ≤ φ ≤ 88°, is highlighted and deciphered with the plot inset. This shows the A(p)(λ,14°,φ) spectra series for the indicated φ span, with increasing spectral peaks and their position as φ increases. Remarkably, the peaks approach the normal absorptance design in both its 100% value and spectral position at 3.5 μm, whereas the minimum peak at the smallest tested φ is still high, close to 50%.
Similar simulations were performed for 2D-GL and 1D-GL-TE structures; there, the optimized wide absorptance spectrum for the normal incidence can also be tuned using θ and φ variations, as seen in the pattern examples in Fig. 8a for the 2D-GL (the p-polarised incidence) and in Fig. 8b for the 1D-GL-TE (the s-polarised incidence). As seen in Fig. 2, the 2D-GL normal absorptance is dominated by two peaks at the CDW and λ = 3.25 μm. Interestingly, upon a θ = 20° tilt (Fig. 8a) this dominance is redistributed among the φ = 0° and φ = 45° incidence angles. Besides, in correlation with Fig. 3c, the simulations show that at θ = 45° the 1D-GL-TE structure also confines |Ex|, as explored in subsection 3, in addition to its intended |Ey| confinement, to provide high absorptance around φ = 90°, as seen in Fig. 8b.
 Fig. 8  Spectral-angular (φ) absorptance patterns for θ's shown in the sub-figure titles: (a) 2D-GL, p-polarisation; (b) 1D-GL-TE, s-polarisation. 
4. Variations in the proposed MM designs
In this section, we first consider the dimensions tolerances, given the materials outlined in subsection 2. Then, we briefly present similar designs with pseudo-binary alloys GeSbTe (GST) instead of PbTe, retaining other materials and λ0 as in subsection 2. Such a replacement can be suitable since the MWIR complex RI of crystalline-phase GSTs62,63 can approach that of PbTe. Also, Ge can be deposited directly on GST,63 which is beneficial in the cases where the optimization leads to too small or zero df.
The set of five-rows sub-figures in Fig. 9 shows the wavelength – structural-parameter color maps of A(ν)(λ) for the designed MMs, whose attributions are shown in the rows’ titles. The first and last rows show the maps for the 1D-GL-TE and 2D-GL, implying their respective default ν. Three internal sub-figures’ rows present the maps for the 1D-GL-TEM at s-, p- and non-polarised irradiation. We computed them for ta, tg, Λ and fx,fx,y with varying one of the parameters and fixing all others at the values shown in Table 2, and display the maps in the columns (a) to (d) over each row. By definition, increasing fx,fx,y at fixed Λ wholly conforms with decreasing W. We tested the tolerance to the variations of ta, though it was not subject to the optimization. But the column (a) λ – ta color maps show that the active layer's thickness and the peak wavelength λ0 can also be optimized. For all designs, there emerge lacunae of high A(ν)(λ) additional to that around the point (3.5 μm, 0.1 μm) fixed in the optimization. The A(ν)(λ) ∼ 1 areas are notable for the 1D-GL-TE and multiple for the 2D-GL, whereas for the 1D-GL-TEM they are tight at ν = s, and extend more at ν = p and non-polarised irradiation.
 Fig. 9  Wavelength–structural-dimension color maps of A(ν)(λ) for the considered MMs’ designs, computed and discussed as described in the text. 
Determining ranges of the three grating-MS etch parameters, in which A(ν)(λ) ∼ 1 sustains, is of most importance for a successful MM fabrication. Such ranges are clearly seen in the columns (b)–(d) color maps, which evidence the tolerance areas, 2D extent in both directions for the 1D-GL-TE and 2D-GL, and band-like for the 1D-GL-TEM. For the latter, the rows 2, 3, and 4, the columns (b) and (c) show almost straight tolerance bands, rather wide in terms of tg and Λ with nearly no and linear shifts of λ0, respectively; yet, the column (d) shows quite different color maps in the different rows. In a similarly high color-intensity range in terms of fx, the tolerance band is nearly horizontal at s- and sharply increasing, convex up, at p-polarisation. While at s-polarisation there emerges one more high color-intensity lacuna at fx > 0.6, no such lacuna exists at p-polarisation. Due to these features, the tolerance range for the non-polarised absorptance, being half the sum of s- and p-polarised ones, is spot-like as the color map in the column (d), row 4 shows. Except for this map, each other shows a fair fabrication tolerance range in the corresponding dimension, which evidences the feasibility of geometrical tuning8 the MMs.
When examining the feasibility to replace PbTe with GST, we focused on GST-225 (Ge2Sb2Te5). Except for one, to our knowledge, report64 claiming an ab initio growth of crystalline GST-225 (c-GST), normally GSTs grow in the amorphous (a-GST) phase. Growing the c-GST phase of an increasing fraction m in the as grown material, which retains the a-GST phase of a decreasing fraction 1 − m, is made by heating. The process tunes n and k of the mixed-phase GST that we modeled due to ref. 62. With this modeling, we optimized our designs for m = 0.75 and simulated A(ν)(λ) at this m, and few m's around it with the step of ±0.1. Fig. 10 shows these results responding to our quest in positive, as concerns the optical absorptance, which is the phase-composition tunable. Due to well measurable photoconductivity in GST-22565 with a clearly defined band gap, our designs with GST-225 instead of PbTe can also be PDs with photoconductive and photovoltaic readout, as reported for quite different structures.66,67 Our designs are targeted to be ∼100% absorptive around λ0 = 3.5 μm. Similar designs with the same materials can be performed for any other λ0 unless k(λ0) of the absorbers get not too small. In spectral ranges, where the materials’ interplay is not favorable for the design principles outlined in subsection 2, other materials fitting those principles can be found.
 Fig. 10  The absorptance of the 0.1 μm thick GST based, optimal 1D-GL-TEM MM at the varying c-GST fraction m: (a) s-polarisation; (b) p-polarisation. The MM's dimensions are: db = 0.488 μm, df = 0.129 μm, tGe = 0.235 μm, tg = 0.406 μm, Λ = 1.973 μm, and Wx = 1.487 μm. 
5. Potential applications
Enhanced IR photo-absorbing devices are desired in such fields as spectroscopy, imaging, remote sensing and communication. IR molecular spectroscopy, which makes use of the molecules’ characteristic vibrational modes in this spectral range,68,69 is implemented in different applications, for example, gas concentration measurements for industrial process control, environmental monitoring, and detection of different explosives for security and safety systems.70 Due to highly transmitting atmospheric windows, imaging, remote sensing, camouflage, free-space optical communication, light detection and ranging (LIDAR) systems, and lab-on-chip sensors are all of great interest.70–72 Motivated by these applications, there is an increasing demand for low cost, highly efficient and compact light sensing devices.
The MMs designed in this study maintain nearly perfect photo-absorptance with a 0.1 μm thick absorber. Making the latter so thin reduces the generation–recombination, shot and Johnson noises and, as a result, increases the detectivity,20 which, in turn, can alleviate the cooling demands relative to systems based on conventional PD architectures.34 The reported high efficiency designs, integrated on a SiO2 substrate, could be suitable for silicon readout integrated circuits for signal readout and processing30 and, thus, also for focal plane arrays.73 Three designed MMs may offer versatile solutions for the different application fields mentioned above, bearing in mind the required spectral ranges, polarisation sensitivity, angular performance, spectral tuning possibilities and more. For example, the 2D-GL design seems more attractive for such non-polarised wide spectral absorption applications as imaging and remote sensing, whereas the 1D-GL-TE design adds the polarisation selectivity capability, which could be beneficial in communication. The spectral absorption tuning possibilities presented in subsection 4 would potentially benefit hyper-spectral systems, thermal signature manipulations for camouflage, spectrally variable sensors and more. By realization and use of the investigated spectral-angular absorptance tuning of these MMs, it is possible to reduce the need for external optical components such as angular and spectral filters, or the quest for exotic optically active media and phenomena.
The designed MMs can be fair ultrathin all-dielectric complements to the diversity of enhanced IR PD devices based on other light confinement and detecting principles. This concerns, in particular, those which employ a synergy of SPs and metal MSs.74,75
6. Conclusions
We designed and studied topmost light-absorption MMs of an original NFE type for MWIR photonics, which comprise in fairly simple design the photo-absorbing semiconductor and technologically compatible dielectrics, transparent in the MWIR range. They submerge the 0.1 μm PbTe, or GST, layer into a CaF2 layered cavity enclosed by a highly back-reflective GL (Ge–air/Ge) MS and a semitransparent Si layer on a SiO2 substrate. We designed three such MMs displaying ∼100% normal absorptance at λ0 = 3.5 μm, concurrently s- and p-polarised (2D-GL, 1D-GL-TEM), and s-polarised (1D-GL-TE), of thicknesses a few times less than λ0, and only moderately exceeding the MM effective-medium wavelength. The post-fabrication options for tuning the spectral MWIR absorption of these MMs, e.g. with the rotations, indicate high potential for their applications. To the best of our knowledge, no such actual tunabilities for non-metallic MMs/MSs8 have been reported.
We shed light on the physical mechanisms behind the MMs’ record peak normal absorptance. These are electric-field confinements, stronger in PbTe, and to a lesser degree in GL MSs. The latter effect uncovers that these MSs are resonant. Moreover, we showed that around the zero-field intensity points, which exist between the discussed sharp intensity peaks, there emerge singular power-density flows, such as vortex and saddle-point waveguide flows. Thus, this study also exposed notable topological-photonics features of the S flows over dielectric/semiconductor MMs, confined within a sub-vacuum-wavelength thickness scale, that incorporate MSs. Using MSs for NFE EM light confinement, theoretically investigated in this study, may conceptually and practically advance the design of innovative, upmost photo-absorption structures with thicknesses down to unbeatable limits. The design principles and analyses developed in this study may be implemented in other fields of nanophotonics research and applications.
Author contributions
R. A. and M. Z. conceived the idea; R. A. and B. M. acquired the funding; B. M. and M. A. supervised and performed the research; M. A. and R. A. developed the required additional mathematical implementation; R. A., M. Z., and B. M. wrote the new codes into the in-house package and performed the numerical simulations and optimizations; R. A. and M. A. validated and analyzed the results and wrote the paper; M. Z. and R. A. performed the visualization; all authors reviewed, edited, and approved the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Maxim Radkin from Shamoon College of Engineering for his great help in preparing the illustrations.
References
M. S. Ünlü and S. Strite, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 607–639 CrossRef .

          R. Dornhaus, G. Nimtz and B. Schlicht, Narrow-Gap Semiconductors, Springer Tracts in Modern Physics, Springer Science + Business Media,  1983 Search PubMed .
C. L. Holloway, E. F. Kuester, J. A. Gordon, J. O'Hara, J. Booth and D. R. Smith, IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., 2012, 54, 10–35 Search PubMed .
N. Yu and F. Capasso, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 139–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Glybovski, S. A. Tretyakov, P. A. Belov, Y. S. Kivshar and C. R. Simovski, Phys. Rep., 2016, 634, 1–72 CrossRef CAS .
A. Li, S. Singh and D. Sievenpiper, Nanophotonics, 2018, 7, 989–1011 Search PubMed .
A. I. Kuznetsov, A. E. Miroshnichenko, M. L. Brongersma, Y. S. Kivshar and B. Luk'yanchuk, Science, 2016, 354, aag2472 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. Zou, I. Staude and D. N. Neshev, Dielectric Metamaterials, Woodhead Publishing,  2020, ch. 7, pp. 195–222 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Liu, H. Cheng, J. Tian and S. Chen, Opto-Electron. Adv., 2020, 3, 200002 CAS .
K. Ou, F. Yu, G. Li, W. Wang, A. E. Miroshnichenko, L. Huang, P. Wang, T. Li, Z. Li, X. Chen and W. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabc0711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, B. P. Clarke, J.-K. So, K. F. MacDonald and N. I. Zheludev, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13705 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ou, G. Li, T. Li, H. Yang, F. Yu, J. Chen, Z. Zhao, G. Cao, X. Chen and W. Lu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19154–19161 RSC .
C. Peng, K. Ou, G. Li, X. Li, W. Wang, Z. Zhao, X. Li, X. Chen and W. Lu, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 11721–11729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, K. Ou, G. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Li, C. Liu, X. Li, X. Chen and W. Lu, Opt. Express, 2021, 29, 12893–12902 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zohar, M. Auslender, L. Faraone and S. Hava, J. Nanophotonics, 2011, 5, 1–16 CrossRef .
M. Zohar, M. Auslender, L. Faraone and S. Hava, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2012, 44, 95–102 CrossRef CAS .
R. Avrahamy, M. Zohar, M. Auslender, Z. Fradkin, B. Milgrom, R. Shikler and S. Hava, Appl. Opt., 2019, 58, F1–F9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Avrahamy, M. Zohar, M. Auslender, B. Milgrom, S. Hava and R. Shikler, Photonics Res., 2020, 8, 381–394 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vahala, Nature, 2003, 424, 839–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rogalski, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2003, 27, 59–210 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klann, T. Höfer, R. Buhleier, T. Elsaesser and J. W. Tomm, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 277–286 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Findlay, C. R. Pidgeon, R. Kotitschke, A. Hollingworth, B. N. Murdin, C. J. G. M. Langerak, A. F. G. van der Meer, C. M. Ciesla, J. Oswald, A. Homer, G. Springholz and G. Bauer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 12908–12915 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J.-X. Shen and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2020, 125, 037401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Charache, P. F. Baldasaro, L. R. Danielson, D. M. DePoy, M. J. Freeman, C. A. Wang, H. K. Choi, D. Z. Garbuzov, R. U. Martinelli, V. Khalfin, S. Saroop, J. M. Borrego and R. J. Gutmann, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 85, 2247–2252 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Levinshtein, S. Rumyantsev and M. Shur, Handbook Series on Semiconductor Parameters, World Scientific Publishing Company, Singapore,  1996, 1999, vol. 1, 2 Search PubMed .
A. Rogalski, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2005, 68, 2267–2336 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Hu, X. Sun, A. M. Agarwal, L. C. Kimerling, D. R. Lim and R. A. Synowicki, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 053707 CrossRef .
G. Radovsky, Z. Dashevsky, V. Kasiyan, M. Auslender and S. Hava, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 501, 6–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Hu, P. Becla, A. M. Agarwal and L. C. Kimerling, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 083719 CrossRef .
J. Wang, J. Hu, P. Becla, A. M. Agarwal and L. C. Kimerling, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 12890–12896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, T. Zens, J. Hu, P. Becla, L. C. Kimerling and A. M. Agarwal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 211106 CrossRef .
R. Mendez-Rial, A. Souto-Lopez and A. Garcia-Diaz, Proc. SPIE, 2018, 10677, 1–6 Search PubMed .
D. Shelton, J. Sigley, R. Nicholas and R. Driggers, Proc. SPIE, 2018, 10624, 1062411 Search PubMed .
S. Chusnutdinow, S. Schreyeck, S. Kret, A. Kazakov and G. Karczewski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 072102 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rivera and M. Alvarez, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2012, 24, 267–269 CAS .
M.-H. Jang, S.-S. Yoo, M. T. Kramer, N. K. Dhar and M. C. Gupta, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2019, 34, 065009 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bean, C. L. Schow, R. Li, H. Nie, J. Schaub and J. C. Campbell, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 1997, 9, 806–808 Search PubMed .
N. S. Sokolov, A. K. Kaveev, A. V. Krupin, S. E. Tyaginov, M. I. Vexler, S. Ikeda, K. Tsutsui and K. Saiki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 142909 CrossRef .

          D. A. Gorski, Patent US3969743A – Protective coating for IV-VI compound semiconductor devices,  1976, https://patents.google.com/patent/US3969743A/en, Space Systems Loral LLC, Lockheed Martin Aerospace Corp Search PubMed .
Y. Sternberg, N. Yellin and L. Ben-Dor, J. Cryst. Growth, 1981, 54, 375–380 CrossRef CAS .
T.-L. Chan, C. Gaire, T.-M. Lu, G.-C. Wang and S. Zhang, Surf. Sci., 2010, 604, 1645–1648 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Motamedi, W. H. Southwell and W. J. Gunning, Appl. Opt., 1992, 31, 4371–4376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V.-C. Su, C.-H. Chu, G. Sun and D. P. Tsai, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 13148–13182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Q. Liu, B.-F. Bai, Q.-D. Chen and H.-B. Sun, Opto-Electron. Adv., 2019, 2, 190021 CAS .
Y. Li and M. Hong, Laser Photonics Rev., 2020, 14, 1900062 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zohar, M. Auslender and S. Hava, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5476–5479 RSC .
M. Auslender and S. Hava, Opt. Lett., 1996, 21, 1765–1767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lalanne and G. M. Morris, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 1996, 13, 779–784 CrossRef .
G. Granet and B. Guizal, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 1996, 13, 1019–1023 CrossRef .
L. Li, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 1997, 14, 2758–2767 CrossRef .

          L. Li, Mathematical Modeling in Optical Science, SIAM, Philadelphia,  2001, ch. 21C, pp. 111–139 Search PubMed .
E. Popov and M. Nevière, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 2001, 18, 2886–2894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Popov, Gratings: Theory and Numeric Applications, Second Revisited Edition, AMU (PUP),  2014, ch. 7, pp. 1–57 Search PubMed .
T. Schuster, J. Ruoff, N. Kerwien, S. Rafler and W. Osten, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 2007, 24, 2880–2890 CrossRef PubMed .

          R. Martí, Handbook of Metaheuristics, Springer US, Boston, MA,  1997, pp. 355–368 Search PubMed .
Z. Ugray, L. Lasdon, J. Plummer, F. Glover, J. Kelly and R. Martí, INFORMS J. Comput., 2007, 19, 328–340 CrossRef .

MATLAB R2019a and Optimization Toolbox 8.3, The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA,  2019 Search PubMed .
S. Molesky, Z. Lin, A. Y. Piggott, W. Jin, J. Vucković and A. W. Rodriguez, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 659–670 CrossRef CAS .
G. Quaranta, G. Basset, O. J. F. Martin and B. Gallinet, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1800017 CrossRef .
C. W. Hsu, B. Zhen, A. D. Stone, J. D. Joannopoulos and M. Soljacic, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16048 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soskin, S. V. Boriskina, Y. Chong, M. R. Dennis and A. Desyatnikov, J. Opt., 2016, 19, 010401 CrossRef .
Y. G. Chen, T. S. Kao, B. Ng, X. Li, X. G. Luo, B. Luk'yanchuk, S. A. Maier and M. H. Hong, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 13691–13698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Leitis, A. HeÃŸler, S. Wahl, M. Wuttig, T. Taubner, A. Tittl and H. Altug, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910259 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Vinod, K. Ramesh and K. S. Sangunni, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-S. Lee, J. R. Abelson, S. G. Bishop, D.-H. Kang, B.-K. Cheong and K.-B. Kim, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 093509 CrossRef .
S. G. Sarwat, N. Youngblood, Y.-Y. Au, J. A. Mol, C. D. Wright and H. Bhaskaran, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44906–44914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Srivastava, P. Mishra and Sunny, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 11131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zheng, H. Zhao, B. Cerjan, S. Yazdi, E. Ringe, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 101105 CrossRef .
Q. Lu, L. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, G. Han and Y. Hao, Materials, 2019, 12, 2532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, B. Dong, X. Luo, T.-Y. Liow, J. Song, C. Lee and G.-Q. Lo, Photonics Res., 2017, 5, 417–430 CrossRef CAS .
M. Itzler, S. Donati, M. S. Unlu and K. Kato, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2004, 10, 665–667 CAS .
H. Tran, T. Pham, J. Margetis, Y. Zhou, W. Dou, P. C. Grant, J. M. Grant, S. Al-Kabi, G. Sun, R. A. Soref, J. Tolle, Y.-H. Zhang, W. Du, B. Li, M. Mortazavi and S.-Q. Yu, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 2807–2815 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rogalski, J. Antoszewski and L. Faraone, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 091101 CrossRef .
G. Li, X. Chen, O. Li, C. Shao, Y. Jiang, L. Huang, B. Ni, W. Hu and W. Lu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 205102 CrossRef .
J. Tong, F. Suo, J. Ma, L. Y. M. Tobing, L. Qian and D. H. Zhang, Opto-Electron. Adv., 2019, 2, 180026 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The proposed and studied enhanced MWIR photo-absorption structure, showing the frame and incidence angles. The structure's schematic, materials, dimensions, and irradiation mode are described in the text.	 

1.406	3.432	1.414	6.162 + i0.154	4.035

 	Fig. 2  Normal absorptance spectra of the designed GL-based structures, the parameters of which are shown in Table 2. The structure and irradiation polarisation are indicated with correspondingly colored arrows.	 

2D-GL	0.075	0–0.02	0.145	0.650	1.766	0.671	0.671	0.99	0.99	1.220
1D-GL-TEM	0.349	0.045	0.279	0.554	1.572	1.098	0	0.985	0.986	1.582
1D-GL-TE	0.140	0.140	0.125	0.630	2.036	1.013	0	0.995	0.229	1.395

 	Fig. 3  Simulated angular polarised absorptance color maps at CDW. 2D-GL: (a) s- and (d) p-polarisations; 1D-GL-TEM: (b) s- and (e) p-polarisations; 1D-GL-TE: (c) s-polarisation. The  and absorptance benchmarks are described in the text. The lower-left corner inset: a 1D-GL based MM mounted on the rotating stage as described in the text, under oblique illumination. For illustration, basic rotations around the x and z-axes are sketched.	 

 	Fig. 4  In the background and at the front – contour plot of |Ey|2 and quiver (arrow map) of the normalized Poynting vector, s (defined in the text), respectively, for 1D-GL-TE at s-polarised irradiation. Dashed lines – the material interface xz projections; dashed-dotted line limited area on the left – the grating mesa's x–z projection.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  The averages of |Ey|2 for 2D-GL at s-polarised irradiation: (a) ; (b) , as defined by eqn (1). Dashed lines – the respective material interface projections; dashed-dotted lines on the left limit the respective grating mesa's y–z projection areas.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electric field and Poynting vector visualization for 2D-GL at s-polarised irradiation over the xy projection of the absorber layer within the normalized grating cell: (a) contour plot of , defined by eqn (1); (b) quiver map of s⊥, defined in the text, – the arrows’ colors represent the color map of Sz. Dashed-dotted lines on the left limit the x–y projected grating mesa's area.	 

 	Fig. 7  
λ–φ color maps of  for 1D-GL-TEM at θ's shown in the sub-figures’ titles. The plot inset, related to the map in sub-figure (c), shows a sequence of the absorptance spectra for a span of the azimuthal angles displayed in the legend, as described in the text.	 

 	Fig. 8  Spectral-angular (φ) absorptance patterns for θ's shown in the sub-figure titles: (a) 2D-GL, p-polarisation; (b) 1D-GL-TE, s-polarisation.	 

 	Fig. 9  Wavelength–structural-dimension color maps of A(ν)(λ) for the considered MMs’ designs, computed and discussed as described in the text.	 

 	Fig. 10  The absorptance of the 0.1 μm thick GST based, optimal 1D-GL-TEM MM at the varying c-GST fraction m: (a) s-polarisation; (b) p-polarisation. The MM's dimensions are: db = 0.488 μm, df = 0.129 μm, tGe = 0.235 μm, tg = 0.406 μm, Λ = 1.973 μm, and Wx = 1.487 μm.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
