Design of self-righting steam generators for solar-driven interfacial evaporation and self-powered water wave detection   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA09773J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA09773J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24664-24674Design of self-righting steam generators for solar-driven interfacial evaporation and self-powered water wave detection†

        
          
            Guoliang 
            Chen‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Na 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jintao 
            He
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lifang 
            Qiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fangbin 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuxue 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liangmin 
            Yu
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Petri 
            Murto
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyi 
            Li
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xiaofeng 
            Xu
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China. E-mail: xuxiaofeng@ouc.edu.cn; lixiaoyi@ouc.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1EW, UK. E-mail: pm707@cam.ac.uk
cKey Laboratory of Marine Chemistry Theory and Technology, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China
dOpen Studio for Marine Corrosion and Protection, Pilot National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, China
Received 
      7th October 2020
    , Accepted 11th November 2020First published on 11th November 2020AbstractSolar-driven interfacial evaporation has attracted growing attention as an emerging and sustainable technology for wastewater purification and desalination. Tremendous research efforts have been dedicated to developing interfacial steam generators that can operate under realistic weather conditions such as changing solar intensity, water salinity, air flow and humidity, yet the effects of water waves have been largely neglected. Herein, we develop the first ever tumbler-shaped steam generator to improve the floating stability of interfacial steam generators. Apart from the good water evaporation rate of ∼1.3 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun in both freshwater and seawater, the tumbler-shaped monolithic steam generator demonstrates outstanding wave-piercing, anti-overturning and self-righting behavior with good structural durability in typical waves of open water. Gratifyingly, further integration of the tumbler-shaped steam generator with a triboelectric nanogenerator enables detection of several water wave parameters (frequency, height, velocity and wavelength) in real-time with high sensitivity. This work provides design protocols not only for developing stable interfacial steam generators for solar-driven water purification and desalination, but also for scaling-up clean water production in open water and engineering self-powered water wave detection, forecast, and blue energy harvest systems.
1. Introduction
Freshwater is a crucial resource for human life and natural systems. Freshwater seems abundant, but when accounting for all water on Earth its supply is limited (∼2.5% from all water). The vast majority of water on Earth's surface is saline water in the oceans (∼97.5%). It is noteworthy that only a small percentage is accessible for sustainable uses (∼0.01%), and the amounts vary geographically and over time.1 Since the past few decades, accelerated urbanization, rapid economic and population growth, water pollution and climate change have increased the demand of freshwater and caused growing concerns about water scarcity worldwide.2,3 The Sun is the most abundant and renewable energy source on our planet. Approximately 35% of the solar energy that reaches the Earth's surface is consumed in driving the water cycle, which play manifold roles in climate and ecosystems, thus being of great importance for the availability of freshwater.4 Evaporation and condensation are essential processes in the water cycle. The former is transfer of water from water/air interfaces to the atmosphere, while the latter means transition from the vapor state back to the liquid state and generation of fresh water. Inspired by nature, the concept of solar-driven “interfacial” evaporation has been employed for low-cost, light-weight, large-area and durable steam generators to develop high-performance wastewater purification and desalination technologies.5–13
In the early stages of design, hydrophilic, thin and black films were directly floated on water. This “direct contact” strategy inevitably suffered from significant heat losses and low light-to-heat conversion efficiencies (Fig. 1a). To overcome these drawbacks, three-dimensional (3D) interfacial steam generators with pillared, hemispheric and irregular shapes have been developed to generate an “indirect contact” with water (Fig. 1b).14–22 Development of 3D sponges, aerogels and hydrogels with monolithic structures has become a topic of growing interest. The material scaffolds can be categorized into biopolymers and synthetic polymers. Biopolymers include several polysaccharides (cellulose, alginate and other heterogeneous compounds), while synthetic polymers are typically hydrophilic polyacrylonitrile (PAN), polyvinyl alcohol, polylactic acid and so on. Extensive efforts on device modifications have been dedicated to managing sunlight, heat, vapor and salinity, with a common aim at boosting water evaporation under realistic conditions.23–29 Considering potential application scenarios, some interfacial steam generators have been designed to deploy on open water such as brine lakes, pit lakes and sewage pools.16 Together with solar irradiation, humidity and air flows, water waves are another environmental stimuli for solar-driven interfacial evaporation and play a key role in sustaining stable and durable production of clean water. Rushing water from surface waves is sometimes powerful and may cause physical damage to the delicate structural elements of interfacial steam generators.30,31 Solar absorbers that are partially submerged, or even sinking and capsizing in water waves, inevitably lose their interfacial heating effect, significantly suppressing the water evaporation rates. It would be highly desirable if the next-generation interfacial steam generators could refuse to capsize, that is, bear a “self-righting” property in water waves and under changing weather conditions. However, this issue has been largely neglected in related studies. In particular, structural design aiming to improve the floating stability of interfacial steam generators is still beyond reach. Interfacial steam generators are expected to act as anti-overturning and self-righting platforms to detect the oscillatory motions of water surface, translating multiple wave parameters (height, period, frequency, velocity and so on) in real-time. This new concept is truly intriguing for future design, and endows interfacial steam generators with great potential in wave energy harvesting, early warning systems and marine resource survey.
 Fig. 1  Schematics of device structures and operating principles of (a) 2D film, (b) 3D hemispheric and (c) 3D tumbler-shaped interfacial steam generators. 
In this contribution, we developed a 3D tumbler-shaped interfacial steam generator with a well-defined monolithic structure, where the top hemispheric aerogel composed of PAN and carbon (CB) nanoparticles was integrated with the beneath cone-shaped polyurethane (PU) foam with a steel ball inside. The PAN/CB composite aerogel served as the solar absorber and water path, while the porous PU foam offered sufficient buoyant force to support the entire structure. Rational integration of the two structural elements (PAN/CB aerogel and PU foam) coupled the interfacial steam generator with “anti-overturning” and “self-righting” properties. It attained good water evaporation rates of ∼1.3 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun in both freshwater and seawater, and – for the first time – the 3D tumbler-shaped interfacial steam generator also returned to upright position in common water waves, keeping the solar absorber always above the water surface. The designed self-righting property has a great potential in allowing stable and continuous evaporation under changing wave conditions and facilitating much needed scale-up of clean water production in open water. Moreover, a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) was properly integrated with the interfacial steam generator. The self-powered system enabled detection of the oscillatory motions of surface water with high sensitivity. Our work endowed the interfacial steam generator with a new function against capsizing and drowning, thereby introducing self-righting interfacial steam generators for water wave detection and forecast in realistic conditions.
2. Results and discussions
2.1. Materials characterization and device fabrication
PAN is a mechanically hard, rigid and thermoplastic polymer. The advantages of using PAN in the construction of interfacial steam generators are generalized as follows: (i) it is the most resistant polymer to degradation by ultraviolet rays; (ii) it features good resistance to most solvents and acids; (iii) in the form of fibers and networks, PAN is thermal-insulating and resistant to breakage. On the other hand, CB features good photostability, intrinsic broadband absorption and low thermal emission, and therefore attractive as a light-absorbing material. In this study, fabrication of a tumbler-shaped interfacial steam generator was divided into four steps, as illustrated in Fig. 2. First, a solution of PAN in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was mixed with CB nanoparticles. Using a template-assisted approach, a gel of PAN/CB composite was poured into the space between two hemispheric shells. After solvent exchange and freeze-drying in the second step, a hemispheric and hollow PAN/CB composite aerogel was formed. Third, the bottom of PAN/CB aerogel was covered with a cone-type polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) mould. The interspace between the hemispheric PAN/CB aerogel and PTFE mould was then filled with a gel of pre-foamed PU. Steel ball with a proper weight was incorporated into the PU gel, and placed at the bottom of the cone. After curing of PU and demolding, a monolithic steam generator was finally constructed. In this design, the hemispheric PAN/CB aerogel served as the solar absorber and water path. The steel ball was used to stabilize the device on water. The PU foam supported the whole structure and isolated the solar absorber above water. Careful distribution of weight and buoyancy of each structural element prevented the device from sinking and overturning.
 Fig. 2  A flow chart of the fabrication of the tumbler-shaped interfacial steam generator. 
A series of PAN aerogels (PAN1, PAN3, PAN5 and PAN7) were fabricated by varying the concentration of PAN in DMSO (1, 3, 5 and 7 wt%, respectively). The density (ρ), porosity (P), wettability, thermal conductivity and mechanical strength of these aerogels were characterized to find the ideal aerogel for the solar absorber and water path. ρ of the aerogels were measured by using a high-precision density meter. As summarized in Fig. 3a, all PAN aerogels showed moderate ρ of 25–60 mg cm−3, which are typical values of common aerogels. Higher concentration of PAN solutions gradually increased the ρ of corresponding aerogels. ρ of the PU foam was measured to be 50 mg cm−3, also showing incredible lightness. P refers to a fraction of the volume of voids over the total volume of an aerogel. According to Archimedes' law, P can be derived by using eqn (1),32 (1)where m1 and m2 are dry and water-saturated weights of PAN aerogel, respectively. Fb is buoyant force of a PAN aerogel, which can be measured by a density meter, and g is the gravitational acceleration (9.8 m s−2). The P of PAN aerogels ranged from 98% to 82%, inversely related to the concentration of the solutions and their ρ, which can be explained by denser networks and reduced void spaces of the aerogel with a higher content of PAN. The morphologies of the corresponding PAN aerogels were confirmed by their cross-section views, as depicted in the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images (Fig. S1, ESI†). The contact angle measurements in Fig. S2 (ESI†) show that each aerogel can readily absorb a water droplet within 2 s, indicating overall good wettability with water. Among the five aerogels, denser networks with higher ρ and lower P tended to slightly slow down the water diffusion on the surface of the aerogel. In general, all PAN aerogels featured moderate thermal conductivity from 0.27 to 0.39 W m−1 K−1, suggesting their good ability to function as thermal insulators (Fig. S3 and S4, ESI†). The thermal conductivity of the aerogels increased gradually with higher loadings of PAN. This was in good agreement with the morphologies, as well as ρ and P characterized above, since the aerogels containing more insulating air were able to inhibit both conduction and convection losses. Moreover, compressive strength of water-saturated PAN aerogels was studied by plotting compressive stress as a function of strain (Fig. 3b). For all PAN aerogels, the compression cycle (loading and releasing) included three regions: a linear elastic region, a plateau region and a final deformation region. Under the same strain, the PAN aerogels with higher ρ gave rise to a higher compressive stress. As summarized in Fig. 3c, the compressive strength at a strain of 80% gradually increased from 0.03 MPa for PAN1 to 1.5 MPa for PAN7. The corresponding Young's modulus rose from 0.015 MPa for PAN1 to 1.0 MPa for PAN7. As compared with the hydrophilic PAN aerogels, the hydrophobic and dry PU foam showed lower compressive strength, where the stress at a strain of 80% reached 100.0 kPa (Fig. 3d). In a short summary, denser networks of PAN aerogels tended to improve the thermal conductivity and compressive strength yet reduce the P and weaken the water wettability. Taking into account all parameters, we decided to use PAN5 aerogels as the ideal material scaffolds for the solar absorber and water path, and the PU foam was used as the floater to construct the interfacial steam generator.
 Fig. 3  (a) ρ and P of PAN aerogels and PU foam; (b) compressive stress–strain curves of PAN aerogels (the inset shows that a PAN5 aerogel supports a calibration weight of 200 g); (c) compressive stress at a strain of 80% and Young's modulus of PAN aerogels; (d) a compressive stress–strain curve of a PU foam; (e) FTIR spectra of structural components; (f) an absorption spectrum of a PAN5/CB aerogel and the solar spectrum (AM 1.5G). 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was employed to analyze the chemical compositions of a neat PAN aerogel, a PAN5/CB aerogel and a PU foam (Fig. 3e). As neat CB nanoparticles were not functionalized with any organics, no peak was found in its FTIR spectrum. The neat PAN and PAN5/CB aerogels presented several characteristic peaks of PAN. For example, the peaks at 2243 cm−1 and 1453 cm−1 corresponded to the stretching vibration of the nitrile and methylene groups, respectively. For the PU foam, the broad peak at 3338 cm−1 corresponded to the stretching vibration peak of N–H bond. The peaks at 2931 cm−1 and 1716 cm−1 originated from the stretching vibration of methylene groups and the carbonyl groups, respectively. The peaks at 1510 cm−1 and 1105 cm−1 originated from the deformation vibration of N–H bond and the stretching vibration peak of C–O–C bond, respectively. Solar absorption is critical for the PAN5/CB aerogel when used as the solar absorber. Reflectance and transmittance were measured by using a UV-Vis-IR spectrometer with an integrating sphere. The absorptance was defined by 1 − R − T at each wavelength, where R and T were the corresponding reflectance and transmittance, respectively. Weighted by the AM 1.5G solar spectrum, the PAN5/CB powder showed a high effective absorptance of ∼94%, and covered a broad wavelength region of 400–2500 nm.
2.2. Characterization of structural elements

Fig. 4a illustrates the monolithic structure of a tumbler-shaped steam generator, which was composed of a PAN5/CB aerogel, a PU foam and a steel ball. As evidenced in our previous work, the 3D hemispheric solar absorber can afford better solar energy harvesting in a wide range of incident angles as compared with conventional 2D structures, boosting both water evaporation rates and photothermal conversion efficiencies under indoor and outdoor conditions.33 Therefore, a 3D hemispheric shape of the PAN5/CB aerogel was formed by using a template-assisted method. Numerous laminar structures in the PAN5/CB aerogel were formed after solvent exchange and freeze-drying. The SEM images in Fig. 4b show that majority of tabular sheets preferred high-angle to near-vertical alignment relative to the water surface, which suggests that they can function as efficient water channels.32,34
 Fig. 4  Schematics, digital photographs and properties of the structural elements of a tumbler-shaped steam generator. (a) A digital photograph of a tumbler-shaped steam generator; (b) SEM images of a PAN5/CB aerogel; (c) dynamic contact angle measurements of a PAN5/CB aerogel; (d) water diffusion test of a PAN5 aerogel; (e) SEM images of a PU foam; (f) thermal conductivity of a PU foam; (g) dynamic contact angle measurements of a PU foam. 
Water droplet on the surface of PAN5/CB aerogel disappeared within 0.6 s, indicating good wettability of the aerogel (Fig. 4c and S2, ESI†). The hydrophilic and sheet-like microstructures with preferential orientations further revealed that the PAN5/CB aerogel can act as efficient channels for water diffusion. Fig. 4d presents rapid water diffusion through a PAN5 aerogel, where the colored water reached the top of the pillared aerogel (∼2.5 cm in height) in a short time of ∼120 s. We note that the water-saturated aerogel featured negligible swelling and hygroscopic shrink, indicating its good ability to resist deformation in water. In brief, the PAN5/CB aerogel endowed the top hemispheric structure with several self-contained properties such as efficient solar absorption, rapid water diffusion and good structural durability. On the other hand, the PU foam showed cellular networks, which consisted of numerous air-filled closed cells with pore sizes ranging from 20 μm to 200 μm (Fig. 4e and S5, ESI†). Unlike the open porous PAN5/CB aerogel, we suggest that the closed-cell PU foam was more impermeable to heat, water and air. The PU foam exhibited lower thermal conductivity of 0.226 W m−1 K−1 and retained higher water contact angle of ∼120° over 10 min (Fig. 4f and g), as compared to PAN aerogels (Fig. 4c). The combination of light weight, good thermal insulation and hydrophobicity made the PU foam an ideal structural element for the floater.
2.3. Self-righting design and capsizing tests
Apart from the design of aerogel and foam, incorporation of a steel ball plays a key role in stabilization of the tumbler-shaped steam generator. For comparison, a hemispheric steam generator without the cone-shaped PU foam and steel ball was fabricated and tested. The weights of the structural elements were considered to ensure that both steam generators floated firmly on water, so that the bottom of each hemispheric solar absorber was exactly parallel to the water surface (Fig. 5a). Archimedes' principle states that a floating object displaces a weight of water equal to its own weight, as expressed in eqn (2), (2)where Fb is the buoyant force, m is the weight of a floating object, g is the acceleration due to gravity, ρw denotes the density of water, and V represents the volume of displaced water. Based on the given internal and external radius of the hemispheric aerogel (R1 = 16 mm, R2 = 20 mm), the height of the cone-shaped mold (h1 = 32.0 mm), and the density of stainless steel and PU foam (ρs = 7.98 g cm−3, ρpu = 0.05 g cm−3), the minimal weight of a steel ball was calculated to be 4.13 g. In this study, we employed a slightly heavier steel ball (4.17 g) to make sure that the bottom of the PAN5/CB aerogel will be in contact with the surface of water. Without using a steel ball, the height of the beneath pillared PU foam (h) was calculated to be 7.2 mm in the hemispheric steam generator (see details in Section 7, Fig. S6, ESI†).
 Fig. 5  (a) Digital photographs and section-views; (b) self-righting tests; (c) capsizing and anti-overturning tests of the hemispheric and tumbler-shaped steam generators. 
In order to further clarify our design, the center of gravity height (YG) of each steam generator was calculated by using eqn (3),35 (3)where mi is the weight of each structural element in the steam generator; n is number of terms of sum; yi is coordinate of the weight (mi) of the steam generator. In this way, the center of gravity heights of the hemispheric steam generator (YG1) and the tumbler-shaped steam generator (YG2) were derived by using eqn (4) and (5) (see details in Section 7, Fig. S6, ESI†), (4) (5)where ρw, ρpu, and ρs are the density of water, PU foam and stainless steel, respectively; R1, R2, and R3 are the internal and external radiuses of the PAN/CB aerogel, and the radius of the selected steel ball, respectively. YG1 and YG2 were calculated to be 8.3 mm and −0.8 mm, respectively, demonstrating that the tumbler-shaped steam generator featured a significantly lower center of gravity as compared with the hemispheric steam generator. The lower-lying center of gravity is proposed to stabilize the whole structure and prevent it from capsizing in large water waves, thus highlighting our design concept in this study.36 Based on the above calculation, two steam generators were fabricated and compared in the capsizing tests.
Capsizing tests were performed to verify and validate our design. A set of photographs were taken in real-time by using a high-speed camera to record the capsizing and self-righting processes of the two devices. As depicted in Fig. 5b, the two steam generators were dropped upside down into the water. The hemispheric steam generator could not keel over in water and kept its upside down orientation over time. In contrast, the tumbler-shaped steam generator was able to overturn at ∼416 ms and then return upright at ∼533 ms (ESI Movie S1†). This processes occurred from any position without intervention, demonstrating the effective self-righting property of the tumbler-shaped steam generator. We point out that our design was able to always keep the solar absorber upright above the surface of water, allowing continuous harvest and conversion of solar energy, irrespective of water waves and air flows.
Associated with the capsizing tests in still water, dynamic capsizing tests were also performed on fast moving water to assess the structural stability against overturning. Different water waves were created by using a benchtop orbital shaker. As depicted in Fig. 5c, the continuously high-speed shaking (130 rpm min−1) overturned the hemispheric steam generator after a short time of ∼30 s and the device could not return to upright orientation any more. On the contrary, the tumbler-shaped steam generator was always able to return upright, thus exhibiting good wave-piercing and anti-overturning behavior.
2.4. Water evaporation in indoor and outdoor conditions
Indoor water evaporation was measured by using an artificial optical setup under one sun (AM 1.5G, 1000 W m−2, at 26 °C and a humidity of ∼45%) (Fig. S7, ESI†). The tumbler-shaped steam generator (SG2) was characterized in parallel with a 3D pillared steam generator SG1, as illustrated in Fig. 6a. SG1 was made from the same PAN5/CB aerogel in the solar absorber of SG2. Both of SG1 and SG2 featured the same diameter of 40 mm. It is noted that ρ of a water-saturated PAN5/CB aerogel (0.95 g cm−3) was close to that of water. Therefore, SG1 was partially submerged in water, and its top surface was nearly parallel to the water surface. On the other hand, the whole solar absorber in SG2 floated above the water surface while its bottom edge was nearly parallel to the water surface. This observation is in good agreement with the structural design in this study. The temperature distribution of water and steam generators were recorded via an IR camera and thermocouples. As shown in Fig. 6b, the surface temperature of SG2 rapidly rose over 40 °C in a short time (∼10 min) and reached a steady state of ∼44 °C. It was nearly ∼5 °C higher than that of SG1 over the whole time of illumination. Water beneath SG2 showed negligible temperature variation of ±1.0 °C, whereas a clear temperature increase of ∼7.5 °C was recorded in water below SG1. This indicates that more heat tended to transfer through the body of SG1 to warm the water, whereas SG2 confined the interfacial light-to-heat conversion effectively on the surface of the solar absorber. The mass losses of water in dark and light over 60 min were measured by using a high-precision electronic balance. The clearly sharp declines of water mass demonstrated the faster water evaporation of SG2 as compared to SG1 (Fig. 6c). As summarized in Fig. 6d, SG2 attained a good water evaporation rate of 1.31 kg m−2 h−1 and a light-to-heat conversion efficiency of 83%, surpassing those of SG1 and bare water. Table S1, ESI† summarizes the device structures and water evaporation rates of interfacial steam generators where PAN has been used as building block in recent years. The comparison indicates good solar evaporation performance of SG2 in this study. An analysis of energy balance was conducted in the quest of performance of SG1 and SG2. We believe that the heat loss was one of the key factors affecting the device performance, since both the solar absorbers of SG1 and SG2 were constructed from the same PAN5/CB aerogel. In general, the heat losses of steam generators are classified as net radiation, convection and conduction losses. The best-performing SG2 showed a radiation loss of ∼3.4%, a convection loss of ∼2.5% and a conduction loss of ∼5.6%. On the other hand, the partially submerging structure of SG1 significantly agitated the conduction loss up to ∼41.8%, which agreed well with the temperature distribution, and was thought to be one of the key constraints for the evaporation performance of SG1 (Section 9, ESI†).37–40
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration and digital photographs of interfacial steam generators (SG1 and SG2) for evaporation measurements; (b) average surface temperature as a function of time (the insets show infrared images of solar absorbers after 1 h illumination); (c) mass changes of water over time in dark and light conditions; (d) evaporation rates and light-to-heat conversion efficiencies under one sun; (e) evaporation rates of SG2 in fresh water and seawater over time (the insets show digital photographs of SG2 during solar desalination); (f) evaporation rates and surface temperature of SG2 in outdoor measurements. 
Long-term evaporation measurements were conducted in both fresh water (the value of total dissolved solids was 1 × 103 mg L−1) and seawater (a salinity of 35 g kg−1) to evaluate the performance stability of SG2. A linear mass loss of water was recorded when SG2 was continuously illuminated under one sun over 5 h (Fig. S8a, ESI†). Fig. 6e shows that SG2 can retain steady water evaporation rates of ∼1.3 kg m−2 h−1 over 5 h in both freshwater and seawater, and no evident decay was found. During the 5 h solar desalination, no salt sediment appeared on the surface of the solar absorber, suggesting good salt rejecting ability of SG2. We suggest that the hydrophilic and sheet-like structures of the PAN5/CB aerogel served as efficient water channels, which tended to establish a dynamic equilibrium of brine distributions. Driven by the salinity gradient, the top salt sediments are rapidly re-dissolved and diffused backward to the seawater.23,24,41,42
Moreover, outdoor evaporation measurements were performed under a real sky throughout daytime (10:00–16:00) in August, Qingdao, China. The azimuth and elevation angles were recorded to pin-point the position of the Sun in the sky. The time-dependent mass losses of water were monitored with the solar angle and intensity, air velocity, ambient temperature and humidity. On a shiny and light breeze day, the solar elevation angle was ∼47° at 10:00, then rose to the maximal angle of ∼74° at 13:00, and fell down to ∼47° at 16:00. The solar intensity varied between 400–800 W m−2, the air velocity referred to Beaufort force 1 was in the range of 0.3–1.5 m s−1, and the humidity ranged between 55–85% (Fig. S9, ESI†). A linear decline of the mass of water was found over the 6 h experiment (Fig. S8b, ESI†). Owing to light air flow, a majority of evaporation rates were higher than the values measured in the lab, and the maximum evaporation rate reached 1.65 kg m−2 h−1, as summarized in Fig. 6f. The synergistic effects of clouds and breeze led to fluctuations of the surface temperature and water evaporation rates.43 The total output of clean water was ∼7.6 kg m−2 in daytime between 10:00–16:00. The result discloses a great potential to meet the daily water intake of people by developing portable interfacial steam generators.31,44–53
2.5. Water wave detection
Deployment of interfacial steam generators on open water such as brine lakes, pit lakes and sewage pools has been directed to explore several real-world applications. In addition to clean water production, it is highly desirable if the steam generators can serve as water-wave spectra sensors, detecting the oscillatory motions of water surface. So far, TENG has been proposed as one of the appealing technologies for blue energy harvesting and self-powered sensing.54–57 In this study, the tumbler-shaped steam generator SG2 was used as an anti-overturning and self-righting platform, and assembled with TENG to construct an integrated system for water wave detection. As depicted in Fig. 7a (top part), a Cu electrode and a FEP (fluorinated ethylene propylene) layer were wrapped around the cone-shaped floater of SG2, which acted as the movable part (Part 1) in TENG. The buoyant force generated by SG2 was enough to support the integrated structure of Part 1. Another Cu electrode and FEP layer were fixed on the wall of the water container, which acted as the static part (Part 2) in TENG. Part 2 was vertical to the water surface, and its bottom edge was exactly in contact with the surface of still water. Digital photographs of the entire system are shown in Fig. S10, ESI.† In real-world applications, Part 2 can be fixed on rocky shores, piers of bridges and sea drilling platforms in open water. The working principle of TENG is illustrated in Fig. S11, ESI.† When the dielectric layer (FEP) in Part 2 was contacted with water, negative charges from water tended to transfer to the surface of FEP due to the strong affinity of FEP to negative charges.58 When the FEP layer was separated from water, the potential difference between Part 1 and Part 2 gave rise to a pulse current. Although a majority of triboelectric charges of TENG were generated via friction between Part 2 and water, the movable Part 1 was essential for construction of the two-electrode-based TENG. As evidenced in previous reports, higher output performance has been achieved for several two-electrode-based TENGs in comparison to the TENGs using a single electrode.59,60 Since the output characteristics of current correlated with the transferred charges and time, the current signals represented the velocity of the waves in a vertical direction.56 The maximum output current was recorded when the highest velocity of a wave was found in the vertical direction. When the wave reached the highest amplitude, the output current became zero, representing a zero velocity in the vertical direction. When the wave fell down, a reverse current pulse was recorded. As a result, the oscillatory motions of water waves were translated into visual signals in real time.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration and digital photographs of SG2 and TENG integrated system; (b) output current at different wave frequencies; (c) transferred charges at different wave heights; (d) wave speed measurements. 
In nature, water waves are driven by atmospheric pressure gradients, gravitational attraction and wind, and generally observed as low frequencies in a range of 0.05–10 Hz.61 In order to evaluate the integrated system for wave frequency detection, a high-precision wavemaker was employed to create water waves with varied frequencies from 0.1 to 1.6 Hz. As shown in Fig. 7b, the output current showed good response in the pace of water waves. The transferred charges of TENG at different immersion depths were measured to evaluate the capacity of the integrated system for wave height detection. Since the bottom edge of Part 2 exactly contacted with the surface of still water, the wave height, which is defined as the vertical distance between the crest and the trough of a wave, was nearly equal to the vertical distance that Part 2 was immersed into water. Therefore, the wave heights were determined by the immersed distances and correlated with the transferred charges between the two electrodes. The transferred charges increased with the wave heights from ∼75 nC at 2 cm to ∼280 nC at 10 cm, as measured by using a programmable electrometer (Fig. 7c). A linear correlation between the transferred charges and the wave heights is plotted in Fig. S12, ESI.† The corresponding Pearson correlation coefficient (Pearson's r) was as large as 0.99, which demonstrated the high sensitivity of the integrated system for wave height detection.
In addition to the detection of wave frequencies and heights, propagation velocity and wavelength of water waves can be calculated when one more static part (Part 3) were used in the integrated system. As depicted in Fig. 7a (bottom part), when a wave reached the first fixed part (Part 2), the external circuit generated the first pulse of current. When the same wave spread to the second fixed part (Part 3), the second signal was recorded. In this case, two clear peaks were generated by one wave, as further depicted in Fig. 7d. The distance (S) between Part 2 and Part 3 was constant (0.70 m), and the interval time (dt) between two adjacent signals was measured to be 1.76 s. Hence, the propagation velocity of the wave was calculated to be 0.40 m s−1. The duration of one signal was 1.43 s and the wavelength of the wave was calculated to be 0.57 m (Section 15, ESI†). These results demonstrate that the integrated system can realize efficient water wave detection in a self-powered manner, where several wave parameters (height, frequency, wave velocity and wavelength) can be recorded in real time.
3. Conclusion
In summary, a 3D tumbler-shaped interfacial steam generator with a well-defined monolithic structure was developed by using a template-assisted approach. The PAN/CB composite aerogel acted as both solar absorber and water path. The hemispheric shape maximized the solar harvesting and light-to-heat conversion, while the ultra-porous and highly hydrophilic network rapidly diffused water and released vapor. The light-weight, hydrophobic and porous PU foam served as the floater, isolating the solar absorber well above the water surface. The selected steel ball delicately balanced the center of gravity and buoyancy of each structural component and stabilized the steam generator in water waves. Our rational design, fabrication and integration demonstrated the first example of an anti-overturning and self-righting interfacial steam generator. Under one sun, it attained good water evaporation rates of ∼1.3 kg m−2 h−1 in both freshwater and seawater, effectively surpassing the evaporation rates of a conventional pillar-shaped PAN/CB aerogel and bare water. Impressively, the 3D tumbler-shaped steam generator returned to upright position from any other position, keeping the solar absorber always above the water surface in changing wave conditions. The outstanding wave-piercing and anti-overturning performance, combined with good structural durability, bring a great potential to stable and continuous interfacial evaporation and scale-up of clean water production. As one of few reports on water wave detection, the tumbler-shaped steam generator integrated with TENG enabled the detection of several water wave parameters (frequency, height, velocity and wavelength) in real-time with high sensitivity. This work paves an innovative prospect for the engineering of anti-overturning and self-righting steam generator systems for solar-driven water purification and desalination, not merely scaling-up clean water production in open water, but also taking into account self-powered water wave detection and forecast in realistic conditions.
4. Experimental section
4.1. Material preparation

4.1.1. Fabrication of PAN aerogels. 
PAN aerogels were named as PANx, where x represents the concentration (wt%) of PAN in solution. Taking fabrication of a PAN5 aerogel as an example: the PAN solution (Solution A, 5 wt%) was prepared by dissolving PAN (1.0 g) in DMSO (17.27 mL) and stirring at 90 °C for 3 h. After degassing, Solution A was transferred into a pillar mold (internal radius: 20 mm). After freezing the PAN solution at −20 °C, DMSO was slowly extracted by using ethanol at −20 °C for 7 days. After that, ethanol was further extracted by using deionized water at room temperature for 2 days. After freeze-drying for 48 h, a PAN5 aerogel was formed. Other aerogels were fabricated by following a similar procedure.


4.1.2. Fabrication of a tumbler-shaped steam generator. 
A gel of PAN and CB was prepared by dispersing 40 mg CB in Solution A (10 mL), and sonicated in an ultrasonic homogenizer. After degassing, the gel was poured into the space between two hemispheric shells (internal radius: 16 mm, external radius: 20 mm). The hemispheric PAN5/CB aerogel was prepared according to a similar procedure described above. After that, the bottom of PAN5/CB aerogel was covered with a cone-type PTFE mold. The interspace between the hemispheric PAN5/CB aerogel and PTFE mold was filled with a gel of pre-foamed PU. A selected steel ball (4.17 g) was incorporated into the PU gel, placing at the bottom of the cone. After curing of PU and demolding, a hemispheric and monolithic steam generator was formed.

4.2. Evaporation measurements
The water evaporation experiments were conducted by using an artificial optical system at a room temperature of ∼26 °C and a humidity of ∼45%. A xenon lamp (CEL-S500, Ceaulight) equipped an AM1.5G optical filter was used as the light source. The intensity of light was calibrated by using a Si-based power meter (PT-SI-SRC, Pharos). The mass change of water was real-time monitored by using a high-precision electronic balance (QUINTIX224-1CN, Sartorius, accuracy: 0.1 mg) and transmitted to a computer. An IR camera (223s-L19, Fotric Precision Instruments) was used for the detection of surface temperature distributions. A k-type thermocouple was used to synchronously record the temperature of steam and water. A hand-held anemometer (AR866A, Smart sensor) was used to measure wind speed in outdoor evaporation test. The outdoor evaporation experiments were conducted during 10:00–16:00 in August at Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China.
4.3. Capsizing tests
The instantaneous photographs were taken by using a high-speed camera (Memrecam ACS-1, Wuhan Union China Technology). Different water waves were created by using a benchtop orbital shaker (SK-L180-S, DLAB Scientific).
4.4. Fabrication and characterization of TENG
First, ∼150 μm thick FEP films were tailored to have proper sizes for each part of TENG. The FEP film in Part 1 had the same area with the side surface of the tumbler-shaped steam generator (22.61 cm2). The FEP film in Part 2 was 8 × 12 cm. Second, a layer of Cu or Cu tape (∼200 nm) was deposited/attached on the FEP surface. After that, thin wires were connected to corresponding Cu electrodes. Finally, a FEP/Cu film was integrated with the tumbler-shaped steam generator, served as Part 1. Two FEP/Cu films were fixed onto the acrylic pedestals, served as Part 2 and Part 3. Different water waves were created by using a wavemaker (Jebao OW-40). The output current signals of the intergated system were measured via a SR570 low-noise current preamplifier from Stanford Research Systems. The transferred charges of the TENG were measured by using a Keithley 6514 system electrometer.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the Qingdao Science and Technology Program: Youth Project of Applied Basic Research, China (Grant No. 19-6-2-15-cg), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China (Grant No. 201941011), the Taishan Scholar Program of Shandong Province (Grant No. tsqn201812026) and the Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation, China (Grant No. ZR2019QB014).
Notes and references
C. J. Vörösmarty, P. Green, J. Salisbury and R. B. Lammers, Science, 2000, 289, 284–288 CrossRef .
I. Haddeland, J. Heinke, H. Biemans, S. Eisner, M. Flörke, N. Hanasaki, M. Konzmann, F. Ludwig, Y. Masaki, J. Schewe, T. Stacke, Z. D. Tessler, Y. Wada and D. Wisser, Proc. Nebr. Acad. Sci., 2014, 111, 3251–3256 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef .
S. B. Darling and F. You, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17633–17648 RSC .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
S. B. Darling, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 030901 CrossRef .
H. Liu, Z. Huang, K. Liu, X. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900310 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, H.-Q. Liang, Z.-K. Xu and Z. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900883 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Q. Liao, H. Yao, Y. Huang, H. Cheng and L. Qu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 429–446 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, Q. Jiang, X. Wu, D. Ghim, H. Gholami Derami, P.-I. Chou, Y.-S. Jun and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24092–24123 RSC .
Z. Xie, Y.-P. Peng, L. Yu, C. Xing, M. Qiu, J. Hu and H. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900400 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, X. Song, M. Huang, S. K. Megarajan, S. F. Shaukat and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9874–9881 RSC .
J. Zhou, Y. Gu, P. Liu, P. Wang, L. Miao, J. Liu, A. Wei, X. Mu, J. Li and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903255 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 507–518 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Li, K. Bertelsmann and D. E. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900720 CrossRef .
F. Ni, P. Xiao, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, J. Gu, L. Zhang and T. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15498–15506 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fang, T. Li, Z. Chen, H. Lin, P. Wang and F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10672–10679 CrossRef CAS .
H. Geng, Q. Xu, M. Wu, H. Ma, P. Zhang, T. Gao, L. Qu, T. Ma and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1512 CrossRef .
L. Wu, Z. Dong, Z. Cai, T. Ganapathy, N. X. Fang, C. Li, C. Yu, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, B. Shao, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1380–1388 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1510–1519 RSC .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
Z. Wang, T. Horseman, A. P. Straub, N. Y. Yip, D. Li, M. Elimelech and S. Lin, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax0763 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
V.-D. Dao, N. H. Vu and S. Yun, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104324 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, P. Zhang, Y. Huang, H. Cheng, C. Li and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905875 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Wang, Z. Lin, N. Xu, X. Li, J. Liang, W. Zhao, R. Lin, B. Zhu, G. Liu, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2020, 4, 928–937 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, Y. Li, C. Chen, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, C. Jia, J. Song, E. M. Hitz, B. Liu, H. Huang, J. Yu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800176 CrossRef .
T. Li, Q. Fang, X. Xi, Y. Chen and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 586–593 RSC .
F. Jiang, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, X. Xu, C. Chen, H. Huang, C. Jia, X. Zhao, E. Hitz, Y. Zhou, R. Yang, L. Cui and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1104–1112 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, N. Zhang, N. Li, L. Yu and X. Xu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901715 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, K. Hong, X. Sun, A. Natan, P. Luan, Y. Yang and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12323–12333 RSC .
S. V. Cherdantsev, J. Min. Sci., 2013, 49, 52–59 CrossRef .
Y. S. Lee, B. K. Kaang, N. Han, H.-J. Lee and W. S. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16371–16381 RSC .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Nebr. Acad. Sci., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, C. Jia, E. M. Hitz, B. Yang and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, M. E. Robson, J. L. Phelps, J. S. Tan, B. Shao, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 708–715 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105269 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, Q. Wang, Y. Shi, P. Liu and R. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900552 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Liu, Q. Huang, X. Liang, X. Zhou, H. Fu, Q. Wu, J. Zhang and W. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2581–2588 RSC .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
L. Yang, G. Chen, N. Zhang, Y. Xu and X. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19311–19320 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, J. Gu, C. Zhang, F. Ni, Y. Liang, J. He, L. Zhang, J. Ouyang, S.-W. Kuo and T. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104002 CrossRef .
P. Mu, Z. Zhang, W. Bai, J. He, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802158 CrossRef .
F. Wang, D. Wei, Y. Li, T. Chen, P. Mu, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18311–18317 RSC .
F. Gong, H. Li, W. Wang, J. Huang, D. Xia, J. Liao, M. Wu and D. V. Papavassiliou, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 322–330 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Xie, J. Wang, J. W. Elam, W. Li and S. B. Darling, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801252 CrossRef .
F. Ni, P. Xiao, N. Qiu, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, J. Gu, J. Xia, Z. Zeng, L. Wang, Q. Xue and T. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104311 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, X. Mu, P. Wang, X. Wang, J. Liu, J. Shi, A. Wei, Y. Tian, G. Zhu, H. Xu, J. Zhou and L. Miao, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104857 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao, Y. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Lu, X. Yang, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11665–11673 RSC .
Q. Zhao, C. Du, Y. Jia, J. Yuan, G. Song, X. Zhou, S. Sun, C. Zhou, L. Zhao and S. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124131 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Xu, X. Xia, J. Fu, L. Huang and Y. Zi, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 40–55 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, L. Liu, L. Zhou, X. Yin, X. Wei, Y. Hu, Y. Liu, S. Chen, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7092–7100 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, Z. Zhang, L. Xu, F. Gao, B. Zhao, Z. Kang, Q. Liao and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 104960 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and A. C. Wang, Mater. Today, 2019, 30, 34–51 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zi, S. Niu, J. Wang, Z. Wen, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8376 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, T. H. Lau, D. Guan and Y. Zi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19485–19494 RSC .
X. Li, J. Tao, X. Wang, J. Zhu, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800705 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta09773j‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematics of device structures and operating principles of (a) 2D film, (b) 3D hemispheric and (c) 3D tumbler-shaped interfacial steam generators.	 

 	Fig. 2  A flow chart of the fabrication of the tumbler-shaped interfacial steam generator.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) ρ and P of PAN aerogels and PU foam; (b) compressive stress–strain curves of PAN aerogels (the inset shows that a PAN5 aerogel supports a calibration weight of 200 g); (c) compressive stress at a strain of 80% and Young's modulus of PAN aerogels; (d) a compressive stress–strain curve of a PU foam; (e) FTIR spectra of structural components; (f) an absorption spectrum of a PAN5/CB aerogel and the solar spectrum (AM 1.5G).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematics, digital photographs and properties of the structural elements of a tumbler-shaped steam generator. (a) A digital photograph of a tumbler-shaped steam generator; (b) SEM images of a PAN5/CB aerogel; (c) dynamic contact angle measurements of a PAN5/CB aerogel; (d) water diffusion test of a PAN5 aerogel; (e) SEM images of a PU foam; (f) thermal conductivity of a PU foam; (g) dynamic contact angle measurements of a PU foam.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Digital photographs and section-views; (b) self-righting tests; (c) capsizing and anti-overturning tests of the hemispheric and tumbler-shaped steam generators.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration and digital photographs of interfacial steam generators (SG1 and SG2) for evaporation measurements; (b) average surface temperature as a function of time (the insets show infrared images of solar absorbers after 1 h illumination); (c) mass changes of water over time in dark and light conditions; (d) evaporation rates and light-to-heat conversion efficiencies under one sun; (e) evaporation rates of SG2 in fresh water and seawater over time (the insets show digital photographs of SG2 during solar desalination); (f) evaporation rates and surface temperature of SG2 in outdoor measurements.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration and digital photographs of SG2 and TENG integrated system; (b) output current at different wave frequencies; (c) transferred charges at different wave heights; (d) wave speed measurements.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta09773j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
