Recent advances in nanostructured carbon for sodium-ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA09984K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA09984K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1604-1630Recent advances in nanostructured carbon for sodium-ion batteries

        
          
            Huimin 
            Zhang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yongxin 
            Huang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Hai 
            Ming
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Gaoping 
            Cao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Wenfeng 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Ming
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Renjie 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aBeijing Key Laboratory of Environmental Science and Engineering, School of Material Science & Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China. E-mail: chenrj@bit.edu.cn
bResearch Institute of Chemical Defense, Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Chemical Energy Storage Technology and Materials, Beijing 100191, China. E-mail: lunaticmh@163.com
cState Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. E-mail: jun.ming@ciac.ac.cn
Received 
      10th September 2019
    , Accepted 7th November 2019First published on 17th December 2019AbstractSodium ion batteries (SIBs) have attracted soaring attention lately as a promising alternative to lithium ion batteries (LIBs), because of the vast availability of sodium, its low price and similar physicochemical properties to lithium. In recent years, significant progress of sodium ion battery anodes, which restricted the development of SIBs in the past decades, has been achieved. Extensive investigations have demonstrated that carbonaceous materials can become the most promising anode candidates for SIBs due to their low cost, high stability and electronic conductivity. In this article, a variety of carbon nanomaterials, including carbon quantum dots (CQDs), carbon nanotubes (CNTs), carbon nanofibers (CNFs), carbon nanosheets, and graphene as well as graphite and amorphous carbon anodes for SIBs, are briefly reviewed in view of their different dimensions and graphitization degrees. It also elaborates on research on carbonaceous material modification by doping with heteroatoms, designing various porous morphologies or compositing with organic or inorganic species. Finally, some perspectives and directions on carbon design for SIBs are also proposed. These comprehensive and in-depth discussions will provide an insight into the optimization of carbonaceous materials in SIB anodes.
1 Introduction
Inevitable fossil fuel depletion has attached great importance to electrical energy storage systems (EESs). Among various secondary batteries, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been considered as the most valuable energy storage and conversion technology with prominent advantages of high energy and power densities. However, with the ever-increasing demand for LIBs, concerns regarding lithium supply arise from its low abundance and uneven distribution in the Earth's crust. In contrast, sodium is highly abundant, and behaves similarly to lithium. In view of this, sodium ion batteries (SIBs) have become an ideal alternative to LIBs.1,2
Although SIBs are a promising alternative, they typically have poor electrochemical activity when compared to LIBs. First, Na has a higher electrochemical potential than Li, leading to lower operating voltages and thus lower energy densities in comparison to LIBs. However, energy density is not a critical issue in the field of large-scale ESSs. Secondly, Na+ ions are heavier and larger than Li+ ions, leading to inferior diffusion kinetics within a solid electrode during cycling of SIBs and often larger volume expansion of the electrode when compared with LIBs. Therefore, it is difficult to find crystalline host materials that have adequate reactive sites and stability for sodium ion storage.3–6
In the last two decades, many materials have been proposed as possible cathodes for SIBs, while reports on anode materials are fairly limited.7 At the earliest stage, carbon-based anode materials have been studied extensively. Carbon materials have been playing a significant role in the development of electrochemical energy storage systems, because they have good conductivity and are abundant in nature and their fabrication is also cost-effective.
However, some carbon-based materials deliver low capacity and suffer from poor rate capability.8 Tailoring the scale and structure of carbon is an effective strategy to boost its electron or ion transport. Remarkably, nano-dimensions with specific morphology endow them with unique physical and chemical properties: high ion-conductivity, good thermal conductivity, and outstanding mechanical properties. Nanocarbon materials with controllable morphology and size contribute to good rate capability because of the decreased diffusion distance for ions, high Na+ diffusion coefficients, and fast electron transport. Different nanostructures have different contributions to the improvement of the electrochemical properties of electrode materials.
Besides, there are numerous reports on carbonaceous materials with different graphitization degrees for application in SIBs, such as graphite, hard carbon and soft carbon. Notably, nongraphitizable hard carbon, which is the first carbon material to approach the performance of graphite in LIBs, is currently the most promising anode material available for SIBs. Nanocarbons with different dimensions (CQDs, CNTs, CNFs, graphene, and PC) and graphitization degrees (hard carbon, soft carbon, and expanded graphite) exhibited various electrochemical performances due to their different microstructures. Since 2011, the growth of the number of publications on nanostructured carbon materials in SIBs has been explosive (Fig. 1) and there already exist some review articles that focus on different aspects of the application of carbon materials in the energy field in early years, including in solar cells, LIBs, SIBs, and supercapacitors.9–11
 Fig. 1  Number of publications on “carbon materials” and “sodium ion batteries” in Web of Science on October 23, 2019. 
However, until now, a comprehensive review on typical structures and modification methods for carbon nanomaterials in SIBs both from the points of view of different dimensions and graphitization degrees is not available. In this review, we mainly focus on undertaking a comprehensive analysis of the morphology, microstructure and performance of carbons, and summarize some crucial strategies such as tailoring their electronic structures by introducing heteroatoms, adapting their physical properties by controlling the pore structure, changing their chemical properties by introducing functional groups on the surface and designing and building hybrid or hierarchical materials (Fig. 2). Finally, this review highlights the remaining challenges and provides main development directions to follow for improving the performance of carbon anodes to bring SIBs to a competitive level.
 Fig. 2  Various nanostructured carbon materials and their modification strategies. 
2 Carbon nanomaterials of different dimensions
2.1 Carbon quantum dots
Zero-dimensional (0D) carbon quantum dots (CQDs, C-dots or CDs), which are generally small carbon nanoparticles (less than 10 nm in size), have emerged as a new type of carbon-based nanomaterial and attracted much interest in photocatalysis, energy convergence/storage, bio-imaging and sensing, because of their nontoxic nature, ease of synthesis, and broad optical absorption and excitation dependent emission behavior.12,13 CQDs as excellent anode materials for SIBs were reported recently using a facile and low energy consumption synthetic approach through one-step NaOH-assisted treatment of acetone. They exhibited superb electrochemical performances with ultralong cycle life and ultrafast rate capability.14
CQDs, very functional and possessing massive flexibility in terms of surface engineering, could also function properly on various energy storage materials by improving electrical conductivity, increasing capacity, decreasing charge transfer resistance and providing favorable kinetics.15 To enhance the electrical conductivity and charge transfer properties of TiO2, TiO2 nanorod/CQD composites have been fabricated utilizing the hydrothermal reaction of P25 and NaOH in the presence of carbon dots followed by ion exchange and calcination treatments. The composite delivers a high specific capacity of 166 mA h g−1 with 93.6% retention even at 5C after 300 cycles.16 Furthermore, CQDs were used to induce rutile TiO2 from nanoparticles to nanoneedles, further self-organizing into a 3D petal-like structure, which displays a remarkable long-term cycle stability. Even at an extremely high rate of 10C (3350 mA g−1), a capacity of 74.6 mA h g−1 is maintained after 4000 cycles with a retention of 94.4%.17 When combining CQDs with VO2 nanostructures for SIB positive electrodes, it is demonstrated that a thin (∼2 nm) additional CQD layer may work as a surface sensitizer and protector to avoid VO2 agglomeration as well as minimizing the dissolution of active materials, especially during long-term cycling.18,19
Compared to other applications of CQDs, there have been fewer studies on their application in sodium ion batteries, and the best CQDs reported have capacities in the range of 250–350 mA h g−1. The development of CQDs has a long way to go for application in SIBs. In-depth theoretical and experimental studies are imperative to delicately design CQD-based electrodes with desirable electrochemical activity through economical synthetic routes.
2.2 Carbon nanotubes
Ordinary nanocarbon particles, with unstable surface morphology, are easy to aggregate, which degrades their advantages of nanostructure with high surface-to-volume ratios, making them unsuitable nanomaterials for major components of secondary batteries requiring high capacity and long-term stability. One-dimensional nanocarbon materials, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon nanofibers (CNFs) possessing a high surface area, have received extensive attention due to their unique physical and chemical characteristics in recent years.9
CNTs are a representative one-dimensional allotrope of carbon. CNTs reveal great advantages of one-dimensional nanomaterials over other nanostructured carbon materials like graphite and nanoparticles: (1) the higher specific surface area provides an easier electrode/electrolyte contact, (2) the higher electrical conductivity leads to enhanced ion transportation, and (3) the hollow structure provides enough space for relieving volume expansion during Na+ storage.
CNTs are attractive as single-wall (SW-CNTs) and multi-wall (MW-CNTs) carbon nanotubes. SW-CNTs typically have a diameter of ∼1 nm and can be considered as a single rolled sheet of graphite.14 MW-CNTs consist of multiple concentric graphitic cylinders, and thus their diameter varies depending on the number of cylinder walls. The spacing between each concentric cylinder is typically ∼3.34 Å. The unique hollow structure and multilayered wall in the case of multi-wall (MW-CNTs) carbon nanotubes enable more reactive sites.20,21 Na ion intercalation will occur at the outside walls or within the inner core through the open ends, as well as between the multilayers through the wall-defects or the open ends of MW-CNTs.
Goonetilleke D. and co-workers22 conducted a comparative electrochemical and mechanistic study of sodium-ion insertion into MW-CNTs and SW-CNTs. All CNTs suffer significant capacity drop as cycling progresses. The SW-CNTs show capacities of 70 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles when discharged to 0.1 V and 126 mA h g−1 when discharged further to 0.01 V. The MW-CNTs show a worse performance of 30 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles when discharged to 0.1 V which is attributed to the limited spacing between concentric graphitic cylinders (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  (a) MW-CNT electrodes in sodium-ion cells showing specific capacity versus cycle number. SW-CNT electrodes in sodium-ion cells showing specific capacity versus cycle number when discharged to (b) 0.1 V. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Modifying the surfaces of CNTs, especially SW-CNTs, may provide further sites for sodium coordination. Alternatively, expanding the inter-layer spacing of MW-CNTs may allow easier sodiation/desodiation.
CNTs are also widely used to modify the traditional electrode materials by serving as conductive additives and current collectors. When active materials are attached along the CNT bundles, each bundle or even each CNT acts as a current collector. They could not only serve as the skeleton to attach the active material but provide a large specific surface area, fast transport pathways, high flexibility and mechanical strength.23,24 On one hand, CNTs can be added to the precursor during the early synthetic process of the active material, so the CNTs will be penetrated through the active material to form a better inner connection. Here the CNTs are typically pretreated and modified with functional groups such as –COOH, –NH3, or –OH to favor the chemical connection between the CNTs and active material. On the other hand, the CNTs may be grown directly within the active material to achieve effective contacts at the nanoscale. The difference between CNT-based hybrid cathodes and anodes is that the CNTs themselves have a capacity as the anode material.
2.3 Carbon nanofibers
Carbon nanofibers (CNFs) have attracted large attention for a long time. Various strategies have been applied to prepare CNFs, including catalytic chemical vapor deposition growth, electrospinning, template-based synthesis and direct pyrolysis of organic polymer nanofibers.25 CNFs show highly improved sodium storage capacity (200–400 mA h g−1), owing to a large number of defect sites to store sodium as well as improved electronic and ionic conductivity. Cao et al. reported that hollow carbon nanowires, prepared from a pyrolyzed hollow polyaniline nanowire precursor, display a high reversible capacity of 251 mA h g−1 and excellent cycling stability over 400 cycles.26 Yu Y prepared CNFs through carbonization of bacterial cellulose, which is an organic compound (i.e. (C6H10O5)n) with a nanofiber network produced by bacteria. The CNF network, with improved electronic conductivity and pore access for electrolytes, delivers superior performance for application in NIBs.27
In particular, the electrospinning technique has been employed to prepare CNFs from diverse polymer precursors such as polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) because of its simplicity and cost effectiveness. Amine and his group28 synthesized two types of hard carbon materials through direct pyrolysis of commercial PVC particles and pyrolysis of electrospun PVC NFs at various temperatures. The hard carbon obtained through pyrolysis of PVC NFs at 700 °C showed an average size around 850 nm with a narrow size distribution (Fig. 4). It exhibited much enhanced electrochemical performances with a discharge capacity of 389 mA h g−1 and an initial coulombic efficiency of 69.9%. The capacity retention was also excellent, showing a discharge capacity of 211 mA h g−1 after 120 cycles. In contrast, the particle size of the commercial PVC pyrolyzed at 700 °C was mainly around 3.9 mm with a wide particle size distribution, and its electrochemical performance was much inferior to that of the pyrolyzed PVC NFs.29
 Fig. 4  SEM images of the PVC precursors. (a) PVC nanofibers prepared by electrospinning and (b) commercial PVC particles. Electrochemical evaluation of the hard carbon materials originating from PVC fibers or particles. (c) Initial discharge–charge profiles for EP and CP hard carbon samples. (d) Cycling performance of EP and CP electrodes tested at 12 mA g−1; the voltage range is between 0.01 and 2.5 V. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Notably, a strategy of pre-oxidation prior to carbonization is applied to CNFs from the electrospinning technique, where a thermoplastic precursor is melted to make fibers. Further melting can be prevented by the crosslinking structure formation for the precursor by introducing a pre-oxidation process, as seen with PVC or polyethylene. This is a typical method to induce a crosslinking structure artificially for thermoplastic precursors, which can also be extended to other fields to preserve the desired morphology and facilitate high performance of carbon materials by controlling the graphitization degree.
2.4 Graphene and graphene-like structure
Graphene has demonstrated its superior potential as an energy-storage electrode material owing to its large surface area and high electrical conductivity that is favorable for storage and transportation of ions and electrons. Moreover, its high flexibility effectively prevents pulverization of the active materials and leads to excellent stability.30 It has been claimed that sodium could adsorb on both sides of graphene layers, leading to outstanding capacities of 300–550 mA h g−1. However, it has been found that the strong π–π interactions between graphene sheets may cause the problems of poor dispersion, restacking and multilayer thickness of graphene sheets during the preparation process, which prevent the full realization of its high specific surface area, excellent electrical conductivity and high theoretical capacity, resulting in unsatisfactory electrochemical performance for SIBs.
Graphite oxide (GO) has emerged as a precursor offering the potential of cost-effective, large-scale production of graphene-based materials.31 The interlayer spaces (usually 0.6 nm) between GO layers are large enough for the Na+ insertion/extraction, however, GO is inappropriate to be directly used as an anode for SIBs. On one hand, due to the existence of too many hydroxyl groups and hydrogen bonds between GO layers, GO displayed much inferior conductivity, which will increase electrochemical polarization and slow the Na+ transportation kinetics, and reduce the available positions for Na+. On the other hand, GO tends to extend the electrochemical activity at higher voltages; high voltages will lead to lower specific energy density. Therefore, chemical, thermal, and electrochemical procedures are traditionally employed to reduce the GO nanosheets (Fig. 5).32
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of sodium storage in graphite-based materials. (a) Na+ cannot be electrochemically intercalated into graphite because of the small interlayer spacing. (b) Electrochemical intercalation of Na+ into GO is enabled by the enlarged interlayer distance because of oxidation. However, the intercalation is limited by steric hindrance from large amounts of oxygen-containing groups. (c) A significant amount of Na+ can be electrochemically intercalated into EG owing to the suitable interlayer distance and reduced oxygen-containing groups in the interlayers. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. 
After reduction, few layered graphene nanosheets with a large surface area, chemical stability, and excellent electronic conductivity hold great promise as an electrode material for electrochemical energy storage systems. The use of such graphene nanosheets as electrode materials for NIBs, although not as prevalent in the literature as for LIBs, has started to emerge recently. It has been demonstrated that thermally reduced graphene oxide (RGO) with a d-spacing of 3.7 Å displayed a specific capacity of 174 mA h g−1 at a current density of 40 mA g−1.33 The capacity was further increased to 280 mA h g−1 at a current density of 20 mA g−1 by expanding the interlayer spacing to 4.3 Å.32
Yun Y. S.34 prepared randomly oriented crumpled graphene paper (ROGP) with high flexibility, which contained permanently folded and/or crumpled graphene, by thionyl chloride treatment of GO, and found that the crumpled structure can significantly increase the power capability of graphene-based anodes of sodium-ion batteries (Fig. 6). These electrodes can deliver a power density of approximately 20000 W kg−1. These freestanding paper electrodes are advantageous compared with conventional electrodes in terms of energy density, because they do not require a binder, conductive agent, or substrate. Tin(II) chloride35 was also used as a reducing agent during the production of RGO at room temperature. The RGO anode obtained delivered a discharge capacity of 272 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1, a good cycling stability over 300 cycles and a superior rate capability.
 Fig. 6  (a) and (b) SEM images of the cross-sectional morphology of ROGP at different magnifications. The inset of (c) shows an optical image of the ROGP. (b) The rate capability of ROGP at various current densities in the range of 100–8000 mA g−1. (d) The cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of ROGP over 500 cycles at a current density of 1000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
However, traditional strategies are still unscalable, consume high amounts of energy, and are expensive for practical application. Wan F. and his group,36 for the first time, described the superior Na storage of unreduced GO by a simple and scalable alkali-metal-ion (Li+, Na+, and K+)-functionalization process. The various alkali metals ions, connecting with the oxygen on GO, have had different effects on morphology, porosity, degree of disorder, and electrical conductivity, which are crucial for Na-storage. Electrochemical tests demonstrated that sodium-ion-functionalized GO has shown outstanding Na-storage performance. Those enhanced sodium-storage properties should be attributed to the high BET area, appropriate mesopores, high degree of disorder, and superior electrical conductivity.
In further attempts to synthesize graphene, a gram-scale synthetic method was developed to produce solvothermal carbon nanomaterials using liquid precursors. These carbon materials had sheet-like 2D nanostructures.37
2.5 Three-dimensional graphene-based materials
Graphene, as a two-dimensional material, demonstrates a fascinating performance. However, the agglomeration or re-stacking of graphene sheets severely suppresses its intrinsic properties, restricting its practical application. Designing a novel structure of graphene, such as 3-dimensional (3DG) architecture, which possesses a lot of in-plane vacancies that favor the cross-plane ion diffusivity, is an effective method to improve the Na-ion storage for rGO. These 3DG structures, including graphene aerogels, graphene foams, and graphene networks, usually possess interconnected macropores that buffer ions to shorten the diffusion distance from the electrolyte to the interior surface. Various 3D rGO materials have been reported with excellent electrical conductivity, high specific surface area and good mechanical properties.38
Generally, 3DG can be prepared via a template-assisted method, self-assembly method and 3D printing method. GO-based chemical synthesis methods are more facile and versatile to synthesize 3DG. Xu J. used freeze-drying and annealing methods to synthesize a N-doped 3D free-standing graphene aerogel, which delivered an unusually high initial reversible capacity of 852.6 mA h g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1 in SIBs.39
Unfortunately, 3DG generally possesses low density due to its porous structure, which certainly reduces the volumetric energy density of the electrodes. Therefore, it is imperative to develop high-density 3D graphene electrodes. Zhang J. constructed a high-density porous graphene macrofoam (HPGM) through drying graphene hydrogels at 80 °C in an air-circulating oven. The obtained HPGM had a density of 1.04 g cm−3, much higher than that of porous graphene foam (PGM) (0.32 g cm−3) that was prepared by freeze-drying graphene hydrogels, and delivered a record high volumetric capacity of 132 mA h cm−3 at 0.05 A g−1.40
3 Carbon materials with different graphitization degrees
Allotropes of carbon have various types, from graphite to amorphous carbon, and therefore numerous efforts were further made for carbon to explore different graphitization degrees, and great progress was achieved as expected.
3.1 Graphite
Graphite, the commercialized carbonaceous anode material for LIBs, however, is unsuitable for SIBs owing to its narrow interlayer distance and the larger sodium ionic radius, as well as the thermodynamic instability of Na–C binary compounds.41 Therefore, to realize superior rate and cycling performance, careful design of graphite structures is required for Na-ion co-intercalation chemistry. Enlarging the interlayer spacing is an unambiguous approach to improve the capacity in all the reports as has been discussed in previous sections. A good example is the use of expanded graphite, which delivered 283 mA h g−1 capacity at 20 mA g−1, close to the theoretical intercalation capacity.32 Moreover, sodium-solvent co-intercalation in diglyme based electrolytes is another efficient approach to improve the sodium storage performance for graphite. When using ether-based electrolytes, highly reversible and fast intercalation/de-intercalation was observed.42 Ultrafast charge–discharge kinetics have been reported by Zhu et al. for Na-solvent intercalated graphite, with more than 100 mA h g−1 still available at current as high as 10–30 A g−1.43 In order to explain the counter-intuitive fast diffusion kinetics of such large Na-solvent intercalated species, Zhu et al. proposed that the phenomenon is the consequence of the reduced strength of the carbon–Na bonds. However, due to the significant voltage increase, the specific energy remains very low.
3.2 Disordered carbon materials
Quite interestingly, carbon materials exhibiting a disordered structure with a low degree of graphitization can deliver a relatively high capacity, and are known as amorphous carbon. Amorphous carbon mainly consists of disordered graphene layers and randomly packed microdomains and exists in the form of ‘soft carbon’ or ‘hard carbon’. The former can be converted to graphite even when annealed at 2500 °C, while the latter cannot. This amorphous structure provides nanosized pores and large interlayer space for ion storage and reversible insertion/desertion, thus resulting in a large capacity for successful sodium ion storage compared to graphite.44–46
Soft carbon consists of a semi-graphitic structure with relatively fewer defects and relatively higher crystallinity than hard carbon before high temperature graphitization. The structure of soft carbon consists of a high strain region and low strain. The high strain region is a disordered region with unorganized carbon, while the low strain region is a graphitic region with high crystallinity carbons, enabling the carbon to have high electrical conductivity. Most soft carbons reported to date deliver capacities in the range of 200–250 mA h g−1, while soft carbon usually exhibits excellent rate performance when being used as an anode material for SIBs. Cao B.47 prepared mesoporous soft carbon (MSC) by a simple nano-CaCO3 template method using mesophase pitch as the carbon precursor (Fig. 7). MSC shows an initial reversible capacity of 331 mA h g−1 at 30 mA g−1 and retains 53 mA h g−1 at an ultrahigh current density of 10 A g−1. Moreover, MSC retains a capacity of 103 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 after 3000 cycles.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of MSC; (b) charge–discharge profiles of initial five cycles for the MSC. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Soft carbon is typically derived from aromatic masses, such as pitch or tar, from petroleum or coal refinement or plastics with low oxygen contents. The sodium storage capacity of pristine pitch is generally below 100 mA h g−1 due to its soft carbon precursor nature which allows it to be graphitized at high temperatures (e.g., 2500 °C) (Fig. 8).48,49 Li et al. used pitch, a common precursor for soft carbon, to prepare a carbon anode material for SIBs by introducing phenolic resin (a hard carbon precursor) to adjust the disorder degree, and found that the pitch-derived amorphous carbon presents a reversible capacity of 284 mA h g−1 and good cyclability. In addition, an easy pre-oxidation treatment in air can enable pitch to realize an effective structural conversion from ordered to disordered during further carbonization processes.50 After pre-oxidation treatment, carbon materials can deliver a high sodium storage capacity of 300.6 mA h g−1, and a superior initial coulombic efficiency of 88.6%. Hard carbon represents another type of carbon material which was highly studied during the last few years. It has a disorder structure combining amorphous/graphitic domains and micropores, and it is recognized as the most promising candidate among all anode materials for SIBs.51 Since 2011, many hard carbon materials have been reported based on a large series of precursors such as carbohydrates (biomass), raw biomass and polymers with higher oxygen contents.
 Fig. 8  High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of (a) hard carbon, (b) SC-900 (soft carbon annealed at 900 °C), and (c) SC-1600 (soft carbon annealed at 1600 °C). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Hard carbons exhibit a sloping voltage region very similar to that of soft carbons, but also display the typical low voltage plateau, as seen in Fig. 9.52,53 This leads to typically higher capacities and lower average oxidation voltages than those of the soft carbons presented in Table 2, leading to significantly higher specific energy. Most of these carbons showed quite high capacities ranging from 250 to more than 350 mA h g−1, and average oxidation voltages near 0.3 V.
 Fig. 9  Discharge and charge curves of (a) a reported soft carbon52 material based on PTCDA for the 1st cycle and (b) a hard carbon material based on sugar for the 1st, 5th, and 20th cycles at 40 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
Unfortunately, hard carbon has been plagued by the limited initial coulombic efficiency (ICE), lower than 75%, and mediocre rate performance over cycling. Thus, a fundamental understanding of the hard carbon structure, ion-transfer and storage mechanism is essential for improving hard carbon performance.
3.3 Sodium storage mechanism of hard carbons
The typical discharge curve of hard carbon vs. Na metal is composed of a slope region and a plateau region. There is a fierce debate recently on the assignment of these two regions to different Na-ion storage mechanisms (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the mechanisms of Na-ion storage in hard carbon: (a) “intercalation–adsorption” mechanism; (b) “adsorption–intercalation” mechanism. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. 
Stevens and Dahn54,55 proposed that the slope region is due to defect assisted interlayer intercalation, which has been demonstrated by a reversible increase of the interlayer distance and a reversible decrease of the peak intensity upon sodiation through in situ X-ray diffraction. However, many other studies are more convinced that the slope region is more likely to be linked with favorable binding of Na at local defects and heteroatoms at the surface of the turbostratic crystallites,56 which was inspired by the theoretical calculation of the effect of defects on improving the sodiation potential, and was demonstrated by experimental studies on the defect effect on hard carbon performance.57
In view of the plateau region, SAXS studies by Dahn and Stevens revealed that the capacity from the low-potential plateau is attributed to nano-plating (adsorption) inside the “enclosed” micropores between the domains. Their arguments were supported by the decrease in the SAXS intensity from the nano-porous region, owing to its filling by sodium. Further insights into the mechanism were presented by Grey et al.58 through a comparison of ex situ and in operando solid-state 23Na NMR spectroscopy, revealing Na clustering in the nanopores at the end of discharge. Many other studies side with amending the sodiation mechanism. Bommier et al. observed decreased capacity from the slope region while increased capacity from the plateau region with the increase of the turbostratic nanodomains. They contend that the plateau region instead of the sloping region is associated with the Na-ion intercalation.57,59
Obtaining a clear and complete picture of the charge storage mechanisms is challenging for two main reasons. First, for most hard carbons (pyrolyzed below 1500 °C), the XRD peak corresponding to the interlayer distance is much broader and weaker. Consequently, it easily overlaps with other background contributions, so that some ex situ characterization techniques can hardly identify it. Besides, the interlayer distance, the crystallite size of the turbostratic domains, and the concentration of heteroatoms and structural point defects could potentially have an intricate relationship, which makes it difficult to experimentally separate their respective influences.
Therefore, further study will be required to properly differentiate the contributions of both mechanisms through introducing some hard carbon materials with tailored microstructures, and more precise in situ or operando characterization techniques need to be developed.
Although there exists disputation on the sodium storage mechanism in hard carbon, enlarging the interlayer spacing, defect control and porosity control have been well-documented to improve the hard carbon performance as SIB anodes.59,60
The irreversible defect binding, pore-filling and so forth are responsible for this loss and hence a method to compensate it is essential for full cell tests. It is well known that a lower surface area increases the ICE for carbon anodes in SIBs. Ji X. discovered that doping graphene oxide into sucrose can effectively reduce the specific surface area of hard carbon to as low as 5.4 m2 g−1, which exhibits a much enhanced first-cycle coulombic efficiency of 83% compared to that of sucrose derived hard carbon, 74%.61 Yang Y. prepared a cost-effective hard carbon material by pyrolyzing and carbonizing the mixture of abundant sucrose and phenolic resin. The hard carbon has an extremely low surface area of 1.54 m2 g−1 and a high initial coulombic efficiency of 87%.62
In addition, it seems that defect concentration is another important factor affecting ICE in low specific area hard carbon materials. Cao Y. obtained a hard carbon electrode with low defect and porosity, which achieved the highest ICE of 86.1%.63 The poor rate capability of hard carbon from low electronic conductivity also cannot be ignored. Notably, the electrical conductivity of carbon materials is dependent on the degree of graphitization.64,65 Yu S. demonstrated that an effective catalytic conversion from sp3 to sp2 carbon occurs through the chelation effect of the precursor and Fe3+, enabling free rearrangement of graphene sheets into expanded nanographite and carbon micropores. The structural merits ensure efficient ion diffusion and fast electron migration and provides superior rate capabilities, preserving a reversible capacity of 55 mA h g−1 even at an extremely high current density of 5 A g−1.
3.4 Nanostructured carbon material based full cells
The urgent demand for the practical application of carbon anodes in SIBs necessitates the development of full cells with high specific energy, good rate performance, and long cycle life, which involves matched cathode and anode materials. The feasibility of solvent-Na ion co-intercalation graphite in a Na full cell has been confirmed by Kang K. et al., while solvent-Na ion co-intercalation graphite generally exhibited a higher average oxidation potential, which will trade off some capacities.66 Even in conjunction with the high potential Na1.5VPO4.8F0.7 cathode, the full cell only delivers a limited energy of ≈120 W h kg−1. In contrast, hard carbon is usually used as anode material in sodium ion full cells due to its longer plateau region. Hu Y. reported a full cell using Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48]O2 as the cathode and a pyrolyzed anthracite as the anode with a practical energy density of 100 W h kg−1, which has a promising practical application.67 In his group, a series of studies were reported with hard carbon as the anode and Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48]O2 as the cathode delivering impressive energy density in the range of 200–300 W h kg−1.68–70 In addition, a variety of cathode materials, including Na3V2(PO4)3,71 Na[Cu1/9Ni2/9Fe1/3Mn1/3]O2,72 Na3V2(PO4)2F3,73 Na3V2O2(PO4)2F,74 and rhombohedral Prussian,75 have been matched with hard carbon anodes, some of which exhibit energy density even more than 300 W h kg−1.76
4 Modifications for nanostructured carbon
In terms of carbon anode materials, the achievements are still insufficient, and plenty of modification strategies have been explored to improve capacity or rate capability via adjusting their microstructure, including layer spacing, degree of graphitization and interface properties.
4.1 Heteroatom doped carbon nanomaterials (light-weight)
It was confirmed that heteroatom doping could effectively enhance the sodium storage properties of carbon materials through interface modification or functional group regulation. Light-weight heteroatom doping in carbonaceous materials is one of the most effective approaches to improve the electrochemical performance. The introduction of heteroatoms, i.e. boron (B), phosphorus (P), nitrogen (N) sulfur (S), and fluorine (F) etc., which basically means to chemically attach or incorporate them into the backbone of the respective carbon material, can generate extrinsic defects and change carbon lattices, and thus can improve their reaction kinetics and electro-chemical performance by tuning the electronic and chemical properties.77–80

4.1.1 N-Doping. 
Nitrogen is by far the most abundantly investigated heteroatom for doping carbon, because, as a “neighbour” of carbon, it is chemically relatively easy to bring the two types of atoms together. Besides, its high electronegativity, high electron affinity, and the availability of five valence electrons for bonding with carbon also make nitrogen an optimum candidate.
The simplest way to obtain N-doped carbons is by the pyrolysis of nitrogen containing organic precursors such as melamine, aminated sugars, PANI, PAN, or polypyrrole (PPY), by which the nitrogen atoms can be directly incorporated into the carbon backbone. Wu P81 fabricated nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs) through a facile carbonization of polypyrrole nanotubes. Due to its unique structural and compositional features, the N-CNT electrode exhibits excellent electrochemical properties for SIBs, delivering a capacity of 248.5 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 250 cycles (Fig. 11). Nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers (N-CNFs) derived from PAN were successfully synthesized by a combination of electrospinning and thermal treatment processes.82,83 The as-prepared N-CNFs were used as anode materials for sodium-ion batteries due to their unique fabric and weakly ordered turbostratic structure as well as large spacing between graphene layers. Results show that N-CNFs carbonized at 800 °C delivered a high reversible capacity of 293 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 in the first cycle. Even though the first-cycle coulombic efficiency was 64%, it increased to nearly 100% only after a few initial cycles. Additionally, these N-CNFs showed excellent cycling and high-rate performance, and maintained a capacity of up to 150 mA h g−1 even at an extremely high current density of 1000 mA g−1 for over 200 cycles. Moreover, nitrogen content can be controlled by post-treatment of crude carbons with reactive nitrogen sources, such as urea, nitric acid or especially ammonia.84 When the nitrogen content was 19.06%, a reversible capacity of 354.0 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 was observed. These N-doped CNFs also exhibited stable cycling performance and good rate capability. It is, therefore, demonstrated that N-doping is an effective method to improve the electrochemical performance of carbon materials, and N-doped CNFs can be used as potential anodes in practical sodium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the N-CNTs. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Wang H.85 fabricated functionalized 3D porous nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheet frameworks via chemical activation of 2D GO/PPy composites with KOH. Unique structural and compositional features could provide effective pathways for rapid ionic and electronic transportation, and excellent supercapacitive and sodium-ion storage properties have been achieved. Li D.86 successfully synthesized graphene-based nitrogen-doped carbon sandwich nanosheets (G-NCs) via an in situ polymerization method. The experimental results demonstrate that the G-NCs, as the anode material for SIBs, exhibit excellent rate performance with a reversible capacity of 110 mA h g−1 even when the test current is as high as 10000 mA g−1. The specific capacity remains at 154 mA h g−1 after 10000 cycles at 5000 mA g−1. Liu H.87 prepared nitrogen-doped 3D graphene by in situ polymerization and subsequent pyrolysis of PANI. The unique composition and nanostructure of the nitrogen-doped 3D graphene enable it to exhibit high reversible sodium storage capacity, good cycle durability and excellent rate capability. Therefore, a hybrid nanostructure of nitrogen-doped carbon and graphene is one of the most promising candidates for anode materials for high-performance sodium ion batteries.88,89
Generally, enhanced capacities from N-doping seem to be associated with larger slope voltages, typically for the samples with larger specific surface areas. This is consistent with the generally accepted explanation that the role of N-doping in the electrochemical performance is based on the pseudocapacitive contribution of the N-related functional groups, which requires a high active area and tends to extend the electrochemical activity at higher voltages.39,90,91
In addition, the investigation into the roles of different N configurations in Na-ion storage behavior deserves our attention. Liu S conducted a systematic investigation of the roles of N dopants in Na storage capability based on highly N-doped carbon materials (29.42 at%) from hexamine-based metal–organic frameworks. The configurations of the N-dopants can be effectively tailored by adjusting the annealing temperature. They demonstrated that the sodiation of pyridinic-N and pyrrolic-N is fully irreversible, sodiation of graphitic-N is partially reversible, and the cycling stability and rate-performance improve with decreasing pyridinic-N/graphitic-N ratio.92


4.1.2 S-Doping. 
Sulfur is an electrochemically active element that can reversibly react with lithium and sodium, and sulfur doping has been proved to be an efficient method to improve the electrical conductivity and provide additional reaction sites for the accommodation of lithium and sodium ions. In comparison with nitrogen, doping S with larger size and smaller electronegativity is beneficial for further expanding the interlayer distance, and significantly boosting electronic properties of carbonaceous materials.
Sulfur doping is generally achieved either by direct pyrolysis of a sulfur containing precursor such as poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene),93 by mixing elemental sulfur with an organic precursor,94 or by mixing the precursor with S-donor substances such as phenol disulfide, sulfuric acid or thiourea.95–98
Ji X.99 prepared sulfur-doped graphitic carbon nanosheets by utilizing sodium dodecyl sulfate as the sulfur resource and graphitization additive, showing a controllable interlayer spacing range from 0.38 to 0.41 nm and superior rate capability of 161.8 mA h g−1 is preserved at a high current density of 5 A g−1 within 5000 cycles, which should be ascribed to the fast surface-induced capacitive behavior derived from its high surface area.
Piao Y. successfully converted S-containing organic molecules (dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO) into sulfur-doped graphene via a one-pot solvothermal method as an anode electrode material for SIBs. They found that the prepared sulfur-doped graphene exhibited a highly disordered structure, a large interlayer distance, and large numbers of active sites. As an anode for SIBs, sulfur-doped graphene exhibited a high reversible capacity of 380 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 100 mA g−1, and an excellent rate performance of 217 mA h g−1 at a particularly high current density of 3200 mA g−1.100
Hong Z.101 controlled S doping sites and the interlayer spacing of disordered carbon by introducing S into carbon with different defect structures. S-Doped hard carbon (S-HC-p) and S-doped porous hard carbon (S-PHC-p) from pitch were synthesized through the molten salt method by using sulfur and Na2S2O3 powder as S sources, respectively. It is demonstrated that S prefers doping in the interlayer for the former with a perfect structure, while S is doped on the carbon layer for the latter with a defective structure. Thus, S-doped hard carbon with fewer defects possesses a larger interlayer distance of 3.997 Å than that (3.695 Å) of porous carbon with lots of defects. Excitingly, the S-doping carbon with a larger interlayer distance and fewer pores exhibits 200 mA h g−1 even after 4000 cycles at 1 A g−1.
Lots of studies on sulfur doped carbon materials have been conducted and when used as anodes for sodium ion batteries, they deliver excellent rate performance and high reversible capacity.102,103 However, as with N-doping, the high voltages due to the Faradaic bulk redox activity of the S dopant counterbalance the large capacities, which are no better than those of the best hard carbons.


4.1.3 P-Doping and B-doping. 
As with sulfur, elemental phosphorus (and its red polymorph in particular) is known to be electrochemically active.104–106 Zhou C. demonstrates a low-cost and scalable synthesis of BP/rGO layered structure electrodes under a pressure of 8 GPa at room temperature and the resulting anodes present excellent cycling stability and rate capability.105 Unfortunately, the cycling stability and ICE for the carbon/red polymorph is still far from satisfactory. It is reported that P-doping into sp2 carbons seems to be effective at low voltage, which can be achieved by mixing the carbon precursor with P donor substances such as phosphoric acid or bis(diphenylphosphino)methane,95,107,108 leading to capacities in the 350–400 mA h g−1 range. Li Z. doped phosphorus oxide (POx) into local structures of hard carbon by pyrolyzing sugar and POx with GO addition. The reversible desodiation capacity for the doped carbon increased from 283 mA h g−1 to 359 mA h g−1 with a low operation potential and a relatively high ICE of 73%. Yang Y. designed two types of anode materials with a similar doping level: a phosphorus-doped graphene (GP, with protrusions) and a nitrogen-doped graphene (GN, with holes). Compared to GN GP delivers an ultrahigh capacity (374 mA h g−1 after 120 cycles at 25 mA g−1), and exhibits an excellent rate capability (210 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1). Similar to S-doping, this suggested that the enlarged interlayer distance and more defective turbostratic nanodomains are responsible for the enhanced capacity without the contribution from POx.107 Ji X. also presents that after P doping, the interlayer distance of hard carbon increased from 3.77 to 3.95 Å through combined experimental studies and first principles calculations, which extends the reversible capacity.57
Due to its lower electronegativity and similar atomic radius to carbon, boron (B) doping is another modification approach of carbon-based materials. Boron doping may also be achieved by mixing the carbon precursor with boric acid. Wang Y. produced boron-functionalized reduced graphene oxide (BF-rGO) via a one-pot hydrothermal treatment of GO and H3BO4. The Na/BF-rGO half cells exhibit unprecedented long cycling stability, with ∼89.4% capacity retained (∼110 mA h g−1) after 5000 cycles (0.002% capacity decay per cycle) at 1000 mA g−1 current density (Fig. 12).109 Thus, they proposed that boron is an ideal candidate to functionalize rGO because the strong chemical bonds between boron and oxygen can serve as pillars to enlarge the interlayer spacing of rGO. However, Li Z. found that an obvious capacity degradation and a much lower ICE for B-doping on sugar-based hard carbon were observed with a limited increase of the interlayer distance.110 In comparison to N, S, sulfur doping in carbon materials for SIBs is hitherto still quite rare. It would be necessary to identify the benefits and drawbacks of B-doping.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustrations of the BF-rGO: side views. (b) Long life cycling stability of BF-rGO at 1000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 


4.1.4 Dual doping. 
Recently, it has been realized that doping carbonaceous host materials with two or more types of heteroatoms can further improve the electrochemical performance because of the synergistic effects among the doped elements. Since N doping improves conductivity, and S and P doping enlarge the interlayer distance, research has occurred to achieve N/S-co-doping and N/P-co-doping to acquire better sodium storage performance to enhance capacity and cycling.110–113
Ji X. obtained S, N-codoped carbon nanosheets (SN-C) by a solvent free one-pot method with p-aminobenzene sulfonic acid as the S source and N source, which displays an ultra-thin sheet-like structure and a tunable interlayer distance ranging from 0.37 nm to 0.41 nm. The SN-C exhibits a high capacity of 380 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles, even at a high current density of 5 A g−1, and a superior high-rate capability of 178 mA h g−1 can be retained after 5000 cycles.113 Similar results were obtained by Zhou Z. who prepared S-doped N-rich carbon nanosheets by treating N-rich carbon nanosheets with H2S/Ar. The resulting graphene sheets are homogeneously doped with nitrogen and sulfur atoms, and displayed high capacity and excellent rate performance as SIB anodes.77 N, P dual-doped carbon sheets are synthesized via a hydrothermal reaction using (NH4)2HPO4 as the N and P source or by phosphidation of the NH2-rich graphene aerogel precursor, all of which exhibit excellent cycle stability and superior rate capability.111
Furthermore, Yu et al. designed a self-supported B, N co-doping 3D interconnected carbon nanofiber thin film (BN-CNFs) by fully infiltrating NH4HB4O7·H2O into the bacterial cellulose pellicle followed by carbonization. The BN-CNFs could be used as an electrode for NIBs directly. They exhibit a high reversible charge capacity (691 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1) and superior rate capability 277 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 10 A g−1).114
Fluorination is also an effective approach to improve the electrochemical performance of carbon materials as a result of increased electrical conductivity from the semi-ionic bonding features of highly electronegative fluorine functional groups in nonaqueous electrolytes. Feng demonstrated that free-standing fluorine and nitrogen co-doped graphene paper (FNGP) electrodes deliver a great rate capability as potential anodes for flexible SIBs, because F and N co-doping in the graphene frameworks simultaneously increases structural defects, provides active sites, and enlarges the graphene interlayer distance.36

4.2 Porous carbon
The morphology basically has a significant influence on the electron transfer and ion transfer kinetics by affecting the electrolyte diffusion paths, which has a great impact on the power delivery of the material. With suitable morphologies, e.g. nanostructured carbon, hollow structure, porous structure, ordered structure, ultralong nanofibers, and multilayer structure, the power density of nanostructured carbon materials can be improved significantly.
As we know, design of a porous structure is also an efficient method to shorten the transport length of sodium ions. In addition, the porous structure has been proved to be an efficient method to buffer the volume change during the ion insertion and extraction in SIBs.115 Porous carbon is generally produced by a template method.102,116 A 3D porous carbon material has been fabricated by a NaCl template method from low-cost pitch and phenolic resin. When applied as an anode material for SIBs, the carbon exhibits excellent rate capability (66 mA h g−1 at 9.6 A g−1) and high reversible capacity (280 mA h g−1 at a low current density of 0.03 A g−1).117 Recently, direct pyrolysis of in situ templates (e.g. sodium ascorbate, sodium citrate, etc.) is appealing for the preparation of porous carbon, which showed the integrated advantages of 3D architecture, large graphitic interlayer spacing, curved interface, and high electrical conductivity. Yan X. recently reported a method for large-scale preparation of porous materials by the simple calcination of sodium citrate without the aid of any additional carbon source, template or catalyst. The optimal sample exhibits superior sodium storage performance, particularly reflected in rate capability and long-term cycling stability.118
Porous nitrogen doped carbon spheres (P-N-CS)119 have been successfully prepared, using SiO2 as the template, and PPy as the carbon and nitrogen source. The results show that the P-N-CS possesses a super rate capability of 155 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1, which is much higher than that of N-CS (18 mA h g−1). In addition, the P-N-CS exhibits outstanding cycle stability with 206 mA h g−1 after 600 cycles at 0.2 A g−1 and the capacity of N-CS is only 96 mA h g−1 under the same conditions. Zhang K.120 also synthesized nitrogen-doped porous interconnected double-shelled hollow carbon spheres (N-DHCSs) by a template-assisted method, and the work has shown that nitrogen-doped carbon materials could be obtained at low temperature (−60–70 °C) using HNO3 as the N provider. When the precursors are rinsed with HCl or H2SO4, uniform porous interconnected double-shelled hollow carbon spheres (DHCSs) are prepared (Fig. 13). The N-DHCSs as anode materials in sodium half-cell exhibit a high reversible capacity of 120 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.2 A g−1 after 100 cycles.
 Fig. 13  (a) High-magnification SEM images of the as-obtained N-DHCSs. (b) Low-magnification HRTEM images of the as-obtained N-DHCSs and simulated pattern inset. (c) Cycle performance in sodium ion batteries of N-DHCSs and DHCSs at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and (d) rate capability of N-DHCSs and DHCSs at different current densities from 0.1 A g−1 to 5 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Some biomass-based functional carbons have been reported for energy storage and conversion and catalysis. Therefore, from the green and economic points of view, the strategy of electrode material preparation applying generally abundant and easily accessible raw materials is of great significance. Ou J.121 fabricated nitrogen doped porous carbon materials (NDPC) from ox horn, and the as-obtained NDPC shows a high initial reversible capacity of 419 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1, and good rate performance (117 mA h g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1) as well as long cycling durability (255 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 300 cycles). Prabakar S. J. R.122 prepared porous sucrose-based hard carbon (SHC), and regulated the porosity by varying the amount of bicarbonate salts added. SHC with an optimized nanoporous structure also resulted in an improved rate capability.
Recently, direct pyrolysis of metal organic frameworks (MOFs) has been proved to be a facile method to synthesize porous carbonaceous materials.123–125
The zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8), as one of the MOFs, consists of Zn2+ transition metal ion and N-containing 2-methyl imidazolate linkers (34 wt% N), which can form nitrogen-doped porous carbon (NPC) after pyrolysis. Compared with other ways to produce NPC, direct pyrolysis of ZIF-8 is a kind of self-template synthesis process that does not need to add any additional carbon source or nitrogen source. NPC was successfully synthesized with zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) as the precursor at a high carbonization temperature of 950 °C, which can generate relatively pure NPC. When used as the anode materials for sodium ion batteries, the NPC exhibits an excellent rate capability and cycling stability, delivering a reversible capacity of 144.7 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 after 200 cycles and a capacity of 117.6 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 400 mA g−1, which is attributed to the existence of the mesoporous structure and the introduction of nitrogen atoms (Fig. 14).126
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of the ZIF-8 products; (b) TEM image of the NPC products; (c) cycle performance and coulombic efficiency at a current density of 50 mA g−1; and (d) rate performance of the NPC electrode. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
However, this process needs to further remove the metal species that exist in the carbon materials derived from MOFs after thermal treatment. Recently, Pan et al. prepared N-doped porous carbon materials (NPCs) through the carbonization of covalent-organic frameworks (COFs) at different temperatures and when used as electrodes for SIBs, they showed a high reversible charge capacity of 88.8 mA h g−1 at 2.5 A g−1 and excellent rate performance.127

4.2.1 Porous carbon nanofibers. 
Porous CNFs, combining the advantages of CNFs and porous carbon nanomaterials, have attracted large attention for a long time.128 When applied as electrodes in sodium-ion batteries, porous CNFs can facilitate charge transfer and improve their rate performance.129 Fu L.130 synthesized nitrogen doped porous carbon fibers by pyrolysis of PPy nanofiber precursors. The CNFs show excellent capacity retention ability and extraordinary rate performance. The reversible capacity at 0.05 A g−1 is 296 mA h g−1 and could still maintain 72 mA h g−1 at a current of 10 A g−1.
In addition, by fabricating flexible, freestanding electrodes without any inactive components such as binders and current collectors, the energy and power density of NIBs can be improved, and also the fabrication cost of NIBs can be further reduced. Recently, Li et al.131 prepared free-standing and binder-free porous CNFs (PCNFs) as anodes for NIBs (Fig. 15). In their study, triblock copolymer Pluronic F127 served as a soft template to create plenty of micropores in PAN-based CNFs, resulting in enhanced Na storage. The P-CNFs delivered an initial discharge capacity of 523 mA h g−1 with an initial coulombic efficiency of as low as 53.5% at a current density of 50 mA g−1. However, after the large initial capacity loss, the free-standing anode delivered a reversible capacity of 266 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, even at a high current density of 500 mA g−1, the anode still delivered 140 mA h g−1 even after 1000 cycles. The excellent electrochemical performances of the anode can be ascribed to its special design and microstructure. The hierarchical porous channels enabled short transport length for Na ions and electrons. Moreover, the 3D interconnected structure furnished a low contact resistance as well as great mechanical stability.
 Fig. 15  (a) and (b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process for the P-CNF electrode. (c) and (d) electrochemical performance of the P-CNF electrode cycled between 0.001 V and 2 V vs. Na+/Na. (c) Capacity–cycle number curves of the P-CNF electrode at a cycling rate of 0.2C; (d) discharge capacity of the PCNF electrode as a function of discharge rate (0.05–20 A g−1). Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.2.2 Porous graphene. 
Two-dimensional carbon nanostructures, especially 2D porous carbon materials, are being increasingly researched for energy storage/conversion devices. They offer significant improvements in power and energy density compared to bulk electrodes because they enable large surface-to-volume ratios for contact with the electrolyte, continuous conducting pathways through the electrodes for electrons, and facile strain relaxation during battery operation.
The synthesis of holey-graphene is usually carried out in multiple steps and can be broadly classified as chemical and physical methods. In the chemical method, graphene is synthesized by Hummers' method in the first step, and subsequently it is decorated with metal nano-particles, and holes are drilled on the graphene surface either under external energy such as heat or by catalytic oxidation and finally the metal nanoparticles are etched out with repeated washing with acid. Vadahanambi S.132 developed a microwave based solvothermal technique for the synthesis of nitrogen doped, holey-carbon nanosheets (hCNS) by using eco-friendly ionic liquids and potassium ethoxide. When applied as electrodes in sodium-ion batteries, hCNS show a high specific capacitance of 268 mA h g−1, good rate capability and 93% initial capacitance retention even after 200 cycles. Zhang X.133 developed porous graphene films (PGFs) by introducing defects and extra edges into graphene, using GO and a metal salt (ferric nitrate) as sources. The pore size and density could be controlled by simply adjusting the amount of ferric nitrate. When used as an anode for sodium ion batteries, PGF showed a reversible capacity of 195 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles. Even at a high rate of 1000 mA g−1, reversible capacity remains at 111 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles. Wang H. and his co-workers134 described a strategy to synthesize 2D porous nitrogen-doped carbon sheets by chemical activation of polypyrrole (PPy)-functionalized graphene sheets with KOH (ANPGs). Benefiting from the unique porous nanostructure and nitrogen doping, the ANPGs exhibit a high reversible capacity (349.7 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1), good cycling stability over 260 cycles, and good rate capability (50 mA h g−1, even at a very high current density of 20 A g−1).
It is known that the presence of hydrogen-terminated groups in carbon-based materials enhances Li ion uptake significantly, by providing additional Li binding sites (L-H-C interactions), Yoon D.135 developed a new strategy to incorporate sufficient numbers of hydrogen-terminated groups into porous carbon nanosheets to give a hydrogen-to-carbon (H/C) ratio of 2.3. The hydrogen-enriched porous carbon nanosheets (H-PCNs) produced herein demonstrated an excellent reversible capacity of 300 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1, remarkable cycling stability over 2000 cycles at high current densities of 5 A g−1, and an outstanding rate-performance of 74 mA h g−1 at an extremely high current density of 5 A g−1 (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Schematic of the preparation of H-PCNs. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
These studies have successfully demonstrated that Na ion uptake and rate-performance can be increased substantially by combining the effects of graphene interlayer spacing dilation, pore structure and porosity adjustments, and the incorporation of heteroatoms (e.g., nitrogen doping).


4.2.3 Mesoporous carbon. 
The highly ordered and tunable mesoporous structure and high specific surface area make mesoporous carbon a good candidate for SIBs. Mesoporous carbon is generally produced by a template method; both hard and soft templates can be used to synthesize mesoporous carbon materials.
Wenzel et al.136 synthesized a silica-templated carbon anode material for SIBs with enhanced rate performance, which is attributed to the minimized Na+ diffusion length by its interconnected pore structure. Kado et al.137 reported commercial MgO-templated mesoporous carbon as an anode material for SIBs with a discharge capacity of 180 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and a rate capability of 70 mA h g−1 at 4 A g−1.
Various nitrogen-rich precursors, such as melamine resin, polyacrylonitrile, polypyrrole, polyaniline, gelatin, and nitrogen containing organic salt, have been used to prepare nitrogen rich mesoporous carbons. Nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbon was synthesized from sucrose by template carbonization using SBA-15 as the template and post-treatment with urea as the nitrogen precursor for SIBs.138 Inagaki M. and his group139 recently synthesized nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbons via the co-pyrolysis of gelatin and magnesium citrate, which show a high reversible capacity of 360 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and stable cycling performance. These studies illuminate that the porous structure and nitrogen doping of the carbons play important roles in facilitating Na+ ion transport and storage in SIBs. However, the high surface areas make the initial coulombic efficiency of the carbons generally lower than 40%, and both chemical activation and silica template methods are tedious and complex. Liu H.140 prepared nitrogen-rich carbon with interconnected mesoporous structure via a nano-CaCO3 template method, using polyaniline as carbon and nitrogen precursors. The nitrogen-rich mesoporous carbon shows a high reversible capacity of 338 mA h g−1 at a current density of 30 mA g−1, and good rate performance as well as ultralong cycling durability (110.7 mA h g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1 over 800 cycles). The excellent sodium storage performance of the nitrogen-rich mesoporous carbon is attributed to its disordered structure with large interlayer distance, interconnected porosity, and enriched nitrogen heteroatoms.
The soft template method is developed through a self-assembly process with amphiphilic surfactant block copolymers as both templates and carbon precursors. Solution-based supramolecular self-assembly represents a powerful approach for the direct fabrication of nanomaterials with structural precision at the nanoscale and even the molecular scale.140 Amphiphilic lipid molecules, such as aliphatic amines or acids, can readily self-organize into stable 2D bilayer structures in aqueous solution, where hydrophobic alkyl chains aggregate in the interior of the bilayers, while the polar heads of the lipids reside on the outer surfaces and are exposed to the aqueous solution. Liu and his group141 developed the supramolecular synergic self-assembly route for the bottom-up synthesis of 2D PPy nanosheets with controlled mesoporous structure (Fig. 17). They investigated the electrochemical performance of the mPPy nanosheet samples as cathode materials for Na-ion batteries; the polymer cathode maintains its initial capacity of 83 mA h g−1, even after 120 cycles at a high rate of 300 mA g−1, demonstrating excellent cycling stability of the mPPy nanosheets for Na-ion batteries.141 Owing to the great advantages of controllable preparation, precise thickness control, easy removal without any residue, such self-assembled 2D lipid structures provide an ideal platform for the construction of complicated hierarchical 2D architectures such as mesoporous nanosheets, and can deliver excellent electrochemical performance when serving as the cathode materials for Na-ion batteries.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the 2D mesoporous PPy nanosheets. (1) Formation of spherical micelles and 2D lipid bilayers derived from the self-assembly of BCP and aliphatic amine (octadecylamine, OTA) in mixed solvents at room temperature, respectively. (2) Supramolecular sandwich-like structure formed by monolayer arrangement of the spherical BCP micelles on the 2D surfaces of the OTA bilayers. (3) Co-assembly of BCP micelles and pyrrole monomers on the OTA surfaces. (4) Formation of pristine 2D mesoporous PPy nanosheets by synergic template-directed polymerization of pyrrole monomers upon the addition of ammonium persulfate (APS). (5) As-made mesoporous PPy nanosheets after the removal of both OTA and BCP templates. (b) SEM images of the mPPy nanosheets synthesized using PS33-b-PEO114 and OTA as the templates. (c) Cycling stability of the mPPy-1 nanosheet cathode at a current density of 300 mA g−1 in Na-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. 
Apart from the aforesaid contents there are many carbon materials which have been evaluated as anode materials for SIBs as well. And the electrochemical performances of the reported carbon materials are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. The reversible specific capacities are mostly in the range of 200–400 mA h g−1, owing to their various structure and composition. Besides, the initial coulombic efficiency (ICE) of most carbons is less than 70% as a result of some irreversible reactions, e.g. the formation of the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer, caused by the high specific surface area, porosity, defects, and functional groups.
Table 1 Carbon nanomaterials of different dimensions




Precursor
ICE (%)
Cyclability (mA h g−1)
Rate capability (mA h g−1)
Year/Ref.





0 dimensional



N-Doped TiO2 nanorods/C-dots
—
165 at 0.84 A g−1 after 300 cycles
176 at 0.84 A g−1; 131 at 3.36 A g−1
2015/16


Rutile TiO2 nanorods/C-dots
50.6
245 at 0.08 A g−1 after 300 cycles
144 at 0.84 A g−1; 60 at 4.19 A g−1
2016/17


VO2 nanorods/C-dots
—
175 at 3.3 A g−1 after 100 cycles
173 at 6.6 A g−1; 133 at 19.8 A g−1
2016/18


VO2 nanorods/C-dots
—
110 at 18 A g−1 after 1500 cycles
198 at 18 A g−1; 150 at 36 A g−1
2014/19






1 dimensional



Hollow carbon nanowires
50.5
220 at 0.05 A g−1 after 200 cycles
210 at 0.25 A g−1; 149 at 0.5 A g−1
2012/26


Cellulose derived carbon nanofibers
58.8
176 at 0.2 A g−1 after 600 cycles
255 at 0.04 A g−1; 85 at 2 A g−1
2013/146


N-Doped interconnected carbon nanofibers
41.8
134.2 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles
150 at 0.2 A g−1; 121 at 2 A g−1; 100 at 5 A g−1




N-Doped interconnected carbon nanofibers
41.8
134.2 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles
150 at 0.2 A g−1; 121 at 2 A g−1; 100 at 5 A g−1
2013/147


N-Doped porous carbon nanofibers
46
243 at 0.05 A g−1 after 100 cycles
210 at 0.2 A g−1; 134 at 2 A g−1;
2014/130


Free standing porous carbon nanofibers
53
266 at 0.05 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 140 at 0.5 A g−1 after 1000 cycles
300 at 0.05 A g−1; 164 at 2 A g−1; 60 at 10 A g−1
2014/131


N-Doped bamboo-like carbon nanotubes
30
100 at 0.5 after 160 cycles
270.6 at 0.05 A g−1; 81 at 1 A g−1
2015/148


N-Doped carbon nanofiber films
35
377 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 210 at 5 A g−1 after 7000 cycles
315 at 0.5 A g−1; 154 at 15 A g−1
2015/149


Hard carbon from polyvinyl chloride nanofibers
69
215 at 0.012 g−1 after 120 cycles
271 at 0.012 A g−1; 147 at 0.24 A g−1
2015/28


Hard carbon microtubes
83
305 at 0.03 A g−1 after 100 cycles
275 at 0.15 A g−1; 180 at 0.3 A g−1
2015/150






2 dimensional



N-Doped carbon nanosheets
35
155 at 0.05 A g−1 after 200 cycles
190 at 0.2 A g−1; 50 at 2 A g−1; 45 at 5 A g−1
2013/134


S-Covalently bonded graphene
57
150 at 1 A g−1 after 200 cycles
262 at 0.1 A g−1;161 at 1 A g−1; 83 at 5 A g−1
2015/151


P-Doped carbon nanosheets
47
321.2 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 159.9 at 2.5 A g−1 after 2500 cycles; 108.8 at 5 A g−1 after 5000 cycles
269 at 0.2 A g−1; 117 at 10 A g−1; 108 at 20 A g−1
2016/152


Few-layered graphene (solvent-assisted intercalation)
58
115 at 12 A g−1 after 8000 cycles
150 at 0.2 A g−1; 125 at 10 A g−1; 100 at 30 A g−1
2016/153


Self-standing S-doped flexible graphene films
49
244 at 0.1 A g−1 after 300 cycles
377 at 0.1 A g−1; 89 at 1 A g−1
2016/98


S-Doped N-rich carbon nanosheets
44
350 at 0.05 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 211 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles
350 at 0.05 A g−1; 150 at 5 A g−1; 110 at 10 A g−1
2016/77


N-Doped holey carbon nanosheets
70
268 at 0.25 A g−1 after 200 cycles
230 at 0.5 A g−1;
2016/132






3 dimensional



Nanocellular carbon foams
—
137 at 0.1 A g−1 after 300 cycles
140 at 0.2 A g−1; 100 at 1 A g−1;
2013/154


Porous carbon/graphene composite
—
250 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles
—
2014/155


N-Doped graphene foams
43
594.0 at 0.5 A g−1 after 150 cycles
1057.1 at 0.1 A g−1; 244.7 at 2 A g−1; 137.7 at 5 A g−1
2015/39


3D porous carbon frameworks
35
303.2 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 147.3 at 2.5 A g−1 after 2500 cycles; 98.3 at 5 A g−1 after 5000 cycles
290 at 0.2 A g−1; 104 at 10 A g−1; 90 at 20 A g−1
2015/14


N/O-Codoped carbon networks
30
545 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 240 at 2 A g−1 after 2000 cycles
650 at 0.1 A g−1; 235 at 1 A g−1; 161 at 5 A g−1,
2016/27


Disordered 3D multi-layer graphene
58
190 at 0.015 A g−1 after 15 cycles; 100 at 0.75 A g−1 after 500 cycles
190 at 0.015 A g−1; 118 at 0.75 A g−1
2016/156


O-Doped 3D interdigitated carbon
63
430 at 0. 1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 223 at 1 A g−1 after 1200 cycles
422 at 0.1 A g−1; 263 at 1 A g−1; 210 at 2 A g−1
2016/157




Table 2 Carbon nanomaterials with different graphitization degrees




Precursor
HTT (°C)
SSABET (m2 g−1)
ICE (%)
Cyclability (mA h g−1)
Year/Ref.





Graphite



Expanded graphite
—
—
50
150 at 0.1 A g−1 after 2000 cycles
2014/32


Graphite (solvent co-intercalation)
—
—
85
110 at 0.2 A g−1 after 6000 cycles
2015/43


Graphite (solvent co-intercalation)
—
—
52
127 at 0.1 A g−1 after 300 cycles; 100 at 0.5 A g−1 after 2500 cycles
J-47b66


Graphite (solvent co-intercalation)
—
—
64
115 at 12 A g−1 after 8000 cycles
2016/153


Graphite (solvent co-intercalation)
—
—
73
100 at 37.2 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles
2014/42






Soft carbon



Pitch (mesocarbon microbeads)
700
0.1
66
161 at 25 mA g−1 after 60 cycles
2015/158


Pitch (mesocarbon microbeads)
800
3.5
71
103 at 500 mA g−1 after 3000 cycles
2016/47


Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
700
—
70
211 at 12 mA g−1 after 150 cycles
2015/28


Polymerized acetone
800
467
34
100 at 5 A g−1 after 10000 cycles
2015/14


Poly(ethylene oxide)/poly(propylene oxide) triblock copolymer
550
1106
71
100 at 500 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles
2016/159


Perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA)
900
14
80
85 at 1000 mA g−1 after 800 cycles
2017/160


Mesitylene
700
4
60
100 at 150 mA g−1 after 50 cycles
2014/161


Naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA)
500
15
46
271 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles
2015/94


Naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA)
1000
146
25
300 at 100 mA g−1 after 400 cycles
2017/162






Hard carbon





Carbohydrates (biomass)




Glucose
1150
—
82
—
2000/51


Sucrose
180 (24 h), 1100
24
61
300 at 30 mA g−1 after 120 cycles
2013/163


Sucrose/SWCNT
185 (24 h), 1100
16
64
223 at 100 mA g−1 after 50 cycles
2014/164


Sucrose
1100
25
80
143 at 40 mA g−1 after 500 cycles
2014/53


Sucrose/CC
1100
70
70
265 at 30 mA g−1 after 20 cycles
2015/165


Sucrose/CC (sphere)
1600
—
84
290 at 30 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
2014/166


Sucrose
1600
8
82
—
2015/59


Sucrose
1300
7
84
260 at 40 mA g−1 after 150 cycles
2016/108


Sucrose
1100
8.5
80
—
2017/95


Cellulose
1000
—
—
275 at 40 mA g−1 after 10 cycles
2002/167


Cellulose
1000
377
59
176 at 200 mA g−1 after 600 cycles
2013/168


Cellulose
1600
3
84
225 at 40 mA g−1 after 500 cycles
2016/169


Cellulose
1300
0.17
86
—
2017/56


Cellulose
275, in air; 1300–1500 in argon
77
∼90
310 at 0.030 A g−1 after 50 cycles
2018/170


Cellulose (TEMPO pre-oxidation)
240, 8 h, 1000, 2 h
126
72
196 at 100 mA g−1 after 200 cycles
2015/171


Chitosan + Ni(AC)2·4H2O
850
1490
35
175 at 20 A g−1
2018/172






Raw biomass



Water caltrop shell
1300
—
84.31
313.9 at 120 mA g−1 after 200 cycles
2019/173


Rice husk
1600
218
50
258 at 30 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
2019/174


Oak leaves
1000
161
74.8
320 at 10 mA g−1 after 200 cycles
2016/175


Banana peels
1100
14.5
67.8
210 at 500 mA g−1 after 600 cycles
2014/176


Humic acid
1500
3.21
73
288 at 100 mA g−1 after 250 cycles
2017/177


Corn
1300
3.7
86
210 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1, 105 mA h g−1 at 600 mA g−1
2016/70


Corn
1100
223
57
191 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1, 151 mA h g−1 at 600 mA g−1
2017/178


Peanut shell
1100
30
68
236 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1, 175 mA h g−1 at 600 mA g−1
2015/178


Peanut shell
1200 + 300 in air
476
55
100 at 3.2 Ag−1 after 10000 cycles
2018/179


Cherry petals
1000
1.86
67.3
146.5 at 500 mA g−1
2018/180


Shaddock
1200
82.8
68
352 at 50 mA g−1 after 200 cycles
2015/181


Dandelion
1200
4.69
59
250. At 5 A g−1
2017/182


Argon shell
1300
2.6
86
305 at 25 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
2017/183






Polymers (derived from coal or petroleum)



Polyacrylonitrile (PAN)
650–2800
20–226
46–73
—
2016/184


Polyaniline (PANI)
1150
23.5
52
207 at 50 mA g−1 after 500 cycles
2016/185


PF + Fe3+
800
664
33
113 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles
2016/90


PTCDA − S+ sulfur powders
950
25.1
55.2
159 at 2 A g−1 after 10000 cycles
2018/65


Phenolic resins
1500
7.9
76
—
2018/186


Pitch + phenolic resins
1400
3.0
88
266 at 0.030 A g−1 after 100 cycles
2016/187


PF spheres (hydrothermal)
1250
219.5
60.2
170 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
2015/188


Charcoal
800 (3 h); 1900 (3 h)
1.48
76
294, 192 and 124 at 150 mA g−1, 300 mA g−1 and 600 mA g−1 after 50 cycles
2018/36


Pitch + S/Na2S2O3/NaCl + KCl
One step molten salt method
4
56
320 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles
2016/189





4.3 Boosting electrochemical performance with ether-based electrolytes
Carbon materials with nanostructure, or a high surface area porous structure, usually induce large irreversible capacity loss from the consumption of electrolyte. In order to improve the first cycle efficiency and the cycle life of carbon anodes in SIBs, attempts have been made to modify the electrolyte. Although less studied, ether-based electrolytes have demonstrated many advantages over carbonate-based electrolytes since they can trigger the reversible co-intercalation of solvent molecules and sodium ions into graphite.42 Ether-based solvent might play a significant role in the process of SEI formation. From this point of view, Yang Q. et al. reported that the SEI formed from diglyme electrolyte is thin, uniform, compact, and more ionically conductive. The ether-derived SEI allowed for simultaneous sodium diffusion and capacitive storage.142 With the reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as the anode material, the ICE can be as high as 74.6%, Even at a high current density of 5 A g−1, the specific capacity of the rGO anode can be obtained at 196 mA h g−1.
Likewise, Freunberger143 found that hard carbon with a higher surface area also exhibited higher coulombic efficiency in an ether-based electrolyte. Similar results were reported by Zhou Z. et al.,144 where a diglyme electrolyte significantly enhanced the rate performance with a capacity of 142 mA h g−1 at a high rate of 3 A g−1 as a result of reduced electrochemical polarization. To integrate the merits of ester- and ether-based electrolytes to enable a highly reversible and high rate hard carbon anode for NIBs, Xu Y. et al. pre-engineered a “foreign SEI” from an ester-based electrolyte, which retains a record-high capacity of 200 mA h g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1 with no detectable degradation for over 1000 cycles.145
Although some explanation is proposed to address the role of ether-based electrolytes in stabilizing the SEI, considerable work needs to be done to identify the optimum structural and microstructural parameters of the SEI, which may lead to improved performance of hard carbon.
4.4 Carbon nanostructured composites
It is rare for a single-phase system to simultaneously achieve a perfect comprehensive performance, including high capacity, good rate capability, and long cycling life, even with nanostructured carbon materials. Thus, the idea of combining the unique properties of individual materials to form composites, such as multi-dimensional composites, transition metal ion doped composites, and conductive polymer composites, possibly having synergistic effects in electrode materials for NIBs, has attracted extensive attention.
Currently, designing carbon hybrid nanostructures seems to be effective. In view of this, graphene is usually mixed with other carbon nanomaterials such as carbon microspheres, CNTs, and porous carbon materials to improve the Na storage performance.190
Song L.191 designed graphene-wrapped graphitic hollow carbon spheres (G-graphitic HCSs), which deliver capacities of 190 mA h g−1 for 200 cycles at 0.1 A g−1 and 145 mA h g−1 for 1000 cycles at 1 A g−1. The results also suggested the potential of using G-graphitic HCS to construct stable Na batteries (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Cycling performance of G-graphitic HCSs in sodium half-cells at (a) 0.1 and (b) 1 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
Reduced graphene oxide/carbon nanotube (CNT) sponge (GCNTS)192 is fabricated via simple freeze drying of graphene oxide/CNT mixed solution and subsequent thermal treatment in a nitrogen atmosphere, and used as an anode for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), and the results show that GCNTS with 20 wt% CNTs has the highest charge capacity of 436 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 50 mA g−1 and even at a high current density of 10 A g−1, a capacity of 195 mA h g−1 is maintained after 7440 cycles. The high capacity, excellent rate performance and long cycling life enable the GCNTS to be a promising candidate for practical SIBs. It was found that the reversible capacities of the hybrids were greatly affected by the distance between two neighboring graphene layers, and the distance further depended on the interaction between graphene and CNTs.
Wan L. developed a sandwich-like composite, porous carbon nanoparticles uniformly distributed on both sides of reduced GO, in which hierarchical porous carbon facilitates Na+ insertion, and graphene guarantees high electronic conductivity for electron supply. The sandwich-like composite delivers a high reversible capacity of 400 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and a remarkable cycling stability (250 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 over 1000 cycles).155 Recently, for the first time, graphene mono- or bi-layers were delicately embedded in porous carbon nanofibers (G/C) through feasible electrospinning and heat treatment processes. When used as the anode for SIBs, it showed an excellent rate capability (261.1 mA h g−1 even at 10000 mA g−1), owing to the prominent advantages of the tailored G/C nanostructure including the homogeneous dispersion of highly exfoliated graphene layers in the carbon matrix, which facilitates electron and Na+ ion transportation.193
4.5 Nanostructured carbon/transition metal (oxides or sulfides)
Although extensive investigations have demonstrated that carbon nanomaterials can become promising electrode candidates for SIBs, their lower capacity still impedes the practical application of SIBs. Anode materials based on the alloying/de-alloying reaction with Na such as Si, Ge, Sn, and Sb seem to be a fascinating choice due to their high specific capacities compared to those of carbonaceous materials. Similar to LIBs, the large volume change during cycling is even more severe for NIBs due to the larger radius of the Na ion than that of the Li ion. In the effort to overcome the volume change problem of NIBs, electrochemically active metals and their alloys have been embedded in carbon materials, achieving synergistic effects in electrode materials for NIBs. For the development of carbon-based composites with alloy materials for SIBs, a series of carbon-based materials have been reported.

4.5.1 CNT and CNF based nanocomposites. 
As 1D materials, CNTs and CNFs are frequently used in nanocomposite-based electrodes as their orientated electronic and ionic transport can enhance the properties of nanocomposite electrodes (as shown in Tables 3 and 4). Generally, CNTs are pretreated and modified with functional groups such as –COOH, –NH3, or –OH to favor the chemical connection between the CNTs and active material. Guo and co-workers reported that sodium storage was improved in the Sb/multiwalled CNT (MWCNT) composite.194 When used as the anode for SIBs, it exhibited a high capacity of 502 mA h g−1 under 100 mA g−1 after 120 cycles, and a superior rate capability of 225 mA h g−1 even under 2 A g−1. Besides, transition metal/CNT composites, some transition metal oxides and metal sulfides also deserve much attention. A nanocomposite of SnO2/CNTs was synthesized through a facile SnCl2 solution-based precipitation method, in which amorphous SnO2 nanoparticles were coated on the CNT surface uniformly. The electrode exhibited a superior specific capacity of 630.4 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and 324.1 mA h g−1 at a high rate of 1.6 A g−1.195 Furthermore, high-quality MoS2 nanosheet/SCNTs were prepared using the facile liquid phase exfoliation method, and were highly porous, extremely conductive, and mechanically robust. The composite membrane can be directly employed as the working electrode of SIBs, which achieved a striking specific capacity of 400 mA h g−1, a volumetric capacity of 650 mA h cm−3, and an areal capacity of up to 6.0 mA h cm−2.196 Notably, CNTs can also be used in cathodes, the difference between CNT-based hybrid cathodes and anodes is that the CNTs themselves have a capacity as the anode material, which can provide extra capacity for sodium storage.114 The Na3V2O2(PO4)2F nanocube/MWCNT composite has been synthesized by an ethylene glycol-assisted hydrothermal reaction. As a cathode material for SIBs, the as-synthesized composite shows a stable capacity of 60 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1 after 1800 cycles.
Table 3 CNT-based cathodes and anodes




Materials
Approaches
Electrochemical performance (mA h g−1)




Fe3O4@CNT199
Filling CNT channels with Fe3O4 nanoparticles
377 at 0.1 A g−1 after 300 cycles


SnO2@CNT195
Coating CNTs with a mainly amorphous SnO2 phase
630.4 at 0.1 A g−1 and 324.1 at 1.6 A g−1


Sb2S3@MWCNT200
Precipitation and subsequent thermal treatment
412.3 at 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles


NiSx@CNT201
Confining the NiSx nanoparticles in a percolating conductive CNT network
500 over 200 cycles


CoS@CNT202
Direct growth of Co3O4 nanocrystals on the CNT backbones, chemical conversion of the Co3O4 nanocrystals to CoS hollow nanoparticles
502 at 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles, 341 and 276 at 2000 and at 5000 mA g−1


SnO2/SWCNTs203
Hydrothermal reaction of the mixed suspension with purified SWCNTs and SnCl2·2H2O
309 at 200 mA g−1 after 300 cycles


MoS2/SWNTs196
Formed by the reaction of liquid phase exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets and 20 wt% SWNTs
>400, 650 mA h cm−3, >4.0 Ah cm−2 after 120 cycles


Bi2S3@CNTs204
Fabricated using a controlled hydrolysis approach
84.4 at 60 mA g−1 after 60 cycles


TiO2/MWCNTs205
Fabricated by thermal treatment using TiO2 nanocrystals and MWCNTs
150 at 500 mA g−1 after 500 cycles


NaTi2(PO4)3/MWCNTs206
Fabricated by utilizing the screening effect of electrostatic repulsion in a solution, and subsequent freeze-drying and calcination convert the assemblies into robust hierarchical porous MWCNT-threaded particles
74.0 at 10 A g−1 and 74.3 at 2 A g−1 after 2000 cycles


Red P/SWCNTs207
Fabricated by a modified vaporization-condensation method
700 at 50 mA g−1; 300 at 2000 mA g−1


Na3V2O2(PO4)2F/MWCNTs114
Synthesized by an ethylene glycol-assisted hydrothermal reaction
98 at 20 mA g−1 after 120 cycles; 60 at 400 mA g−1 after 1800 cycles


Na3.12Fe2.44(P2O7)2/MWCNTs208
Fabricated by a solid-state reaction
100 at 30 mA g−1




Table 4 Electrospun nanofiber hybrid electrodes for NIBs




Materials


Heat treatment (°C)
Electrochemical performance (mA h g−1)




Sb@C25
SbCl3/PAN/DMF
1st step: 250 °C for 1 h in air; 2nd step: 600 °C for 5 h in H2/Ar
350 at 100 mA g−1 after 300 cycles


Sb2O3 or Sb2S3 @C carbon fiber cloth209
SbCl3/H2O, potassium antimonyl tartrate/thioacetamide/H2O
1st step: 150 °C for 6 h hydrothermally; 2nd step: 100 °C for 3 h in H2/Ar hydrothermally
514 at 0.5 A g−1 after 500 cycles (SO/CFC), 736 at 0.5 A g−1 after 650 cycles (SS/CFC)


SnSb@C210
SnO2 NPs, Sb2O5 NPs/PMMA, PAN/DMF
1st step: 280 °C for 5.5 h in air; 2nd step: 700 °C for 3 h in Ar
356 at 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles


Porous CNF@SnO2@C211
SnCl2/PAN, PMMA/DMF
1st step: 280 °C for 5.5 h in air; 2nd step: 700 °C in argon for 2 h
374 at 50 mA g−1


Sn@NCNFs197
PAN/SnCl2·2H2O/DMF
1st step: 250 °C for 2 h in air; 2nd step: 600 °C in H2/Ar for 1 h
390 at 500 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles


Co3O4-CNF212
Co(NO3)2·6H2O/PVP/DI water and ethanol solution
1st step: 350 °C for 4 h; 2nd step: at 800 °C for 4 h
400 at 250 mA g−1 after 700 cycles


Li4Ti5O12@C213
Li(ac)2.H2O, TiO(acac)2/PVP/EtOH
1st step: 400 °C for 2 h in Ar; 2nd step: 800 °C for 5 h in Ar
163 at 35 mA g−1 after 100 cycles


Li4Ti5O12/CNF214
PVP/CH3COOLi·2H2O, Ti(OC4H9)4, (CH3COO)2Cu/C2H5OH, CH3COOH
1st step: 280 °C for 5.5 h in air; 2nd step:750 °C for 4 h in argon
158.1 at 30 mA g−1


TiO2@CNF215
Ti(OC4H9)4/PVP/C2H5OH/CH3COOH
1st step: 280 °C for 5.5 h; 2nd step: 650 °C, for 4 h in Ar
159.1 at 800 mA g−1


MoS2-C composite198
(NH4)2MoS4/PVP/DMF
1st step: 450 °C for 2 h in H2/Ar; 2nd step: 800 °C for 6 h in Ar
1007 at 1 A g−1 after 100 cycles, 661 at 10 A g−1 after 1000 cycles


MoS2/C216
PAN/(NH4)2MoS4/DMF
1st step:400 °C for 2 h; 2nd step:800 °C for 1 h in Ar/H2
283.9 at 100 m A g−1 after 600 cycles


Na3V2(PO4)3/C217
NaH2PO4, NH4VO3/PEO/CA
1st step: 500 °C in Ar; 2nd step: 800 °C in Ar
75 at 100 mA g−1 after 106 cycles


Na3V2(PO4)3/C218
NaH2PO4, NH4VO3/PVP/CA
1st step: 300 °C for 3 h in Ar; 2nd step: 800 °C for 8 h in Ar
107.2 at 23.52 mA g−1 after 125 cycles, 96.8 at 235.2 mA g−1 after 30 cycles


Na3V2(PO4)3/C219
NH4VO3, NH4H2PO4, CH3COONa/PVP
800 °C for 4 h; and 6 h in Ar
83 at 100 mA g−1 after 300 cycles


Fe2O3@CNF220
Fe2O3/bacterial cellulose pellicles
500 °C for 1 h; 800 °C for 2 h in Ar
408 at 100 mA g−1 after 350 cycle




On the other hand, as another kind of representative nanocarbon, carbon nanofibers combined with some active phases such as transition metals, transition metal oxides, and transition metal sulfides are easily prepared by methods such as the electrospinning process. Sha M. successfully synthesized Sn/CNF composites by the electrospinning technique. The as-prepared Sn/CNF materials with Sn nanoparticles homogeneously distributed in the carbon nanofiber matrix provide a structurally stable host for Na+ intercalation and deintercalation, thus resulting in an excellent high-rate cycling performance (390 mA h g−1 even at an extremely high-rate of 1C after over 1000 cycles).197 Yu Y. successfully prepared MoS2/CNFs composites, with single-layered ultra-small nanoplates of MoS2 embedded in thin carbon nanowires, by the electrospinning process. The rate performance and cycling stability for sodium storage were found to be outstanding, resulting in a capacity of up to 484 and 253 mA h g−1 at 1 and 10 A g−1, respectively, after 100 cycles. The sodium storage for transition metal oxides or transition metal sulfides usually consists of conversion and alloying reactions. This suggests that the restriction to ultra-small reaction domains allows for an almost diffusion-less and nucleation-free conversion reaction, thereby resulting in a high capacity and a remarkable cycling performance.198


4.5.2 Graphene-based nanocomposites. 
Recent work has also employed graphene composites as SIB electrode materials (shown in Table 5). Metal, metal oxides, or metal sulfides incorporated into the interlamellar space of graphene not only prevent graphene from restacking and increase basal spacing, but also effectively minimize the effects of volume expansion and aggregation of active materials during Na+ charge/discharge processes improving the electrical conductivity. Thus, in this integrated system, the merits of both graphene and the active phase may create synergetic effects and lead to very high reversible capacity, long cycle life, and excellent rate performance.
Table 5 Graphene hybrid anodes with different metal oxides




Materials
Fabrication method
Electrochemical performance (mA h g−1)




TiO2/rGO225
One-pot ultrasonic spray pyrolysis process from the spray solution
148 at 168 mA g−1 after 500 cycles


TiO2/rGO226
Microwave-assisted reduction–hydrolysis route from the mixture of TiCl3, ethylene glycol and GO
90 at 12000 mA g−1


TiO2 NFs/rGO227
rGO sheets were wrapped onto PAH-grafted TiO2 NFs
200 at 335 mA g−1 after 200 cycles


Fe2O3/graphene146

In situ synthesis in a GO, Fe(NO3)3 and NaBH4 aqueous mixture solution, followed by heating to reduce GO to graphene
440 at 284 mA g−1, 219 at 2 A g−1


Fe2O3/graphene228

In situ synthesis in a GO, Fe(NO3)3 and NaBH4 aqueous mixture solution, followed by microwave-assisted reduction of GO
289 at 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles


Fe3O4/graphene229
Co-precipitation method
210 after 250 cycles.


SnO2/graphene230

In situ synthesis in a GO and SnCl2 aqueous mixture solution, followed by heating to reduce GO to graphene
200 at 20 mA g−1 after 100 cycles


Tin oxide/graphene231
Through a layer-by-layer assembly, followed by reduction of GO
220 at 640 mA g−1


Sb2O3/rGO232

In situ synthesis in a GO and SbCl2 aqueous mixture solution, followed by microwave-assisted heating to reduce GO to graphene
503 at 100 mA g−1 after 50 cycles


SbOx/rGO233
Through a wet-milling approach accompanied by a redox reaction between Sb and GO
409 at 1 A g−1 after 100 cycles


MoO3/rGO234
MoO3 are synthesized starting from the oxidation of few-layer MoS2 nanosheets. MoO3-rGO composites are prepared using a hydrothermal method
665 at 0.09 mA g−1 after 100 cycles


Bi2O3/rGO235
Through a simple reduction method by using NaBH4 as a reducing agent in Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and GO solution
607 at 140 mA g−1 after 50 cycles


Co3O4 mesoporous nanosheets/3D graphene236
3D graphene was first synthesized by chemical vapor deposition, followed by a hydrothermal reaction in Co(NO3)2·6H2O and hexamethylenetetramine solution
523.5 at 25 mA g−1 after 50 cycles


CoS/rGO221
Solvothermal using Co(CH3COO)2 (Co(Ac)2), thiourea (Tu), and GO as precursors in ethanol at 200 °C for 10 h
420 at 1000 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles


NiSx@rGO222
Hydrothermal using nickel chloride and GO at 180 °C for 24 h
499 at 200 mA g−1 after 100 cycles




Still on the graphene as part of the carbon-based materials, metal oxides such as Fe2O3 with an average diameter of 5 nm were uniformly anchored onto graphene nanosheets (Fe2O3/Graphene) by Song H. The amorphous Fe2O3/GNS composites show a high capacity of 440 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, which is obviously higher than the specific capacity of 284 mA h g−1 of crystalline Fe2O3. Even at a high current density of 2 A g−1, amorphous Fe2O3/GNS composites still exhibit a specific capacity as high as 219 mA h g−1. It is demonstrated that the amorphous structures of Fe2O3 as well as the strong interfacial interaction between Fe2O3 and graphene effectively buffer the volume change during sodiation and desodiation.146
Metal sulfides have a larger interlayer spacing along the c-axis, which may facilitate the accommodation of Na ions. Therefore, graphene-metal sulfide composites also deserve much attention lately. From the literature search, the cobalt and nickel sulfide composites with graphene show better electrochemical performance than other composites, including specific capacity and rate performance. With a facile solvothermal method, Peng S.221 decorated cobalt sulfide nanoplates on reduced graphene oxide to form CoS/rGO composites. The composites deliver outstanding cycle stability (420 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles) and extraordinary rate capability (306 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1). It is demonstrated that the 2D conductive framework of rGO, ultrathin feature of CoS nanoplates, and the unique nanoarchitecture with enhanced electrolyte penetration are responsible for the excellent electrochemical performances of the composite. Among the various metal sulfides, Ni-based sulfides stand out as the most promising Na-storage anode based on their resource abundance, low cost, environmental friendliness and high theoretical specific capacity. Tao H.222 designed unique NiSx/rGOS composites with ultrafine NiSx nanospheres uniformly wrapped in the in situ S-doped rGO matrix, demonstrating a remarkable rate performance of 414 mA h g−1 even at 4 A g−1.


4.5.3 3D carbon-based nanocomposites. 
Recent progress has demonstrated that incorporating metal, metal oxides, or metal sulfides into a highly electrically conductive three-dimensional (3D) carbon material can also effectively alleviate the aggregation of nanomaterials, enhance the ionic/electric conductivities, and maintain the whole integrity of electrodes (as shown in Table 6). A self-supported 3D graphene foam hybrid architecture is thus highly desirable. Chen J. reported a self-supported amorphous Sb2S5 nanoparticle/3D graphene foam hybrid architecture fabricated via a facile one-step hydrothermal co-assembly method. The as-prepared composite can be directly used as an electrode for SIBs without adding a binder or current collector, exhibiting outstanding electrochemical performance with exceptional rate capability (525 mA h g−1 at 10.0 A g−1) as well as ultralong cycling life (775 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 0.2 A g−1). This is ascribed to the synergistic effect of Sb2S5 NPs and the 3D graphene foam backbone, which can effectively enhance the electrical conductivity and shorten the Na+ ion diffusion distance.223
Table 6 Porous carbon hybrid anodes with different metal oxides or sulfides




Material
Fabrication method
Electrochemical performance (mA h g−1)




Sb/PC237
By self-wrapping and controlled growth process with chitosan as a self-wrapping precursor
372 at 500 mA g−1 after 100 cycles


Sn/PC238
By dispersing SnO2 nanoparticles into a soft-template polymer matrix followed by carbonization
295 at 20 mA g−1 after 15 cycles


SnSb/PC210
By a simple electrospinning method with subsequent thermal treatment
356 at 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles


SnO2/PC239
Through an immediate thermal treatment of the mixture of stannous chloride dihydrate and tartaric acid
280.1 at 100 mA g−1 after 250 cycles


SnO2/PCNF211
By amorphous carbon-coated SnO2 electrodeposited porous carbon nanofibers
374 at 50 mA g−1 after 100 cycles


SnS/PC240
Using silica opals as the hard template followed by a carbonization and sulfuration process
400 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles


Fe3O4/PC241
Via a biochemistry approach using recombinant elastin-like polypeptides containing the hexahistidine tag followed by annealing
657 and 246 at 0.1 and 2 A g−1


Co3O4/PC242
Via a biochemistry approach using recombinant elastin-like polypeptides containing the hexahistidine tag followed by annealing
583 and 183 at 0.1 and 2 A g−1


TiO2/N-doped PC243
Fabricated through direct carbonization of N-containing Ti-MOFs (NH2-MIL-125)
159 at 1.6 A g−1 after 2500 cycles


MoS2/PC244
The void nanospheres produced by SiO2 nanospheres surround the core shell MoS2/C nanospheres by a facile glucose carbonization process
523 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles




Carbon fiber cloth (CFC), as another typical nanostructured carbon material, can serve as a highway to rapidly transport electrons to the active material. Besides, as a conductive substrate for binder-free flexible electrodes, CFC replaces traditional 2D metal current collectors, such as copper foil, avoiding the use of polymer binder/conductive additives that may encounter virtual swelling in commonly used electrolytes and cause rapid capacity degradation, and poor cycle stability and rate performance.224 Thus, CFC with high ion/electron conductivity and good mechanical flexibility may be an ideal three-dimensional substrate for the construction of high performance flexible electrodes for energy storage. Liu S prepared Sb2O3/CFC and Sb2S3/CFC through a facile hydrothermal method, and during this process, interlaced Sb2O3 nanosheets and Sb2S3 micro-nanospheres grew on CFC, respectively.209 All these two flexible electrodes manifest extraordinary cycle performance and rate capability.


4.5.4 Nanocomposites based on other carbon nanomaterials. 
Carbon nanospheres, porous nanostructures and core–shell structures are often designed to further facilitate sodium ion transport. With the tunable pore size and wall thickness, high pore volume and surface area, inner connection among pore channels and easy functionalization, the porous spherical carbon network was found to be an ideal matrix to incorporate active materials. The porous structure may provide solutions to many problems in batteries such as low electrical conductivity, large volume expansion, and dissolution in electrolyte. Recently in SIBs, alloy materials, metal oxides (FeOx and SnO2), metal sulfides and some SIB cathodes often combine with porous carbon to form hybrid electrodes, and their electrochemical performances are markedly increased accordingly.244,245
Chen J. adopted a spray pyrolysis method to prepare Sn/porous spherical carbon composites with ultra-small Sn nanoparticles (∼8 nm) homogeneously embedded in a spherical carbon network. This unique structure of ultra-fine Sn grains embedded in the porous carbon network effectively buffers the stress of the inner nanoscale active material, suppressing the volume expansion and particle aggregation of Sn during the sodiation/desodiation process, ensuring an impressive cycle life (415 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 1000 mA g−1) and excellent rate capability (349 mA h g−1 even at 4000 mA g−1).246 With a similar method, Chen J. also reported γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles uniformly embedded in a porous carbon matrix, delivering high electrochemical performance as expected.247
Core–shell morphologies were designed to provide protective coatings, however, cracking of the shells may still occur upon volume expansion.248 In view of this problem, Yu Y. designed a yolk–shell structure, and the advantage of the yolk–shell structure lies in the presence of internal void space to accommodate the volumetric expansion of inner active materials during sodiation/desodiation, thus preserving the structural integrity of the shell, and ensuring stable cycle performance (360 mA h g−1 at 1500 mA g−1 after 400 cycles).249

4.6 Nanocarbon-based materials for flexible SIBs
Along with the strong consumer market demand for portable, ultrathin/lightweight and flexible and wearable electronic devices, flexible SIBs are now being extensively developed. The majority of reported flexible electrodes are constructed on the basis of carbonaceous materials due to their better structural stability against repeated deformations (i.e. graphene films, carbon cloth, and carbon nanofibers).71,193,250
Graphene (i.e. graphene films or paper) is a promising material for flexible power sources due to its exceptional mechanical flexibility and excellent tensile modulus. Recently, Yun Y. et al.251 prepared flexible graphene stacks from rGO via vacuum filtration followed by heating under a pressure of ∼10 kPa at 800 °C, which showed high electrical conductivities of ∼1.64–102 S cm−1, a tensile modulus of ∼920 MPa, and a tensile strength of ∼23.6 MPa and when paired with Na1.5VPO4.8F0.7, a high specific energy and power of approximately 107.7 W h kg−1 and 2050 W kg−1 were obtained, respectively.
Carbon cloth, a commercially available woven fabric, is regarded as an outstanding substrate for constructing flexible electrodes due to its high electrical conductivity, porous network, large surface area, and good mechanical flexibility and strength, which provides a stable support structure for the active materials and fast transport pathways for electrons. Meanwhile, the porous characteristics, loose texture, and open spaces between neighboring fibers facilitate the penetration of electrolyte. Wu X. et al.250 prepared a flexible and self-supporting P-doped carbon cloth via a vacuum-sealed doping technology. When directly used as a binder-free anode for sodium-ion batteries, the as-prepared electrode delivers superior Na-storage properties in terms of long-term cycle life (∼88% capacity retention after even 600 cycles).
Unlike commercially available carbon cloth, carbon nanofibers are usually prepared by electrospinning and a subsequent annealing treatment. The carbon fibrous mats derived from electrospun nanofibers can be directly used as flexible electrodes. Lou X.149 successfully fabricated a large-size free-standing flexible film composed of interconnected nitrogen-doped long and porous carbon nanofibers, which are beneficial for its mechanical properties. The free-standing film obtained exhibits a stable capacity of 210 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 after 7000 cycles.
In addition, carbon materials can act as flexible substrates to either encapsulate various active materials or grow active materials on their surface, including Sb2O3 or Sb2S3/carbon cloth,209 MoS2/CNF,216 tin oxide/graphene,231etc.
Significant efforts have been made for the development of flexible electrode materials with superior electrochemical performance. Note that a suitable battery configuration is critical to satisfy the mechanical flexibility requirement, and comprehensive efforts are required to understand the mechanical and electrochemical behaviors of flexible batteries. There is still much room for nanostructured carbon materials developed in the laboratories to be mass produced at an industrial level.
5 Conclusions and outlook
Among the numerous SIB carbon anode materials, the use of carbonaceous materials undergoes huge progress. Generally, these tailored carbon nanomaterials were endowed with high rate capability and long cycling life as anodes for SIBs, remarkably, and they can also be used to buffer the volume change of the alloy anodes during Na insertion and extraction reactions by designing novel nanostructures with different dimensions that can solve this predicament, because nanostructures possess a short ionic/electronic transport distance and strong stress tolerance.
However, compared with LIBs, there have been few reports on CNTs for SIBs. It is challenging to achieve high purity, particularly, SWCNTs, for various applications. Compared with CNTs, graphene is studied widely because its synthesis requires a much shorter time, so it seems available for large-scale applications. However, the realization of high-quality graphene materials with close and repeating sizes remains challenging. In contrast, so far, although various multi-functional CNFs have been obtained, there is still plenty of room for the development of electrospun electrode materials for SIBs. To better satisfy the future development of miniature and wearable electronic devices, it has become urgent to discover one-dimensional, thin SIBs. Besides the continuous efforts on effective structure control (interlayer spacing, defect and porosity) and property optimization for carbon nanomaterials, multidimensionally assembled nanoarchitectures composed of 0D CQDs, 1D CNFs and CNTs, 2D graphene sheets and 3D nanostructured carbon will be highly desirable. The nanoarchitecture will exhibit unique synergistic effects, in which each unit exerts its own advantages and overcomes the deficiencies of the other units.
In addition, in view of graphitization degree, hard carbon generally delivers higher reversible capacity, while soft carbon exhibits better rate capability. Therefore, the mixing of soft and hard carbon precursors may be another intriguing strategy toward improving the performance of nanostructured carbon via tuning the microstructure. Especially, a strategy of pre-oxidation can be applied to realize transformation of soft carbon to hard carbon by introducing a crosslinking structure into soft carbon, further facilitating the performance of carbon materials.
To summarize, after modification, considerable advances in capacity and rate capability for nanostructured carbon have been achieved. However, modified carbons generally present a higher average oxidation voltage, which may offset larger capacities to the same extent. Besides, the increase of capacity at higher voltages is typically related to the higher specific surface area and more defects, which may result in larger initial irreversible capacity. Especially for porous carbon, although developed porosity is often believed to be beneficial to enhance rate capability in SIBs, lower ICE is still a serious issue. Hence, the surface and open porosity of porous carbon need to be controlled to avoid harsh parasitic reactions with the electrolyte, and the closed pores should be appropriate to have high capacity and balanced ICE. In the meantime, most of the nanostructured carbons suffer from large initial irreversible capacity because of the decomposition of the electrolyte and the formation of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer. The optimized electrolyte and additive should be explored to tailor the formation of the SEI film and improve the initial coulombic efficiency. Compared with LIBs, the formation mechanism of the SEI in SIBs is reported rarely, and more efforts are still required to understand the formation of the SEI layer and the exact effect of extra elements for the nanocarbon electrode. A recent report of remarkably high coulombic efficiency in the first cycle for high specific surface area carbon using an ether-based electrolyte can serve as a guide for further improvement. Therefore, the difference of passivation and interface analyses of negative electrodes for Na-ion cells between ether-based and ester-based electrolytes should be identified.
Besides, much attention should be focused on carbon-based materials in terms of full cells for SIBs to boost their energy and power density for practical application. Currently, this is a major and important aspect for SIBs that highly demand rapid development. Thus, with the ongoing development of carbon-based nanocomposite anode materials at the same time, greater efforts should be made towards developing cathode materials to pair with anode materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC: 21703285). The work was supported by the State's Key Project of Research and Development Plan (Grant No. 2016YFB0901503). (Research on basic scientific problems of sodium-based energy storage battery with high safety, long life and low cost).
Notes and references
V. Palomares, M. Casas-Cabanas, E. Castillo-Martinez, M. H. Han and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2312–2337 RSC .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-Gonzalez and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 RSC .
N. Zhang, Y.-C. Liu, C.-C. Chen, Z.-L. Tao and J. Chen, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 31, 1739–1750 CAS .
C. Nithya and S. Gopukumar, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2015, 4, 253–278 CAS .
L. P. Wang, L. Yu, X. Wang, M. Srinivasan and Z. J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9353–9378 RSC .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Fang, Z.-X. Chen, X.-P. Ai, H.-X. Yang and Y.-L. Cao, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2017, 33, 211–241 CAS .
B. H. Nguyen and V. H. Nguyen, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 7, 15 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Ren, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qin, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5159–5223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, Y. Luo, W. Qiu, P. Liu and Y. Tong, Carbon, 2016, 98, 162–178 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su and G. Centi, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22, 151–173 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Q. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 362–381 RSC .
Y. F. Wang and A. G. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6921–6939 RSC .
H. Hou, C. E. Banks, M. Jing, Y. Zhang and X. Ji, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7861–7866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-X. Wang, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 527–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Ji, M. Jing, H. Hou, Y. Zhu, L. Fang, X. Yang, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5648–5655 RSC .
Y. Zhang, C. W. Foster, C. E. Banks, L. Shao, H. Hou, G. Zou, J. Chen, Z. Huang and X. Ji, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9391–9399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, Y. Luo, F. Lyu, F. Wang, H. Yang, H. Li, C. Liang, M. Huang, Y. Huang and Y. Tong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9733–9744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Liang, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 565–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Pokropivnyi, Powder Metall. Met. Ceram., 2002, 41, 123–135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terrones, Int. Mater. Rev., 2004, 49, 325–377 CrossRef CAS .
D. Goonetilleke, J. C. Pramudita, M. Choucair, A. Rawal and N. Sharma, J. Power Sources, 2016, 314, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, G. Chen and D. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 432–436 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, W. Weng, J. Ren, L. Qiu, Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Chen, J. Deng, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1217–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, M. Li, K. R. Adair, X. Sun and Y. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13882–13906 RSC .
Y. Cao, L. Xiao, M. L. Sushko, W. Wang, B. Schwenzer, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3783–3787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Z. Yang, W. Li, L. Gu and Y. Yu, Small, 2016, 12, 2559–2566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, Z. Wang, C. Wu, R. Xu, F. Wu, Y. Liu, H. Li, Y. Li, J. Lu and K. Amine, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5598–5604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Yang, L. Gu, Q. Chen and Y. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600468 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
Y. Wen, K. He, Y. Zhu, F. Han, Y. Xu, I. Matsuda, Y. Ishii, J. Cumings and C. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5 Search PubMed .
Y.-X. Wang, S.-L. Chou, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Carbon, 2013, 57, 202–208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Yun, Y.-U. Park, S.-J. Chang, B. H. Kim, J. Choi, J. Wang, D. Zhang, P. V. Braun, H.-J. Jin and K. Kang, Carbon, 2016, 99, 658–664 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kumar, R. R. Gaddam, S. R. Varanasi, D. F. Yang, S. K. Bhatia and X. S. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 214, 319–325 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, Y.-H. Li, D.-H. Liu, J.-Z. Guo, H.-Z. Sun, J.-P. Zhang and X.-L. Wu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 8152–8157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Choucair, P. Thordarson and J. A. Stride, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 30–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, P. Yang, X. Xia, J. Liu, J. Wang, X. Fan, S. V. Savilov, J. Lin, H. J. Fan and Z. X. Shen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, M. Wang, N. P. Wickramaratne, M. Jaroniec, S. Dou and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2042–2048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. Lv, Y. Tao, Y.-B. He, D.-W. Wang, C.-H. You, B. Li, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2015, 1, 112–118 CrossRef .
H. Hou, X. Qiu, W. Wei, Y. Zhang and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602898 CrossRef .
B. Jache and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10169–10173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, F. Cheng, Z. Hu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 626–634 CrossRef CAS .
E. Irisarri, A. Ponrouch and M. R. Palacin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2476–A2482 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wahid, D. Puthusseri, Y. Gawli, N. Sharma and S. Ogale, Chemsuschem, 2018, 11, 506–526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhong, Y. Wu, S. Zeng and Y. Yu, Chem.–Asian J., 2018, 13, 1248–1265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cao, H. Liu, B. Xu, Y. Lei, X. Chen and H. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6472–6478 RSC .
Z. Jian, C. Bommier, L. Luo, Z. Li, W. Wang, C. Wang, P. A. Greaney and X. Ji, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2314–2320 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mochida, Y. Korai, C. H. Ku, F. Watanabe and Y. Sakai, Carbon, 2000, 38, 305–328 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, C. Zhao, X. Qi, Y. Qi, H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800108 CrossRef .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1271–1273 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, Z. Jian, Z. Xing, W. Wang, C. Bommier, M. M. Lerner and X. Ji, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 516–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bommier, W. Luo, W.-Y. Gao, A. Greaney, S. Ma and X. Ji, Carbon, 2014, 76, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A803–A811 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 4428–4431 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiu, L. Xiao, M. L. Sushko, K. S. Han, Y. Shao, M. Yan, X. Liang, L. Mai, J. Feng, Y. Cao, X. Ai, H. Yang and J. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7 Search PubMed .

          Z. Li, C. Bommier, Z. Sen Chong, Z. Jian, W. Surta, X. Wang, Z. Xing, J. C. Neuefeind, W. Stickle, M. Dolgos, P. Greaney and X. Ji, Mechanism of Na-Ion Storage in Hard Carbon Anodes Revealed by Heteroatom Doping,  2017 Search PubMed .
J. M. Stratford, P. K. Allan, O. Pecher, P. A. Chater and C. P. Grey, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12430–12433 RSC .
C. Bommier, T. W. Surta, M. Dolgos and X. Ji, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5888–5892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xiao, T. Rojo and X. Li, Chemsuschem, 2019, 12, 133–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, C. Bommier, Z. Jian, X. Li, R. Carter, S. Vail, Y. Lu, J.-J. Lee and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2626–2631 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Ming, W. Zhang, G. Cao and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23766–23774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, H. Lu, Y. Fang, M. L. Sushko, Y. Cao, X. Ai, H. Yang and J. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703238 CrossRef .
W. Yang, W. Yang, F. Zhang, G. Wang and G. Shao, Small, 2018, 14, 1802221 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-L. Yu, S. Xin, Y. You, L. Yu, Y. Lin, D.-W. Xu, C. Qiao, Z.-H. Huang, N. Yang, S.-H. Yu and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14915–14922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Hong, Y.-U. Park, J. Kim, I. Hwang and K. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 534–541 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Hu, Y. Li, X. Qi, R. Xiaohui, H. Li, X. Huang and L. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 5, 191–197 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y.-S. Hu, M.-M. Titirici, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1600659 CrossRef .
Y. Li, L. Mu, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen, X. Huang, Y. S. Hu, Y. M. Li, L. Q. Mu, H. Li, L. Q. Chen and X. J. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 139–145 CrossRef .
P. Liu, Y. Li, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13046–13052 RSC .
Y. Wang, N. Xiao, Z. Wang, Y. Tang, H. Li, M. Yu, C. Liu, Y. Zhou and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2018, 135, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Lu, X. Qi, Y. Wang, L. Mu, Y. Li, Q. Ma, J. Li and Y.-S. Hu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 269–279 CrossRef .
D. Sun, B. Luo, H. Wang, Y. Tang, X. Ji and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103937 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shen, Y. You, Y. Niu, Y. Li, C. Dai, L. Hu, B. Guo, J. Jiang, S. Bao and M. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16581–16587 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Song, R. Qiao, L. A. Wray, M. A. Hossain, Y.-D. Chuang, W. Yang, Y. Lu, D. Evans, J.-J. Lee, S. Vail, X. Zhao, M. Nishijima, S. Kakimoto and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2548–2554 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, I. Ikeuchi, A. Garsuch, M. Schulz-Dobrick and S. Komaba, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3677–3680 RSC .
J. Yang, X. Zhou, D. Wu, X. Zhao and Z. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604108 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, A. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Liu, X. Cao, Y. Ma, L. Chen, C. Lau, T.-C. Chen, F. Wei and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5530–5537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-H. Yao, W.-Q. Cao and M.-S. Cao, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2016, 16, 574–580 CrossRef .
G. Ma, K. Huang, Q. Zhuang and Z. Ju, Mater. Lett., 2016, 174, 221–225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, P. Wu, Y. Wang, W. Fang, F. Zhao, J. Du, P. Zhang, Y. Tang, S. Wei and Y. Zhou, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2016, 65, 552–557 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. Ge, H. Jiang, K. Fu and X. Zhang, Carbon, 2015, 94, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
P.-Y. Zhao, B.-J. Yu, S. Sun, Y. Guo, Z.-Z. Chang, Q. Li and C.-Y. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 232, 348–356 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. Ge, J. Zhu, H. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Hu and X. Zhang, Energy Technol., 2016, 4, 1440–1449 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Sun, H. T. Tan, J. B. Franklin, Y. Guo, H. Fan, M. Ulaganathan, X.-L. Wu, Z.-Z. Luo, S. Madhavi and Q. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, L. Zhang, H. Chen, J. Wang, L.-X. Ding, S. Wang, P. J. Ashman and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8630–8635 RSC .
H. Liu, M. Jia, B. Cao, R. Chen, X. Lv, R. Tang, F. Wu and B. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 319, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
H. An, Y. Li, Y. Gao, C. Cao, J. Han, Y. Feng and W. Feng, Carbon, 2017, 116, 338–346 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, Z. Zhang, K. Du, X. Zhao, W. Chen, Y. Lai and J. Li, Carbon, 2015, 91, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, Y. Cao, W. A. Henderson, M. L. Sushko, Y. Shao, J. Xiao, W. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, Z. Nie and J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 279–288 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhong, Y. Li, L. Zhang, J. Tang, X. Li, C. Liu, M. Shao, Z. Lu, H. Pan and B. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2970–2977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Zhou and H. Song, Small, 2018, 14, 1703548 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Qie, W. Chen, X. Xiong, C. Hu, F. Zou, P. Hu and Y. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500195 Search PubMed .
W. Li, M. Zhou, H. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2916–2921 RSC .
Z. Li, C. Bommier, Z. Sen Chong, Z. Jian, T. W. Surta, X. Wang, Z. Xing, J. C. Neuefeind, W. F. Stickle, M. Dolgos, P. A. Greaney and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602894 CrossRef .
D. Xu, C. Chen, J. Xie, B. Zhang, L. Miao, J. Cai, Y. Huang and L. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501929 CrossRef .
F. M. Hassan, R. Batmaz, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Xiao, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, K. Xie, L. Li, W. Zhou, J. Sunarso and Z. Shao, Carbon, 2016, 107, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zou, C. Wang, H. Hou, C. Wang, X. Qiu and X. Ji, Small, 2017, 13 CAS .
B. Quan, A. Jin, S.-H. Yu, S. M. Kong, J. Jeong, H. D. Abruna, L. Jin, Y. Piao and Y.-E. Sung, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700880 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hong, Y. Zhen, Y. Ruan, M. Kang, K. Zhou, J.-M. Zhang, Z. Huang and M. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802035 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Bandosz and T.-Z. Ren, Carbon, 2017, 118, 561–577 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, D. Yan, T. Lu and L. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 241, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, X. Yuan and X. Yu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16675–16682 RSC .
Y. Liu, Q. Liu, A. Zhang, J. Cai, X. Cao, Z. Li, P. D. Asimow and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8323–8329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, X. Zhu, B. Luo, Y. Zhang, Y. Tang, H. Wang and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801197 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, D.-M. Tang, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Liang, S. Chen, Q. Weng, M. Zhou, Y. Xue, J. Liu, J. Wu, Q. H. Cui, C. Lian, G. Hou, F. Yuan, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 979–986 RSC .
Z. Li, L. Ma, T. W. Surta, C. Bommierit, Z. Jian, Z. Xing, W. F. Stickle, M. Dolgos, K. Amine, J. Lu, T. Wu and X. Ji, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 395–401 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Liu and Z. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18860–18866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Bommier, Z. S. Chong, Z. Jian, T. W. Surta, X. Wang, Z. Xing, J. C. Neuefeind, W. F. Stickle, M. Dolgos, P. A. Greaney and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602894 CrossRef .
C. Li, Q. Fu, K. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Tang, H. Li, H. Jiang and L. Chen, Carbon, 2018, 139, 1117–1125 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, H. Zeng, D. Han, K. Qiao, W. Xing, M. J. Rood and Z. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37172–37180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zou, H. Hou, G. Zhao, Z. Huang, P. Ge and X. Ji, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 4622–4632 RSC .
P. R. Kumar, Y. H. Jung, J. E. Wang and D. K. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 421–427 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lyu, L. Yang, D. Xu, J. Zhao, H. Lai, Y. Jiang, Q. Wu, Y. Li, X. Wang and Z. Hu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3535–3543 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou and L.-Z. Fan, Ionics, 2018, 24, 3065–3073 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lu, Y. Sun, H. Xiang, X. Liang and Y. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702434 CrossRef .
B. Yang, J. Chen, S. Lei, R. Guo, H. Li, S. Shi and X. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702409 CrossRef .
D. Li, H. Chen, G. Liu, M. Wei, L.-x. Ding, S. Wang and H. Wang, Carbon, 2015, 94, 888–894 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, X. Li, J. Liang, Y. Zhu, L. Hu, Q. Cheng, C. Guo, N. Lin and Y. Qian, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 155, 174–182 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ou, L. Yang, Z. Zhang and X. Xi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 237, 23–30 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. R. Prabakar, J. Jeong and M. Pyo, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 161, 23–31 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, K. Cheng, Y.-n. Wu, Y. Wang, C. Morlay and F. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y.-Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, Y. Chen, Y. Lai, K. Zhang, J. Li and Z. Zhang, Carbon, 2017, 123, 250–258 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, Z. Zhang, Y. Fu and Y. Gan, Mater. Lett., 2015, 161, 332–335 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, G. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Li, T. Lu and L. Pan, Carbon, 2017, 116, 686–694 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Zhao and F. Yang, Carbon, 2015, 95, 552–559 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, W. Xiao, J. Li, G. Li, Z. Wu, C. Xuan, D. Luo, Y.-P. Deng, D. Wang and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28604–28611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fu, K. Tang, K. Song, P. A. van Aken, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1384–1389 RSC .
W. Li, L. Zeng, Z. Yang, L. Gu, J. Wang, X. Liu, J. Cheng and Y. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 693–698 RSC .
S. Vadahanambi, H.-H. Chun, K. H. Jung and H. Park, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38112–38116 RSC .
X. Zhang, J. Zhou, C. Liu, X. Chen and H. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8837–8843 RSC .
H.-g. Wang, Z. Wu, F.-l. Meng, D.-l. Ma, X.-l. Huang, L.-m. Wang and X.-b. Zhang, Chemsuschem, 2013, 6, 56–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yoon, D. H. Kim, K. Y. Chung, W. Chang, S. M. Kim and J. Kim, Carbon, 2016, 98, 213–220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wenzel, T. Hara, J. Janek and P. Adelhelm, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3342–3345 RSC .
Y. Kado, Y. Soneda and N. Yoshizawa, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2015, 4, A22–A23 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Li and X.-J. Lv, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 62673–62677 RSC .
M. Inagaki, M. Toyoda, Y. Soneda, S. Tsujimura and T. Morishita, Carbon, 2016, 107, 448–473 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, M. Jia, N. Sun, B. Cao, R. Chen, Q. Zhu, F. Wu, N. Qiao and B. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27124–27130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, F. Wang, R. Dong, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Zhuang, Y. Mai and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8365–8370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, D.-W. Wang, W. Lv, S. Zhang, Q. Liang, D. Zheng, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 370–376 RSC .
L. Schafzahl, I. Hanzu, M. Wilkening and S. A. Freunberger, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 401–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-E. Zhu, L. Yang, X. Zhou, F. Li, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9528–9532 RSC .
P. Bai, Y. He, P. Xiong, X. Zhao, K. Xu and Y. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 274–282 CrossRef .
D. Li, J. Zhou, X. Chen and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30899–30907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Qie, L. Yuan, W. Zhang, X. Hu and Y. Huang, Carbon, 2013, 55, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, L. Zhang, H. Chen, L.-x. Ding, S. Wang and H. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16045–16048 RSC .
S. Wang, L. Xia, L. Yu, L. Zhang, H. Wang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502217 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y.-S. Hu, M.-M. Titirici, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600659 CrossRef .
X. Wang, G. Li, F. M. Hassan, J. Li, X. Fan, R. Batmaz, X. Xiao and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 746–754 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hou, L. Shao, Y. Zhang, G. Zou, J. Chen and X. Ji, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600243 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Cohn, K. Share, R. Carter, L. Oakes and C. L. Pint, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 543–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, J. Xiao, W. Wang, M. Engelhard, X. Chen, Z. Nie, M. Gu, L. V. Saraf, G. Exarhos, J.-G. Zhang and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3909–3914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, Y.-X. Yin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301584 CrossRef .
K. Smith, R. Parrish, W. Wei, Y. Liu, T. Li, Y. H. Hu and H. Xiong, Chemsuschem, 2016, 9, 1397–1402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan and B. Lu, Small, 2016, 12, 2783–2791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-J. Song, S.-S. Liu, B.-J. Yu, C.-Y. Wang and M.-W. Li, Carbon, 2015, 95, 972–977 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, H. Song, Y. Li, Y. Chen, X. Chen, J. Zhou, Z. Ma, X. Wan, P. Tian and J. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 218, 285–293 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, Q. Liu, S. Chen, Z. Xu and B. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602778 CrossRef .
V. G. Pol, E. Lee, D. Zhou, F. Dogan, J. M. Calderon-Moreno and C. S. Johnson, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, F. Shen, W. Luo, S. Zhu, M. Zhao, B. Natarajan, J. Dai, L. Zhou, X. Ji, R. S. Yassar, T. Li and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponrouch, A. R. Goni and M. Rosa Palacin, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Babu and M. Pyo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1045–A1050 CrossRef .
A. Ponrouch and M. R. Palacin, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 54, 51–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Xu, X. Wu, J. Yu, Y. Wang, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 71–77 RSC .
P. Thomas and D. Billaud, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3303–3307 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, J. Schardt, C. Bommier, B. Wang, J. Razink, J. Simonsen and X. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10662–10666 RSC .
V. Simone, A. Boulineau, A. de Geyer, D. Rouchon, L. Simonin and S. Martinet, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 761–768 CrossRef .
H. Yamamoto, S. Muratsubaki, K. Kubota, M. Fukunishi, H. Watanabe, J. Kim and S. Komaba, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16844–16848 RSC .
F. Shen, H. Zhu, W. Luo, J. Wan, L. Zhou, J. Dai, B. Zhao, X. Han, K. Fu and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23291–23296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, Z. Li, B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Peng, R. Qi, J. Wang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706294 CrossRef .
P. Wang, L. Fan, L. Yan and Z. Shi, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 775, 1028–1035 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Rybarczyk, Y. Li, M. Qiao, Y.-S. Hu, M.-M. Titirici and M. Lieder, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 29, 17–22 CrossRef .
H. Li, F. Shen, W. Luo, J. Dai, X. Han, Y. Chen, Y. Yao, H. Zhu, K. Fu, E. Hitz and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2204–2210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Lotfabad, J. Ding, K. Cui, A. Kohandehghan, W. P. Kalisvaart, M. Hazelton and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7115–7129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, M. Chen, Q. Li, C. Yuan and C. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 123, 727–734 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dou, I. Hasa, M. Hekmatfar, T. Diemant, R. J. Behm, D. Buchholz and S. Passerini, Chemsuschem, 2017, 10, 2668–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, K. Cui, D. Karpuzov, X. Tan, A. Kohandehghan and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 941–955 RSC .
D. Mitlin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 249 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhu, F. Liang, Z. Zhou, X. Zeng, D. Wang, P. Dong, J. Zhao, S. Sun, Y. Zhang and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1513–1522 RSC .
N. Sun, H. Liu and B. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20560–20566 RSC .
C. Wang, J. Huang, H. Qi, L. Cao, Z. Xu, Y. Cheng, X. Zhao and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2017, 358, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dahbi, M. Kiso, K. Kubota, T. Horiba, T. Chafik, K. Hida, T. Matsuyama and S. Komaba, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9917–9928 RSC .
B. Zhang, C. M. Ghimbeu, C. Laberty, C. Vix-Guterl and J.-M. Tarascon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501588 CrossRef .
W. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Chemelectrochem, 2018, 5, 3206–3212 CrossRef CAS .
A. Beda, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and C. M. Ghimbeu, Carbon, 2018, 139, 248–257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Mu, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 139–145 CrossRef .
C. Zhao, Q. Wang, Y. Lu, B. Li, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1125–1129 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ge, H. Hou, X. Cao, S. Li, G. Zhao, T. Guo, C. Wang and X. Ji, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800080 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Song, S. Xin, D.-W. Xu, H.-Q. Li, H.-P. Cong and S.-H. Yu, Chemnanomat, 2016, 2, 540–546 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yan, X. Xu, T. Lu, B. Hu, D. H. C. Chua and L. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L.-Z. Fan and L. Jiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1698–1705 RSC .
X. Zhou, Z. Dai, J. Bao and Y.-G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13727–13731 RSC .
J. Cui, Z.-L. Xu, S. Yao, J. Huang, J.-Q. Huang, S. Abouali, M. A. Garakani, X. Ning and J.-K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10964–10973 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. He, D. Hanlon, A. Harvey, J. N. Coleman and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8821–8828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sha, H. Zhang, Y. Nie, K. Nie, X. Lv, N. Sun, X. Xie, Y. Ma and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6277–6283 RSC .
C. Zhu, X. Mu, P. A. van Aken, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2152–2156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Xia and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18532–18542 RSC .
J. Li, D. Yan, X. Zhang, S. Hou, D. Li, T. Lu, Y. Yao and L. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 436–446 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, Q. Gong, B. Traynor, D. Zhang, J. Li, H. Ye, F. Chen, N. Han, Y. Wang, X. Sun and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3162–3170 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, C. Y. J. Tan and Z. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 339, 41–50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Ren, X. Gao, W. Zhang, H. Duan, M. Wang, J. Shui and M. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1802913 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yang, H. Wang, T. Liu and L. Gao, Mater. Lett., 2016, 167, 102–105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, G. Xu, H. Xiao, X. Wei and L. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 236, 33–42 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Xu, L. W. Yang, X. L. Wei, J. W. Ding, J. X. Zhong and P. K. Chu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 580–590 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Wen, X. Fan, T. Gao, F. Han, C. Luo, S.-C. Liou and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3254–3264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Longoni, J. E. Wang, Y. H. Jung, D. K. Kim, C. M. Mari and R. Ruffo, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Z. Cai, J. Zhou, M. Zhu, A. Pan and S. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9169–9176 RSC .
C. Chen, K. Fu, Y. Lu, J. Zhu, L. Xue, Y. Hu and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 30793–30800 RSC .
M. Dirican, Y. Lu, Y. Ge, O. Yildiz and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18387–18396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fu, X. Zhou and Y. P. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2016, 170, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, K. Tang, K. Song, P. A. van Aken, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20813–20818 RSC .
Y. Ge, H. Jiang, K. Fu, C. Zhang, J. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. Qiu and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 860–865 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ge, J. Zhu, Y. Lu, C. Chen, Y. Qiu and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 989–996 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiong, W. Luo, X. Hu, C. Chen, L. Qie, D. Hou and Y. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, K. Tang, K. Song, P. A. van Aken, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5081–5086 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Bai, F. Wu, Y. Li and C. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 784–792 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D.-W. Han, M. R. Jo, K. Song, Y.-I. Kim, S.-L. Chou, H.-K. Liu and Y.-M. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1005–1009 RSC .
L. Shi, Y. Li, F. Zeng, S. Ran, C. Dong, S.-Y. Leu, S. T. Boles and K. H. Lam, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 356, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, X. Han, L. Li, Z. Zhu, F. Cheng, M. U. Srinivansan, S. Adams and S. Ramakrishna, Small, 2016, 12, 1359–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, M. Zhou, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9322–9328 RSC .
Y. Lu, N. Zhang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhang, M. Zhou, Z. Tao, L. A. Archer and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3668–3674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-q. Xiong, J.-p. Tu, X.-h. Xia, X.-y. Zhao, C.-d. Gu and X.-l. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7906–7912 RSC .
J. H. Kirn, W. Choi, H.-G. Jung, S. H. Oh, K. Y. Chung, W. I. Cho, I. H. Oh and I. W. Nah, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 690, 390–396 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Wen, X. Hu, X. Ji, M. Yan, L. Mai, P. Hu, B. Shan and Y. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yeo, J.-W. Jung, K. Park and I.-D. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13862 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, T. Chen, H. Chu, L. Niu, Z. Sun, L. Pan and C. Q. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 166, 12–16 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, Q. Wei, X. Wang, G. Zhang, H. Shu, X. Yang, A. C. Tavares and S. Sun, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 16624–16633 RSC .
J. Zhu and D. Deng, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 154, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, S. Chen, B. Sun, C. Wang and G. Wang, Chemsuschem, 2015, 8, 2948–2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, D. Yana, J. Ma, W. Qin, X. Zhang, T. Lu and L. Pan, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 15634–15642 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, Z. Dai and J. Bao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 23527–23534 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Sreedhara, A. L. Santhosha, A. J. Bhattacharyya and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9466–9471 RSC .
C. Nithya, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 1000–1006 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Cheng, H. Sun, H. Arandiyan, J. Li and M. Ahmad, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 878–884 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, W. Zhang, C. Wu, Q. Fan, W. Zhang, X. Hu and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 479–487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 128–133 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, H. Hou, G. Zou, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Liao, S. Li and X. Ji, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 214, 156–164 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xue, N. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Tang, Z. Bai and S. Dou, Carbon, 2018, 134, 222–231 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, W. Sun, X. Rui, Y. Zhou, W. J. Ng, Q. Yan and E. Fong, Nano Energy, 2016, 21, 71–79 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, C. Yan, X. Gu, L. Li, P. Dai, D. Li and H. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1516–1522 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Xia, G. Wang, Y. Zhou and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 309, 417–425 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, S. Hu, X. Luo, Z. Li, X. Sun, M. Li, F. Liu and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605820 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wu, H. Hou, C. Zhang, P. Ge, Z. Huang, M. Jing, X. Qiu and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26118–26125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, X. Han, Y. Liu, X. Hu, Q. Zhao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401123 CrossRef .
W. Li, S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, J. H. Kim, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4037–4042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, P. Kopold, C. Wu, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3531–3538 RSC .
H. Y. Lu, X. H. Zhang, F. Wan, D. S. Liu, C. Y. Fan, H. M. Xu, G. Wang and X. L. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12518–12527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Choe, N. R. Kim, M. E. Lee, H. J. Yoon, M. Y. Song, H.-J. Jin and Y. S. Yun, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 716–720 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Number of publications on “carbon materials” and “sodium ion batteries” in Web of Science on October 23, 2019.	 

 	Fig. 2  Various nanostructured carbon materials and their modification strategies.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) MW-CNT electrodes in sodium-ion cells showing specific capacity versus cycle number. SW-CNT electrodes in sodium-ion cells showing specific capacity versus cycle number when discharged to (b) 0.1 V. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of the PVC precursors. (a) PVC nanofibers prepared by electrospinning and (b) commercial PVC particles. Electrochemical evaluation of the hard carbon materials originating from PVC fibers or particles. (c) Initial discharge–charge profiles for EP and CP hard carbon samples. (d) Cycling performance of EP and CP electrodes tested at 12 mA g−1; the voltage range is between 0.01 and 2.5 V. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of sodium storage in graphite-based materials. (a) Na+ cannot be electrochemically intercalated into graphite because of the small interlayer spacing. (b) Electrochemical intercalation of Na+ into GO is enabled by the enlarged interlayer distance because of oxidation. However, the intercalation is limited by steric hindrance from large amounts of oxygen-containing groups. (c) A significant amount of Na+ can be electrochemically intercalated into EG owing to the suitable interlayer distance and reduced oxygen-containing groups in the interlayers. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) and (b) SEM images of the cross-sectional morphology of ROGP at different magnifications. The inset of (c) shows an optical image of the ROGP. (b) The rate capability of ROGP at various current densities in the range of 100–8000 mA g−1. (d) The cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of ROGP over 500 cycles at a current density of 1000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of MSC; (b) charge–discharge profiles of initial five cycles for the MSC. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of (a) hard carbon, (b) SC-900 (soft carbon annealed at 900 °C), and (c) SC-1600 (soft carbon annealed at 1600 °C). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Discharge and charge curves of (a) a reported soft carbon52 material based on PTCDA for the 1st cycle and (b) a hard carbon material based on sugar for the 1st, 5th, and 20th cycles at 40 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the mechanisms of Na-ion storage in hard carbon: (a) “intercalation–adsorption” mechanism; (b) “adsorption–intercalation” mechanism. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the N-CNTs. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustrations of the BF-rGO: side views. (b) Long life cycling stability of BF-rGO at 1000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) High-magnification SEM images of the as-obtained N-DHCSs. (b) Low-magnification HRTEM images of the as-obtained N-DHCSs and simulated pattern inset. (c) Cycle performance in sodium ion batteries of N-DHCSs and DHCSs at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and (d) rate capability of N-DHCSs and DHCSs at different current densities from 0.1 A g−1 to 5 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of the ZIF-8 products; (b) TEM image of the NPC products; (c) cycle performance and coulombic efficiency at a current density of 50 mA g−1; and (d) rate performance of the NPC electrode. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) and (b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process for the P-CNF electrode. (c) and (d) electrochemical performance of the P-CNF electrode cycled between 0.001 V and 2 V vs. Na+/Na. (c) Capacity–cycle number curves of the P-CNF electrode at a cycling rate of 0.2C; (d) discharge capacity of the PCNF electrode as a function of discharge rate (0.05–20 A g−1). Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of the preparation of H-PCNs. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the 2D mesoporous PPy nanosheets. (1) Formation of spherical micelles and 2D lipid bilayers derived from the self-assembly of BCP and aliphatic amine (octadecylamine, OTA) in mixed solvents at room temperature, respectively. (2) Supramolecular sandwich-like structure formed by monolayer arrangement of the spherical BCP micelles on the 2D surfaces of the OTA bilayers. (3) Co-assembly of BCP micelles and pyrrole monomers on the OTA surfaces. (4) Formation of pristine 2D mesoporous PPy nanosheets by synergic template-directed polymerization of pyrrole monomers upon the addition of ammonium persulfate (APS). (5) As-made mesoporous PPy nanosheets after the removal of both OTA and BCP templates. (b) SEM images of the mPPy nanosheets synthesized using PS33-b-PEO114 and OTA as the templates. (c) Cycling stability of the mPPy-1 nanosheet cathode at a current density of 300 mA g−1 in Na-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH.	 


0 dimensional

N-Doped TiO2 nanorods/C-dots	—	165 at 0.84 A g−1 after 300 cycles	176 at 0.84 A g−1; 131 at 3.36 A g−1	2015/16
Rutile TiO2 nanorods/C-dots	50.6	245 at 0.08 A g−1 after 300 cycles	144 at 0.84 A g−1; 60 at 4.19 A g−1	2016/17
VO2 nanorods/C-dots	—	175 at 3.3 A g−1 after 100 cycles	173 at 6.6 A g−1; 133 at 19.8 A g−1	2016/18
VO2 nanorods/C-dots	—	110 at 18 A g−1 after 1500 cycles	198 at 18 A g−1; 150 at 36 A g−1	2014/19


1 dimensional

Hollow carbon nanowires	50.5	220 at 0.05 A g−1 after 200 cycles	210 at 0.25 A g−1; 149 at 0.5 A g−1	2012/26
Cellulose derived carbon nanofibers	58.8	176 at 0.2 A g−1 after 600 cycles	255 at 0.04 A g−1; 85 at 2 A g−1	2013/146
N-Doped interconnected carbon nanofibers	41.8	134.2 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles	150 at 0.2 A g−1; 121 at 2 A g−1; 100 at 5 A g−1	

N-Doped interconnected carbon nanofibers	41.8	134.2 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles	150 at 0.2 A g−1; 121 at 2 A g−1; 100 at 5 A g−1	2013/147
N-Doped porous carbon nanofibers	46	243 at 0.05 A g−1 after 100 cycles	210 at 0.2 A g−1; 134 at 2 A g−1;	2014/130
Free standing porous carbon nanofibers	53	266 at 0.05 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 140 at 0.5 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	300 at 0.05 A g−1; 164 at 2 A g−1; 60 at 10 A g−1	2014/131
N-Doped bamboo-like carbon nanotubes	30	100 at 0.5 after 160 cycles	270.6 at 0.05 A g−1; 81 at 1 A g−1	2015/148
N-Doped carbon nanofiber films	35	377 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 210 at 5 A g−1 after 7000 cycles	315 at 0.5 A g−1; 154 at 15 A g−1	2015/149
Hard carbon from polyvinyl chloride nanofibers	69	215 at 0.012 g−1 after 120 cycles	271 at 0.012 A g−1; 147 at 0.24 A g−1	2015/28
Hard carbon microtubes	83	305 at 0.03 A g−1 after 100 cycles	275 at 0.15 A g−1; 180 at 0.3 A g−1	2015/150


2 dimensional

N-Doped carbon nanosheets	35	155 at 0.05 A g−1 after 200 cycles	190 at 0.2 A g−1; 50 at 2 A g−1; 45 at 5 A g−1	2013/134
S-Covalently bonded graphene	57	150 at 1 A g−1 after 200 cycles	262 at 0.1 A g−1;161 at 1 A g−1; 83 at 5 A g−1	2015/151
P-Doped carbon nanosheets	47	321.2 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 159.9 at 2.5 A g−1 after 2500 cycles; 108.8 at 5 A g−1 after 5000 cycles	269 at 0.2 A g−1; 117 at 10 A g−1; 108 at 20 A g−1	2016/152
Few-layered graphene (solvent-assisted intercalation)	58	115 at 12 A g−1 after 8000 cycles	150 at 0.2 A g−1; 125 at 10 A g−1; 100 at 30 A g−1	2016/153
Self-standing S-doped flexible graphene films	49	244 at 0.1 A g−1 after 300 cycles	377 at 0.1 A g−1; 89 at 1 A g−1	2016/98
S-Doped N-rich carbon nanosheets	44	350 at 0.05 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 211 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	350 at 0.05 A g−1; 150 at 5 A g−1; 110 at 10 A g−1	2016/77
N-Doped holey carbon nanosheets	70	268 at 0.25 A g−1 after 200 cycles	230 at 0.5 A g−1;	2016/132


3 dimensional

Nanocellular carbon foams	—	137 at 0.1 A g−1 after 300 cycles	140 at 0.2 A g−1; 100 at 1 A g−1;	2013/154
Porous carbon/graphene composite	—	250 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	—	2014/155
N-Doped graphene foams	43	594.0 at 0.5 A g−1 after 150 cycles	1057.1 at 0.1 A g−1; 244.7 at 2 A g−1; 137.7 at 5 A g−1	2015/39
3D porous carbon frameworks	35	303.2 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 147.3 at 2.5 A g−1 after 2500 cycles; 98.3 at 5 A g−1 after 5000 cycles	290 at 0.2 A g−1; 104 at 10 A g−1; 90 at 20 A g−1	2015/14
N/O-Codoped carbon networks	30	545 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 240 at 2 A g−1 after 2000 cycles	650 at 0.1 A g−1; 235 at 1 A g−1; 161 at 5 A g−1,	2016/27
Disordered 3D multi-layer graphene	58	190 at 0.015 A g−1 after 15 cycles; 100 at 0.75 A g−1 after 500 cycles	190 at 0.015 A g−1; 118 at 0.75 A g−1	2016/156
O-Doped 3D interdigitated carbon	63	430 at 0. 1 A g−1 after 100 cycles; 223 at 1 A g−1 after 1200 cycles	422 at 0.1 A g−1; 263 at 1 A g−1; 210 at 2 A g−1	2016/157


Graphite

Expanded graphite	—	—	50	150 at 0.1 A g−1 after 2000 cycles	2014/32
Graphite (solvent co-intercalation)	—	—	85	110 at 0.2 A g−1 after 6000 cycles	2015/43
Graphite (solvent co-intercalation)	—	—	52	127 at 0.1 A g−1 after 300 cycles; 100 at 0.5 A g−1 after 2500 cycles	J-47b66
Graphite (solvent co-intercalation)	—	—	64	115 at 12 A g−1 after 8000 cycles	2016/153
Graphite (solvent co-intercalation)	—	—	73	100 at 37.2 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles	2014/42


Soft carbon

Pitch (mesocarbon microbeads)	700	0.1	66	161 at 25 mA g−1 after 60 cycles	2015/158
Pitch (mesocarbon microbeads)	800	3.5	71	103 at 500 mA g−1 after 3000 cycles	2016/47
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)	700	—	70	211 at 12 mA g−1 after 150 cycles	2015/28
Polymerized acetone	800	467	34	100 at 5 A g−1 after 10000 cycles	2015/14
Poly(ethylene oxide)/poly(propylene oxide) triblock copolymer	550	1106	71	100 at 500 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles	2016/159
Perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA)	900	14	80	85 at 1000 mA g−1 after 800 cycles	2017/160
Mesitylene	700	4	60	100 at 150 mA g−1 after 50 cycles	2014/161
Naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA)	500	15	46	271 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	2015/94
Naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA)	1000	146	25	300 at 100 mA g−1 after 400 cycles	2017/162


Hard carbon



Carbohydrates (biomass)


Glucose	1150	—	82	—	2000/51
Sucrose	180 (24 h), 1100	24	61	300 at 30 mA g−1 after 120 cycles	2013/163
Sucrose/SWCNT	185 (24 h), 1100	16	64	223 at 100 mA g−1 after 50 cycles	2014/164
Sucrose	1100	25	80	143 at 40 mA g−1 after 500 cycles	2014/53
Sucrose/CC	1100	70	70	265 at 30 mA g−1 after 20 cycles	2015/165
Sucrose/CC (sphere)	1600	—	84	290 at 30 mA g−1 after 100 cycles	2014/166
Sucrose	1600	8	82	—	2015/59
Sucrose	1300	7	84	260 at 40 mA g−1 after 150 cycles	2016/108
Sucrose	1100	8.5	80	—	2017/95
Cellulose	1000	—	—	275 at 40 mA g−1 after 10 cycles	2002/167
Cellulose	1000	377	59	176 at 200 mA g−1 after 600 cycles	2013/168
Cellulose	1600	3	84	225 at 40 mA g−1 after 500 cycles	2016/169
Cellulose	1300	0.17	86	—	2017/56
Cellulose	275, in air; 1300–1500 in argon	77	∼90	310 at 0.030 A g−1 after 50 cycles	2018/170
Cellulose (TEMPO pre-oxidation)	240, 8 h, 1000, 2 h	126	72	196 at 100 mA g−1 after 200 cycles	2015/171
Chitosan + Ni(AC)2·4H2O	850	1490	35	175 at 20 A g−1	2018/172


Raw biomass

Water caltrop shell	1300	—	84.31	313.9 at 120 mA g−1 after 200 cycles	2019/173
Rice husk	1600	218	50	258 at 30 mA g−1 after 100 cycles	2019/174
Oak leaves	1000	161	74.8	320 at 10 mA g−1 after 200 cycles	2016/175
Banana peels	1100	14.5	67.8	210 at 500 mA g−1 after 600 cycles	2014/176
Humic acid	1500	3.21	73	288 at 100 mA g−1 after 250 cycles	2017/177
Corn	1300	3.7	86	210 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1, 105 mA h g−1 at 600 mA g−1	2016/70
Corn	1100	223	57	191 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1, 151 mA h g−1 at 600 mA g−1	2017/178
Peanut shell	1100	30	68	236 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1, 175 mA h g−1 at 600 mA g−1	2015/178
Peanut shell	1200 + 300 in air	476	55	100 at 3.2 Ag−1 after 10000 cycles	2018/179
Cherry petals	1000	1.86	67.3	146.5 at 500 mA g−1	2018/180
Shaddock	1200	82.8	68	352 at 50 mA g−1 after 200 cycles	2015/181
Dandelion	1200	4.69	59	250. At 5 A g−1	2017/182
Argon shell	1300	2.6	86	305 at 25 mA g−1 after 100 cycles	2017/183


Polymers (derived from coal or petroleum)

Polyacrylonitrile (PAN)	650–2800	20–226	46–73	—	2016/184
Polyaniline (PANI)	1150	23.5	52	207 at 50 mA g−1 after 500 cycles	2016/185
PF + Fe3+	800	664	33	113 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	2016/90
PTCDA − S+ sulfur powders	950	25.1	55.2	159 at 2 A g−1 after 10000 cycles	2018/65
Phenolic resins	1500	7.9	76	—	2018/186
Pitch + phenolic resins	1400	3.0	88	266 at 0.030 A g−1 after 100 cycles	2016/187
PF spheres (hydrothermal)	1250	219.5	60.2	170 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles	2015/188
Charcoal	800 (3 h); 1900 (3 h)	1.48	76	294, 192 and 124 at 150 mA g−1, 300 mA g−1 and 600 mA g−1 after 50 cycles	2018/36
Pitch + S/Na2S2O3/NaCl + KCl	One step molten salt method	4	56	320 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles	2016/189

 	Fig. 18  Cycling performance of G-graphitic HCSs in sodium half-cells at (a) 0.1 and (b) 1 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

Fe3O4@CNT199	Filling CNT channels with Fe3O4 nanoparticles	377 at 0.1 A g−1 after 300 cycles
SnO2@CNT195	Coating CNTs with a mainly amorphous SnO2 phase	630.4 at 0.1 A g−1 and 324.1 at 1.6 A g−1
Sb2S3@MWCNT200	Precipitation and subsequent thermal treatment	412.3 at 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles
NiSx@CNT201	Confining the NiSx nanoparticles in a percolating conductive CNT network	500 over 200 cycles
CoS@CNT202	Direct growth of Co3O4 nanocrystals on the CNT backbones, chemical conversion of the Co3O4 nanocrystals to CoS hollow nanoparticles	502 at 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles, 341 and 276 at 2000 and at 5000 mA g−1
SnO2/SWCNTs203	Hydrothermal reaction of the mixed suspension with purified SWCNTs and SnCl2·2H2O	309 at 200 mA g−1 after 300 cycles
MoS2/SWNTs196	Formed by the reaction of liquid phase exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets and 20 wt% SWNTs	>400, 650 mA h cm−3, >4.0 Ah cm−2 after 120 cycles
Bi2S3@CNTs204	Fabricated using a controlled hydrolysis approach	84.4 at 60 mA g−1 after 60 cycles
TiO2/MWCNTs205	Fabricated by thermal treatment using TiO2 nanocrystals and MWCNTs	150 at 500 mA g−1 after 500 cycles
NaTi2(PO4)3/MWCNTs206	Fabricated by utilizing the screening effect of electrostatic repulsion in a solution, and subsequent freeze-drying and calcination convert the assemblies into robust hierarchical porous MWCNT-threaded particles	74.0 at 10 A g−1 and 74.3 at 2 A g−1 after 2000 cycles
Red P/SWCNTs207	Fabricated by a modified vaporization-condensation method	700 at 50 mA g−1; 300 at 2000 mA g−1
Na3V2O2(PO4)2F/MWCNTs114	Synthesized by an ethylene glycol-assisted hydrothermal reaction	98 at 20 mA g−1 after 120 cycles; 60 at 400 mA g−1 after 1800 cycles
Na3.12Fe2.44(P2O7)2/MWCNTs208	Fabricated by a solid-state reaction	100 at 30 mA g−1

Sb@C25	SbCl3/PAN/DMF	1st step: 250 °C for 1 h in air; 2nd step: 600 °C for 5 h in H2/Ar	350 at 100 mA g−1 after 300 cycles
Sb2O3 or Sb2S3 @C carbon fiber cloth209	SbCl3/H2O, potassium antimonyl tartrate/thioacetamide/H2O	1st step: 150 °C for 6 h hydrothermally; 2nd step: 100 °C for 3 h in H2/Ar hydrothermally	514 at 0.5 A g−1 after 500 cycles (SO/CFC), 736 at 0.5 A g−1 after 650 cycles (SS/CFC)
SnSb@C210	SnO2 NPs, Sb2O5 NPs/PMMA, PAN/DMF	1st step: 280 °C for 5.5 h in air; 2nd step: 700 °C for 3 h in Ar	356 at 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles
Porous CNF@SnO2@C211	SnCl2/PAN, PMMA/DMF	1st step: 280 °C for 5.5 h in air; 2nd step: 700 °C in argon for 2 h	374 at 50 mA g−1
Sn@NCNFs197	PAN/SnCl2·2H2O/DMF	1st step: 250 °C for 2 h in air; 2nd step: 600 °C in H2/Ar for 1 h	390 at 500 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles
Co3O4-CNF212	Co(NO3)2·6H2O/PVP/DI water and ethanol solution	1st step: 350 °C for 4 h; 2nd step: at 800 °C for 4 h	400 at 250 mA g−1 after 700 cycles
Li4Ti5O12@C213	Li(ac)2.H2O, TiO(acac)2/PVP/EtOH	1st step: 400 °C for 2 h in Ar; 2nd step: 800 °C for 5 h in Ar	163 at 35 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
Li4Ti5O12/CNF214	PVP/CH3COOLi·2H2O, Ti(OC4H9)4, (CH3COO)2Cu/C2H5OH, CH3COOH	1st step: 280 °C for 5.5 h in air; 2nd step:750 °C for 4 h in argon	158.1 at 30 mA g−1
TiO2@CNF215	Ti(OC4H9)4/PVP/C2H5OH/CH3COOH	1st step: 280 °C for 5.5 h; 2nd step: 650 °C, for 4 h in Ar	159.1 at 800 mA g−1
MoS2-C composite198	(NH4)2MoS4/PVP/DMF	1st step: 450 °C for 2 h in H2/Ar; 2nd step: 800 °C for 6 h in Ar	1007 at 1 A g−1 after 100 cycles, 661 at 10 A g−1 after 1000 cycles
MoS2/C216	PAN/(NH4)2MoS4/DMF	1st step:400 °C for 2 h; 2nd step:800 °C for 1 h in Ar/H2	283.9 at 100 m A g−1 after 600 cycles
Na3V2(PO4)3/C217	NaH2PO4, NH4VO3/PEO/CA	1st step: 500 °C in Ar; 2nd step: 800 °C in Ar	75 at 100 mA g−1 after 106 cycles
Na3V2(PO4)3/C218	NaH2PO4, NH4VO3/PVP/CA	1st step: 300 °C for 3 h in Ar; 2nd step: 800 °C for 8 h in Ar	107.2 at 23.52 mA g−1 after 125 cycles, 96.8 at 235.2 mA g−1 after 30 cycles
Na3V2(PO4)3/C219	NH4VO3, NH4H2PO4, CH3COONa/PVP	800 °C for 4 h; and 6 h in Ar	83 at 100 mA g−1 after 300 cycles
Fe2O3@CNF220	Fe2O3/bacterial cellulose pellicles	500 °C for 1 h; 800 °C for 2 h in Ar	408 at 100 mA g−1 after 350 cycle

TiO2/rGO225	One-pot ultrasonic spray pyrolysis process from the spray solution	148 at 168 mA g−1 after 500 cycles
TiO2/rGO226	Microwave-assisted reduction–hydrolysis route from the mixture of TiCl3, ethylene glycol and GO	90 at 12000 mA g−1
TiO2 NFs/rGO227	rGO sheets were wrapped onto PAH-grafted TiO2 NFs	200 at 335 mA g−1 after 200 cycles
Fe2O3/graphene146	
In situ synthesis in a GO, Fe(NO3)3 and NaBH4 aqueous mixture solution, followed by heating to reduce GO to graphene	440 at 284 mA g−1, 219 at 2 A g−1
Fe2O3/graphene228	
In situ synthesis in a GO, Fe(NO3)3 and NaBH4 aqueous mixture solution, followed by microwave-assisted reduction of GO	289 at 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles
Fe3O4/graphene229	Co-precipitation method	210 after 250 cycles.
SnO2/graphene230	
In situ synthesis in a GO and SnCl2 aqueous mixture solution, followed by heating to reduce GO to graphene	200 at 20 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
Tin oxide/graphene231	Through a layer-by-layer assembly, followed by reduction of GO	220 at 640 mA g−1
Sb2O3/rGO232	
In situ synthesis in a GO and SbCl2 aqueous mixture solution, followed by microwave-assisted heating to reduce GO to graphene	503 at 100 mA g−1 after 50 cycles
SbOx/rGO233	Through a wet-milling approach accompanied by a redox reaction between Sb and GO	409 at 1 A g−1 after 100 cycles
MoO3/rGO234	MoO3 are synthesized starting from the oxidation of few-layer MoS2 nanosheets. MoO3-rGO composites are prepared using a hydrothermal method	665 at 0.09 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
Bi2O3/rGO235	Through a simple reduction method by using NaBH4 as a reducing agent in Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and GO solution	607 at 140 mA g−1 after 50 cycles
Co3O4 mesoporous nanosheets/3D graphene236	3D graphene was first synthesized by chemical vapor deposition, followed by a hydrothermal reaction in Co(NO3)2·6H2O and hexamethylenetetramine solution	523.5 at 25 mA g−1 after 50 cycles
CoS/rGO221	Solvothermal using Co(CH3COO)2 (Co(Ac)2), thiourea (Tu), and GO as precursors in ethanol at 200 °C for 10 h	420 at 1000 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles
NiSx@rGO222	Hydrothermal using nickel chloride and GO at 180 °C for 24 h	499 at 200 mA g−1 after 100 cycles

Sb/PC237	By self-wrapping and controlled growth process with chitosan as a self-wrapping precursor	372 at 500 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
Sn/PC238	By dispersing SnO2 nanoparticles into a soft-template polymer matrix followed by carbonization	295 at 20 mA g−1 after 15 cycles
SnSb/PC210	By a simple electrospinning method with subsequent thermal treatment	356 at 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles
SnO2/PC239	Through an immediate thermal treatment of the mixture of stannous chloride dihydrate and tartaric acid	280.1 at 100 mA g−1 after 250 cycles
SnO2/PCNF211	By amorphous carbon-coated SnO2 electrodeposited porous carbon nanofibers	374 at 50 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
SnS/PC240	Using silica opals as the hard template followed by a carbonization and sulfuration process	400 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles
Fe3O4/PC241	Via a biochemistry approach using recombinant elastin-like polypeptides containing the hexahistidine tag followed by annealing	657 and 246 at 0.1 and 2 A g−1
Co3O4/PC242	Via a biochemistry approach using recombinant elastin-like polypeptides containing the hexahistidine tag followed by annealing	583 and 183 at 0.1 and 2 A g−1
TiO2/N-doped PC243	Fabricated through direct carbonization of N-containing Ti-MOFs (NH2-MIL-125)	159 at 1.6 A g−1 after 2500 cycles
MoS2/PC244	The void nanospheres produced by SiO2 nanospheres surround the core shell MoS2/C nanospheres by a facile glucose carbonization process	523 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
