Cerium oxide nanoparticles, combining antioxidant and UV shielding properties, prevent UV-induced cell damage and mutagenesis  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR03767K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR03767K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15643-15656Cerium oxide nanoparticles, combining antioxidant and UV shielding properties, prevent UV-induced cell damage and mutagenesis

        
          
            Fanny 
            Caputo
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Milena 
            De Nicola
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Andrzej 
            Sienkiewicz
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Anna 
            Giovanetti
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Ignacio 
            Bejarano
          
        
      ae, 
      
        
          
            Silvia 
            Licoccia
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Enrico 
            Traversa
          
        
      be and 

        
          
            Lina 
            Ghibelli
          
        
      *a
aDipartimento di Biologia, Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy. E-mail: ghibelli@uniroma2.it
bDipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche; Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy
cInstitute of Physics of Complex Matter, Faculty of Basic Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédéral de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
dUTBIORAD, ENEA, Roma, Italy
eKing Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      8th June 2015
    , Accepted 14th August 2015First published on 20th August 2015AbstractEfficient inorganic UV shields, mostly based on refracting TiO2 particles, have dramatically changed the sun exposure habits. Unfortunately, health concerns have emerged from the pro-oxidant photocatalytic effect of UV-irradiated TiO2, which mediates toxic effects on cells. Therefore, improvements in cosmetic solar shield technology are a strong priority. CeO2 nanoparticles are not only UV refractors but also potent biological antioxidants due to the surface 3+/4+ valency switch, which confers anti-inflammatory, anti-ageing and therapeutic properties. Herein, UV irradiation protocols were set up, allowing selective study of the extra-shielding effects of CeO2vs. TiO2 nanoparticles on reporter cells. TiO2 irradiated with UV (especially UVA) exerted strong photocatalytic effects, superimposing their pro-oxidant, cell-damaging and mutagenic action when induced by UV, thereby worsening the UV toxicity. On the contrary, irradiated CeO2 nanoparticles, via their Ce3+/Ce4+ redox couple, exerted impressive protection on UV-treated cells, by buffering oxidation, preserving viability and proliferation, reducing DNA damage and accelerating repair; strikingly, they almost eliminated mutagenesis, thus acting as an important tool to prevent skin cancer. Interestingly, CeO2 nanoparticles also protect cells from the damage induced by irradiated TiO2, suggesting that these two particles may also complement their effects in solar lotions. CeO2 nanoparticles, which intrinsically couple UV shielding with biological and genetic protection, appear to be ideal candidates for next-generation sun shields.
Introduction
The ultraviolet region of electromagnetic spectrum includes wavelengths that fall in the A (400–315 nm), B (315–280 nm), and C (280–100 nm) categories.1 UV rays deeply interact with living matter, behaving not only as biological regulators but also as stressors that affect cells and tissues. UVB and UVC directly damage DNA, causing genetic mutations and cancer.2 Moreover, UV rays activate intracellular chromophores that generate reactive oxygen species (ROS), promoting oxidative stress; this condition is responsible for many pathological states and ageing.3 Cells damaged by UV, if not correctly repaired, may lose their viability and undergo cell death by apoptosis,4 or survive with genetic alterations and cause cancer.2 The direct targets of UV damage are not only the skin and the eye,5 but systemic effects of UV exposure have also been described, including the imbalance of the inflammatory response.6
Practices of leisure and professional exposure to sunlight have dramatically changed since the development and diffusion of UV-shielding lotions. Inorganic shields included in modern sun protection products are mostly based on titanium dioxide particles, which are needle-like or nearly spherical shape rutile and/or anatase nanocrystals;7,8 both crystal forms act as stable and efficient UV-shields. The formulations that contain nanosized particles allow the preparation of transparent lotions. Therefore, nanosized TiO2 is preferred by the cosmetic industry. Thus, the market of UV-shielding lotions containing nano-formulation of TiO2 has dramatically flourished in the last few years.8 However, concern for the health of sunshield customers comes from the notion that anatase and rutile particles, including those present in commercial sunscreens, if irradiated with UV in an aqueous environment,9–11 produce ROS via the photocatalytic effect12 and enhance the ultraviolet damage to DNA and cells in in vitro systems despite the shielding effect.7,8,13–18 Therefore, under sun exposure, TiO2, while blocking the UV radiation and reducing direct UV damage, promotes secondary oxidative stress constituting a health hazard.19–21 Strategies aimed to overcome this problem are presently a focus of great interest, focusing on the addition of molecular22,23 or particulate24 antioxidants. However, the results have been deceiving because of the instability of the antioxidants to the persistent solar irradiation.
Cerium oxide (CeO2) can shield UV rays.25,26 Because of their shielding activity, CeO2 nanoparticles were proposed for the first time as an alternative to TiO2 and ZnO2 in sunscreen lotions by Yabe et al.27–29 Interestingly, it was recently shown30 that a combination of TiO2/CeO2 nanoparticles allows better refractory properties, increasing the sun protection factor (SPF) provided by the TiO2 nanoparticles formulations presently adopted in commercial lotions.
In addition to their shielding properties, CeO2 nanoparticles act as potent antioxidants due to the redox switch of cerium ions in the 3+ and in the 4+ valence state in the oxide, as reviewed by different groups.31–35 The Ce3+/Ce4+ redox couple has been shown to exert robust antioxidant effects while undergoing 3+ to 4+ transition when dismutating superoxides,31,32,36–38 and regenerating a reduced valency that catalyses the transformation of H2O2 in H2O + O2.32,36–38 Thus, CeO2 nanoparticles abate the most noxious ROS in a catalytic, energy-free and auto-regenerative fashion. Accordingly, CeO2 nanoparticles protect cells32,33,36,39–41 and animals32,33,36,42,43 from many different external stress sources, exert strong anti-apoptotic effects,31,44 ameliorate many serious oxidant-related pathologies and32,33,36,45,46 promote wound healing;33 moreover, CeO2 nanoparticles exert potent and intriguing anticancer effects.47,48
Because of the coexistence of UV-refracting and anti-oxidant properties, cell protective effects of CeO2 nanoparticles suggest that they may serve as multitasking tools to protect from risks related to exposure to sunlight by shielding UV rays on the one side and by protecting from the noxious effects of the residual radiation products on the other. Two pioneering studies by Zholobak et al.25,35 investigated the protective effect of CeO2 nanoparticles on UV-irradiated epithelial cell lines, showing that a pre-treatment with CeO2 nanoparticles significantly increases the viability of the UV-ray-irradiated cells. However, with adherent cell models, where nanoparticles necessarily form a shield over the cell monolayer, they were unable to discriminate between the physical shielding effects and the biological activity exerted by CeO2 nanoparticles.
The main objective of this study is to evaluate the extra-shielding effects of CeO2 nanoparticles, analyse the mechanisms involved, and establish a comparison of these effects with the effects exerted by TiO2 nanoparticles. In addition, we investigated the eventual protective effects of CeO2 nanoparticles against the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 to explore the possibility of using a mixture of the two particles in solar lotions, exploiting the higher UV-filtering ability of TiO2 nanoparticles and the persistent and autoregenerative ability of CeO2 nanoparticles.
Results and discussion
Photocatalytic and UV-shielding properties of TiO2 and CeO2 nanoparticles
To obtain nanoparticles of similar size and shape, TiO249,50 and CeO231,50 nanoparticles were prepared according to wet chemical synthetic procedures, which allowed tailoring the powder features.49–52 These synthetic procedures were well established in our lab and are very reproducible.
TiO2 precursors were heated at 450 °C, obtaining single anatase phase nanoparticles (labelled as TiO2) of 10 nm, as shown by the XRD patterns (Fig. 1A), selected area electron diffraction patterns (SAED) and the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 1B). The heating temperature was selected according to the results of simultaneous thermogravimetric and differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA), which showed that at 400 °C the weight loss ended in correspondence with the crystallization of the amorphous precursor in the anatase phase.
 Fig. 1  Physico-chemical characterization of TiO2, CeO2 and SDC nanoparticles. (A) XRD diffraction patterns of TiO2 CeO2, and SDC nanoparticles. (B) TEM images and SAED patterns of NPs. Miller index and d-spacing values from SAED are reported in the table in panel D. (C) UV-Vis absorbance spectra for the NP suspensions. (D) Summary of the characteristics of NP powder and dispersion; SSA: specific surface area; NP dispersion characterization: mean hydrodynamic diameter (d), mean polydispersity index (P.I.) by DLS analysis (Cumulant analysis) and zeta potential of 200 μg mL−1 NP dispersions. 
Cerium oxide nanoparticles (labelled CeO2) of the same size were obtained by heating a CeO2 nanoparticle precursor to 450 °C, which was the same procedure that allowed optimizing the previously reported CeO2 nanoparticles redox activity.31,51,53 In this case as well the annealing temperature was selected according to the TG-DTA results, which showed that the sample was crystalline with a stable weight at 450 °C. The thermal treatment was necessary to eliminate all the organic residues, which may alter the native biological properties of CeO2 nanoparticles, whose analysis is in the scope of this study.
The Ce3+/4+ redox switch, which confers antioxidant activity to CeO2 nanoparticles, can be abolished by doping with Sm, which substitutes for Ce3+ ions in the nanoparticle lattice;31 Sm-doped CeO2 nanoparticles have been exploited to investigate the role played by the 3+/4+ redox switch in the catalytic activity of CeO2 nanoparticles,31 including the antioxidant bio-effects.31 For this study, 20% Sm-doped CeO2 nanoparticles (labelled as SDC) were synthesized, as described by Esposito et al.,52 to obtain samples that significantly reduced the Ce3+ concentration, while maintaining the content of oxygen vacancies with respect to the CeO2 nanoparticle sample. As previously demonstrated by our group,31 increasing concentrations of Sm ions (5%–20%) dose-dependently reduced the anti-oxidant activity of CeO2 nanoparticles in abiotic as well as in biological systems; the anti-oxidant activity of CeO2 nanoparticles was totally abolished with 20% doping, the concentration that was chosen for the present study.

Fig. 1 presents the physico-chemical characterization of the different NPs tested. Fig. 1A and 1B show the XRD, the SAED and the TEM images of the CeO2 and SDC nanoparticle samples. The particles were shown to be crystalline by XRD and SAED analysis. TiO2 was shown to possess an anatase crystal structure, while CeO2 and SDC nanoparticles were characterized to have the fluorite crystal structure of cerium oxide. The particle size measured using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was in the 5–16 nm range. The BET specific surface area was in the 57–47 m2 g−1 range, a value smaller than the theoretically expected one, due to the aggregation of nanoparticles.31
To measure the UV shielding efficiency of the three types of nanoparticles, the UV absorbance spectra were recorded in aqueous media for the dispersion of the prepared samples, as shown in Fig. 1C. The results obtained are in line with the values reported by other abiotic studies25–28 showing high shielding efficiency of TiO2 powder, good absorption in the UV region for CeO2 nanoparticles, and a weaker effect for SDC nanoparticles.

Fig. 1D summarizes the physico-chemical features of the three nanopowders and their colloidal dispersion properties in H2O and physiological media.
XPS analysis was performed to measure the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio in CeO2vs. SDC nanoparticles, as reported by Celardo et al.;31 it showed a significant decrease in Ce3+ concentration (6% vs. 21%) at 20% Sm-doping. The zeta potential values measured in water at pH 7.4 are negative for all the NPs tested, which are slightly lower for the SDC NPs probably due to a small increase in their size. Importantly, the zeta potential values measured in biological media become neutral for all the NPs tested (between −10 and 10 mV), due to the absorption of serum proteins. Therefore, the NPs tested do not present different biological behavior in cellular culture experiments due to differences in their surface charge.
We then analysed the photocatalytic effect of the three powders irradiated with visible light, UVA, UVB or UVC by EPR analysis using α-(4-pyridyl N-oxide)-N-tert-butylnitrone POBN as a spin trap. Fig. 2 shows that anatase produces a strong EPR signal after UVA, UVB and UVC irradiation, whereas CeO2 nanoparticles are ineffective, which is consistent with a previous study.26 The EPR signal of TiO2 is compatible with the production of hydroxyl radical, which is very reactive and dangerous in biological environments.
 Fig. 2  Nanoparticle photocatalytic activity. EPR spectra of the POBN-OH spin abduct signal produced by TiO2, CeO2 and SDC nanoparticles suspensions at 800 μg mL−1. The signal produced by irradiated anatase is compatible with the hydroxyl free radical, as shown by the hyperfine coupling constant values AH = 15 G and AN = 1.68 G. 
CeO2 nanoparticles protection from UV-induced cell damage
TiO2 nanoparticles exert protective effects on UV-irradiated skin models,54–56 and one study reports that CeO2 nanoparticles protect cells from the toxic effects of UV rays.25 These results are complex to interpret because both particles combine UV shielding properties with redox effects (antioxidant vs. pro-oxidant by TiO2vs. CeO2 nanoparticles, respectively), and it is difficult to attribute the final effects to one or the other action. Indeed, the shielding and redox effects are not easily separated because, in vitro, the cells most relevant for human exposure (e.g., skin fibroblasts or keratinocytes) grow in monolayers, and in experimental conditions, the powders are necessarily added to form a sheet on the top of the cells. To separately evaluate the two effects, the UV-shielding should be removed or minimized.
For this purpose, we irradiated the human keratinocyte cells HaCat soon after detaching from the substrate by trypsin treatment; thus, keratinocytes became temporarily similar to the cells growing in suspension (i.e., like blood cells). During irradiation, floating cells and powders were kept in gentle agitation to minimize UV shielding. Fig. 3 shows the extent of DNA damage induced by UVB irradiation on HaCat forming monolayers, compared with the same HaCat irradiated monolayers while they freely float after the trypsin treatment in the presence/absence of CeO2 or TiO2 nanoparticles. Note that the extent of UVB-induced DNA damage is not influenced by the fact that cells adhere or float. As far as the effects of nanopowders are concerned, CeO2 nanoparticles reduce UVB-induced DNA damage on keratinocytes under both conditions, whereas TiO2 nanoparticles, which protect the adherent cells, fail to significantly protect floating cells. This implies that the cytoprotective action of TiO2 is due to their shielding effect, whereas CeO2 nanoparticles essentially protect via their antioxidant properties.
 Fig. 3  Differential protection of CeO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles in UVB-irradiated HaCaT monolayer vs. trypsinized HaCat. DNA damage after irradiation with UVB. DNA damage was quantified by alkaline comet assay. All the values are the mean of ≥3 independent experiments ± SD; *p < 0.05, #p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance of irradiated cells with respect to the UVB-irradiated cells group (*) and comparison between UVB-irradiated TiO2 (#) are shown. 
To analyse the mechanisms through which CeO2 nanoparticles exert their cytoprotective effect, we investigated the cells physiologically grown in a suspension (i.e., blood cells instead of trypsinized keratinocytes) because some of the end-points (e.g., mutagenesis or cell cycle analyses) require long incubation times that would inevitably require re-adhesion of the trypsinized cells, i.e., a poorly controllable condition. Thus, our system of choice was Jurkat human T lymphocytes, because these cells have been thoroughly studied in terms of their cellular response to UV irradiation.57,58 The experimental strategy adopted to analyse the modulation of UV-induced cytotoxicity on Jurkat cells is summarized in Fig. 4. In the first round of experiments, we analysed UV-induced lesions by measuring the extent of DNA damage, the DNA damage response in terms of the arrest of the cell division cycle, the extent of apoptosis, and the rate of cell proliferation. The protocols for the UV irradiation of cells were as follows: 3 mW cm−2 of UVA for 60 minutes, 3 mW cm−2 of UVB for 1 minute, and 2 mW cm−2 of UVC for 0.5 minutes. The exposure times were chosen to obtain a similar (∼50%) loss of cell viability at 24 h post-irradiation with UVB and UVC, whereas for UVA, the exposure time was arbitrarily posed at 60 min to mimic standard solar exposure. The cells were also irradiated with visible light (up to 1 h), in the presence or absence of the three nanopowders; in either case, no toxic effects were observed. Fig. 5 shows how the three types of nanoparticles modulate the acute toxicity of UVA, UVB and UVC on Jurkat cells in terms of DNA damage, cell cycle alterations, cell death by apoptosis, and inhibition of cell proliferation.
 Fig. 4  Experimental strategy. A scheme of the experimental strategy adopted to analyse the modulation of UV-induced cytotoxicity on Jurkat cells ± NPs (grey circles) is depicted, showing the set of cellular events in response to irradiation in chronological order; oxidative stress (orange box),DNA damage (red box) induced by irradiation, followed by the DNA damage response (purple box), which induces the arrest of the proliferative cycle and a process to repair the DNA damage. When the damage is repaired, the cell cycle arrest is released, then cells enter mitosis and proliferate, while in the presence of irreparable damage, the cells undergo apoptosis or they proliferate in spite of the persistent damage, propagating mutations to the genome. 
 Fig. 5  Modulation of cytotoxicity by nanoparticles. (A) DNA damage index by a comet assay 1 h after irradiation. (B) Cell cycle profiles 24 h after irradiation; the arrows indicate profile changes compared to the control. Time course of cell proliferation (C) and apoptosis (D). For A–D: values are mean of ≥3 experiments ± SD; *p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to the UV-irradiated cells group is shown. (E) Quantification of UV-irradiated titania OH˙ radicals production normalized for the cell irradiation time (60 min UVA, 1 min UVB and 30 s UVC) (left graph) and compared with the extra-toxicity induced by irradiated TiO2. 
UVA irradiation per se was essentially non-toxic, whereas UVB and UVC produced DNA damage (Fig. 5A), which caused cell cycle arrest in the G2 phase (Fig. 5B), inhibition of cell proliferation (Fig. 5C), and cell death by apoptosis (Fig. 5D). None of the powders were toxic without irradiation by any of the selected criteria. CeO2 nanoparticles did not cause any toxicity by themselves, nor did they increase the toxic effects of irradiation at any wavelength. In contrast, irradiated TiO2 exerted strong toxic effects, which was especially evident upon UVA irradiation. This observation corroborates the EPR results, pointing to the fact that TiO2 is the only particle that is able to produce the highly toxic hydroxyl radicals as a result of the photocatalytic effect. The correlation between the production of hydroxyl radicals by irradiated anatase and cytotoxicity is shown in Fig. 5E, where the amount of hydroxyl radicals produced by TiO2 for each wavelength (EPR analysis) is normalized to the actual time used to irradiate cells, and it is compared with the increment in toxicity by irradiated anatase.
In agreement with previous results,25,59 we showed that CeO2 nanoparticles preserve the viability of UV-irradiated cells, abolishing apoptosis and maintaining high cellular proliferation rates. In addition, we showed that CeO2 nanoparticles reduce UV-induced DNA lesions to an extent (almost to the control level) that the DNA damage response is nearly abolished, because the arrest of their cell cycle is barely detectable (see cell cycle profiles in Fig. 5B). Overall, these results show that CeO2 nanoparticles exert dramatic cell protection from UVB and UVC irradiation, significantly reducing the cell toxicity measured by any criteria.
CeO2 nanoparticles prevent UV-induced mutagenesis
The death of cells with damaged or mal-repaired DNA is a preferential solution compared to the survival of the damaged cells; the latter being a situation likely leading to mutations and eventually cancer. Therefore, the suicide of damaged cells by apoptosis eliminates potential cancerous cells, which is in fact the first barrier against carcinogenesis.60 Thus, agents that decrease apoptosis, and thereby preserve the mutated cells, do not exert a favourable effect on organism homeostasis. In such instances, the decrease in apoptosis is accompanied by increased mutagenesis.
To understand whether, in our system, the decrease in apoptosis of irradiated cells by CeO2 nanoparticles implies the survival of mutated cells, we performed mutagenesis analysis by evaluating the fraction of cells forming micronuclei; this test encompasses a broad array of different types of chromosome mutations arising from mal-repaired DNA. Fig. 6A shows that not only did CeO2 nanoparticles not increase micronuclei formation upon UVB and UVC irradiation, but mutagenesis was also almost completely prevented. The latter results provide the mechanistic basis to the reported ability of CeO2 nanoparticles to exert anti-carcinogenic effects on UV-irradiated melanoma cells.61
 Fig. 6  CeO2 protection from UV-induced mutagenesis by accelerating DNA repair. (A) Fraction of micronuclei among the bi-nucleated cells. (B) Kinetics of DNA breaks after 1 min irradiation with UVB (left) and 30 s irradiation with UVC (right). DNA damage was quantified by an alkaline comet assay at the indicated time points; values are normalised to the control. All the values are the mean of ≥3 independent experiment ± SD; *p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to the UV-irradiated cells group is shown. 
The types of DNA lesions induced by UVB and UVC (unlike those produced by ionizing radiations) are easily repairable.62 In these instances, apoptosis and mutagenesis are more likely to be the consequence of insufficient, rather than incorrect, repair (as instead occurs for ionizing radiations), and take place when the extent of the damage exceeds the number of enzymatic machineries available for DNA repair. Thus, the coexistence of strong anti-apoptotic and anti-mutagenic effects suggests that CeO2 nanoparticles may accelerate the rate of DNA repair to reach completion before the onset of apoptosis or cell division. To test the rate of DNA repair, we observed a time course for DNA breaks of cells that were irradiated by UVB in the presence/absence of CeO2 nanoparticles. Fig. 6B shows that in irradiated Jurkat cells, the sealing of DNA breaks begins soon after irradiation. After 24 h, the amount of DNA breaks was reduced by ∼50% with respect to the initial damage. In the presence of CeO2 nanoparticles, repair was faster, and at 24 h, completion was already reached. This result demonstrates that CeO2 nanoparticles not only reduce UV-induced DNA damage, but also accelerate the rate of DNA repair. Base and nucleotide excision repair, the two major mechanisms involved in the repair of UV-irradiated DNA, include redox-sensitive enzymes, where a cysteine-metal coordination group (a [4Fe–4S] cluster) is required for the rapid detection of DNA damage through electrochemical gradients.63 Therefore, it is conceivable that CeO2 nanoparticles may reinforce the redox cycle of the enzymes involved, accelerating repair of the DNA double helix. Interestingly, it has been recently demonstrated that the anti-oxidant action of silymarin enhances the nucleotide excision repair (NER) mechanism in UV irradiated human fibroblasts. Therefore, it is conceivable that CeO2 nanoparticles may reinforce the redox cycle of the enzymes involved, accelerating DNA repair.64
Protection from UV-damage requires the Ce3+/Ce4+ redox switch
To study the mechanism through which CeO2 nanoparticles exert these effects, we examined whether this is due to the antioxidant effects of CeO2 nanoparticles. Therefore, we compared the effects of CeO2 nanoparticles with those of SDC, where the 3+ cerium ions were substituted by the fixed-valency 3+ Sm for all the experiments described above. Previous studies indicated that 20% doping completely abolished the redox switch and the biological effects,31 therefore this degree of doping was chosen. As shown in Fig. 5 and 6, Sm-doping prevented the cell-protective effects of CeO2 nanoparticles for all parameters investigated, showing that the protective effect of CeO2 nanoparticles requires the 3+/4+ valence switch, and is therefore related to their antioxidant ability.
To cross-check whether the antioxidant effect obtained by other means, i.e., using the molecular radical scavenger N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), would promote similar protective effects, we examined whether NAC would protect Jurkat cells from UVB and UVC-induced apoptosis and mutagenesis. Fig. 7 shows that NAC indeed reduces the extent of UV-induced apoptosis (panel A) and mutagenesis (panel B), showing that this is an oxidation-related type of cell damage following UV irradiation, and confirming that CeO2 nanoparticles provide protection via their antioxidation ability. Remarkably, the anti-apoptotic and anti-mutagenic effects of CeO2 nanoparticles were more efficient than those exerted by NAC, suggesting that auto-regenerative CeO2 nanoparticles protect from UV irradiation better than a stoichiometric molecular antioxidant.
 Fig. 7  CeO2 nanoparticles act as an antioxidant in UV-irradiated Jurkat cells. (A) Apoptosis in UVB and UVC irradiated cells pre-treated with CeO2 nanoparticles (200 μg mL−1 for 24 h) vs. NAC (1 mM for 1 h) for 1 h. #p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance of the protection due to NAC pre-treatment with respect to CeO2 pre-treatment is shown. (B) Micronuclei formation in UVB-irradiated cells pre-treated with CeO2vs. NAC, #p < 0.05 (ANOVA) and vs. without CeO2 values, *p < 0.05. (C) DHR fluorescent signal detected by flow cytometry immediately after irradiation in cells ± NPs with UVA (60 min; 2 mW cm−2), UVB (10 min; 3 mW cm−2) and UVC (10 min; 3 mW cm−2). The values are the mean of ≥3 independent experiments ± SD; *p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to the UV-irradiated cells group is shown. 
To measure the direct antioxidant effects of CeO2 nanoparticles in our system, we performed a single cell analysis with dihydrorhodamine (DHR), an intracellular probe that detects a wide range of free radical species. Fig. 7C shows that irradiation with UVA, UVB or UVC causes an increase in DHR signal. UVA induced ROS production to a similar extent as UVB or UVC, though this did not induce acute toxicity in our system. This suggests that either UVA-produced ROS are different and less toxic species compared with those produced by UVB or UVC, or that ROS are toxic only in the presence of direct DNA damage, which is an effect induced only by UVB and UVC. It is worth noting that Jurkat cells are devoid of the important UVA-specific chromophores such as melanin present in the skin, and that a fraction of melanin, in the form of pheomelanin, is responsible for the UV-induced photocatalytic effect.65 The lack of these UVA-specific chromophores may render Jurkat cells less exposed to the acute toxicity that UVA may promote in skin cells.
The effects of the powders on UV-induced ROS production revealed a pro-oxidant effect of TiO2 upon UVA irradiation and a strong antioxidant effect of CeO2 nanoparticles, which reduced UVA-induced ROS production and completely prevented ROS products generated by UVB and UVC, as well as a loss of protection by SDC, as expected.
CeO2 nanoparticles protect cells from oxidative damage induced by UV-irradiated TiO2
The antioxidant and cell protective effects of CeO2 nanoparticles were then probed against the photocatalytic effects of TiO2. In particular, the presence of CeO2 nanoparticles with concentration ratios as low as 1:4 with respect to TiO2 completely scavenged the hydroxyl radicals produced by irradiated TiO2, which became undetectable by EPR; this suggested that CeO2 nanoparticles may act to be in competition with the POBN spin trap (Fig. 8A). Similar results were obtained by analyzing the cytotoxic effects; Fig. 8B shows that CeO2 nanoparticles dose-dependently protect the cells from toxicity induced by UVA-irradiated TiO2.
 Fig. 8  CeO2 nanoparticles counteract the photocatalytic effects and cytotoxicity of UVA-irradiated TiO2. (A) POBN-OH spin abduct produced by 800 μg mL−1 UVA irradiated TiO2 ± 200 μg mL−1 CeO2 or SDC. (B) Apoptosis 24 h after UVA irradiation of cells pre-treated with TiO2 ± CeO2 or SDC (25–200 μg mL−1) for 24 h. The values are the mean of ≥3 independent experiments ± SD; *,#p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to UVA-irradiated cells (*) or to the SDC + TiO2 (mixture 1:1) (#) group is shown. (C) Apoptosis in UVA-irradiated cells pre-treated with CeO2 (100 μg mL−1 for 24 h), NAC (1 mM for 1 h) or Trolox (100 μM for 30 min) ± TiO2 (100 μg mL−1 for 24 h) *, #p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to the UVA-irradiated cells (*) and to the CeO2 + TiO2 (mixture 1:1) pre-treatment (#) is shown. 
The scavenging of ROS produced by irradiated TiO2 particles is a priority from a public health and commercial point of view, and the addition of molecular antioxidants to the TiO2-based lotions has been attempted; however, the results were deceiving to date. To explore whether CeO2 nanoparticles may be a better alternative to molecular antioxidants, we compared the scavenging effects of CeO2 nanoparticles against ROS produced by irradiated TiO2 nanoparticles with that of efficient molecular antioxidants such as NAC and trolox, a soluble analog of vitamin E. Fig. 8C shows that NAC and trolox did reduce the overall oxidative DCF signal of irradiated titania, but were significantly less efficient compared to CeO2 nanoparticles. This suggests that the stability of the antioxidant effect of CeO2 nanoparticles, due to the auto-regenerative redox cycle, may overcome the problems of the stability of the molecular antioxidants.
The novel biological protective inter-particle cooperative effect superimposed on the increase in the physical shielding of TiO2/CeO2 nanoparticles mixtures, recently reported by Truffault et al.30 discloses unexpected options to solve the problems related to the photo-toxicity of TiO2.
Experimental
Synthesis and characterization of ceramic nanopowders
TiO2, CeO2 and 20% samarium-doped ceria nanoparticles (SDC) were synthesized using wet-chemical procedures, as previously described.31,49–53 TiO2 nanoparticles were prepared by heating the dried TiO2 precursor (Ti isopropoxide) to 450 °C for 4 h. CeO2 and SDC nanoparticles powders were prepared by heating the precursor to 450 °C for 8 h. The temperatures were selected after characterizing the dried precursor using simultaneous thermogravimetric and differential thermal analysis (TG/DTA, Netzsch STA 409) performed in air flow (80 mL min−1) from ambient temperature to 1200 °C with a 2 °C min−1 heating rate. Phase and morphology of the materials were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips X-Pert) analysis. Crystal structure was identified by a comparison of XRD and selected area electron diffraction pattern (SAED) measurements; 2θ and d-spacing values were compared with the references obtained from the JCPDS data base (71-1166 for anatase, 75-0390 for CeO2 fluorite structure and 75-0158 for 20% samarium-doped cerium oxide). Nanoparticle dimensions were determined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), performed at an electron beam energy of 300 keV using a Titan G2 60–300 ST Cs-Image corrected microscope (FEI). Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were also acquired by selecting an area of about 150 nm containing the sample nanoparticles. In addition, X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) were performed to determine the elemental composition of samples. Specific surface area (BET analysis) measurements were performed by treating the samples in helium flux at 300 °C for 1 h using a Micromeritics Gemini V equipment.
Nanoparticle dispersions
A stock dispersion of CeO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles was prepared in deionized water at a concentration of 20 mg mL−1. NPs were dispersed with ultrasound (Branson Ultrasonic Corp., Danbury, CT, USA) at 20% amplitude for 5 minutes and immediately diluted to the final concentration used for each experiment. Zeta potential and dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements of the NPs at a concentration of 200 μg mL−1 were performed immediately after sonication at 37 °C in deionized H2O (pH 7.4) or in RPMI medium + 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, to mimic cell culture environment) with a Malvern Zetasizer (Nano-ZS, Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK). DLS experiments consisted of 15 runs per measurement and all the experiments were carried out in triplicate. The mean ± standard deviation (SD) of the hydrodynamic diameter and the polydispersity index (P.I.) by cumulant analysis were calculated. The zeta potential experiments consisted of 100 runs per measurement and all the experiments were carried out in triplicate. The mean of each triplicate measurement ± standard deviation (SD) is reported. The measurements in H2O were made in general purpose mode and the measurements in cell media were carried out in monomodal mode due to the high conductivity of this sample (16 mS cm−1). The Smoluchowski approximation was used to convert the electrophoretic mobility to the zeta potential.
UV-Vis absorbance
Absorbance of NP suspensions in H2O (pH 7.4) at a final concentration of 50 μg mL−1 was recorded in the 200–600 nm range using a UV-Vis spectrometer (Perkin Elmer Lambda 25 UV-vis spectrometer).
Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy measurements
A stock POBN solution was freshly prepared immediately before the experiments. The NPs were sonicated and immediately dispersed in 0.1 M POBN solution at a final concentration of 800 μg mL−1. The tests were performed without irradiating a POBN solution, used as a control, and by irradiating POBN-NPs suspensions. The samples were irradiated at 25 °C as follows:
(i) For 20 minutes, using a 150 W halogen light source at 10 W cm−2, model KL1500 Electronic (Schott AG, Mainz, Germany).
(ii) For 10 minutes, either with UVC at 2 mW cm−2 (254 nm, Spectroline EF-140C/FE) or with UVA and UVB at 3 mW cm−2 (365 nm and 312 nm, respectively, Spectroline ENB-260C/FE).
During exposure to light, 2 mL volumes of the suspensions were equilibrated with oxygen at the atmospheric pressure and stirred vigorously to prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles. To avoid overheating by light, the temperature of suspensions was stabilized at 25.0 ± 0.1 °C using a Haake K10 bath vessel with a temperature control module Haake DC10 (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany).
After each illumination step, the suspension volumes of ∼15 μL were drawn into thin-walled borosilicate glass capillaries (0.7 mm ID, 0.87 mm ED, Model CV7087-100, VitroCom Inc., Mountain Lakes, NJ, USA), sealed at both ends with a tube sealant (ChaSeal, Chase Scientific Glass Inc., Rockwood, TN, USA), and analysed using an X-band ESR spectrometer (Model EleXsys 500, Bruker Spectrospin, Karlsruhe, Germany) equipped with a super-high-Q cavity, Bruker Model ER 4122SHQE. The typical instrumental settings were microwave frequency ∼9.4 GHz, microwave power 0.65 mW, sweep width 120 G, modulation frequency 100 kHz, modulation amplitude 0.5 G, receiver gain 60 dB, time constant 40.96 ms, conversion time 81.92 ms, and total scan time 167.8 s. Routinely, to improve the signal-to-noise ratio, two traces were accumulated for each ESR spectrum. Control ESR measurements were performed for all the POBN-nanoparticle suspensions prior to exposing them to light.
Cell cultures
Jurkat cells (human tumor T lymphocyte)66 and HaCat cells (spontaneously transformed human keratinocyte) were grown at 37 °C in an RPMI 1640 medium (Jurkat) or in a DMEM medium (HaCat cells), supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 100000 units per L penicillin, 50 mg L−1 streptomycin, and 200 mM glutamine, in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2in air. All the experiments were performed on cells in the logarithmic phase of growth under the condition of >96% of viability. In each experiment, Jurkat cells were kept at a concentration of 106 cells per mL, whereas the HaCat cells confluence was kept at 80%.
Cell incubation with nanoparticles
NP suspensions were prepared at a final concentration of 200 μg mL−1, sonicated as previously described31 and immediately incubated with Jurkat cells or HaCat cells; the experiments were performed after overnight pre-incubation with the nanoparticle suspensions.
Materials for cell treatments
Hoechst 33342, etoposide (VP16), propidium iodide (PI), ribonuclease enzyme (RNAse), α-(4-pyridyl-1-oxide)-N-tert-butylnitrone (POBN), N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), 6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid (trolox), normal melting point agarose, low melting point agarose, and all the other chemicals used in the comet assay technique were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Dihydrorhodamine (DHR) was purchased from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR). Stock solutions: Hoechst 33342 (10 mg mL−1), RNAse (20 mg mL−1) and POBN (0.5 M) were prepared in distilled water; DHR (10 mM) was prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO); PI (5 mg mL−1) was prepared in distilled water.
Cell irradiation
Unless indicated otherwise, the cells were placed in 24-well culture plates in complete medium without phenol red and irradiated at room temperature as follows:
(i) Visible light at 10 W cm−2 using a 150 W halogen light source on Model KL1500 Electronic (Schott AG, Mainz, Germany) for 60 minutes.
(ii) UVA (365 nm, Spectroline lamp model ENB-260C/FE) at 3 mW cm−2 for three times 20 minutes each separated by two intervals of 10 minutes each, during which the cells were placed at 37 °C under 5% CO2;
(iii) UVB (312 nm, Spectroline lamp model ENB-260C/FE) single exposure at 3 mW cm−2 for 1 minute.
(iv) UVC (254 nm, Spectroline lamp model EF-140C/FE) single exposure at 2 mW cm−2 for 30 seconds.
During irradiation of trypsinized or suspended cells, the cell/nanopowder suspensions were kept in constant gentle agitation.
Cell treatments with molecular antioxidants
Prior to irradiation, Jurkat cells were pre-incubated with NAC at the final concentration of 10 mM for 1 h or with Trolox at the final concentration of 100 μM for 30 minutes.
Analysis of cell proliferation
The rate of cell proliferation was assessed by evaluating cell concentration at increasing time points after irradiation using a Burker counting chamber; the values are given as number of cell per mL.
Evaluation of apoptosis
Apoptosis was evaluated quantifying the fraction of apoptotic nuclei by fluorescence microscopy after DNA staining with the cell-permeable specific dye Hoechst 33342, which was added directly to the cell culture at a final concentration of 10 μg mL−1.67 To evaluate the eventual presence of necrotic cells, the cells were also stained with PI at a final concentration of 5 μg mL−1. The fraction of apoptotic nuclei among the total cell population was calculated by counting at the fluorescence microscope at least 300 cells in at least three independent randomly selected microscopic fields. In addition, apoptosis was estimated by quantifying the sub-G1 apoptotic peak in the cell cycle profile; the two methods gave similar values.
Cell cycle analysis
The cells were washed with PBS and fixed overnight in 70% ethanol at 20 °C, treated with RNAse at 200 μg mL−1, stained with PI at the final concentration of 50 μg mL−1 and finally analyzed by FACSCalibur flow cytometer. 20000 cells were analyzed for each sample. Data was analyzed using WinMdi 2.9 software.
DNA damage analysis by alkaline Comet assay
Alkaline Comet assay is a single-cell gel electrophoresis method that allows the detection of single- and double-strand DNA breaks.68 One hour after irradiation (unless stated otherwise), the cells were suspended in 0.5% low melting point agarose and then pipetted onto a frosted glass microscope slide pre-coated with a layer of 0.2% normal melting point agarose. The slides were incubated in an alkaline lysis solution for 40 min (Jurkat cells) or for 1 h (HaCat cells). After cell lysis, the slides were rinsed with an electrophoresis buffer to allow DNA unwinding. Electrophoresis was conducted with the Subcell GT System/15 × 25 cm equipped with Power Pack 300 (Bio Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA, USA) at 20 V and 350 mA for 18 min (Jurkat cells) or 30 min (HaCat cells). Subsequently, the slides were gently washed in a neutralization buffer solution for 5 min, dehydrated with an ethanol series, and dried at room temperature. One hundred cells on each slide were scored using a fluorescence microscope; the extent of genetic damage was evaluated by visual scoring provided in arbitrary units.69
Detection and quantification of intracellular ROS
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) were measured by dihydrorhodamine (DHR), a probe that is internalized in cells and fluoresces only when oxidized to rhodamine,70 and thus allows quantitative assessment of intracellular ROS. Before the measurement, the cells were irradiated with UVA (60 minutes, 3 mW cm−2), UVB (10 minutes, 3 mW cm−2) or UVC (10 minutes, 2 mW cm−2). Immediately after irradiation, DHR was added directly to the cell samples to a final concentration of 2 μM and incubated at 37 °C in the dark for 20 min. The cells were then analyzed using a FACSCalibur flow cytometer; 10000 cells were analyzed for each sample. The data was analyzed with WinMdi 2.9 software; the mean values were used for tables and graphs.
Mutagenesis analysis via the micronuclei assay
The micronuclei test is a broad-spectrum mutagenesis test.71 Micronuclei are small nuclear bodies arising from improper chromosome separation at mitosis as a consequence of mal-repaired DNA damage. Evaluation of the fraction of micronuclei among the cells undergoing mitosis is a measure of early mutagenesis after genotoxic treatments. After irradiation, cytochalasin B (3 μg mL−1; Sigma) was added to the cells to prevent cell division without inhibiting mitosis; after 24 h, the resulting bi-nucleated cells labelled the cells that underwent mitosis. The medium was then removed, and the cells were rinsed with PBS, treated with hypotonic solution (KCl 0.075 M) for 3 min and then fixed with Carnoy fixative (methanol/acetic acid, 20:1) for 8 min and then stained with Hoechst 33342. 500 bi-nucleated cells were scored under a fluorescent microscope; the values given in the graphs represent the number of micronuclei per 500 bi-nucleated cells.
Statistical analysis
Each experiment was repeated ≥3 times. The data is presented as mean ± SD. A statistical evaluation was conducted by one-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey's multiple comparison test (Homogeneous Variances) using the SPSS 16.0 software. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.
Conclusions
We demonstrated that the extra-shielding properties of irradiated TiO2 nanoparticles exert highly damaging effects via the production of hydroxyl radicals, whereas CeO2 nanoparticles allow significant cell and genetic protection against UV-induced damage. The phototoxic action of UVA- and UVB-irradiated TiO2 nanoparticles is highly relevant to the impact of exposure of human skin to ultraviolet light, because UVA and UVB reach the Earth's surface and TiO2 is the main active component of widely used sun shield lotions. Considering that modern life habits would barely abandon the practice of direct exposure to sunlight, an efficient technological solution to the adverse effects of UV-irradiated TiO2 nanoparticles is urgently needed. Therefore, CeO2 nanoparticles appear to be the ideal candidates to overcome the problems connected with the photocatalytic effect of TiO2 nanoparticles. Sunscreen lotions are applied above the stratum corneum, the tough cutaneous barrier that is impermeable to nanoparticles. Therefore, the photocatalytic effects of TiO2 nanoparticle-based lotions would develop above the skin surface, and are rather harmless to an intact epidermis.19,72 The health hazard arises when the stratum corneum becomes leaky in bruised or erythematous skin, which is a frequent consequence of sunburn; this would allow the penetration of nanoparticles that would thus come into physical contact with the living cells in the deep underlying derma.21,72 This is a scenario rather similar to our experimental system, where nanopowders and cells are mixed together; in such instances, the cell damaging or protective effects of nanoparticles becomes highly relevant. This reflects the observations of many recent studies, which report that TiO2 protect ex vivo skin specimen and skin models from UVA irradiation,54–56 but not cultured keratinocytes or dermal fibroblasts,13–18 where the nanoparticles are in contact with the living cells. This is specific for UVA,73 as confirmed by our study with UVB-irradiated HaCat cells, where TiO2 nanoparticles exert a protective effect due to their shielding power.
Strategies to bypass the risks of photocatalytic effect of TiO2 nanoparticles have been attempted, such as the deactivation of the photocatalytic effect of the nanoparticle surface by molecular capping23 or inert oxides coating,23 with unsatisfactory outcomes.21 Recently an alternative strategy was proposed, involving the inclusion of antioxidants in TiO2-based formulations.22–24,74 The use of a nano-antioxidant, such as fullerene24 and silver nanoparticles,75 has been reported to scavenge the oxidative stress induced by UV irradiation, exerting cell protection in keratinocytes irradiated in the presence of TiO2.24 This study suggests that CeO2 nanoparticles, which combine the UV-shielding with potent antioxidant action, may be a successful adjuvant in TiO2-based lotions formulae because of their impressive protection against damage induced directly by UV in general, as well as by the photocatalytic effect of irradiated TiO2 nanoparticles in particular. The additional bonus that CeO2 nanoparticles would provide include their potent anti-inflammatory properties,32,36 which would contrast the UV-induced local (erythema) and systemic pro-inflammatory effects. The small size of CeO2 nanoparticles (<10 nm), which would guarantee transparency of the sunscreen lotions, is a key asset from the commercial point of view. The high UV refracting ability would contribute to the overall shielding efficiency of TiO2 nanoparticles-based sun creams. Therefore, CeO2 nanoparticles possess the requirements to be a breakthrough in solar shield technology, and studies aimed at investigating their efficacy and safety in specific applications should be considered as a priority.
Acknowledgements
F.C. and M.D.N. are recipient of fellowships from the PhD school in Materials for Health, Energy and Environment, Università di Roma Tor Vergata. We wish to thank Dr Vittoria Maresca, Ospedale S. Gallicano (Roma, Italy), and Prof. Giampiero Gualandi, Università La Tuscia (Viterbo, Italy) for invaluable support. Thanks are due to Prof. Francesco Stellacci and Dr Marta Mameli, École Polytechnique Fédéral de Lausanne (EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland), for invaluable discussions and support. We thank Dr Dalaver H. Anjum, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia) for assistance in TEM observations; Ms Marianeve Polimeno and Ms Monica Maio (Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Roma Tor Vergata) are acknowledged for the experiments with HaCat cells.
Notes and references
H. Merwald, G. Klosner, C. Kokesch, M. Der-Petrossian, H. Hönigsmann and F. Trautinger, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2005, 79, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. L. Ghissassi, R. Baan, K. Straif, Y. Secretan, V. Bouvard, V. L. Benbrahim-Tallaa, N. Guha, C. Freeman, L. Galichet and V. Cogliano, Lancet Oncol., 2009, 10, 751 CrossRef .
G. T. Wondrak, M. K. Jacobson and E. Jacobson, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2006, 5, 215 CAS .
L. F. Z. Batista, B. Kaina, R. Meneghini and C. F. M. Menck, Mutat. Res., 2009, 681, 197 CAS .
A. T. Black, M. K. Gordon, D. E. Heck, M. A. Gallo, D. L. Laskin and J. D. Laskin, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2011, 81, 873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Clydesdale, G. W. Dandie and H. K. Muller, Immunol. Cell Biol., 2011, 79, 547 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rampaul, I. P. Parking and L. P. Cramer, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 191, 138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Lewicka, A. F. Benedetto, D. N. Benoit, W. W. Yu, J. D. Fortner and V. L. Colvin, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 3607 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, M. Wanhong, C. Chuncheng, H. Ji and J. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 170, 353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Uchino, H. Tokunaga, M. Ando and H. Utsumi, Toxicol. In Vitro, 2002, 16, 629 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nag, D. Guin, P. Basac and S. V. Manorama, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pierzchała, M. Lekka, A. Magrez, A. J. Kulik, L. Forro and A. Sienkiewicz, Nanotoxicology, 2012, 6, 813 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xue, J. Wu, F. Lan, W. Liu, X. Yang, F. Zeng and H. Xu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 8500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. O. Park, M. Yu, S. K. Kang, S. I. Yang and Y.-J. Kim, Mol. Cell. Toxicol., 2011, 7, 67 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaeger, D. G. Weiss, L. Jonas and R. Kriehuber, Toxicology, 2012, 296, 27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yin, J. Liu, M. Ehrenshaft, J. E. Roberts, P. P. Fu, R. P. Mason and B. Zhao, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 2012, 263, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Fenoglio, J. Ponti, E. Alloa, M. Ghiazza, I. Corazzari, R. Capomaccio, D. Rembges, S. Oliaro-Bosso and F. Rossi, Nanoscale, 2013, 21, 6567 RSC .
F. Rancan, B. Nazemi, S. Rautenberg, M. Ryll, S. Hadam, Q. Gao, S. Hackbarth, S. F. Haag, C. Graf, E. Rühl, U. Blume-Peytavi, J. Lademann, A. Vogt and M. C. Meinke, Skin Res. Technol., 2014, 20, 182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Skocaj, M. Filipic, J. Petrovic and S. Novak, Radiol. Oncol., 2011, 45, 227 CAS .
B. Vileno, M. Lekka, A. Sienkiewicz, S. Jeney, G. Stoessel, J. Lekki, L. Forró and Z. Stachura, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 5149 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gilbert, F. Pirot, V. Bertholle, L. Roussel, F. Falson and F. Padois, Int. J. Cosmet. Sci., 2013, 35, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xue, W. Liu, J. Wu, X. Yang and H. Xu, Toxicol. In Vitro, 2011, 25, 110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Smijs and S. Pavel, Nanotechnol., Sci. Appl., 2011, 4, 95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kato, H. Aoshima, Y. Saitoh and N. Miwa, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 3285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Zholobak, V. K. Ivanov, A. B. Shcherbakov, A. S. Shaporev, O. S. Polezhaeva, A. Y. Baranchikov, Y. N. Spivak and Y. D. Tretyakov, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2011, 102, 32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Herrling, M. Seifert and K. Jung, SOFW J., 2013, 139, 10–15 CAS .
S. Yabe and T. Sato, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 171, 7 CrossRef CAS .
L. Truffault, M.-T. Ta, T. Devers, K. Konstantinov, V. Harel, C. Simmonard, C. Andreazza, I. P. Nevirkovets, A. Pineau, O. Veron and J.-P. Blondeau, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45, 527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, S. Yabe, M. Yamashita, S. Momose, S. Yoshida, S. Yin and T. Sato, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2002, 75, 39 CrossRef CAS .
L. Truffault, B. Winton, B. Choquenet, C. Andreazza, C. Simmonard, T. Devers, K. Konstantinov, C. Couteau and L. J. M. Coiffard, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Celardo, M. De Nicola, C. Mandoli, J. Z. Pedersen, E. Traversa and L. Ghibelli, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Celardo, J. Z. Pedersen, E. Traversa and L. Ghibelli, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1411 RSC .
S. Das, J. M. Dowding2, K. E. Klump, J. F. McGinnis, W. Self and S. Seal, Future Med., 2013, 8, 1483 CAS .
S. Das, S. Chigurupati, J. Dowding, P. Munusamy, D. R. Baer, J. F. McGinnis, M. P. Mattson, W. Self and S. Seal, MRS Bull., 2014, 39, 976 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karakoti, S. Singh, J. M. Dowding, S. Seal and W. T. Self, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4422 RSC .
I. Celardo, E. Traversa and L. Ghibelli, J. Exp. Ther. Oncol., 2011, 9, 47 CAS .
E. G. Heckert, A. S. Karakoti, S. Seal and W. T. Self, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 2705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pirmohamed, J. M. Dowding, S. Singh, B. Wasserman, E. Heckert, A. S. Karakoti, J. E. King, S. Seal and W. T. Self, Chem. Commun., 2010, 28, 2736 RSC .
J. Colon, N. Hsieh, A. Ferguson, P. Kupelian, S. Seal, D. W. Jenkins and C. H. Baker, Nanomedicine, 2010, 6, 698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Das, S. N. Bhargava, J. F. Kang, L. M. Riedel, S. Seal and J. J. Hickman, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 1918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Tsai, J. Oca-Cossio, K. Agering, N. E. Simpson, M. A. Atkinson, I. Constantinidis and W. Sigmund, Nanomedicine, 2007, 2, 325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, S. Patil, S. Seal and J. F. McGinnis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 152 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Colon, L. Herrera, J. Smith, S. Patil, C. Komanski, P. Kupelian, S. Seal, D. W. Jenkins and C. H. Baker, Nanomedicine, 2009, 5, 225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. González-Flores, M. De Nicola, E. Bruni, F. Caputo, A. B. Rodríguez, J. Pariente and L. Ghibelli, Mol. Cell. Biochem., 2014, 397, 245 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Caputo, M. De Nicola and L. Ghibelli, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2014, 92, 112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Walkey, S. Das, S. Seal, J. Erlichman, K. Heckman, L. Ghibelli, E. Traversa, J. F. McGinnis and W. T. Self, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2015, 2, 33 RSC .
M. Sack, L. Alili, E. Karaman, S. Das, A. Gupta, S. Seal and P. Brenneisen, Mol. Cancer Ther., 2014, 13, 1740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Alili, M. Sack, A. S. Karakoti, S. Teuber, K. Puschmann, S. M. Hirst, C. M. Reilly, K. Zanger, W. Stahl, S. Das, S. Seal and P. Brenneisen, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 2918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Traversa, M. L. Di Vona, S. Licoccia, M. Sacerdoti, M. C. Carotta, L. Crema and G. Martinelli, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2001, 22, 167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licoccia and E. Traversa, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mandoli, F. Pagliari, S. Pagliari, G. Forte, P. Di Nardo, S. Licoccia and E. Traversa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Esposito and E. Traversa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 91, 1037 CAS .
F. Pagliari, C. Mandoli, G. Forte, E. Magnani, S. Pagliari, G. Nardone, S. Licoccia, M. Minieri, P. Di Nardo and E. Traversa, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Augustin, C. Collombel and O. Damour, Photochem. Photobiol., 1997, 66, 853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Boisnic, M. C. Branchet-Gumila, C. Merial-Kieny and T. Nocera, Skin Pharmacol. Physiol., 2005, 18, 201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Haywood, A. Volkov, C. Andrady and R. Sayer, Free Radical Res., 2012, 46, 265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Scoltock and J. A. Cidlowski, Exp. Cell Res., 2004, 297, 212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. S. Wang, L. L. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. K. Cheng, F. Y. Heng, N. H. Wu and Y. F. Shen, J. Biol. Chem., 2004, 279, 42545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Zholobak, A. B. Shcherbakov, A. S. Bogorad-Kobelska, O. S. Ivanova, A. Y. Baranchikov, N. Y. Spivak and V. K. Ivanov, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2014, 130, 102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Caputo, R. Vegliante and L. Ghibelli, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2012, 84, 1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Alili, M. Sack, C. von Montfort, S. Giri, S. Das, K. S. Carroll, K. Zanger, S. Seal and P. Brenneisen, Antioxid. Redox Signaling, 2013, 19, 765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Sinha and D. P. Häder, Photochem. Photobiol., 2002, 1, 225 RSC .
O. A. Lukianova and S. S. David, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2005, 9, 145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Katiyar, S. K. Mantena and S. M. Meeran, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e21410 CAS .
J. M. Wood and K. U. Schallreuter, J. Invest. Dermatol., 2006, 126, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Schneider, H. U. Schwenk and G. Bornkamm, Int. J. Cancer, 1977, 19, 621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ghibelli, C. Nosseri, S. Coppola, V. Maresca and L. Dini, Exp. Cell Res., 1995, 221, 270 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Giovanetti, E. Basso and T. Deshpande, Int. J. Radat. Biol., 2008, 84, 227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Collins, Mol. Biotechnol., 2004, 26, 249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Radogna, L. Paternoster, M. De Nicola, C. Cerella, S. Ammendola, A. Bedini, G. Tarzia, K. Aquilano, M. Ciriolo and L. Ghibelli, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 2009, 239, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. I. Countryman and J. A. Heddle, Mutat. Res., 1976, 41, 321 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Newman, M. Stotland and J. I. Ellis, J. Am. Acad. Dermatol., 2009, 61, 685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, A. Brennan and S. A. Diamond, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2012, 31, 2099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Carlotti, E. Ugazio, L. Gastaldi, S. Sapino, D. Vione, I. Fenoglio and B. Fubini, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2009, 96, 130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Arora, N. Tyagi, A. Bhardwaj, L. Rusu, R. Palanki, K. Vig, S. R. Singh, A. P. Singh, S. Palanki, M. E. Miller, J. E. Carter and S. Singh, Nanomedicine, 2015, 11, 1265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Physico-chemical characterization of TiO2, CeO2 and SDC nanoparticles. (A) XRD diffraction patterns of TiO2 CeO2, and SDC nanoparticles. (B) TEM images and SAED patterns of NPs. Miller index and d-spacing values from SAED are reported in the table in panel D. (C) UV-Vis absorbance spectra for the NP suspensions. (D) Summary of the characteristics of NP powder and dispersion; SSA: specific surface area; NP dispersion characterization: mean hydrodynamic diameter (d), mean polydispersity index (P.I.) by DLS analysis (Cumulant analysis) and zeta potential of 200 μg mL−1 NP dispersions.	 

 	Fig. 2  Nanoparticle photocatalytic activity. EPR spectra of the POBN-OH spin abduct signal produced by TiO2, CeO2 and SDC nanoparticles suspensions at 800 μg mL−1. The signal produced by irradiated anatase is compatible with the hydroxyl free radical, as shown by the hyperfine coupling constant values AH = 15 G and AN = 1.68 G.	 

 	Fig. 3  Differential protection of CeO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles in UVB-irradiated HaCaT monolayer vs. trypsinized HaCat. DNA damage after irradiation with UVB. DNA damage was quantified by alkaline comet assay. All the values are the mean of ≥3 independent experiments ± SD; *p < 0.05, #p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance of irradiated cells with respect to the UVB-irradiated cells group (*) and comparison between UVB-irradiated TiO2 (#) are shown.	 

 	Fig. 4  Experimental strategy. A scheme of the experimental strategy adopted to analyse the modulation of UV-induced cytotoxicity on Jurkat cells ± NPs (grey circles) is depicted, showing the set of cellular events in response to irradiation in chronological order; oxidative stress (orange box),DNA damage (red box) induced by irradiation, followed by the DNA damage response (purple box), which induces the arrest of the proliferative cycle and a process to repair the DNA damage. When the damage is repaired, the cell cycle arrest is released, then cells enter mitosis and proliferate, while in the presence of irreparable damage, the cells undergo apoptosis or they proliferate in spite of the persistent damage, propagating mutations to the genome.	 

 	Fig. 5  Modulation of cytotoxicity by nanoparticles. (A) DNA damage index by a comet assay 1 h after irradiation. (B) Cell cycle profiles 24 h after irradiation; the arrows indicate profile changes compared to the control. Time course of cell proliferation (C) and apoptosis (D). For A–D: values are mean of ≥3 experiments ± SD; *p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to the UV-irradiated cells group is shown. (E) Quantification of UV-irradiated titania OH˙ radicals production normalized for the cell irradiation time (60 min UVA, 1 min UVB and 30 s UVC) (left graph) and compared with the extra-toxicity induced by irradiated TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 6  CeO2 protection from UV-induced mutagenesis by accelerating DNA repair. (A) Fraction of micronuclei among the bi-nucleated cells. (B) Kinetics of DNA breaks after 1 min irradiation with UVB (left) and 30 s irradiation with UVC (right). DNA damage was quantified by an alkaline comet assay at the indicated time points; values are normalised to the control. All the values are the mean of ≥3 independent experiment ± SD; *p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to the UV-irradiated cells group is shown.	 

 	Fig. 7  CeO2 nanoparticles act as an antioxidant in UV-irradiated Jurkat cells. (A) Apoptosis in UVB and UVC irradiated cells pre-treated with CeO2 nanoparticles (200 μg mL−1 for 24 h) vs. NAC (1 mM for 1 h) for 1 h. #p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance of the protection due to NAC pre-treatment with respect to CeO2 pre-treatment is shown. (B) Micronuclei formation in UVB-irradiated cells pre-treated with CeO2vs. NAC, #p < 0.05 (ANOVA) and vs. without CeO2 values, *p < 0.05. (C) DHR fluorescent signal detected by flow cytometry immediately after irradiation in cells ± NPs with UVA (60 min; 2 mW cm−2), UVB (10 min; 3 mW cm−2) and UVC (10 min; 3 mW cm−2). The values are the mean of ≥3 independent experiments ± SD; *p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to the UV-irradiated cells group is shown.	 

 	Fig. 8  CeO2 nanoparticles counteract the photocatalytic effects and cytotoxicity of UVA-irradiated TiO2. (A) POBN-OH spin abduct produced by 800 μg mL−1 UVA irradiated TiO2 ± 200 μg mL−1 CeO2 or SDC. (B) Apoptosis 24 h after UVA irradiation of cells pre-treated with TiO2 ± CeO2 or SDC (25–200 μg mL−1) for 24 h. The values are the mean of ≥3 independent experiments ± SD; *,#p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to UVA-irradiated cells (*) or to the SDC + TiO2 (mixture 1:1) (#) group is shown. (C) Apoptosis in UVA-irradiated cells pre-treated with CeO2 (100 μg mL−1 for 24 h), NAC (1 mM for 1 h) or Trolox (100 μM for 30 min) ± TiO2 (100 μg mL−1 for 24 h) *, #p < 0.05 (ANOVA). Significance with respect to the UVA-irradiated cells (*) and to the CeO2 + TiO2 (mixture 1:1) pre-treatment (#) is shown.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
