Localized surface plasmon resonance for enhanced electrocatalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00237F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00237F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12070-12097Localized surface plasmon resonance for enhanced electrocatalysis

        
          
            Jian 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Song 
            Xue
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rongrong 
            Ji
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bing 
            Li
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jinghong 
            Li
          
          
        
      *b
aTianjin Key Laboratory of Organic Solar Cells and Photochemical Conversion, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin 300384, China. E-mail: zjtjbd@email.tjut.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry, Key Lab of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: jhli@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      19th March 2021
    First published on 17th September 2021AbstractElectrocatalysis plays a vital role in energy conversion and storage in modern society. Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) is a highly attractive approach to enhance the electrocatalytic activity and selectivity with solar energy. LSPR excitation can induce the transfer of hot electrons and holes, electromagnetic field enhancement, lattice heating, resonant energy transfer and scattering, in turn boosting a variety of electrocatalytic reactions. Although the LSPR-mediated electrocatalysis has been investigated, the underlying mechanism has not been well explained. Moreover, the efficiency is strongly dependent on the structure and composition of plasmonic metals. In this review, the currently proposed mechanisms for plasmon-mediated electrocatalysis are introduced and the preparation methods to design supported plasmonic nanostructures and related electrodes are summarized. In addition, we focus on the characterization strategies used for verifying and differentiating LSPR mechanisms involved at the electrochemical interface. Following that are highlights of representative examples of direct plasmonic metal-driven and indirect plasmon-enhanced electrocatalytic reactions. Finally, this review concludes with a discussion on the remaining challenges and future opportunities for coupling LSPR with electrocatalysis.
Jian Zhao
Jian Zhao is a professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology. Prior to this, she conducted her postdoctoral research at Nanyang Technological University and Singapore University of Technology and Design after receiving her PhD from Queensland University of Technology in 2013. Her research area mainly focuses on photo/thermal catalytic organic synthesis with plasmonic nanostructures, and heterogeneous electrocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction and water splitting.
Song Xue
Song Xue is a professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology. Before entering Tianjin University of Technology in 2007, he worked at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing. The focus of his research is on the design and synthesis organic dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells, hole-transporting materials for perovskite solar cells, and nanomaterials for the photochemical conversion of CO2.
Rongrong Ji
Rongrong Ji received her BS from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology. She is currently under the supervision of Prof. Jian Zhao for her Master's degree. Her main area of research is Cu-based nanomaterials for photo/thermal-catalytic organic transformations.
Bing Li
Bing Li received her BS from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology. She is currently under the supervision of Prof. Jian Zhao for her Master's degree. Her main area of research is TiO2 nanomaterials for the degradation of organic dyes and Cu-bimetallic nanomaterials for photo/thermal-catalytic organic transformations.
Jinghong Li
Jinghong Li is an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University, China. He received his BSc in 1991 from the University of Science and Technology of China and his PhD in 1996 from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include electroanalytical chemistry, bio-electrochemistry and sensors, physical electrochemistry and interfacial electrochemistry, electrochemical materials science, and nanoscopic electrochemistry.
1. Introduction
In recent years, the worsening energy crisis and environmental issues have made the utilization of clean and renewable energy extremely important. By using renewable electricity generated from solar energy or wind, electrocatalysis could be a core technique for green synthesis under ambient conditions. It is also a promising approach to achieve zero-carbon emission for producing value-added chemicals and fuels,1–3 for example, hydrogen-energy and metal–air batteries involving the electrocatalytic HER and OER processes,4–6 hydrocarbons from greenhouse gas CO2 electrolysis,7,8 ammonia or urea by the electroreduction of N2,9,10etc. However, reactions can be limited by their sluggish kinetics, a high overpotential, and undesirable side-reactions. Ideally, the design of an electrochemical interface is the foundation of electrocatalytic synthesis. Various electrocatalysts have been engineered to promote reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface.
In this scenario, localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) seems to be a powerful approach to improve the electrocatalytic performance and selectivity utilizing UV and visible-light irradiation. Briefly, the LSPR excitation of a metallic nanostructure could be visualized as the co-oscillation of its free conduction electrons coupled with the electromagnetic field of the incoming light. As a result of LSPR excitation, highly energetic electrons or hot holes, a strong electromagnetic field and heat dissipation are generated at the nanostructured surface. Therefore, a wide range of applications in many fields, including nanosensors11–13 and biomedicine and information technologies,14,15 can be opened. The application of the LSPR effect in catalysis is a relatively recent research field,16–20 especially electrocatalysis.21–23 The incorporation of these LSPR features into electrocatalysis has shown unprecedented activity. Using light irradiation, the key parameters of electrocatalysis could be manipulated by reducing the onset potential/overpotential (thermodynamics), accelerating the reaction kinetics or reducing the Tafel slope, lowering the activation energy, enhancing the current density and exchange current density, and altering the reaction path to inhibit undesirable side-products.
LSPR-mediated electrocatalysis relies strongly on the LSPR effect and the electrocatalytic activity of plasmonic electrocatalysts. The LSPR frequency and strength could be simply tuned by varying the size/shape,24,25 component,26 and the interparticle distance of the nanostructures.27,28 The LSPR effects can be encountered directly by the adjacent reactant species at the electrode/electrolyte interface, where pure plasmonic materials act as both light-absorbing and electrocatalytic sites. Alternatively, plasmonic materials can first interact with adjacent electroactive materials (e.g., Pt, Pd, metal oxide/hydroxide, MOF) and semiconductors, and then play an indirect role in the electrocatalytic reactions. The interface of a hybrid composite is critical for interaction of the plasmonic effects with adjacent species such as in the transfer of hot carriers. The size/shape and morphology of plasmonic metal nanostructures and supports could also be controlled to increase the electrochemical surface area, the density of active sites and even the electronic conductivity. Moreover, compared with single-component plasmonic metal nanostructures, the synergistic effect and electronic structures could be tailored for electrocatalytic reactions through alloy formation. Although progress has been achieved for this relatively recent and rapidly growing field, the current state-of-the art catalysts are insufficient in the terms of their current density, turnover frequency (TOF) and stability. The design of active plasmonic electrocatalysts is highly desirable to meet the requirements of renewable energy technology on a large scale.
Thus, we give an overview for the engineering of various LSPR-based nanostructures and electrodes. The preparation process and parameters that affect the obtained structure are presented for improving the activity of the designed materials. Exploiting the intrinsic mechanism for plasmonic-mediated electrocatalysis is still a challenge at the present stage and is important for plasmonic electrocatalyst design. So far, a variety of techniques that assist with experimental and theoretical simulations have been developed to reveal the underlying mechanisms. We highlight our efforts on the characterization techniques used to identify the LSPR effect and differentiate individual LSPR effects at electrochemical interfaces with in situ and ex situ spectroscopy, pairing LSPR with electrochemical methods. Based on the mechanisms of LSPR for electrocatalysis, selected cases for direct pure plasmon metal-driven electrocatalysis and indirect plasmon-enhanced electrocatalysis over hybrid systems are discussed, especially on how the LSPR effects interact with the reactant molecule, the electrocatalytically active species and semiconductors.
2. Physical understanding of LSPR for electrocatalysis
2.1 Fundamentals of LSPR
“Plasmon” describes the collective oscillation of conduction electrons in metals.29 When the electron oscillation is confined on a nanostructure, it is termed LSPR. The LSPR effect is established with nanoparticles that have a diameter much smaller than the wavelength of the light, where the particle can be described as an electric dipole: as shown in Fig. 1, with incoming light irradiation, the electromagnetic field of the light causes the free conduction electron density in the metal nanoparticle to polarize to one surface, creating a net charge difference at the nanoparticle surface (electric dipole). This dipole generates an electric field inside the nanoparticle opposite to that of the light, which in turn acts as a restoring force to drive the electrons returning to the equilibrium position. In this way the electrons oscillate in resonance with the light's frequency, referred to as localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) since it is confined to the nanoparticles and located at the surface.30,31 For non-spherical structures such as nanorods (Fig. 1b), the oscillation is either along or across the rod, corresponding to longitudinal resonance and transverse resonance, respectively.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration for LSPR formed via the interaction between light and a particle sphere that is smaller than the light wavelength. (b) Schematic illustration for the transverse and longitudinal oscillation of electrons confined in metal nanorods. (a) is adapted from ref. 31 and 29 with permission. Copyright 2012 and 2017 IOP Publishing Group. (c) is adapted from ref. 33 with permission. Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Mie originally calculated the surface plasmon resonance by solving Maxwell's equations for spherical nanoparticles. In Mie theory, the extinction cross-section can be expressed as:25,32 (1)where V is the particle volume, ω is the angular frequency of the exciting light, c is the speed of light, εm is the dielectric constant of the surrounding medium, and ε1 and ε2 are the real part and the imaginary part of the dielectric function of the metal nanoparticle, respectively.
As indicated in eqn (1), the plasmon absorption band appears when the condition ε1 = −2εm is fulfilled. The position of this absorption band depends on the intrinsic properties of the metal nanostructure. Al, Mg, In, and Ga exhibit strong LSPR in the UV region, while the plasmonic resonance of Ni is relatively weak (Fig. 1c).33 For Au, Ag and Cu nanostructures, distinct and well-defined LSPR absorption peaks are located in the visible region, and these are known as “good” plasmonic materials. Thus, LSPR experiments are most commonly carried out using Au, Ag and Cu.21,34–36
Besides the intrinsic dielectric properties of individual metal nanostructures, this LSPR band could be tuned to enhance the visible-light absorption of the catalyst, by varying the size, shape, component, interparticle distance, etc. of the nanostructures.24–28 Take Au nanostructures as an example. As shown in Fig. 2a,37 the LSPR peak of gold nanoparticles (Au NPs), which is attributed to the intraband s-to-s electron excitation, increases with the increase in particle size from 4.5 nm to 10 nm. This surface plasmon disappears when it is smaller than 2–3 nm. The coupling of LSPR will be observed when the plasmonic nanostructures approach one another (within 2.5 times the particle diameter).27,38–43 Thus, the LSPR band can be dramatically altered by the interparticle distance or gaps between two plasmonic nanostructures. The monitored optical spectra change with gaps between Au NPs from 0 nm to 80 nm, as shown in Fig. 2b.40 Shape effects seem to be even more pronounced in regulating the optical absorption spectra.
 Fig. 2  Visible-light absorption of plasmonic Au-based nanostructures. (a) The absorption spectra of Au NPs with different average diameters in sodium dodecyl sulfate aqueous solution. (b) Polarized transmission spectra of interacting Au NPs with different interparticle distances. (c) Experimental (solid curves) and theoretical (dashed curves) absorption spectra for square Au rods with decreasing aspect ratio, from 85 nm/23 nm, to 81 nm/34 nm, to small octahedra 85 nm. (d) The color or visible-light absorption change for Au nanorods, SiO2@Au core–shell nanoparticles, and Au nanocages. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 37 and 40 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2007 and 2004 American Chemical Society. (c) and (d) are adapted from ref. 44 and 14 with permission. Copyright 2008 and 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For rod-shaped Au nanostructures (Fig. 2c),44 the LSPR band splits into the transverse resonance band and the longitudinal resonance band. The former is located at around 520 nm, coincident with that of spherical particles, while the latter band depends strongly on the aspect ratio (length/width). The variation of the component also leads to a color change for Si@Au core–shell nanostructures and Au nanocages (Fig. 2d).14 When these nanostructures are hybridized with another material, the visible-light absorption of the composite catalyst could be enhanced by the LSPR effect of the nanostructure.
2.2 Mechanism in plasmonic metal nanostructures for electrocatalysis
The LSPR excitation or evanescent wave excitation will quickly undergo radiative decay (i.e. scattering), that occurs by the re-emission of phonons, and non-radiative decay, which generates hot carriers on a time scale ranging from 1 fs to 100 fs.10,17,18,45–48 The three main physical mechanisms involved in LSPR-assisted electrochemistry are illustrated in Fig. 3A–C. In mechanism A, a high lattice temperature of the plasmonic material is induced by the relaxation of hot carriers via electron–electron (100 fs to 1 ps) and electron–phonon scattering (1 to 10 ps). The local electrolyte temperature slowly increases with this photothermal effect (heat dissipation, 100 ps to 10 ns), which has been utilized to enhance the reaction kinetics or current density in certain electrocatalytic reactions.49 Mechanism B involves a highly enhanced electromagnetic field, which could activate nearby species or generate vacancies in the conduction band of adjacent semiconductors.22,50 The finite-difference time-domain method (FDTD) is usually used to calculate the current enhancement for field-enhanced electrocatalytic activity. In mechanism C, the transfer of hot carriers occurs from the plasmonic nanostructure to an adjacent species, as shown in (Fig. 4C-1–C-6), which is critical for direct plasmon-driven electrocatalysis over pure plasmonic electrocatalysts and indirect plasmon-assisted electrocatalysis over electroactive species or semiconductors.
 Fig. 3  Main physical mechanisms on plasmonic metallic nanostructures arising from LSPR (A–C). (A) Photo-induced heating of plasmonic materials. (B) Enhancement of the electromagnetic field. (C) Photo-induced electron–hole pair generation and hot electron injection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 

Hot carrier transfer over pure plasmonic electrocatalysts. 
Hot electrons transfer to the cathode via an external circuit, while the holes left on the plasmonic material are responsible for oxidation reactions (Fig. 4C-1). At negative potential bias for reduction reactions, hot holes are quenched faster than hot electrons, leading to the accumulation of electrons for reducing the reactants (Fig. 4C-2). For the plasmon-induced hot electron transfer at the interface between the plasmon material and the reactant adsorbate, several transition pathways have been proposed.35,51–53 There is indirect electron transfer via chemical interface scattering (100 fs to 10 ps) and direct electron transfer via chemical interface damping (5 to 100 fs) (Fig. 4, transfer path for C-2).35,51,54 In the indirect process, the decay of resonant plasmons creates hot electron–hole pairs in the metal. The hot electrons with enough energy then transfer to the adsorbate. In the direct process, electrons are resonantly transferred to an unoccupied adsorbate state without the formation of an excited electron distribution in the metal (Fig. 4, transfer path-i). The chemical bond formed by the interaction of the molecule with the metal could reduce the energy gap between the HOMO and LUMO for adsorbates, leading to direct intramolecular excitation from the HOMO to the LUMO (Fig. 4, transfer path-ii).55,56
 Fig. 4  Plasmon-enhanced electrocatalytic oxidation and reduction reactions via hot carrier transfer (C-1 to C-5), plasmon-induced resonant energy transfer (D) and the scattering effect (E). (C-1 and C-2) Electrocatalytic oxidation and reduction reactions over pure plasmonic materials. (C-3) The hot holes transfer from plasmonic materials to electroactive species for electrocatalytic oxidation reactions. (C-4) Hot electrons transfer to semiconductors for reduction reactions. The transfer paths for C-2, and C-4 and C-5 illustrate the indirect and direct electron-transfer processes at the interface. (C-5) Hot electron-injection to an n-type semiconductor facilitates oxidation reactions over plasmonic materials and/or n-type semiconductors. (C-6) Hole transfer to a p-type semiconductor with a wide band gap leaving electrons for reduction reactions over plasmonic materials. (D and E) Plasmon-induced resonant transfer and the scattering effect between plasmonic materials and semiconductors. Transfer paths for C-2, C-4 and C-5 are adapted from ref. 35 with permission. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) and (E) are adapted from ref. 49 with permission. Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 


Hot carrier transfer at the interface between a plasmonic material and electroactive species. 
Upon LSPR excitation, the hot electrons are swept into the external circuit while the transfer of the remaining hot holes leads to the formation of an active electrocatalyst with a high valence state for oxidation reactions (Fig. 4C-3). The hot electron transfer could induce a change in the charge density distribution and binding energy of the reaction intermediates for transition metallic species (Fig. 4C-4), accelerating the reactions. The transfer of hot electrons can also generate vacancies in transition metal electrocatalysts,57 confirmed by theoretical calculations and the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) technique.


Hot carrier transfer at the interface between a plasmonic material and semiconductors. 
The electron transfer process at the interface between a plasmonic material and semiconductors is similar as that in the presence of reactants, including the indirect and direct pathways (Fig. 4, transfer path for C-4 and C-5). The hot electrons are transferred to or are generated in the conduction band of semiconductors to participate in reduction reactions, or are transferred to the external circuit, producing a photocurrent and increasing the separated holes for oxidation reactions (Fig. 4C-4 and C-5). It is proposed that direct transfer achieves a higher efficiency than the indirect route for injecting hot electrons to adjacent reactants or semiconductors.51,53 The Schottky barrier formed at the interface of a metal and a semiconductor could facilitate the hot electron transfer process by delaying their return to the plasmonic metal nanostructures (ps to sub-ns scale).35 The electrons transfer to the reactant species upon plasmon decay for p-type semiconductors with large bandgap structure (Fig. 4C-6), whereas holes transfer to the valence band of the semiconductor and then to the external circuit.
In addition, plasmon-induced resonant energy transfer (Fig. 4D) and the scattering effect (Fig. 4E) in some hybrid systems of plasmonic material/semiconductors play a role in electrocatalytic reactions. Plasmon resonant energy transfer occurs when the light absorption of a plasmonic metal overlaps with the absorption of the nearby semiconductor (few nm). The transfer of energy leads to the generation of electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor, extending the carrier creation to a longer wavelength and enhancing the photocurrent.58 The scattering effect is photo-emission toward the medium with a higher refractive index, namely the semiconductor in an aqueous electrolyte, which indeed enhances the light absorption of some semiconductors for electrocatalytic water splitting.59–61
Differentiation of the aforementioned effects will be illustrated in Section 4 that deals with characterization, and the details of how these effects assist in electrocatalysis will be described in Section 5 using selected cases.

3. Preparation methods for LSPR-based electrodes
The successful design of plasmonic materials is critically important for enhancing the electrocatalytic activity. For instance, the optimized particle size, shapes and composition of plasmonic nanostructure achieved high activity for PEC water splitting and the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) (Fig. 5).57,62,63 Au nanoparticles (NPs) with size of 5, 15 or 30 nm were fabricated via a chemical reduction strategy and then adsorbed onto the inner surface of TiO2 nanotube arrays via electrostatic interaction. There was a marked increase in the photocurrent for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in the presence of Au NPs and the PEC performance increased with the decrease of particle size (Fig. 5a), attributed to the enhanced transfer of hot carriers from LSPR-excited Au across the Au/TiO2 interface. A designed mixture of deposited Au NPs and adsorbed Au nanorods (NRs) on TiO2 nanowires exhibited enhanced activity for the OER over the entire UV-visible region, caused by the LSPR excitation of both the nanoparticle and nanorod structures (Fig. 5b). The alloy composition of the AgPt electrode was also simply manipulated to optimize the synergistic effect between the light absorber (plasmonic Ag) and the electroactive species (Pt), in turn enhancing the PEC ORR. The optimized AgPt30 gave a rapid and obvious response of suppressing peroxide with the light illumination, which corresponded with the enhanced current density (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  Controllable sizes, shapes and multi-metallic compositions of plasmonic electrocatalysts via post-treatment for promoting electrochemical reactions. (a) Schematic illustration of Au NPs (5, 15 or 30 nm) adsorbed on TiO2 nanotube arrays for PEC water splitting and the corresponding photocurrent density. (b) Schematic illustration of Au NPs and Au NRs adsorbed on TiO2 nanorods for PEC water splitting and the corresponding incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE). (c) Schematic illustration of the experimental set-up of AgPt drop-cast on an RDE for the PEC ORR and the corresponding results. (a) is reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) is reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) is adapted from ref. 57 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Various strategies have been utilized to engineer supported plasmonic metal nanostructures and LSPR-based electrodes. As summarized in Fig. 6, the in situ fabrication process includes photo/chemical reduction,64–101 deposition–precipitation,102–122 electrodeposition,123–136 vapor deposition etc.137–148 In the two-steps process, various plasmonic nanostructures could be designed in the first step and then assembles into electrode via post-treatment (chemical/electrostatic adsorption, spin coating/drop casting or self-assembly).149–181 Some strategies might be simple for fabricating a self-supporting electrode, whereas others are favorable for their size and shape confinement. These strategies could also be borrowed to incorporate these materials for other applications in photocatalysis and thermal catalysis.
 Fig. 6  Summarized preparation processes for supported plasmonic metal nanostructures and LSPR-based electrodes via one-step (self-supporting) and two-step (post-treatment) processes. 
3.1 Photo/chemical reduction
Pioneering work on photoreduction or photodeposition was reported by Clark and Vondjidis in 1965 and by Kraeutler and Bard in 1978.64,65 For the photodeposition of plasmonic material onto semiconductors, the conduction band position of the semiconductor should match with the redox potential of the plasmonic metal salt solution for photoreduction. Namely, the conduction band of the semiconductor must be more negative than the redox potential of the metal, while the valence band must be more positive than the hole scavengers.66 The most frequently used hole scavengers or sacrificial agents are H2O,67–73 MeOH,74–77 and EtOH.70,78–82 The metal salt precursor and the irradiation time have an influence on the morphology and particle size of the supported plasmonic metal nanostructures. A high precursor concentration and a long irradiation time always develop a large particle size. A larger particle size shows a lower electrocatalytic activity for water splitting over photodeposited Au NPs.67,83 Repeating the photodeposition step will make a difference, leading to larger Au NPs with a smaller particle number density, whereas smaller Au NPs with a larger particle number density are obtained via single-step photodeposition under UV light irradiation (Fig. 7a).68 In addition, the plasmonic nanostructures could be selectively photodeposited on immobilized semiconductor substrates.84–86 For example, needle-like Au nanostructures were control-deposited on a TiO2 thin film by altering the UV light intensity and the irradiation time.84 The extremely low UV light intensity could allow the photoreduction of Au3+ by photogenerated electrons from the TiO2 film surface while preventing the uncontrolled photoreduction of Au3+ in the solution or the formation of Au aggregates.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration for the difference in prepared Au/CeO2 NPs between the single-step photodeposition method and the multi-step photodeposition method. (b) Schematic illustration for the growth of Ag NPs (white ring) induced by the enhanced plasmonic field (red ring) inside light-excited Au nanoholes (yellow structure). (c) Schematic illustration for the formation of AuAg alloy NPs on GO/LDH via a photodeposition method. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 68 and 72 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2012 and 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) is adapted from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In the absence of a semiconductor, separated plasmonic bi-metal or alloy nanostructures could also be easily loaded via photoreduction to promote the catalytic activity. Ag NPs were deposited inside light-excited Au nanohole arrays using the LSPR effect (Fig. 7b).72 Supports with a high conductivity and specific surface area were chosen to facilitate catalytic reactions. Small AuPd and AuAg alloy NPs on graphene oxide (GO) and a ZnCr layered double hydroxide (LDH) were reported by Parida's group.80,87 For the formation of alloy NPs, they proposed that H+ from the HAuCl4 precursor could interact with the amine groups forming the positively charged ammonium ion (Fig. 7c). The negative ion (AuCl4−) first bonded to the positively charged support surface since Ag or Pd was in the form of positive ions (AgNO3 and PdCl2). Then Ag+ or Pd2+ ions attached to the negatively charged Au particles via metallic bonds, resulting in the formation of AuAg or AuPd bimetallic alloys. Furthermore, the first reduction of AuCl4− was decided by its high redox potential.
In chemical reduction, a reducing agent is required instead of the photogenerated electrons used in the photoreduction method. Strong (e.g. NaBH4,88–94 H295–97) and weak reducing agents (e.g. alcohols98–100 and HCHO101) with/without stabilizers have been widely investigated in engineering-supported Au, Ag and Cu nanostructures. Compared with NaBH4, using a weak reducing agent it is much easier to manipulate the obtained structure, e.g., interparticle distance,101 in turn tuning the plasmon effect on electrocatalysis. Seed-mediated chemical reduction is also widely applied in the design of various colloidal plasmonic metallic nanostructures in the absence of a support, and is the first step for assembling an LSPR-based electrode via a post-treatment strategy. Besides the electroactivity enhancement, alloy formation could inhibit the oxidation of plasmonic monometallic nanoparticles with low stability. Shiraishi's group fabricated the supported AuCu alloy (3.4 nm) via H2 reduction and found that the surface Cu atoms oxidized during the reaction could be reduced by plasmon-activated Au atoms, which maintained alloy effect and the high activity.97
3.2 Deposition–precipitation
Deposition–precipitation (DP) is a technique for depositing metal catalysts on supports by varying the pH of the precursor solution. A variety of precipitating bases (NaOH,102–105 Na2CO3,106,107 and urea108–112), pH values and calcination temperature have been investigated for the DP method.
Since the particle size is a key parameter that must be considered to guide the design of plasmonic electrocatalysts, pH values should be carefully controlled for the DP method. The pH exhibited a significant effect on the Au particle size at pH > 6 where the main Au complexes were transformed from AuCl4− to [Au(OH)nCl4−n]− (n = 1–3), utilizing NaOH as the precipitating base.113 Different from NaOH or Na2CO3 agents that were discovered by Haruta's group for preparing supported Au NPs,114,115 urea will decompose by heating (60–90 °C) and form NH4+ and OH−, i.e., CO(NH2)2 + 3H2O → CO2 + 2NH4+ + 2OH−, leading to the pH increase of the precursor solution. Then, gold or Cu precursors could be deposited as ammonia complexes.112,116
The DP processes are always followed by annealing to obtain a catalyst in the metallic state as well as to enhance the interaction between the support and the LSPR metal nanostructures.117 Strong interfaces by annealing could facilitate the plasmon-induced hot electron transfer at the plasmonic metal/semiconductor interface to achieve high-performance electrocatalysis.118 However, a high annealing temperature could cause the growth of LSPR metal NPs.102,108,119–121 Thus, to achieve a high activity for the plasmonic electrocatalysts, both parameters should be balanced. Manipulating the annealing conditions might be a good choice to increase the interface interaction while maintaining a similar particle size since some reports have shown that the growth of the Au particle size induced by an increase in the calcination temperature was not drastic, especially under an H2 atmosphere.120 The annealing process also has an influence on the position of the Au NPs.119,122 As shown in Fig. 8a, Au NPs were formed mainly on the rutile surface upon calcination at 200 °C and migrated to the anatase/rutile interface at high temperature (300–400 °C). When the calcination temperature was higher than 400 °C, larger Au NPs (>5 nm) were formed, reducing the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 8  (a) Influence of the calcination temperature on the particle size and location of Au NPs on TiO2 (P25). The steps of Au NP deposition on TiO2via (b) chemical reduction, (c) photodeposition, and (d) the deposition–precipitation method. (a) is adapted from ref. 122 with permission. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b–d) are adapted from ref. 103 with permission. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Similar to the photo/chemical reduction strategy, alloy formation via DP also leads to a small particle size compared with the monometallic counterpart.111,121 The DP method usually achieves a smaller particle size than photodeposition.122 These three strategies were investigated for fabricating plasmonic Au–TiO2 catalysts.103 The photodeposition method developed a larger Au particle size (41 nm) than the DP method (10–16 nm, 200–600 °C). The photodeposition method also gave larger Au NPs than the chemical reduction method using NaBH4 (8.7 nm). As illustrated in Fig. 8b–d, the photo-reduction was incomplete, leading to a mixture of Au0/Au3+ with a relatively low Au content compared with the other two methods.
3.3 Electrodeposition
Electrodeposition is an easy, scalable, and inexpensive technique for the in situ controllable preparation of LSPR-based electrodes. Compared with other strategies, however, it is not favorable for small nanoparticle confinement, especially for nanostructures with sizes of a few nm to tens of nm. By simply tuning the applied potential/current, adjusting the precursor concentration, adding additives, or varying the substrates during electrodeposition, the surface morphology of plasmonic Au, Ag and Cu could be controlled.123–135
Although the formation mechanism for some metal nanostructure systems is still under investigation, a general trend can be summarized. The applied potential or current plays an important role both thermodynamically and kinetically. At a high overpotential/current, there are more nucleation sites and a faster deposition rate. Also, under equilibrium or near-equilibrium conditions, the nanostructure develops a simple morphology with a minimum surface energy. At more negative potentials or with a limited precursor concentration, the deposited nanostructures possess complicated shapes since mass transport and surface kinetics play major roles in determining the shapes. These complicated shapes possess a high density of catalytic sites (dendrites, 3D nanopores) that are favorable for electrocatalysis, such as electrodeposited plasmonic Ag dendrites for enhanced EC CO2 reduction.136 Recently, a hetero-nanoelectrode of highly ordered arrays of Au NRs and MoS2 quantum sheets was fabricated via sequential electrodeposition (Fig. 9a).118 The gap between the nanorods was adjusted (20 nm) to enable the scattering effect/reabsorption to improve the light absorption of Au–Au–MoS2. Hot electron injection from excited Au to the conduction band of MoS2 also lead to a broad and strong absorption in the visible-light range. Both effects result in a high performance in the plasmon-enhanced electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the Au–Au–MoS2 fabrication process and corresponding mechanism for plasmon-enhanced electrocatalysis of the HER. (b) Adsorption of additives for shape control (left) and for selective metal deposition (right). (c) Schematic illustration of the KBr additive-mediated anisotropic crystal growth of Cu NPs. (d) Preferential adsorption of the additive malachite green (MG) on Cu(111) leads to “blocking” effects, resulting in faster growth in the (200) direction. (a) is adapted from ref. 118 with permission. Copyright 2021 Springer. (b), (c) and (d) are adapted from ref. 129, 133 and 134, respectively with permission. Copyright 2009, 2013 and 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Tailoring the active facets at the interface is also an important strategy to tune the performance of plasmonic electrocatalysts. Additives could be absorbed on certain facets of the support substrate to selectively hinder the metal deposition (Fig. 9b),129 or adsorbed on certain facets of metal crystallites and in turn “block” the growth of these facets (Fig. 9c and d).133,134
3.4 Vapor deposition
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or physical vapor deposition (PVD) could easily produce a uniform film of plasmonic metal nanostructures, directly being applied in plasmon-enhanced electrocatalysis. 3 nm Au film was loaded on SrTiO3 substrate via e-beam electrodeposition by Misawa group for enhancing N2 fixation under visible-light irradiation.137–139 The light-excited Ag thin film cathode fabricated via this technique also exhibited high selectivity for electrochemical CO2 reduction.140,141
Uniformly dispersed plasmonic metal nanoparticles could be obtained via PVD and sequential annealing or an electrochemical process. As shown in Fig. 10a and b, Atwater and co-workers designed ∼8 nm plasmonic Au and Cu NPs on p-type semiconductors via electron-beam evaporation for LSPR-enhanced electrochemical CO2 reduction.142,143 A 1.5-nm-thick Au discontinuous film was initially deposited on a p-GaN substrate via PVD, followed by annealing at a controlled temperature and time to ensure the coalescence of the discontinuous film to ∼8 nm nanoparticles (Fig. 10a). The thickness of these deposited films will determine the final particle size and density. The plasmon-excited Au NPs with an optimized size and density could significantly enhance the electron mobility, exhibiting the highest applied bias photon-to-current efficiency for electrocatalytic water splitting.144
 Fig. 10  Preparation of plasmonic (a) ∼8 nm Au/p-GaN, (b) ∼8 nm Cu/p-NiO and (c) ∼630 nm Au nanohole electrodes via physical vapor deposition (PVD). (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 142 and 143 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2018 and 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) is designed according to ref. 146. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, polystyrene beads were used as a template to manipulate the plasmon metal structures via vapor deposition. For instance, hexagonally arrayed Ag nanopyramids were obtained for photoelectrochemical CO2 and NO3− reduction.145 The sizes of the plasmonic nanostructures were dependent on the diameter of the polystyrene beads. The plasmon-enhanced electroactivity was of the order of 75 nm Ag nanopyramids > 180 nm Ag nanopyramids > roughened Ag film > smooth Ag film. Assisted with polystyrene beads (Fig. 10c), an electrode with an array of Au nanoholes was also fabricated for the electrochemical ORR in an alkaline electrolyte. The plasmon-enhanced activity could be competitive with that on Pt electrodes which are known as the most active metal for the ORR.146
The PVD approach with the gas aggregation source (GAS) has also been utilized to produce various plasmonic nanoparticles, even alloy nanoparticles with controlled compositions. Faupel's group deposited plasmonic AuAg alloy NPs from custom-built multicomponent targets via GAS and enhanced the composition control using in operando optical emission spectroscopy.16,147,148 This will be a useful technique for preparing self-supported electrodes that are directly utilized in LSPR-enhanced electrocatalysis.
3.5 Post-treatment processes
The post-treatment or two-step process is favorable for fabricating LSPR-based electrodes with tunable sizes, morphologies and even multi-metallic nanostructures. So far, a great deal of research has been devoted to engineering LSPR-based electrodes via the two-step strategy for electrocatalytic reactions.57,149–162 In the first step, various plasmonic materials are usually fabricated via the seed-mediated chemical reduction method. The second step is assembly of the electrode through chemical/electrostatic adsorption or drop casting/spin coating, described as follows.

3.5.1 Chemical/electrostatic adsorption. 
Strong adsorption occurs when chemical bonds are formed between ligands and the LSPR-based metal, such as Au–S and Au–N bonds.163–166 A TiO2 nanowire array electrode was functionalized using mercaptopropionic acid ligands with the carboxylic acid group attached to TiO2 and the thiol group exposed outwards. This functionalized electrode is capable of adsorbing Au NRs via Au–S bonds,63 and effectively enhanced the PEC oxygen evolution reaction (Fig. 5b). 3-Aminopropyl-triethoxysilane (APTES) and 3-aminopropyl-trimethoxysilane (APTMS) are ligands well known for the fabrication of Au@SiO2 sandwich and core–shell structures via Au–N bonds.165–167 In addition, the thickness of the SiO2 shell could be tuned via the concentration of the precursor such as Na2SiO3/TEOS (Fig. 11a).168 The tunable thickness of this insulating layer plays an important role in plasmon-mediated electrocatalysis since a non-reactive shell is required to avoid the catalytic effects of plasmonic nanostructures or to block the transfer of hot carriers for mechanistic investigations.165,169
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic fabrication process of the Au@SiO2 core–shell structure via APTMS-functionalized citrate–Au NPs and Na2SiO3/TEOS. (b and c) Schematic fabrication of Au/CNTs via electrostatic interaction and the plasmonic-driven electrocatalytic MOR. (a) is adapted from ref. 168 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) and (c) are adapted from ref. 172 with permission. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
The positively charged ligands poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), and the negatively charged ligands poly(sodium styrene sulfonate) (PSS) and polyacrylic acid (PAA) were used to functionalize plasmonic metal and supports for fabricating plasmonic catalysts.170,171 As shown in Fig. 11b,172 Au NPs on CNTs were successfully obtained via the electrostatic interaction between PAH and PSS. After functionalization, the charge state of the Au NPs@PAH determined via the zeta potential was +22.7 mV whereas it was −53.4 mV for CNTs@PSS (Fig. 11c). The light-excited Au NPs enhanced the activity for the methanol oxidation reaction (MOR) and there was an increment in the current density after removing the PAH-PSS linker layer through annealing, which indicated that the interface layers had a negative effect on the electrocatalytic activity. A small gap was also observed between the TiO2 nanowire and Au NRs for the presence of other linker molecules (e.g. mercaptopropionic acid63). However, the presence of Au NRs indeed assisted the charge transfer for the PEC OER. A similar phenomenon was observed for the insulating ethylenediamine spacer between Au NPs and glassy carbon, where the resistance of charge transfer across the insulating layer was not limited.154 Thus, the negative effect caused by the insulating linker molecule should be considered when engineering a plasmonic electrocatalyst via ligand absorption.


3.5.2 Other post-treatment methods. 
Various colloidal LSPR metal nanostructures could be post-treated for an electrode via self-assembly173,174 or spin coating/drop casting.175 Spin coating/drop casting is also utilized for supported LSPR catalysts,176–179 where a Nafion solution is sometimes added to promote adhesion.91,180,181 Generally, a slow evaporation rate is favorable for a uniform film via drop casting. For spin coating, the rotation speed could be adjusted to obtain a uniform film.

4. Characterization of plasmonic electrocatalysts for electrochemical interfaces
The characterization of plasmonic electrocatalysts and the interface for multi-metal nanostructures, a plasmonic metal/support, and an electrode/electrolyte plays a critical role in the design of the material and mechanistic investigations of plasmonic electrocatalysis.
4.1 Traditional techniques

4.1.1 LSPR band and XPS. 
The LSPR absorption could be manipulated to mediate the electrocatalytic process. UV-Vis spectroscopy is applied in monitoring the LSPR absorption band. The typical LSPR absorption bands for Au, Ag and Cu nanoparticles are located at approximately 530 nm, 400 nm and 580 nm, respectively (Fig. 12a).182 These LSPR bands change with the morphology of the designed metal nanostructures.44,46,183 Thus, it is easy to monitor the changes in the structure such as the shell thickness,14 the alloy composition,34 and even the interparticle distance or position.38,39
 Fig. 12  (a) LSPR band for Au, Ag and Cu NPs. (b–d) XPS analysis for Au, Ag, Cu nanostructures, respectively: (b) Au species supported on CeO2; (c) Ag/TiO2 film as prepared and after calcination; and (d) CuxO supported on carbon nanotubes. (e) Auger Cu LMM spectra after different sample treatments. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 182 and 185, respectively with permission. Copyright 2012 and 2008 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (e) is adapted from ref. 189 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
LSPR metal nanostructures might be oxidized during electrocatalysis. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a powerful measurement technique for identifying the oxidation states of elements. The characteristic binding energy values for metallic Au0 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 were differentiated from Au+ and Au3+, which were, respectively, located at 83.9 eV and 87.7 eV (Fig. 12b).184–187 Metallic Ag0 is located at a lower binding energy than Ag+, 369.0 eV and 375.0 eV for Ag+ 3d5/2 and 3d3/2, and 368.3 eV and 374.3 eV for Ag0 3d5/2 and 3d3/2, respectively (Fig. 12c).188 It is easy to differentiate Cu0/Cu+ from Cu2+ since Cu2+ presents a satellite peak (Fig. 12d). Auger Cu LMM spectra are usually applied to confirm the presence of Cu+ and Cu0 (Fig. 12e), with corresponding kinetic energy values at 916.6 eV and 918.7 eV, respectively.189,190
XPS also provides strong evidence for the alloy/bimetallic formation and interaction via electron transfer from the LSPR metal to the support. For example, the peaks of Ag had a positive shift when mixed with graphene as a result of the transfer of electrons from Ag to graphene.151,191 Metallic Ag was confirmed in the AgCu alloy.192 Compared with metallic Ag, the binding energy shifted towards lower values for Ni/Ag and Co/Ag and higher values for Ru/Ag and Pd/Ag, caused by the charge transfer based on the difference in electronegativity values (Ag, 1.93; Ru, 2.20; Pd, 2.20; Ni, 1.91; Co, 1.88).193


4.1.2 Interface analysis with HRTEM. 
High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) is applied in analyzing individual planar fringes, crystal interfaces, interphase boundaries or crystallographic orientation relationships among different crystal phases.88,194 Early this year, using aberration-corrected environmental TEM, the in situ manipulation of the epitaxial rotation of Au NPs on TiO2 from S‖ to S= or the atomic configuration at the Au–TiO2 interface was achieved by changing the external environment (Fig. 13).195 We believe that greater achievements will be made for plasmon-mediated electrocatalysis with development of the technique at the electrode/electrolyte interface.
 Fig. 13  Tunable Au/TiO2(001) interface under different gas environments observed using spherical aberration-corrected environmental TEM at 500 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2021 AAAS. 

4.2 Experimental and theoretical plasmon mapping
The LSPR of metallic nanostructures could be investigated experimentally using energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy (EFTEM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy-electron energy loss spectroscopy (STEM-EELS),196–198 as well as theoretically using the finite element method (FEM),199,200 discrete dipole approximation (DDA) and the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method.201–204
The spatial distribution of LSPR modes for Au NPs with various particle number densities was visualized using STEM-EELS plasmon mapping, as shown in Fig. 14a.101 The hot spot induced by LSPR became more intense as the interparticle distance was reduced (i–iii). There was a decrease in the hotspot intensity with a further increase in the particle number density (iv) due to the reduced number of gaps between the connected Au NPs. From FEM plasmon mapping, the typical electric field distributions and corresponding local heating power densities of supported Ag and Ag@Au nanospheres were calculated (Fig. 14b).199 The coated Au shell led to an enhancement of the local electric fields but to lower heating power densities. Other calculation methods, such as boundary element method (BEM) simulations, were also utilized for mapping the LSPR modes of the AuAg nanoframe and the corresponding induced electric field distributions in 3D (Fig. 14c),205 which matched with experimental observations.
 Fig. 14  (a) STEM-EELS plasmon mapping of Au NPs with various particle number densities. The brightness of the orange color indicates the signal intensity. (b) FEM plasmon mapping of an Ag nanosphere and an Ag@Au core–shell nanosphere (thickness = 1 nm) at an excitation light wavelength of 380 nm. (i) and (iii) represent the typical E-field distribution, and (ii) and (iv) are the corresponding local heating power densities (P). (c) BEM simulated plasmon maps of LSPR modes for an AuAg nanoframe located at 1.56, 1.68 and 1.94 eV, and the corresponding induced electric field intensity distribution in 3D. (d) FDTD results of near-field electromagnetic field distributions at the 532 nm wavelength for (i) Au NP@Pd, (ii) and (iii) Au NP@rGO@Pd with different rGO thicknesses, and (iv) Au NP. (e) Average electric field enhancement as a function of the distance from the Ag cube, resulting from FDTD simulations. (f) Temperature distribution map for a light-excited Au nanohole electrode in water at different time points, 2 W cm−2. (g) Spatial temperature mapping for light-excited Al nanocrystals on Al2O3 in air, 10 W cm−2. (a) is reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) is adapted from ref. 199 with permission. Copyright 2019 AIP Publishing Group. (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) is adapted from ref. 206 with permission. Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) is reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (f) is adapted from ref. 146 with permission. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) is adapted from ref. 209 with permission. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
FDTD simulation was also used for calculating the electromagnetic near-field distributions at the catalytic interface and assisting with mechanism explanations in LSPR-enhanced electrocatalysis.63,206–208 As shown in Fig. 14d, the results of FDTD indicated the high performance of Au NP@rGO@Pd in plasmonic-enhanced EC water splitting.206 There was an obvious field enhancement in the vicinity of the plasmonic Au NP by incorporating Pd-active centers. The thickness of the rGO layer or the gap between the Au NP core and Pd showed a significant influence on the electromagnetic field. The field enhancement as a function of the distance from the Ag nanocube surface was also simulated using FDTD (Fig. 14e).208 The highest field strength was in the proximity of the Ag nanostructure, which would be encountered by the semiconductor closest to Ag.
The temperature distribution map for a plasmonic nanostructure/electrolyte interface at different time points is also an effective technique for monitoring the photothermal effect. Szunerits's group mapped the temperature of the Au nanohole electrode at different time increments,146 from near 0 s to equilibrium (20 s). The results confirmed that the heating started near the light-excited plasmonic Au and then diffused to the surrounding medium (e.g., H2O), as shown in Fig. 14f, promoting the reaction rate. Halas's group observed a temperature upwards of 175 °C on the surface of Al2O3-suppored Al nanocrystals using high-resolution spatial and temporal mapping at a high light intensity (Fig. 14g).209 Through a comparison of this temperature profile with optical absorption and field enhancement, however, they found that this photothermal effect did not play a major role in the photocatalytic reverse water–gas shift reaction.
4.3 
          In situ XAS/XANES for the electron occupancy

In situ XAS or XANES is a powerful technique for tracking the electronic states of plasmonic electrocatalysts with and without illumination,50,57,206,210,211 offering further insight into the LSPR effects on the adjacent electroactive species or semiconductors via their interaction. For the designed plasmonic Ag–Pt bimetallic nanocages, the in situ XAS/XANES approach was used to offer a meaningful indication of Pt d-band character, which comprised mainly Pt5d states,57 since the Pt L3-edge absorption involved the transition from the 2p to 5d states. Under light illumination, AgPt with an optimized ratio showed the highest intensity (Fig. 15a), i.e., the presence of more vacancies in the 5d state and hot electrons transferred from plasmon-excited Ag to the Pt active center, leading to the highest performance in the EC ORR. The peak XANES intensity is also related to the electron occupancy of semiconductors and then the electron transferred to their conduction band could be determined (Fig. 15b). Using in situ XANES at the Zn K-edge (Fig. 15c) and DFT calculations, in addition to LSPR-induced hot electron transfer, it was proved that LSPR-induced field enhancement could modify the band structure at the Au/ZnO interface leading to the rapid transportation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.50
 Fig. 15  (a) In situ XANES for relative vacancies in the Pt5d state for the plasmonic AgPt electrocatalyst with different ratios in the dark and under light illumination. (b) Schematic illustration of XANES measurements for plasmonic hot electron injection to a semiconductor, altering its CB state density and the amplitude of the absorption edge. (c) In situ XANES for relative vacancies for the Au NP/ZnO plasmonic electrocatalyst. (a) is adapted from ref. 57 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) is reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2020 AIP Publishing Group. (c) is adapted from ref. 50 with permission. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
4.4 Coupling LSPR with electrochemical methods

4.4.1 Electrochemistry to differentiate LSPR effects. 
Together with the above theoretical simulations, electrochemistry-related characterization has been utilized with the aim of determining the LSPR mechanism in electrocatalysis. Hot electron transfer was experimentally verified by plotting the photocurrent against the wavelength. As shown in Fig. 16a, comparing the LSPR absorption spectrum of Au NPs against the photocurrent plotted versus the wavelength, fitted to Fowler's law,50,212 it can be seen that LSPR can promote hot electron flow and that hot electron injection plays an important role in PEC water splitting.50 The LSPR-induced photocurrent was also compared with the quality factor, defined as Q = LSPR peak energy/line width, to illustrate the function of the local field enhancement.213,214 Large values of Q indicate a high local field enhancement. Huber's group measured the photocurrent and quality factor over different Au nanodot sizes for PEC water splitting (Fig. 16b).214 The direct proportional relationship indicated that the enhanced water splitting performance with the decreased Au nanodot size was induced by the local field enhancement as the quality factor increased. The wavelength-dependent IPCE measurements over engineered TiO2–Au@TiO2/Al2O3/Cu2O confirmed the scattering mechanism in the UV range and the plasmon-induced resonant energy transfer (PIRET) mechanism in the visible-near-IR range (Fig. 16c).60
 Fig. 16  Electrochemistry for verifying LSPR effects. (a) Photocurrent and absorption spectra of Au/ZnO plotted versus the wavelength, fitted to Fowler's law. (b) Relationship between the generated photocurrent and the calculated quality factor (Q) as a function of the Au nanodot size for plasmon-enhanced water splitting. (c) IPCE of TiO2–Au@TiO2/Al2O3/Cu2O (red triangles), TiO2–Au@TiO2 (black squares), Cu2O (blue circles) and TiO2/Cu2O (light blue line) for the proposed PIRET and scattering mechanism (inset). (d) CV scans of Pd0.52Ag/CNTs for the MOR at different temperatures, and the corresponding peak potential plotted against the peak current density to determine the LSPR-induced photothermal effects. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 50 and 214 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2012 and 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) is adapted from ref. 60 with permission. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) is adapted from ref. 152 with permission. Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Efforts have been made to differentiate the photothermal effect from other LSPR effects, which are usually realized through investigating the electrochemical parameters by elevating the electrolyte temperature, via external heating, to be equal to the temperature induced by the LSPR effect. In some reports, the photothermal effect contributes only to the current enhancement and not to the potential shift.152,172 For example, from cyclic voltammetry (CV) scans at different temperatures and the corresponding peak potential plotted against the peak current density, the thermal effect of plasmonic Ag only induced a current enhancement for the Pt-catalyzed MOR (Fig. 16d). They differentiated the photothermal effect from the non-thermal effect by comparing the results under light illumination, where both the enhanced current density and the potential shift were observed. Both the higher current and the potential shift induced by the photothermal effect were also observed in some reports.169 However, some reported that the photothermal effect had no influence on either the potential shift or the current density.215,216 By measuring the temperature near the Au/GCE surface and in the bulk electrolyte under different laser light intensities, Jain's group systematically investigated the photothermal effect on solution resistance, electron transfer resistance, current density and onset potential using the HER as the model reaction.154 They found that the photothermal effect contributed little to the current density enhancement or to the overpotential shift, but it indeed reduced the solution resistance. In addition, there are investigations on the activation energy derived from CV at different temperatures, utilizing the Arrhenius equation and kinetic data.146,217 Elevated temperatures in the dark could increase the reaction rate, which could be promoted further with light irradiation. Thus, a lower activation energy could be achieved with light compared with in the dark. Regarding the controversial results for different systems reported, more efforts should be made to reveal the underlying mechanism. Moreover, attention should be paid to how to keep the reaction conditions, such as the pressure (P) and gas volume (V), unchanged when elevating the electrolyte temperature.
There are also other examples of home-made electrochemical setups to differentiate LSPR effects.218 The individual role of LSPR effects is dependent on the designed system and could be discerned with the assistance of various electrochemical characterization methods, theoretical methods, in situ spectroscopy and other techniques.


4.4.2 
            In situ plasmonic spectroscopy integrated with electrochemistry. 
An interdisciplinary technique combining in situ plasmonic spectroscopy and electrochemistry is necessary for investigating the role of plasmonic nanostructures and the evolution of intermediates at plasmonic metal surfaces or electrode/electrolyte interfaces during reactions.141,219–224 The in situ local electrochemical current images were recorded using an LSPR-excited Au electrode and a charge coupled device (CCD) camera (Fig. 17a).221 This setup gave vivid optical images of the reaction evolution with different applied potentials (i–vi), indicating whether the reaction took place or when it achieved the maximum reaction current. With the assistance of in situ dark-field scattering spectroscopy measurements under potential control over an Au electrode (Fig. 17b),222 it was confirmed that the generated hot electrons were responsible for the plasmon-enhanced EC oxidation of glucose. The technique of in situ SERS spectra integrated with electrochemistry was established by Tian's group for plasmonic Ag electrode-driven hydrodehalogenation (Fig. 17c).223 Changes in the peaks using EC-SERS (i) gave information on C–Br bond cleavage and the formation of new bonds during the reaction. Time series EC-SERS spectral mapping showed that the plasmonic-mediated EC hydrodehalogenation reaction was accelerated at a shorter laser wavelength (ii–iii). In situ ATR-FTIR spectroscopy at different potentials under dark and light conditions was also developed recently and confirmed that light could assist the desorption of CO from the plasmonic Ag surface, facilitating EC CO2 reduction.141
 Fig. 17  
In situ LSPR spectroscopy with electrochemistry (WE, working electrode; CE, counter electrode; RE, reference electrode). (a) Schematic illustration of electrochemical current imaging with SPR using an Au working electrode and the corresponding images at different potentials (i–vi) for the redox reaction of the Ru(NH3)63+ complex. (b) Schematic illustration of electrochemical LSPR scattering spectroscopy measurement under a dark-field microscope for glucose oxidation. (c) Schematic illustration of EC-SERS measurements, and the corresponding Raman spectra at different potentials (i), and time series mapping using different lasers (ii–iii) for the hydrodehalogenation reaction. (a) is adapted from ref. 221 with permission. Copyright 2010 AAAS. (b) and (c) are adapted from ref. 222 and 223 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2017 and 2020 American Chemical Society. 

5. LSPR-mediated electrocatalysis
The early studies of plasmon-induced photoelectrochemistry were reported by the Tatsuma group for the Au/TiO2 film in 2004/2005.225,226 So far, progress has been made in direct LSPR-driven electrocatalysis (pure plasmonic metals) and indirect LSPR-enhanced electrochemical reactions in hybrid systems, namely over electroactive species and semiconductors (Table 1).
Table 1 Summary of LSPR-based electrodes for electrocatalytic reactions




Electrode
Preparation methoda
Morphology of LSPR metal nanostructures
Electrocatalytic reactions
Performance of LSPR-based electrode (support only or under dark conditions)b
Ref.





a CR, chemical reduction.
b The potential is converted according to E (V vs. RHE) = E (V vs. Ag/AgCl) + E0 (Ag/AgCl) + 0.0591 × pH.





Direct LSPR-driven electrocatalysis or pure plasmonic electrode


Au/GCE
Adsorption
11.3 nm Au NPs
HER
2.55 W cm−2, 488 nm, η = 46 mV (78)

154



Au nanoporous
Dealloy
{111}-rich 34 nm porous Au
MOR
0.1 W cm−2, Xe lamp, 0.53 mA cm−2 (0.25) at 1.2 V

227



Au/CNTs
CR-adsorption
13.8 nm Au NPs
MOR, EOR
0.05 W cm−2, white LED, 1.09 mA cm−2ECSA (0.66) for MOR, 2.06 mA cm−2ECSA (1.39) for EOR, at 1.46 V

172



Au/Ti/glass
PVD
630 nm Au nanohole array (center-to-center 980 nm)
ORR
2 W cm−2, 980 nm, −5.0 mA cm−2 (−2.5) at 0.9 V

146



Ag/graphene
CR-adsorption
Ag nanotriangles
ORR
28.3 W cm−2, 532 nm, 0.086 mA μgAg−1 at 0.8 V

151



Ag/Ti/glass
PVD
10–100 nm nodule-like
CO2RR
0.17 W cm−2, 365 nm, 80–95% CO (40–15%) at −0.6 V to −0.8 V; 2% CH3OH, 4% HCOO− (0, 2%) at −1.1 V

140



Ag/Ti/glass
PVD + PS template
75 nm Ag nanopyramids
CO2RR
0.85 W cm−2, Xe lamp, −1.05 mA cm−2 (−0.8) at −1.1 V

145



Au/GCE
CR-drop cast
20 nm Au NPs
CO2RR
0.12 W cm−2, 520 nm, 52% CH3OH at −0.8 V

158



Au/GCE
CR-drop cast
15 nm Au NPs
Glucose oxidation, EG oxidation, EOR
0.2 W cm−2, 532 nm, glucose 8.8 μA cm−2 (4.6), EG 7.1 μA cm−2 (4.2), EOR 3.9 μA cm−2 (2.1) at 1.07 V

222



AuAg/GCE
CR-drop cast
10 nm AuAg nanobowls
EG oxidation
>400 nm, 5653 mA mg−1 (2474) at 1.05 V

156







Indirect LSPR-enhanced electrocatalysis over electroactive materials


Au–CoFe MOF nanosheets
Adsorption-drop cast
Au NRs (12 nm/52 nm)
HER
1.5 W cm−2, 808 nm, 6 mA cm−2 (1.5) at −0.24 V

217



Au@rGO@Pd
CR-adsorption
50 nm AuNPs–Pd NPs
HER
>420 nm, η = 30 mV (74), 162 mV dec−1 (86)

206



OER

η = 303 mV (285), 47.2 mV dec−1 (42.1)


Pt/Fe–Au NRs
CR-drop cast
Dumbbell-like
HER
808 nm, η10 = 18 mV (43)

149



Au/Ni(OH)2 nanosheets
CR-adsorption
4.8 nm Au NPs
OER
1.2 W, 532 nm, 17.5 mA cm−2 (7) at 1.53 V; η10 = 270 mV (330)

243



Au/MnO2 nanosheets
Adsorption-drop cast
12.9 nm Au NPs
OER
0.2 W, 532 nm, 13 mA cm−2 (2) at 1.58 V

242



Au@IrO2
CR-drop cast
93.2 nm Au nanoflowers
OER
0.2 W, 532 nm, 15 mA cm−2 (2) at 1.6 V

157



Au–NiCo MOF
CR-adsorption
Au NRs (12 nm/52 nm)
OER
0.2 W cm−2, 808 nm, 7 mA cm−2 (4) at 1.46 V

244



Au@AgPt
CR-drop cast
353 nm urchin-like
MOR
0.2 W cm−2, >420 nm, 3.3 A mgPt−1 (2.6) at 0.98 V

240



Pt–Edged Au
CR-drop cast
75 nm Au nanodisk
MOR
>420 nm, 2.7 mA cm−2 (0.8) at 0.68 V

241



Au/Pt–GCE
CR-drop cast
52 nm Au nanobowls
MOR
1.49 W cm−2, >420 nm, 497.6 mA mg−1 (261.7) at 0.98 V

169



Au–PtRu
PVD-electrodeposition
630 nm nanohole array (center-to center 980 nm)-PtRu NPs
MOR
2 W cm−2, 980 nm, 17.2 mA cm−2 (13.7) at 0.87 V

215



Pd0.52Ag/CNTs
CR-drop cast
nanotube (150 nm/several μm)
MOR
1.0 W cm−2, 530 nm, 4.8 A mgPd−1 (1.4) at 0.8 V

152



Au@Pd@Pt
CR-drop cast
Au NRs (aspect ratio 3.1)
ORR
0.1 W cm−2, 720 nm > λ > 460 nm, 2.56 A mgPt−1 (1.25); 3.57 mA cm−2 (1.7), at 0.9 V

239



Ag/Cu
Electrodeposition-PVD
10 nm Ag/10 nm−2 μm Cu
CO2RR
0.17 W cm−2, 365 nm, 70% CO (20%) at −0.6 to −0.7 V

258



Au@Pt/GCE
CR-drop cast
30 nm Au NPs@5 nm Pt NPs
Ammonia oxidation
0.89 W cm−2, 532 nm, 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V

151







Indirect LSPR-enhanced electrocatalysis over semiconductors


Au–Au–MoS2
Electrodeposition
Nanorod array-quantum sheet
HER
1 W cm−2, 721 nm, onset potential −0.12 V

118



Au/TiO2 PC-nanotube arrays
Photoreduction
20 nm Au NPs
OER
0.1 W cm−2, ≥420 nm, 0.15 mA cm−2 (0); solar simulator, 2.3 mA cm−2 (1.1), at 1.23 V

67



Au/TiO2 PC-nanorod arrays
Thermal reduction
10 nm Au NPs
OER
0.1 W cm−2, >420 nm, 0.47 mA cm−2 (0); solar simulator, 1.6 mA cm−2 (0.7), at 1.0 V

98



Au/TiO2 nanowire arrays
CR-adsorption
8 nm NPs + (15 nm/40 nm) NRs
OER
0.1 W cm−2, white light, 1.5 mA cm−2 (0.8) at 0.98 V

63



Au/TiO2 nanotube arrays
CR-adsorption
5, 15, or 30 nm Au NPs
OER
0.1 W cm−2, >415 nm, 5 nm AuNPs-1.4 mA cm−2; 15–30 nm AuNPs-0.7 mA cm−2, at 1.23 V

62



Au/ZnO nanorod arrays
CR-adsorption
4.7 nm Au NPs
OER
0.1 W cm−2, >420 nm, 0.3 mA cm−2 (0); solar simulator, 1.3 mA cm−2 (0.7), at 1.6 V

50



Ag@SiO2/BiVO4
Spray deposition
50 nm Ag NPs
OER
0.1 W cm−2, white light, 0.3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V

59



Ag@(Cu2O/CuO-7 nm layer)
Electrodeposition
Ag dendrites
CO2RR
0.1 W cm−2, white LED, 54% CH3COO− at −0.22 V

136



Au/p-NiO film
PVD
10 nm Au NPs
HER
0.1 W cm−2, Xe lamp, 25 μA cm−2 (0.25) at 0 V

254



Cu/p-NiO film
PVD
8 nm Cu NPs
CO2RR
0.16 W cm−2, 565 nm, 13–19% CO (2–8%), 18–24% HCOO− (6–7%), at −0.7 V to −0.9 V

143





5.1 Direct LSPR-driven electrocatalysis
LSPR metal alone could act as both a light absorbent and a catalytically active center for directly enhancing the electrocatalytic activity. Thus, the dimensions and the morphology of a free-standing plasmonic metallic electrode show a significant effect on the performance.227,228 Various conductive supports could also be utilized for loading LSPR metal nanostructures including carbon materials (glassy carbon, carbon, graphene, etc.), Ti film, FTO and ITO substrates. Employing pure LSPR metal as model system, the mechanism has been further investigated to identify the contributions of LSPR effects including photogenerated electrons, hot holes, local electromagnetic fields and photothermal effects to the electrocatalytic activity in the absence of a Schottky junction.

5.1.1 LSPR-enhanced electrocatalytic activity of pure plasmonic metal. 
Utilizing glucose oxidation as a model system, Xia's group demonstrated that plasmonic Au NPs on glassy carbon (GC) directly accelerated the electrocatalytic reaction upon LSPR excitation. They investigated the underlying mechanism via experiments on the light wavelength, the electrolyte pH and using dark-field scattering spectroscopy integrated with the electrochemistry technique.222 As illustrated in Fig. 18a and b, they proposed that photogenerated carriers (hot electrons) on LSPR-excited Au NPs either recombined with photogenerated holes (i), took part directly in electrochemical reduction reactions (ii), or transferred to the external circuit (iii). Appling a potential above the onset potential, (iii) occurred and generated a photocurrent. At this suitable voltage bias, the hot holes were driven to the surface of the Au NPs and those with a matching energy level could oxidize glucose, which inhibited the recombination of hot electrons and holes. The proposed plasmonic-enhanced mechanism was also successfully applied to other electrochemical oxidation reactions including the oxidation of ascorbic acid, ethanol, ethylene glycol, and glycerol. They also found that highly alkaline conditions enhanced the photoanodic current density due to the fast capture of hot holes by OH−. Kim and co-workers reported a synergistic effect between surface plasmon polariton (SPP) of an Au film and the LSPR effect of Au nanobipyramids for enhanced electrocatalytic glycerol oxidation enabled by a higher concentration of hot holes.160 The contributions of hot holes generated from interband transitions and around the Fermi level for the photooxidative dissolution of Au NRs were distinguished by Link, Landes and co-workers.229 The hot holes generated in the d-band of the Au NRs were able to overcome the higher activation barrier of electrochemical oxidation reactions, which is too high for the hot holes around the Femi level. Manipulating the multi-metallic component of LSPR metals is able to further enhance their electroactivity due to an efficient LSPR effect, a synergistic effect and an electronic effect between different LSPR metals.156,230
 Fig. 18  (a) Possible transfer pathways of photogenerated carriers and the energy level of photogenerated holes (Eh) on a plasmonic Au NP electrode. (b) Schematic illustration of the experiment setup and principle plasmonic enhancement mechanism for glucose oxidation with an Au NP electrode. (c) The three proposed plasmonic effects of the Ag electrode distinguished by a rapid current response (RC) and a slow current response (SC). (i) Typical photocurrents at different potentials with the laser light on and off, and (ii) photocurrents with the laser light illuminating different positions. (d) Injection of hot carriers from plasmonic Ag to adsorbed CO2 and COOH intermediates at moderate cathodic potentials under light irradiation (360 nm). (e) Injection of hot carriers from plasmonic Ag to adsorbed CO2, COH and CHO intermediates at highly cathodic potentials under light irradiation (>360 nm). (f) Schematic illustration for the LSPR-enhanced ORR mechanism in alkaline solution with an Au nanohole electrode. (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) and (d)–(e) are adapted from ref. 218 and 145 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2020 and 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (f) is adapted from ref. 133 with permission. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to efficient hot carrier separation and a reduced activation energy (overpotential), Wang and co-workers demonstrated that the photothermal effect promoted the reaction kinetics of ascorbic acid oxidation with plasmonic Au nanostars upon LSPR excitaion.231 Regarding the thermal and non-thermal effects, various studies have been reported for quantifying these effects.218,232,233 Experimental and theoretical evidence has shown that non-thermal effects contributed significantly to the plasmonic-enhanced electrocatalytic reactions, far outweighing the photothermal effect.232,233 Recently, Lu and co-workers reported a new strategy to quantitatively evaluate the thermal and non-thermal effects (plasmonic electric effect and hot electrons) at an Ag NP electrode via a slow and rapid current response instead of using a conventional thermal camera and subtraction method, respectively (Fig. 18c).218 This hypothesis was based on the fact that it took a much longer time for photocurrent observation induced by the photothermal effect than by hot carriers. The specific contributions from thermal and non-thermal effects could be manipulated by applied potential (i). The rapid current response disappeared when the light was located at the electrode above the electrolyte level (ii), in agreement with the absence of non-thermal effects since hot electrons were unable to reach the reaction sites due to their short mean-free path. At a higher voltage bias, they observed a larger contribution of the thermal effect to the enhanced current. It was also reported that the photothermal effect of Ag nanostructures could be minimized by using graphene as a support for the plasmonic-enhanced ORR.151


5.1.2 LSPR-switched electrocatalytic reaction pathway. 
LSPR effects could not only enhance the sluggish electrochemical reactions but also increase the low selectivity by inhibiting undesirable intermediates or selectively interacting with adsorbed reactant species/desired intermediates. A plasmonic Ag film on a Ti/glass slide was reported to direct the selectivity of CO2 reduction.140 At a small applied potential (−0.6 V to −0.8 V vs. RHE), the light excitation promoted CO production while it suppressed the HER. At a large applied potential (−1.1 V vs. RHE), the light excitation enhanced the formation of CH3OH and HCOO−. CH3OH was only observed with light-excited Ag. The hot electrons generated were found to be responsible for the observed selectivity change rather than localized plasmonic heating. Kostecki and co-workers showed that hot electrons from LSPR-excited Ag were transferred to specific unoccupied molecular orbitals of adsorbed species using different applied potentials and light sources, resulting in the selective reduction of CO2. The hot electrons were injected into the LUMO of the adsorbed CO2 or COOH at short wavelengths (∼360 nm) and moderate potentials, enhancing the production of CO, whereas the hot carriers were injected into the LUMO of the adsorbed CO2, COH or CHO at longer wavelengths (>360 nm) and high potentials, promoting the formation of CH4, CH3OH or C2H5OH (Fig. 18d and e).145 The plasmonic Au nanohole array film on a Ti/glass slide for enhancing the ORR activity and switching the ORR pathway was also reported.146 It was demonstrated that the LSPR effect was stronger than the thermal effect, resulting in a lower activation energy. The reaction followed a direct four-electron pathway under light irradiation to reduce O2 to H2O, whereas under dark conditions there was a contribution of the two-electron side-reaction pathway forming the undesirable H2O2 intermediate (Fig. 18f). This plasmon-induced suppression of the two-electron pathway in the ORR was also verified for AgPt,57 the hybrid system of an LSPR metal-electrocatalytic material.


5.1.3 Volcano plots for plasmonic electrocatalysts. 
Volcano plots are widely explored for the electrocatalytic HER,234–236 ORR,235 OER,235 and CO2RR.237,238 The top position of a volcano plot indicates that the adsorption energy is neither too strong nor too weak for the reaction. As shown in Fig. 19a and b, Ag is located downhill of the volcano plot. With an increase in the laser intensity, it was found that the ORR activity of plasmonic Ag nanotriangles increased first and then decreased slightly.151 This could be explained using the volcano plot. With laser excitation, the O adsorption energy shifted to the optimized position due to the LSPR effect. When the laser power exceeded a certain degree, the activity would move over the peak of the volcano plot and then decline. The high performance of plasmonic Au–Pd–Pt active centers under light irradiation for the ORR was also induced by the shift of pure Pt toward the optimized scenario.239 As shown in Fig. 19c, results from DFT calculations indicate that the binding energy of OH* on the Pt surface decreases due to the injection of hot electrons, which is favorable for the ORR. Thus, volcano plots could provide a guide for developing novel multi-metallic nanostructures for plasmon-mediated electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 19  (a) ORR volcano plot for metals. (b) Effect of light irradiation on the ORR activity for plasmonic Ag plotted against the O absorption energy. (c) Number of injected hot electrons on the Pt surface for Au–Pd–Pt as a function of the calculated OH* binding energy; the inset shows the charge density distribution. (a) is adapted from ref. 235 with permission. Copyright 2017 AAAS. (b) is adapted from ref. 151 with permission. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) is adapted from ref. 239 with permission. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 

5.2 Indirect LSPR-enhanced electrocatalysis

5.2.1 LSPR-enhanced electrocatalytic reactions over electroactive species. 
LSPR effects have been applied in promoting the activity of electrocatalytic materials. Pt is a well-known active electrocatalyst for the HER, methanol and ethanol oxidation reactions (MOR and EOR), and the ORR etc. Plasmonic Au@AgPt urchin-like nanostructures were fabricated for the MOR.240 The localized heating and the decreased d-band center of the surface Pt was induced by the LSPR effect of plasmonic Au and Ag, leading to the superior MOR kinetics. In this reaction system, the negative effect of elevated temperature existed, promoting poisoning of the catalyst by the CO intermediate. The LSPR-excited hot holes injected to CO could weaken the adsorption energy of CO, reactivating the poisoned Pt active sites. The localized electric field from LSPR excitation could downshift the LUMO energy level of the CO intermediate, boosting the rate-limiting step (*CO + OH− → *COOH + e−) for the MOR under light irradiation. A threefold higher current density with light irradiation over that in the dark was also found for the MOR when utilizing Pt–Au nanodisks. Light-excited Au nanodisks were confirmed to be responsible for the enhanced electric current.241 In the ORR, Amal and co-workers optimized the Au–Pd–Pt NR nanostructures to maintain both the LSPR effect of the Au NRs and the ORR activity of Pt, where Pd served as the buffer layer.239 A 2.2-fold enhancement was observed with visible-light illumination. Through experimental and theoretical investigations such as single-particle PL studies, DFT calculations and FDTD simulations, they found that the enhanced activity of Pt was mainly caused by the transfer of hot carriers from the light-excited Au NR core to the Pt NP, resulting in the modification of its surface electronic structure and too-strong binding behavior to adsorbed intermediates such as O* and OH* (Fig. 19c). Recently, Lyutakov's group deposited the plasmon and catalytically active Au@Pt nanostructures on a proton exchange membrane to incorporate the plasmon-active membrane into the fuel cell for enhancing both the HOR and ORR half-reactions. Light-trigged enhancement of the photocurrent was observed.216
As is known, Pd is also an efficient catalytic material for various reactions. The mechanism for the LSPR-enhanced electrocatalytic properties of Pd active sites is similar to Pt active sites. Kim and co-workers designed a reduced graphene oxide (rGO) spacer between an Au NP core and a Pd NP shell.206 The rGO was proposed to reduce PdO, to enhance the conductivity and to transfer hot carriers from light-excited Au NPs to surface Pd NPs. A 1.9-fold and a 1.1-fold enhancement in the HER and OER under light illumination was achieved, respectively. Jain's group fabricated Pd–Ag alloy nanotubes/CNTs and combined the catalytic activity of Pd and the LSPR effects of Ag for the electrocatalytic MOR.152 An enhancement in the current density and a shift of the peak potential was observed for visible-light plasmonic response of Ag, whereas only the current density change was obtained by changing the electrolyte temperature. In addition to the function of photogenerated electrons and holes from LSPR-excited Pd–Ag, as shown in Fig. 20a, they also found that the LSPR excitation could lower the quasi-Fermi level of the Pd–Ag alloy, resulting in a decrease of the open-circuit potential (OCP).
 Fig. 20  (a) Energy diagram and schematic illustration for the MOR with Pd–Ag nanotubes/CNTs. Eref and Eeq refer to the reference potential and equilibrium potential of the MOR. Vo and ΔV are OCP and the reduction of the OCP induced by LSPR excitation. (b) Schematic illustration for the LSPR-enhanced OER with Au/Ni(OH)2. The dashed line represents the Femi level of the Au NPs. (c) Schematic illustration for the LSPR-enhanced OER with Au/MnO2. (d) Schematic illustration and energy diagram for the electron-transfer process between the light-excited Au NR and the NiCo–MOF. (e) Schematic illustration for the energy diagram and activation energy change of Au/CoFe–MOF nanosheets with 808 nm laser irradiation for the HER. (a), (c) and (e) are adapted from ref. 152, 242 and 217, respectively, with permission. Copyright 2019, 2018 and 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) is adapted from ref. 243 with permission. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) is adapted from ref. 244 with permission. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The LSPR excitation could also enhance the generation of active species with a high valence for metal oxide/hydroxide species, further promoting electrocatalytic oxidation reactions (Fig. 20b–d). Ye and co-workers loaded Au NPs onto Ni(OH)2 nanosheets, achieving a fourfold enhancement in activity and a decrease in the overpotential (η10) from 330 mV to 270 mV under 532 nm laser irradiation.243 Besides the improved hot electron transfer from light-excited Au, as shown in Fig. 20b, the charge transfer from Ni(OH)2 to the hot holes of Au could promote the oxidation of inactive NiII to active NiIII/IV species, where the NiIII/IV sites capture electrons from OH−, markedly enhancing the OER activity. The strategy could be extended to the Au/CoO and Au/FeOOH systems. Other studies also confirmed the hot hole-facilitated oxidation of CoII to active CoIII/IV species for the OER using CoO NPs/Au NRs.245 The facilitated generation of active Mnn+ species from Mn4+ and electron attraction from OH− was also reported in Au/MnO2 nanosheets (Fig. 20c).242 IrO2 and RuO2 are among the best OER electrocatalysts. Camargo's group designed an Au@IrO2 nanoflower where the ultrathin IrO2 layer (1 nm) did not completely cover the Au branches.157 The hot holes generated from the light-excited Au core could activate Ir–O bonds by transferring it to its antibonding states, which played a dominant role in the enhanced OER activities.
The hot hole-facilitated generation of high-valence metal active sites was also observed for LSPR metal and metal–organic framework (MOF) hybrids in electrocatalytic oxidation reactions. For example, plasmon-induced hot holes (Au NPs) mediated the oxidative formation of CoIII/NiIII active species from CoII/NiII in ultrathin semiconductor-like Co/Ni–MOF nanosheets, promoting OER activity.246 For the OER, Xia and co-workers found a synergistic effect between the high-valence Ni active species and energy matching with Au NRs/NiCo–MOF.244 The hot electron transfer and electron transfer between high-valence Ni* and Au were via the same path as stated above while the electron could also transfer from Ni to Co centers via oxygen ligands, further facilitating the formation of high-valence Ni* (Fig. 20d, top). Moreover, the hot electrons and holes respectively transferred from light-excited Au NPs to the LUMO and HOMO of the NiCo–MOFs, resulting in the decrease of its energy level and better matching with the OH−/O2 potential (Fig. 20d, bottom). In the same year, Jiang and co-workers gave a first report on assembling Au NRs on CoFe MOF nanosheets for LSPR-enhanced HER.217 A dramatic decrease of the overpotential from 228 mV to 135 mV at 1 mA cm−2 and an increase of the current density from 1.5 mA cm−2 to 6 mA cm−2 at −0.24 V were obtained by switching the light on and off. As shown in Fig. 20e, the continuous injection of hot electrons induced by the LSPR-excited Au NRs could raise the Fermi level of the CoFe MOF, matching better with the energy level of the H2O/H2 potential, and reducing the activation energy for the HER.


5.2.2 LSPR-enhanced electrocatalytic reactions over semiconductors. 
The LSPR effects on electrocatalysis within LSPR metal/semiconductor systems have been widely investigated. Regarding semiconductors, for p-type semiconductors the majority carriers are holes, which move in the valence band and in the direction of conventional current flow, whereas for n-type semiconductors the majority carriers are electrons, which move in conduction band and against the direction of conventional current flow. Both LSPR metals and/or semiconductors could be excited by adjusting the light wavelength.
Tsai and co-workers loaded plasmonic Au NPs onto n-type ZnO nanorod arrays for the OER.50 Using small Au NPs (4.7 nm), a higher photocurrent was obtained (1.3 and 0.3 mA cm−2) than with pure ZnO nanorods (0.7 and 0 mA cm−2) under visible-light and solar simulation. They ascribed the enhanced separation of photogenerated electrons and holes to the injection of hot electrons from the light-excited Au NPs to ZnO and the creation of vacancies in the conduction band of ZnO by the plasmon-induced electromagnetic field (Fig. 21a). Several strategies were successfully adopted to reveal these effects. The photocurrent diverged from Fowler's law indicated the contribution of hot electrons from the LSPR effect of Au NPs, as shown in Fig. 16a. DOS and XANES investigations demonstrated that the LSPR-induced electromagnetic field could generate vacancies in the conduction band of the ZnO support (Fig. 15c), facilitating the formation of photogenerated electrons.50 In their work, small Au particles exhibited a better performance than big Au particles. A higher photocurrent was also achieved for other electrocatalytic reactions over LSPR metals that possessed a smaller particle size.62,214 Huber and co-workers demonstrated that the high performance of the smaller Au size was probably due to the greater number of charge carriers generated by the increased localized electric field, which is directly proportional to the quality factor.214 The LSPR effect of Au and Ag nanostructures on an n-type TiO2 film upon the electrochemistry was first investigated by some experts in the early 2000s.225,226,247–249 Employing electrochemical techniques, Wei and co-workers illustrated the electron transfer within plasmonic Au/TiO2 under visible-light irradiation (>515 nm) and discovered that the excited-state lifetimes of these transferred electrons were much longer than photogenerated electrons from UV-excited TiO2, which further enhanced HER activity.250 Recently, utilizing a series of molecules with various redox potentials and Au/TiO2 as the model system, Willets and co-workers successfully quantified the wavelength-dependent plasmonic hot carrier energy distributions at the Au/TiO2 interface, which facilitated the reactions.251
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the plasmon-induced effects on the Au/ZnO photoelectrode for the OER. (b) Photocurrent and simulated absorption enhancement for Au@SiO2 at the bottom/on top of a 100 nm thin Fe2O3 photoelectrode layer. (c) Schematic of the Si@Al@α-Fe2O3 core–multishell photoelectrode for the OER. (d) Schematic illustration of the Ag@SiO2/BiVO4 photoelectrode for the OER and the corresponding absorption enhancement (fabs, red), catalytic enhancement (fcat, blue) and total enhancement factor (f, black) plotted versus the excitation wavelength. (e) Schematic illustration of the Au/p-NiOx/Al photoelectrode for the OER. (e′) Schematic illustration of Au/n-TiO2 for reduction reactions and Au/p-GaN for oxidation reactions. (e′′) Predicted energy diagram of the Cu/p-NiO for CO2RR. (f) Schematic illustration for the synergistic interaction of the photonic layer and LSPR over Au/TiO2 for the OER. (a–c) and (e–e′′) are adapted from ref. 50, 155, 252, 254, 142 and 143, respectively, with permission. Copyright 2012, 2011, 2014, 2015, 2018 and 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) and (f) are adapted from ref. 59 and 98, respectively, with permission. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
n-Type semiconductors with a low band gap, such as BiVO4,59,61,162 and α-Fe2O3,252,253 have also been applied in such a hybrid system for the LSPR-promoted OER at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface. Au@SiO2 nanostructures at different locations of Fe2O3 gave different enhanced photocurrents as a function of the wavelength (Fig. 21b). Utilizing aluminum nanoparticles as the plasmonic material, the Si@Al@α-Fe2O3 core@multishell structure was engineered by Yang's group (Fig. 21c). Compared with the core–shell design, this structure could ensure a uniform electromagnetic field enhancement induced by LSPR excitation over the entire nanowire electrode. Moreover, the enhanced photocurrent of Al NPs (50 nm) was comparable to Ag NPs with the same size, outperforming Au NPs, providing an inexpensive alternative plasmonic electrocatalyst to precious metals.
Excepting the LSPR effect, the catalytic effects of a plasmonic metal in such a hybrid system were confirmed by Abdi's group using a unique strategy.59 As shown in Fig. 21d, modifying the BiVO4 surface with Ag@SiO2 core–shell NPs, they found that the scattering effect was dominant for absorption enhancement of the OER. Adding H2O2 as a hole scavenger, they investigated the absorption enhancement, the catalytic enhancement and the total enhancement factor, where the catalytic enhancement was obtained by dividing the total enhancement factor by the absorption enhancement. The catalytic enhancement was significantly larger than the absorption enhancement.
p-Type semiconductors with a large band gap incapable of being excited under visible-light irradiation are able to act as hot hole acceptors and block electron transfer from plasmonic metals, promoting direct reduction reactions on an LSPR-excited metal surface. As shown in Fig. 21e, p-type NiOx blocks electron transfer while allowing hole transfer back to the Al electrode and then to the Pd anode via the external circuit. The hot electrons left on the Au NPs surface are directly transferred to H+ for the HER without a Schottky junction.254 The difference between such a p-type semiconductor with a large bandgap and n-type TiO2 with a large band gap is illustrated in Fig. 21e′. Atwater and co-workers chose a large band gap p-type semiconductor as a support, which served solely to collect hot holes from light-excited plasmonic Au or Cu, resulting in the accumulation of hot electrons on the metal surface for CO2 reduction (Fig. 21e′ and e′′). Upon plasmon excitation, the plasmonic photocathodes improved the CO2 selectivity and suppressed H2 production in an aqueous electrolyte. Enhanced CO selectivity was observed for the plasmonic Au/p-GaN photocathode, while both enhanced CO and HCOO− selectivity was observed for the Cu/p-NiO photocathode.142,143 In designing such a system (e.g. Cu/p-NiO), the valence band of the p-type semiconductor and the Fermi level of the plasmonic metal should be matched for the formation of a modest Schottky barrier (ΦB) of around 1 eV at the interface to allow hot-hole injection (Fig. 21e′′). Besides these systems, the plasmonic Ag nanodimer structure has also been deposited on p-GaP for the HER. The pH value of electrolyte showed an influence on the activity. The improved HER activity was confirmed with light irradiation, especially under neutral conditions.255
When the adsorption of the semiconductor overlaps with the LSPR absorption band of its supported metal nanostructure, a further increase in the visible-light absorption and catalytic activity can be observed. Such systems have been reported for Au@Cu2O,58 Ag/N doped-TiO2,208,256 and Au/TiO2 PCNTs.257 Photonic layers of semiconductors have also been applied to enhance the LSPR effect on electrocatalysis. The photonic band gap of TiO2 photonic crystals was tuned to overlap with the LSPR band of Au NPs, resulting in more hot electrons transferred from light-excited Au NPs to TiO2, in turn improving the water-splitting efficiency (Fig. 21f).67,98
It is also possible to tune reduction reactions at the cathodic electrode side with an LSPR-based electrode at anodic electrode side. Misawa and co-workers demonstrated that plasmon-induced charge separation promoted the OER and the subsequent N2 reduction reaction (NRR) in one system comprised of both the anode and cathode.137,138 Recently, they further constructed a two-electrode (Au/n-SrTiO3‖Zr) system for ammonia synthesis, as shown in Fig. 22.139 The electrons generated from the light-excited plasmonic Au NPs transferred to the conduction band of SrTiO3 and further to the Zr coil via an external circuit, facilitating the NRR to NH3.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the PEC reaction cell, and (b) the energy diagram of the Au/n-SrTiO3‖Zr system. Adapted from ref. 139 with permission. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

6. Conclusions and outlook
The efficient utilization of solar energy is a promising route to relieve energy shortages and reduce environmental pollution. The LSPR effect of light-excited plasmonic metal nanostructures could produce electromagnetic field enhancement, create hot carriers, induce resonant energy transfer and the photothermal effect. For traditional electrocatalysis, therefore, LSPR could provide new possibilities not only to promote the activity but also to tune the reaction pathway and consequently improve the selectivity. Although progress has been achieved in LSPR-mediated electrocatalysis, the following items may be considered for future development.
(1) Materials design. In addition to the further improvement on the activity of currently available LSPR-based electrodes, either through structure/shape design or the synergistic effect of alloys, efforts should be made to explore new types of plasmonic metal nanostructures. For instance, cheap and stable non-noble alternative materials with the LSPR effect in the visible-light range are desirable for their large-scale applications. The undiscovered properties of novel plasmonic materials could probably enter a new regime. Moreover, future efforts should be devoted to the modification of preparation methods that aim to seek a facile and simple synthetic approach for constructing active LSPR-based electrodes on a large scale with a controllable size/shape and structure.
Careful materials design is required for certain hybrid plasmonic metals (Au, Al) and semiconductors (TiO2) under UV-Vis light irradiation since both negative and positive effects of LSPR exist.16,259–261 The negative effect comes from the reverse injection of electrons from the plasmonic metal to the conduction band of the semiconductor, promoting the recombination of UV-generated electron–hole pairs in TiO2. Although the positive effects of the LSPR play a dominant role over the negative effects, strategies should be adopted to further promote the positive effects, either through varying the intensity ratio of the Vis/UV light, engineering an interface Schottky barrier, or designing hybrid materials with sufficient LSPR energy to excite the semiconductor to generate electron–hole pairs through mechanism D in Fig. 4.
(2) Mechanistic investigations. A deep understanding of the mechanisms involved in LSPR-enhanced electrocatalysis is required and could provide grounds for the rational design of plasmonic electrocatalysts. Although a few attempts have been made to explain the LSPR-induced chemistry, further investigations are needed to achieve a detailed description of the roles of hot electrons, hot holes, and magnetic and photothermal effects during the electrocatalytic process. Developments in theoretical simulations and material characterization techniques, such as in situ spectroscopies together with electrochemical methods, will surely offer help for differentiating the contribution of LSPR effects while assisting in the design of efficient plasmonic electrocatalysts. Stable plasmonic metals with well-known properties are suitable materials for mechanistic investigation or proof-of-concept studies such as Au nanostructures.
(3) Ag and Cu nanostructures are different from plasmonic Au in that they are easily oxidized. In situ reduction seems to be a promising alternative for the rational design of plasmonic electrocatalysts. This could also create a large number of active sites for certain reactions, e.g., the in situ reduction of CuxO nanoparticles to Cu for LSPR-enhanced CO2 reduction. A multicomponent nanostructure, such as in alloy formation, is another solution that could inhibit the oxidation of Ag or Cu and provide new catalytically active centers.
(4) Exploiting new LSPR-mediated electrochemical processes. The application of LSPR in electrocatalysis is not limited to the above types of electrochemical reactions in Table 1. Seeking new types of electrocatalytic organic synthesis is in its exciting early stages. Moreover, exploiting the application of LSPR in other electrochemistry research fields is attractive. For example, a light-induced high-performance electrode for use in batteries was discovered last year.262
(5) Tuning the reaction pathway. The experimental and theoretical results show that the transfer of hot electrons and the reaction pathway could be tuned using different applied potentials and light sources. Selectivity is extremely important in organic synthesis. Precise control over the product selectivity via LSPR-induced electrochemistry is significant and challenging. To this end, future efforts on the exploration of multi-component plasmonic metals combined with variation of the potential and light wavelengths are expected.
(6) Practical applications. Encouraged by the present and continuing research efforts on efficiency improvement, we believe that there will be a widespread application of LSPR-mediated electrocatalysis for large-scale synthesis or transforming various compounds on an industrial scale. We also expect the development of controllable PEC devices integrated with LSPR effects for practical applications such as in renewable-energy storage.
Abbreviations

AORAlcohol oxidation reaction
APTES3-Aminopropyl-triethoxysilane
APTMS3-Aminopropyl-trimethoxysilane
CBConduction band
CO2RRCO2 reduction reaction
CTABCetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CVDChemical vapor deposition
DDADiscrete dipole approximation
DFTDensity functional theory
DPDeposition–precipitation
EELSElectron energy loss spectroscopy
EFTEMEnergy-filtered transmission electron microscopy
EOREthanol oxidation reaction
FDTDFinite-difference time-domain method
FEMFinite element method
FFTFast Fourier transform
GCEGlassy carbon electrode
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
HRTEMHigh-resolution transmission electron microscopy
LSPRLocalized surface plasmon resonance
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MOFMetal–organic framework
MORMethanol oxidation reaction
OCPOpen-circuit potential
OEROxygen evolution reaction
ORROxygen reduction reaction
PAAPolyacrylic acid
PAHPoly(allylamine hydrochloride)
PECPhotoelectrochemical
PIRETPlasmon-induced resonant energy transfer
PVDPhysical vapor deposition
PSSPoly(sodium styrene sulfonate)
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidone
rGOReduced graphene oxide
STEMScanning transmission electron microscopy
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SERSSurface enhanced Raman spectroscopy
TEOSTetraethylorthosilicate
VBValence band
XANESX-Ray absorption near edge structure
XASX-Ray absorption spectroscopy
XPSX-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21621003, 21235004 and 21327806), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2016YFA0203101) and the Tsinghua University Initiative Scientific Research Program. Financial support of this work by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC 21703154) and the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (18JCYBJC43100) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
C. Andronescu, J. Masa and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15298–15312 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. C. Xu and X. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 1–2 CrossRef .
Y. L. Yang, Y. Tang, H. M. Jiang, Y. M. Chen, P. Y. Wan, M. H. Fan, R. R. Zhang, S. Ullah, L. Pan, J. J. Zou, M. M. Lao, W. Sun, C. Yang, G. F. Zheng, Q. L. Peng, T. Wang, Y. L. Luo, X. P. Sun, A. S. Konev, O. V. Levin, P. Lianos, Z. Hu, Z. Shen, Q. Zhao, Y. Wang, N. Todorova, C. Trapalis, M. V. Sheridan, H. P. Wang, L. Zhang, S. M. Sun, W. Z. Wang and J. M. Ma, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 2089–2109 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, L. Pan, F. Idrees, X. W. Zhang, L. Wang, J. J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 136–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Q. Y. Zhang and X. L. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808167 CrossRef PubMed .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
C. Chen, J. F. K. Kotyk and S. W. Sheehan, Chem, 2018, 4, 2571–2586 CAS .
J. Zhao, S. Xue, J. Barber, Y. W. Zhou, J. Meng and X. B. Ke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4700–4734 RSC .
C. Chen, X. R. Zhu, X. J. Wen, Y. Y. Zhou, L. Zhou, H. Li, L. Tao, Q. L. Li, S. Q. Du, T. T. Liu, D. F. Yan, C. Xie, Y. Q. Zou, Y. Y. Wang, R. Chen, J. Huo, Y. F. Li, J. Cheng, H. Su, X. Zhao, W. R. Cheng, Q. H. Liu, H. Z. Lin, J. Luo, J. Chen, M. D. Dong, K. Cheng, C. G. Li and S. Y. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 717–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qing, R. Ghazfar, S. T. Jackowski, F. Habibzadeh, M. M. Ashtiani, C. P. Chen, M. R. Smith and T. W. Hamann, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 5437–5516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Wang, J. H. Zhou and J. H. Li, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700197 CrossRef .
L. H. Tang and J. H. Li, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 857–875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, T. Sun and K. T. V. Grattan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 195, 332–351 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Dreaden, A. M. Alkilany, X. H. Huang, C. J. Murphy and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2740–2779 RSC .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Ghori, S. Veziroglu, A. Hinz, B. B. Shurtleff, O. Polonskyi, T. Strunskus, J. Adam, F. Faupel and O. C. Aktas, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 3760–3764 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7188–7216 RSC .
A. Gelle, T. Jin, L. Garza, G. D. Price, L. V. Besteiro and A. Moores, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 986–1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Sun and H. X. Xu, Small, 2012, 8, 2777–2786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Aslam, V. G. Rao, S. Chavez and S. Linic, Nat. Catal, 2018, 1, 656–665 CrossRef .
S. W. Li, P. Miao, Y. Y. Zhang, J. Wu, B. Zhang, Y. C. Du, X. J. Han, J. M. Sun and P. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 33, 2000086 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Choi, K. Chung, T. T. H. Nguyen and D. H. Kim, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1415–1433 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, Y. W. Lee, H. Ahn, J. H. Kim and S. W. Han, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 4, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Besteiro, P. Yu, Z. Wang, A. W. Holleitner, G. V. Hartland, G. P. Wiederrecht and A. O. Govorov, Nano Today, 2019, 27, 120–145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 409–453 Search PubMed .
M. R. S. Dias and M. S. Leite, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2881–2891 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4797–4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Coronado, K. L. Kelly, L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 Search PubMed .
V. Amendola, R. Pilot, M. Frasconi, O. M. Maragò and M. A. Iatì, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 203002 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209–217 RSC .
M. A. Garcia, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 389501 CrossRef .
G. Mie, J. Ann. Phys., 1908, 25, 377–445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. M. Kim, J. E. Park and J. M. Nam, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704528 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Liz- Marzán, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 32–41 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Zhang, S. He, W. X. Guo, Y. Hu, J. W. Huang, J. R. Mulcahy and W. D. Wei, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2927–2954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gellé and A. Moores, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2019, 15, 60–66 CrossRef .
K. Yamada, K. Miyajima and F. Mafune, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11246–11251 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Su, Q. H. Wei, X. Zhang, J. J. Mock, D. R. Smith and S. Schultz, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1087–1090 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shao, C. Fang, H. Chen, Y. C. Man, J. Wang and H. Q. Lin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1424–1430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Atay, J. H. Song and A. V. Nurmikko, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1627–1631 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Chu, J. Y. Wang, L. Ding, D. N. Yuan, Y. Zhang, J. Liu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14310–14316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Funston, C. Novo, T. J. Davis and P. Mulvaney, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. F. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679–2724 RSC .
V. Myroshnychenko, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, I. Pastoriza-Santos, A. M. Funston, C. Novo, P. Mulvaney, L. M. Liz-Marzan and F. J. Garcia de Abajo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1792–1805 RSC .
G. Baffou and R. Quidant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3898–3907 RSC .
P. Christopher, D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Linic, U. Aslam, C. Boerigter and M. Morabito, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 567–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Zhang, C. Y. Zhang, H. R. Zheng and H. X. Xu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2506–2515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mascaretti, A. Dutta, S. Kment, V. M. Shalaev, A. Boltasseva, R. Zboril and A. Naldoni, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805513 CrossRef PubMed .
C. K. Chen, H. M. Chen, C. J. Chen, L. C. Cheng, P. C. Wu, B. H. Cheng, Y. Z. Ho, M. L. Tseng, Y. Y. Hsu, T. S. Chan, J. F. Lee, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7362–7372 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Kale and P. Christopher, Science, 2015, 349, 587–588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 632–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Ratchford, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13610–13614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jung, E. Kazuma, H. Ueba, M. Trenary and Y. Kim, Science, 2018, 360, 521–526 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Kazuma and Y. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4800–4808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Lin, C. S. Hsu, S. Y. Chiu, T. Y. Liao and H. M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2224–2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. T. Li, F. K. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. J. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Abdi, A. Dabirian, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15272–15277 RSC .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, T. Butburee, J. H. Yun, H. Chen, R. M. Richards and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20127–20133 RSC .
M. Valenti, E. Kontoleta, I. A. Digdaya, M. P. Jonsson, G. Biskos, A. Schmidt-Ott and W. A. Smith, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 739–747 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Song, S. Y. Moon, E. H. Gwag, I. I. Nedrygailov, C. Lee, J. J. Kim, W. H. Doh and J. Y. Park, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22180–22188 RSC .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. D. Chang, Y. C. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. H. Lu, Y. X. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Clark and A. G. Vondjidis, J. Catal., 1965, 4, 691–696 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kraeutler and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 4317–4318 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wenderich and G. Mul, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14587–14619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 13, 14–20 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14526–14533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Chen, L. S. Meng, Z. Y. Ma, S. He, Y. D. Hou, H. H. Li, R. S. Yuan, X. H. Huang, X. X. Wang, X. C. Wang and J. L. Long, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 294–298 RSC .
S. H. Wei, Y. S. Liu and W. Gao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 287, 59–68 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Cheng, J. Taing and J. C. Hemminger, ACS Nano, 2011, 8, 6325–6333 Search PubMed .
B. Ai, Z. Wang, H. Mohwald and G. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12094–12102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Busser, B. Mei, A. Pougin, J. Strunk, R. Gutkowski, W. Schuhmann, M. G. Willinger, R. Schlogl and M. Muhler, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1030–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 136, 458–465 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Tanaka, Y. Nishino, S. Sakaguchi, T. Yoshikawa, K. Imamura, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2551–2553 RSC .
M. A. Sliem, T. Hikov, Z. A. Li, M. Spasova, M. Farle, D. A. Schmidt, M. Havenith-Newen and R. A. Fischer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 9858–9866 RSC .
A. J. J. Lennox, P. Bartels, M. M. Pohl, H. Junge and M. Beller, J. Catal., 2016, 340, 177–183 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Tseng and J. J. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 66, 51–57 CrossRef .
S. Ren and W. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2236–2245 RSC .
M. Sahoo, S. Mansingh, S. Subudhi, P. Mohapatra and K. Parida, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 4678–4692 RSC .
H. Gu, Y. Yang, J. X. Tian and G. Y. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6762–6768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Zhang, F. X. Xiao, G. C. Xiao and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11293–11302 RSC .
Z. Jin, Q. Y. Wang, W. T. Zheng and X. Q. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5273–5279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Veziroglu, M. Z. Ghori, M. Kamp, L. Kienle, H. G. Rubahn, T. Strunskus, J. Fiutowski, J. Adam, F. Faupel and O. C. Aktas, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800465 CrossRef .
S. Veziroglu, A. L. Obermann, M. Ullrich, M. Hussain, M. Kamp, L. Kienle, T. Leißner, H. G. Rubahn, O. Polonskyi, T. Strunskus, J. Fiutowski, M. Es-Souni, J. Adam, F. Faupel and O. C. Aktas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Veziroglu, M. Ullrich, M. Hussain, J. Drewes, J. Shondo, T. Strunskus, J. Adam, F. Faupel and O. C. Aktas, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2020, 389, 125613 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sahoo, S. Mansingh and K. M. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7614–7627 RSC .
J. Zhao, X. B. Ke, H. W. Liu, Y. M. Huang, C. Chen, A. Bo, X. L. Sheng and H. Y. Zhu, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 628–634 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Hao, X. N. Guo, Y. T. Pan, S. Chen, Z. F. Jiao, H. Yang and X. Y. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9361–9364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Wu, W. X. Sun, J. J. Chen, J. H. Zhao, Q. Cao, W. H. Fang and Q. H. Zhao, J. Catal., 2019, 377, 110–121 CrossRef CAS .
F. Marques Mota, D. L. T. Nguyen, J. E. Lee, H. Y. Piao, J. H. Choy, Y. J. Hwang and D. H. Kim, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 364–4374 CrossRef .
L. Abis, N. Dimitritatos, M. Sankar, S. J. Freakley and G. J. Hutchings, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 5686–5691 RSC .
X. Y. Wang, R. Y. Wang, J. Wang, C. Y. Fan and Z. F. Zheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020,(22), 1655–1664 RSC .
L. Rout, A. Kumar, R. S. Dhaka, G. N. Reddy, S. Giri and P. Dash, Appl. Catal., A, 2017, 538, 107–122 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Huang, Z. Liu, G. P. Gao, G. Xiao, A. Du, S. Bottle, S. Sarina and H. Y. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4975–4985 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Guo, C. H. Hao, G. Q. Jin, H. Y. Zhu and X. Y. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1973–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sugano, Y. Shiraishi, D. Tsukamoto, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5295–5299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. T. Lee, S. H. Yang and Z. H. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1409–1419 RSC .
K. Fuku, R. Hayashi, S. Takakura, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7446–7450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, J. Q. Liu, B. Zheng, X. Huang, X. Zhang, C. L. Tan, J. Z. Chen, Z. X. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6250–6254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dhiman, A. Maity, A. Das, R. Belgamwar, B. Chalke, Y. Lee, K. Sim, J. M. Nam and V. Polshettiwar, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6594–6603 RSC .
R. Juárez, C. G. Silva, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Priebe, J. Radnik, A. J. J. Lennox, M. M. Pohl, M. Karnahl, D. Hollmann, K. Grabow, U. Bentrup, H. Junge, M. Beller and A. Brückner, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2137–2148 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schünemann, G. Dodekatos and H. Tüysüz, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7743–7750 CrossRef .
C. Q. Chen, Y. H. Zheng, Y. Y. Zhan, X. Y. Lin, Q. Zheng, K. M. Wei and J. F. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10773–10777 Search PubMed .
X. Q. Dong, J. W. Lei, Y. F. Chen, H. X. Jiang and M. H. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 448–458 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Wang, H. Song, H. Pang, Y. X. Ning, T. D. Dao, Z. Wang, H. L. Chen, Y. X. Weng, Q. Fu, T. Nagao, Y. M. Fang and J. H. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dodekatos and H. Tüysüz, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7307–7315 RSC .
L. Liu, P. Li, B. Adisak, S. Ouyang, N. Umezawa, J. Ye, R. Kodiyath, T. Tanabe, G. V. Ramesh, S. Ueda and H. Abe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9875–9882 RSC .
S. Zhang, C. Chang, Z. Q. Huang, Y. Y. Ma, W. Gao, J. Li and Y. Q. Qu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6481–6488 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Jiang, C. C. Jia, L. C. Zhang, S. R. He, Y. H. Sang, H. D. Li, Y. Q. Li, X. H. Xu and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 209–217 RSC .
Z. Wang, D. Brouri, S. Casale, L. Delannoy and C. Louis, J. Catal., 2016, 340, 95–106 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. C. Carabineiro, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haruta, S. Tsubota, T. Kobayashi, H. Kageyama, M. J. Genet and B. Delmon, J. Catal., 1993, 144, 175–192 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tsubota, M. Haruta, T. Kobayashi, A. Ueda and Y. Nakahara, Surf. Sci. Catal., 1991, 63, 695–704 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giorgio, R. Zanella, C. R. Henry and C. Louis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7634–7642 CrossRef .
H. L. Tang, J. K. Wei, F. Liu, B. T. Qiao, X. L. Pan, L. Li, J. Y. Liu, J. H. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 56–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Jiang, X. X. Wu, J. Q. Chang, Y. H. Ma, L. T. Song, Z. X. Chen, C. Liang, X. F. Liu and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 1195–1201 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Tomoki Akita, S. Ichikawa, K. Tanaka and M. Haruta, Surf. Interface Anal., 2001, 31, 73–78 CrossRef .
R. Zanella and C. Louis, Catal. Today, 2005, 107–108, 768–777 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sandoval, A. Aguilar, C. Louis, A. Traverse and R. Zanella, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 40–49 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6309–6315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Tian, G. Zhao and T. Tatsuma, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23478–23481 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Harmer, X. J. Zhou, N. F. Heinig and K. T. Leung, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5109–5113 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. B. Sun, S. Canepa, H. Y. Sun, M. N. Yesibolati, M. Sherburne, R. Xu, T. Sritharan, J. S. C. Loo, J. W. Ager, J. Barber, K. Mølhave and Z. C. J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11905–11916 RSC .
M. Liu, Y. J. Pang, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, O. Voznyy, J. X. Xu, X. L. Zheng, C. T. Dinh, F. J. Fan, C. H. Cao, F. P. G. de Arquer, T. S. Safaei, A. Mepham, A. Klinkova, E. Kumacheva, T. Filleter, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2016, 537, 382–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, C. C. Fong, X. Zhang, L. L. Chan, P. K. Lam, P. K. Chu, K. Y. Wong and M. Yang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 4430–4438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Wang, X. C. Chen, S. Liu, C. P. Wong and S. Chu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1788–1794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. P. Steinmiller, C. G. Read and K. S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12040–12041 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Keilbach, J. Moses, R. Köhn, M. Döblinger and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5430–5436 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. H. Hoang, S. Verma, S. Ma, T. T. Fister, J. Timoshenko, A. I. Frenkel, P. J. A. Kenis and A. A. Gewirth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5791–5797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. De Luna, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C. T. Dinh, M. B. Ross, O. S. Bushuyev, P. Todorović, T. Regier, S. O. Kelley, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
R. Venkatasubramanian, J. He, M. W. Johnson, I. Stern, D. H. Kim and N. S. Pesika, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13135–13139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Han, X. Zhang and G. W. Leach, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 3589–3598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, D. W. Du, R. Lan, J. Humphreys, D. N. Miller, M. Walker, Z. C. Wu, J. T. S. Irvine and S. W. Tao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 1101–1109 CrossRef CAS .
E. Landaeta, R. A. Masitas, T. B. Clarke, S. Rafacz, D. A. Nelson, M. Isaacs and Z. D. Schultz, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3478–3486 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oshikiri, K. Ueno and H. Misawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9802–9805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Oshikiri, K. Ueno and H. Misawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3942–3946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Oshikiri, K. Ueno and H. Misawa, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 4443–4448 RSC .
E. B. Creel, E. R. Corson, J. Eichhorn, R. Kostecki, J. J. Urban and B. D. McCloskey, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1098–1105 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Corson, R. Kas, R. Kostecki, J. J. Urban, W. A. Smith, B. D. McCloskey and R. Kortlever, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11750–11762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. DuChene, G. Tagliabue, A. J. Welch, W. H. Cheng and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2545–2550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. DuChene, G. Tagliabue, A. J. Welch, X. Li, W. H. Cheng and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2348–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mi, L. Wen, R. Xu, Z. Wang, D. Cao, Y. Fang and Y. Lei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501496 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, E. B. Creel, E. R. Corson, B. D. McCloskey, J. J. Urban and R. Kostecki, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800363 CrossRef .
T. N. Saada, A. G. M. da Silva, P. Subramanian, L. Pang, N. Adnane, B. Bjafari-Rouhani, V. Mishyn, D. Meziane, S. Melinte, G. Sandu, F. Dumeignil, S. Paul, R. Wojcieszak, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10395–10401 RSC .
J. Vahl, W. Strobel, O. Reichstein, T. Polonskyi, L. Strunskus, L. Kienle and F. Faupel, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 175703 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Drewes, A. Vahl, N. Carstens, T. Strunskus, O. Polonskyi and F. Faupel, Plasma Process Polym., 2021, 18, e2000208 CrossRef .
X. Guo, X. Li, S. Kou, X. Yang, X. Hu, D. Ling and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7364–7369 RSC .
X. Wan, J. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Li, H. Wang, R. Pan, E. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Li and J. Zhang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1162–1170 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shi, J. He, B. Zhang, J. Peng, Y. Ma, W. Chen, F. Li, Y. Qin, Y. Liu, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song, T. Deng, X. Qian, J. Ye and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1371–1378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, J. Zou, J. Y. Ye, Z. Y. Zhou, Z. Lin, X. Kang, P. K. Jain and S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8794–8798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Heo, C. Chen, A. J. Wilson and P. K. Jain, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18430–18434 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Wilson, V. Mohan and P. K. Jain, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 29360–29369 CrossRef CAS .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. Chen, B. M. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, P. Song, B. Yan, J. Wang, J. Guo and Y. Du, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4138–4146 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. de Freitas, L. S. Parreira, E. C. M. Barbosa, B. A. Novaes, T. Mou, T. V. Alves, J. Quiroz, Y. Wang, T. J. Slater, A. Thomas, B. Wang, S. J. Haigh and P. H. C. Camargo, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12281–12291 RSC .
W. Lu, F. Ju, K. Yao and X. Wei, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 4348–4357 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nazemi and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103886 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chung, X. Zhu, X. Zhuo, Y. J. Jang, C. H. Choi, J. S. Lee, S. H. Kim, M. Kim, K. Kim, D. Kim, H. C. Ham, A. Baba, J. Wang and D. H. Kim, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 23234–23240 RSC .
C. Wang, X. P. Zhao, Q. Y. Xu, X. G. Nie, M. R. Younis, W. Y. Liu and X. H. Xia, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 5805–5811 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. O. Herrmann and J. J. Baumberg, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Y. Li, Z. K. Zhou, S. Tang, X. F. Yu, S. Xiao, Z. Wu, Q. Xiao, Y. Zhao, H. Wang and P. K. Chu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2511–2517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, D. Q. Lima, I. Lee, F. Zaera, M. Chi and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7088–7092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pineda, L. Gomez, A. M. Balu, V. Sebastian, M. Ojeda, M. Arruebo, A. A. Romero, J. Santamaria and R. Luque, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2043–2049 RSC .
P. Guo, J. Xu, X. Zhuang, W. Hu, X. Zhu, H. Zhou, L. Tang and A. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 566–571 RSC .
C. Han, S. Li, Z. Tang and Y. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8914–8922 RSC .
C. Li, P. Wang, Y. Tian, X. Xu, H. Hou, M. Wang, G. Qi and Y. Jin, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5391–5398 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, C. Fang, T. Bi, Z. Cui, G. Zhao, X. Jiang and J. Hu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 10787–10794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, N. Ding, L. Lou, K. Iwasaki, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li, K. Nakata, A. Fujishima and Q. Meng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806774 CrossRef .
Y. Xiao, Y. M. Huang, S. Xue and J. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118596 CrossRef .
E. Contreras, C. Palacios, B. Huerta, S. Ahn, O. Vazquez-Mena, R. D. Cadena-Nava, G. Alonso-Nunez, O. E. Contreras, M. T. Oropeza-Guzmán and J. M. Romo-Herrera, Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 8755–8764 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Diyarbakir, H. Can and O. Metin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3199–3206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, Y. Ding, S. M. Goodman, H. H. Funke and P. Nagpal, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12450–12457 RSC .
W. Zhu, Y. J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, Q. Li, R. Michalsky, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16132–16135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rogers, W. S. Perkins, G. Veber, T. E. Williams, R. R. Cloke and F. R. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4052–4061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, T. H. Chow, S. N. Lai, B. Zheng and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17733–17744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, C. Jin, X. Li, J. Liu, Z. Sun, C. Shi, X. Li and A. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6514–6524 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Song, D. H. Anjum, R. Sougrat, M. N. Hedhili and N. M. Khashab, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25003–25010 RSC .
X. Sun, D. Li, Y. Ding, W. Zhu, S. Guo, Z. L. Wang and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5745–5749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Scaiano, K. G. Stamplecoskie and G. L. Hallett-Tapley, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4798–4808 RSC .
C. Xue and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2036–2038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abad, P. Concepcion, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4066–4069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corma and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2096–2126 RSC .
X. Ke, S. Sarina, J. Zhao, X. G. Zhang, J. Chang and H. Y. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3509–3511 RSC .
B. Mondal and P. S. Mukherjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12592–12601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Mosquera, J. M. Albella, V. Navarro, D. Bhattacharyya and J. L. Endrino, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, I. Zegkinoglou, N. J. Divins, F. Scholten, I. Sinev, P. Grosse and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4825–4831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Hua, Q. Wan, Z. Su, X. Tan, L. Liu, F. Zhang, G. Chen, D. Tan, X. Cheng, B. Han, L. Zheng and G. Mo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 13606–13619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, H. Shen, L. Sun, B. Cheng, B. Liu and J. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2041–2047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. M. Huang, Q. Xiao and H. Y. Zhu, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 817–825 RSC .
P. Verma, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 2551–2558 RSC .
H. W. Liu, Z. F. Zheng, D. J. Yang, X. B. Ke, E. Jaatinen, J. C. Zhao and H. Y. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6219–6227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Yuan, B. E. Zhu, K. Fang, X. Y. Li, T. W. Hansen, Y. Ou, H. S. Yang, J. B. Wagner, Y. Gao, Y. Wang and Z. Zhang, Science, 2021, 371, 517–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Konečná, T. Neuman, J. Aizpurua and R. Hillenbrand, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4775–4786 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Nelayah, M. Kociak, O. Stéphan, F. J. García de Abajo, M. Tencé, L. Henrard, D. Taverna, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Liz-Marzán and C. Colliex, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 348–353 Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, G. Li and J. P. Camden, Chem. Rev., 2017, 118, 2994–3031 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. N. Zhai, L. R. Deng, N. N. Wang, Y. H. Mao, J. L. Yang and Y. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 183902 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, L. Ma, M. Hou, J. Li, Z. Xie and Z. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Sherry, S. H. Chang, G. C. Schatz, R. P. Van Duyn, B. J. Wiley and Y. N. Xia, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2034–2038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Knight, N. S. King, L. F. Liu, H. O. Everitt, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 834–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Swearer, H. Q. Zhao, L. N. Zhou, C. Zhang, H. Robatjazi, J. M. P. Martirez, C. M. Krauter, S. Yazdi, M. J. McClain, E. Ringe, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 8916–8920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Q. Zhao, L. N. Zhou, A. E. Schlather, L. L. Dong, M. J. McClain, D. F. Swearer, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6677–6682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Genç, J. Patarroyo, J. Sancho-Parramon, R. Arenal, M. Duchamp, E. E. Gonzalez, L. Henrard, N. G. Bastús, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, V. F. Puntes and J. Arbiol, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 770–779 CrossRef .
J. E. Lee, F. M. Mota, C. H. Choi, Y. R. Lu, R. Boppella, C. L. Dong, R. S. Liu and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801144 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202–5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Robatjazi, H. Q. Zhao, D. F. Swearer, N. J. Hogan, L. N. Zhou, A. Alabastri, M. J. McClain, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 27 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, C. J. Chen, C. L. Dong, X. T. Kong, A. O. Govorov, R. S. Liu and N. Q. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7117–7126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Tang, C. J. Chen, Z. L. Huang, J. Bright, G. Meng, R. S. Liu and N. Q. Wu, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 220901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Lee, C. H. Jung, J. Park, H. Seo, G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4251–4255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sönnichsen, T. Franzl, T. Wilk, G. von Plessen, J. Feldmann, O. Wilson and P. Mulvaney, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 077402 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Kim, S. H. Lee, A. A. Upadhye, I. Ro, M. I. Tejedor-Tejedor, M. A. Anderson, W. B. Kim and G. W. Huber, ACS Nano, 2014, 10, 10756–10765 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Pang, A. Barras, V. Mishyn, S. Heyte, E. Heuson, H. Oubaha, G. Sandu, S. Melinte, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 50426–50432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Elashnikov, K. Zahorjanova, E. Miliutina, Z. Kolska, M. Cieslar, V. Svorcik and O. Lyutakov, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12068–12075 RSC .
S. S. Wang, L. Jiao, Y. Y. Qian, W. C. Hu, G. Y. Xu, C. Wang and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10713–10717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Ou, B. B. Zhou, J. D. Shen, T. W. Lo, D. Y. Lei, S. L. Li, J. Zhong, Y. Y. Li and J. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6790–6793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Graf, G. B. Vonbun-Feldbauer and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3188–3200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Hoener, S. R. Kirchner, T. S. Heiderscheit, S. S. E. Collins, W. S. Chang, S. Link and C. F. Landes, Chem, 2018, 4, 1560–1585 CAS .
X. Shan, U. Patel, S. Wang, R. Iglesias and N. Tao, Science, 2010, 327, 1363–1366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. G. Nie, Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, J. J. Xu, X. H. Xia and H. Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5897–5905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Y. Cai, W. X. Sun, J. Z. Wang, X. R. Shen, C. Zhan, R. Devasenathipathy, J. Z. Zhou, D. Y. Wu, B. W. Mao and Z. Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17489–17498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shan, I. Diez-Perez, L. Wang, P. Wiktor, Y. Gu, L. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Lu, S. Wang, Q. Gong, J. Li and N. Tao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 668–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1810–1811 RSC .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. Du, Y. Z. Zhang, J. H. Han, S. Q. Huang, A. Hirata and M. W. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 286–293 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, R. Zhang, R. Wang, L. D. Negro and S. D. Minteer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, H1132–H1135 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Zubeidi, B. S. Hoener, S. S. E. Collins, W. Wang, S. R. Kirchner, S. A. H. Jebeli, A. Joplin, W. S. Chang, S. Link and C. F. Landes, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1301–1306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rasmussen, A. Serov, K. Artyushkova, D. Chen, T. C. Rose, P. Atanassov, J. M. Harris and S. D. Minteer, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 241–245 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Wang, W. C. Hu, F. F. Liu, Q. Y. Xu and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 301, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tagliabue, A. S. Jermyn, R. Sundararaman, A. J. Welch, J. S. DuChene, R. Pala, A. R. Davoyan, P. Narang and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3394 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rodio, M. Graf, F. Schulz, N. S. Mueller, M. Eich and H. Lange, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2345–2353 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. B. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Feaster, C. Shi, E. R. Cave, T. Hatsukade, D. N. Abram, K. P. Kuhl, C. Hahn, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4822–4827 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Liu, J. P. Xiao, H. J. Peng, X. Hong, K. Chan and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Zheng, W. Xie, M. M. Li, Y. H. Ng, D. W. Wang, Y. Dai, B. B. Huang and R. Amal, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 233–242 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bi, P. F. Guo, B. Wang, X. J. Yu, C. C. Kong, L. Xu, X. J. Zhang and S. C. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6638–6646 RSC .
G. Chen, M. Sun, J. Li, M. Zhu, Z. Lou and B. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18874–18880 RSC .
J. Xu, P. Gu, D. J. S. Birch and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801573 CrossRef .
G. Liu, P. Li, G. Zhao, X. Wang, J. Kong, H. Liu, H. Zhang, K. Chang, X. Meng, T. Kako and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9128–9136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Hu, Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, C. Wang, M. R. Younis, J. Pang, C. Wang and X. H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10601–10609 RSC .
P. Ghosh, A. Kar, S. Khandelwal, D. Vyas, A. Q. Mir, A. L. Chakraborty, R. S. Hegde, S. Sharma, A. Dutta and S. Khatua, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 5795–5803 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, P. Wang, C. Li, H. Li and Y. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37095–37102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Yu, Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 5417–5420 RSC .
J. S. DuChene, B. C. Sweeny, A. C. Johnston-Peck, D. Su, E. A. Stach and W. D. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7887–7891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, K. D. Wijesekara, X. Xi and K. A. Willets, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3629–3637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ramadurgam, T. G. Lin and C. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4517–4522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Archana, N. Pachauri, Z. Shan, S. Pan and A. Gupta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 15506–15516 CrossRef CAS .
H. Robatjazi, S. M. Bahauddin, C. Doiron and I. Thomann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6155–6161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sato, H. Minamimoto and K. Murakoshi, Chem. Lett., 2020, 49, 806–808 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Ingram, P. Christopher, J. L. Bauer and S. Linic, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 1441–1447 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meng, Y. H. Xiao, Y. M. Huang, X. G. Liu and J. Zhao, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 17289–17295 RSC .
E. R. Corson, A. Subramani, J. K. Cooper, R. Kostecki, J. J. Urban and B. D. McCloskey, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9970–9973 RSC .
Z. J. Lin, X. H. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Y. Tian, L. C. Dai, B. B. He, C. Han, Y. G. Wu, Z. G. Zeng and Z. Y. Hu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4114–4123 RSC .
X. G. Meng, L. Q. Liu, S. X. Ouyang, H. Xu, D. F. Wang, N. Q. Zhao and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6781–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Veziroglu, M. Ullrich, M. Hussain, J. Drewes, J. Shondo, T. Strunskus, J. Adam, F. Faupel and O. C. Aktas, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2020, 389, 125613 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Tong, C. P. Luo, J. D. Li, Z. W. Mei, M. M. Wu, A. P. O'Mullane and H. Y. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 21095–21099 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Jian Zhao
	Jian Zhao is a professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology. Prior to this, she conducted her postdoctoral research at Nanyang Technological University and Singapore University of Technology and Design after receiving her PhD from Queensland University of Technology in 2013. Her research area mainly focuses on photo/thermal catalytic organic synthesis with plasmonic nanostructures, and heterogeneous electrocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction and water splitting.

Song Xue
	Song Xue is a professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology. Before entering Tianjin University of Technology in 2007, he worked at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing. The focus of his research is on the design and synthesis organic dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells, hole-transporting materials for perovskite solar cells, and nanomaterials for the photochemical conversion of CO2.

Rongrong Ji
	Rongrong Ji received her BS from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology. She is currently under the supervision of Prof. Jian Zhao for her Master's degree. Her main area of research is Cu-based nanomaterials for photo/thermal-catalytic organic transformations.

Bing Li
	Bing Li received her BS from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology. She is currently under the supervision of Prof. Jian Zhao for her Master's degree. Her main area of research is TiO2 nanomaterials for the degradation of organic dyes and Cu-bimetallic nanomaterials for photo/thermal-catalytic organic transformations.

Jinghong Li
	Jinghong Li is an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University, China. He received his BSc in 1991 from the University of Science and Technology of China and his PhD in 1996 from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include electroanalytical chemistry, bio-electrochemistry and sensors, physical electrochemistry and interfacial electrochemistry, electrochemical materials science, and nanoscopic electrochemistry.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration for LSPR formed via the interaction between light and a particle sphere that is smaller than the light wavelength. (b) Schematic illustration for the transverse and longitudinal oscillation of electrons confined in metal nanorods. (a) is adapted from ref. 31 and 29 with permission. Copyright 2012 and 2017 IOP Publishing Group. (c) is adapted from ref. 33 with permission. Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Visible-light absorption of plasmonic Au-based nanostructures. (a) The absorption spectra of Au NPs with different average diameters in sodium dodecyl sulfate aqueous solution. (b) Polarized transmission spectra of interacting Au NPs with different interparticle distances. (c) Experimental (solid curves) and theoretical (dashed curves) absorption spectra for square Au rods with decreasing aspect ratio, from 85 nm/23 nm, to 81 nm/34 nm, to small octahedra 85 nm. (d) The color or visible-light absorption change for Au nanorods, SiO2@Au core–shell nanoparticles, and Au nanocages. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 37 and 40 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2007 and 2004 American Chemical Society. (c) and (d) are adapted from ref. 44 and 14 with permission. Copyright 2008 and 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Main physical mechanisms on plasmonic metallic nanostructures arising from LSPR (A–C). (A) Photo-induced heating of plasmonic materials. (B) Enhancement of the electromagnetic field. (C) Photo-induced electron–hole pair generation and hot electron injection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Plasmon-enhanced electrocatalytic oxidation and reduction reactions via hot carrier transfer (C-1 to C-5), plasmon-induced resonant energy transfer (D) and the scattering effect (E). (C-1 and C-2) Electrocatalytic oxidation and reduction reactions over pure plasmonic materials. (C-3) The hot holes transfer from plasmonic materials to electroactive species for electrocatalytic oxidation reactions. (C-4) Hot electrons transfer to semiconductors for reduction reactions. The transfer paths for C-2, and C-4 and C-5 illustrate the indirect and direct electron-transfer processes at the interface. (C-5) Hot electron-injection to an n-type semiconductor facilitates oxidation reactions over plasmonic materials and/or n-type semiconductors. (C-6) Hole transfer to a p-type semiconductor with a wide band gap leaving electrons for reduction reactions over plasmonic materials. (D and E) Plasmon-induced resonant transfer and the scattering effect between plasmonic materials and semiconductors. Transfer paths for C-2, C-4 and C-5 are adapted from ref. 35 with permission. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) and (E) are adapted from ref. 49 with permission. Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  Controllable sizes, shapes and multi-metallic compositions of plasmonic electrocatalysts via post-treatment for promoting electrochemical reactions. (a) Schematic illustration of Au NPs (5, 15 or 30 nm) adsorbed on TiO2 nanotube arrays for PEC water splitting and the corresponding photocurrent density. (b) Schematic illustration of Au NPs and Au NRs adsorbed on TiO2 nanorods for PEC water splitting and the corresponding incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE). (c) Schematic illustration of the experimental set-up of AgPt drop-cast on an RDE for the PEC ORR and the corresponding results. (a) is reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) is reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) is adapted from ref. 57 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Summarized preparation processes for supported plasmonic metal nanostructures and LSPR-based electrodes via one-step (self-supporting) and two-step (post-treatment) processes.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration for the difference in prepared Au/CeO2 NPs between the single-step photodeposition method and the multi-step photodeposition method. (b) Schematic illustration for the growth of Ag NPs (white ring) induced by the enhanced plasmonic field (red ring) inside light-excited Au nanoholes (yellow structure). (c) Schematic illustration for the formation of AuAg alloy NPs on GO/LDH via a photodeposition method. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 68 and 72 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2012 and 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) is adapted from ref. 87 with permission. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Influence of the calcination temperature on the particle size and location of Au NPs on TiO2 (P25). The steps of Au NP deposition on TiO2via (b) chemical reduction, (c) photodeposition, and (d) the deposition–precipitation method. (a) is adapted from ref. 122 with permission. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b–d) are adapted from ref. 103 with permission. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the Au–Au–MoS2 fabrication process and corresponding mechanism for plasmon-enhanced electrocatalysis of the HER. (b) Adsorption of additives for shape control (left) and for selective metal deposition (right). (c) Schematic illustration of the KBr additive-mediated anisotropic crystal growth of Cu NPs. (d) Preferential adsorption of the additive malachite green (MG) on Cu(111) leads to “blocking” effects, resulting in faster growth in the (200) direction. (a) is adapted from ref. 118 with permission. Copyright 2021 Springer. (b), (c) and (d) are adapted from ref. 129, 133 and 134, respectively with permission. Copyright 2009, 2013 and 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Preparation of plasmonic (a) ∼8 nm Au/p-GaN, (b) ∼8 nm Cu/p-NiO and (c) ∼630 nm Au nanohole electrodes via physical vapor deposition (PVD). (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 142 and 143 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2018 and 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) is designed according to ref. 146. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic fabrication process of the Au@SiO2 core–shell structure via APTMS-functionalized citrate–Au NPs and Na2SiO3/TEOS. (b and c) Schematic fabrication of Au/CNTs via electrostatic interaction and the plasmonic-driven electrocatalytic MOR. (a) is adapted from ref. 168 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) and (c) are adapted from ref. 172 with permission. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) LSPR band for Au, Ag and Cu NPs. (b–d) XPS analysis for Au, Ag, Cu nanostructures, respectively: (b) Au species supported on CeO2; (c) Ag/TiO2 film as prepared and after calcination; and (d) CuxO supported on carbon nanotubes. (e) Auger Cu LMM spectra after different sample treatments. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 182 and 185, respectively with permission. Copyright 2012 and 2008 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (e) is adapted from ref. 189 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Tunable Au/TiO2(001) interface under different gas environments observed using spherical aberration-corrected environmental TEM at 500 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2021 AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) STEM-EELS plasmon mapping of Au NPs with various particle number densities. The brightness of the orange color indicates the signal intensity. (b) FEM plasmon mapping of an Ag nanosphere and an Ag@Au core–shell nanosphere (thickness = 1 nm) at an excitation light wavelength of 380 nm. (i) and (iii) represent the typical E-field distribution, and (ii) and (iv) are the corresponding local heating power densities (P). (c) BEM simulated plasmon maps of LSPR modes for an AuAg nanoframe located at 1.56, 1.68 and 1.94 eV, and the corresponding induced electric field intensity distribution in 3D. (d) FDTD results of near-field electromagnetic field distributions at the 532 nm wavelength for (i) Au NP@Pd, (ii) and (iii) Au NP@rGO@Pd with different rGO thicknesses, and (iv) Au NP. (e) Average electric field enhancement as a function of the distance from the Ag cube, resulting from FDTD simulations. (f) Temperature distribution map for a light-excited Au nanohole electrode in water at different time points, 2 W cm−2. (g) Spatial temperature mapping for light-excited Al nanocrystals on Al2O3 in air, 10 W cm−2. (a) is reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) is adapted from ref. 199 with permission. Copyright 2019 AIP Publishing Group. (c) is reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) is adapted from ref. 206 with permission. Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) is reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (f) is adapted from ref. 146 with permission. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) is adapted from ref. 209 with permission. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) In situ XANES for relative vacancies in the Pt5d state for the plasmonic AgPt electrocatalyst with different ratios in the dark and under light illumination. (b) Schematic illustration of XANES measurements for plasmonic hot electron injection to a semiconductor, altering its CB state density and the amplitude of the absorption edge. (c) In situ XANES for relative vacancies for the Au NP/ZnO plasmonic electrocatalyst. (a) is adapted from ref. 57 with permission. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) is reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2020 AIP Publishing Group. (c) is adapted from ref. 50 with permission. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Electrochemistry for verifying LSPR effects. (a) Photocurrent and absorption spectra of Au/ZnO plotted versus the wavelength, fitted to Fowler's law. (b) Relationship between the generated photocurrent and the calculated quality factor (Q) as a function of the Au nanodot size for plasmon-enhanced water splitting. (c) IPCE of TiO2–Au@TiO2/Al2O3/Cu2O (red triangles), TiO2–Au@TiO2 (black squares), Cu2O (blue circles) and TiO2/Cu2O (light blue line) for the proposed PIRET and scattering mechanism (inset). (d) CV scans of Pd0.52Ag/CNTs for the MOR at different temperatures, and the corresponding peak potential plotted against the peak current density to determine the LSPR-induced photothermal effects. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 50 and 214 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2012 and 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) is adapted from ref. 60 with permission. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) is adapted from ref. 152 with permission. Copyright 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 17  
In situ LSPR spectroscopy with electrochemistry (WE, working electrode; CE, counter electrode; RE, reference electrode). (a) Schematic illustration of electrochemical current imaging with SPR using an Au working electrode and the corresponding images at different potentials (i–vi) for the redox reaction of the Ru(NH3)63+ complex. (b) Schematic illustration of electrochemical LSPR scattering spectroscopy measurement under a dark-field microscope for glucose oxidation. (c) Schematic illustration of EC-SERS measurements, and the corresponding Raman spectra at different potentials (i), and time series mapping using different lasers (ii–iii) for the hydrodehalogenation reaction. (a) is adapted from ref. 221 with permission. Copyright 2010 AAAS. (b) and (c) are adapted from ref. 222 and 223 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2017 and 2020 American Chemical Society.	 


Direct LSPR-driven electrocatalysis or pure plasmonic electrode
Au/GCE	Adsorption	11.3 nm Au NPs	HER	2.55 W cm−2, 488 nm, η = 46 mV (78)	
154

Au nanoporous	Dealloy	{111}-rich 34 nm porous Au	MOR	0.1 W cm−2, Xe lamp, 0.53 mA cm−2 (0.25) at 1.2 V	
227

Au/CNTs	CR-adsorption	13.8 nm Au NPs	MOR, EOR	0.05 W cm−2, white LED, 1.09 mA cm−2ECSA (0.66) for MOR, 2.06 mA cm−2ECSA (1.39) for EOR, at 1.46 V	
172

Au/Ti/glass	PVD	630 nm Au nanohole array (center-to-center 980 nm)	ORR	2 W cm−2, 980 nm, −5.0 mA cm−2 (−2.5) at 0.9 V	
146

Ag/graphene	CR-adsorption	Ag nanotriangles	ORR	28.3 W cm−2, 532 nm, 0.086 mA μgAg−1 at 0.8 V	
151

Ag/Ti/glass	PVD	10–100 nm nodule-like	CO2RR	0.17 W cm−2, 365 nm, 80–95% CO (40–15%) at −0.6 V to −0.8 V; 2% CH3OH, 4% HCOO− (0, 2%) at −1.1 V	
140

Ag/Ti/glass	PVD + PS template	75 nm Ag nanopyramids	CO2RR	0.85 W cm−2, Xe lamp, −1.05 mA cm−2 (−0.8) at −1.1 V	
145

Au/GCE	CR-drop cast	20 nm Au NPs	CO2RR	0.12 W cm−2, 520 nm, 52% CH3OH at −0.8 V	
158

Au/GCE	CR-drop cast	15 nm Au NPs	Glucose oxidation, EG oxidation, EOR	0.2 W cm−2, 532 nm, glucose 8.8 μA cm−2 (4.6), EG 7.1 μA cm−2 (4.2), EOR 3.9 μA cm−2 (2.1) at 1.07 V	
222

AuAg/GCE	CR-drop cast	10 nm AuAg nanobowls	EG oxidation	>400 nm, 5653 mA mg−1 (2474) at 1.05 V	
156



Indirect LSPR-enhanced electrocatalysis over electroactive materials
Au–CoFe MOF nanosheets	Adsorption-drop cast	Au NRs (12 nm/52 nm)	HER	1.5 W cm−2, 808 nm, 6 mA cm−2 (1.5) at −0.24 V	
217

Au@rGO@Pd	CR-adsorption	50 nm AuNPs–Pd NPs	HER	>420 nm, η = 30 mV (74), 162 mV dec−1 (86)	
206

OER	
η = 303 mV (285), 47.2 mV dec−1 (42.1)
Pt/Fe–Au NRs	CR-drop cast	Dumbbell-like	HER	808 nm, η10 = 18 mV (43)	
149

Au/Ni(OH)2 nanosheets	CR-adsorption	4.8 nm Au NPs	OER	1.2 W, 532 nm, 17.5 mA cm−2 (7) at 1.53 V; η10 = 270 mV (330)	
243

Au/MnO2 nanosheets	Adsorption-drop cast	12.9 nm Au NPs	OER	0.2 W, 532 nm, 13 mA cm−2 (2) at 1.58 V	
242

Au@IrO2	CR-drop cast	93.2 nm Au nanoflowers	OER	0.2 W, 532 nm, 15 mA cm−2 (2) at 1.6 V	
157

Au–NiCo MOF	CR-adsorption	Au NRs (12 nm/52 nm)	OER	0.2 W cm−2, 808 nm, 7 mA cm−2 (4) at 1.46 V	
244

Au@AgPt	CR-drop cast	353 nm urchin-like	MOR	0.2 W cm−2, >420 nm, 3.3 A mgPt−1 (2.6) at 0.98 V	
240

Pt–Edged Au	CR-drop cast	75 nm Au nanodisk	MOR	>420 nm, 2.7 mA cm−2 (0.8) at 0.68 V	
241

Au/Pt–GCE	CR-drop cast	52 nm Au nanobowls	MOR	1.49 W cm−2, >420 nm, 497.6 mA mg−1 (261.7) at 0.98 V	
169

Au–PtRu	PVD-electrodeposition	630 nm nanohole array (center-to center 980 nm)-PtRu NPs	MOR	2 W cm−2, 980 nm, 17.2 mA cm−2 (13.7) at 0.87 V	
215

Pd0.52Ag/CNTs	CR-drop cast	nanotube (150 nm/several μm)	MOR	1.0 W cm−2, 530 nm, 4.8 A mgPd−1 (1.4) at 0.8 V	
152

Au@Pd@Pt	CR-drop cast	Au NRs (aspect ratio 3.1)	ORR	0.1 W cm−2, 720 nm > λ > 460 nm, 2.56 A mgPt−1 (1.25); 3.57 mA cm−2 (1.7), at 0.9 V	
239

Ag/Cu	Electrodeposition-PVD	10 nm Ag/10 nm−2 μm Cu	CO2RR	0.17 W cm−2, 365 nm, 70% CO (20%) at −0.6 to −0.7 V	
258

Au@Pt/GCE	CR-drop cast	30 nm Au NPs@5 nm Pt NPs	Ammonia oxidation	0.89 W cm−2, 532 nm, 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V	
151



Indirect LSPR-enhanced electrocatalysis over semiconductors
Au–Au–MoS2	Electrodeposition	Nanorod array-quantum sheet	HER	1 W cm−2, 721 nm, onset potential −0.12 V	
118

Au/TiO2 PC-nanotube arrays	Photoreduction	20 nm Au NPs	OER	0.1 W cm−2, ≥420 nm, 0.15 mA cm−2 (0); solar simulator, 2.3 mA cm−2 (1.1), at 1.23 V	
67

Au/TiO2 PC-nanorod arrays	Thermal reduction	10 nm Au NPs	OER	0.1 W cm−2, >420 nm, 0.47 mA cm−2 (0); solar simulator, 1.6 mA cm−2 (0.7), at 1.0 V	
98

Au/TiO2 nanowire arrays	CR-adsorption	8 nm NPs + (15 nm/40 nm) NRs	OER	0.1 W cm−2, white light, 1.5 mA cm−2 (0.8) at 0.98 V	
63

Au/TiO2 nanotube arrays	CR-adsorption	5, 15, or 30 nm Au NPs	OER	0.1 W cm−2, >415 nm, 5 nm AuNPs-1.4 mA cm−2; 15–30 nm AuNPs-0.7 mA cm−2, at 1.23 V	
62

Au/ZnO nanorod arrays	CR-adsorption	4.7 nm Au NPs	OER	0.1 W cm−2, >420 nm, 0.3 mA cm−2 (0); solar simulator, 1.3 mA cm−2 (0.7), at 1.6 V	
50

Ag@SiO2/BiVO4	Spray deposition	50 nm Ag NPs	OER	0.1 W cm−2, white light, 0.3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V	
59

Ag@(Cu2O/CuO-7 nm layer)	Electrodeposition	Ag dendrites	CO2RR	0.1 W cm−2, white LED, 54% CH3COO− at −0.22 V	
136

Au/p-NiO film	PVD	10 nm Au NPs	HER	0.1 W cm−2, Xe lamp, 25 μA cm−2 (0.25) at 0 V	
254

Cu/p-NiO film	PVD	8 nm Cu NPs	CO2RR	0.16 W cm−2, 565 nm, 13–19% CO (2–8%), 18–24% HCOO− (6–7%), at −0.7 V to −0.9 V	
143


 	Fig. 18  (a) Possible transfer pathways of photogenerated carriers and the energy level of photogenerated holes (Eh) on a plasmonic Au NP electrode. (b) Schematic illustration of the experiment setup and principle plasmonic enhancement mechanism for glucose oxidation with an Au NP electrode. (c) The three proposed plasmonic effects of the Ag electrode distinguished by a rapid current response (RC) and a slow current response (SC). (i) Typical photocurrents at different potentials with the laser light on and off, and (ii) photocurrents with the laser light illuminating different positions. (d) Injection of hot carriers from plasmonic Ag to adsorbed CO2 and COOH intermediates at moderate cathodic potentials under light irradiation (360 nm). (e) Injection of hot carriers from plasmonic Ag to adsorbed CO2, COH and CHO intermediates at highly cathodic potentials under light irradiation (>360 nm). (f) Schematic illustration for the LSPR-enhanced ORR mechanism in alkaline solution with an Au nanohole electrode. (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) and (d)–(e) are adapted from ref. 218 and 145 with permission, respectively. Copyright 2020 and 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (f) is adapted from ref. 133 with permission. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) ORR volcano plot for metals. (b) Effect of light irradiation on the ORR activity for plasmonic Ag plotted against the O absorption energy. (c) Number of injected hot electrons on the Pt surface for Au–Pd–Pt as a function of the calculated OH* binding energy; the inset shows the charge density distribution. (a) is adapted from ref. 235 with permission. Copyright 2017 AAAS. (b) is adapted from ref. 151 with permission. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) is adapted from ref. 239 with permission. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Energy diagram and schematic illustration for the MOR with Pd–Ag nanotubes/CNTs. Eref and Eeq refer to the reference potential and equilibrium potential of the MOR. Vo and ΔV are OCP and the reduction of the OCP induced by LSPR excitation. (b) Schematic illustration for the LSPR-enhanced OER with Au/Ni(OH)2. The dashed line represents the Femi level of the Au NPs. (c) Schematic illustration for the LSPR-enhanced OER with Au/MnO2. (d) Schematic illustration and energy diagram for the electron-transfer process between the light-excited Au NR and the NiCo–MOF. (e) Schematic illustration for the energy diagram and activation energy change of Au/CoFe–MOF nanosheets with 808 nm laser irradiation for the HER. (a), (c) and (e) are adapted from ref. 152, 242 and 217, respectively, with permission. Copyright 2019, 2018 and 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) is adapted from ref. 243 with permission. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) is adapted from ref. 244 with permission. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the plasmon-induced effects on the Au/ZnO photoelectrode for the OER. (b) Photocurrent and simulated absorption enhancement for Au@SiO2 at the bottom/on top of a 100 nm thin Fe2O3 photoelectrode layer. (c) Schematic of the Si@Al@α-Fe2O3 core–multishell photoelectrode for the OER. (d) Schematic illustration of the Ag@SiO2/BiVO4 photoelectrode for the OER and the corresponding absorption enhancement (fabs, red), catalytic enhancement (fcat, blue) and total enhancement factor (f, black) plotted versus the excitation wavelength. (e) Schematic illustration of the Au/p-NiOx/Al photoelectrode for the OER. (e′) Schematic illustration of Au/n-TiO2 for reduction reactions and Au/p-GaN for oxidation reactions. (e′′) Predicted energy diagram of the Cu/p-NiO for CO2RR. (f) Schematic illustration for the synergistic interaction of the photonic layer and LSPR over Au/TiO2 for the OER. (a–c) and (e–e′′) are adapted from ref. 50, 155, 252, 254, 142 and 143, respectively, with permission. Copyright 2012, 2011, 2014, 2015, 2018 and 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) and (f) are adapted from ref. 59 and 98, respectively, with permission. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the PEC reaction cell, and (b) the energy diagram of the Au/n-SrTiO3‖Zr system. Adapted from ref. 139 with permission. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
AOR	Alcohol oxidation reaction
APTES	3-Aminopropyl-triethoxysilane
APTMS	3-Aminopropyl-trimethoxysilane
CB	Conduction band
CO2RR	CO2 reduction reaction
CTAB	Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
DDA	Discrete dipole approximation
DFT	Density functional theory
DP	Deposition–precipitation
EELS	Electron energy loss spectroscopy
EFTEM	Energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy
EOR	Ethanol oxidation reaction
FDTD	Finite-difference time-domain method
FEM	Finite element method
FFT	Fast Fourier transform
GCE	Glassy carbon electrode
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
HRTEM	High-resolution transmission electron microscopy
LSPR	Localized surface plasmon resonance
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MOF	Metal–organic framework
MOR	Methanol oxidation reaction
OCP	Open-circuit potential
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
PAA	Polyacrylic acid
PAH	Poly(allylamine hydrochloride)
PEC	Photoelectrochemical
PIRET	Plasmon-induced resonant energy transfer
PVD	Physical vapor deposition
PSS	Poly(sodium styrene sulfonate)
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidone
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscopy
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SERS	Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy
TEOS	Tetraethylorthosilicate
VB	Valence band
XANES	X-Ray absorption near edge structure
XAS	X-Ray absorption spectroscopy
XPS	X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
