Photo-assisted water oxidation with cobalt-based catalyst formed from thin-film cobalt metal on silicon photoanodes   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01209F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01209F
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2058-2061Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhoto-assisted water oxidation with cobalt-based catalyst formed from thin-film cobalt metal on silicon photoanodes†

        
          
            Elizabeth R. 
            Young‡§
*a, 
      
        
          
            Ronny 
            Costi‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Sarah 
            Paydavosi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Daniel G. 
            Nocera
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Vladimir 
            Bulović
          
        
      a
aOrganic and Nanostructured Electronics Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 13-3138, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: bulovic@mit.edu;   Tel: +1 617 253 7012
bDepartment of Chemistry, 6-335, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA. E-mail: nocera@mit.edu;   Tel: +1 617 253 5537
Received 
      23rd February 2011
    , Accepted 11th April 2011First published on 12th May 2011AbstractIntegrating chemical catalysts for water splitting with photoanode materials is a longstanding challenge in demonstrating light-assisted water oxidation, a process which can be used for the generation of solar fuels. In this work we use a silicon photoanode as a substrate for processing cobalt metal films to form a cobalt-based water oxidation catalyst (Co–Pi) integrated with the silicon photoanode. The Co–Pi coated photoanodes show catalytic onset at 0.85 V under illumination, which is better than silicon photoanodes coated with ITO and solution-deposited Co–Pi (catalytic onset at 1.05 V) and significantly better photoanodes with only ITO contacts (catalytic activity onset at 1.6 V).

Broader context
Integrating water-splitting electrocatalysts and photoanode materials is a longstanding challenge to achieve light-assisted water oxidation. Water-splitting to form molecular hydrogen and oxygen is an attractive paradigm for the generation of solar fuels. In order to advance water-splitting as a solar fuel cycle, it is necessary to develop stable photoanode structures for merging catalysts with photoanode materials. An inexpensive and scalable cobalt-based water-oxidizing catalyst, Co–Pi, has been previously reported and can be formed viaelectrodeposition from Co2+ ions in aqueous solutions containing potassium phosphate (KPi) at pH 7 or by direct formation from thin-film cobalt metal electrodes in KPi. We demonstrate utilization of a silicon photoanode as a substrate for processing cobalt metal films to form the Co–Pi catalyst. These photoanodes are compared to silicon photoanodes both without Co–Pi deposition and with solution-based electrodeposited Co–Pi. The silicon photoanodes with Co–Pi formed from cobalt metal thin films show the largest photocurrents of photoanode structures presented in this work, reaching current densities of up to 2 mA cm−2 under illumination.

Introduction
We show that the chemical electrocatalysis for water splitting can be powered by integrated silicon photovoltaic devices, which demonstrates light-powered water oxidation as a route for generation of solar fuels.1–7 Transformation of the solar energy into a chemical fuel is particularly attractive energy conversion transformation, as it addresses the long-standing challenge in the development of photovoltaic systems, which is their intermittency of power generation.7 Stored solar fuels would be used when sunlight does not reach the solar panels, enabling continuous, solar-generated energy use. The fuel cycle demonstrated in this study is the splitting of water to molecular hydrogen and oxygen, which can be used as fuels or as high energy precursors in fuel synthesis.5,7
A manufacturable and scalable water-splitting catalyst (Co–Pi) formed under chemically benign conditions is technologically attractive for integration with photovoltaic devices or photoanodes in photoelectrochemical cells.8Co–Pi films can be formed either viaelectrodeposition from Co2+ ions in aqueous solutions containing potassium phosphate (KPi) at pH 79,10 or by processing thin-film (800 nm thick) cobalt metal anodes on substrates in KPi at pH 7.11Electrodes with the Co–Pi catalyst film can operate in Co2+ free solutions containing phosphate or borate buffers.12 The Co–Pi catalyst oxidizes water into oxygen at low applied overpotentials.
The light-assisted operation of the Co–Pi catalyst interfaced directly to high band-gap semiconducting metal oxide electrodes13–16 encourages its continued development for use in photoelectrochemical cells. The utility of the Co–Pi catalyst can be further advanced by integrating it with well-researched and technologically relevant photoanode materials, such as silicon. The silicon photoanode absorbs light in the visible range enabling higher efficiency harvesting of the solar spectrum. In this work, we use doped silicon wafers as substrates for processing cobalt metal thin films from which the Co–Pi catalyst forms.
Experimental
Photoactive P–N junction silicon substrates are prepared from P-type silicon wafers, with N-type doping. The substrates are prepared by growing a 10 nm thick layer of SiO2 (at 800 °C in dry O2) on top of a clean P-type silicon substrate (with boron doping level on the order of 1015 cm−3). The highly doped N-type contact layer is established by implantation of phosphorus atoms at energy of 20 keV, which leads to the maximum concentration of 7 × 1019 atoms cm−3 at the Si/SiO2 interface and a junction depth of around 200 nm. Then, rapid thermal annealing (900 °C for 10 s) in a forming gas is applied to reduce the implantation damage and activate the dopants, and is followed by chemically stripping the oxide layer.

        Silicon wafers are cut into 1 × 2 cm2 substrates. Immediately before introducing the substrates into the sputtering chamber (AJA International Orion 5 system), the substrates are immersed in 10% HF for silicon oxide removal. Low-pressure sputter deposition (10 mTorr) of a thin film of cobalt metal (800 nm thick) onto the P-type side and of indium tin oxide (ITO, 200 nm) onto the N-type side is performed at deposition rates of 1 Å s−1 (forming ITO/Si/Co structure). These layers serve both as chemically protective layers and as electrical contacts to the wafer. Using the same silicon substrate, control photoanodes are also fabricated. The control photoanode consists of ITO contacts sputtered on both sides of the wafer (forming ITO/Si/ITO structure).
To form the water oxidation catalyst, the ITO/Si/Co electrode is immersed in a phosphate buffer solution and an anodic bias is applied to it for transforming of the cobalt to Co–Pi, as described previously,11 forming the final ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi photoanode structure. A control photoanode consists of the ITO/Si/ITO structure with Co–Pi electrochemically deposited from solution onto the P-type side (forming ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi structure), with deposition conditions described previously.9,11Electrochemical deposition is performed in a two compartment H-cell using a CHI Instruments 760D Potentiostat/Galvanostat.

Fig. 1a shows a schematic of the device architecture for the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi photoanode. Fig. 1b shows an SEM image of the Co–Pi film formed on top of the ITO/Si/Co electrode after over-night processing under ambient conditions and a bias of 1.3 V (all potentials are reported versusAg/AgCl reference electrode). Fig. 1c shows the Co–Pi film formed by electrodeposition on the ITO/Si/ITO substrate at 1.1 V. Additional SEM images are presented in Fig. S1–S5 in the ESI†. The cracks seen in the SEM images are typical on Co–Pi films after drying.9,10SEM images were acquired by a FEI/Philips XL30 FEG ESEM. Chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and Aesar.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the silicon P–N junction photovoltaic device used as a photoanode coated with the thin film of the Co–Pi catalyst on the P-side and the ITO electrode on the N-side. SEM images of the (b) ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode and of the (c) ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi electrode show similar morphologies. The cracks that appear in the images form due to the drying of the Co-Pi film prior to the SEM imaging. 
Electrochemical characterization of the electrodes is performed in a quartz cell setup using a Pt mesh counter electrode, an Ag/AgCl reference electrode and 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7). The working electrode is either the ITO/Si/ITO, ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi, or ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode. In each case the electrode is masked using a MICCROStop Laquer (Tolber Chemical Division) to define an active working area of 1 cm2. The Ag/AgCl reference electrode is positioned in proximity to the working electrode.
Photolysis experiments are performed using a 1000 W Xe arc-lamp to characterize the behavior of the electrodes under illumination. The electrochemical cell is immersed in a water bath held at 10 °C that prevents heating of the sample, and also serves as an IR filter for lamp irradiation. After passing through the filters and lenses of the photolysis setup, the lamp illumination intensity is equivalent to 2 suns. The incident photon flux above the band gap of silicon (which corresponds to 37% of the solar spectrum)17,18 is 3.6 × 1020photons per s cm2. The reflected number of photons from the illuminated ITO-covered N-type side is measured to be 6.3 × 1018photons per s cm2 (about 2% of the incident light, measured at a 90° angle from the lamp with a thermal powermeter). Thus, we can determine that the samples absorb 3.5 × 1020photons per s cm2, a value that will be used for quantum yield calculations.
Results and discussion

Fig. 2 shows representative cyclic voltammograms (CV) of each photoanode structure under illumination and under dark conditions. Fig. 2a shows CVs taken in light and dark conditions for ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi. Fig. 2b and c show CV scans for the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi and ITO/Si/ITO, respectively. Note that the axes have been scaled for each set of data. In fact, the current density passing through the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi photoanode under illumination is roughly two orders of magnitude greater than through the ITO/Si/ITO and a factor of two greater than through the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi. The onset of the catalytic wave varies for each electrode under both illumination conditions. The onset of water oxidation for the ITO/Si/ITO electrode occurs at 1.35 V under illumination, and is higher than 1.6 V in the dark. The onset of the catalytic action for water oxidation (for which the thermodynamic limit is 0.62 V vs.Ag/AgCl at pH 7) occurs at lower applied potentials for the Co–Pi loaded photoanodes. For ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi, the onset occurs at 1.1 V in dark and 0.95 V under illumination. Better activity is achieved for the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode for which the onset occurs at 1.1 V in dark and as low as 0.85 V under illumination.
 Fig. 2  
          Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of (a) the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode, (b) the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi electrode, and (c) the ITO/Si/ITO electrode demonstrating the effect of light on current densities as conditions changed from dark (blue) to illuminated (red). Under illumination the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi exhibits the highest current densities, followed by ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi and ITO/Si/ITO. Note that both Y and X axes scales vary. 
Differences in performance are particularly clear in Fig. 3, which shows a comparison of steady-state current versus applied potential curves under dark and light conditions for the three photoanodes and of a glass/Co/Co–Pi electrode from a previous study.11 The current density (A cm−2) plotted at each applied potential is recorded at steady-state conditions after the current stabilized for each applied voltage. The ITO/Si/ITO electrode passes very little current (10 μA cm−2) compared to the Co–Pi loaded electrodes and shows negligible change between light and dark conditions. The ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi electrode exhibits higher dark current densities and demonstrates further increase under illumination. In this case, the current offset between dark and light conditions reaches 200 μA cm−2 at an applied potential of 1.35 V. The ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode reaches current densities higher than the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi electrode in dark conditions. In light conditions, the current density increases dramatically. More notably, the current offset between dark and light conditions over the catalytic regime of the electrode under illumination (between 0.85 V and 1.35 V) increases from 100 μA cm−2 (at 0.85 V) to 1 mA cm−2 (at 1.35 V) and even higher. We also note that the catalytic onset of the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode under illumination occurs earlier than under all other conditions, including the glass/Co/Co–Pi electrode. Knowing the incident photon flux, we determine the conversion yield of photons to charge per electrode at a given applied potential. We use the applied potential of 1.35 V and calculate the light induced currents only. The quantum yield of the ITO/Si/ITO cells is measured to be 1.5 × 10−7 electrons per photon. For the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi photoanode, the yield is higher at 3.7 × 10−6 electrons per photon. The ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi photoanode achieves an order of magnitude higher quantum yield than the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi photoanode, reaching a yield of 1.7 × 10−5 electrons per photon.
 Fig. 3  Current density vs. applied potential (I/V) curves for each electrode under dark and light conditions. The graph plots the steady-state current at each potential. The ITO/Si/ITO electrode shows minimal activity compared to the Co–Pi loaded electrodes. In dark conditions both Co–Pi loaded electrodes exhibit similar current densities; however, under illumination the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode has significantly higher current densities than ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi. For comparison, an I/V curve from a previous work11 corresponding to a glass/Co/Co–Pi electrode has been added (purple stars) to the new results to emphasize the improved, lower catalytic onset potential of the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode under illumination. 
Visual inspection of the electrodes at various potentials and illumination conditions reveals gas evolution at potentials as low as 0.85 V for ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrodes under light illumination, whereas all other electrodes required notably higher potentials (above 1.1 V) to produce the same effect. The ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi photoanode fabrication and processing provides a 250 mV advantage under illumination towards production of a given current density in the catalytic regime compared to the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi.
Fabrication and characterization of this suite of silicon-based photoanodes demonstrate that integrating the Co–Pi catalyst with a photoanode can significantly increase photocurrents. The judicious choice of materials and their sequencing on the photoanodic substrate is of primary importance to this demonstration. Silicon does not show water oxidation activity at potentials up to 1.35 V, even when conductive ITO contacts are used in place of the insulating native oxide. Illumination makes virtually no difference in this case. Integration of Co–Pi onto the silicon photoanode changes the behavior of the substrate, so that in dark, the catalytic onset occurs at 1.1 V. Although in dark conditions both the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi and the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi exhibit similar current densities, under illumination the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi achieves higher current densities. This performance enhancement might arise from a better, more ohmic contact formed between the Co–Pi layer and the underlying silicon substrate in the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode than between the Co–Pi layer, the ITO and the silicon contacts of the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi photoanode.
When considering the energy band structure of silicon with respect to the water oxidation potential, we note that the valence band of silicon is not at an oxidative potential versus the water/oxygen couple.19,20 Therefore the mismatch of energy bands at the silicon/catalyst interface is not deterministic in setting the operation of the photoanode. This study shows that the proper integration of a silicon photoanode and a catalytic material for water oxidation indeed improves the light-assisted catalytic activity and lowers applied potentials necessary to achieve water oxidation.
Conclusions
These results demonstrate the importance of material selection and device engineering for harnessing the solar spectrum towards catalytic chemical fuel production. The robust and abundant silicon electrode and direct processing of the cobalt metal produces an improved light-assisted water oxidation device.
Acknowledgements
E.R.Y. gratefully acknowledges the National Science Foundation for an American Competitiveness in Chemistry (ACC-F) postdoctoral fellowship (Grant No. CHE-0936816). R.C. and D.G.N. thank the Chesonis Family Foundation. We also acknowledge MIT NSF-sponsored Center for Materials Science and Engineering and MIT Microelectronics Technology Laboratory for providing us the material characterization and thin film growth tools.
Notes and references
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1978, 29, 189–222 CAS .
M. S. Wrighton, Acc. Chem. Res., 1979, 12, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, Science, 1984, 223, 1141–1148 CrossRef CAS .
M. Greatzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Esswein, Y. Surendranath, S. Y. Reece and D. G. Nocera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 499–504 RSC .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 109–114 RSC .
E. R. Young, D. G. Nocera and V. Bulovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1726–1728 RSC .
Y. Surendranath, M. Dinca and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2615–2620 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K. S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633–20636 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, J. Sun, H. Inumaru and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6086–6087 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4202–4207 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Seabold and K. S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1105–1112 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Henry, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 4494–4500 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, 2nd edn,  1981 Search PubMed .
A. Kumar, W. C. Wilisch and N. Lewis, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1993, 18, 327–353 CrossRef CAS .

          J. D. Plummer, M. D. Deal and G. B. Peter, Silicon VLSI Technology-Fundamentals, Practice and Modeling, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1st edn,  2000 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images of the Co thin film prior to Co–Pi formation, the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode post-processing and the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi electrode. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01209f‡ Equal contribution.§ Permanent address: Department of Chemistry, Amherst College, AC# 2243, Amherst, MA 01002, USA. E-mail: E-mail: eyoung@amherst.eduThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Integrating water-splitting electrocatalysts and photoanode materials is a longstanding challenge to achieve light-assisted water oxidation. Water-splitting to form molecular hydrogen and oxygen is an attractive paradigm for the generation of solar fuels. In order to advance water-splitting as a solar fuel cycle, it is necessary to develop stable photoanode structures for merging catalysts with photoanode materials. An inexpensive and scalable cobalt-based water-oxidizing catalyst, Co–Pi, has been previously reported and can be formed viaelectrodeposition from Co2+ ions in aqueous solutions containing potassium phosphate (KPi) at pH 7 or by direct formation from thin-film cobalt metal electrodes in KPi. We demonstrate utilization of a silicon photoanode as a substrate for processing cobalt metal films to form the Co–Pi catalyst. These photoanodes are compared to silicon photoanodes both without Co–Pi deposition and with solution-based electrodeposited Co–Pi. The silicon photoanodes with Co–Pi formed from cobalt metal thin films show the largest photocurrents of photoanode structures presented in this work, reaching current densities of up to 2 mA cm−2 under illumination.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the silicon P–N junction photovoltaic device used as a photoanode coated with the thin film of the Co–Pi catalyst on the P-side and the ITO electrode on the N-side. SEM images of the (b) ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode and of the (c) ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi electrode show similar morphologies. The cracks that appear in the images form due to the drying of the Co-Pi film prior to the SEM imaging.	 

 	Fig. 2  
          Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of (a) the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode, (b) the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi electrode, and (c) the ITO/Si/ITO electrode demonstrating the effect of light on current densities as conditions changed from dark (blue) to illuminated (red). Under illumination the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi exhibits the highest current densities, followed by ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi and ITO/Si/ITO. Note that both Y and X axes scales vary.	 

 	Fig. 3  Current density vs. applied potential (I/V) curves for each electrode under dark and light conditions. The graph plots the steady-state current at each potential. The ITO/Si/ITO electrode shows minimal activity compared to the Co–Pi loaded electrodes. In dark conditions both Co–Pi loaded electrodes exhibit similar current densities; however, under illumination the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode has significantly higher current densities than ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi. For comparison, an I/V curve from a previous work11 corresponding to a glass/Co/Co–Pi electrode has been added (purple stars) to the new results to emphasize the improved, lower catalytic onset potential of the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode under illumination.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SEM images of the Co thin film prior to Co–Pi formation, the ITO/Si/Co/Co–Pi electrode post-processing and the ITO/Si/ITO/Co–Pi electrode. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01209f
‡ Equal contribution.
§ Permanent address: Department of Chemistry, Amherst College, AC# 2243, Amherst, MA 01002, USA. E-mail: E-mail: eyoung@amherst.edu

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
