Membrane processes for a sustainable industrial growth  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2RA22580H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2RA22580H
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5694-5740Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMembrane processes for a sustainable industrial growth

        
          
            Maria Giovanna 
            Buonomenna
          
        
      *
      Ordine dei Chimici della Campania, Via A. Tari, 22 80138, Napoli, Italy. E-mail: mg.buonomenna@chimici.it
Received 
      19th October 2012
    , Accepted 20th December 2012First published on 20th December 2012AbstractThis review gives an overview of the key results in various fields of membrane technology with special emphasis to their exploitation in sustainable industrial applications. Considerable progress has been made in short time in a number of important application areas: membrane technology and engineering for water treatment, gas separation, purification and recovery in petrochemical, chemical, pharmaceutical, electronic industry, regenerative medicine etc. The basic properties of membrane operations (generally a-thermal; simple in concept and operation; modular and easy to scale-up; with a potential for more rational utilization of raw materials and recovery and reuse; compatible to a retrofit strategy) are at the basis of their integration into industrial practice.
1. Introduction
On 13th February 2012 the European Commission has presented “Innovating for Sustainable Growth: a Bioeconomy for Europe”, the action plan for a sustainable bio-economy in Europe.1 The bio-economy encompasses the sustainable production of renewable biological resources and their conversion and that of waste streams into food, feed, bio-based products such as bio-plastics, biofuels and bioenergy. It includes agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food and pulp and paper production, as well as parts of chemical, biotechnological and energy industries. The increasing world population and the way we produce and consume manufactured goods place unprecedented pressure on our environment. In spite of the recent discovery of new gas and oil reserves it is inevitable that their availability will eventually dwindle. This is particularly true as more populous nations make economic progress leading to an increase in the rate of consumption for these resources. Even the recent discovery of large reserves of U.S. shale gas, if used to supply a major portion of the country's need, will last for only a few decades.
In this context, a question remains as to how Chemical Engineering will tackle the challenges imposed by renewable resources. How will chemicals be produced? How will the grand challenges of energy and potable water supply be met?
A possible solution is offered by the process intensification strategy:2 increase of the competitiveness of the process industries by making industrial processes more efficient, faster and more environmentally friendly.
Van Gerven and Stankiewicz defined the fundamentals of process intensification with its four generic principles/objectives.3 For a long time, process intensification has been applied in only a few areas. Currently, it can offer a methodology to suit many chemical and related industries, from petroleum to pharmaceutical, agricultural, food, health, environmental, textile, electronics etc.
Membrane processes meet the requirements of process intensification because they have the potential to replace conventional energy-intensive techniques, to improve the performance of reactive processes.4 Membrane technology is today recognized as key factor for a sustainable growth in many industrial segments. One of the significant and recognized benefits of membrane operations is their low direct energy consumption because of the absence of phase transformations. The second, but not secondary, important feature is the possibility for reducing indirect energy consumption through the recycling and reuse of raw materials and secondary materials minimizing the formation of wastes.
Membrane technologies are in many fields recognized as amongst the best available technologies (BATs)5 in Waste Water and Waste Gas Treatment/Management Systems in the Chemical Sector, for Waste Treatments Industries, the Textiles Industry, in the Slaughterhouses and Animal By-products Industries.6
The framework concept of BATs was applied by Integrated pollution prevention and control directive (IPPC), 96/61/EC to the integrated control of pollution to the three media air, water and soil. The concept is also part of the directive's recast in 2008 (2008/1/EC) and its successor directive (Industrial Emissions Directive) published in 2010.5
Leading energy research centers in Europe focused their research on the separation technologies required for clean and sustainable energy systems. The relatively low energy consumption of membrane technology renders it a key component in a clean, green and sustainable energy system.
In 2010 a Memorandum of Understanding was signed by five leading membrane technology groups (EIMRA):7 the Energy Research Centre of the Netherlands (ECN), the Risø National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy in Denmark (DTU), the Flemish Institute for Technological Research in Belgium (VITO), SINTEF in Norway and Forschungszentrum Jülich in Germany.
EIMRA aims to facilitate the transition from basic research to applications of separation Technologies for Sustainable Energy Systems. In this way, EIMRA will contribute to the worldwide effort to enhance industrial efficiency and reduce carbon dioxide emissions.7
In Fig. 1 the overall membrane market trend in the USA and world is reported. For few other technologies the market growth is so rapid: the annual world sales only for the membranes increased by 7.8% and the world growth of the membrane plants is 60–80 times higher than that of membranes.8
 Fig. 1  USA and world membrane market.8 
The utilization of membrane operations as hybrid systems, in combination with other conventional techniques or integrated with different membrane operations is considered the way forward for more rationale applications.9 The synergic interactions derived from hybrid systems, make these systems advantageous in many industrial processes.10–14 The possibilities of redesigning various industrial sectors by combining various membrane operations have been studied and in some case realized with low environmental impacts and low energy consumption.15
What tools for indicating which of a membrane or traditional operation is more sustainable for a specific process?
IChemE (Institution of Chemical Engineers) recommend Sustainable Development Progress Metrics for use in the Process Industries, a document which is the result of the work and debate by a number of individuals drawn from industry, academia and consultancy. Three groups of indicators (or metrics) are presented: a) environmental indicators, b) economic indicators, c) social indicators, which reflect the three components of sustainable development. Most of the progress metrics are calculated in the form of appropriate ratios. Ratio indicators can be chosen to provide a measure of impact independent of the scale of operation, or to weigh cost against benefit, and in some cases they can allow comparison between different operations. For example, in the environmental area, the unit of environmental impact per unit of product or service value is a good measure of eco-efficiency.
Sikdar16 elucidates the above concept speaking of one-dimensional (1-D) (ecological, economic and sociological metrics, which measure, only one aspect of the system), 2-D and 3-D metrics. The 2-D metrics belong to the interactions of any two aspects of sustainability: we can identify eco-efficiency, socio-ecological and socio-economic metrics. 3-D metrics can be obtained from the intersection of all three aspects, which could be called true sustainability metrics. These seven types can be summarized below:16
Group 1 (1-D): economic, ecological, and sociological indicators
Group 2 (2-D): socio-economic, eco-efficiency, and socio-ecological indicators
Group 3 (3-D): sustainability indicators
Martins et al.17 evaluated plant performance by means of two sustainability metrics: mass and energy intensities. They were calculated by dividing the total consumption of non-renewable materials and energy required by the process, respectively, by the total mass of product. Lower values for both indicators are related to an intensified process with a lower impact on the global ecosystem. In this review, some of the most recent interesting results concerning membrane operations are presented and the impact of membrane technology on sustainable industrial growth is discussed.
2. Membrane unit operations: some recent progresses
The main industrial interests in membrane technology involve the separation of gas mixtures, wastewater treatment and water recycling, enhanced oil recovery, separations of organic liquids, oil to gas conversion. In Table 1 an overview of some characteristics (applied driving force, mode of separation and applications) of technically relevant membrane separation processes with recent references is given.
Table 1 Technically relevant membrane separation processes, their operating principles, and their application




Entry#
Separation process
Applied driving force
Mode of separation
Applications
Ref.




1
Microfiltration
Hydrostatic pressure (0.5-4 bar)
Filtration (size exclusion)
Water purification, sterilization

23–30



2
Ultrafiltration
Hydrostatic pressure (1-10 bar)
Filtration (size exclusion)
Separation &fractionation of molecular mixtures

31–40



3
Diafiltration
Hydrostatic pressure (1-10 bar)
Filtration (size exclusion); dialysation
Purification of molecular mixtures artificial kidney

41–48



4
Nanofiltration
Hydrostatic pressure (5-40 bar)
Filtration (size exclusion); solution-diffusion mechanism; donnan exclusion effect
Separation of sugars, other organic molecules and multivalent salts

49–55



5
Reverse osmosis
Hydrostatic pressure (10-100 bar)
Solution-diffusion mechanism
Sea & brackish water desalination

56–68



6
Forward osmosis
Natural osmosis (osmotic pressure gradient)
Solution-diffusion mechanism
Sea & brackish water desalination

69–80



7
Pressure retarded osmosis
Natural osmosis (osmotic pressure gradient)
Solution-diffusion mechanism
Sea & brackish water desalination

81–85



8
Dialysis
Concentration gradient
Diffusion
Drug delivery, artificial kidney

86–91



9
Donnan dialysis
Concentration gradient of individual ions
Diffusion Donnan exclusion
Water softening

92–97



10
Electrodialysis
Electrical potential
Migration Donnan-exclusion
Water desalination

96, 98–100



11
Electrodialysis reversal
Electrical potential due to different concentration (concentration cell)
Migration Donnan-exclusion
Water desalination

90, 101–104



12
Continuous Electrodeionization (CEDI)
Electrical potential
Migration Donnan-exclusion
Water desalination

105–108



13
Capacitive deionization (CapDI)
Electrical potential (electric double-layer capacitors)
Migration Donnan-exclusion
Water desalination

109–111



14
Gas separation
Vapor pressure gradient
Solution-diffusion
See the list of applications in Table 6

112–121



15
Pervaporation
Vapor pressure gradient
Solution-diffusion
Separation of azeotropic mixtures

122–129



16
Vapor permeation
Vapor pressure gradient
Solution-diffusion
Recovering of organic vapors from air

130–133



17
Membrane contactors
See the paragraph 2.6

134–141





Many membrane operations are practically based on the same materials, only differing in the methods. They cover all existing unit operations used in process engineering: concentrations, fractionations, clarifications, molecular separations in the liquid phase, in the gas phase, in suspensions. Traditional membrane separations such as microfiltration (MF), ultrafiltration (UF), nanofiltration (NF), reverse osmosis (RO), diafiltration, electrodialysis (ED), pervaporation (PV), gas separation (GS), already largely used in many different areas are completed with other membrane systems such as membrane contactors (membrane distillation, osmotic distillation, membrane emulsifiers, membrane crystallizers etc) and membrane reactors (membrane bio-reactors, submerged membrane reactors, inert membrane reactors, catalytic membrane reactors). Membrane reactors are example of integrated systems: molecular separation and chemical transformations in a single unit (for this reason they are not listed in Table 1, concerning only membrane separation processes).
Forward osmosis (FO) and pressure-retarded osmosis (PRO) (Table 1, entry 6 and 7, respectively) are emerging membrane separations technologies that have the potential to be innovative, sustainable, and affordable alternatives to RO and electro-dialysis reversal (EDR) because of their ability to utilize the green energy available in natural systems.18 For water reuse and desalination, FO requires much less energy to induce a net flow of water across the membrane compared to traditional pressure-driven membrane processes such as reverse osmosis (RO). However, different from RO, the permeate of FO is not a product water ready for consumption but a mixture of drawn water and draw solution. As a result, a second step of separation must be employed to produce clean water and to regenerate the draw solution. The world's first osmotic power plant with capacity of 4 kW was opened by Statkraft (Oslo, Norway) 24th November 2009 in Tofte, Norway. In June 2011 Statkraft and Nitto Denko/Hydranautics (Oceanside, CA, USA) have entered into an agreement on the development and supply of membranes for osmotic power: under this agreement, for the first time in the world, membranes specifically for the use in large scale osmotic power plants will be developed. The two companies acknowledge the need of innovation for creation of new business and will develop solutions for sustainable growth. Other emerging technologies considered as more economical alternative to RO for desalination are Continuous Electrodeionization (CEDI) and CapDI (Capacitive deionization) (Table 1, entries 12 and 13, respectively).
In the next paragraphs, recent progresses for some relevant and advancing membrane separation processes listed in Table 1, integrated into industrial practice are reported. An extensive treatise of all the membrane operations is far beyond the scope of this review and further reading of the relevant publications on the Membrane Science and Technology are recommended.19–22
2.1 Reverse osmosis
RO process has a strategic role in desalination for the production of drinkable water due to the basic properties common to other membrane operations, which are generally a-thermal do not involve phase changes or chemical additives, they are simply in operation, they are modular and easy to scale-up, they are low in energy consumption with a potential for recovery and reuse of byproducts. Among technologies as Multi Stage Flash (MSF), Multi Effect Distillation (MED), Vapor Compression (VC), which use thermal power to separate water from the brine, Electrodialisys Reversal (EDR), which uses high voltage current to remove cations and anions from the stream, Brackish Water Reverse Osmosis (BWRO) or Sea Water Reverse Osmosis (SWRO), are the fastest growing desalination technique which is beginning to dominate the current and future desalination markets (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Global desalination capacity by process.142 
The causes of RO surpass are mainly two: RO uses less energy than MSF (2.2–6.7 kWh/m3 for seawater RO desalination compared to 17–18 kWh/m3 for MSF) and RO recovery factor is higher than thermal processes (40–60% for RO with respect to 10–20% for thermal processes).
The important and growing role played by RO for the sea water desalination has been confirmed recently in the ceremony for 2011 Global Water Awards in Berlin, where the Sydney's Desalination Plant, one of the largest RO plants in the world, has been named “Desalination Plant of the Year”. The Sydney's Desalination Plant began providing drinking water in January 2010.
Sydney Water carried out extensive research on potential environmental and social impacts before the plant was built. This included reducing energy use, impacts on local flora and fauna, releasing seawater concentrate back into the ocean and construction impacts. The monitoring carried out at Sydney's desalination plant and the other Australian plants is considered to be the benchmark for the rest of the world. Turning seawater into drinking water uses a lot of energy. In the Sydney's Desalination Plant every kilowatt-hour of energy used is fully offset by renewable energy sourced from a purpose-built wind farm at Bungendore in NSW. The yearly generation capacity of the wind farm is greater than the yearly energy use at the desalination plant. Sydney's desalination plant can supply up to 15% of Sydney's current water needs. The plant can be quickly upgraded to twice its size if necessary, providing up to 30% of Sydney's water needs. The plant currently has an average capacity of 250 million litres a day.
There are other examples of desalination plants which respect the logic of a sustainable growth (see Table 2) and among them Thames Gateway merits some attention.
Table 2 Large RO Seawater Desalination plants in the world143




Plant Name/Location
Capacity (m3 day−1)




TSDP, Singapore
318500


Kurnell, Sydney
250000


Ashkelon, Israel
330000


Fujairah, UAE
171000


Point Lisas, Trinidad
109152


Tampa Bay Desalination Plant, USA
94750


Chennai Minjur/India
100000


Carboneras – Almeria, Spain
121280


Barcelona, Spain
200000


Campo de Cartagena – Mauricia, Spain
140230


Larnaca, Cyprus
54000


Beckton, Thames Gateway UK
150000


Hadera, Israel
388000


Sorek, Israel (under construction)
510000


Jebel Ali G RO, UAE
113500


Palmachim, Israel
120000


Ashdod, Israel
150000


Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
200112


Shuwaikh, Kuwait
114000


Mactaa, Algeria
500000


Souk Tleta, Algeria
200000


Wonthaggi, Victoria (Australia)
410000




Thames Gateway (Beckton, UK) is a 150000 m3 day−1 RO plant in Beckton, East London, drawing tidal brackish water from the Thames Estuary. In Fig. 3 a schematic of the water treatment processes adopted for the Desalination Plant is given. Ultrafiltration provides a barrier against viruses and other pathogens that can be automatically integrity tested. One of the RO major problems is its sensitivity to membrane fouling. High quality RO feed-water is required to ensure long term performance and efficient plant operation. Today, in an increased number of plants, membrane based pre-treatments (such as MF, UF, NF) are considered to replace conventional RO pre-treatment as coagulation, flocculation.
 Fig. 3  Thames Gateway (UK) desalination plant.144 
The RO plant is divided into three streams, each stream is identical, comprising four brine stages. The configuration was selected to maximise the overall system recovery to 84%. The permeate from the four RO stages flows via a common pipe to the post-treatment plant.144
Thames Gateway (UK) desalination plant was opened in June 2010 and can supply enough water for 1 million people. Energy recovery devices were supplied by Flowserve Calder, with UF membranes provided by Norit and RO membranes by Hydranautics. The project is the only facility of its kind in the UK, and obtains its entire power requirement from renewable energy generated onsite from biofuels – the first large-scale membrane desalination plant in the world to do so. Thames Water's determination to protect the environment and ensure sustainability is at the heart of the Beckton project. Crushed aggregate from the remains of abandoned buildings on the site was used in the foundations, while the company secured special permission to withdraw water during the ebb tide when the river is at its lowest salinity, in order to reduce the plant's energy consumption. Acoustic sound barriers and air blast systems are used to drive fish away from the intake during abstraction, ensuring maximum protection for marine life.
The possibility of easy integration of different but complementary membrane operations in RO pre-treatment (MF/UF/MBR/NF/Membrane Contactors) and post-treatment stages (Membrane contactor/Membrane Distillation/Membrane Crystallizer) (Fig. 4) allows to control and minimize fouling phenomena and has the potentialities to approach the concept of “zero-liquid-discharge” and “total raw materials utilization”.145–148
 Fig. 4  Integrated membrane operations for RO desalination. 
The growing number of large size desalination plants which adopt membrane technology as UF for the feed pretreatment (Souk Tleta desalination plant in Algeria, Beckton Thames Gateway desalination plant in UK, Palm Jumeirah desalination plant, Bahrain desalination plant, Ashdod desalination plant, Table 2) is due to the availability on the market of new high performance membranes for UF/MF as Multibore®Membrane by Inge watertechnologies AG (Greifenberg, Germany), Hyflux's Kristal® 600 series by Hyflux (Singapore), Seaguard membranes by Pentair X-Flow (Enschede, The Netherlands), INEA™ and ALTEON™ by Aquasource (Degremonte Groupe, Toulouse, France), etc.
The US Environmental Protection Agency considers the brine (Fig. 4), which is flushed back into the sea, as "industrial waste" that is harmful to sensitive marine ecosystems. At present the majority of desalination facilities discharge their concentrated waste streams into surface waters or oceans and safe and scrupulous measures are adopted to mitigate and control the impact of the discharged brine. In 2008149 a new water-purification system, which can solve the problem of the harmful brine by-product that is ordinarily dumped back into the sea, has been tested in UAE. The design of the system is by the German company I.E.S.150 The entire process has been studied with an exemplary intake flow rate of 1488 m3 d−1. The RO unit recovers 528 m3 d−1 of water, with another 600 m3 d−1 of water being extracted in the thermo distillation unit. 2160 kg d−1 of gypsum, 50400 kg d−1 of table salt and 10800 kg d−1 of magnesium-potassium concentrate are extracted in the mineral recovery units. The overall recovery of potable water amounts to 75% of the input water. Although there are many commercial membranes suitable to membrane distillation (MD) of seawater, there are very few commercial or pre-commercial MD modules.151
Vega-Beltrán et al151 studied a project entitled “Seawater Desalination by Innovative Solar-Powered Membrane-Distillation System”, MEDESOL (FP6-2005-Global-4, FP6-036986). The main project objective is the development and experimental assessment of solar multi-stage MD concept in order to obtain a high-efficiency and cost-effective system for stand-alone seawater desalination. Some MD modules have been connected with a particular design arrangement to minimize both, main and auxiliary energy consumptions. The selection of the system configuration is based on a generic membrane distillation module. The authors selected the configuration of the MD system among different candidate designs, prospected solar MD technology as function of available MD modules. The influence on system efficiency of main operational parameters of an individual module (temperature gradient across the membranes and maximum working temperature) has been evaluated.
George Lychnos et al.152 have recently proposed the idea that concentrated brines obtained by solar evaporation of seawater may be used to remove moisture from the air in the first stage of a desiccant cooling process. The use of concentrated brine in a solar-powered desiccant cycle for greenhouse cooling has been simulated for five cities with different types of climate and could be extended to sufficiently concentrated brine from RO desalination plants giving an excellent example of sustainable growth.
The salinity of the oceans changes slightly from around 32 ppt (3.2%) to 40 ppt (4.0%). Low salinity is found in cold seas, particularly during the summer season when ice melts. High salinity is found in the ocean ‘deserts’ in a band coinciding with the continental deserts. Due to cool dry air descending and warming up, these desert zones have very little rainfall, and high evaporation. The Red Sea located in the desert region but almost completely closed, shows the highest salinity of all (40 ppt) but the Mediterranean Sea follows as a close second (38 ppt). Lowest salinity is found in the upper reaches of the Baltic Sea (0.5%). The Dead Sea is 24% saline, containing mainly magnesium chloride MgCl2. Shallow coastal areas are 2.6–3.0% saline and estuaries 0–3%.
Seawater, interestingly, shows always the same proportions of dissolved ions being salinity differences caused by either evaporating fresh water or adding fresh water from rivers: chlorides, sulfates, bicarbonates, borate, fluoride (in decreasing order) of sodium, magnesium, calcium, potassium and strontium.
RO desalination is devoted to the production of drinkable water not only from seawater, but also from other sources containing type of ions different from those above listed. In 2011 the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Commissioner announced several actions to review the prevalence and impact of hexavalent chromium in public water supplies. The actions have been appeared urgent on the basis of the study results by the Environmental Working Group citing presence of hexavalent chromium in 31 of 35 cities tested as well as a host of other harmful industrial chemicals and pharmaceuticals drugs. In the same year, 3 M Clean Water Solutions (St. Paul, MN) reports 3 M™ Reverse osmosis drinking water filtration system certified for the reduction of chromium-6.
Recently (2011),153 Dow Water & Process Solutions (Minneapolis, MN) announced the next generation of Dow FILMTEC™ reverse osmosis: FILMTEC™ LC HR 4040 and FILMTEC™ LC LE 4040 utilize advanced membrane chemistry to deliver high-quality water (rejection rate of 99.7%) at low total cost of ownership. The element is ideally suited for processes with high quality/high volume water requirements such as those found in pharmaceutical, car wash and industrial applications.
RO desalination is strategic in ultrapure water for the electronic industry as well as. Sustainable development in the ultrapure water market goes hand-in-hand with the electronics market. The line width of microelectronic devices has decreased to 0.2 μm and is supposed to go down to nanometers. Under these conditions, even a particle of size half the line width will become a large impurity. Often considered the lifeblood of a semiconductor chip fabrication facility, or “fab,” the systems to produce ultra-pure water are essential since a chip comes into contact with ultrapure water more than 35 times during the production process. Any disruption of service or “out-of-spec” water can compromise the chips and even result in loss of product.
RO, alone, is not sufficient to achieve such high level of purity. Along with RO, methods such as UF, deionization, and UV sanitization are adopted to achieve the required specifications. A special Report of the tech magazine IEEE Spectrum, Engineers of the New Millennium: The Global Water Challenge, reports a podcast with an impressive title: Semicondutor Manufacturing Plants can use as much water as a small city. It is reported that one chip manufacturing plant uses anywhere between 2 to 4 million gallons of ultrapure water per day, and that, on the average, is roughly equivalent to the water usage of a city of maybe 40000 to 50000 people. The water that is being cleaned is already very clean, but also very small traces of impurity must be removed, because, if water has any contaminants in it, it will be harmful. A very interesting point is about bacteria: any bacteria, live or dead, cannot be tolerated because they typically have some of the trace elements in them like phosphorus and carbon. These traces of these compounds will change the electrical properties of the silicon wafer.
In addition to its requirement in chip manufacturing, ultrapure water is also used in large quantities in solar photovoltaic manufacturing industries. Considering the pollution from fuels, carbon emissions, and the need for an alternate source of energy, different governments invest in strategic programs for photovoltaic and consequently many large and small companies have entered the solar photovoltaic market with products ranging from solar cells, to solar modules and panels.
High Efficiency Reverse Osmosis (HERO)154 is a proprietary system originally developed to provide ultrapure water to the microelectronics industry. HERO has several potential advantages over conventional RO: greater water recovery, higher quality permeate, higher operating flux and generally lower costs. HERO systems are most advantageous for applications with challenging feed water (e.g., with a silica content greater than 20 ppm) or in areas with high water costs, limited available water, high water quality requirements, or zero liquid discharge requirements. In Fig. 5 a schematic of the HERO technology is given.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the HERO™ technology. 
The key to HERO is the chemical pretreatment that the feed water undergoes before undergoing RO. Feed water entering the system typically contains many dissolved and suspended impurities, including magnesium, calcium, silica, chlorine, and bacteria. Hard water leads to scaling i.e., calcium and magnesium compounds precipitate onto the RO membrane (shortens membrane life and increases maintenance costs) at the high pH and high recoveries used in the RO phase of the HERO process. To remove hardness constituents such as calcium and magnesium, chemicals may be added to the feed water to raise the alkalinity to the same level as the hardness concentration.
This hardness/alkalinity balance increases the efficiency of the subsequent weak acid cation softening process. To produce soft water, hydrogen ions from the weak acid cation resin are exchanged with hard ions in the water. The addition of hydrogen ions converts much of the feed alkalinity (i.e. carbonates) to carbonic acid and carbon dioxide. Additional acid may be added to this water to completely convert all the remaining alkalinity to free carbon dioxide gas, which then may be removed via degasification. This step improves the final water quality and reduces the amount of chemicals required to raise the pH in the next step. In the next step, the pH of the feed water is raised to pH 10.5 to increase the solubility of the silica and destroy biological organisms in the feed water. The feed water then enters the RO system. For systems larger than 50 gpm, capital costs for HERO are generally about 15% lower because of the higher flux rate, which allows fewer RO membranes to be used. Because of higher water recovery rates and reduced fouling and scaling of the RO membranes, HERO operating and energy costs are also typically less than those of conventional RO. Case studies suggest that, depending on the characteristics of the feed water and water costs, operating a HERO system costs about 20%–40% less than operating a conventional RO system.
Below, two examples of industrial applications of HERO systems are proposed. Chemplast Sanmar Limited is the flagship company of the Sanmar Group, a leading industrial house in South India. They manufacture Chloro-chemicals, PVC Resins, Caustic Soda/Chlorine, Chlorinated Solvents and Silicon Wafers. Chemplast's primary intent was to treat the rejects from the Reverse Osmosis (RO) system by Evaporation/ Crystallization so as to achieve Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD). For Chemplast, Aquatech designed a ZLD System based on the HERO™ technology (Fig. 6). The combined effluents are processed to recycle the treated soft water for cooling tower make-up and other usages in the plant. HERO™ system totally eliminates possibility of biological growth in the permeate. The concentrate dissolved solids in the reject stream are followed by Mechanical Vapor Compression based ZLD system. The overall recovery of the complete ZLD system at Chemplast is over 97%.
 Fig. 6  Process flow diagram of ZLD designed by Aquatec for Chemplast.154 
In December 2010 AU Optronics Corp.155 announced the inauguration of AUO SunPower Sdn. Bhd in Malaysia. General Electric (GE) has been selected to supply the new SunPower-AUO joint venture solar cell fabrication plant with an ultra-pure water system to meet the needs of its next generation manufacturing facility (Fig. 7). GE supplied and installed the internationally patented HERO process. The system, operating on a challenging and variable feedwater source, provides 2400 gallons per minute of ultra-pure water for manufacturing. AUO SunPower is located in Melaka's “solar valley”, south of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
 Fig. 7  Ariel view of the new SunPower-AUO joint venture solar cell fabrication plant in Malaysia which use HERO™ technology.155 
The construction will continue through 2013 and, when completed, is expected to generate more than 1400 megawatts annually of high-efficiency solar cells. The SunPower-AUO facility will be the largest silicon solar manufacturing factory in the world: the two-building facility will be more than 1 million square feet, which is approximately the size of seven U.S. football fields, and will house 28 solar cell production lines when fully online.

2.1.1 Membrane materials. 
An extensive treatise about the membrane materials for RO is far beyond the scope of this review and further reading of the recent publications on the subjects are recommended (see references 156–159).
The earliest commercial RO membranes (based on the work of Loeb and Sourirajan)160 were derived from cellulose acetate and had a dense surface-skin grading continuously into a more open substructure.
The asymmetric polymeric membranes were rapidly overtaken by membranes in which the active separating layer (thin film) and the porous support-layer were optimized separately, from different materials (composite membranes). The thin-film composite approach is adopted in most modern RO membranes. The real breakthrough in composite-membrane design came with the discovery by Cadotte patented in 1978:161 an aqueous solution of a reactive prepolymer, such as a polyamine, is deposited in the pores of a microporous support membrane, such as a polysulfone ultrafiltration membrane. The amine-loaded support is then immersed in a water-immiscible solvent solution containing a reactant, such as a diacid chloride in hexane. The amine and acid chloride react at the interface of the low immiscible solutions to form a densely crosslinked, extremely thin membrane layer. In Fig. 8 a polyamide thin film membrane constituting the top coating layer of a composite membrane is shown.
 Fig. 8  Polyamide thin-films constituting the top coating layer of a composite membrane. (a) SEM image of the film top surface. (b) TEM cross-section (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 162). 
In these last years, the research in the field of RO membranes concerned advanced membranes characterized by high productivity and resistance to fouling leading to significant energy reduction in desalination process. In fact, apart from the cost of energy to run the high-pressure pumps, membrane fouling is an important factor that controls the cost of RO water purification unit. Since the maintenance and remediation expenses represent an important contribution for the total operating cost, membranes with inherent antifouling capability are urgent needed. Better understanding insight into the membrane structure associated with advancements in membrane characterization techniques (e.g. Atomic Force Microscopy as tool to characterize membrane surface roughness) has played an important role to produce membranes with enhanced permeability maintaining high salt rejection. In Fig. 9 the improvement of performance of commercial RO membranes (Dow Filmtec seawater and Toray brackish water series) is shown.
 Fig. 9  The development of RO membrane by reaction optimisation and post synthesis surface modifications: (a) Dow Filmtec seawater series and (b) Toray brackish water series (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 156). 
Fouling in RO membranes is controlled by interactions between the membrane surface and solutes such as proteins, carbohydrates and bacteria. Thus the surface properties of the RO membrane are critical to its susceptibility to fouling. Of surface properties such as roughness, charge and hydrophobicity, a number of studies suggest that surface roughness may be the most important.163–166 Surface roughness was strongly correlated with flux decline in bench scale tests of a number of RO and NF membranes. A colloid probe AFM study167 of a rough reverse osmosis membrane (AFC99, PCI Membranes) found that adhesive forces between the colloid probe and surface were 20 times lower at the peaks than in the valleys, suggesting that colloid fouling could be greatly reduced if the periodicity of the roughness was small enough to prevent penetration of the colloids into the valleys. One way to change these properties is to modify the chemistry of the membrane. Modification of surface roughness forms the basis of the GE Osmonics Duraslick membrane, in which a smooth surface is obtained by interposing a proprietary polymer layer between the polysulfone substrate and the polyamide thin film.168
Norberg et al.169 reported that increased hydrophilicity, lower surface charge and greater smoothness were associated with better antifouling performance. In addition, there have been studies, which alluded to the possible correlation between higher flux and increased roughness, possibly due to an increased interfacial area between the rough membrane surface and the feed solution.170,171 In a recent paper, Ramon and Hoek172 presented theoretical results which offer further insights into the fundamental challenges in designing high flux, fouling resistant RO membranes.
While fouling results seem fairly consistent (i.e. rougher membranes foul more quickly and are harder to clean), high permeability has been correlated with both increased and decreased roughness. The study of Ramon and Hoek172 reports attempts to clarify the role that membrane morphology plays in transport through composite structures by applying their previously developed model173 to a few simplified geometrical representations, which capture the essential features of polyamide composite RO membrane surface. In Fig. 10, the transport through the solid phase of the support material is considered.
 Fig. 10  Representative simulations of membrane segments over a porous support with a permeable solid phase (set to be equally permeable as the coating film) showing the concentration field and diffusive streamlines emerging under the combined effect of film roughness and support pores (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 172). 
Aligned (Fig. 10a) and non-aligned (Fig. 10b), double porosity (or wavelength) supports are also assigned a permeant diffusion coefficient (in the “solid” phase of the support, which is really microporous) that is identical to that of the coating film. The flux distribution is dampened when the microporosity of the support membrane offers diffusion equal to that of the coating film. However, the authors have not accounted for any differences in solute or solvent partitioning into the support membrane microporous regions.172 The original cellulose acetate integrally skinned RO membranes represent a case where the solubility and diffusivity of solvent and solutes should be roughly the same throughout the microporous regions of the skin layer and supporting layer. The authors made the following conclusions to design RO thin film composite membranes: i) making a film rougher will increase its permeability if proportional cross-sections of the film decrease in thickness to enable other cross-sections to increase in thickness; ii) having a support membrane always reduces permeability, unless it has a highly porous skin layer and its solid phase exhibits microporosity and structure that permit transport comparable to or greater than the overlying coating film. However, the results, reported by the same authors in another study,173,174 suggest that in order to maximize rejection, large pores and low porosity are desirable. Therefore, there might be a compromise in terms of rejection for a support prepared on the basis of the above characteristics. In addition to research into conventional polymeric thin film composite RO membranes, nanotechnology has opened the way to produce membrane functionalized with discrete nanoparticles or nanotubes. In Table 3 a general classification of novel desalination membranes for RO is given.175 Recent reviews by Hoek,176 Mattia,156 van der Bruggen159 propose an extensive overview for these new RO membranes.
Table 3 Classification of novel desalination membranes




Membrane type
Schematic
Ref.





Inorganic


a) Ceramic





159, 176




b) Metallic







Thin film nanocomposite (TFN)





158, 176–178









Bio-inspired membranes





176, 156










In 2005 Hoek et al.177 report about interfacial polymerization of thin film nanocomposite (TFN) RO membranes. The goal, is to embed molecular sieve nanoparticles throughout the polyamide thin film layer of an interfacial composite RO membrane. The most prominent nanoparticles being investigated are zeolites, silver, TiO2, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and silica particles. The recent reviews by Bart Van der Bruggen,159 Misdan,157 Cao,158 Hoek178 report the membrane preparation details for several examples of RO TFN membranes. Because of the enhanced mechanical stability observed for nanocomposite materials, RO membranes comprising polyamide thin films coated over nanocomposite-polysulfone supports were hypothesized to “resist” physical compaction better than polyamide thin films formed over pure polysulfone supports. Pendergast et al.179 assess the compaction behavior of hand-cast nanocomposite supported polyamide composite membranes relative to polysulfone supported polyamide composite membranes to help understand and control irreversible, internal fouling of RO membranes by physical compaction. All but one nanocomposite-polysulfone supported RO membrane experienced less flux decline compared to pure polysulfone supported RO membranes. The performance advantage of nanocomposite supported membranes was greater at higher applied pressure. Electron microscope images support the hypothesis that nanocomposite supports resisted physical compaction. Fathizadeh et al.180 reported the preparation and characterization of thin film nanocomposite based on polyamide and nano-NaX zeolite (40–150 nm), coated via interfacial polymerization of trimesoylchloride (TMC) and m-phenylenediamine (MPD) monomers over porous polyethersulfone ultrafiltration support. The results showed that addition of nano-NaX zeolite to the polyamide membrane led to improvement of surface properties such as RMS roughness, contact angle and solid–liquid interfacial free energy, a decrease in film thickness and an increase in pore size and water flux. In Fig. 11, the membrane surface and cross section characterization is shown.
 Fig. 11  SEM images of the surface (a) and cross section morphology (b) of TFN membranes (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 180). 
Biological lipid bilayers containing aquaporins (the protein channels that control water flux across biological membranes) transport water and maintain selectivity that far surpasses all commercial RO membranes. Kumar et al. include Aquaporin-Z from E. coli bacterial cells in a polymeric membrane demonstrating that aquaporins are functional for synthetic applications.181 The resulting protein–polymer membrane demonstrates over an order of magnitude increase in water permeability over a purely polymeric membrane, as well as full rejection of glucose, glycerol, salt, and urea.
Overall, bio-inspired membranes are farthest from commercial reality, but offer the most promise for performance enhancements; however, nanocomposite membranes offering significant performance enhancements are already commercially available.

2.2 Forward osmosis (FO)
The concept of osmotic energy generation is not recent, but most of the early works,182–187 were discontinued owing to the lack of suitable membranes for the process.
The term “osmosis” describes the natural diffusion of water through a semi-permeable membrane from a solution of a lower concentration to a solution with a higher concentration (Fig. 12a).
 Fig. 12  Schematic of FO process (C1(M) and C2(M) are the solution concentration in molarity (M)). C2 solution is the draw solution, containing the draw solutes (or osmotic agents). 
RO and FO are common in that they use semi-permeable membranes to separate dissolved solutes from water (Fig. 12b–c). The semipermeable membrane acts as a barrier that allows water to pass through, while rejecting salts, organics, and proteins, as well as viruses, bacteria, and other pathogenic material. FO exploits the osmotic pressure difference that develops when a semi-permeable membrane separates two solutions of different concentrations. Instead of employing hydraulic pressure as the driving force for separation in the RO process, FO uses the osmotic pressure gradient across the membrane to induce a net flow of water through the membrane into what is referred to as the “draw” solution, thus efficiently separating the freshwater from its solutes (Fig. 12b). Driven by an osmotic pressure gradient, FO does not require significant energy input as in the comparable case of RO.
In osmosis, the osmotic pressure itself is the driving force for mass transport, depending on the molar concentration. FO uses the osmotic pressure differential Δπ across the membrane, rather than hydraulic pressure differential Δp (as in RO) (Fig. 12c). The FO process results in dilution of a highly concentrated stream. The concentrated solution on the permeate side of the membrane is the driving force in the FO process (Fig. 12b). The flux direction of the permeating water in FO and RO is opposite and different from RO, the permeate of FO is not a product water, ready for consumption, but a mixture of drawn water and draw solution.
In Table 4 a comparison between FO and RO processes is given. FO requires much less energy to induce a net flow of water across the membrane compared to RO (operation at low or no hydraulic pressure), but a second step of separation must be employed to produce clean water and to regenerate the draw solution.
Table 4 Main differences between FO and RO72




Process
Advantages
Disadvantages
Challenges




FO
Less energy intensive for water transport across the semi-membranes; more reversible fouling
Permeate water ≠ product; requires a second separation step
Ineffective membranes; lack of cost effective draw solutes; limited studies on fouling


RO
Permeate water = high quality product
High energy consumption; some irreversible fouling
How to improve energy recovery efficiency; how to mitigate membrane fouling




The second step of separation might be energy intensive if inappropriate draw solutes and recycle processes were utilized. Therefore, one must take both costs of FO membranes and draw solute recycle into consideration in order to have a fair comparison of a FO technology with other water production technologies. Although the fouling behavior of FO membranes is more reversible than RO membranes,188–190 the removal of foulants in the former is more complicated than the latter because of the internal concentration polarization when the feed stream faces the porous sublayer.191–193
In 2008, Gerstandt et al.194 provided the fundamental knowledge of energy production for an osmotic power plant. Recently, Chung and colleagues72 summarized the state-of-art of FO technologies in terms of membranes and draw solutes. They analyzed the prospective of FO processes in order to conduct meaningful R&D and develop effective and sustainable technologies for clean water and clean energy. Different research papers by the same groups report about the use of several compounds as draw solutes (osmotic agent) such as 2-methylimidazole-based compounds,73 thermosensitive magnetic nanoparticles,74 super hydrophilic nanoparticles,77 polyelectrolytes.78 Polyelectrolytes have proven their advantages as draw solutes in forward osmosis process in terms of high water flux, minimum reverse flux, and ease of recovery.
As mentioned in paragraph 2, Statkraft, one of the major energy providers in Norway, is the first company that pioneered serious research on osmotic power by mixing river water and seawater across a semi-permeable membrane building the first prototype plant in 2009.195
In 2001, Statkraft invited GKSS-Forschungszentrum to develop a suitable osmosis membrane for osmotic power. Two different types of membranes were optimised: thin film composites (TFC) and asymmetric cellulose acetate. In 2011 Statkraft has entered into an agreement with Nitto Denko/Hydranautics to develop and supply membranes for osmotic power.
In September 2012 Modern Water (UK) has announced the installation and commissioning of its 200 m3 d−1 forward osmosis desalination plant at Al Najdah in the Al Wusta region of Oman. The UK company was awarded the contract to build and operate the plant in June 2011 by Oman's Public Authority for Electricity and Water. The plant of Al Najdah started producing product water at full capacity in July 2012 and during August 2012 testing was undertaken which saw the water quality exceed contractual standards. The plant is now operating commercially at full capacity and the Group has now entered into the 12 month operation and maintenance (O&M) phase. It is the world's first commercial forward osmosis desalination plant and the Group's second plant in Oman. The first plant of forward osmosis installed was in Al Khaluf (Fig. 13). In the Modern Water’s process osmotic agent system recirculates transferring pure water from the seawater (the feed) to the regeneration (permeate extraction) system. In the first stage, feed-water is fed under low pressure to the forward osmosis membranes, which are highly resistant to fouling and are resistant to oxidizing agents. The osmotic agent, on the other side of the membrane, draws fresh water from the seawater due to a difference in osmotic pressure. This fresh water dilutes the osmotic agent. In the second stage, permeate is extracted from the system. The pure water is removed from the dilute osmotic agent which is regenerated (or concentrated) for reuse in the first stage. This can be achieved in a number of ways depending on the proprietary osmotic agent selected. Several are the benefits of FO osmosis technology compared to RO: i) energy consumption typically up to 30% lower than conventional RO; ii) inherently low fouling characteristics (both particulate and biological fouling); iii) significantly reduced product boron levels without post-treatment when compared to conventional RO; iv) higher availability than a conventional RO plant due to low fouling, simple cleaning and ease of operation.
 Fig. 13  a) Picture and b) schematic of FO osmosis plant in Al Khaluf (Oman). 
Chung and colleagues79 proposed the concept of a polyelectrolyte-promoted forward osmosis/membrane distillation (FO–MD) hybrid system, applied to recycling the wastewater containing an acid dye (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of the lab-scale FO–MD hybrid system (reproduced with permission by ACS, ref. 79). 
In 2011, Hydration Technology Innovations LLC (Scottsdale, AZ) and Eastman Chemical Co. (Kingsport, TN) proposed HydroPack™. The HydroPack™ is a paper-thin pouch that overnight can turn dirty water in to a flavored, healthy drink. The pouch is a forward-osmosis water purifier that draws water though a membrane to combine with a powdery substance that converts it into a Gatorade®-type drink.

2.2.1 Membrane materials. 
Recently, Chung et al.72 summarized the state-of-art of FO membranes for low pressures processes. In FO application for desalination and water treatment, the active layer of the membrane faces the feed solution and the porous support layer faces the draw solution (Fig. 12).
The ideal material of membranes for FO and pressure retarded osmosis (PRO) would have a high active-layer density and result in high solute rejection; the thin membrane film, having minimum porosity of the support layer, would minimize internal concentration polarization, and therefore, provide a higher water flux. In addition, it would be desired that the membrane be hydrophilic for enhanced flux and reduced membrane fouling. Both non-solvent phase inversion method and the thin-film composition (TFC) method via interfacial polymerization on porous substrates were used to prepare FO membranes.72 Another method used to prepare FO membranes is the layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition of nanometer-thick polycations and polyanions on porous charged substrates.196
The membrane materials used with reported some relevant references are listed in Table 5. Usually, membranes derived from the phase inversion method have relatively low fluxes compared to those membranes made from TFC approach. In addition the phase inversion membrane also tends to have a greater sub-layer resistance and internal concentration polarization (ICP) owing to the difficulties in controlling the selective skin and sublayer morphology simultaneously during the rapid phase inversion process.72
Table 5 Membrane materials for Membrane Contactor allowing two fluid phases to contact each other248




System
Membranes




Gas–Liquid (Vapor–Liquid)
Porous polypropylene membranes; porous tetrafluoroethylene membranes; porous poly-4-methyl-1-pentene membranes with a dense skin; polysulfone membranes with a nonporous hydrophobic high free volume fluoropolymer coating. Dense skin or dense coating employed, have as high a permeance as possible (e.g., silicone rubber) without allowing the liquid phase to permeate through; the porous support should be as porous as possible.


Liquid–Liquid
Porous hydrophobic polypropylene in hollow-fiberform (Celgard Inc., Charlotte, NC); Fluorinated copolymers (Mykrolis Inc., Billerica, MA) are good candidates for use with most solvents (exceptions include perflourinated solvents) as hydrophobic membranes; membranes based on nylon, regenerated cellulose, or polyacrylonitrile have been successfully employed with aqueous phase in pores; porous ceramic membranes having a polymeric coating (Kühni AG, Allschwil, Switzerland).




In 2010 Wang et al. were the first in inventing double-skinned FO membranes to reduce the ICP effects. These new membranes consists of a less selective nanofiltration (NF) skin layer, a fully porous cross-section, and a highly selective RO skin layer.197 Subsequent theoretical and experimental works have confirmed the unique characteristics and advantages of this type of membrane morphology such as low fouling and low ICP.198,199
Qi et al.200 investigated another strategy to reduce fouling and ICP by studying the effect of LbL active layer properties on the FO performance. A series of FO membranes were prepared with varied number of polyelectrolyte bilayers which were composed of positively charged poly(allylaminehydrochloride) (PAH) and negatively charged poly(sodium4-styrene-sulfo-nate) (PSS), with either PAH or PSS as the terminating layer. The active layers were characterized in terms of contact angle, surface roughness, and zeta potential, which were exploited to explain the variations of the hydraulic permeability and the solute permeability.
In recent studies by Wang et al.201 and Widjojo et al.,202 it is reported that the hydrophilicity of porous substrates plays an important role on TFC FO membranes. TFC membranes that are interfacially polymerized on hydrophilic porous substrates not only show reduced ICP effects but also have a very high water flux. Han et al.203 proposed a novel sulfonated poly(ether ketone) (SPEK) polymer with super-hydrophilic nature as the substrate material to fabricate high performance thin-film composite (TFC) membranes for desalination via FO. m-Phenylenediamine (MPD) and 1,3,5-trimesoyl chloride (TMC) were employed as the monomers for the interfacial polymerization reaction to form a thin aromatic polyamide selective layer. It has been demonstrated that blending a certain SPEK material into the polysulfone (PSU) substrate of TFC-FO membranes not only plays the key role to form a fully sponge-like structure, but also enhances membrane hydrophilicity and reduces structure parameters. It has been demonstrated that the membrane structure parameter, an indicator of potential ICP, can be significantly decreased by blending a certain amount of hydrophilic sulfonated materials into the membrane substrates.

2.3 Continuous electrodeionization (CEDI)
Electrochemical deionization (EDI), also called electrodeionization, is a process that removes ionizable species from liquids using ionically active media and an electrical potential to influence ionic transport. Continuous Electrodeionization (CEDI) is an electrodeionization process where the ion transport properties of the active media are the primary scale-up parameters. CEDI is based on a combination of electrodialysis and conventional ion-exchange, making use of the advantages of both processes, i.e. the continuous operation of electrodialysis and the effective removal of salts by ion-exchange. CEDI devices combine the use of ion exchange resins, ion exchange membranes and electrodes without the need for regeneration chemicals.
The EDI process was discovered in the 1950s204,205 in a laboratory, and the first commercial apparatus for the production of high-purity water was available in 1987 under the trade name Ionpure. Since the first practical application of CEDI for the production of high quality deionized water, the process has reached a substantial technical and commercial relevance today as a final demineralization step after a reverse osmosis desalination treatment. In Fig. 15 a process schematic is shown.
 Fig. 15  Schematic of CEDI. 
Under the influence of the electric field, cations will migrate in the direction of the negatively charged cathode, through the cation-exchange resin, cation-permeable membrane and into the concentrating stream. An anion permeable membrane on the opposite side of that stream prevents further migration, effectively trapping the cations in the concentrating stream. The process for anion removal is analogous, but in the opposite direction, toward the positively charged anode. The CEDI cell combines the benefits of ion exchange and electrodialysis while minimizing the problems associated with each of these separate technologies. The ion exchange resin provide high ionic conductivity to the normally high resistance found in the dilute compartments of an electrodialysis cell. The resin's high ionic capacity increases the residence time of the ionic contaminants inside the cell allowing more time for the transport of these ions into the appropriate compartments. The electrodes generate a potential gradient for ionic movement within the cell. At cation/anion (resin/resin and resin/membrane) interfaces water is dissociated into its constituent ions, H+ and OH−, which regenerate the resins on-line, so there is no down time or need for regenerative chemicals as in ion exchange.
The spiral CEDI devices are analogous to a spiral-wound RO element, but with the ion exchange membrane, resins, and spacers wound spirally around a center electrode rather than a permeate tube. Spiral-wound CEDI devices are installed inside a pressure vessel, but configurations vary, with product water flow parallel to or perpendicular to the center electrode. One type of spiral CEDI device is shown in Fig. 16.206
 Fig. 16  Spiral-wound CEDI device (shown without housing) (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 206). 
CEDI technology have numerous applications in many engineering fields.207,208 It is believed that there are more than 1300 industrial size CEDI installations worldwide, about 95% of which have been supplied by U.S. Filter. CEDI is now applied on large industrial scale as a cost effective alternative to the previously used ion-exchange deionization techniques to provide deionized water of extremely low conductivity. Deionized water is used for the production of electronic components and pharmaceuticals, for cleaning metal surfaces, in analytical laboratories and as boiler feed water. Recent papers by Oren209 and Jonathan Wood206 describe the mechanisms of operation, types of device construction, and principal industrial applications CEDI.
2.4 CapDI technology
During 2010 a feasibility study made by Voltea B.V. (Sassenheim, The Netherlands) in collaboration with the Delft Blue Water project consortium (Delfuent, Evides, Veolia, Hoogheemraadschap Delfland) showed that CapDI technology (capacitive deionization) can desalinate wastewater more efficiently than other competing technologies such as RO.210
In CapDI, water flows through a small electrical field of 1.5 volts that is created by a pair of electrodes. Dissolved ions are pulled out of the water stream, toward the electrodes. The electrodes are separated from the water by membranes that selectively allow only positive or negative ions to pass (Fig. 17). CapDI is effective at removing all type of ions from water (e.g. calcium, sodium, chloride, sulfate, carbonate etc.).
 Fig. 17  Schematic of the main steps of CAPDI: purification (step 1); regeneration (step 2) and flushing (step 3). 
The main steps of the CapDI Process are:
1) Purification: as saline water flows into the CapDI module, the oppositely charged electrodes attract the ions and pull them through the selective membranes where the ions collect on the electrodes. Clean, desalinated water flows out of the system (step 1, Fig. 17);
2) Regeneration: once the surfaces of the electrodes become saturated with ions, they are regenerated by reversing the electrical charge of the electrodes. Since like charges repel, the ions are pushed out of the electrodes and become trapped between the membranes (step 2, Fig. 17);
3) Flushing: the concentrated brine between the two membranes is flushed from the system. The charge of the electrodes is returned to normal and the system is again ready to desalinate (step 3, Fig. 17).
CapDI is the most energy efficient technology available for removing salt from brackish water. CapDI saves electricity by reusing the energy stored in the electrodes during desalination, a process similar to recharging a battery. CapDI does not require any chemicals such as biocides or anti-scalants.
Voltea B.V. as part of a project for the development of a wastewater recycling plant for agricultural use, financed in 2011 by the Dutch Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, is building a full scale CapDI treatment unit to desalinate 5–10 m3 h−1 of effluent from the Harnaschpolder Wastewater treatment plant near Delft. The project goal is to produce desalinated water than can be reused for irrigation at local greenhouses.
2.5 Organic solvent nanofiltration
Organic Solvent Nanofiltration (OSN) membranes have recently emerged on the market to broaden the applications from aqueous to organic feeds in nanofiltration and reverse osmosis. The control of impurities is a critical issue in pharmaceutical industry and very strict regulations related with this issue have been introduced by International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH).211 Organic syntheses in the pharmaceutical industry are often carried out in organic solvents and involve products with high added value that have to be separated from the organic solvents. Conventional separations are materials or energy intensive (in the chemical industry) or difficult to achieve at a large scale (pharmaceutical industry). Solvent (nano)- filtration is possibly an interesting alternative with benefits in terms of economy, environment and safety.212 An important reason for the pharmaceutical industry to adopt membrane technology is the ability to concentrate the pharmaceutical intermediate/end product at room temperature instead of high temperature, which may cause active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) degradation. Over the past decade, a significant progress in solvent resistant nanofiltration membranes has been made and this technology may be considered as a viable alternative separation solution to highly energy intensive processes as distillation. In a recent paper by Elin M. Rundquist et al.,213 the feasibility of using OSN as an alternative to distillation for solvent recovery is analyzed and discussed. An important and commonly used operation in API purification is crystallization. Crystallisation can generate large volumes of mother liquors containing the impurities removed during operation as well as dissolved API. API containing mother liquors are generally discarded as waste, and depending on the API solubility yield losses can be significant. Therefore, further treatment of mother liquors could be a lucrative way to recovery both organic solvent and valuable API. Recovery processing is conventionally achieved through distillation. Energy-efficiency calculations for this case study demonstrate that OSN uses 25 times less energy per liter of recovered solvent when compared to distillation. However, the restricted solubility of the compounds within the waste stream resulted in recovery of less solvent for OSN. A combined approach of OSN and distillation allows to obtain equivalent recovery volumes with the energy consumption remaining 9 times lower than when distillation is used alone.213
Livingstone and colleagues proposed the use of OSN to enhance Peptide/Oligonucleotide Synthesis process (Fig. 18).214 A new generation of drugs based on biomolecules (peptides, oligonucleotides) will come to market in the next 20 years due to their potential therapeutic applications. The development of new processes for the chemical manufacture of biomolecules is based around improving the separation processes that are central to their synthesis and integrating these with reaction processes.
 Fig. 18  Basic schematic of the Membrane Enhanced Peptide/Oligonucleotide Synthesis process, the thick black line represents the OSN membrane.214 
Various polymeric and ceramic membranes were prepared and studied for the use in organic solvents.215 With regard to chemical, thermal and mechanical stability, the most robust are ceramic membranes. They are usually prepared from materials such as alumina (Al2O3), zirconia (ZrO2) or titania (TiO2). Ceramic membranes have several advantages as good selectivity, long life time and ease of cleaning.216 However, their large-scale production and module construction are relatively difficult and expensive. Due to intrinsic hydrophilicity of ceramics and consequently low flux of non-polar solvents, these membranes are less versatile in applications. In order to increase the transport of organic solvents, the surface of inorganic membranes can however, be hydrophobized via silylation grafting.217,218 Only few ceramic OSN membranes are commercially available. The most studied is a silylated TiO2-based membrane produced by Fraunhofer-Institut für Keramische Technologien und Systeme – IKTS (former HITK, Hermsdorf, Germany).219 In ceramic membranes, the rigidity of the pore network and the absence of sorption phenomena constitute the main difference with polymer membranes. As a consequence, theories on solvation, structural and hydration forces related to solid surfaces applies in meso- and microporous ceramic membrane materials. Modeling of organic solvent permeation in porous membranes is still in infancy but it can be of great interest for the development of new membrane processes in many industrial sectors.
In a recent study, Marchetti et al.220 proposed a model for solvent permeation through ceramic UF and NF membranes is presented. The model introduces several correction factors to account for the surface phenomena that arise in a nanotube due to solvent–membrane surface interactions: capillarity, polarity and steric hindrance. The correction terms are functions of the pore size, so that the model can be applied indistinctly to both UF and NF membranes. The model has good predictability for pure solvents and solvent mixtures reducing the number of experiments needed to characterize a membrane.
Nowadays the majority of OSN membranes are based on polymers. The reasons for that are wide choice of materials, relatively easy processing (coating or phase inversion) and good reproducibility. It is also much easier to tailor polymeric membrane to the application compared to ceramic membranes. The general disadvantages of polymeric materials are usually limited solvent and thermal stability.
One of the first and most studied type of OSN membranes are thin film composites comprising of a thin, dense poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) selective layer on polyacrylonitrile (PAN)221–225 or polyimide porous supports.226 The PDMS selective layer swells extensively in non-polar solvents decreasing the solute rejection.222,227,228
In order to suppress swelling additional plasma crosslinking can be performed.221
Another approach to decrease the swelling concerns the use of PDMS top layer filled with ceramic particles such as zeolites,225,228 zeolite hollow spheres,229 MOFs.230
In these cases, modification of the external filler surface may improve the membrane performance. The incorporation of unmodified MOFs as fillers in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) membranes230 produced increased permeance but lower retention compared to unfilled membranes. Membranes were characterized with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) where poor adhesion of the fillers to PDMS was observed. Chemical modification of the fillers with N-methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)-trifluoroacetamide (MSTFA) allowed synthesis of defect-free membranes with higher retention of RB, due to good interaction with fillers and decreased membrane swelling.
For conventional glassy polymers (polyamides, polyimides, polysulfones, etc.), the nanoporous structure of selective layer is mainly created by immersion precipitation, although recently, the interfacial polymerization has also been used. Recently, Solomon et al.231 claim successful preparation of a new generation of OSN membranes: high TFC membranes prepared via interfacial polymerization and solvent activation. They exhibit significantly higher permeabilities for polar aprotic solvents, including DMF, acetone and THF, than commercial integrally skinned asymmetric OSN membranes; and yet have comparable rejections.
Polyimides (PI)232–235 are attractive for membrane fabrication because of their excellent film-forming and mechanical properties as well as good thermal and chemical resistance. However, these membranes are unstable in some strong aprotic solvents. To improve the polymer stability, crosslinking can be performed via UV irradiation, thermal treatment or chemical reactions.236–240
Next to PDMS and conventional glassy polymers such as polyimides, high free volume polymers such as polyacetylenes and polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIMs) display even higher diffusion coefficients, and so are expected to give high flux and eventually high retention nanofiltration membranes.
In 2006 high free volume poly[1-(trimethylsilyl)-1-propyne] (PTMSP) has been proposed as a new membrane material for OSN applications.241 It was shown that dense PTMSP membranes with thickness of 24–30 μm have high ethanol permeability exceeding those of commercially silicone-based membranes. The intrinsic nanoporous structure of PTMSP is naturally formed during the casting of polymeric solution and no subsequent treatment is required. It is stable in alcohols, ketones and some aliphatic hydrocarbons (PTMSP with cis-conformation higher than 65% is insoluble in hexane and heptane. Subsequently, some of the authors of ref. 241, investigated the development of a composite membrane with PTMSP selective layer onto a commercial poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN) porous support.242
PIM polymers are soluble only in a very few solvents, with solubility parameters centering around those of tetrahydrofuran (THF) and chloroform. In other solvents, either in polar (alcohols, ketones), aromatic (benzene, toluene), non-polar (alkanes) or aprotic polar (DMF, NMP, DMSO), more or less swelling is observed, thus demonstrating solvent stability of the virgin membrane to most organic solvents. Within the first published reports on PIMs, the organophilic behavior of PIM-1 was demonstrated using the example of pervaporative separation of phenol from water.243
In 2005 the application of PIM-1 for OSN has been suggested.244 Recently Fritsch et al.245 produced thin film composite membranes of PIM-1 and PIM copolymers (polymers of intrinsic microporosity) on a polyacrylonitrile (PAN) porous support (Fig. 19). For control of swelling, a simple, technically realizable method of cross-linking was produced by blending the PIM with polyethyleneimine, coating to give thin film composites (TFCs) and thermally or chemically cross-linking the separation layer on the supporting membrane.
 Fig. 19  Novel thin film based on PIM for OSN (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 245). 
The new PIM TFCs were tested with the solvents n-heptane, toluene, chloroform, tetrahydrofuran, and alcohols, and compared to similarly cross-linked poly(trimethylsilyl propyne) TFCs and state of the art industrial Starmem™ 240 membranes. Better retention, a steeper retention curve and much higher fluxes were detected for the newly developed PIM TFC membranes.245
Currently the choice of the commercial membranes is limited only to a few flat sheet membranes and spiral wound modules. Capillary membranes have clear advantages compared to the above configurations: high surface to volume ratio, no spacers required and therefore more compact and simpler modules can be built. In a recent study, S. M. Dutczak et al.246 prepared and characterized solvent resistant composite capillary membranes made of an α-alumina support and a selective poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) top layer. The advantages of a ceramic support such as high mechanical, thermal and chemical stability were combined with very good separation properties of the PDMS coating. The prepared composite capillary membranes are stable for at least 40 h in toluene and have MWCO of 500 Da.
The same research group explored247 a new technique called “chemistry in a spinneret”, to fabricate a hollow fiber (HF) for OSN. This technique combines the membrane formation and crosslinking reaction into a single step process. P84 polyimide was chosen as a membrane forming polymer and poly(ethylene imine) (PEI), dissolved in the bore liquid, as a crosslinking agent. In order to obtain a membrane with the best stability and adequate membrane MWCO, the composition of the bore liquid was systematically varied, including solvent/non-solvent ratio and PEI concentration.
2.6 Membrane contactors
Membrane contactors are membrane systems used to contact two phases in order to promote the mass transfer between them. In membrane contactors, the membrane does not act as a selective barrier, but the separation is based on the principles of phase equilibrium.
Essentially, a porous membrane, most often in hollow-fiber form, is the basic element in such a device. Any membrane in flat or spiral-wound or hollow-fiber or any other form has two interfaces since it has two sides. However, conventional separation processes involve usually one interface in a two-phase system, for example, gas–liquid, vapor–liquid, liquid–liquid, liquid–supercritical fluid, gas–solid, liquid–solid, and the like. Membrane contactors allow the creation of one immobilized phase interface between two phases participating in separation via the membrane. Three types of immobilized phase interfaces in two-phase configurations are relevant:248
1. Two fluid phases in contact: gas–liquid, liquid–liquid, vapor–liquid, supercritical fluid–fluid (fluid phase membrane contactors) (Fig. 20.1a).
 Fig. 20  Schematic of membrane contactor operations: 1. Membrane contactor allowing two fluid phases to contact each other; 2. membrane contactor for solid-fluid phase contacting; 3. membrane contactor system with multiple immobilized fluid phase interfaces (modified by ref. 248). 
2. One fluid phase in contact with one solid phase: liquid–solid; gas/vapor–solid; supercritical fluid–solid (solid–fluid phase membrane contactors) (Fig. 20.2).
3. The membrane system has two immobilized phase interfaces; each interface is between two immiscible fluid phases, for example, gas–liquid (1) and liquid–gas (2), liquid–liquid (1) and liquid–liquid (2) (multiple-phase-interface-based membrane contactor) (Fig. 20.3).
In Table 5 the membrane materials for membrane based contacting of two fluid phases are reported.
In all of the two-phase configurations identified above, phase interfaces are not created by dispersing one phase as drops or bubbles or particles into the other phase.
One form of membrane contactor, however, helps in creating a dispersion through the membrane structure, and then the two phases continue to contact each other as they flow through the membrane device flow channels. This particular form of membrane contactors has been utilized in liquid–liquid systems via emulsion formation and in gas–liquid systems via bubble generation (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Dispersion creation and phase contacting in a dispersion-based membrane contactor.248 
Techniques employing gas–liquid, liquid–liquid, and liquid–solid immobilized bulk interfaces are being industrially practiced as membrane contactors on a large scale. Common features of these membrane operations are low operating costs, modularity for easy handing of larger flows, low pressure drops through the contactors. All traditional stripping, scrubbing, absorption, liquid–liquid extraction processes can be carried out according to this configuration. Today applications of membrane contactors can be found in many relevant industrial segments: for adding or removing O2, CO2 and N2 to or from liquids in the Semiconductor, Power, Pharmaceutical, Photographic, Food and Beverage, and many other general industries. In many applications, membrane contactors are used in integrated membrane processes. Below, some applications of membrane contactors are briefly discussed. Oxygen negatively impacts many processes: it is corrosive and can oxidize materials. In the power and industrial areas, piping, boilers and equipment are susceptible to corrosion if deaeration is not present. Membrane Contactors offer easy-to-operate, modular solutions for degassing and oxygen removal from water without chemicals and without large vacuum towers or de-aerators. Liqui-Cel Membrane Contactors have been chosen as the liquid technology for oxygen removal of choice at a Thin Film Transistor (TFT) Plant located in China.249 The manufactured TFT's are used primarily in mobile phone and handheld PC displays. Dissolved gasses left in the water can cause defects on the TFT surface. Liqui-Cel® Membrane Contactors are commonly used for gas transfer with water or with fluids that have a similar surface tension to water. They utilize a patented radial flow design and are available in a variety of contactor sizes that are ideal for flow rates between 0.5–400 gpm (0.1–91 m3 h−1). Larger flow rates are easily handled by piping multiple contactors in parallel (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Commonly used porous hollow fiber-based membrane contactor (courtesy of Membrana, Charlotte, NC). 
CO2, present in the flue gas, is selectively absorbed into an absorption liquid through a porous membrane (Membrane Gas Absorption, MGA) (Fig. 23). In Chemical Gas Absorption Technology columns are used to capture CO2 from flue gas into solvent.
 Fig. 23  Gas mixture containing CO2 contact liquid phase through an immobilized fluid phase interface in a membrane contactor: porous membrane without nonporous coating. 
The advantages of MGA are several: operational flexibility (liquid phase and gas phase are not directly contacted; avoiding the conventional problems such as flooding, foaming, channeling and entrainment in packed column); more economic (membrane device has larger contact area); reduction in size and weight compared to conventional columns; linear scale-up (the modularity of membrane modules makes the design simple and easy to be scaled up linearly); it is easier to predict the performance of a membrane contactor: the interfacial area is known and constant; it does not depend on the operating conditions such as temperature and liquid flow-rate. In Fig. 24 MGA flow-sheet is reported. The real operational time of membrane modules decides whether MAS performs better than CAS or not. Membrane absorption system looks superior to chemical absorption system unless serious membrane pore-wetting and pore-plugging happened. Research on how to reduce the membrane price and how to prolong the membrane lifetime is very important in the future. The formation of emulsions or dispersions characterized by very uniform dimensions of droplets can be realized using membrane emulsification, which can produce all types of single and multiple emulsions (o/w, w/o, w/w, w/o/w, o/w/o, m/w, s/o/w) (Fig. 25). The method of membrane emulsification has already been applied in some areas of the food, chemical, electronic and medical industries.250-252
 Fig. 24  Membrane gas absorption process 
 Fig. 25  Schematic of membrane emulsification a) cross-flow mode by using hollow fiber/capillary membranes; b) dead-end mode with flat membranes. 
The dispersed phase is forced through the pores of a microporous membrane directly into the continuous phase. Emulsified droplets are formed and detached at the end of the pores with a drop-by-drop mechanism. The advantages of membrane emulsification over conventional emulsification processes are that it enables to obtain very fine emulsions of controlled droplet sizes and narrow droplet size distributions. Successful emulsification can be carried out with much less consumption of emulsifier and energy, and because of the lowered shear stress effect, membrane emulsification allows the use of shear-sensitive ingredients, such as starch and proteins. For membrane emulsification, several types of membranes, e.g. ceramic, polymeric, metallic and glass are tested.
The Shirasu porous-glass (SPG) membrane (Fig. 26) was developed by Nakashima and Shimizu, who introduced membrane emulsification in the late 1980s in Japan and funded in 1996 the company SPG Technology Co., Ltd.253
 Fig. 26  Shirasu porous-glass (SPG) membrane (left) and related fibers.253 
SPG membrane emulsification produces W/O/W emulsion of uniform droplet size and realizing high enclosing rate. W/O/W emulsion means a double emulsion in which oil (O) droplets enclosing water (W) droplets are dispersing in water (W), also called water-in-oil-in-water emulsion. Emulsions occur in many forms of processing and are used extensively by the foods, cosmetics and coatings industries. Because of their compartmentalized internal structure, double emulsions can provide advantages over simple oil-in-water emulsions for encapsulation, such as the ability to carry both polar and non-polar cargos, and improved control over release of therapeutic molecules.254
2.7 Gas separation
As energy costs rise, membrane technology for separating gases is likely to play an increasingly important role in reducing the environmental impact and costs of industrial processes. Gas separation membranes offer a number of benefits over other gas separation technologies. Conventional technologies such as the cryogenic distillation of air, condensation to remove condensable organic vapors from gas mixtures, and amine absorption to remove acid gases such as carbon dioxide from natural gas require a gas-to-liquid phase change in the gas mixture that is to be separated. The phase change adds a significant energy cost to the separation cost. Membrane gas separation, on the other hand, does not require a phase change. In addition, gas separation membrane units are smaller than other types of plants, like amine stripping plants, and therefore have relatively small footprints. A small footprint is important in environments such as offshore gas-processing platforms. The lack of mechanical complexity in membrane systems is another advantage. The main industrial applications of membrane technology in GS are summarized in Table 6 along with the corresponding traditional technologies and the membrane materials used.
Table 6 Main industrial applications of membrane GS




Separation
Process
Traditional technology
Membrane materiala





a The membrane materials reported are those of plant installed; no gas separation membrane process at lab scale status are reported.





CO2/CH4
Natural gas sweetening, landfill gas upgrading
Amine absorption
Polymers (cellulose acetate, polyaramide, polyimide, perfluoropolymers)


CO2/hydrocarbons
Natural gas liquid removal
Glycol absorption and cooling in a propane refrigeration plant (−20 °C)
Polymers (cellulose acetate, polyimide, polyamide)


CO2/N2
CO2 capture
Amine absorption
Polymer (polyimide)


H2O/CH4
Natural gas dehydration
Glycol absorption
Polymer (cellulose acetate)


N2/CH4
Nitrogen removal
Cryogenic distillation
Polymer (silicon rubber)


H2/N2
Ammonia purge gas
Pressure swing adsorption (PSA)
Polymer (polysulfone)


H2/CO
Syngas ratio adjustment
PSA
Polymer (polyimide)


H2/hydrocarbons
Hydrogen recovery in refineries
PSA
Polymers (silicon rubber; polyimide)


O2/N2
Nitrogen generation, oxygen-enriched air production
Cryogenic distillation
Polymers (silicon rubber, polysulfone, polyimide, polyphenylene, ethyl cellulose)


VOCs/gas
Polyolefin plant resin degassing; ethylene recovery
Adsorption, refrigeration and turbo-expander plants
Polymer (silicone rubber, PTMSP)




Although several materials (polymers, zeolite, metallic, ceramic, etc) have been investigated so far as potential membrane materials, few polymers (i.e. polysulfone, polyimide, cellulose acetate, silicon rubber, perfluoropolymers) as reported in Table 6, found actual application in industrial gas-separating plant. Despite much progress in the development of zeolite molecular sieve membranes, there is so far no industrial gas separation by zeolite membranes, with the exception of the de-watering of bio-ethanol by steam permeation using LTA membranes; Pd membranes, which possess exclusive selectivity to hydrogen, are sensitive to poisoning and excessive expensive, limiting their use for wide scale industrial use; mixed conducting ceramic membrane materials (e.g. perovskite type membranes), which have high oxygen ion transport rate and high oxygen permeability, however, lead to high thermal and chemical expansion and poor structural stability especially at high temperature and under low oxygen partial pressure. OTM syngas technology (oxygen transport membrane synthesis gas) utilizes these mixed conducting membranes able to separate oxygen from air in the same temperature region required for the reforming of natural gas. In 1997 Dr Prasad of Helios-NRG, LLC and formerly a corporate fellow of Praxair Inc. founded an alliance involving Praxair, British Petroleum, Amoco, Phillips Petroleum, Statoil, and Sasol to develop ceramic membrane syngas technology for gas-to-liquid processes. The project DE-FC26-07NT43088, financed by U.S. Department of Energy and started in May 2007, foresees for the 3rd phase (October 2010–September 2015) the industrial applications of OTM integrated technology with modules qualified for scale-up and larger demonstration projects.
In other words, it is a long way from a material that showed a good performance in terms of permeability and selectivity to industrial application of membranes based on it.
The requirements for production of gas separation membranes include reproducibility of the membrane preparation, not expensive costs, good mechanical properties, absence of microdefects, thermal and chemical stability under the conditions of the separation process. Often, high cost of production of potential membrane materials is regarded as the main obstacle for using a new material for industrial gas separation membranes.
In Table 7 typical costs for membranes for gas separation are reported.
Table 7 Typical costs for gas separation membrane units255




Type of unit
Typical cost ($/m2 of membrane)




Membrane
20


Membrane in spiral-wound module form
100


Membrane modules in a skid
500




On the basis of the data reported in this table, it is evident that the cost of membranes used in gas separation processes is a small fraction of the membrane skid cost. The strategies used to reduce membrane skid cost are mainly two: i) increase the permeance of the membranes (i.e. P/l, where P is the membrane permeability and l the membrane thickness) by using composite membranes with a very thin separative layer (l) allowing a smaller membrane area to be used to treat the same volume gas; ii) develop larger membrane modules and new skid designs.
Composite membranes consist of microporous support layer coated with one or more thin layers of a different polymer that performs the separation. Composite membranes allow high-cost polymer materials to be used economically in the separating layers.

2.7.1 Natural gas treatment. 
2.7.1.1 Carbon dioxide removal. 
In the natural gas industry, the principal application of membranes has been the separation of carbon dioxide from natural gas.
CYNARA Membrane Systems, a Cameron group technology, is one important solution for the upstream oil and gas industry providing state-of-the-art CO2 membrane separation systems. The group introduced very large hollow-fiber module (Fig. 27) to reduce membrane skid cost.
 Fig. 27  Photograph showing the development of hollow-fiber membrane modules at CYNARA (now part of Cameron), from the first 5 in. modules of the 1980s to the 30 in. diameter behemoths currently being introduced (reproduced with permission by ACS, Ref. 255). 
CYNARA's membrane modules consist of hundreds of thousands of asymmetric hollow fibers. Epoxy tube sheets on each end of the fiber bundle and o-rings are used to separate feed and permeate gas. Pressurized gas flows into the membrane case, where it contacts the fiber bundle. Gas flows radially inward. As the gas traverses the bundle, CO2 selectively permeates the fiber into the low pressure lumen of the fiber. The residual gas continues across the bundle and is collected in a central perforated tube. The hollow fiber technology maximizes surface area per unit volume relative to competing membrane technology. Double ended permeate flow minimize pressure drop down the lumen of the fiber maximizing separation performance (Fig. 28). The vertical orientation of the hollow fibers, combined with the central collection tube and the unique ability of cellulose acetate to withstand condensing hydrocarbons, allow for efficient handling of hydrocarbon liquids. In fact, hydrocarbon liquids are a valuable product for many customers.
 Fig. 28  CYNARA hollow fibers.256 
CYNARA's membrane modules were selected by the E&P company PETRONAS CARIGALI SBN BHD and used in the world's largest CO2 membrane plant for natural gas clean-up, Cakerwala Gas Field Development, Malaysia. The Cakerawala Gas Field is located offshore in the lower part of the Gulf of Thailand approximately 150 km Northeast to Kota Bharu and 160 km East of Narathiwat in water-depth of about 60 meters in contract area of Block A-18 in the Joint Development Area.
The Cakerawala field development project consists of six Wellhead Platforms, Central Processing Platform & Living Quarters, Riser Platform and FSO (Puteri). Committed processed gas at a rate of 790 MMscfd (932200 Sm3/ h−1), is delivered to the buyers' sales pipeline through delivery point located on the riser platform. The successful CO2 membrane plant for natural gas clean-up represents a milestone for other high CO2 offshore gas fields.
Development of high CO2 gas fields offshore gives significant new challenges for all upstream oil sector companies worldwide. PETRONAS has indeed realized these challenges as Malaysia is proven to be one of the countries with high CO2 gas fields in the world. High CO2 content gas reservoirs make most of the gas field development uneconomical and it has remained undeveloped. By removing CO2 offshore will not only reduce the corrosion problems but also reduce the size of the export gas pipeline and decrease the compression power. As a developing country, Malaysia's resources have to be developed timely to sustain supply to meet the increasing gas demand. In addition, the development of these high CO2 gas fields requires prudent management of CO2 capture, transportation and storage and utilization to enable commercialization of these gas fields.
The application of CO2 removal plant on an offshore platform is few with limited feedback and established operations on the optimum choice of treatment or methodology within the industry. The main constraints for application on an offshore platform are space and weight limitations. Installing a complex system with numerous equipment and extensive utilities to support its operation is against the trend in the offshore industry to pursue compact facilities, reduce manning levels for safety and logistic reasons and operating costs.
PATRONAS, the E&P company involved in the Cakerawala field development project, with extensive experiences in developing high CO2 offshore gas field projects had made extensive evaluation on several process for gas separation namely amine absorption, physical absorption, cryogenic distillation (Ryan Holmes process), membrane system and other current technologies. The studies undertaken had led to a conclusion that membrane technology is the most promising, effective and economical way to date for offshore CO2 removal due its characteristics of compactness, compact size, moderate utility consumption, easy operation and reliability (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  Comparison among current technologies for offshore CO2 removal.257 
ProSep Inc., is another company that provides process solutions to the oil and gas industry providing with an easy-to-install, easy-to-operate, flexible, environmentally friendly, cost-effective solution. The modular skid-mounted membrane separation units house both Grace cellulose acetate (CA) spiral wound and Medal polyimide (PI) hollow fiber membrane modules.
UOP SEPAREX™ membrane technology is used primarily for natural gas upgrading (removal of carbon dioxide and water vapor to pipeline specifications and lowering of the H2S level) and Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) Operations, Biogas Methane Recovery (CO2 removal and dehydration of the biogas/landfill off-gas (typically ~55% methane) to pipeline specification). Cellulose acetate SEPAREX™ membranes are produced both as hollow fibers and flat sheets packaged as spiral-wound modules (Fig. 30). Currently, both types of membrane modules are produced by different companies. Hollow-fiber modules allow large area of membrane to be packaged into compact membrane modules. All membranes used for nitrogen production from air use hollow-fiber modules. However, natural gas treatment is complicated by the presence of components as water, carbon dioxide, C4+ hydrocarbons, aromatics, which degrade and plasticize the membrane; the gas is treated at relatively high pressures (30–60 bar against less than 10 bar for nitrogen from air production). Under these conditions the higher permeances of flat sheet membranes formed as spiral-wound modules can compensate for their higher cost compared to hollow-fiber membranes.255
 Fig. 30  SEPAREX™ spiral wound flat membrane modules.258 
Cook (from Quicksilver Resource, Inc.) and Echt (from UOP) reported259 an interesting survey of cost effective natural gas treatment by using membrane technology SEPAREX™ membranes instead of traditional technology of amine absorption.
In the April 1995 issue of the journal Hydrocarbon Processing, the justification for choosing a membrane system over an amine/glycol system was discussed and economic data presented by the two authors. At that time, the membrane system had been in operation for 15 months, allowing comparison of projected cost to actual cost.
The paper by Cook and Echt259 represents a remark on the system's performance over the twelve-year period since commissioning. Actual performance data and cost of operation are presented. Based on operating cost (including product loss and fuel usage), system flexibility, system reliability and system performance, the authors demonstrate that the original economic evaluation is shown to have been conservative. In particular, membrane life has far exceeded expectation and strongly contributed to improved economic performance. Operating costs are shown to be lower per year than estimated for an amine system followed by a glycol dehydrator. Also presented in the paper is a report on the installation of new, improved membrane elements that have increased hydrocarbon recovery and further reduced operating costs during 2006.
Quicksilver Resources Inc. (Quicksilver) formerly Mercury Exploration Company, is an independent oil and gas company, headquartered in Fort Worth (Texas) engaged in the development and production of natural gas, natural gas liquids (NGL) and crude oil. The Wilderness gas processing facility is one of two gas processing facilities owned and operated by Quicksilver in northern Michigan. The plant removes CO2 and water from the gas which arrives at the facility via high-pressure discharge line from satellite compressor stations and via low pressure gathering closer to the plant. Locally gathered gas is compressed to approximately 69 atm. The combined gas streams are fed to a Separex™ Membrane System for removal of CO2 to less than two mole percent and removal of water to less than seven pounds per million standard cubic feet. The treated gas goes into the energy pipelines for distribution to southern Michigan areas.
Initial gas inlet was less than 15 MMscfd (17700 Sm3 h−1), at 64 atm. The feed gas contained less than the design 11% CO2. Product gas with <2% CO2 was obtained from one 30-tube primary membrane skid and one 6-tube secondary membrane skid.
Two additional 15 MMscfd (17700 Sm3 h−1) membrane trains were added. These plants saw the installation of the second and third 30-tube primary membrane skids along with one additional 10-tube second stage skid. Each plant has its own pretreatment section. The modular nature of the plant skids allowed phased investment while drilling increased the amount of gas available for treatment. This was one of the advantages of membrane technology over amine treating.
Total processing capacity today is 45 MMscfd (53100 Sm3 h−1) with inlet CO2 concentration approaching 15 mol%, a 36% increase above the design value. Outlet specification remains <2% CO2. A process flow sketch is shown in Fig. 31.
 Fig. 31  Wilderness gas processing facility operated by Quicksilver in northern Michigan.259 
Natural gas is delivered to the first membrane stage pretreatment section which provides key protection for the membrane elements. Accumulation of solids or liquids on the membrane surface can cause a decline in performance by damaging or blocking the membrane surface. After pretreatment, warm gas enters the two-stage membrane system. The first membrane stage consists of six banks (rows) of five membrane tubes. The arrangement of the banks is three tube banks in series with three tube banks. As the feed gas flows through the membrane tubes, the gas is separated into a CO2-rich permeate stream at low pressure and a CO2-depleted residue stream (or non-permeate stream) at high pressure. The residue gas contains <2% CO2 and is sent to sales gas metering. Overall pressure drop, including pretreatment, is of 1.0–1.4 atm.
The CO2-rich permeate gas is compressed and routed to the second stage pretreatment section to remove lubricating oil entrained from the permeate compressors. The secondary pretreatment equipment is identical to the primary pretreatment, but smaller in size. The secondary membrane preheater has a rated duty of 0.25 MMBTU/Hr (7.33 × 10−5 kW). Residual gas from the second stage membranes is recycled to the first membrane stage for hydrocarbon recovery. Permeate from the second stage is sent to the vent.
Pretreatment of natural gas feed streams to control the fouling, plasticization and condensation of hydrocarbons on the membranes is required for all membrane systems. Oil mist and particulates must always be removed, but for CO2 removal systems, treatment of the gas to control condensation of liquids on the membrane or excessive plasticization of the membrane is required too. Baker et al. have illustrated clearly the phenomenon.255 At high temperatures the natural gas mixture exists as a single phase. However, when the gas is cooled heavy hydrocarbons in the gas will reach their saturation values and condensation will occur. The dew point is the temperature at which condensation just begins and the gas enters the two-phase region of graph shown in Fig. 32. When the gas is processed by a membrane, carbon dioxide and some methane is removed in the permeate. Heavier hydrocarbons are retained and concentrated in the residue gas. The increase of heavy hydrocarbon concentration in the gas causes the phase envelope to shift to higher temperatures. The combination of Joule–Thomson cooling and increased heavy hydrocarbon levels in the residue gas is sufficient to bring the gas into the two-phase region of the phase envelope and condensation of hydrocarbon liquids at the end of the membrane train likely occur damaging the membrane module. Two solutions are feasible to reduce the entity of condensation problem: i) to heat the feed sufficiently so that the residue gas even when cooled by Joule–Thomson expansion, does not enter the phase envelope; ii) to remove most of the condensable components in the gas before sending the gas to the membrane unit. The first solution reduces the membrane selectivity whilst the second one is based on glycol absorption (to remove water) in combination with cooling and condensation (to remove C4+ hydrocarbons). In practice, feed gas heating and removal of hydrocarbon are used together.
 Fig. 32  Changes in the phase envelope of CO2 containing natural gas during processing by a CO2 selective membrane (reproduced with permission by ACS, Ref. 255). 
Standard and enhanced UOP MemGuard™ pretreatment schemes are shown in Fig. 33(a) and 33(b), respectively. Standard pretreatment removes feed contaminants such as lube oil and corrosion inhibitor, but is not valuable for removal of heavy hydrocarbons as in very rich feed gas.
 Fig. 33  a) Standard and b) enhanced UOP MemGuard™ pretreatment schemes. 
In the enhanced UOP MemGuard™ pretreatment, regenerable adsorbent unit replaces the non-regenerative absorbent bed. The advantages of this type of pretreatment are several: i) efficient dew point depression; ii) treatment of feed with varying levels of gas contaminants; iii) MemGuard™ product gas is bone dry which allows use of carbon steel metallurgy; iv) if permeate gas is to be sequestrated, additional dehydration is typically not required.
The choice of one-stage (Fig. 34a), two-stage (Fig. 34b) or combination of both the processes (Fig. 34c) depends on several factors:255 i) selectivity and permeances of membrane used; ii) the carbon dioxide concentration of the gas and the separation required; iii) location of the plant: on an offshore platform the total cost is subordinated to the weight, footprint and simplicity of operation whilst the opposite relation is valid for onshore plants.
 Fig. 34  Different design for membrane gas separation plants. 
The advantages of one stage membrane unit are the simplicity, the absence of moving parts, the possibility of reliable operation, but the hydrocarbon recovery is low. With two stage membrane units, greater CO2 removal and high hydrocarbon recover are obtained but a recycle compressor is required. With the design of Fig. 34c, feed with high CO2 are processed with reduced compression obtaining intermediate hydrocarbon recovery.
The membranes used in the CO2 removal application are made from rigid, glassy polymers: cellulose acetate (UOP Separex™ membranes; Grace Membrane systems), polyimide (Medal Airliquid membranes).
2.7.1.2 Separation of C3+ hydrocarbons. 
Natural gas usually contains heavy hydrocarbons (propane, butane and other hydrocarbons). At many remote natural gas production sites, raw, untreated gas is the only fuel available to drive field compressor engines or power generation turbines.255 In gas engines, the rich fuel may pre-detonate severely damaging the internals of the firing chamber. In addition, condensation of hydrocarbons (due to day-night temperature variations) may damage the combustion chambers in gas engines and gas turbines, increasing maintenance costs and downtime. Since the engines and turbines drive other machinery, any disruption in their operation will reduce production resulting in significant revenue loss. To increase the reliability and reduce unscheduled downtime of such key equipment, a simple technology to separate heavy hydrocarbons from natural gas is necessary.
Membrane Technology & Research, Inc. (MTR) has developed and commercialised a membrane based process called VaporSep®.260 The enabling technology of VaporSep is a rubbery membrane: the membrane permeates condensable vapours, such as C3+ hydrocarbons, aromatics, and water vapour, while rejecting condensable gases, such as methane, ethane, nitrogen and hydrogen. Systems based on these membranes were first commercialized in 1990. Since then, MTR has supplied more than 50 systems to the chemical process industry worldwide. The majority of these units are found in the polymer industry in the production of polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyethylene (PE), and polypropylene (PP).
These unique rubbery membranes have recently been applied to the separation of C3+ hydrocarbons from methane and ethane in natural gas processing. One of the applications for the technology is to condition fuel gas used in gas engines and turbines in the natural gas industry (MTR's FuelSep™).262
A flow diagram of MTR's FuelSep™ is shown in Fig. 35. The gas, at a pressure of 100 psig, is compressed to 1000 psig and cooled in an air-cooled aftercooler. The heavy hydrocarbons are condensed and recovered as a liquid. The high-pressure gas, saturated in heavy hydrocarbons, contains 6.2% of C4+ hydrocarbons and over 5000 ppm hydrogen sulfide. This gas is not an ideal engine fuel. To improve the gas quality, the pressurised fuel stream is sent to the membrane system.
 Fig. 35  MTR's FuelSep™ systems.262 
The membrane selectivity increases as the size and condensability of each hydrocarbon in the stream increase: the C5+ hydrocarbons with a selectivity of >20 are almost completely removed and the concentration of C3+ hydrocarbons is reduced from 11.8% to 2.8%.261
The gas methane number increased from 16 to 71, which denotes an excellent fuel.261 The treated gas is then routed to the gas engine as fuel. The heavy hydrocarbon rich permeate stream is sent to the feed side of the compressor. The fuel conditioning system is completely passive. The power to drive the separation is provided by the existing compressor, so that no new rotating equipment is required. In addition, the conditioning occurs at ambient temperature, avoiding the issues of hydrate formation.
Another very important feed for membrane operations is associated petroleum gas (APG). APG is a common by-product in oil production. The gas can, after processing, be utilized in a number of ways, i.e. be included in the natural gas distribution networks, used for on-site electricity generation, re-injected for enhanced oil recovery, or used as feedstock for the petrochemical industry. This gas can exist separate from oil in the formation (free gas) or it can be dissolved in the crude oil. Once separated from crude oil it commonly exists in mixtures with other hydrocarbons such as ethane, propane, butane and pentane.
Membrane materials that are suitable for performing such processes are the same used for the separation of C3+ hydrocarbons in natural gas treatment, i.e. materials with so-called solubility controlled permeation, that is, larger permeability coefficients for higher hydrocarbons P(C4)/P(C1) > 1. In the paragraph 2.7.3, a list of novel materials, proposed for this separation, is given and discussed.


2.7.2 CO2 capture. 
The awareness of the occurrence of a global climate change, has increased due to, for instance, the media attention surrounding the Kyoto protocol in 1997.263 These climate changes mainly manifest themselves as a worldwide increase in the average temperature, phenomenon at the basis of the rise in sea level, the retreat of glaciers, the increased frequency of more extreme weather conditions.
The worldwide consensus is that this sudden increase is not a natural phenomenon, but is related to the recent human activity on the planet. Since the Industrial Revolution, humans started to use large quantities of carbon containing fossil fuels.
From the early 1900's, the use of fossil fuels has increased tremendously. These fossil fuels are mainly burned to generate electricity or facilitate transportation, thereby emitting large amounts of CO2 to the atmosphere, contributing to global warming. While Kyoto Protocol (1997) may have helped reduce emissions in some countries, world carbon dioxide emissions have grown more than what would have been expected. In the absence of new government action, global energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions will increase by 55% from 1990 to 2030, with developing countries (primarily China and India) being responsible for over three-quarters of the increase. Developing countries' share of global emissions overtook that of OECD countries soon after 2010 (Fig. 36). China became the world's largest emitter prior to 2010.
 Fig. 36  World carbon dioxide emissions.264 
Compared to oil and gas, coal is the lowest cost method of producing electric power and it is relatively abundant in large energy-consuming nations, such as China. Coal will continue to be used to produce a large percentage of the world's electric power. Coal-fired power plants generate more than 50% of the electricity in the United States and produce about 40% of the country's CO2 emissions (Fig. 37).
 Fig. 37  CO2 emission distribution by different sources.265 
Worldwide, the situation is similar. A recent MIT study concluded that under any foreseeable scenario, coal use will increase between now and 2050.266 The same study predicts that under a business-as-usual scenario (no CO2 emission mitigation), global CO2 emissions from coal combustion will increase from 9 Gton/year in 2000 to 32 Gton/year in 2050.266 This 2050 value will be 55% of projected global CO2 emissions at that time.
How to reduce the worldwide emissions of CO2? The problem may be faced by achieving the following targets:
1) Decrease energy consumption
2) Improve energy efficiency
3) Promote renewable energy sources
4) Achieve Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)
5) Use carbon dioxide
All the factors above listed are key issues, which has received in these years considerable attention.
CCS is a formidable technological and scientific challenge.267,268 CO2 is captured from power plant emissions, and sequestered underground in geological structures for long periods of time. The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is considering three ways to capture CO2 generated in coal-based power production (Fig. 38):269
 Fig. 38  Approaches to power generation with fossil fuels (coal, oil and natural gas) that include carbon dioxide capture and sequestration (CCS) (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 269). 
a) Post-combustion CO2 capture from power plant flue gas
b) Pre-combustion CO2 capture from gasified coal synthesis gas
c) Oxy-combustion, which separates oxygen from air prior to combustion and produces a nearly sequestration-ready CO2 effluent.
a) In post-combustion capture, CO2 capture occurs after the combustion process. The CO2 is separated from other flue gas constituents either originally present in the air or produced by combustion and it mainly involves the separation of CO2 from N2.
b) In pre-combustion capture, the CO2 is removed from the fuel before the actual combustion process takes place. The principle of this process is first to convert the fossil fuel into CO2 and H2via gasification. Then, the CO2 and H2 are separated and this results in a hydrogen-rich gas, which can be combusted to yield electricity.
c) In oxy-combustion capture, the fossil fuel is burned with an oxygen enriched stream that contains little or no N2. The exhaust gas from this system is therefore highly concentrated in CO2 and after the removal of water vapor, the CO2 is ready for subsequent transport and storage.
All three pathways have their advantages and disadvantages. These are summarized in Table 8.270
Table 8 Advantages and disadvantages of different CO2 capture pathways270




Process
Advantages
Barrier to implementation




Post-combustion
•Application to the majority of existing coal-fired power plants
Flue gas is:


•Retrofit technology option
• dilute in CO2


• at ambient pressure


resulting in:


• low CO2 partial pressure


•significantly higher performance or circulation volume required for high capture levels


•CO2 produced at low pressure compared to sequestration requirements










Pre-combustion
Synthesis gas is:
•Applicable mainly to new plants, as few gasification plants are currently in operation


• concentrated in CO2
•Barriers to commercial application of gasification are common to pre-combustion capture:


• high pressure
•availability


resulting in:
•cost of equipment


• high CO2 partial pressure
•extensive supporting systems requirements


•increased driving force for separation


•more technologies available for separation


•potential for reduction in compression costs/loads










Oxy-combustion
•Very high CO2 concentration in flue gas
•Large cryogenic O2 production requirement may be cost prohibitive


•Retrofit and repowering technology option
•Cooled CO2 recycle required to maintain temperatures within limits of combustor materials




•Decreased process efficiency




•added auxiliary load




Conventional separation processes for CO2 capture are amine absorption, adsorption (by zeolites or active carbon) and cryogenic separation.271–273 Even though amine absorption is the most common technology for post-combustion capture, large-scale equipment for the CO2 removal and chemical handling, significant energy consumption in the regeneration are required.
In Fig. 39 carbon capture processes are reported in terms of cost reduction benefits vs. time to commercialization. Membrane systems require more time to commercialization compared to conventional separation systems as amine solvents, cryogenic separation, but cost reduction benefits are higher.
 Fig. 39  Carbon capture processes and R&D (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 270). 
The main problems related to limited applications of membranes in post-combustion capture is the low CO2 concentration and pressure of the flue gas, which require the use of membranes with high selectivities (ca 100) for fitting the specification delivered by the International Energy Agency, i.e. a CO2 recovery of 80% with a purity of at least 80%. Favre274–277 and Baker278 gave excellent analyses of the problem focusing the key features of the capture process via membranes: a) selectivity; b) energy requirement (operating conditions, pressure ratio, stage cut); c) productivity (feed flow rate, permeability, thickness). In Fig. 40 membrane plant design as drawn by a plant purchaser is shown.278
 Fig. 40  Schematic of a membrane plant design for CO2 capture.278 
The cost of the membrane modules is often 10–20% of the plant cost. Compressor electricity cost is significantly more than the annualized module replacement cost. Baker analyzes two different membrane system configurations (Fig. 41): a) flue gas stream compression; b) vacuum on the permeate stream. For both the configurations, the specific conditions are: pressure ratio = 10, selectivity (α) = 50, P/l = 1000 GPU (7.5 × 10−13 ms−1Pa−1), efficiency = 0.8 and 90% CO2 recovery. On the basis of the analysis results, vacuum operation is the lowest energy design, using only 40% of the compression power, but ten times the membrane area. Excessively high membrane selectivity need too much membrane area and produce only a marginal improvement in performance: 30 < α < 50. A single stage process is not going to work.
 Fig. 41  Configuration of the two membrane systems proposed for CO2 capture.278 
A two-stage process requires too much power and membrane area, the scenario improves with a two-step process, but not much. In Fig. 42 the MTR process is shown: a two-step process with a countercurrent sweep with combustion air makes lower the energy required; CO2 recycled in the combustion air stream decreases membrane area required.278
 Fig. 42  MTR process for CO2 capture.278 
The use of membrane characterized by higher CO2 permeance reduces costs more than higher membrane selectivity. Polaris™ membranes are 10 times more permeable to CO2 than conventional membranes used for natural gas treatment. Fig. 43 evidences the role played by the membrane permeance compared to membrane selectivity for Polaris™ membranes.
 Fig. 43  Trend of CO2 capture vs. membrane selectivity.278 
The Polaris™ membrane, thin film membranes based on hydrophilic rubbery polymers, can be used to recover and purify CO2 for sequestration, enhanced oil recovery (EOR), or for use in chemical and industrial applications. The resulting CO2 enriched stream can be produced in gas or liquid form, depending on the final use for CO2. The combination of Polaris™ membranes (Fig. 44) with the counter current module design that utilizes incoming combustion air to generate separation driving force, greatly reduces the projected cost of CO2 capture.
 Fig. 44  Polaris™ membranes configured in spiral wound modules.279 
MTR is actually involved in a contract with the US Department of Energy for the construction of a membrane skid containing MTR's Polaris membranes capable of 90% CO2 capture from a 20 tons-of-CO2/day slipstream of coal fired flue gas, at Arizona Public Service's Cholla power plant.280
Other companies besides MTR are involved in the membrane technology for CO2 separation from post-combustion flue gas. Carbozyme Inc., Porogen Corporation, Gas Technology Institute (GTI), to name a few, have been innovating several novel hybrid membranes for this purpose.
In particular, Carbozyme Inc. has been in the process of developing and testing an enzyme-catalyzed, liquid membrane that has received support from both NASA and the US Department of Energy.281
The applications of Carbozyme's innovative technology have included not only capture of greenhouse gases but also life support in closed environments, plant growth stimulations, HVAC, enhanced oil and gas recovery, and coal-bed methane production.281


2.7.3 Novel membrane materials. 
As reported in Table 6, few polymers found actual application as membrane materials in industrial gas-separating plants. The most tested and used material is cellulose acetate. Cellulose acetate membranes were initially developed for reverse osmosis, and now are the most popular CO2 removal membrane. To overcome state-of-the art membranes for the gas separation processes listed in Table 6, new polymers, copolymers, block copolymers, blends and mixed matrix membranes have been developed.282
In a recent perspective by Yampolskii283 novel interesting membrane materials studied in this last decade for gas and vapour separations were discussed.
However, many of them have failed during application because of different reasons (expensive materials, weak mechanical and chemical stability).
Car et al.284 considered the old work of Kulprathipanja285 to design new membrane materials with superior performance, low cost and feasible for mass production (Kulprathipanja dispersed polyethylene glycol (PEG) in PDMS improving CO2 permeability). They blend existing commercial block polymers as PEBAX, containing ethylene oxide units, with PEG producing membrane materials with improved permeability.
As reported in paragraph 2.7, the key issue to make competitive current membranes for large scale applications is the membrane permeance. In this context, the development of thin film membranes is of crucial importance. Several materials and methods of fabrication have been proposed for the manufacturing of high performance membranes.
Shingo Kazama's group from RITE (Research Institute of Innovative Technology for the Earth) produced cardo-polyimide asymmetric hollow fiber membranes, with excellent CO2/N2 separation property, good solubility and thermal stability (Fig. 45).286
 Fig. 45  RITE Cardo-polyimide (BTDA type) hollow fiber membranes.286 
The same group has investigated the use of polyamidoamine dendrimers (PAMAM), conventional and modified (Fig. 46a and 46b, respectively).
 Fig. 46  a) Conventional and b) novel hydroxil modified polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer.286 
The asymmetric hollow fiber membranes are coated with a solution of PAMAM by means of an in situ module modification method. The novel hydroxyl PAMAM dendrimer shows excellent CO2 permeability and selectivity over N2 and H2. Yave et al.287 at GKSS Research Centre Geesthacht GmbH (now Helmholtz Centrum, Germany) developed nanostructured membranes with outstanding performance for CO2 separation: the measured CO2 flux is extremely high (>2 m3 m−2 h−1 bar−1) with selectivity over H2 and N2 of 10 and 40, respectively, based on poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)-poly(butylene terephthalate) (PBT) multiblock copolymer, (known as Polyactive®). Smart additives such as polyethylene glycol dibutyl ether are incorporated as spacers or fillers for producing nanostructured materials with controlled morphology.288 In the next step, the membranes have developed and manufactured as nanometric thin film membranes with even better performance by using PBT-PEO block copolymers and controlling nanofabrication conditions.289 Defect free selective layers thinner than 100 nm have been produced exhibiting unmatched high CO2 permeance (Fig. 47).
 Fig. 47  a) Cross-section of thin film Polyactive® membranes on microporous PAN support; b) selectivity vs. CO2 flux for PolyMemBrain membranes (thin film Polyactive® membranes on microporous PAN support) compared to other membranes intended for CO2/N2 separation.289 
Yave et al.290 reported also the design and synthesis of a new block copolymer based on PEO. The developed copolymers are similar to those known as Polyactive®, the difference however was the rigid segment. Instead of four methylene units, the rigid segment had three methylene units poly(trimethylene terephthalate) (PTT), thereby this difference greatly affected on the CO2 separation performance. The properties of block copolymers were tailored for producing optimal materials, the ratio of each segment, the crystalline and amorphous phase were well-controlled, and the density and glass transition temperature were decreased to lower values, resulting hence in optimal membranes for CO2 capture (Fig. 48). Because the block copolymers are based on commercially available segments, Yave et al. suggested that those block copolymers can be produced on large scale.
 Fig. 48  CO2 permeability of tailor-made multiblock copolymers as a function of content and length of PEO segment (the optimal copolymer membrane is localized on the top of surface) (reproduced with permission by IOP Science, Ref. 290). 
A relatively new class of polymers, polybenzodioxanes, have been identified as polymers of intrinsic porosity (PIM). A feature of these materials is that they incorporate sites of contortion or spiro-center that force the polymer chains to form a loosely packed matrix. A type of polybendioxane, the so-called PIM-1 was recently shown to exhibit a CO2 permeability >12000 Barrer combined with a selectivity of 25.291 Du et al. recently modified PIM-1 post-polymerization to yield tetrazole-functionalized PIM-1. Selectivity close to 40 along with an excellent permeability in excess of 2000 Barrer was obtained.292 Li et al. prepared and characterized novel thermally self-cross-linked polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIM-1) membranes by post-modification of PIM-1 at the elevated temperature for a period of 0.5–2 days. PIM-1 thermally treated at 300 °C for 2 days has the CO2 permeability of 4000 Barrer with CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 ideal selectivity of 54.8 and 41.7, respectively. The thermally cross-linked PIM-1 membranes will probably provide a promising alternative in industrial energy development.293
Recently, Sultanov et al.294 synthesized poly(1-trimethylsilyl-1-propyne)-block-poly(4-methyl-2-pentyne) (PTMSP-b-PMP) block copolymers of different composition by catalytic systems based on NbCl5 with organometallic co-catalysts. Poly(1-trimethylsilyl-1-propyne) (PTMSP) (Table 9, entry 1) is the most studied polymer among 1,2-disubstituted polyacetylenes due to its extremely high gas and vapor transport parameters.295 PTMSP has high selectivity toward condensable hydrocarbons while separating them from mixtures with non-condensable gases. PTMSP as other glassy polyacetylenes and addition-type polynorbornenes with Si-containing side groups (Table 9, entries 4 and 5) is characterized by solubility-controlled permeation (the variations of the permeability coefficients correlate with the changes of the solubility and not diffusion coefficient, like in other glassy polymers). In mixed gas permeation the selectivity of these polymers, in separation of hydrocarbon mixture (e.g. C4H10/CH4) increases compared to individual gas permeation, due to mainly the reduction of CH4 permeability, effect which can be explained by partial blocking of the pores in these membrane materials.283 However, solubility of PTMSP in higher hydrocarbons restrains wide usage of this polymer in separation processes. The removal of organic vapors from their mixtures with permanent gases, separation of natural and associated petroleum gases, capture of gasoline vapors from air are very important from a practical point of view but found to be only a partial solution.283 Therefore, investigations are conducted to improve the properties of PTMSP, for example, by synthesizing copolymers. Another 1,2-disubstituted polyacetylene, poly(4-methyl-2-pentyne) (PMP) (Table 9, entry 2) has high resistance toward most organic solvents and rather high gas and vapor transport parameters, although these parameters are lower than that of PTMSP. Several years ago random copolymers of 1-trimethylsilyl-1-propyne (TMSP) with 4-methyl-2-pentyne (MP) were synthesized, but they were not of high interest because of low molecular weights and poor mechanical properties. Block copolymers of TMSP with MP in contrast to random copolymers may combine properties of PTMSP and PMP. (PTMSP-b-PMP) block copolymers (entry 3, Table 9, PTMSP:PMP=60:40) synthesized by Sultanov et al.294 represent novel polymeric materials based on PTMSP and PMP combining resistance toward aromatic and aliphatic hydrocarbons with high gas transport parameters.
Table 9 Transport parameters for the system CH4/C4H10




Entry #
Polymer

P, Barrer
Selectivity α(C4H10/ CH4)
Ref.


CH4
C4H10
Mixed gas
Ideala





a Selectivity calcd from single gas permeability; [C4H10] = 2 mol%a, 7.5 mol%b 7.6 mol%c in feed.





1



2200
68000
31a
3.5

294



2



770
7200
9a
2.5

294



3



1100
20000
18a
2.8

294



4



900
17500
21b
19

283



5



3300
26900
12.9c
8.1

283





Currently, polymers are the dominant materials used for membranes, due to easy processability and adequate permselectivity for many gas pairs. The separation performance of processable polymeric materials is limited by an upper bound trade off curve relating permeability and selectivity. Molecular sieve membranes show pores in the region of a few Å and allow the separation of small molecules such as H2, He, H2O, and NH3. Membranes like metals, oxides suffer from brittleness and thermal expansion problems.
As crystalline materials, zeolites and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are more stable against degradation than the X-ray amorphous materials, and they show a uniform pore size without any pore size distribution, which is determined by their crystallographic structure. Despite much progress in the development of zeolite molecular sieve membranes, there is so far no industrial gas separation by zeolite membranes. The difficulties in the scale up have been underestimated, and no major industrial use of inorganic membranes in gas separation is realized.
With the new material class of MOFs, new nanoporous materials are available and Caro296 formulates the question whether MOFs can solve the problems connected with the development of zeolite membranes. Although at first glance, zeolites and MOFs are very similar, there are significant differences between zeolites and MOFs which can either facilitate or complicate the preparation of MOF membranes.
Most synthesized MOFs are crystallites and tested as adsorbents for gas separation. Several reviews have summarized for numerous experimental studies for CO2 capture in MOF adsorbents.297–299 Nevertheless, nearly all these experiments examined the adsorption of mixed gases (e.g. CO2, N2, CH4, and H2) due to the formidable difficulty associated with mixtures. By contrast, simulation can be readily used for single or multi-component systems. Thus, quantitative understanding of mixture adsorption in MOFs has been obtained, to a large extent, from simulation studies. Compared with adsorptive separation, membrane-based separation is considered to be energetically more efficient, lower capital cost and larger separation capability. However, the fabrication of MOF membranes is a formidable task.300 Only in recent years, have there been active experimental endeavors to explore MOF membranes for gas separation.296 Since both equilibrium and dynamic properties are required, simulation for gas separation in MOF membranes is more time-consuming than in MOF adsorbents. Nevertheless, a handful of simulation studies have been reported. Keskin and Sholl301 examined the separation performance of diverse MOFs for CO2/CH4 and CO2/H2 mixtures. They found that all the MOFs examined exhibit unfavorably low CO2 selectivities and mixture effects play a crucial role in determining the performance. Along with considerable interest in MOF membranes, MOF-based composite membranes have received increasing attention for gas separation. In this emerging area, a handful of experiments have been conducted,302 but modeling studies are rare. Using atomistic simulation and continuum model, Keskin and Sholl303 attempted to select MOF/polymer membranes for high-performance gas separation. A highly selective MOF was identified and predicted to enhance the performance of Matrimid and other polymers for CO2/CH4 separation.
The combination of the established spinning technology for hollow fibers with a hybrid membrane material that contains molecular sieve nanoparticles especially MOF in a basic polymer could be a promising concept.304 The organic linkers of MOFs in a polymer matrix can couple with the polymer matrix and relative high wt% of MOF in the polymer can be obtained.305 These MOF-based mixed matrix membranes show remarkable higher fluxes and selectivities in comparison with the neat polymer.306–308
Carbon molecular sieves (CMS) or carbon membranes are a class of size-sieving materials prepared by pyrolysis of thermosetting polymers. This process could help cross the Robeson's upper bound for the corresponding polymers. Several studies report selectivities and permeabilities for CMSs well in excess of the performance of polymeric membranes for difficult cases where the size of the molecules to be separated is very small.282 Pyrolysis process during the formation of CMS membranes is complex and recent studies indicate that performance of CMS pyrolysis can be controlled by carefully tuning the pyrolysis atmosphere.309 Unlike zeolites, MOF, which have a well-defined pore size distribution, CMSs have been typically plagued by larger pore size distributions, which allow large and condensable molecules to enter and plug the pore network. This traditional picture of CMSs is changing in the last few years thanks to a controlled oxidation technique that is able to finely tune the pore size; this breakthrough is giving a new impetus to the research on CMS membranes.282,310
The recent study by Koenig et al.311 represents a significant step toward the realization of more energy-efficient membranes for natural gas production and for reducing carbon dioxide emissions from power plant exhaust pipes. Nanoscale pores into graphene sheets through ultraviolet light-induced oxidative “etching,” were introduced (Fig. 49). The permeability of various gases across the porous graphene membranes was measured. Experiments were done with a range of gases including hydrogen, carbon dioxide, argon, nitrogen, methane and sulphur hexaflouride-which range in size from 0.29 to 0.49 nanometers-to demonstrate the potential for separation based on molecular size. The atomically thin, porous graphene membranes represent a new class of ideal molecular sieves, where gas transport occurs through pores which have a thickness and diameter on the atomic scale. It is very new the announcement made by Cohen-Tnaugy and Grossman312 on the use of using one-atom-thick sheets of graphene for desalination. The results indicate that the water permeability of this material is several orders of magnitude higher than conventional reverse osmosis membranes, and that nanoporous graphene may have a valuable role to play for water purification.312
 Fig. 49  Illustration depicting a single molecular-sized pore in a graphene membrane.311 
Graphene, a single layer of graphite, represents the first truly two-dimensional atomic crystal. It consists of a single layer of carbon atoms chemically bonded in a hexagonal “chicken wire” lattice-a unique atomic structure that gives it remarkable electrical, mechanical and thermal properties. Those characteristics make graphene an ideal material for creating a separation membrane because it is durable and yet doesn't require a lot of energy to push molecules through it. But crucial technical challenges will need to be overcome before the technology can be fully realized: creating large enough sheets of graphene to perform separations on an industrial scale and developing a process for producing precisely defined nanopores of the required sizes. The experiments by Koenig et al.311 were done on a relatively small scale. The importance of graphene in the scientific world was illustrated by the 2010 Nobel Prize in physics that honored two scientists at Manchester University in England, Andre K. Geim and Konstantin Novoselov, for producing, isolating, identifying and characterizing graphene.

3. Hybrid membrane processes
Lipnitzki and Field313 defined a hybrid process as a combination consisting of generally different, unit operations, which are interlinked and optimized to achieve a pre-defined task. Hybrid processes are more than just integrated processes. A true hybrid process takes advantage from synergy of integration to solve technical and economic limitations that apply to at least one of the component unit operations and that could not be achieved either technically or economically alone. The strategy of introducing hybrid processes in the modern clean technologies is characterized by advanced levels of automation capacity, modularity, and remote control. But it also includes upgrading and retrofitting of an existing process, thus reducing energy consumption and low costs, and could be regarded as one means of to form a both technically and economically viable technologies. Among membrane separation hybrid systems there are four specific groups that could be distinguished: i) membranes combined with conventional unit processes,314 ii) hybrid processes combining only different membrane separation processes,315 iii) membrane contactors and iv) membranes combined with some kind aggregation of separated substances. Below some recent examples belonging to i) and ii) groups are described and discussed inspired by successful experiences of hybrid membrane systems pertaining to water desalination and gas separation.
3.1 Hybrid membrane desalination systems
There continue to be incremental improvements to the RO process combining reverse osmosis with thermal technologies (Multistage Flash Distillation (MSF), Multi Effect Distillation (MED), membrane operations in both RO pre-treatment (MF/UF/MBR/NF/Membrane Contactor) and post-treatment stages (Membrane contactor/Membrane Distillation/Membrane Crystallizer).143 Hybrid systems allows the creation of more economically convenient desalination process, to control and minimize fouling phenomena. They have the potential to approach the concept of “zero-liquid-discharge” and “total raw materials utilization”.145–148
An interesting example concerns the water purification system and method patented by General Electric (GE) which combine reverse osmosis and electrodeionization.315 In Fig. 50 a general flow-sheet of the process is shown. Permeate water from RO unit is sent to an electrodeionization (EDS) unit for additional ions removal. The reject brine stream from the RO unit is fed to a second membrane treatment unit which removes divalent ions and produces a non-scaling salt stream, which is then fed to the salt cell of the unit. After passing through the salt cells, the brine stream emerges from the EDI unit as a concentrated effluent stream, which can be discharged to a waste unit and the twice purified ultrapure product water is ready for use.
 Fig. 50  A combination electrodeionization/reverse osmosis process.316 
Con Edison operates the largest district-energy steam system in the United States (the use of steam for heating, hot water, and air conditioning). In April 2005, the East River Repowering Project (ERRP) completed the expansion of the steam generating capacity of the East River complex from 2.7 to 5.7 million pounds/ h−1 (339.93 to 718.14 kg s−1), and the electric generating capacity from 300 to 660 MW.317 This was accomplished by the installation of two dual-fuel combustion turbines, two heat-recovery steam generators, a demineralization facility, and 80000 feet (24.38400 Km) of process piping – all without increasing the footprint of the station. Con Edison elected to use RO and continuous electrodeionization (CEDI) to provide the demineralized water required as makeup to the steam generators. In addition to being some of the latest technology available, the hybrid system also avoid the regular use of hazardous regeneration chemicals required by conventional ion exchange systems. In Fig. 51 the RO/CEDI Plant Isometric is shown. The pre-treatment section is composed of chemical treatment, as well as multi-media, and cartridge filtration. Filtered water from the cartridge filters is treated with sodium bisulfite to keep the free chlorine in the water source from oxidizing the thin film composite polyamide membranes. The water is then forwarded via the RO feed pumps to the inlets of the RO banks. RO permeate flows to the inlet of the CEDI banks while the RO reject and RO flush flow to the East River. RO permeate dump water from pre- and post-service flushing flows back to the raw water storage tank.
 Fig. 51  Hybrid RO/CEDI plant isometric.317 
The CEDI system uses all-filled type modules and therefore does not require concentrate brine injection or concentrate recirculation. The CEDI product flows to the five demineralized water storage tanks while the CEDI reject flows to the inlet of the decarbonators. The decarbonated CEDI reject is recycled back to the raw water storage tank. Backwash and rinse flows from the multi-media filter cleaning sequence are directed to an Auto Pulse Filter (APF) system for treatment for discharge to the East River. These filters operate via a diatomaceous earth (DE) filtration aid. The Auto Pulse Filters discharge particulate matter to a sludge tank for trucking off-site. One of the main system design constraints was to minimize the storage of on-site bulk chemicals, as well as transportation of these chemicals by truck through New York City. This motivation for the requirements of the system is in line with Con Edison's commitment to environmental excellence. Other system design constraints included limits on the water discharged to the East River and the product water quality specifications. All the water treatment equipment was supplied by Siemens Water Technologies (Ionpure Products, Lowell, Mass.).
Recently, Siemens Industry Inc. (Erlangen, Germany) successfully concluded an R&D project on low-energy seawater desalination by means of a hybrid membrane process, combining Electrodialysis (ED) and CEDI.318 The R&D initiative commenced in October 2008 and a demonstration plant was built in Singapore to treat seawater to drinking water quality. The results show that the new process reduces desalting energy by over 50% compared to best available technology. The next step for Siemens is to set up a full-scale system in cooperation with Singapore's national water agency PUB by 2013. The project goal was to produce World Health Organization standard drinking water quality from seawater, at the same time cutting energy consumption by half compared to current technologies. Instead of using reverse osmosis, which requires high-pressure pumps to force water through semi-permeable membranes, the Siemens engineers turned to electrochemical desalination. The seawater is pre-treated with a self-cleaning disk filter, followed by Memcor ultrafiltration modules. The pilot desalination plant is composed of three ED units arranged in series to handle high concentrations of salt. They are followed by three CEDI units assembled in a parallel flow configuration to remove smaller amounts of salt. The energy demand of the whole process including pumping, pre-treatment, desalting, and post-treatment is less than half of what is used by the best available seawater desalination technologies today, which is typically between 3.4–4.8 kWh/m3. Besides the energy savings, other advantages are low vibration and noise levels, improved safety, and only minimal pre- and post-treatment.
In the same context of developing new technologies and improving existing ones to reduce desalting energy, High Efficiency ElectroDialysis (HEED®) design requires significantly less membrane area and is much more energy efficient compared to traditional ED designs, making it more economical and adding flexibility for the removal of a wide range of undesirable ions from product and recirculating process streams.319 Hybrid processes consisting of HEED®, RO, and/or distillation (Fig. 52) also offers a solution to an increasingly important issue: disposal of concentrate generated by RO.318
 Fig. 52  Schematic of Hybrid HEED®/RO/ distillation system.319 
This highly concentrated brine can be difficult to dispose, especially at inland desalination plants. For some applications, combined HEED® and RO hybrid systems would result in more efficient operation since electrodialysis efficiency decreases with decreasing diluate (product) concentration; the HEED® process would only be utilized to partially reduce the concentration of the feed rather than produce a very low concentration finished product, with the RO providing the finished product.
This configuration also allows higher overall recovery, single pass RO system operation since the RO feed (electrodialysis diluate) concentration would already be reduced by the HEED® process. It also allows blending of HEED® and RO product waters to produce the final water quality desired, minimizing membrane area required for both HEED® system and RO.
3.2 Hybrid membrane gas separation systems
The integration of membranes with other well-established separation processes in the chemical and petrochemical industries, was considered in different works.320 Usually, the combination membranes/PSA is considered in H2 separation, while hybrid membranes + amine absorption are applied to the CO2 separation.
PSA and membrane-based gas separation processes are two different alternatives for effective, continuous bulk gas separation at the industrial scale. Both these processes possess characteristics that render them advantageous over conventional cryogenic processes, and often they are combined into a Hybrid Separation System. The first combination of a membrane and an adsorption separation process is attributed to Mercea and Hwang (1994);321 a PSA unit was used to improve the O2 enrichment performance of a Continuous Membrane Column (CMC), and the combination featured superior economics and separation performance over both PSA and CMC processes.
High-purity hydrogen, which is foreseen as the fuel for the future, is commercially produced by pressure swing adsorption (PSA), a typically low product recovery process. Previous studies322,323 identified that integrating a membrane module into PSA can improve the overall recovery of the separation process. In integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) power plants, coal is gasified to produce syngas comprising carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen (H2). The syngas is cleaned to remove sulfur and heavy metals, and then combusted to produce electricity. In addition to electricity and steam production for plant use, refineries can also co-produce H2 for hydro-processing needs. In this case, the synthesis gas product is H2 enriched by the membrane unit and then purified in the PSA unit to produce a high-purity H2 stream. In Fig. 53 the IGCC scheme for H2 recovery by UOP using the Selexol process, membrane and PSA units.324
 Fig. 53  IGCC scheme with H2 recovery.324 
The Selexol process is a well-proven stable acid gas removal system based on the use of dimethyl ether of polyethylene glycol as a physical solvent, which selectively removes hydrogen sulfide and carbonyl sulfide from the synthesis gas. If chemicals production either in combination with power production is the objective, then H2/CO synthesis gas from gasification can be used to make a wide range of chemicals. Methanol, ammonia, oxo-alcohols are at the top of the list, additional chemicals that can be manufactured from synthesis gas including isobutylene, MTBE, acetic anhydride, acetic acid, dimethyl terephthalate, acetaldehyde and methylamine.325 Methanol is one of the largest commercially produced chemicals and plays an important role as a chemical intermediate. Gasification based on heavy oils, coal, or coke can provide a desirable feed source for methanol synthesis gas production (Fig. 54). The hybrid membrane/PSA process is attractive for methanol synthesis gas production when the main aim of the gasifier facility is the production of power. H2 permeates from the membrane resulting in a stream enriched in H2 and leaving non-permeate stream that is depleted of CO2. A PSA unit is used to produce high-purity H2 from the membrane permeate. Mixing the H2 with the non-permeate allows the production of methanol synthesis gas of any desired ratio of the reactants, regardless of the gasifier effluent composition. The advantage of a gasifier for the production of methanol synthesis gas is that it operates at the pressure required for the methanol reaction. Compression costs are required only for the high purity H2 from the PSA process to the methanol synthesis reactor.
 Fig. 54  Gasification scheme for methanol production.324 
There are many membrane/amine hybrid systems currently operating around the world. Baker reported that membrane plants are preferred for high-concentration gas streams and amine plants for relatively low-concentration streams.255 In an amine plant, the size of the absorbent recirculation rate, reboiler stripping tower, pumps, and heat exchangers all increase in proportion to the mass of CO2 to be removed. Early applications of membrane technology were in the area of enhanced oil recovery with CO2 flood. In Fig. 55 a block diagram of a membrane/amine plant is shown: the membrane removes two-third of the carbon dioxide and the amine plant removes the remainder.
 Fig. 55  Typical membrane/amine hybrid plant for the treatment of natural gas (reproduced with permission by ACS, Ref. 255). 
A portion of the permeate gas from the membrane unit is used as fuel for the amine plant; the remainder is vented or reinjected with the overall result that the combined plant is significantly less expensive than each separate separation unit.
Several EOR projects use a combination of membranes and amines to recover CO2 that is returned to the surface and recover the valuable hydrocarbons in the gas. In general, high CO2 content of a gas is a good indicator for the use of membranes and/or hybrid systems. Low CO2 pipeline specifications are another reason to adopt a hybrid configuration. Another important hybrid process is the combination of condensation under pressure with membrane separation, illustrated in Fig. 56. In this process, a vapor-permeable membrane unit is combined with a vapor condensation/flash unit.133
 Fig. 56  A hybrid compression–condensation–membrane separation system to recover liquid propylene and nitrogen from a mixed-gas feed.133 
The feed gas is first compressed and then sent to a vapor condenser. On cooling the gas, a portion of the vapor contained in the feed gas (in this case propylene), condenses and is removed as liquid. The condenser off-gas, containing uncondensed propylene, is sent to the membrane unit, which preferentially permeates the hydrocarbon vapor, leaving a 99% pure nitrogen residue stream. The propylene-enriched permeate gas is recycled to the incoming feed gas. The gas sent to the membrane unit comes directly from the chilled vapor condenser and is, therefore, saturated with propylene and cold. Under these conditions, the solubility of the hydrocarbon in the membrane is enhanced, and the membrane selectivity is high. Ethylene, polyethylene and polypropylene plants make polyolefins, principally from ethylene and propylene. After the polyolefin resin is produced, it contains unreacted monomer and hydrocarbon solvents, dissolved in the resin powder. The dissolved hydrocarbon must be removed before the polymer can be used, and this is done by stripping with hot nitrogen, in a column known as a degassing bin. Most new polyolefin plants have installed hydrocarbon recovery units. By the mid-1990s, MTR was selling million-dollar systems to petrochemical plants to recover olefins from polyolefin manufacture. About the same time, licensees of GKSS technology in Europe began installing large systems to capture gasoline vapors from tank farms and fuel terminals. A photograph of a typical membrane system fitted to a polyolefin plant resin degassing bin is shown in Fig. 57.326 The front portion of the unit is the compressor package. The spiral-wound membrane modules are contained in the horizontal tubes above and behind the compressor. During the last 10 years, almost 50 of these systems have been installed around the world.
 Fig. 57  Photograph of a membrane propylene recovery system installed at a modern polypropylene plant.326 
Conclusions
Science and technology play its part in mitigating the pressing sustainability problems by supplying solutions. But more attention needs to be paid to how these solutions are deployed, to weighing up the pros and cons of any answer. The fast growing industrial degree of membrane technology implementation, the diffuse feasibility studies for the applications of new membrane operations in hot areas as water treatment, energy recovery indicate the realization of long-range choices. These are the consequence of the growing legislation (EC in Europe, EPA and Energy Department in U.S., Water Security Council of Japan, Singapore's national water agency PUB, Department of Planning and Infrastructure of New South Wales in Australia, etc) and standardization to identify the role of membrane operations in various areas, specifically in water treatment due to the emergency of the demand for water on a global scale.
References

          http://ec.europa.eu/research/bioeconomy/news-events/news/20120213_en.htm
        .
A. Stankiewicz and J. A. Moulijn, Chem. Eng. Progr., 2000, 96, 22–34 CAS .
T. Van Gerven and A. Stankiewicz, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 2465–2474 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Charpentier, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 3465–3485 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.epa.ie/whatwedo/advice/bat/
        .

          http://www.epa.ie/downloads/advice/brefs/
        .

          http://www2.fz-juelich.de/portal/index.php?index=1215&jahr=2010&cmd=show&mid=774
        .

          http://www.enea.it/it/Ricerca_sviluppo/documenti/ricerca-di-sistema-elettrico/tecnologie-elettriche/rse19.pdf
        .
B. E. Logan and M. Elimelech, Nature, 2012, 488, 313–319 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Lokhandwala, I. Pinnau, Z. He, K. D. Amo, A. R. DaCosta, J. G. Wijmans and R. W. Baker, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 346, 270–279 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Merkel, H. Lin, X. Wei and R. Baker, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 359, 126–139 CrossRef CAS .
B. Belaissaoui, Y. Le Moullec, D. Willson and E. Favre, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 424, 415–416 Search PubMed .
E. Favre, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 171, 782–793 CrossRef CAS .
E. Favre, R. Bounaceur and D. Roizard, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2009, 68, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Baker, J. G. Wijmans and J. H. Kaschemekat, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 151, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Sikdar, AIChE J., 2003, 49, 1928–1932 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Martins, T. M. Mata, C. A. V. Costa and S. K. Sikdar, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 2962–2973 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Chung, X. Li, R. C. Ong, Q. Ge, H. Wang and G. Han, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2012, 1, 246–257 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Scott, Handbook of industrial membranes, Elsevier Science & Technology Books,  1999 Search PubMed .

Membrane technology in the chemical Industry, ed. S. Pereira Nunes and K-V. Peinemann, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH,  2006 Search PubMed .

Advanced membrane technology and Applications, ed. N. N. Li, A. G. Fane, W. S. Winston Ho and T. Matsuura, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey,  2008 Search PubMed .

Advanced materials for membrane preparation, ed. M. G. Buonomenna and G. Golemme, Bentham Science Publishers, Sharjah (United Arab Emirates),  2012 Search PubMed .
H. Zhu, X. Wen and X. Huang, Desalination, 2012, 284, 324–331 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gallego-Molina, J. A. Mendoza-Roca, D. Aguado and M. V. Galiana-Aleixandre, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2012 DOI:10.1016/j.cherd.2012.08.003 .
Q. Wang, Z. Wang and Z. Wu, Desalination, 2012, 297, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Gamage, J. D. Rimer and S. Chellam, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 411–412, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
M. Raffin, E. Germain and S. J. Judd, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 96, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Bilad, D. Vandamme, I. Foubert, K. Muylaert and I. F. J. Vankelecom, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 111, 343–352 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dizge, G. Soydemir, A. Karagunduz and B. Keskinler, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 366, 278–285 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rezaei, H. Abadi, M. Reza Sebzari, M. Hemati, F. Rekabdar and T. Mohammadi, Desalination, 2011, 265, 222–228 CrossRef .
J. K. Parashuram, S. K. Maurya, H. H. Rana, P. S. Singh, P. Ray and A. V. R. Reddy, J.Membr. Sci., 2013, 425, 251–261 CrossRef .
M. M. Rohani and A. L. Zydney, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 397–398, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
K. Guerra, J. Pellegrino and J. E. Drewes, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 87, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and H. Deng, Desalination, 2012, 300, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jayalakshmi, S. Rajesh, S. Senthilkumar and D. Mohan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 90, 120–132 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Huang, L.-J. Shi, G.-M. Zeng, X. Li, S.-B. He, F. Li, Y.-L. Xiong, S.-H. Guo, D.-M. Zhang and G.-X. Xie, Desalination, 2012, 294, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heo, H. Kim, N. Her, S. Lee, Y.-G. Park and Y. Yoon, Desalination, 2012, 298, 75–84 CrossRef CAS .
M. Al Manasrah, M. Kallioinen, H. Ilvesniemi and M. Mänttäri, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 114, 375–381 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Yi, S. L. Yu, W. X. Shi, S. Wang, N. Sun, L. M. Jin, X. Wang and L. P. Sun, Desalination, 2012, 305, 12–16 CrossRef CAS .
Jia Xu, L. G. Ruan, Xue Wang, Ye Y. Jiang, Li X. Gao and Jie C. Gao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 85, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
R. Paulen, M. Fikar, G. Foley, Z. Kovács and P. Czermak, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 411–412, 160–172 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Lai, M. Mondor, C. Moresoli, H. Drolet, M. Gros-Louis, D. Ippersiel, F. Lamarche and Y. Arcand, J. Food Eng., 2013, 114, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carstensen, C. Marx, J. André, T. Melin and M. Wessling, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 421–422, 39–50 CrossRef CAS .
R. Paulen, M. Fikar, Z. Kovács and P. Czermak, Chem. Eng. Process., 2011, 50, 815–821 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sen, A. Roy, A. Bhattacharya, D. Banerjee and C. Bhattacharjee, Desalination, 2011, 273, 168–178 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yin, G. Yang, Z. Zhong and W. Xing, Desalination, 2011, 268, 233–237 CrossRef CAS .
O. Nishida, T. Nakamura, Y. Hara, M. Yumoto, Y. Shimomura and K. Moriyama, Contrib Nephrol., 2011, 81, 173–172 Search PubMed .
H. Hirasawa, S. Oda and K. Matsuda, Contrib. Nephrol., 2007, 156, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schmidt, T. Köse and P. Lutze, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 429, 103–120 CrossRef .
D. Nanda, K.-L. Tung, Y.-L. Li, N.-J. Lin and C.-J. Chuang, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 349, 411–420 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Zhang, Z. Zhou, J. Ren, Z. Geng, J. Luan and G. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 394–395, 218–229 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Sun, T. A. Hatton, S. Y. Chan and T.-S. Chung, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 401–402, 152–162 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Siew, A. G. Livingston, C. Ates and A. Merschaert, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012 DOI:10.1016/j.ces.2012.10.028  
        .
S. Subramanian and R. Seeram, Desalination, 2013, 308, 198–208 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Harisha, K. M. Hosamani, R. S. Keri, S. K. Nataraj and T. M. Aminabhavi, Desalination, 2010, 252, 75–80 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peñate and L. García-Rodríguez, Desalination, 2012, 284, 1–8 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, A. Liao and Y. Hu, Desalination, 2012, 307, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. K. El-Ghonemy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 4016–4028 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Desalination, 2012, 293, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Radu, J. S. Vrouwenvelder, M. C. M. van Loosdrecht and C. Picioreanu, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 188, 30–39 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peñate and L. García-Rodríguez, Desalination, 2012, 284, 86–91 CrossRef .
G.-D. Kang and Yi-M. Cao, Water Res., 2012, 46, 584–600 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Zahrani, J. Orfi, Z. Al-Suhaibani, B. Salim and H. Al-Ansary, Procedia Eng., 2012, 33, 404–414 CrossRef CAS .
N. Melián-Martel, J. J. Sadhwani, S. Malamis and M. Ochsenkühn-Petropoulou, Desalination, 2012, 305, 44–53 CrossRef .
A. M. K. El-Ghonemy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 4597–4605 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dydo, I. Nemś and M. Turek, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 89, 171–180 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fritzmann, J. Löwenberg, T. Wintgens and T. Melin, Desalination, 2007, 216, 1–76 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bellona, D. Heil, C. Yu, P. Fu and J. E. Drewes, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 85, 69–76 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yong, W. A. Phillip and M. Elimelech, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 392–393, 9–17 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, S. Lee, H. K. Shon, M. Elimelech and S. Hong, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 419–420, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, L. D. Nghiem, W. E. Price and M. Elimelech, Water Res., 2012, 46, 2683–2692 CrossRef CAS .
T.-S. Chung, X. Li, R. C. Ong, Q. Ge, H. Wang and G. Han, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2012, 1, 246–257 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Yen, F. M. Haja N., M. Su, K. Y. Wang and T.-S. Chung, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 364, 242–252 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ling, T.-S. Chung and X. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10788–10790 RSC .
M. M. Ling and T.-S. Chung, Desalination, 2011, 278, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ling, K. Y. Wang and T-S. Chung, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 5869–5876 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ling and T.-S. Chung, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 372, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ge, J. Su, G. L. Amy and T.-S. Chung, Water Res., 2012, 46, 1318–1326 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ge, P. Wang, C. Wan and T.-S. Chung, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 6236–6243 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ge, J. Su, T.-S. Chung and G. Amy, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 382–388 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chou, R. Wang, L. Shi, Q. She, C. Tang and A. G. Fane, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 389, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
A. Achilli, T. Y. Cath and A. E. Childress, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 343, 42–52 CrossRef .
J. W. Post, J. Veerman, H. V. M. Hamelers, G. J. W. Euverink, S. J. Metz, K. Nymeijer and C. J. N. Buisman, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 288, 218–230 CrossRef CAS .
Q. She, X. Jin and C. Y. Tang, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 401–402, 262–273 CrossRef CAS .
A. Achilli and A. E. Childress, Desalination, 2010, 261, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, T. Sun, D. Sui and J. Dong, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 698, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-J. Tan, F.-F. Li, X.-L. Xu and J.-M. Xing, Desalination, 2012, 286, 1389–393 Search PubMed .
I. Ayensu, J. C. Mitchell and J. S. Boateng, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2012, 50, 905–909 CrossRef CAS .
G. Moreno-Bautista and K. C. Tam, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 389, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, C. Wu, T. Xu and Y. Wu, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 366, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Fissell and S. Roy, Semin. Dial., 2009, 22, 665–70 CrossRef .
S. Ben Hamouda, K. Touati and M. Ben Amor, Arabian J. Chem., 2012 DOI:10.1016/j.arabjc.2012.07.035 .
M. Şahin, H. Görçay, E. Kır and Y. Şahin, React. Funct. Polym., 2009, 69, 673–680 CrossRef .
A. Rózańska and J. Wiśniewski, Desalination, 2009, 240, 326–332 CrossRef .
B. Zhao, H. Zhao and J. Ni, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 160, 170–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Wiśniewski, M. Kabsch-Korbutowicz and S. Łakomska, Desalination, 2011, 281, 257–262 CrossRef .
O. Altintas, A. Tor, Y. Cengeloglu and M. Ersoz, Desalination, 2009, 239, 276–282 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mulyati, R. Takagi, A. Fujii, Y. Ohmukai, T. Maruyama and H. Matsuyama, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 417–418, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
U. López-García, R. Antaño-López, G. Orozco, T. Chapman and F. Castaneda, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2009, 68, 375–381 CrossRef .
R. Elías-Serrano, D. I. Tellez Medina, L. Dorantes Álvarez, L. Alamilla Beltrán, J. Chanona-Pérez, G. Calderón-Domínguez, P. Fito and G.F. Gutiérrez-López, J. Food Eng., 2007, 83, 277–284 CrossRef .
F. Valero and R. Arbós, Desalination, 2010, 253, 170–174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Turek and B. Bandura, Desalination, 2007, 205, 67–74 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ruggieri, J. L. Fernandez-Turiel, D. Gimeno, F. Valero, J. C. García and M. E. Medina, Desalination, 2008, 227, 314–326 CrossRef CAS .
J. Veermana, R. M. de Jong, M. Saakesa, S. J. Metza and G. J. Harmsen, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 343, 7–15 CrossRef .
J.-H. Song, K.-H. Yeon and S.-H. Moon, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 291, 165–171 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.water.siemens.com/en/applications/high_purity_water/Pages/pw_cs_cedi_sys_optimization.aspx
        .

          http://www.water.siemens.com/en/videos/high-purity-water/Pages/ionpure-cedi-overview.aspx
        .

          http://www.idswater.com/Common/Paper/Paper_112/Improvements%20in%20Continuous.htm
        .

          http://upetd.up.ac.za/thesis/available/etd-02182005-130807/unrestricted/00dissertation.pdf
        .
T. J. Welgemoed and C. F. Schutte, Desalination, 2005, 183, 327–340 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.rwlwater.com/capacitive-deionization-promising-desalination-technology-resdesigned/
        .
A. S. Colin, G. W. Stevens and S. E. Kentish, Fuel, 2012, 96, 15–28 CrossRef .
B. Belaissaoui, D. Willson and E. Favre, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 211–212, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Oana, D. Gorri, K. Nijmeijer, I. Ortiz and A. Urtiaga, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 419–420, 49–56 Search PubMed .
R. Khalilpour, A. Abbas, Z. Lai and I. Pinnau, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2012 DOI:10.1016/j.cherd.2012.07.009. .
C. H. Lau, P. Li, F. Li, T.-S. Chung and D. R. Paul, Prog. Pol. Sci., 2012 DOI:10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2012.09.006. .
H. Z. Chen and T.-S. Chung, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 6001–6011 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qin, Q. Meng, Y. Feng and Y. Gao, Surface Science, 2013, 607, 153–158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, J. R. Johnson, O. Karvan, D. S. Sholl and W. J. Koros, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 401–402, 76–82 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Scholes, J. Bacus, G. Q. Chen, W. X. Tao, G. Li, A. Qader, G. W. Stevens and S. E. Kentish, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 389, 470–477 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Kumbharkar and K. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 415–416, 793–800 CrossRef CAS .
M. Villegas, E. F. Castro Vidaurre, A. C. Habert and J. C. Gottifredi, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 367, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, Y. Liu, G. Chen, X. Gu and W. Xing, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2011, 19, 904–910 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kaewkannetra, N. Chutinate, S. Moonamart, T. Kamsan and T. Y. Chiu, Desalination, 2011, 271, 88–91 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raisi and A. Aroujalian, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2011, 82, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jullok, S. Darvishmanesh, P. Luis and B. Van der Bruggen, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 175, 306–315 CAS .
G. Liu, W. Wei, H. Wu, X. Dong, M. Jiang and W. Jin, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 373, 121–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. Claes, P. Vandezande, S. Mullens, K. De Sitter, R. Peeters and M. K. Van Bae, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 389, 265–271 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mosleh, T. Khosravi, O. Bakhtiari and T. Mohammadi, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2012, 90, 433–441 CrossRef CAS .

          R. W. Baker and J. G. Wijmans, Membrane Separation of Organic Vapors from Gas Streams, in Polymeric Gas Separation Membranes, ed. D. R. Paul and Y. P. Yampolskii, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL 1994 Search PubMed .
K. Ohlrogge, J. B. Rockmiller, J. Wind and R. D. Behling, Sep. Sci. Technol., 1993, 28, 227–240 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Ohlrogge and K. Stürken, The Separation of Organic Vapors from Gas Streams by Means of Membranes, in Membrane Technology, ed. S.P. Nunes and K-V. Peinemann, J. Wiley, Chichester, UK,  2001 Search PubMed .

          R. W. Baker, Vapor and gas separation by membranes in Advanced Membrane Technology and Applications, ed. N. N. Li, A. G. Fane, W. S. W. Ho and T. Matsuura, John Wiley & Sons, Ch. 21,  2008, pp.559–580 Search PubMed .
E. Drioli, G. Di Profio and E. Curcio, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2012, 1, 178–182 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kamalesh, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 5250–5266 CrossRef .
S. Atchariyawut, C. Feng, R. Wang, R. Jiraratananon and D. T. Liang, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 285, 272–281 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kertesz and S. Schlosser, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2005, 41, 275–287 CrossRef CAS .
J. Phattaranawik, T. Leiknes and W. Pronk, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 247, 153–167 CrossRef CAS .
E. Favre and H. F. Svendsen, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 407–408, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Ž. Olujić, M. Behrens, L. Sun and F. Jan de Graauw, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 350, 19–31 CrossRef .
J. J. Cai, K. Hawboldt and M. Abedinzadegan Abdi, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 397–398, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mezher, H. Fath, Z. Abbas and A. Khaled, Desalination, 2011, 266, 263 CrossRef CAS .

          M. G. Buonomenna, Hybrid membrane processes in desalination systems in Recent Developments in Separation Research 1, ed. S. G. Pandalai, Transworld Research Network, Trivandrum, India,  2012, ISBN: 978-81-7895-574-2 Search PubMed .

          http://waterprojectsonline.com/case_studies/2010/Thames_Beckton_2010.pdf
        .
Y. Wu, L. Xia, Z. Hu, S. Liu, H. Liu, B. Nath, N. Zhang and L. Yang, Environ. Pollut., 2011, 159, 2968–2973 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pérez-González, A. M. Urtiaga, R. Ibáñez and I. Ortiz, Water Res., 2012, 46, 267–283 CrossRef .

          http://www.usbr.gov/pmts/water/publications/reportpdfs/report149.pdf
        .

Chemical Engineering Research and Design, ed. C. Deng, X. Feng and J. Bai, Vol. 86, Issue 2,  2008, pp 165–171 Search PubMed .

          http://www.thenational.ae/news/uae-news/environment/breakthrough-desalination-system-could-benefit-uae
        .

          F. Münk, Ecological
and economic analysis of seawater desalination plants, University of Karlsruhe, Diploma Thesis,  2008 Search PubMed .

  (a) J. H. Hanemaaijer, Desalination, 2004, 168, 355 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. C Vega-Beltrán, L. García-Rodríguez, I. Martín-Mateos and J. Blanco-Gálvez, Desalination and Water Treatment, 2010, 18, 133–138 CrossRef .
G. Lychnos, R. Amdouni and P. A. Davies, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7978–7982 RSC .

          http://www.americanro.com/1772776.html
        .

          http://www.wateronline.com/doc.mvc/HERO-High-Efficiency-Reverse-Osmosis-Technolo-0001.
        .

          http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/SPWR/1061111165x0x453648/9577388E-424A-41E2-BE32-B7BF46C2BBA1/2010AR.pdf
        .
K. P. Lee, T. C. Arnot and D. Mattia, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 370, 1–22 CrossRef CAS .
N. Misdan, W. J. Lau and A. F. Ismail, Desalination, 2012, 287, 228–237 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kang and Y. Cao, Water Res., 2012, 46, 584–600 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim and B. Van der Bruggen, Environ. Pollut., 2010, 158, 2335–2349 CrossRef CAS .
S. Loeb and S. Sourirajan, Adv. Chem., 1962, 38, 117–132 CrossRef .

          J. E. Cadotte
          , Interfacially Synthesized Reverse Osmosis Membrane, US 4277344
           1981
         Search PubMed .
A. K. Ghosh, B.-H. Jeong, X. Huang and E. M. V. Hoek, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 311, 34–45 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mansouri, S. Harrisson and V. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4567–4586 RSC .
A. Subramani, X. F. Huang and E. M. V. Hoek, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 336, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elimelech, X. Zhu, A. E. Childress and S. Hong, J. Membr. Sci., 1997, 127, 101–109 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Vrijenhoek, S. Hong and M. Elimelech, J. Membr. Sci., 2001, 188, 115–128 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Bowen and T. A. Doneva, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 229, 544–549 CrossRef .
G. Osmonics, Duraslick – Low Fouling Membranes for Surface and Natural Water Search PubMed  
          http://www.desalwater.com/Featured-Duraslick.htm,
        .
D. Norberg, S. Hong, J. Taylor and Y. Zhao, Desalination, 2007, 202, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hirose, H. Ito and Y. Kamiyama, J. Membr. Sci., 1996, 121, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Al-Jeshi and A. Neville, Desalination, 2006, 189, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Ramon and E. M. V. Hoek, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 425–426, 141–148 CrossRef .
G. Z. Ramon, M. C. Y. Wong and E. M. V. Hoek, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 415–416, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Goodyer and A. L. Bunge, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 409–410, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .

          M. G. Buonomenna, Low energy reverse osmosis membranes, Desalination 2013 DOI:10.1016/j.desal.2013.01.006.
M. T. Pendergast and E. M. V. Hoek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1946–1971 CAS .

          E. M. V. Hoek, B. H. Jeong and Y. Yan, Nanocomposite membranes and methods of making and using same, U.S. Application 11/364,885, Priority: US 60/660,428, March 9, 2005.
M. T. M. Pendergast, A. K. Ghosh and E. M. V. Hoek, Desalination, 2013, 308, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. M. Pendergast, J. M. Nygaard, A. K. Ghosh and E. M. V. Hoek, Desalination, 2010, 261, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Fathizadeha and A. Aroujaliana, A. Raisi, J. Membr. Sci. 2011, 375, 88–95 Search PubMed .
M. Kumar, M. Grzelakowski, J. Zilles, M. Clark and W. Meier, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A., 2007, 104, 20719–20724 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Pattle, Nature, 1954, 174, 660–660 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Norman, Science, 1974, 186, 350–352 CAS .
O. Levenspiel and N. de Nevers, Science, 1974, 183, 157–160 CAS .
S. Loeb and R. S. Norman, Science, 1975, 189, 654–655 CAS .
S. Loeb, J. Membr. Sci., 1976, 1, 49–63 CrossRef .
K. L. Lee, R. W. Baker and H. K. Lonsdale, J. Membr. Sci., 1981, 8, 141–171 CrossRef CAS .
A. Achilli, T. Y. Cath, E. A. Marchand and A. E. Childress, Desalination, 2009, 239, 10–21 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mi and M. Elimelech, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 320, 292–302 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mi and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 2022–2028 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mi and M. Elimelech, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 348, 337–345 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, C. Boo, M. Elimelech and S. Hong, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 365, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Tang, Q. She, W. C. L. Lay, R. Wang and A. Fane, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 354, 123–133 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gerstandt, K.-V. Peinemann, S. E. Skilhagen, T. Thorsen and T. Holt, Desalination, 2008, 224, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Thorsen and T. Holt, Statkraft patents on semi permeable membrane for use in osmosis, and method and plant for providing elevated pressure by osmosis to create power. WO Patent 03/047733 A1; 2009, US Patent 7,566,402 B2; 2009, US Patent application 2009/0008330 A1;  2009 Search PubMed .
P. Podsiadlo, A. K. Kaushik, E. M. Arruda, A. M. Waas, B. S. Shim, J. Xu, H. Nandivada, B. G. Pumplin, J. Lahann, A. Ramamoorthy and N. A. Kotov, Science, 2007, 318, 80–83 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Wang, R. C. Ong and T. S. Chung, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 4824–4831 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, K. Y. Wang, T. S. Chung, H. M. Chen, Y. C. Jean and G. Amy, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 360, 522–535 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Tang, Q. She, W. C. L. Lay, R. Wang, R. Field and A. G. Fane, Desalination, 2011, 283, 178–183 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qi, W. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Ma, J. Wei, T. W. Chin and C. Y. Tang, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 423–424, 536–542 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Wang, T. S. Chung and G. Amy, AIChE J., 2012, 58, 770–781 CrossRef CAS .
N. Widjojo, T. S. Chung, M. Weber, C. Maletzko and V. Warzelhan, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 383, 214–223 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, T.-S. Chung, M. Toriida and S. Tamai, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 423–424, 543–555 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Kunin and R. J. Myers, Ion Exchange Resins, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York,  1950, 109 Search PubMed .
W. R. Waiters, D. W. Weiser and L. J. Marek, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1955, 47, 61 CrossRef .
J. Wood, J. Gifford, J. Arba and M. Shaw, Desalination, 2010, 250, 973–976 CrossRef CAS .

          F. DiMascio, J. Wood and J. M. Fenton, The Electrochemical Society Interface.  1998, 26–29 Search PubMed .

          http://www.energy.ca.gov/reports/2004-01-22_500-03-<?pdb_no 068C?><?pdb_no 068C?><?pdb_no 068C?><?pdb_no 068C?><?pdb_no 068C?><?pdb_no 068C?>068C<?pdb END?><?pdb END?><?pdb END?><?pdb END?><?pdb END?><?pdb<?db_id PDB?><?db_id PDB?><?db_id PDB?><?db_id PDB?><?db_id PDB?> END?>.PDF
        .
Y. Oren, Desalination, 2008, 228, 10–29 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.voltea.com
        .

          http://www.ich.org/
        .
J. Geens, B. De Witte and B. Van der Bruggen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2007, 42, 2435–2449 CAS .
E. M. Rundquist, C. J. Pink and A. G. Livingston, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2197–2205 RSC .

          http://www3.imperial.ac.uk/ceseparationprocesses/research/projects
        .

  (a) 
            V. Meynen and A. Buekenhoudt, Hybrid Organic-Inorganic membranes for solvent filtration, in Advanced Materials for Membrane Preparation, M. G. Buonomenna and G. Golemme, Bentham Science Publishers, Sharjah, U.A.E.,  2012, ISBN: 978-1-60805-505-0 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) A. V. Volkov, G. A. Korneeva and G. F. Tereshchenko, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2008, 77, 983–993 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guizard, A. Ayral and A. Julbe, Desalination, 2002, 147, 275–280 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuru, M. Miyawaki, H. Kondo, T. Yoshioka and M. Asaeda, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2003, 32, 105–109 CrossRef CAS .
B. Verrecht, R. Leysen, A. Buekenhoudt, C. Vandecasteele and B. V. D. Bruggen, Desalination, 2006, 200, 385–386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geens, K. Boussu, C. Vandecasteele and B. V. D. Bruggen, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 281, 139–148 CrossRef CAS .
P. Marchetti, A. Butté and A. G. Livingston, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 415–416, 444–458 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aerts, A. Vanhulsel, A. Buekenhoudt, H. Weyten, S. Kuypers, H. Chen, M. Bryjak, L. E. M. Gevers, I. F. J. Vankelecom and P.A. Jacobs, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 275, 212–219 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ebert, J. Koll, M. F. J. Dijkstra and M. Eggers, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 285, 75–80 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Stafie, Poly(dimethyl siloxane) – based composite nanofiltration membranes for non-aqueous applications, Ph.D. thesis, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, ( 2004) Search PubMed .
N. Stafie and D. F. Stamatialis, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 228, 103–116 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. M. Gevers, S. Aldea, I. F. J. Vankelecom and P. A. Jacobs, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 281, 741–746 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Robinson, E. S. Tarleton, C. R. Millington and A. Nijmeijer, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 230, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Robinson, E. S. Tarleton, C. R. Millington and A. Nijmeijer, Filtration, 2004, 4, 50–56 CAS .
L. E. M. Gevers, I. F. J. Vankelecom and P. A. Jacobs, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2500–2502 RSC .
S. Basu, M. Maes, A. Cano-Odena, L. Alaerts, D. E. De Vos and I. F. J. Vankelecom, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 344, 190–198 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vanherck, A. Aerts, J. Martens and I. Vankelecom, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2492–2494 RSC .
M. F. J. Solomon, Y. Bhole and A. G. Livingston, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 423–424, 371–382 CrossRef .
C. Ba, J. Langer and J. Economy, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 327, 49–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, Z. Li and F.-S. Wong, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 241, 305–314 CrossRef CAS .

          A .G. Livingston and Y. H. See-Toh, Asymmetric membranes for use in nanofiltration, in: P. A. Publication, Imperial Innovations Limited, United States,  2010 Search PubMed .
K. Vanherck, A. Cano-Odena, G. Koeckelberghs, T. Dedroog and I. Vankelecom, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 353, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
W. Albrecht, B. Seifert, T. Weigel, M. Schossig, A. Hollander, T. Groth and R. Hilke, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2003, 204, 510–521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. S. Toh, F. W. Limb and A. G. Livingston, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 301, 3–10 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kita, T. Inada, K. Tanaka and K.-I. Okamoto, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 87, 139–147 CrossRef .
K. Hendrix, K. Vanherck and I. F. J. Vankelecom, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 421–422, 15–24 CrossRef CAS .
I. Soroko and A. Livingston, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 343, 189–198 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Volkov, D. F. Stamatialis, V. S. Khotimsky, V. V. Volkov, M. Wessling and N. A. Platé, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 281, 351–357 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Volkov, V. V. Parashchuk, D. F. Stamatialis, V. S. Khotimsky, V. V. Volkov and M. Wessling, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 333, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Budd, E. S. Elabas, B. S. Ghanem, S. Makhseed, N. B. McKeown, K. J. Msayib, C. E. Tattershall and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 456–459 CrossRef CAS .

          N. B. McKeown, P. M. Budd and D. Fritsch, Thin layer composite membranes with microporous layers and supporting layers, in: PCT Int. Appl., 2005, WO 2005113121,  2005, 93 pp Search PubMed .
D. Fritsch, P. Merten, K. Heinrich, M. Lazar and M. Priske, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 401–402, 222–231 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Dutczak, M. W. J. Luiten-Olieman, H. J. Zwijnenberg, L. A. M. Bolhuis-Versteeg, L. Winnubst, M. A. Hempenius, N. E. Benes, M. Wessling and D. Stamatialis, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 372, 182–190 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Dutczak, C. R. Tanardi, K. K. Kopeć, M. Wessling and D. Stamatialis, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 86, 183–189 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Sirkar, Membrane contactors in Advanced Membrane Technology and Applications, ed. N. N. Li, A. G. Fane, W. S. W. Ho and T. Matsura, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey,  2008, pp. 687-702 Search PubMed .

          http://www.liquicel.com/press.cfm?pr=27
        .
C. Charcosset, J. Food Eng., 2009, 92, 241–249 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Gijsbertsen-Abrahamse, A van der Padt and R. M. Boom, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 230, 149–159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kukizaki and M. Goto, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 299, 190–199 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.spg-techno.co.jp/english/contents/spg_membrane.shtml
        .
K. Pays, J. Giermanska-Kahn, B. Pouligny, J. Bibette and F. Leal-Caldron, J. Control. Release, 2002, 79, 193–205 CrossRef CAS ; S. S. Davis and I. M. Walker, Methods Enzymol., 1987, 149, 51–64 CrossRef .
R. W. Baker and K. Lokhandwala, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 2109–2121 CrossRef CAS .
Cameron Data Sheet 2010 | TC9814-012.

          http://www.igu.org/html/wgc2009/papers/docs/wgcFinal00529.pdf
        .

          http://www.uop.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/UOP-Separex-Membrane-Technologytech-presentation.pdf
        .

          http://www.uop.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/UOP-Cost-Effective-Natural-Gas-Conditioning-Tech-Paper.pdf
        .

          http://www.mtrinc.com/publications/membranes_for_fuel_gas_conditioning.pdf
        .

          A. Jariwala, K. Lokhandwala and R. W. Baker, Only Raw Sour Gas for Engine Fuel? Proven Membrane Process Cleans Gas for Engines. Presented at the Laurance Reid Gas Conditioning Conference, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA,  2006 Search PubMed .

          http://www.mtrinc.com/pdf_print/natural_gas/MTR_Brochure_FGC.pdf
        .

          http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/environment/tackling_climate_change/l28060_it.htm
        .

          http://www.ec.gc.ca/doc/media/m_123/c2_eng.html#figure2
        .

          http://web.mit.edu/sequestration/talloires/2_to_page_pdfs/Talloires_Baker.pdf
        .
T. C. Merkel, H. Lin, X. Wei and R. Baker, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 359, 126–139 CrossRef CAS .
E. Favre, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 294, 50–59 CrossRef CAS .
H. Herzog, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 148A–153 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Mikus and T. Melien, CO2 capture project: CCP economics overview, in: Third Annual Conference on Carbon Capture and Sequestration, Alexandria, Virginia, USA, 2004 .
J. D. Figueroa, T. Fout, S. Plasynski, H. McIlvried and R. D. Srivastava, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2008, 2, 9–20 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.co2captureproject.org
        .

          http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/srccs/srccs_chapter3.pdf
        .

          http://gcep.stanford.edu/pdfs/assessments/carbon_capture_assessment.pdf
        .
R. Bounaceur, N. Lape, D. Roizard, C. Vallieres and E. Favre, Energy, 2006, 14, 2556–2570 CrossRef .
E. Favre, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 171, 782–793 CrossRef CAS .
E. Favre, R. Bounaceur and D. Roizard, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 328, 11–14 CrossRef CAS .
B. Belaissaoui, D. Willson and E. Favre, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 211–212, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .

          R. W. Baker, Contribution to Membrane Technology for CO2 separation, GKSS, Sept. 29th–Oct 2nd  2009 Search PubMed .

          http://www.netl.doe.gov/publications/proceedings/09/CO2/pdfs/5312%20MTR%20membrane%20%28Merkel%29%20mar09.pdf
        .

          http://www.mtrinc.com/news.html#DOE14mil
        .
Micro Hydro Power′′, http://www.micro-hydro-power.com/Small-hydro.htm Access Date: April 16th, 2011.
M. G. Buonomenna, W. Yave and G. Golemme, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10745–10773 RSC .
Y. Yampolskii, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 3298–3311 CrossRef CAS .
A. Car, C. Stropnik, W. Yave and K.-V. Peinemann, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 307, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Kulprathipanja, US Patent 4606740 ( 1986) Search PubMed .

          S. Kazama, Carbon sequestration leadership forum, 1st International Workshop on CSLF Projects, 2005, Berlin, Germany Search PubMed .
W. Yave, A. Car, S. S. Funari, S. P. Nunes and K. V. Peinemann, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 326–333 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yave, A. Car, K.-V. Peinemann, M. Q. Shaikh, K. Rätzke and F. Faupel, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 339, 177–183 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Yave, Contribution to Membrane Technology for CO2 separation, GKSS, Sept. 29th–Oct 2nd 2009; W. Yave, A. Car, J. Wind, K.-V. Peinemann, Nanotechnology,  2010, 21, 395301–8 Search PubMed .
W. Yave, A. Szymczyk, N. Yave and Z. Roslaniec, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 362, 407–416 CrossRef CAS .
P. Budd, N. McKeown, B. S. Ghanem, K. J. Msayib, D. Fritsch, L. Starannikova, N. Belov, O. Sanfirova, Y. Yampolskii and V. Shantarovich, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 325, 851–860 CrossRef CAS .
N. Du, H. B. Park, G. P. Robertson, M. M. Dal-Cin, T. Visser, L. Scoles and M. D. Guiver, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 372–375 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Li, Y. Xiao, T.-S. Chung and S. Kawi, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1427–1437 CrossRef CAS .
E. Y. Sultanov, A. A. Ezhov, S. M. Shishatskiy, K. Buhr and V. S. Khotimskiy, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1222–1229 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagai, T. Masuda, T. Nakagawa, B. D. Freeman and I. Pinnau, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 721–798 CrossRef CAS .
J. Caro, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2011, 1, 77–83 CrossRef CAS .
S. Keskin, T. M. van Heest and D. S. Sholl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 879–891 CrossRef CAS .
G. Férey, C. Serre, T. Devic, G. Maurin, H. Jobic, P. L. Llewellyn, G. D. Weireld, A. Vimont, M. Daturi and J. S. Chang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 550–562 RSC .
J. R. Li, Y. G. Ma, M. C. McCarthy, J. Sculley, J. M. Yu, H. K. Jeong, P. B. Balbuena and H. C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 1791–1823 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, J. Liu, R. A. Fischer and C. Woll, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1081–1106 RSC .
S. Keskin and D. S. Sholl, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11786–11795 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Vinh-Thang and S. Kaliaguine, MOF-based mixed-matrix membranes for industrial applications. In Coordination Polymers and Metal Organic Frameworks, ed. O. L. Ortiz and L. D. Ramírez, Nova Science Publishers,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. Keskin and D. S. Sholl, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 343–351 CAS .
J. Hu, H. P. Cai, H. Q. Ren, Y. M. Wei, Z. L. Xu, H. L. Liu and Y. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 12605–12612 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. C. Ordonez, K. J. Balkus, J. P. Ferraris and I. C. H. Musselman, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 361, 28–37 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Perez, K. J. Balkus, J. P. Ferraris and I. H. Musselman, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 328, 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
S. Basu, M. Maes, A. Cano-Odena, L. Alaerts and D. E. de Vos, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 344, 190–198 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, T. H. Bae, W. L. Qiu, W. J. Koros, C. W. Jones and S. Nair, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9863–9866 CrossRef .
M. Kiyono, P. J. Williams and W.J. Koros, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 359, 2–10 CrossRef CAS .

          P. J. Williams and W. J. Koros, Gas separation by carbon membranes , in Advanced Membrane Technology and Applications, ed. N. N. Li, A. G. Fane, W. S. W. Ho and T. Matsuura, John Wiley & Sons,  2008, Ch. 23, pp. 599–632 Search PubMed .
S. P. Koenig, L. Wang, J. Pellegrino and J. Scott Bunch, Nat. Nanotechnol. DOI:10.1038/nnano.2012.162 .
D. Cohen-Tanugi and J. C. Grossman, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(7), 3602–3608 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lipnizki, R. W. Field and P.-K. Ten, J. Membr. Sci., 1999, 153, 183–210 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Gienger and R. J. Ray, AIChE Symp. Ser., 1988, 84, 168 CAS .
R. Wodzki, G. Sionkowski and G. Pozniak, Sep. Sci. Technol., 1999, 34, 627–649 CrossRef CAS .

US Patent 7,919,001
         Search PubMed .

          http://www.water.siemens.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/Product_Lines/Ionpure_Products/Con%20Ed%20%20IWC-2006-41-RevA.pdf
        .

          http://www.desalination.biz/news/news_story.asp?id=6008&title=Siemens+ED-CEDI+desalination+demo+achieves+1.8%26%23160%3BkWh%2Fm%26%23179%3B
        .

          http://www.eetcorp.com/lts/HEEDappl.htm
        .

          M. G. Buonomenna, G. Golemme and E. Perrotta, Membrane Operations for Industrial Applications in Advances in Chemical Engineering ed. Z. Nawaz and S. Naveed,  Intech Open access Publishers,  2012, Ch. 21, pp. 543–562, ISBN 978-953-51-0392-9 and references cited therein Search PubMed .
P. Mercea and S. T. Hwang, J. Membr. Sci., 1994, 88, 132–144 CrossRef .
S. Sircar and W. Waldron Sep., Sep. Purif. Technol., 1999, 17, 11–20 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sircar and T. Golden, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2000, 35, 667–687 CrossRef CAS .

          http://msdssearch.dow.com/PublishedLiteratureDOWCOM/dh_011a/0901b8038011ac0c.pdf?filepath=gastreating/pdfs/noreg/170-01448.pdf&fromPage=GetDoc
        .
D. L. Heaven, Oil Gas J., 1996, 27, 49–54 Search PubMed .

          http://www.mtrinc.com/publications/MT01%20Fane%20Memb%20for%20VaporGas_Sep%202006%20Book%20Ch.pdf
        .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  USA and world membrane market.8	 

1	Microfiltration	Hydrostatic pressure (0.5-4 bar)	Filtration (size exclusion)	Water purification, sterilization	
23–30

2	Ultrafiltration	Hydrostatic pressure (1-10 bar)	Filtration (size exclusion)	Separation &fractionation of molecular mixtures	
31–40

3	Diafiltration	Hydrostatic pressure (1-10 bar)	Filtration (size exclusion); dialysation	Purification of molecular mixtures artificial kidney	
41–48

4	Nanofiltration	Hydrostatic pressure (5-40 bar)	Filtration (size exclusion); solution-diffusion mechanism; donnan exclusion effect	Separation of sugars, other organic molecules and multivalent salts	
49–55

5	Reverse osmosis	Hydrostatic pressure (10-100 bar)	Solution-diffusion mechanism	Sea & brackish water desalination	
56–68

6	Forward osmosis	Natural osmosis (osmotic pressure gradient)	Solution-diffusion mechanism	Sea & brackish water desalination	
69–80

7	Pressure retarded osmosis	Natural osmosis (osmotic pressure gradient)	Solution-diffusion mechanism	Sea & brackish water desalination	
81–85

8	Dialysis	Concentration gradient	Diffusion	Drug delivery, artificial kidney	
86–91

9	Donnan dialysis	Concentration gradient of individual ions	Diffusion Donnan exclusion	Water softening	
92–97

10	Electrodialysis	Electrical potential	Migration Donnan-exclusion	Water desalination	
96, 98–100

11	Electrodialysis reversal	Electrical potential due to different concentration (concentration cell)	Migration Donnan-exclusion	Water desalination	
90, 101–104

12	Continuous Electrodeionization (CEDI)	Electrical potential	Migration Donnan-exclusion	Water desalination	
105–108

13	Capacitive deionization (CapDI)	Electrical potential (electric double-layer capacitors)	Migration Donnan-exclusion	Water desalination	
109–111

14	Gas separation	Vapor pressure gradient	Solution-diffusion	See the list of applications in Table 6	
112–121

15	Pervaporation	Vapor pressure gradient	Solution-diffusion	Separation of azeotropic mixtures	
122–129

16	Vapor permeation	Vapor pressure gradient	Solution-diffusion	Recovering of organic vapors from air	
130–133

17	Membrane contactors	See the paragraph 2.6	
134–141


 	Fig. 2  Global desalination capacity by process.142	 

TSDP, Singapore	318500
Kurnell, Sydney	250000
Ashkelon, Israel	330000
Fujairah, UAE	171000
Point Lisas, Trinidad	109152
Tampa Bay Desalination Plant, USA	94750
Chennai Minjur/India	100000
Carboneras – Almeria, Spain	121280
Barcelona, Spain	200000
Campo de Cartagena – Mauricia, Spain	140230
Larnaca, Cyprus	54000
Beckton, Thames Gateway UK	150000
Hadera, Israel	388000
Sorek, Israel (under construction)	510000
Jebel Ali G RO, UAE	113500
Palmachim, Israel	120000
Ashdod, Israel	150000
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia	200112
Shuwaikh, Kuwait	114000
Mactaa, Algeria	500000
Souk Tleta, Algeria	200000
Wonthaggi, Victoria (Australia)	410000

 	Fig. 3  Thames Gateway (UK) desalination plant.144	 

 	Fig. 4  Integrated membrane operations for RO desalination.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the HERO™ technology.	 

 	Fig. 6  Process flow diagram of ZLD designed by Aquatec for Chemplast.154	 

 	Fig. 7  Ariel view of the new SunPower-AUO joint venture solar cell fabrication plant in Malaysia which use HERO™ technology.155	 

 	Fig. 8  Polyamide thin-films constituting the top coating layer of a composite membrane. (a) SEM image of the film top surface. (b) TEM cross-section (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 162).	 

 	Fig. 9  The development of RO membrane by reaction optimisation and post synthesis surface modifications: (a) Dow Filmtec seawater series and (b) Toray brackish water series (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 156).	 

 	Fig. 10  Representative simulations of membrane segments over a porous support with a permeable solid phase (set to be equally permeable as the coating film) showing the concentration field and diffusive streamlines emerging under the combined effect of film roughness and support pores (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 172).	 


Inorganic
	
a) Ceramic
	

	
159, 176


b) Metallic
	



Thin film nanocomposite (TFN)
	

	
158, 176–178





Bio-inspired membranes
	

	
176, 156





 	Fig. 11  SEM images of the surface (a) and cross section morphology (b) of TFN membranes (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 180).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of FO process (C1(M) and C2(M) are the solution concentration in molarity (M)). C2 solution is the draw solution, containing the draw solutes (or osmotic agents).	 

FO	Less energy intensive for water transport across the semi-membranes; more reversible fouling	Permeate water ≠ product; requires a second separation step	Ineffective membranes; lack of cost effective draw solutes; limited studies on fouling
RO	Permeate water = high quality product	High energy consumption; some irreversible fouling	How to improve energy recovery efficiency; how to mitigate membrane fouling

 	Fig. 13  a) Picture and b) schematic of FO osmosis plant in Al Khaluf (Oman).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of the lab-scale FO–MD hybrid system (reproduced with permission by ACS, ref. 79).	 

Gas–Liquid (Vapor–Liquid)	Porous polypropylene membranes; porous tetrafluoroethylene membranes; porous poly-4-methyl-1-pentene membranes with a dense skin; polysulfone membranes with a nonporous hydrophobic high free volume fluoropolymer coating. Dense skin or dense coating employed, have as high a permeance as possible (e.g., silicone rubber) without allowing the liquid phase to permeate through; the porous support should be as porous as possible.
Liquid–Liquid	Porous hydrophobic polypropylene in hollow-fiberform (Celgard Inc., Charlotte, NC); Fluorinated copolymers (Mykrolis Inc., Billerica, MA) are good candidates for use with most solvents (exceptions include perflourinated solvents) as hydrophobic membranes; membranes based on nylon, regenerated cellulose, or polyacrylonitrile have been successfully employed with aqueous phase in pores; porous ceramic membranes having a polymeric coating (Kühni AG, Allschwil, Switzerland).

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of CEDI.	 

 	Fig. 16  Spiral-wound CEDI device (shown without housing) (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 206).	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic of the main steps of CAPDI: purification (step 1); regeneration (step 2) and flushing (step 3).	 

 	Fig. 18  Basic schematic of the Membrane Enhanced Peptide/Oligonucleotide Synthesis process, the thick black line represents the OSN membrane.214	 

 	Fig. 19  Novel thin film based on PIM for OSN (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 245).	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic of membrane contactor operations: 1. Membrane contactor allowing two fluid phases to contact each other; 2. membrane contactor for solid-fluid phase contacting; 3. membrane contactor system with multiple immobilized fluid phase interfaces (modified by ref. 248).	 

 	Fig. 21  Dispersion creation and phase contacting in a dispersion-based membrane contactor.248	 

 	Fig. 22  Commonly used porous hollow fiber-based membrane contactor (courtesy of Membrana, Charlotte, NC).	 

 	Fig. 23  Gas mixture containing CO2 contact liquid phase through an immobilized fluid phase interface in a membrane contactor: porous membrane without nonporous coating.	 

 	Fig. 24  Membrane gas absorption process	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic of membrane emulsification a) cross-flow mode by using hollow fiber/capillary membranes; b) dead-end mode with flat membranes.	 

 	Fig. 26  Shirasu porous-glass (SPG) membrane (left) and related fibers.253	 


CO2/CH4	Natural gas sweetening, landfill gas upgrading	Amine absorption	Polymers (cellulose acetate, polyaramide, polyimide, perfluoropolymers)
CO2/hydrocarbons	Natural gas liquid removal	Glycol absorption and cooling in a propane refrigeration plant (−20 °C)	Polymers (cellulose acetate, polyimide, polyamide)
CO2/N2	CO2 capture	Amine absorption	Polymer (polyimide)
H2O/CH4	Natural gas dehydration	Glycol absorption	Polymer (cellulose acetate)
N2/CH4	Nitrogen removal	Cryogenic distillation	Polymer (silicon rubber)
H2/N2	Ammonia purge gas	Pressure swing adsorption (PSA)	Polymer (polysulfone)
H2/CO	Syngas ratio adjustment	PSA	Polymer (polyimide)
H2/hydrocarbons	Hydrogen recovery in refineries	PSA	Polymers (silicon rubber; polyimide)
O2/N2	Nitrogen generation, oxygen-enriched air production	Cryogenic distillation	Polymers (silicon rubber, polysulfone, polyimide, polyphenylene, ethyl cellulose)
VOCs/gas	Polyolefin plant resin degassing; ethylene recovery	Adsorption, refrigeration and turbo-expander plants	Polymer (silicone rubber, PTMSP)

Membrane	20
Membrane in spiral-wound module form	100
Membrane modules in a skid	500

 	Fig. 27  Photograph showing the development of hollow-fiber membrane modules at CYNARA (now part of Cameron), from the first 5 in. modules of the 1980s to the 30 in. diameter behemoths currently being introduced (reproduced with permission by ACS, Ref. 255).	 

 	Fig. 28  CYNARA hollow fibers.256	 

 	Fig. 29  Comparison among current technologies for offshore CO2 removal.257	 

 	Fig. 30  SEPAREX™ spiral wound flat membrane modules.258	 

 	Fig. 31  Wilderness gas processing facility operated by Quicksilver in northern Michigan.259	 

 	Fig. 32  Changes in the phase envelope of CO2 containing natural gas during processing by a CO2 selective membrane (reproduced with permission by ACS, Ref. 255).	 

 	Fig. 33  a) Standard and b) enhanced UOP MemGuard™ pretreatment schemes.	 

 	Fig. 34  Different design for membrane gas separation plants.	 

 	Fig. 35  MTR's FuelSep™ systems.262	 

 	Fig. 36  World carbon dioxide emissions.264	 

 	Fig. 37  CO2 emission distribution by different sources.265	 

 	Fig. 38  Approaches to power generation with fossil fuels (coal, oil and natural gas) that include carbon dioxide capture and sequestration (CCS) (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 269).	 

Post-combustion	•Application to the majority of existing coal-fired power plants	Flue gas is:
•Retrofit technology option	• dilute in CO2
• at ambient pressure
resulting in:
• low CO2 partial pressure
•significantly higher performance or circulation volume required for high capture levels
•CO2 produced at low pressure compared to sequestration requirements

	
	

Pre-combustion	Synthesis gas is:	•Applicable mainly to new plants, as few gasification plants are currently in operation
• concentrated in CO2	•Barriers to commercial application of gasification are common to pre-combustion capture:
• high pressure	•availability
resulting in:	•cost of equipment
• high CO2 partial pressure	•extensive supporting systems requirements
•increased driving force for separation
•more technologies available for separation
•potential for reduction in compression costs/loads

	
	

Oxy-combustion	•Very high CO2 concentration in flue gas	•Large cryogenic O2 production requirement may be cost prohibitive
•Retrofit and repowering technology option	•Cooled CO2 recycle required to maintain temperatures within limits of combustor materials

	•Decreased process efficiency

	•added auxiliary load

 	Fig. 39  Carbon capture processes and R&D (reproduced with permission by Elsevier, Ref. 270).	 

 	Fig. 40  Schematic of a membrane plant design for CO2 capture.278	 

 	Fig. 41  Configuration of the two membrane systems proposed for CO2 capture.278	 

 	Fig. 42  MTR process for CO2 capture.278	 

 	Fig. 43  Trend of CO2 capture vs. membrane selectivity.278	 

 	Fig. 44  Polaris™ membranes configured in spiral wound modules.279	 

 	Fig. 45  RITE Cardo-polyimide (BTDA type) hollow fiber membranes.286	 

 	Fig. 46  a) Conventional and b) novel hydroxil modified polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer.286	 

 	Fig. 47  a) Cross-section of thin film Polyactive® membranes on microporous PAN support; b) selectivity vs. CO2 flux for PolyMemBrain membranes (thin film Polyactive® membranes on microporous PAN support) compared to other membranes intended for CO2/N2 separation.289	 

 	Fig. 48  CO2 permeability of tailor-made multiblock copolymers as a function of content and length of PEO segment (the optimal copolymer membrane is localized on the top of surface) (reproduced with permission by IOP Science, Ref. 290).	 



1	

	2200	68000	31a	3.5	
294

2	

	770	7200	9a	2.5	
294

3	

	1100	20000	18a	2.8	
294

4	

	900	17500	21b	19	
283

5	

	3300	26900	12.9c	8.1	
283


 	Fig. 49  Illustration depicting a single molecular-sized pore in a graphene membrane.311	 

 	Fig. 50  A combination electrodeionization/reverse osmosis process.316	 

 	Fig. 51  Hybrid RO/CEDI plant isometric.317	 

 	Fig. 52  Schematic of Hybrid HEED®/RO/ distillation system.319	 

 	Fig. 53  IGCC scheme with H2 recovery.324	 

 	Fig. 54  Gasification scheme for methanol production.324	 

 	Fig. 55  Typical membrane/amine hybrid plant for the treatment of natural gas (reproduced with permission by ACS, Ref. 255).	 

 	Fig. 56  A hybrid compression–condensation–membrane separation system to recover liquid propylene and nitrogen from a mixed-gas feed.133	 

 	Fig. 57  Photograph of a membrane propylene recovery system installed at a modern polypropylene plant.326	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
