Recent progress of light manipulation strategies in organic and perovskite solar cells  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR05663G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR05663G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18517-18536Recent progress of light manipulation strategies in organic and perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Jing-De 
            Chen†
, 
      
        
          
            Teng-Yu 
            Jin†
, 
      
        
          
            Yan-Qing 
            Li
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jian-Xin 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *
      Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, Jiangsu, PR China. E-mail: yqli@suda.edu.cn; jxtang@suda.edu.cn
Received 
      4th July 2019
    , Accepted 7th August 2019First published on 15th August 2019AbstractOrganic and perovskite solar cells are suffering from the insufficient utilization of incident light and thus low light harvesting efficiency despite their rapid progress in the past decade. In this regard, light manipulation strategies have attracted numerous attention to solve this inherent limit. Herein, the recent advances in light manipulation techniques in this area are overviewed. The light manipulation mechanisms are illustrated to classify the structures. Various light manipulation structures, fabrication techniques, and corresponding results are given and discussed, addressing the suppression of surface reflection, nano/micro-structure-induced light scattering, and the plasmonic effects with periodic metallic patterns and metallic nanoparticles. A brief perspective on future research is also proposed for pursuing broadband light harvesting.Jing-De ChenJing-DE Chen received his B.S. degree in physics from Zhejiang Normal University in 2012, and Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from Soochow University in 2018. Then, he joined the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) as a research assistant professor. His research interests focus mainly on energy conversion mechanisms in organic and perovskite solar cells and development of flexible transparent conductive substrates.Teng-Yu JinTeng-Yu Jin received his B.Sc. degree (2016) in Materials Science and M.Sc. degree (2019) in Physics from Soochow University, China. He is now a Ph.D. student in Physics at the National University of Singapore, Singapore. His research interests focus mainly on interface engineering and photon management of organic and perovskite solar cells, and 2D layered semiconductor materials for optoelectronic applications.Yan-Qing LiYan-Qing Li received her B.Sc. degree in physics from Zhejiang University, and MPhil. degree and Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from the City University of Hong Kong. She is now professor at the Institute of Nano Functional & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. Her main research interests lie in the organic and inorganic/organic hybrid materials and devices with a focus on flexible electronics, involving the synthesis, characterization, and device integration of metal and semiconductor nanostructures and thin-films for a range of device applications including light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and smart windows.Jian-Xin TangJian-Xin Tang received his B.Sc. degree in physics from Zhejiang University, and Ph.D. degree in Physics and Materials Science from the City University of Hong Kong. In 2008, he was appointed professor at the Institute of Nano Functional & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. His research areas/interests span device physics and surface science on organic and perovskite light-emitting diode technology for flat panel displays and solid-state lighting, and organic/perovskite photovoltaic cells for renewable energy, including localized electronic state and charge barrier formation at organic interfaces, and novel device architectures with interface modification for carrier transport and light manipulation.
1. Introduction
In recent years, thin-film solar cells, especially organic solar cells (OSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PeSCs), have emerged as promising technologies for producing clean and renewable energy owing to their rapidly-developing power conversion efficiency (PCE). Particularly, they possess unique properties such as lightweight, roll-to-roll processability, optical transparency and mechanical flexibility over traditional solar cells.1,2 Both OSCs and PeSCs have a similar device architecture, in which an ultrathin absorber is sandwiched between the transparent front electrode and opaque rear electrode. Various strategies including material optimization, morphology control, and interface modification have been extensively explored for maximizing the PCEs of either OSCs or PeSCs.3–7 The PCEs of single- and tandem-junction OSCs have been pushed to 16.35%5 and 17.3%,6 respectively. Meanwhile, the PCE of PeSCs has experienced a rapid growth to a state-of-the-art value of 24.02% in the past decade,7 which is comparable to the commercialized crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells.
One key factor for realizing highly efficient solar cells is to take the full advantage of sunlight, which yields a high short-circuit current density (JSC). Hence, the layer thickness of the absorber should be thick enough to fully absorb the incident light. For example, ideal light harvesting can be achieved only when the layer thickness of organic semiconductors is over 400–500 nm. However, considering the nature of low charge-carrier mobility and short exciton diffusion length of major organic materials, thin active layers (100–200 nm) are commonly used to suppress the charge recombination and exciton extinction. This, in turn, leads to insufficient photon absorption and carrier generation, resulting in low external quantum efficiency (EQE) and JSC. In contrast, perovskite materials possess superior properties, such as long charge-carrier diffusion length and superior ambipolar transport ability, allowing a rather thick active layer (∼500 nm) in PeSCs for efficient light absorption. Once the light illuminates the perovskite absorber, few rays can escape from the devices. This is attributed to the more reliable light harvesting in PeSCs compared to OSCs. Yet in fact, the nanoscale film-induced interference results in wavelength-dependent light distribution in devices. Hence, broadband and efficient light absorption cannot be achieved in common PeSCs. Moreover, unexpected light loss is present in PeSCs due to light reflection at the substrate surface and the inner interfaces of the devices. It is noteworthy that the inner interface reflection of PeSCs is higher than OSCs due to the relatively high refractive indices of perovskite materials. As a result, the obtained JSC is usually lower than the theoretical limit.8
To solve the trade-off between light absorption and charge collection in OSCs and PeSCs with an ultrathin absorber, light manipulation has become a commonly used strategy to enhance light harvesting and achieve a high PCE.9–32 One of the efficient approaches is to apply an antireflection (AR) coating on the outer surface of the solar cells.22,23,27 The AR coating reduces the reflection at the air/glass interface. Another approach is to incorporate biomimetic or periodic nanostructures into the active layers or buffer layers of OSCs and PeSCs by soft nanoimprint lithography.24–26,31,32 The introduction of nanostructures increases the internal scattering, and causes the surface plasmonic resonance (SPR) effect for trapping the incident light and thereby enhancing the photon absorption effectively. Moreover, the light scattering center can be successfully introduced into solar cells for light harvesting by inserting metal nanoparticles (NPs) inside the active layer or at the appropriate interface of devices.28–30 Other favorable methods for light manipulation have also been developed, such as optical haze thin films for AR and light scattering,33–37 microcavity structure for optical confinement,38–44 and periodic nanopatterns for surface plasmon polariton (SPP) enhanced light harvesting.45–47
In this article, we review the recent advances in optical manipulation strategies for OSCs and PeSCs. To understand the light manipulation mechanism, Fig. 1 shows a schematic light path and the interaction between incident sunlight and opaque thin-film solar cells. R1 and R2 represent the light loss due to reflection at the front surface and the light escaping from the device without being fully absorbed, respectively, while A represents the absorbed light for photocurrent generation. It is clear that the PCE optimization in OSCs and PeSCs requires the suppression of R1 and R2 and the enhanced A for light harvesting. Section 2 focuses on the external AR strategies to reduce R1. Sections 3–5 discuss the light trapping methods to reduce R2 and enhance A through microcavity-assisted light trapping, geometrical redirection-assisted light trapping, and plasmonic-induced light trapping, respectively. Finally, section 6 offers a perspective on the possible future developments of the strategies of optical manipulation for OSCs and PeSCs.
 Fig. 1  Interaction between the incident sunlight and opaque thin film solar cells. 
2. Antireflection strategies
As shown in Fig. 1, a part of incident light is directly reflected by the outer surface of a solar cell, leading to the decrease in the upper EQE limit. According to Fresnel's law, the light reflection occurs at the interface of two media due to a refractive index offset. The reflection coefficients as a function of refractive indices of the media and incident angle are given by eqn (1) and (2), where n1 and n2 are the refractive indices of the incident medium and the transmitted medium, and i1 and i2 are the incident angle and refractive angle, respectively. (1) (2)
For normal incidence, eqn (1) can be simplified as eqn (3): (3)
It is known that the reflection coefficient depends on the difference in the refractive indices of the two media. For solar cells, the direct reflection of incident sunlight occurs at various interfaces, especially the substrate/air interface due to a large mismatch of refractive indices between different layers. According to Fresnel's law, the reflection often becomes more severe when the incident angle increases. It is thus of importance to reduce the reflection loss at large incident angles to meet the requirement of practical application. The use of an AR coating in OSCs and PeSCs is an efficient method for optical manipulation, which reduces the reflected light and allows more light to enter the device. Moreover, the addition of an AR coating on the surface of OSCs and PeSCs is convenient since it has no influence on the internal device structure. Even under tilted illumination, AR coatings also exhibit good transmittance due to multiple light scattering. Therefore, solar cells with AR coatings show limited diversity in PCEs with the variation of the incident angle of solar irradiation, which is highly attractive for solar panels without a mechanical solar tracking system. In addition, AR coatings with nanoscale profiles usually feature good self-cleaning properties due to the nanostructure-induced hydrophobic surface. This phenomenon can prevent the accumulation of dust and water droplets on the cell surface, which benefits the long-term stability of the solar cells in a real environment.
2.1. AR coatings with nanostructures
In recent years, AR coatings with nanostructures such as biomimetic moth-eye,22,23 nanocone arrays,48 and inverted-pyramids,36,49,50 are extensively explored to reduce light reflection because of the gradient refractive index profile of the nanostructured AR coating.23 As shown in Fig. 2a, a UV-curable resin layer with a biomimetic moth-eye nanostructure was introduced on the glass surface to act as an AR coating.22 This AR coating was fabricated via soft nanoimprint lithography, which had advantages of manufacturing compatibility for large-area and low-cost solar cells. The comparison of light reflectance of various substrates (Fig. 2b) indicates that a biomimetic moth-eye AR coating results in the reduction of the average reflectance over a broad spectrum from 300 nm to 800 nm. Correspondingly, the EQE spectra exhibit an almost uniform increase in the range of 300–800 nm for the AR cell relative to that of the flat one due to the improved light absorption. Notably, the device with AR shows a JSC enhancement even under the tilted illumination conditions. The enhancement ratio increases along with the incident angle, and is up to 118% for the incident light at 80°. Later, the moth-eye nanostructured ZnO buffer layer was used as the AR coating in OSCs,23 which causes an increase in the transmittance over a wide spectral range of 350–800 nm with no apparent diversity. As a result, the enhanced light harvesting in dual-sided moth-eye patterned OSCs was achieved, yielding an 18% increase in photocurrent and an improved PCE of 10.1%. The AR coating was also applied in PeSCs (Fig. 2c),48 where the AR film with the imprinted nanocone array was attached to the glass surface for improving the optical transmittance and achieving a water-repelling effect. As shown in Fig. 2d, the optical reflectance of the device with an AR coating is significantly reduced in a broad wavelength range, and the largest reduction approaches 8% for nanocones with an aspect ratio of 1.0. The reduced reflectance is also attributed to the tapered shape of imprinted nanocones, which gradually varies the effective refractive index from air to the polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film. As a result, the JSC increases from 17.7 mA cm−2 to 19.3 mA cm−2, along with the simultaneously increased PCE from 12.06% to 13.14%. It is also found that the absorption of the reference device is decreased gradually with an increase of the incident angle, while the device with an AR coating remains almost the same.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of an OSC with a moth-eye patterned AR coating. (b) Reflectance of the incident light from the glass side for OSCs with and without the UV-curable resin AR coating measured at normal incidence. Inset depicts the schematic of the measurement procedure. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic structure of a PeSC attached with a nanocone-structured PDMS film. (d) Optical properties of PeSCs with and without a PDMS nanocone film. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the top illuminated OSC using the patterned MoO3/Ag/PDMS. (f) Total transmittance spectra of planar MoO3/Ag, planar MoO3/Ag/PDMS (P0), and various patterned MoO3/Ag/PDMS (P1, P2, P3, and P4). These figures have been reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Ham and co-workers reported a novel design of a dielectric/metal/polymer (DMP) as the top transparent electrode (Fig. 2e),50 where the PDMS layer with a small refractive index was imprinted with inverted pyramid shape for anti-reflection. The reduced optical loss at the air/DMP interface significantly enhances the total transmittance of the transparent electrode. As shown in Fig. 2f, the average transmittance in the region of 400–800 nm is about 60.4% for MoO3/Ag, while it increased to 75.5% when using a patterned PDMS layer (MoO3/Ag/PDMS). In addition, the angularly dependent absorption spectra recorded by rotating the light source to mimic the sunlight indicated that the daily absorption is up to 72.3% for the device with patterned PDMS and is higher than the value of the planar device. Later, the same group reported an efficient AR coating with subwavelength inverted pyramid structures,36 which was fabricated by using a soft lithographic technique with etched GaN molds. The average haze value in the visible region (400–800 nm) was gradually enhanced by increasing the structure size, achieving a maximum value of 93% with a structure diameter of 960 nm. As a result, the PCE of OSCs was enhanced from 7.12% to 8.41% mainly due to the reduced reflection and increased optical absorption in the active layer.
The application of a hazy film as an AR coating is another efficient strategy to reduce the reflection as well as prolong the optical path in the device due to the scattering effect. Various NPs have been used to fabricate large-area, low-cost haze films. For example, a highly efficient haze film coating composed of silica NPs was reported (Fig. 3a),35 where silica NPs with precisely controlled dimensions were simultaneously formed and self-assembled on a poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrate by using room-temperature plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). The optimized silica NP-coated film exhibited an enhanced transmission haze of 16.8% in the spectral range of 350–700 nm, leading to the reduced film thickness of the active layer and a 13% PCE improvement. In 2018, Jeong and co-workers designed a sequence of simple plasma-assisted dry coating process to control the geometrical features of the silica NP-coated layer for simultaneously enhancing the light scattering and contaminant-repelling features for a noticeable improvement in the PCE of OSCs.37 Similarly, a solution-processed AR coating was developed, which was based on the structured ZnO film by combining ZnO colloidal spheres (CSs) and NPs (Fig. 3b).27 The Mie scattering theory indicates that the light scattering effect can be maximized at a specific wavelength of incident light for a given particle size. Therefore, polydisperse ZnO CSs (denoted as p-ZnO) with a wide distribution of particle sizes were used for a broadband AR application. It is clear in the total transmission spectra (Fig. 3c) that p-ZnO on a glass surface shows a superior antireflection ability, leading to a substantial increase in total transmittance from 91.4% to 96.2% at 550 nm.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of globular silica nanoparticles coated on PET substrates via a PECVD process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the ZnO CS embedded in the host of ZnO NPs with a thickness of 50 nm. (c) Total transmission spectra of ITO-glass substrates without and with ZnO CS. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
2.2. AR coatings with microstructures
In the case of an AR coating patterned with subwavelength nanostructures, the optical reflection is reduced due to the formation of a gradient refractive index profile and Mie-scattering, which follows the wave-optics. In contrast, the effect of AR coatings with microstructures on the reflection can be described by geometrical optics.
Jošt and co-workers applied an AR coating with random distributed micro-scale pyramids by UV nanoimprint lithography on the glass side of inverted (p–i–n) PeSCs,49 leading to a 5% increase in JSC and thereby an improved PCE up to 17.1%. Optical simulations matched well with the experimental data, revealing that the improvement in device performance was mainly due to the reduction in total reflection. Kang and co-workers designed a high hazy film coating composed of self-aggregated alumina nanowire arrays (Fig. 4a),34 resulting in the variation of total and diffuse transmittance, and the haze of the substrates with respect to the change of the nanowire packing density. By optimizing the etching conditions, the nanowire bundle arrays enabled the ultrahigh haze up to ∼98% and the high total transmittance up to ∼96% (Fig. 4b). By simply attaching the AR coating onto the front glass surface of OSCs, the device performance was significantly improved with a 10.28% enhancement in PCE.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of self-aggregated alumina nanowires with a controlled etching time. (b) Total and diffuse transmittance spectra (normalized to the Scotch tape transmittance) for the haze films prepared by different etching times. “Haze A”, “Haze B”, “Haze C”, and “Haze D” represent the haze films produced at 43 min, 44 min, 45 min, and 46 min of the etching process, respectively. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Configuration of a MLA coating and operational principle of the light trap. (d) Transmission spectra in the forward and backward illumination directions for the MLA with mirrors. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the Optical Society of America. (e) Schematic illustration of light behavior for OSCs with (solid arrows) and without (dashed arrows) MLA. (f) EQE spectra for OSCs in (e), and the relative increase in EQE. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Microlens array (MLA) has also been widely used as an AR coating in OSCs. A novel light trapping configuration based on the MLA was reported in conjunction with an aligned micro-aperture array (Fig. 4c).51 The incident light could be redirected and focused onto small entrances by the MLA-based AR coating, which significantly reduced the reflection of incident light. Forward and backward transmission spectra showed strong asymmetry (Fig. 4d), where the sample exhibited a high transmittance around 90% under forward illumination and a low transmittance lower than 15% under backward illumination. Similarly, a soft-lithographically molded MLA on the front surface of solar cells was presented (Fig. 4e).52 Light transmitting through MLA will have a non-normal incident angle due to the curved surface of the microlens, and light reflected from a microlens may strike a neighboring lens, where the lens curvature results in an incident angle suitable for transmission. In either case, the reflection of incident light is effectively suppressed, leading to an overall increase in the absorption efficiency. The MLA also shows good wide-angle light harvesting properties, arising from the curved lens surface for effectively reducing the reflection of high-angle incident light.
2.3. AR substrates
Besides the attachment of an additional AR coating, the patterning of the substrate surface is also an efficient strategy to reduce the reflection loss by recycling the reflected light. For example, two schemes were proposed:53 V-shaped configuration (Fig. 5a) and double parabolic trapper (DPT) (Fig. 5b) by taking into account both daily and annual movement of the sunlight. As shown in Fig. 5a, the V-shaped configuration manipulates the incident light through multiple reflections at the interfaces of both sides of the V-shaped solar cells. When the vertex angle (θv) is small enough, the incident light will experience several times of reflection as well as re-absorption, leading to the minimized reflection loss. Moreover, the enhancement ratio of JSC increases with respect to a decrease in θv. A maximum enhancement ratio of 40.7% can be achieved with a θv value of 40°. DPT is another substrate design that has the potential to enhance the PCE significantly from 5.9% to 8.9% for PCDTBT:PC70BM-based OSCs by perfectly trapping the incident light between two parabolic solar cells. As depicted in Fig. 5b, two parabolas with different sizes that face each other and share the same focal point were designed, and the parabola surface concentrates all the reflected light to a focal point. Then, the incident light keeps circulating between the parabolas by several times of reflections. When the solar cells are implemented on the surface of two parabolas and a front mirror (the red regions in Fig. 5b), efficient light trapping can be achieved. An enhancement of 50.9% was obtained when θa = 0° (θa is annual incident angle variation).53 Although the abovementioned two kinds of substrates may cause the higher cost of the solar cell modules due to the increased material usage, this may not be a significant problem if a significant PCE enhancement is achieved.
 Fig. 5  (a) V-shaped light trapping configuration and the normalized JSC values as a function of annual incident angle variation (θa) for V-shaped OSCs with different vertex angles (θv). (b) Geometrical characteristics of a parabola concentrating all of the incident rays parallel to the axis into a focus or reflecting them in a reverse manner, DPT structure for perfect light trapping, and normalized JSC with the variation of θa. Ray-traced images are also shown when θa = 0° and ±23.5°. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Optical Society of America. 
The AR strategies recently adopted in OSCs and PeSCs are commonly used to reduce the light reflection at the substrate surface and to increase the light transmission to the absorber. These strategies, such as nanostructures, microstructures, and shaped substrates, involve different mechanisms.54 When the nanostructures are in subwavelength scale, the mechanism of the interaction between incident light and the structure is dominated by the wave optics. By designing an appropriate surface morphology, a gradient refractive index profile of the structure can be realized, leading to a reduced reflection. While the structures are in microscale or larger, geometrical optics play a major role in light manipulation. The conventional design route is perusing multiple reflections of incident light to recycle the reflected light. It should be noted that the ratio of light reflected directly by the substrate is relatively low compared to the light that escapes from the device without being absorbed, especially in OSCs. Therefore, strategies which enable light trapping to reduce the escaping light deserve more attention. In the next three sections, we will focus on strategies of light trapping methods for efficient light absorption.
3. Microcavity-assisted light trapping
An optical microcavity is a structure formed by two reflecting faces and a sandwiched spacer layer.2 For OSCs and PeSCs, a standing-wave microcavity is formed when the active layer is sandwiched by two reflective electrodes. Considering the utilizations of charge transport layers, the resonance wavelengths are determined by the effective optical thickness of the spacer layers. Constructive interference takes place in the case of resonance for light with a suitable wavelength bound inside a microcavity, which travels back and forth between the reflectors until getting absorbed or escaping from the device. Notably, incident light with resonant frequencies will be trapped effectively in this optical microcavity, while the other out-of-phase waves will be depressed. Therefore, the microcavity resonance can improve the light absorption of the devices over a narrow spectral range instead of the entire solar spectrum.
According to previous reports,2,17 conditions for constructive interference can be satisfied if the optical width of the spacer equals multiple integers of the wavelength of the incident light. Moreover, a phase change will also take place for the light reflected at each metal electrode, and the phase shift must be taken into account when determining the optical path length of the incident light. Consequently, the optically resonant conditions for the incident light with a certain wavelength (λ) can be formulated by eqn (4):17 (4)where n is the real part of the refractive index of the spacer, d is the thickness of the spacer between two electrodes, ψ1 and ψ1 are the respective phase changes due to the reflection at each interface, and m is a positive integer.
In order to obtain an effective microcavity for light trapping, two important factors must be taken into account. One factor is the selection of the front transparent electrode with a suitable reflectance. This electrode enables the incident light to reach the active layer and prevents the incident light from escaping from the device. The other one is the selection of dielectric materials, including the active layer, charge transport layers, and other functional layers. Commonly, the front transparent electrodes in OSCs and PeSCs are often sandwiched by two dielectric layers. One of them inside the microcavity acts as a part of the optical spacer to modulate the phase of the light ray. The other one outside the microcavity plays several roles in solar cells, such as the seed layer for film formation, the protective layer for long-term stability, and an optical spacer to minimize the reflection at the device surface. Next, we will review the recent development of microcavity-assisted light manipulation in OSCs and PeSCs by considering the issues related to front transparent electrodes and dielectric layers.
3.1. Reflective electrodes in microcavity structures
Indium–tin-oxide (ITO) is the commonly used transparent electrode material in OSCs and PeSCs, which makes the devices resemble the microcavity geometry. However, due to the high transparency of the ITO electrode, the unabsorbed photons can easily escape from the devices, leading to the ordinary OSCs and PeSCs with weak microcavity features. To enhance microcavity resonance in ITO-based devices, Long and co-workers inserted a titanium dioxide (TiO2) layer to form a two-mode moderate microcavity.55 Simulation results indicated that the two-mode microcavity with a 60 nm thick active layer can significantly improve the light absorption at two discrete wavelength ranges, yielding an improvement of about 13.8%. However, the efficacy of the bilayered electrode-based devices is still suffering from considerable optical dissipation due to the high transparency of TiO2.
Hence, replacing ITO with a highly reflective material is the reasonable strategy to form a stronger microcavity. Among the potential alternatives, the transparent ultrathin metal films (UTMFs) with a thickness less than 30 nm are the most promising candidates because of their high conductivity, superior mechanical flexibility, and ease of large-area fabrication.17 Noble metals, especially Ag and Au, are commonly used in microcavity structures. Most importantly, their superior optical properties enable the formation of a stronger microcavity than the ITO-based one, which yields more effective light confinement. Nevertheless, the performance of UTMFs is greatly affected by the film quality. UTMFs grow with an island-like surface morphology, which exhibits a lower conductivity than that of the counterpart with a flat and compact morphology. Since the film formation of UTMFs is related to their thickness, there is a tradeoff between electrical resistance and optical transparency. A thick UTMF leads to good conductivity and unsatisfactory transparency, while an extremely thin UTMF exhibits good transparency and high sheet resistance. Therefore, it is necessary to facilitate the uniform growth of UTMFs to be as thin as possible for maintaining high conductivity and transparency. Schubert and co-workers investigated the conditions of achieving high-performance UTMFs (Fig. 6a).56 It was found that the thermal evaporation of Ag on a dielectric substrate resulted in a rough and granular layer with high resistance when the Ag thickness was lower than 10 nm. However, the use of a 1 nm thick seed layer (e.g., Ca, Al, and Au) can modulate the surface energy of the substrate, and thus improve the wetting properties between Ag and the substrate, resulting in a continuous and smooth Ag layer of 3 nm with enhanced optical and electrical properties (Fig. 6a). The optimal electrode consisting of 1 nm thick Au and 7 nm thick Ag exhibited a sheet resistance of 19 Ω sq−1 and a maximum transmittance of 83% at 580 nm, which were even higher than that of ITO. OSCs constructed with such a top electrode achieved a PCE of 4.7%, which was identical to the case of bottom-illuminated ITO-based devices (Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM images of 7 nm thick Ag layers deposited on various seed layers with different surface energies γ. The wetting of silver is improved with increasing surface energy of the seed layer. (b) Stack design of small-molecule OSC with a microcavity structure. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
3.2. Dielectric materials in microcavity structures
Dielectric materials also play an important role in forming an effective microcavity. A suitable dielectric layer can function as a seed layer for the good film formation of UTMFs,57 protect the UTMF from oxidation in air, and sometimes acts as an optical spacer to modulate the phases of light waves to realize the constructive interference.38,39
Schubert and co-workers investigated the influence of various oxide seed interlayers on the film morphology of UTMFs.57 Thermally evaporated MoO3, WO3, and V2O5 films were employed as a seed layer, which could promote the film uniformity of the subsequently deposited ultrathin Ag layer. As a result, the transmittance of the Ag-based UTMF electrode was increased, which benefited the incident light to enter the device for higher photocurrent generation in the active layer. A MoO3 layer deposited outside the UTMF can also protect the UTMF from degradation and prolong the device lifetime. The high refractive index TeO2 was also applied as a seeding layer to facilitate the growth of smooth, highly conductive, and transparent Ag ultrathin films (Fig. 7a).39
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the OSC with a 66 nm thick TeO2 film. (b) Electric field distribution calculated by TMM for a 600 nm light wave with a unitary incoming intensity (incident from the left), showing the dramatic decrease in the reflection and the maximized intensity within the cell with a 66 nm thick TeO2 film. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) OSC with microcavity configuration using a semitransparent Ag film and a top-capping light incoupling layer as the optical incident electrode. (d) Jph of the microcavity device using a TeO2 top-capping layer as a function of tBHJ and the thickness of the TeO2 layer. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Besides the function of a seeding layer for better UTMF deposition, dielectric layers can serve as optical spacers for optical modulation.39 As shown in Fig. 7b, the electric field distribution profiles of the electrodes with and without a TeO2 layer indicate that the total reflection of the UTMF towards the glass substrate can be dramatically reduced by introducing a high refractive index TeO2 film, and an increased electric field within the active layer can be achieved due to the microcavity resonance. Similarly, the thickness effect of the TeO2 capping layer on light harvesting was investigated (Fig. 7c).38 As shown in Fig. 7d, the optimal photocurrent (Jph) of the microcavity-based OSC using a TeO2 top capping layer can achieve the value of 15.96 mA cm−2, which is remarkably larger than that of the ITO-based device (outlined by the dashed line is 13.97 mA cm−2). Moreover, the optimal Jph for TeO2-based OSCs is extremely close to the best value predicted from the microcavity devices using virtual capping layers, manifesting the optical ideality of TeO2 as a capping layer in this system.
More importantly, the thickness of the dielectric layers directly affects the resonance frequency according to eqn (4). It has been demonstrated that the resonance frequency can be adjusted by varying the layer thickness of the functional media between two reflective layers, achieving different absorption and JSC values.38 Moreover, the microcavity can be used as the filter for colorful and transparent devices by tuning the spacer thickness, leading to the change of the resonance frequency.58 Although the thickness of functional layers plays an important role in the microcavity structures, it is difficult to match the thickness-dependent electrical properties of the functional layers. Only if the functional layers with suitable thicknesses are employed, preferable charge extraction properties can be realized.
4. Optical redirection-assisted light trapping
The Lambert–Beer law describes the relationship between light absorption and the optical path length as expressed by: (5)and (6)where L is the optical path length, I0 and IL are the intensities of incident light and transmitted light, respectively, k(λ) is the complex part of the refractive index of the material, and λ is the wavelength of incident light. Eqn (6) represents the absorption coefficient. Following the law in eqn (5), a longer optical path length leads to more efficient light absorption. Moreover, eqn (6) reveals that the absorption depends strongly on the wavelength since the extinction coefficient k(λ) is wavelength dependent. For instance, a thin layer may be thick enough for the absorption of ultraviolet light, while it is too thin to effectively absorb the infrared light. For conventional OSCs and PeSCs under light illumination at the normal direction of the substrate, the optical path length L in the active layer with a thickness of d is L = 2n·d (n is the refractive index of the active layer). Note that the active layers in OSCs and PeSCs are often kept relatively thin for good exciton dissociation and charge collection, leading to a short optical path and thus the non-effective absorption of the incident light. Therefore, prolonging the optical path in the active layers is a promising strategy to enhance light harvesting for thin-film OSCs and PeSCs. Obviously, the geometrical redirection of the incident light is a facile route to change the light propagation direction by reflection, scattering, or diffraction.
4.1. Light scattering by AR coating
As discussed in section 2, one effective method to prolong the optical path length is to use the AR coatings with high haze for light scattering. The scattered light will propagate into the device with different angles (θ), leading to an optical path length L = 2n·d/cosθ. For an increased θ, the resulting L can be many times longer than that of the normal incidence. Moreover, it should be noted that the AR coatings with high haze will not induce an additional optical loss of the incident light if the materials are optically transparent. For example, the incident light getting through the MLA has an additional angular component, which leads to an effective increase in L in the active layer (Fig. 4e).52 The EQE spectra of OSCs with and without a MLA (Fig. 4f) illustrate that the relative increase is greater in relatively weak absorption regions, which is in good agreement with the Lambert–Beer law.
4.2. Internal nanopatterns
The introduction of internal nanopatterns into OSCs and PeSCs is a widely used light trapping strategy because they can efficiently prolong the optical length of the incident light in an ultrathin active layer over broadband wavelength regions.22,23,59,60 The presence of subwavelength nanopatterns in OSCs and PeSCs can not only enhance the light scattering, but also induce an SPR effect for light harvesting. The latter will be discussed in section 5.
To enhance light harvesting in OSCs, biomimetic moth-eye nanopatterns with a quasi-periodic gradient shape profile have been introduced into the sol–gel-derived ZnO electron transport layer (ETL) via a soft nanoimprinting technique.22,23 Compared with the reference device with a flat structure fabricated and tested under the same conditions, broadband self-enhanced light absorption with optimum charge extraction was realized in nanopatterned OSCs. As a result, an 18% increase in photocurrent was achieved, yielding a record PCE > 10% for PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based OSCs at that time. The experimental and theoretical characterization verified that the substantial improvement of OSCs was mainly ascribed to the broadband polarization-insensitive light scattering in the biomimetic nanostructured active layer. Later, a nanopatterned ZnO:Al2O3 composite film was used as an efficient light- and charge manipulation layer in OSCs, in which the Al2O3 shells on ZnO nanoparticles enabled the passivation effect for optimal electron collection by suppressing the charge-recombination loss.24 Consequently, a peak EQE over 90% was achieved in single-junction OSCs with different active layers, yielding a certified PCE of 13.03% for a nonfullerene blend of FTAZ:IDIC. More recently, the biomimetic moth-eye nanostructures were transferred to the flexible substrate to form a composite electrode with the combination of electrically conductive Ag nanowires (AgNWs) (Fig. 8a).25 The moth-eye nanostructures were compatible with the flexible electrode, showing good properties in terms of optical transparency, electrical conductivity, mechanical flexibility, and low-temperature processability. As a result, single-junction non-fullerene flexible OSCs achieved a PCE exceeding 12% due to the broadband light scattering enhancement.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of a flexible OSC with moth-eye nanopatterned AgNWs/ZnO on a PET substrate, and the corresponding SEM image. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Dual-grating nanopatterned OSC and the corresponding AFM image. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the diffracted light to enhance light harvesting. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the mesoscopic MAPbI3 PeSC with a TiO2 inverse opal (IO) electron-conducting scaffold and the corresponding cross-section SEM image. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides biomimetic moth-eye nanostructures with a quasi-random morphology, periodic gratings were also used for light trapping in OSCs and PeSCs. Basically, random nanopatterns mainly manipulate the incident light by the scattering effect, which is different from the dominating mechanism of light diffraction for periodic nanopatterns. Broadband scattering can occur with the utilization of nanopatterns with various sizes. However, the diffraction can only be excited by the periodic pattern with a period larger than the wavelength of incident light. The advantage of periodic patterns is the presence of largely included angles between the diffracted light and the normal of the film surface, which prolongs the optical path in the absorber. Leem and co-workers introduced the nanostructures consisting of two-dimensional (2D) hexagonal periodic grating arrays on the surfaces of front ZnO ETL and rear active layers by a soft nanoimprinting technique.61 When gratings with a period of 380 nm in ZnO and with a period of 650 nm in the active layer were used, the OSCs exhibited an absorption improvement over a broad wavelength range of 350–750 nm, showing a large JSC enhancement ratio of ∼22.2%. Later, the dual-grating patterns were implemented by a simple yet cost-effective method with the commercial CD and DVD disks as the mold, which could easily duplicate the original grating structures into the sol–gel-derived ZnO ETL (Fig. 8b).26 Consequently, the complicated mold fabrication process can be avoided, and the easy transfer of various 2D grating patterns into OSCs is enabled. A substantial increase in photocurrent and PCE was obtained due to broadband light scattering by the optimized dual-grating patterns. Similarly, grating structures have been successfully used in PeSCs to achieve efficient light trapping. Nanoimprint lithography (NIL) has been recently developed as a popular lithographic technique with properties of high-throughput, low cost, and large-area fabrication. Unlike traditional lithographic approaches using photons or electrons to modify the assisted resists, NIL is a universal method relying on the direct mechanical deformation of the target materials. However, soft target materials are required in this technique. Different from soft organic films, it is difficult to directly pattern the relatively hard perovskite layers through NIL. Consequently, many novel strategies have been conducted to pattern the perovskite films. Mao and co-workers presented a direct nanopatterning method to fabricate perovskite films with a periodic structured surface.62 This method is basically a process about CH3NH2 gas flow-assisted recrystallization of solid perovskite films, leading to the simultaneous patterning and crystallization of perovskite films. Moreover, Wang and co-workers introduced a large-area one-dimensional (1D) grating structure to assist the growth of perovskites from a liquid phase with commercial CD or DVD disks.63 The constructed 1D grating on the perovskite active layer enabled the nanophotonic light trapping due to the diffraction effect and effectively suppressed the carrier recombination (Fig. 8c). Compared to the planar PeSCs, the diffraction-grating devices achieved higher JSC and PCE.
To date, the TiO2 film is the most commonly used ETL in PeSCs. It can serve as a scaffold to support the perovskite layer, facilitate the interfacial charge extraction, and reduce the influence of hysteresis. A compact TiO2 film usually results in poor light manipulation and charge separation properties as compared to the mesoporous TiO2. Therefore, the introduction of nanostructures on the surface of TiO2 becomes a promising strategy to redirect light transmission and to enlarge the interfacial area between TiO2 and perovskites for promoting charge separation. Chen and co-workers proposed a multifunctional inverse opal-like TiO2 ETL (IOT-ETL) by a simple polystyrene-assistant method, which took the full advantage of the compact layer and mesoporous scaffold layer in PeSCs.64 The porous structure in IOT-ETL could obviously enhance the light harvesting efficiency of PeSCs. For example, the IOT-ETL based PeSCs yielded the best PCE of 13.1%, higher than 11.0% of the conventional device based on the mesoporous TiO2 layer.64 Similarly, Ha and co-workers prepared an inverse opal TiO2 film with a three-dimensionally (3D) interconnected porous structure as an electron-conducting scaffold for PeSCs (Fig. 8d).65 The highest PCE of 17.1% was achieved for the device with a 600 nm thick scaffold. Recently, Deng and co-workers reported the fabrication of a grating-patterned TiO2 scaffold by using the easily available CDs as the hard mold to introduce a grating-patterned nanostructure into PeSCs. Compared to flat TiO2-based devices, the significantly increased JSC and PCE for PeSCs with a grating TiO2 and an AR coating was realized.21
4.3. Embedded NP-induced scattering
Metallic, semiconducting and insulating NPs have also been embedded in the active layers or charge transport layers of OSCs and PeSCs to boost light harvesting. It is found that the introduction of metallic NPs (e.g., Ag or Au) into the functional layers benefits the increase in JSC and PCE due to the absorption enhancement induced by localized surface plasmonic resonance (LSPR) and scattering. For the NPs made from dielectric materials like SiO2, the enhanced light harvesting only originated from the light scattering effect. In this section, we will discuss the role of NPs as scattering centers to prolong the optical path length in the devices, while the LSPR-induced absorption enhancement will be reviewed in the next section.
Jung and co-workers reported a nanobump assembly (NBA) constructed with MoO3 covered Ag NPs in OSCs via vacuum thermal evaporation to isolate the active layer and the underlying layer.66 A strong forward scattering effect of the NBA was obtained, showing 24% enhancement in JSC and 18% in PCE compared to the devices with bare MoO3. The observed improvements were attributed to the enhanced light scattering and multireflection effects arising from the NPs. Gollu and co-workers incorporated SiO2 NPs with various sizes into the active layer and ZnO ETL of OSCs for light trapping enhancement due to the scattering effect and total internal reflection arising from SiO2 NPs.67 The devices demonstrated a 13% increase in PCE when SiO2 NPs were incorporated into the P3HT:PCBM active layer, whereas the PCE was increased by 20% when SiO2 NPs were incorporated into the ZnO ETL. Liu and co-workers introduced black phosphorus quantum dots (BPQDs) into OSCs as the scattering center, showing the dramatic PCE improvement of more than 10% due to the strong BPQD-induced scattering in the broadband wavelength region.68
Given that different metals have diverse permittivities, an offset in resonance frequencies can be found for different metals with identical shapes and sizes. The combination of various metal NPs is thus an effective strategy to tune the absorption region. Chen and co-workers reported a facile synthetic protocol for the preparation of large-size Au:Ag alloy NPs and inserted them into the active layer of OSCs.69 By tuning the Au-to-Ag ratio and the concentration of alloy NPs in the active layer, the utilization of 1% Au11Ag89 alloy NPs was found to promote the PCE from 3.61% to 4.73%. Considering the resonance peak of Au11Ag89 alloy NPs located around 418 nm, the full spectrum increase in light absorption revealed the outstanding light scattering ability of metal alloy NPs.
5. Plasmon-assisted light harvesting
SPPs are due to the excitation of coherent oscillations of delocalized electrons at the interface of metal and dielectric medium with a propagation direction along the metal surface. The charge motion in SPPs generates an electromagnetic field with an electric component perpendicular to the metal surface, and the energy of the electric field falls off evanescently due to the absorption. Basically, the relatively high extinction coefficient (k) of the metal results in a shorter penetration depth than that of the dielectric medium. For example, the penetration depth of SPPs is approaching 100 nm for organic semiconductors. In certain situation, the SPPs will couple with the incident light with identical frequency and momentum, which can benefit the light absorption in the metal/semiconductor system. However, free-space photons with a given frequency usually have less momentum than SPPs because of the offset in their dispersion relations. The momentums of SPP (|kSPP|) and free-space photons (|k0|) can be given by: (7)and (8)where ε0 and εm are the permittivities of the dielectric medium and metal, ω is the angular frequency, and c is the speed of light in a vacuum. The momentum mismatch determines that the incident light from a dielectric medium cannot directly couple into the SPPs. Hence, gratings can be employed to match the wave vector of SPPs and photons (Fig. 9a). The grating increases the parallel wave vector component (|kg|), and gives rise to the excitation of SPPs. The situation is presented as (9)where m is an integer, and Λ is the period of grating. In addition, the incident photon can couple with SPPs more easily when the metal is in nanoparticle shape with a closed surface. However, the excited SPPs cannot propagate along the surface due to the severe curved surface morphology, resulting in localized SPPs (that is also named LSPR). The LSPRs can be simply excited by an incident light wave with specific resonant frequency, which is determined by the size of the NPs and the permittivity of the surrounding dielectric medium. Besides the advantages of light absorption, LSPR possesses superior light scattering ability because of the strong electric field generated around metal NPs (Fig. 9b). The light scattering ability is found in the plane metal film with isolated grooves or valleys, which scatters the SPPs out to free-space.
 Fig. 9  (a) Periodical structure to induce SPPs and (b) embedded NPs positioned in active layers to enhance the LSPR. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the OSC with metal grating. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of PeSCs with grating or moth-eye patterned rear electrodes. (e) Simulated cross-section near-field distributions for TE polarized incident light at 780 nm in PeSCs with moth-eye structures. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
According to the criteria of the excitation of SPPs and LSPRs, many strategies have been proposed to facilitate light harvesting in OSCs and PeSCs.1,10,15,17,18 Under the precise engineering of SPPs and LSPRs, incident light can be concentrated into a thin active layer, and simultaneously be absorbed. Typically, metal back electrodes with periodic patterns are constructed in solar cells to diffract the indent light and excite SPPs (Fig. 9a), while LSPRs are generated by introducing an amount of noble metal NPs into the functional layers or at the interfaces (Fig. 9b). In this section, we will discuss the plasmon-induced light trapping in three types of device structures: (1) patterned metal electrodes,45,47,70–74 (2) metal NPs in functional layers,28–30,75–98 and (3) the synergy between patterned metal electrodes and metal NPs.99–101
5.1. Structured metal electrodes
According to eqn (9), the frequency of SPPs is related to the morphology of the periodic patterns. Various parameters, including periodicity, duty cycle, and depth, are critical for the periodic patterns to tune the resonance frequency into the visible wavelength region. Metal electrodes with periodic patterns are commonly used in OSCs and PeSCs to trigger SPPs due to the ease of their fabrication. For example, You and co-workers demonstrated highly efficient OSCs by simply incorporating the large-area 1D grating on the surface of the active layer using nanoimprint lithography (Fig. 9c), where a 1D grating patterned metal/dielectric interface was shaped after depositing the metal electrode.47 The resulting PCE of patterned OSCs was increased to 7.73%, which was higher than 7.20% for the flat device. The enhancement in photocurrent was mainly attributed to the diffraction-induced increase in optical path and the excitation of SPPs with the redistributed electromagnetic field. Note that the excitation of SPPs is deeply related to the polarization of incident light. The incident light with electric components parallel to the grating cannot generate the resonance. To make full use of incident light, 2D hexagonal periodic grating arrays were introduced on the active layers.60 The patterned active layer gives rise to the formation of patterned metal electrodes, exhibiting the absorption enhancement peaks at wavelengths of ∼370 nm, 450 nm, and 670 nm, respectively. A similar phenomenon has been observed for 1D and 2D gratings on light harvesting in OSCs.102 It was concluded that the impressive enhancement originated from the polarization-independent excitation of SPPs at the interface between the active layer and patterned metal electrode.
Given that the plasmonic excitation condition is relatively severe, only the exact diffraction light can be coupled with SPPs. Similar to the introduction of metallic periodic patterns, random structures were inserted into the metal/dielectric interface by shaping the active layer of OSCs, which utilized the LSPR effect. Niesen and co-workers investigated the influence of the randomly structured metal electrode on device performance.70 In specific, polystyrene (PS) nanospheres were randomly distributed on the active layer to act as masks for MoOx deposition. After removing the PS spheres, the subsequent deposition of the Ag electrode resulted in the formation of the metal film with a bumpy surface. As a result, LSPRs were excited on the surface of a randomly structured Ag electrode, and the LSPR wavelength coincided with the absorption region of the active layer by optimizing the sphere sizes for benefiting the light absorption. The quasi-randomly nanostructured metal electrodes were also introduced into the OSCs by successively depositing the active layer and rear metal electrode on pre-structured ZnO ETL.22,23 It should be emphasized that the performance enhancement for OSCs with nanostructured metal electrodes arises from the synergetic interplay of several factors (e.g., light scattering, LSPR, and SPPs) for a broadband enhancement on the device absorption.
The patterned rear electrode can also enhance the light absorption of PeSCs through the plasmonic effect. The effects of periodic gratings and moth-eye nanostructures on light harvesting of PeSCs were compared by patterning the top PCBM-based ETL and rear metal electrode via the nanoimprinting technique (Fig. 9d).32 The experimental and theoretical results indicated that the moth-eye nanostructures were more beneficial for light harvesting enhancement than the periodic gratings due to their broadband response to the solar spectrum with polarization independence. The simulated results for transverse electric (TE) polarized incident light clearly show that the electric field intensity in PeSCs can be redistributed by the moth-eye nanostructures due to the excitation of LSPRs (Fig. 9e).
In addition, the utilization of structured metal electrodes can break the space charge limit in OSCs by inducing the plasmonic-electrical effect.103,104 Sha and co-workers proposed such an effect and investigated the influence of a grating-structured metal electrode on the optical and electrical properties of OSCs.105 It turned out that the gratings with a suitable size can redistribute the photogenerated charges and shorten their pathway to the transport layer, benefiting the remarkable suppression of the charge recombination loss.
5.2. Metal NP-induced LSPRs
The incorporation of metal NPs at the appropriate interfaces is the most common approach for achieving LSPR-enhanced OSCs and PeSCs because of the simple processing through spin-coating or thermal evaporation. Theoretically, inserting metal NPs into active layers is the optimal strategy since the LSPRs can to the most extent contribute to the light absorption in the active layers. In such case, metal NPs function as the periodic patterns between the metal electrode and active layer. Metal nanospheres are the most commonly used particles in the light manipulation of solar cells due to their easy synthesis. It has been demonstrated that the inserted metal nanospheres in the absorber can enhance light harvesting significantly.106 Kulkarni and co-workers found that Ag nanoprisms embedded in the polymer active layer could significantly enhance the generation of long-lived charge carriers, which caused the increased photocurrent in OSCs.83 Wang and co-workers blended truncated octahedral Au NPs into the active layer, showing an enhanced absorption with a sharp peak around 530 nm.80 Lee and co-workers added Au NP-decorated nitrogen (N)- or boron (B)-doped carbon nanotubes (Au:NCNTs or Au:BCNTs, respectively) into the active layer of OSCs (Fig. 10a), giving rise to the LSPR-induced exciton generation and dissociation.77 Along with the selective charge transport ability of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), PTB7:PC70BM-based OSCs achieved a PCE of 9.98%.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of synergistic effects of Au:CNTs on LSPR-induced exciton generation, dissociation, and charge fast transport along CNTs, and the simulated electric field distribution around Au:CNTs in OSCs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of plasmonic OSCs with metal NPs embedded in the PEDOT:PSS-based HTL. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the dual plasmonic device (PNP-535 doping into PEDOT:PSS layer and TNP-450 into C60-bis layer, and the mechanism of the optical enhancement). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Notably, the frequency of LSPRs is governed by the diameter of NPs along the oscillation direction. Hence, the light-coupling wavelength region can be broadened by tuning the shape of NPs, such as pyramid, cuboid, rod and star shape. Liu and co-workers demonstrated that the variation of the diameters of cuboid Au@Ag NPs along different directions gave rise to the couplings at different wavelengths in OSCs.81 A broad spectrum enhancement of absorption was realized due to the synergy of LSPRs with different frequencies. The optical properties of novel star-shaped Au NPs have been studied to clarify their light manipulation ability.107 It was found that star-shaped Au NPs possessed a broadband absorption from 500 to 900 nm arising from the presence of various LSPR frequencies. Compared to Au nanospheres with a single absorption peak and Au nanorods with two peaks, star-shaped Au NPs exhibit a more ideal ability for light manipulation. Moreover, the resonance frequencies could be further shifted by adjusting the thickness of the Ag shell. Another strategy for broadband light manipulation is to simply mix metal NPs with different shapes and sizes. For example, Li and co-workers added both Ag NPs and Ag nanoprisms into the active layer to pursue a broadband absorption enhancement.79 Compared to bare OSCs, the devices with metal NPs show a 17.91% increase in JSC and 19.44% increase in PCE. Theoretical and experimental studies revealed that the origin of the observed performance improvement was ascribed to the simultaneous excitation of many low- and high-order resonances modes, which were material-, shape-, size-, and polarization-dependent.
Despite the aforementioned successes in utilizing the LSPR effect by blending metal NPs in active layers for effective light trapping, two critical issues should be taken into account. The incorporation of metal NPs into the active layer is problematic since the particles can act as recombination centers for exciton quenching and may affect the notoriously sensitive morphology of the active layers in OSCs.1 As a practical solution for these problems, coating metallic NPs with dielectric shells to form a core/shell structure has been demonstrated as an effective strategy to reduce defects or to isolate the metal NPs. Chen and co-workers reported the incorporation of Au@SiO2 core/shell NPs into the active layers of OSCs, leading to an increase in PCE from 3.29% to 3.80% for P3HT:PCBM-based devices.82 Such a ∼16% enhancement in PCE was related to the Au@SiO2 NP-induced LSPR effect on the enhanced light absorption. In contrast, the devices incorporated with bare Au NPs exhibited a lower efficiency enhancement, indicating that the coating of the dielectric SiO2 shell was beneficial for device performance. Similarly, Jankovic and co-workers incorporated Au/SiO2 core/shell nanospheres and nanorods into the active layer of OSCs to achieve an increase in PCE.76 A silica shell layer as an electrically insulating surface was added onto Au core NPs and nanorods to avoid the interference with carrier generation and transport in the active layer. Yao and co-workers investigated the incorporation of titania/benzoic-acid-fullerene bishell-decorated Ag NPs (Ag@TiO2@Pa) into the active layers of both OSCs and PeSCs.108 The benzoic acid fullerene decoration enabled the NPs to be compatible with fullerene acceptors or a perovskite absorber. Moreover, coating the Ag@TiO2 NPs with a fullerene shell can activate the efficient LSPR to facilitate the exciton dissociation and the reduction of monomolecular recombination. As a result, the improved light absorption and enhanced carrier extraction of devices with Ag@TiO2@Pa NPs were achieved with the improved JSC and FF, respectively. The synergistic optical and electrical effects of Ag@TiO2@Pa NPs promoted a maximum PCE of 13.0% for OSCs and a PCE of 20.2% for plasmonic PeSCs.
Instead of applying a core–shell structure, the blending of metal NPs with buffer layers provides a facile route to avoid the metal NP-induced exciton quenching in the active layer. For example, Baek and co-workers reported highly efficient plasmon-assisted OSCs by embedding Au@Ag NPs into a hole transport layer (HTL) of PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 10b).88 The power conversion efficiency was enhanced from 5.3% to 6.3% for PCDTBT:PC70BM-based OSCs and from 7.9% to 9.2% for PTB7:PC70BM-based OSCs. Similarly, Lu and co-workers incorporated the mixture of Ag NPs and Au NPs into the anode buffer layer, leading to dual resonance enhancement light harvesting and 20% enhancement in PCE.95 Different from the blending of metal NPs in HTLs, thermally deposited Ag NPs were embedded in the MoO3 HTL to excite the LSPR at the rear electrode.28,29 Upon optimizing the MoO3/Ag NPs/MoO3 sandwich structure, the enhanced light harvesting was achieved, resulting in an increase in JSC without sacrificing electrical properties. As a result, 20% enhancement in PCE for P3HT:PCBM-based devices and 15% enhancement in PCE for P3HT:ICBA-based devices were realized. Xu and co-workers incorporated Au and Ag NPs into the TiO2 ETL and subsequently obtained an improved JSC while the corresponding VOC was maintained.85 By introducing 30% Ag NPs, the best performance device shows a 20.7% PCE enhancement relative to the reference device. However, it should be mentioned that the light harvesting enhancement in the cases of blending metal NPs in buffer layers was dominated by the light scattering effect rather than the plasmonic effect, since the near-field LSPR might not strongly penetrate into the active layer.
Nevertheless, superior light harvesting is obviously expectable by combining the mentioned strategies with the incorporation of metal NPs into several functional layers. Yang and co-workers inserted 50 nm sized and 70 nm sized Au NPs into the ETL and HTL, respectively. The construction of dual LSPRs with different frequencies prolongs the optical path of incident light in the active layer and contributes to broadband enhancement in EQE.91 Later, Yao and co-workers enhanced the PCE of OSCs from 7.7% up to 9.0% by inserting Ag nanoprisms with a similar strategy (Fig. 10c).92 Spectroscopic and device evidence indicated that the resulting enhancements were consistent with the enhanced optical absorption induced by the dual-LSPR effect of Ag nanoprisms (Fig. 10c). Importantly, this method enabled the universal absorption and EQE enhancement without affecting the morphology of the active layers.
Analogous to patterned metallic electrodes, metal nanoparticles can contribute to the redistribution of photogenerated carriers due to plasmon-electrical effects.104 Zhang and co-workers found that both optical and electrical properties of the OSCs can be manipulated by inserting Au NPs into TiO2 ETL.109 Specifically, the filling of traps was achieved with the transfer of plasmonically excited electrons from Au NPs to TiO2. The effective barrier for charge extraction is reduced accordingly, which benefits the elevation of device performance.
5.3. Synergy of structured electrodes and metal NPs
The excitation strategies of SPPs and LSPRs together with the corresponding device fabrication methods have been discussed above. Each kind of nanostructured metal electrode and metal NP has its optical resonance at a distinct narrow spectral region. In principle, it is feasible to achieve light manipulation in a broad spectral region through the cooperative utilization of these two kinds of plasmonic nanostructures, where various resonance modes can be excited and integrated into one device. For example, Li and co-workers constructed dual metallic nanostructures composed of Au NPs embedded in the active layer and a grating patterned Ag rear electrode, which experimentally demonstrated the excitation and cooperation of SPPs and LSPRs (Fig. 11a).100 A broadband absorption enhancement was obtained, leading to a 15.8% enhancement in PCE. Later, they introduced Au NPs into the active layer and incorporated it with a grating-patterned Ag electrode (Fig. 11b), showing broadband absorption enhancement in the range of 350–800 nm due to multiple plasmonic effects.101 As a result, a maximum PCE of 9.62% was obtained, which was one of the highest efficiencies in plasmonic OSCs reported for single-junction OSCs at that time.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the dual metallic structural device. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Plasmonic absorption enhancement of devices with Au NP-embedded interlayer and grated electrode. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Representative illustration of a NP-enhanced plasmonic AgNW network, and the plasmon coupling in a NP-NW hybrid plasmonic system showing the interaction between LSPR of a metal NP and the propagating SPP on a metal NW. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Notably, SPPs can also be generated in metal nanowires (NWs), while the propagation direction is along NWs. Kim and co-workers decorated the aligned Ag NWs with core–shell silver–silica NPs (Ag@SiO2 NPs) as a transparent electrode for exciting the dual-plasmon resonance.99 As schematically shown in Fig. 11c, the LSPR was excited by the illumination of incident light and further converted to SPPs due to the interaction between Ag NWs and Ag@SiO2 NPs. The hybridization of multiple plasmonic effects gave rise to the improved device performance in OSCs, which exhibited a 11.0% enhancement in PCE.
6. Summary and outlook
OSCs and PeSCs have limitations in light harvesting due to a large refractive index mismatch of functional layers and the unsatisfying light extinction coefficient of absorbers. Light manipulation techniques offer the possibility of achieving efficient light harvesting and better device performance. Impressive progress on the photocurrent enhancement has been made in the past decade through the introduction of metallic or dielectric-based particles or patterns. In this review, we classify the light manipulation strategies into two types according to the underlying mechanisms. The first type aims to reduce the reflection at the front surface of the devices. It has been demonstrated that the reflection can be suppressed with gradient refractive index modification, which minimizes the refractive index mismatch. Moreover, nano/micro-structure-induced light scattering has been demonstrated as an effective approach to reduce the reflection and redirect the light ray. Another type focuses on the trapping of the transmitted light from the substrate into the active layer. Light trapping is realized by prolonging the optical path of incident light in the absorber, which can be obtained by introducing microcavity, scattering, diffraction, and other light redirecting methods. In addition, periodic metallic patterns and metallic NPs exhibit unique light coupling capacity due to the excitation of SPPs and LSPRs. Notably, the majority of these structures have their own unique spectral response even if it may be related to multiple light manipulation phenomena. Hence, the incorporation of multiple light manipulation structures into one device becomes an effective strategy for pursuing broadband light harvesting. Until now, the progress reported in the scientific literature suggested that the incident light can be trapped in OSCs and PeSCs by fully taking the advantage of light manipulation techniques. However, the light harvesting in OSCs and PeSCs is still far from an ideal situation since some of the existing techniques possess a narrow spectral response. Therefore, further investigation of full-spectrum light manipulation structures remains challenging in the realization of highly efficient OSCs and PeSCs. Unique light trapping patterns like deterministic aperiodic nanopatterns deserve the systematic research of their optical effects on light harvesting. Moreover, another research priority is to present the corresponding facile, low-cost, and large-area structure fabrication techniques for promoting the commercialization of OSCs and PeSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61520106012, 91633301, 61722404, 51873138), the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2016YFB0401002, 2016YFB0400700), and the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science & Technology.
References
C. H. Chou and F. C. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8444 RSC .
Q. D. Ou, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600123 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kang, W. Lee, J. Oh, T. Kim, C. Lee and B. J. Kim, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994 RSC .
X. Xu, K. Feng, Z. Bi, W. Ma, G. Zhang and Q. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2019, e1901872,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201901872 .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. Ding, R. Xia, H. L. Yip, Y. Cao and Y. Chen, Science, 2018, 361, 1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, G. H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019 DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2019.06.014 .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, W. Liu and H. Chen, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 210 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 133 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ellmer, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 809 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choy, W. K. Chan and Y. Yuan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Niggemann, M. Riede, A. Gombert and K. Leo, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2008, 205, 2862 CrossRef CAS .
G. Luo, X. Ren, S. Zhang, H. Wu, W. Choy, Z. He and Y. Cao, Small, 2016, 12, 1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Ko, J. R. Tumbleston, A. Gadisa, M. Aryal, Y. Liu, R. Lopez and E. T. Samulski, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16293 RSC .
Q. Gan, F. J. Bartoli and Z. H. Kafafi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Chueh, M. Crump and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 321 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Catchpole, S. Mokkapati, F. Beck, E. C. Wang, A. McKinley, A. Basch and J. Lee, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 461 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Deng and L. Li, Small Methods, 2019 DOI:10.1002/smtd.201900150 .
J.-D. Chen, L. Zhou, Q. D. Ou, Y. Q. Li, S. Shen, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301777 CrossRef .
J. D. Chen, C. Cui, Y. Q. Li, L. Zhou, Q. D. Ou, C. Li, Y. Li and J. X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Chen, Y. Q. Li, J. Zhu, Q. Zhang, R. P. Xu, C. Li, Y. X. Zhang, J. S. Huang, X. Zhan, W. You and J. X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706083 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. X. Zhang, J. Fang, W. Li, Y. Shen, J. D. Chen, Y. Li, H. Gu, S. Pelivani, M. Zhang, Y. Li and J. X. Tang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhang, C. Gao, J.-D. Chen, W. Li, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11830 RSC .
J. D. Chen, S. Wang, Q. Sun, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801292 CrossRef .
P. P. Cheng, L. Zhou, J. A. Li, Y. Q. Li, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2158 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Cheng, G. F. Ma, J. Li, Y. Xiao, Z. Q. Xu, G. Q. Fan, Y. Q. Li, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22781 RSC .
G. Q. Fan, Q. Q. Zhuo, J. J. Zhu, Z. Q. Xu, P. P. Cheng, Y. Q. Li, X. H. Sun, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15614 RSC .
L. Zhou, Q. D. Ou, J. D. Chen, S. Shen, J. X. Tang, Y. Q. Li and S. T. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4040 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wei, R. P. Xu, Y. Q. Li, C. Li, J. D. Chen, X. D. Zhao, Z. Z. Xie, C. S. Lee, W. J. Zhang and J. X. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700492 CrossRef .
S. Esiner, T. Bus, M. M. Wienk, K. Hermans and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1013 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kang, K. Bae, M. Nam, D.-H. Ko, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2650 RSC .
J. Yun, W. Wang, S. M. Kim, T. S. Bae, S. Lee, D. Kim, G. H. Lee, H. S. Lee and M. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 932 RSC .
J. Ham, W. J. Dong, G. H. Jung and J. L. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jeong, G. Zhao, M. Song, S. M. Yu, J. Rha, J. Shin, Y. R. Cho and J. Yun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2379 RSC .
K. S. Chen, H. L. Yip, J. F. Salinas, Y. X. Xu, C. C. Chueh and A. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Salinas, H. L. Yip, C. C. Chueh, C. Z. Li, J. L. Maldonado and A. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Sergeant, A. Hadipour, B. Niesen, D. Cheyns, P. Heremans, P. Peumans and B. P. Rand, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zuo, C. C. Chueh, Y. X. Xu, K. S. Chen, Y. Zang, C. Z. Li, H. Chen and A. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, C. Z. Li, C. C. Chueh, S. Q. Liu, J. S. Yu and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500406 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, P. Romero-Gomez, P. Mantilla-Perez, S. Colodrero, J. Toudert and J. Martorell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700356 CrossRef .
C. J. An, C. Cho, J. K. Choi, J. M. Park, M. L. Jin, J. Y. Lee and H. T. Jung, Small, 2014, 10, 1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Bi, J. Feng, Y. Chen, Y. S. Liu, X. L. Zhang, Y. F. Li, M. Xu, Y. F. Liu, X. C. Han and H. B. Sun, Org. Electron., 2015, 27, 167 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, J. Seifter, J. H. Park, D. G. Choi and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1319 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, X. Li, F. Xie, W. Sha, J. Kwong, G. Li, W. Choy and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1203 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, K. H. Tsui, Q. Zhang, J. He, Y. Yao, D. Li and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jošt, S. Albrecht, L. Kegelmann, C. M. Wolff, F. Lang, B. Lipovšek, J. Krč, L. Korte, D. Neher, B. Rech and M. Topič, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1232 CrossRef .
J. Ham, W. J. Dong, J. Y. Park, C. J. Yoo, I. Lee and J. L. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tvingstedt, S. Dal Zilio, O. Inganäs and M. Tormen, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Myers, W. Cao, V. Cassidy, S. H. Eom, R. Zhou, L. Yang, W. You and J. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6900 RSC .
C. Cho and J. Y. Lee, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 276 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Cho, S. Jeong, H. J. Choi, N. Shin, B. Kim, E. Jeon and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1697 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Long, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 033301 CrossRef .
S. Schubert, J. Meiss, L. Müller-Meskamp and K. Leo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 438 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schubert, M. Hermenau, J. Meiss, L. Müller-Meskamp and K. Leo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4993 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, H. Zhen, Z. Huang, G. Li and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, H. Zhen, Z. Huang, G. Li and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aryal, K. Trivedi and W. W. Hu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Leem, S. Kim, C. Park, E. Kim and J. S. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, W. Sha, H. Zhang, X. Ren, J. Zhuang, V. Roy, K. S. Wong and W. Choy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606525 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, P. Wang, X. Zhou, C. Li, H. Li, X. Hu, F. Li, X. Liu, M. Li and Y. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702960 CrossRef .
X. Chen, S. Yang, Y. C. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Hou, X. H. Yang and H. G. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500105 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Ha, J. H. Heo, S. H. Im and J. H. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1972 RSC .
K. Jung, H. J. Song, G. Lee, Y. Ko, K. Ahn, H. Choi, J. Y. Kim, K. Ha, J. Song, J. K. Lee, C. Lee and M. Choi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Gollu, R. Sharma, G. Srinivas, S. Kundu and D. Gupta, Org. Electron., 2015, 24, 43 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, S. Lin, P. You, C. Surya, S. P. Lau and F. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Chen, S. W. Chou, W. H. Tseng, I. W. P. Chen, C. C. Liu, C. Liu, C. L. Liu, C. Chen, C. I. Wu and P. T. Chou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3975 CrossRef CAS .
B. Niesen, B. P. Rand, P. Van Dorpe, D. Cheyns, L. Tong, A. Dmitriev and P. Heremans, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 145 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. An, H. W. Yoo, C. Cho, J. M. Park, J. K. Choi, M. L. Jin, J. Y. Lee and H. T. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2915 RSC .
C. E. Petoukhoff and D. M. O'Carroll, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kang, T. Xu, H. J. Park, X. Luo and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Khan, H. Keshmiri, F. Kolb, T. Dimopoulos, E. J. W. List-Kratochvil and J. Dostalek, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 435 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, C. Liu, J. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Shen, W. Guo and S. Ruan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Jankovic, Y. M. Yang, J. You, L. Dou, Y. Liu, P. Cheung, J. P. Chang and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Kim, S. H. Cha, S. C. Kim, M. Song, J. Lee, W. S. Shin, S. J. Moon, J. H. Bahng, N. A. Kotov and S. H. Jin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lee, J. Lim, N. Lee, H. I. Park, K. E. Lee, T. Jeon, S. A. Nam, J. Kim, J. Shin and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. C. H. Choy, H. Lu, W. E. I. Sha and A. H. P. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2728 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, D. Y. Kim, K. W. Choi, J. H. Seo, S. H. Im, J. H. Park, O. O. Park and A. J. Heeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, R. Jiang, P. You, X. Zhu, J. Wang and F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 898 RSC .
B. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Zhou, X. Huang, X. Zhao, H. Wang, M. Liu, Y. Lu and S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 906 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Kulkarni, K. M. Noone, K. Munechika, S. R. Guyer and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, X. Wu, C. Guan, K. Fai Tai, E. K. Yeow, H. Jin Fan, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2004 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. Xu, X. Z. Zhu, X. B. Shi, J. Liang, Y. Jin, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yao, X. Jia, Y. Liu, W. Guo, L. Shen and S. Ruan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yao, P. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Chen, W. Guo, S. Ruan and L. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Baek, G. Park, J. Noh, C. Cho, C. H. Lee, M. K. Seo, H. Song and J. Y. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Wu, F. C. Chen, Y. S. Hsiao, F. C. Chien, P. Chen, C. H. Kuo, M. H. Huang and C. S. Hsu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kakavelakis, I. Vangelidis, A. Heuer-Jungemann, A. G. Kanaras, E. Lidorikis, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501640 CrossRef .
X. Yang, C. C. Chueh, C. Z. Li, H. L. Yip, P. Yin, H. Chen, W. C. Chen and A. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 666 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, M. Salvador, C. C. Chueh, X. K. Xin, Y. X. Xu, D. W. deQuilettes, T. Hu, Y. Chen, D. S. Ginger and A. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400206 CrossRef .
K. Yao, X. K. Xin, C. C. Chueh, K. S. Chen, Y. X. Xu and A. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 567 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, W. Q. Liu, M. Xiong, Y. Y. Zhang, T. Liang, J. T. Yang, M. S. Xu, J. Ye and H. Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14798 RSC .
L. Lu, Z. Luo, T. Xu and L. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, S. J. Ko, Y. Choi, P. Joo, T. Kim, B. R. Lee, J. W. Jung, H. J. Choi, M. Cha, J. R. Jeong, I. W. Hwang, M. H. Song, B. S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 732 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kozanoglu, D. H. Apaydin, A. Cirpan and E. N. Esenturk, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1720 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Liu, C. M. Chen, Y. W. Su, S. M. Wang and K. H. Wei, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2476 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, S. Kang, J. Heo, S. Cho, J. W. Kim, A. Choe, B. Walker, R. Shanker, H. Ko and J. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800659 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, W. Choy, L. Huo, F. Xie, W. E. Sha, B. Ding, X. Guo, Y. Li, J. Hou, J. You and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Ren, F. Xie, Y. Zhang, T. Xu, B. Wei and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1220 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Choy, X. Ren, J. Xin, P. Lin and D. Leung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 153304 CrossRef .
W. Sha, H. Zhu, L. Chen, W. C. Chew and W. Choy, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choy, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2015, 22, 1 Search PubMed .
W. Sha, X. Li and W. Choy, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sygletou, G. Kakavelakis, B. Paci, A. Generosi, E. Kymakis and E. Stratakis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kozanoglu, D. H. Apaydin, A. Cirpan and E. N. Esenturk, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1720 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, H. Zhong, Z. Liu, M. Xiong, S. Leng, J. Zhang, Y. X. Xu, W. Wang, L. Zhou, H. Huang and A. K. Jen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, W. Choy, F. Xie, W. Sha, X. Li, B. Ding, K. Zhang, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4255 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Jing-De Chen	Jing-DE Chen received his B.S. degree in physics from Zhejiang Normal University in 2012, and Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from Soochow University in 2018. Then, he joined the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) as a research assistant professor. His research interests focus mainly on energy conversion mechanisms in organic and perovskite solar cells and development of flexible transparent conductive substrates.
Teng-Yu Jin	Teng-Yu Jin received his B.Sc. degree (2016) in Materials Science and M.Sc. degree (2019) in Physics from Soochow University, China. He is now a Ph.D. student in Physics at the National University of Singapore, Singapore. His research interests focus mainly on interface engineering and photon management of organic and perovskite solar cells, and 2D layered semiconductor materials for optoelectronic applications.
Yan-Qing Li	Yan-Qing Li received her B.Sc. degree in physics from Zhejiang University, and MPhil. degree and Ph.D. degree in Materials Science from the City University of Hong Kong. She is now professor at the Institute of Nano Functional & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. Her main research interests lie in the organic and inorganic/organic hybrid materials and devices with a focus on flexible electronics, involving the synthesis, characterization, and device integration of metal and semiconductor nanostructures and thin-films for a range of device applications including light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and smart windows.
Jian-Xin Tang	Jian-Xin Tang received his B.Sc. degree in physics from Zhejiang University, and Ph.D. degree in Physics and Materials Science from the City University of Hong Kong. In 2008, he was appointed professor at the Institute of Nano Functional & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. His research areas/interests span device physics and surface science on organic and perovskite light-emitting diode technology for flat panel displays and solid-state lighting, and organic/perovskite photovoltaic cells for renewable energy, including localized electronic state and charge barrier formation at organic interfaces, and novel device architectures with interface modification for carrier transport and light manipulation.

 	Fig. 1  Interaction between the incident sunlight and opaque thin film solar cells.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of an OSC with a moth-eye patterned AR coating. (b) Reflectance of the incident light from the glass side for OSCs with and without the UV-curable resin AR coating measured at normal incidence. Inset depicts the schematic of the measurement procedure. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic structure of a PeSC attached with a nanocone-structured PDMS film. (d) Optical properties of PeSCs with and without a PDMS nanocone film. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the top illuminated OSC using the patterned MoO3/Ag/PDMS. (f) Total transmittance spectra of planar MoO3/Ag, planar MoO3/Ag/PDMS (P0), and various patterned MoO3/Ag/PDMS (P1, P2, P3, and P4). These figures have been reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of globular silica nanoparticles coated on PET substrates via a PECVD process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the ZnO CS embedded in the host of ZnO NPs with a thickness of 50 nm. (c) Total transmission spectra of ITO-glass substrates without and with ZnO CS. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of self-aggregated alumina nanowires with a controlled etching time. (b) Total and diffuse transmittance spectra (normalized to the Scotch tape transmittance) for the haze films prepared by different etching times. “Haze A”, “Haze B”, “Haze C”, and “Haze D” represent the haze films produced at 43 min, 44 min, 45 min, and 46 min of the etching process, respectively. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Configuration of a MLA coating and operational principle of the light trap. (d) Transmission spectra in the forward and backward illumination directions for the MLA with mirrors. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the Optical Society of America. (e) Schematic illustration of light behavior for OSCs with (solid arrows) and without (dashed arrows) MLA. (f) EQE spectra for OSCs in (e), and the relative increase in EQE. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) V-shaped light trapping configuration and the normalized JSC values as a function of annual incident angle variation (θa) for V-shaped OSCs with different vertex angles (θv). (b) Geometrical characteristics of a parabola concentrating all of the incident rays parallel to the axis into a focus or reflecting them in a reverse manner, DPT structure for perfect light trapping, and normalized JSC with the variation of θa. Ray-traced images are also shown when θa = 0° and ±23.5°. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Optical Society of America.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM images of 7 nm thick Ag layers deposited on various seed layers with different surface energies γ. The wetting of silver is improved with increasing surface energy of the seed layer. (b) Stack design of small-molecule OSC with a microcavity structure. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the OSC with a 66 nm thick TeO2 film. (b) Electric field distribution calculated by TMM for a 600 nm light wave with a unitary incoming intensity (incident from the left), showing the dramatic decrease in the reflection and the maximized intensity within the cell with a 66 nm thick TeO2 film. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) OSC with microcavity configuration using a semitransparent Ag film and a top-capping light incoupling layer as the optical incident electrode. (d) Jph of the microcavity device using a TeO2 top-capping layer as a function of tBHJ and the thickness of the TeO2 layer. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of a flexible OSC with moth-eye nanopatterned AgNWs/ZnO on a PET substrate, and the corresponding SEM image. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Dual-grating nanopatterned OSC and the corresponding AFM image. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the diffracted light to enhance light harvesting. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the mesoscopic MAPbI3 PeSC with a TiO2 inverse opal (IO) electron-conducting scaffold and the corresponding cross-section SEM image. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Periodical structure to induce SPPs and (b) embedded NPs positioned in active layers to enhance the LSPR. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the OSC with metal grating. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of PeSCs with grating or moth-eye patterned rear electrodes. (e) Simulated cross-section near-field distributions for TE polarized incident light at 780 nm in PeSCs with moth-eye structures. These figures have been reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of synergistic effects of Au:CNTs on LSPR-induced exciton generation, dissociation, and charge fast transport along CNTs, and the simulated electric field distribution around Au:CNTs in OSCs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of plasmonic OSCs with metal NPs embedded in the PEDOT:PSS-based HTL. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the dual plasmonic device (PNP-535 doping into PEDOT:PSS layer and TNP-450 into C60-bis layer, and the mechanism of the optical enhancement). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the dual metallic structural device. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Plasmonic absorption enhancement of devices with Au NP-embedded interlayer and grated electrode. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Representative illustration of a NP-enhanced plasmonic AgNW network, and the plasmon coupling in a NP-NW hybrid plasmonic system showing the interaction between LSPR of a metal NP and the propagating SPP on a metal NW. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
