A CO 2 adsorption dominated carbon defect-based electrocatalyst for efficient carbon dioxide reduction   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA11473D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA11473D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1205-1211A CO2 adsorption dominated carbon defect-based electrocatalyst for efficient carbon dioxide reduction†

        
          
            Qilong 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Gao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jianrui 
            Feng
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunjie 
            Zhou
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shengbo 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Manxiu 
            Nie
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jiongpeng 
            Zhao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Fuchen 
            Liu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Zhong
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Zhenhui 
            Kang
          
        
      *b
aTianjin Key Laboratory of Organic Solar Cells and Photochemical Conversion, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Drug Targeting and Bioimaging, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin 300384, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zhaojp@tjut.edu.cn; fcliu@tjut.edu.cn
bInstitute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-based Functional Materials and Devices, Soochow University, 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, PR China. E-mail: zhkang@suda.edu.cn
cInstitute of Natural Sciences, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Westlake University, No. 18 Shilongshan Road, Hangzhou 310064, PR China
Received 
      18th October 2019
    , Accepted 6th December 2019First published on 23rd December 2019AbstractControlling interface gas adsorption properties of carbon materials is a prerequisite for exploiting efficient metal-free electrocatalysts but it is usually ignored. Herein, we fabricate a hierarchical porous carbon electrocatalyst with defect (DHPC) by carbon thermal reaction, which shows good CO2RR selectivity and stability. The experimental results indicated that the carbon defect might be the active center for efficient CO2RR performance because it can serve as a Lewis base center and provide an appropriate CO2-chemisorption energy. Moreover, X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) results demonstrated that the carbon defect can induce a reversible carbon–carbon interface with CO2 gas molecule, which would be further strengthened under an applied bias. Besides, the 13CO2 isotope labelling experiment and density functional theory calculations further confirmed that the high CO2RR performance of DHPC comes from its intrinsic defect sites. This study not only provides a new avenue and concept to design CO2RR electrocatalysts but also, to some extent, indicates a possible catalytic mechanism for carbon defect-based electrocatalysts.
Introduction
With the exorbitant utilization of fossil fuels, excessive anthropomorphic CO2 emission has been leading to many problems related with ecological environment and climate.1–3 To reverse these adverse impacts, converting CO2 into commodity chemicals or decreasing CO2 concentration (air/ocean) by an electrocatalytic reduction strategy is a promising way due to its good compatibility with clean energy (tidal, solar, and wind), ambient reaction conditions, and high feasibility in economic and engineering areas.4 As low-cost and environment friendly electro-catalysts, metal-free carbon-based materials for efficient CO2 reduction electrocatalysts have been attracting considerable attention.5–7 However, it is a great challenge to fabricate abundant active sites for CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) electrocatalysts in a steady carbon lattice and even information on the active sites is not adequately known.8 In general, the preferential sites of CO2 activation/adsorption are considered as CO2RR active sites.9 Therefore, appropriate CO2 activation/adsorption of the catalysts is a prerequisite condition for designing an efficient metal-free CO2RR electrocatalyst. Moreover, owing to the weak Lewis acidity of CO2 molecule, introducing Lewis base sites on the surface of carbon materials is indispensable for promoting CO2 activation/adsorption.9 However, a high temperature pyrolysis process is inclined to generate a electroneutral π conjugated structure.10 Hence, breaking the electroneutrality of the sp2 carbon lattice in situ in the pyrolysis process becomes a meaningful way to construct Lewis base sites on the carbon materials. Previous reports have shown that heteroatom doping (e.g., nitrogen) could induce charge polarization of the local carbon framework, tending to form Lewis base sites in the carbon framework.11 As a consequence, these Lewis base sites can facilitate CO2 activation/adsorption effectively.9,11 However, the heteroatom-doped carbon materials always suffer from high hydrogen evolution ratio due to the uncontrollable doping type, leading to the low faradaic efficiency to CO2RR.12,13 Besides, although hundreds of papers have been published on the topic until now, the actual active center and catalytic mechanism arising from nitrogen doping still remains a topic of debate.13,14 Thus, it is essential to find a new avenue to modulate the local electronic structure and induce Lewis base sites on the surface of carbon materials to boost the CO2RR performance.
Recently, defect-based carbon materials have attracted substantial attention as electrocatalysts.15–17 It exhibits a great potential in the diversity of structural design of the electrocatalyst.18–21 However, because it is difficult to introduce abundant defects of a specific type, the relationship of the defect and CO2RR electrocatalysis activity in carbon is still not completely established and there are just a few catalyzers that have been reported. Therefore, exploring an efficient strategy to fabricate defect sites with appropriate CO2 activation/adsorption energy may provide a new way for designing high performance CO2RR catalysts. Herein, a defect-rich hierarchical porous carbon catalyst (DHPC), was fabricated by pyrolyzing ZnO NP@ZIF-8 with the help of KNO3 and ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO NPs), which serve as oxygen supplier and carbon tailoring agent to facilitate carbon defect site/Lewis base site generation, respectively. Compared with the perfect graphite structure (e.g., graphene and carbon nanotubes), such mesoporous and carbon defect structure of DHPC can improve its CO2 adsorption/activation efficiently. As a result, it exhibits efficient CO2RR activity (to CO) in a KHCO3 medium with the highest faradaic efficiency of up to 99.5% at −0.5 V vs. RHE. More importantly, such carbon material is useful even in a real sea-water medium with high CO faradaic efficiency as well (96.5% at −0.6 V). To the best to our knowledge, DHPC demonstrates state-of-the-art selectivity towards CO2RR among all the reported metal-free electrocatalysts.6,9
Results and discussion
Preparation and characterizations of the DHPC and HPC catalysts
The synthesis of DHPC is depicted in Scheme 1, and it is optimized by our previous synthetic technology (detailed analysis of material fabrication is discussed in the ESI† and previous work).22 ZnO NP@ZIF-8 was fabricated by an in situ encapsulation process (ZnO NPs and KNO3 molecules dispersed in the channel of MOF are shown in Fig. S1–S3†). For comparison, the ZnO NP@ZIF-8 was washed using EtOH:H2O = 1:1 to remove KNO3 molecules and was named as ZnO NP@ZIF8-W (“W” means wash). Finally, ZnO NP@ZIF-8 and ZnO NP@ZIF8-W were heat treated at 900 °C, resulting in the formation of DHPC and hierarchical porous carbon (HPC) electrocatalyst, respectively. Moreover, in order to eliminate the impact of trace metal impurities, DHPC and HPC samples were subjected to a series strict acid treatment (these samples were washed by 10% HF aqueous solution, 10% HCl aqueous solution, deionized water, absolute ethanol, and acetone for 6 h). As shown in Fig. 1a, HPC shows a broken polyhedron morphology with an average size of about 100 nm. In DHPC, the particles aggregate and show a sponge-like morphology, as illustrated in Fig. 1d. Meanwhile, compared with HPC, the TEM image of DHPC also shows a larger mesoporous structure, which could facilitate the reactant/product mass transfer in the electrocatalytic process (Fig. 1b and e). Moreover, there are many irregular holes in the DHPC, which may would result in various defects and adjust the local electron density, thus providing more active sites for electrocatalytic reaction. The mapping images of both DHPC and HPC show uniform distribution of C element and weak signal of N element (Fig. 1c and f). In addition, the spherical aberration corrected transmission electron microscope (ACTEM) images and the corresponding filtered images of DHPC (Fig. 1g and i) revealed that the random carbon framework structure with abundant edge bands predominates in the bulk regions of the sample and some pentagon defects and normal hexagons were also observed, indicating the existence of carbon defect sites in the sample.
 Scheme 1  Synthetic process of DHPC and HPC. 
 Fig. 1  (a), SEM image of HPC (the inset image is magnified the SEM image of HPC). (b) TEM image of HPC. (c1–c4) The element mappings of HPC. (d) SEM image of DHPC (the inset image is the magnified SEM image of DHPC). (e) TEM image of DHPC. (f1–f4) The element mapping of DHPC. (g) High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HRTEM) of DHPC. (h) Magnification of one segment of the HRTEM image. The inset image is the HRTEM image of DHPC after fast Fourier transformation (FFT) filtering. The bright green spots are carbon atoms. (i) Magnification of one segment of the HRTEM after fast Fourier transformation (FFT) filtering. 
The power X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns of HPC and DHPC have coincident characteristic peaks of the (002) and (100) planes of graphite (JCPDS no. 75-1621) and no peaks of the metal species (Fig. S5†). Also, the pyrolysis process is demonstrated by the TEM data, indicating the pore expanding and carbon tailoring effects of KNO3 and ZnO NPs (detailed discussions are shown in Fig. S6†). It is noteworthy to mention that the peak intensity of DHPC is weaker than that of HPC, also implying the lower crystallinity and the higher defect structure. The Raman spectra of HPC and DHPC in Fig. 2a exhibits two distinct bands at 1345 cm−1 and 1590 cm−1, corresponding to the D-band of defective sp3 carbon and G-band of graphitic sp2 carbon.23 The ID/IG ratio reflects the defect degree of carbon materials as well. HPC exhibits a low ID/IG ratio (ID/IG = 0.97), indicating its high degree of graphitization.24 For comparison, DHPC exhibits a considerable amount of defects, which is proved by the relatively high intensity of ID/IG ratio (ID/IG = 1.22). The chemical composition/state of HPC and DHPC were investigated via X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and inductively coupled plasma elemental analysis (ICP), which reveal the existence of C, N, and O species and with not any other metal elements (<1 ppm) in HPC and DHPC (Fig. 2b, Tables S1 and S2†). Besides, both DHPC and HPC show a high C-content and ultra-low N-content, and this result is in good agreement with the energy dispersive spectra (EDS) (Fig. S7, Table S3†). As shown in Fig. 2b, the N-content of HPC is over two times that of DHPC. Given that pyridinic-N and pyrrolic-N are deemed to be the active sites in many electrocatalytic reactions according to previous reports, we investigated the N 1s XPS spectra of these samples carefully (Fig. S8, Table S4†). The N 1s XPS spectrum of HPC also exhibits a stronger pyridinic-N and pyrrolic-N ratio of 0.51% and 0.36%, respectively. For comparison, the pyridinic-N and pyrrolic-N contents in the DHPC sample are just 0.12% and 0.25%, which are about 25% and 69% in the HPC sample, respectively. Moreover, compared with a previous mesoporous carbon catalyst that was fabricated via a high temperature nitrogen removal strategy, DHPC and HPC showed slightly lower nitrogen content.21 Furthermore, it is worth noting that DHPC and HPC have similar oxygen contents, according to the XPS and EDS results (Tables S1 and S3†), viz., 2.10% (6.42%) and 1.34% (6.27%), respectively. As a consequence, they can serve as an ideal control group to reveal the electrocatalytic mechanism beyond the N doping mechanism.
 Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of DHPC and HPC. (b) XPS survey scan of DHPC and HPC. (c) N2 sorption isotherms of hierarchical porous carbon materials of DHPC and HPC at 77 K. (d) CO2 adsorption isotherms of DHPC and HPC at 273 K. (e) CO2-TPD curve of C-900 (the background signal was deducted). (f) The time-course adsorption of H+ by the HPC and DHPC catalyst. 
The N2 adsorption isotherms curves suggest that unlike the ZIF-8 template-directed porous carbon (PC) with type-I isotherm curve, both HPC and DHPC show a typical IV isotherm curves and DHPC has a more pronounced hysteresis loop, which conforms with the pore distribution curves well (Fig. 2c, S9 and S10†). Compared with the HPC sample, DHPC has a large mesopore size, which is distributed from 5–20 nm. Such a mesopore structure of DHPC is beneficial for the diffusion dynamics during the electrocatalytic process. Besides, DHPC shows more micropores and higher defect ratio than HPC, which may provide a matched pore size and more Lewis base sites for CO2 adsorption. Therefore, we explore CO2 adsorption on DHPC and HPC to preliminary investigate their capabilities in electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. As shown in Fig. 2d, the CO2 adsorption uptake of HPC at 273 K increases almost linearly with the pressure and climbs to nearly 2.98 mmol g−1 at a pressure of 1.0 bar. For comparison, the CO2 adsorption uptake of DHPC is 3.75 mmol g−1, which is about 1.26 times of HPC at a pressure of 1.0 bar. Such CO2 adsorption uptake is higher than that of most carbon materials in previous literatures, which implies the abundant CO2RR active sites of DHPC.25 The CO2 temperature-programmed desorption (CO2-TPD) measurement was used to certify the Lewis basic sites of DHPC.11 As shown in Fig. 2e, two pronounced peaks can be clearly observed in two completely different temperature areas in the CO2-TPD curve. The former peak, located at 80 °C, shows a typical CO2-physisorption signal. The latter peak located at 400 °C is the CO2-chemisorption signal, also indicating the existence of abundant Lewis basic sites. These Lewis base sites on DHPC may lead to a favourable C–CO2 interface for the CO2RR reaction. However, the competitive effect between proton adsorption and CO2 adsorption properties on the catalyst surface always has a great impact on the CO2RR performance.26 Therefore, to identify the feasibility of the DHPC catalyst applied to CO2RR, the proton adsorption experiment is executed (Fig. 2f). The amount of adsorbed proton on DHPC was 8.92 mg g−1, which was just 64.6% that of Co3O4–C dots-C3N4 CO2RR catalyst (13.8 mg g−1) in comparison to previous reports.26 The HPC sample shows a slightly lower amount of adsorbed proton, which may be ascribed to the lower BET surface area. These results indicated that the defect active center can not only serve as a favorable Lewis basic site to promote CO2 activation/adsorption but also exhibits a weak proton adsorption property on the catalyst surface, which satisfied the core requirement of the CO2RR electrocatalyst.
Electrocatalytic CO2RR performance in a 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte
Based on the above study, we evaluated the CO2RR performance of DHPC and HPC in an airtight H-type cell (Fig. S11†) with a CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte (pH = 7.2). As shown in Fig. 3a, compared with the HPC catalyst, the DHPC catalyst shows a lower onset potential of −0.35 V (versus RHE) and a larger current density reaching 10 mA cm−2 at −0.80 V in the CO2-saturated electrolyte. Moreover, in the Ar-saturated electrolyte, the linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) polarization curves of the DHPC catalyst show a much smaller current density and a larger negative shift than that of the CO2-saturated electrolyte, which indicates its high CO2RR activity. The Tafel slope (Fig. S12†) also demonstrates the faster kinetic process of DHPC (145 mV dec−1) than that of HPC (172 mV dec−1). To further evaluate the CO2RR performance of DHPC and HPC, the faradaic efficiencies (FE) for CO and H2 are investigated in a 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution (Fig. 3b and S13†). For the DHPC catalyst, the FE of CO formation (FECO) is over 90% from −0.5 to −0.9 V versus RHE and reaches the maximum (≈99.5%) at −0.5 V, with the H2 signal too low to be detected by the TCD detector at −0.5 V. Such a performance is comparable to the best metal-free electrocatalysts and single atom electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction to CO (Tables S7 and S8†). DHPC also exhibits an ultra-low HER performance even in a 0.5 M H2SO4 medium, implying its high selectivity for CO2RR as well (Fig. S14†). Therefore, based on the ICP result (Table S2†) and metal poisoning experiment (Fig. S15†), the main contribution of its ultrahigh CO2RR performance could not be ascribed to metal impurities.27 On the contrary, the HPC catalyst exhibits a relatively poor CO2RR performance with a low FECO value (22.4%) and a high FEH2 value (88.9%). Besides, the CO partial current densities of DHPC are over ten times higher than that of HPC, suggesting that the defect sites are significantly beneficial for CO2RR (Fig. 3c). In order to further identify the role of carbon defect in CO2RR, ZnO@ZIF-8 was pyrolyzed at 800 °C as the control sample, named L-DHPC. As shown in Fig. S16a,† the PXRD pattern indicates an amorphous graphite structure of L-DHPC. Furthermore, L-DHPC exhibits a similar BET surface area and pore diameter distribution to that of DHPC (Fig. S16b and c†). However, it is worth noting that L-DHPC shows a higher nitrogen content (Fig. S16d and e†) but a lower defect ratio (Fig. S16f†) than that of DHPC; thus, it also provides us with an ideal control sample to reveal the effect of carbon defect. Compared with the LSV curves of DHPC, the LSV curves of L-DHPC in Ar and CO2 saturated conditions (Fig. S17a†) have closer current density, implying a worse CO2RR performance of it. Moreover, the FE of L-DHPC was also lower than that of DHPC in the range from −0.5 to −0.8 V versus RHE (Fig. S17b†). These results further demonstrated that the main contribution of the high CO2RR performance of DHPC originated from the carbon defect. The possible liquid products are detected by 1HNMR, confirming the absence of any other liquid products (Fig. S18†).
 Fig. 3  (a) LSV curves of DHPC and HPC in a 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte. (b) Faradaic efficiencies of DHPC and HPC in 0.5 M KHCO3 at various potentials. (c) Partial current densities (CO) of DHPC and HPC in 0.5 M KHCO3 at various potentials. (d) LSV curves of DHPC in a real sea water electrolyte. (e) Faradaic efficiencies of DHPC in real sea water at various potentials. (f) Partial current densities (CO) of DHPC in 0.5 M KHCO3/real sea water at various potentials. 
Electrocatalytic CO2RR performance in real seawater
The ocean is the largest sink for anthropogenic CO2, suggesting the importance of fabricating highly selective and seawater-usable CO2RR electrocatalysts.28 Therefore, the CO2-saturated real sea water (pH = 5.3) was utilized to replace the CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution for the CO2RR test (Fig. S11†). The DHPC catalyst shows decent CO2RR performance with a low onset potential of −0.45 V (versus RHE) and just slightly decreased current density than that in 0.5 M KHCO3 (Fig. 3d). Moreover, the DHPC catalyst also shows over 90% FECO in a real seawater medium in the range of −0.6–0.9 V versus RHE, strongly demonstrating its general capability to be used even in complicated real seawater (Fig. 3e). Fig. 3f exhibits the current density evolution of DHPC both in 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution and real sea water medium. Clearly, with the increased potential, the current density also increases in both the solutions. However, DHPC shows a lower current density in real sea water than that in the 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution, which might be attributed to the low concentration of CO32−/HCO3−, complicated ion environment, and pH effect29 in real sea water.30 Notably, the current density of DHPC maintains 95.9% (68%) of its initial one after 25 (10) hours in a 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution (real seawater), suggesting the excellent long-term stability of the DHPC catalyst (Fig. S19†).
The investigation of electrocatalytic mechanism
X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) experiments were performed to further explore the CO2RR process. The XAS spectra of the DHPC sample immersed in a CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 solution, in the LSV process, and after the reaction are shown in Fig. 4a. All the samples were taken from the reaction cell and then quickly put into the experimental chamber for XAS. The spectrum after simple immersion in the CO2-saturated solution does not show a strong oxidative peak at about 288.7 eV due to its less oxidative power. Notably, DHPC exhibits a slight increase in the π* peak signal when it was immersed in the CO2-saturated solution (red curve). Moreover, a distinct increase in the π* peak can be observed in the DHPC sample with an applied bias in the LSV test (green curve). These results suggest a strong residue interaction between the CO2 molecules and the DHPC surface in the liquid electrolyte system, showing a similar phenomenon with the CO2-TPD result. The chemically adsorbed CO2 can easily react with the DHPC sample with the applied bias in the LSV test; thus, a CO2–C–DHPC bonding might be created. The new bonding will significantly increase the π* peak, as observed in Fig. 4a (green curve). After reaction, the spectrum can also recover, as observed in the blue curve, indicating a reversible CO2–C–DHPC interface formation in the CO2RR process. The formation of CO2–C–DHPC interfaces directly indicates that the carbon atom can serve as the CO2RR electrocatalytic centre. In order to exclude the impact of CO32−, the isotope-labeled CO2 and XAS experiments were performed. As shown in Fig. S20,† the CO signal (m/z) were right shifted from 28 to 29, indicating that the formation of CO is due to CO2 reduction. Meanwhile, it is clear to see, from the control spectra of the XAS experiment (Fig. S21†), that without the saturated CO2 gas, there is almost no change in the XAS peak at about 285.5 eV in the reaction or after the reaction when compared to the pristine DHPC. The results also confirm that the interaction between DHPC and CO2 is indeed derived from CO2.
 Fig. 4  (a) K-edge XAS curves of DHPC with different treatment modes (inset image is partial enlargement of the K-edge XAS curves of DHPC). (b) Free energy diagram for CO2 reduction to CO over C5 + H defect site and pyridinic N site. (c and d) Projected density of states (PDOS) of adsorbed CO molecule on C5 + H site and corresponding differential charge density. (e) PDOS of adsorbed CO molecule on the pyridinic N site and corresponding differential charge density (f). The shadow area in PDOS denotes the overlap of C and O. 
Therefore, according to the above investigation of XAS results and ACTEM images, the edge/topological carbon defect structure (pentagon defects) are deemed to be the electrocatalytically active centre, which can redistribute the local electron density and provide a stronger affinity to the reactants and intermediates. To get deeper insights into the catalytic site of the carbon catalyst, we employed density functional theory-based first-principle calculations to obtain the free energy diagrams over different hypothesized active sites. Given the ultra-low HER performance, some topologic defect models are excluded (e.g., 585-3, 7557-4).18 Besides, the ACTEM images (rich edge and pentagon defects) that are exhibited above also provide a blue print for the defect model. Preliminarily, the adsorption energy of CO2 and H+ was calculated to express the intrinsic adsorption abilities of DHPC (Table S5†). The results show that the adsorption energies for H+ and CO2 of C5 + H are −0.78 eV and −0.46 eV, respectively. It indicates a spontaneous CO2 and H+ adsorption energy of C5 + H, which conforms with the CO2-TPD and XAS results as well. Then, the four edge models were selected to further study their CO2RR performance: C5 + H edge, pyridinic N, armchair edge, and zigzag edge (Fig. 4b, S22†).
The calculations denote that the C5 + H site exhibits fast kinetics with a barrier of only 0.33 eV (Fig. 4b). It can be attributed to the very strong adsorption of *COOH radical over the zigzag edge site and the very strong binding of *COOH and *CO on the armchair edge, which conform with the CO2* free energy results (Fig. S22†). To eliminate the possibility of contribution from doped N in the carbon skeleton, we also tested the reaction barrier over pyridinic N (Fig. 4b). However, the barrier is larger than C5 + H model. Therefore, compared with the C5 + H model, the pyridinic N model shows a stronger binding with the *CO molecule with a dual-site adsorption, which is may be difficult for CO release. Such a strong adsorption energy may also prohibit the active site for the next cycle. To analyze the reason why the dual-site is inclined to be generated in the pyridinic N model, it can be concluded by the geometry effect and electronic property effect. At first, to form the dual-site, the distance between the two bonding sites in pyridinic N model is similar to the bond length of CO, which provides a prerequisite condition for dual-site formation. Moreover, the N heteroatom is electron-sufficient and the neighboring C atoms are electron-deficient in the pyridinic model. In the CO molecule, the C atom is electron-deficient and the O atom is electron-sufficient. Hence, the dual-site is strongly likely to be formed in the pyridinic N model. To further identify this phenomenon, we calculated the differential charge density and projected density of states (PDOS) of adsorbed *CO over the C5 + H site (Fig. 4c and d) and pyridinic N (Fig. 4e and f). From the PDOS of C and O, we can find that the overlapped area of the C5 + H model is larger than that of the pyridinic N model. The larger overlapped area of C and O indicates a stronger interaction between the C atom and the O atom in the *CO molecule, which denotes that the *CO molecule binds weakly on the catalytic surface. The differential charge density shows that the electron is accumulated on the O atom (the yellow region) in the C5 + H model due to the larger electronegativity of O compared to the C skeleton. In contrast to the C5 + H model, the C–O bond exhibits deficiency of electron (the blue region), manifesting that the catalytic site makes the C–O bond in the CO molecule weaker and binds C atom and O atom more strongly. Thus, the calculations confirm the carbon defects (e.g., C5 + H model) with appropriate CO2 and intermediate adsorption energy, which can activate the CO2 molecules and facilitate the CO2RR process.
Conclusions
In summary, a defect-rich hierarchical porous carbon was synthesized via an optimized carbon thermal reduction strategy. It exhibits abundant defect structures and an ultra-high CO2RR activity (to CO) in both the KHCO3 medium and real sea-water medium. The experimental results indicated that the carbon defect sites can induce Lewis basicity on the surface of carbon materials, which is beneficial for CO2 adsorption/activation. Moreover, with the applied bias in the LSV test, a reversible CO2–C–DHPC bonding was created, demonstrating that the carbon atom active center can accelerate the CO2RR process. Similarly, the DFT calculations also suggest that the specific carbon defect sites (e.g., C5 + H) with appropriate CO2 and intermediate adsorption energy decrease the reaction energy barriers and then facilitate the CO2RR process remarkably. We believe that this work provides a new avenue and concept in the design of CO2RR electrocatalysts.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by National MCF Energy R&D Program (2018YFE0306105), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51725204, 51972216, 21471106, 21771132, 21571139 and 21871209), Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science & Technology, the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province (2019B010933001), the 111 Project, Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (17JCQNJC05900), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20190041, BK20190828) and Special Program of Talents Development for Excellent Youth Scholars in Tianjin (TJTZJH-QNBJRC-2-3). Also, we thank Dr Zhang from ZKKF (Beijing) Science & Technology Co., Ltd for TEM observations.
References
T. DeVries, M. Holzer and F. Primeau, Nature, 2017, 542, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhu, J. Liu and S. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, B. R. Sandberg, J. A. Akey, X. Liu, D. C. Bell, J. K. Nørskov, K. Chan and H. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 111 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, Y. Xue, L. Qu, H. J. Choi and J. B. Baek, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vasileff, Y. Zheng and S. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700759 CrossRef .
J. Wu, T. Sharif, Y. Gao, T. Zhang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1804257 Search PubMed .
Y. Song, W. Chen, C. Zhao, S. Li, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 10840 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Duan, J. Xu, Z. Wei, J. Ma, S. Guo, S. Wang, H. Liu and S. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701784 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Jia, P. Song, Q. Wang, D. Li, S. Min, C. Qian, L. Wang, Y. F. Li, C. Ma, T. Wu, J. Yuan, M. Antonietti and G. A. Ozin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 7955 CrossRef .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604103 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cui, Z. Pan, L. Zhang, H. Peng and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701456 CrossRef .
S. Liu, H. Yang, X. Huang, L. Liu, W. Cai, J. Gao, X. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Huang and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800499 CrossRef .
D. Yan, Y. Li, J. Huo, R. Chen, L. Dai and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606459 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yan, Y. Jia and X. Yao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7628 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Ji, Y. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Li and S. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, J. Chen and X. Yao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1250 RSC .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, A. Du, G. Gao, J. Chen, X. Yan, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Xiang, Chem, 2018, 4, 285 CAS .
R. Daiyan, X. Tan, R. Chen, W. H. Saputera, H. A. Tahini, E. Lovell, Y. H. Ng, S. C. Smith, L. Dai, X. Lu and R. Amal, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 39, 2292–2298 CrossRef .
Q. Wu, Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Sun, J. Zhao, Y. Liu, F. Liu, M. Nie, F. Ning, N. Yan, X. Jian, X. Zhou, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, N. Mahmood, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Casiraghi, A. Hartschuh, H. Qian, S. Piscanec, C. Georgi, A. Fasoli, K. S. Novoselov, D. M. Basko and A. C. Ferrari, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aijaz, N. Fujiwara and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, S. Zhao, X. Wu, H. Li, Y. Zhou, C. Zhu, N. Yang, X. Jiang, J. Gao, L. Bai, Y. Liu, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee and Z. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1828 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lum, Y. Kwon, L. Peter, L. Chen, E. L. Clark, A. T. Bell and J. W. Ager, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .
T. DeVries, M. Holzer and F. Primeau, Nature, 2017, 542, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Ana, K. Matthias, L. Nathaniel, J. Wen, S. Julian, B. Alexander, R. Jan and S. Peter, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 812–817 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Ma, C. X. Wu, X. J. Feng, H. Q. Tan, L. K. Yan, Y. Liu, Z. H. Kang, E. B. Wang and Y. G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 788 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta11473dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Synthetic process of DHPC and HPC.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a), SEM image of HPC (the inset image is magnified the SEM image of HPC). (b) TEM image of HPC. (c1–c4) The element mappings of HPC. (d) SEM image of DHPC (the inset image is the magnified SEM image of DHPC). (e) TEM image of DHPC. (f1–f4) The element mapping of DHPC. (g) High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HRTEM) of DHPC. (h) Magnification of one segment of the HRTEM image. The inset image is the HRTEM image of DHPC after fast Fourier transformation (FFT) filtering. The bright green spots are carbon atoms. (i) Magnification of one segment of the HRTEM after fast Fourier transformation (FFT) filtering.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of DHPC and HPC. (b) XPS survey scan of DHPC and HPC. (c) N2 sorption isotherms of hierarchical porous carbon materials of DHPC and HPC at 77 K. (d) CO2 adsorption isotherms of DHPC and HPC at 273 K. (e) CO2-TPD curve of C-900 (the background signal was deducted). (f) The time-course adsorption of H+ by the HPC and DHPC catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) LSV curves of DHPC and HPC in a 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte. (b) Faradaic efficiencies of DHPC and HPC in 0.5 M KHCO3 at various potentials. (c) Partial current densities (CO) of DHPC and HPC in 0.5 M KHCO3 at various potentials. (d) LSV curves of DHPC in a real sea water electrolyte. (e) Faradaic efficiencies of DHPC in real sea water at various potentials. (f) Partial current densities (CO) of DHPC in 0.5 M KHCO3/real sea water at various potentials.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) K-edge XAS curves of DHPC with different treatment modes (inset image is partial enlargement of the K-edge XAS curves of DHPC). (b) Free energy diagram for CO2 reduction to CO over C5 + H defect site and pyridinic N site. (c and d) Projected density of states (PDOS) of adsorbed CO molecule on C5 + H site and corresponding differential charge density. (e) PDOS of adsorbed CO molecule on the pyridinic N site and corresponding differential charge density (f). The shadow area in PDOS denotes the overlap of C and O.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta11473d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
