Morphology control, spectrum modification and extended optical applications of rare earth ion doped phosphors  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CP01412E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CP01412E
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 15120-15162Morphology control, spectrum modification and extended optical applications of rare earth ion doped phosphors

        
          
            Xiangfu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jintang 
            Xu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jihong 
            Yu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanyan 
            Bu
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Jose 
            Marques-Hueso
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Xiaohong 
            Yan
          
          
        
      a
aCollege of Electronic and Optical Engineering & College of Microelectronics, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, 210023, China. E-mail: xfwang@njupt.edu.cn
bCollege of Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, 210023, China. E-mail: buyy@njupt.edu.cn
cInstitute of Sensors, Signals and Systems, School of Engineering and Physical Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK. E-mail: j.marques@hw.ac.uk
Received 
      13th March 2020
    , Accepted 1st June 2020First published on 9th June 2020AbstractRare earth ion (RE3+) doped nano-phosphors with controllable morphologies have a wide range of applications in laser crystals, LEDs, bio-probes, photo-catalysis, three-dimensional displays, sensors, and flash memories. This review summarizes the morphology control strategy, phase transfer theory, spectrum modulation, and extended optical applications of RE3+-doped phosphors. The roles of surfactants in the morphology control in the liquid–solid–solution phase transfer process for RE3+-doped fluorides, oxides and other compounds are discussed. The relevant mechanisms of controlling morphologies are illustrated. The size- and shape-dependent optical properties of RE3+ doped phosphors, including the emission intensities, intensity ratios of adjacent emission bands, decay times and thermal stability, are analyzed. The extended optical applications and main challenges of RE3+-doped phosphors are also discussed.
Xiangfu Wang
Xiangfu Wang received his PhD degree from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2012. From 2012 to present, he has worked as an associate professor in the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China. His current research concentrates on optoelectronic devices and sensors and the photoluminescence of rare-earth ion doped nano-materials and transparent glass ceramics.
Jintang Xu
Jintang Xu obtained his bachelor's degree from the Nanjing Jinling Institute of Technology in 2017. From 2017 to present, he has worked for his master's degree in Xiangfu Wang's group. His current research concentrates on the optical properties of rare earth ion doped perovskite phosphors.
Jihong Yu
Jihong Yu obtained his bachelor's degree from the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2018. From 2018 to present, he has worked for his master's degree in Xiangfu Wang's group. His current research concentrates on the design of flexible capacitive pressure sensors.
Yanyan Bu
Yanyan Bu obtained her PhD degree from the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2017. From 2017 to present, she has worked as a senior engineer in the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Her current research concentrates on the optical temperature sensing of rare-earth ion doped transparent glass ceramics.
Jose Marques-Hueso
Jose Marques-Hueso received his MSc degree in physics from the University of Valencia, Spain, and his PhD degree with the Optoelectronic Materials and Devices Group, Materials Institute, University of Valencia, in 2011, where he completed the PG Cert. on photonics in 2006. From 2002 to 2005, he was with the Soft-Matter Group, Johannes Gutenberg Universität Mainz, Germany. In 2011, he joined Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK, as a Research Associate to apply photon-managing technologies to materials for solar cells. In 2015, he commenced a position as a Research Fellow to study the use of metallic nanocomposites. Since 2017, he has been an assistant professor with the Institute of Sensors, Signals and Systems, Heriot-Watt University. He has published over 60 journal and conference papers, two book chapters, and an international patent. He has participated in more than 50 conferences and scientific events, including symposium and conference organization and several invited oral presentations. His research interests include the use of luminescent and functional materials for optoelectronic devices, sensors, and manufacturing processes.
Xiaohong Yan
Xiaohong Yan received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 1997. From 2010 to present, he has worked as a professor in the College of Electronic Science and Engineering at the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His current research concentrates on the transport and manipulation of quantum systems and new energy materials.
1. Introduction
Rare earth ion-doped phosphors have attracted much attention due to their multiple applications in nano-probes,1,2 photo-catalysis,3,4 three-dimensional displays5 and flash memories.6 In order to meet the optical requirements of these applications, including the intensity, color and decay time of the luminescence, it has been proven that the controllable morphology of crystals plays a crucial role. In the last few years, particles with diverse shapes and sizes have been obtained. The fluoride materials β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ and Na1.23Ca0.12Y1.28Er0.24F6 can be prepared with nanodisk,7,8 nano-rod and nanotube morphologies with the assistance of surfactants. The rare earth-doped oxides Y2O3:Eu3+ and β-Ga2O3:Dy3+ can be synthesized in a controlled way as hexagonal prisms and ellipsoids,9–11 in which the pH value plays an important role in the reaction system of oxides. The other rare earth-doped complex compounds like the tungstates CaWO4,12 NaGd(WO4)2,13 and Y2(WO4)3,14 the borates GdBO315 and YBO316,17 and the vanadates YVO4,18–20 GdVO4,21–23 and LaVO424 were synthesized in a deterministic way with diverse morphologies of spherical, hollow spherical, nanocubic, rhombic polyhedron, rod-like, ellipsoidal-like, spindle-like, flower-like, and stratiform shapes.
The most important aspect of crystal morphology research was controlled synthesis with the assistance of surfactants. The surfactants were used to control the various relevant parameters affecting the size, shape and crystallinity of inorganic nanocrystals. The most commonly used surfactants are trisodium citrate (Na3Cit), anionic sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), oleic acid (OA), cationic cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), dimethylformamide (DMF), sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulphosuccinate (Na(AOT)), oleylamine (OL), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), tetraethoxysilane (TOX), triethanolamine (TEA), and glycine. The molecular structure of surfactants typically contains a hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic chain,25 as shown in Fig. 1. The hydrophobic chains are prone to minimizing contact with water molecules by self-association. Surfactant molecules with a large head and a small chain tend to self-assemble as a normal micelle with an inner chain core and an outer water-soluble end surface (Fig. 1a). In contrast, surfactant molecules with a small head and branched hydrocarbon chains tend to aggregate with a core of head groups and chains at the surface, which is called a reverse micelle (Fig. 1b). The diameter of the normal micelle is determined by the length of the hydrocarbon chains and the size of the water-soluble polar ends at low surfactant concentration. The surfactant–water system is a dynamic equilibrium system, in which all the molecules involved in a micelle are replaced by others after a few microseconds. The size of reverse micelles is determined by the amount of water in the system. The system can be separated into two phases – oil and water – by a continuous surfactant layer as the surfactant concentration increases, and it can form interconnected water channels, cylinders, or saddle-shaped surfaces. Moreover, the structures can be bicontinuous in both water and oil, where surfactant molecules aggregate as a planar or lamellar film (Fig. 1c), while more water induces a new phase transition. A stable emulsion could be formed by a ‘supra-aggregate’ which contains two strongly bound functionalized surfactant molecules. Therefore, the surfactants can aggregate into an onion or a spherulite shape (Fig. 1d). The diversity of aggregated structures can be explained by geometrical factors and it is important to provide a microenvironment as a template to synthesize materials with diverse morphologies.
 Fig. 1  Surfactant shapes and various self-assemblies in colloidal solution. (a) Cone-shaped surfactant resulting in (b) normal micelles. (c) Champagne cork shaped surfactant resulting in (d) reverse micelles with controlled size by water content tuning. (e) Interconnected cylinders. (f) Planar lamellar phase. (g) Onion-like lamellar phase. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission of Nature. 
The effects of morphologies on properties such as emission intensity and decay time have been investigated in many materials. β-NaYF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ with different morphologies exhibit decreasing emission intensity and decay time when the size decreases. The materials Lu2O3:Yb3+/Er3+ nanospheres26 and LiYF4:Er3+/Yb3+ crystals27 both show increased red to green emission ratios as their particle size decrease. The NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocrystal luminescence presents different thermal stability for an ultra-small particle size of 7 nm.28 The Eu3+ doped material NaY(MoO4)2:Eu3+29 shows that the emission intensity is influenced by the crystallinity and light scattering of the host material due to the morphology in flakes and sheaf-like structures. Many other rare earth doped materials also exhibit different morphological effects on the luminescence, for instance, Tb3+ doped YBO3:Ce3+,Tb3+ nanophosphor,17 Tm3+ CaF2:Yb3+,Tm3+ crystals,30 Dy3+ doped GdVO4:Dy3+ particles,23 Pr3+ doped NaYF4:Yb3+/Pr3+ nanocrystals,31 Sm3+ doped CaWO4:Sm3+ microspheres32 and Nd3+ doped LaAlO3:Nd3+ nanocrystals.33
This review focuses on materials’ morphologies and their effects on luminescence properties. Firstly, the morphologies and formation mechanisms for fluorides, oxides and other compounds are presented. We systematically illustrate the factors which influence morphologies during the hydrothermal process. Then, the luminescence properties dependent on morphologies are summarized for all types of rare earth doped materials. These luminescence properties include the emission intensity, intensity ratio of emission bands and decay time.
2. Fundamental principles of morphology control
Surfactant based templates are used to control the size, shape and crystallinity of inorganic nanocrystals. The most commonly used surfactants are anionic sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), dialkylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate-based compounds ([Emim][BF4], [Bmim][BF4] and [Omim][BF4]), cationic cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC) or bromide (CTAB), double-chained, anionic sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulphosuccinate (Na(AOT)), dimethylformamide (DMF), oleic acid (OA), citric acid (CA), trisodium citrate (CA-3Na), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt (EDTA), trisodium citrate (Na3Cit), oleylamine (OL), disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA-2Na), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), tetraethoxysilane (TOX), triethanolamine (TEA), glycine, L(+)-tartaric acid (LTA) and so on.
The shape of the surfactant plays an important role in the formation of assemblies. The molecular structure of surfactants typically contains a polar hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic chain-like tail,34 as shown in Fig. 1. When surfactants are added to water, aggregates will be formed because non-polar tails are prone to self-associate to minimize contact with the polar water molecules. Conical surfactant molecules25 with a large head and a small tail (Fig. 1a) tend to self-assemble as a normal micelle with an inner chain core and an outer water-soluble end surface (Fig. 1b). The diameter of the normal micelle is determined by the length of the oil-soluble hydrocarbon tail and the size of the water-soluble end at low surfactant concentration. In the surfactant–water system, every surfactant molecule from a micelle may leave its position randomly and be replaced by others after a few microseconds. The system remains in dynamic equilibrium and the micelle structure is always the same. By contrast, cork-shaped surfactant molecules with a small polar head and branched hydrocarbon chains tend to aggregate with a core formed by the head groups and the chains at the surface, which is called a reverse micelle. The size of reverse micelles can be increased by incrementing the amount of water of the system, for example as it happens with the 0.1 M Na(AOT) surfactant system and micelles in the 4–18 nm range. In addition, reverse micelles may exchange their water content and redistribute into two distinct micelles. The system space can be separated into two volumes of oil and water by a continuous surfactant layer as the surfactant concentration increases. This can include interconnected water channels, cylinders, or saddle-shaped surfaces (Fig. 1e). The structures can become bicontinuous in both water and oil, with surfactant molecules aggregated as a planar or lamellar film (Fig. 1f). Thus, the system will become opaque and birefringent. A stable emulsion could be formed by a ‘supra-aggregate’ which contains two strongly bound functionalized surfactant molecules. In this case, the surfactants can aggregate with an onion or a spherulite shape (Fig. 1g). In summary, the surfactants are able to aggregate into different types of structure, such as micelles, reverse micelles, and microemulsions, essentially influenced by the molecular structure and concentration of surfactants. The diversity of aggregated structures can be explained by geometrical factors and they provide templates to synthesize nanomaterials with diverse morphologies.
Li et al. proposed the liquid–solid–solution (LSS) phase transfer synthetic strategy to control the size and shape of oxide, sulfide, and fluoride nanocrystals using different surfactants,35 as shown in Fig. 2. The LSS process involves the reduction of noble metal ions by ethanol at the interfaces of metal linoleate (solid), the ethanol–linoleic acid liquid phase (liquid) and water–ethanol solution (solution) at different temperatures. After the aqueous solution of noble metal ions, sodium linoleate (or another sodium stearate) and the mixture of linoleic acid (or another fatty acid) and ethanol were added into the vessel in this order. Three phases were formed in this system: sodium linoleate (solid), a liquid phase of ethanol and linoleic acid (liquid), and a water–ethanol solution containing noble metal ions (solution).
 Fig. 2  Scheme of the liquid–solid–solution (LSS) phase transfer synthetic strategy. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission of Nature. 
The ion exchange of noble metal ions occurred spontaneously across the interface of sodium linoleate (solid) and the water–ethanol solution (solution), which led to the formation of noble metal linoleate and the release of sodium ions into the aqueous phases. Then, at a certain temperature, the ethanol in the liquid and solution phases reduced the noble metal ions at the liquid–solid or solution–solid interfaces. Along with the reduction process, in situ generated linoleic acid adsorbs on the surfaces of the noble metal nanocrystals with the alkyl chains on the outside, which induces hydrophobic surfaces on the produced metal nanocrystals. A spontaneous phase-separation occurs due to the weight of the metal nanocrystals and the incompatibility between the hydrophobic surfaces and their hydrophilic surroundings, and they can be easily collected at the bottom of the container.
The LSS phase transfer and separation process has been used to generate nanocrystals with a variety of shapes, for instance, hexagons, nano-rods, and nanosheets. Recently, cubic phase NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ NCs were synthesized by the LSS phase transfer synthetic strategy.36 In addition, noble metals (Ag, Au, Rh, and Ir), semiconductors130 (CdS, Ag2S, ZnS, PbS, MnS, ZnSe, and CdSe), and rare earth fluorescent nanoparticles35 (NaYF4, YF3, LaF3, and YbF3) were synthesized by using the LSS phase transfer synthetic strategy, as shown in Fig. 3. These synthesized nanocrystals can be easily dispersed in nonpolar solvents (such as cyclohexane and chloroform) to form homogenous colloidal solutions, as shown in Fig. 4. Along with the series of functional nanocrystals mentioned above, this LSS strategy provides a simple and convenient route to synthesis of a broad range of new-type nanocrystals with novel structures and functional properties (such as semiconducting, fluorescent, magnetic and dielectric).
 Fig. 3  TEM images of nanocrystals. (a) Noble metal nanocrystals: Ag, Au, Rh and Ir. (b) Semiconductor nanocrystals: Ag2S, PbS, ZnSe, and CdSe. (c) Magnetic and dielectric nanocrystals: Fe3O4, CoFe2O4, BaTiO3 and TiO2. (d) Rare earth fluorescent nanocrystals: NaYF4, YF3, LaF3 and YbF3. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission of Nature. 
 Fig. 4  Cyclohexane solutions of nanoparticles with a typical concentration of 2%. (a–c) Cyclohexane solutions of noble metals (a), semiconductors (b), and rare earth fluorescent and magnetic nanocrystals (c). Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission of Nature. 
2.1 Morphology control of NaMF4 (M = Y, Gd, La, Yb, Tb and Ce) via surfactants, the ratio of reactants, the pH value, temperature and reaction time
β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ can be successfully prepared as nanodisks, nanorods and nanotubes by using oleic acid (OA) as the template, as shown in Fig. 5, and reported by Fan Zhang et al.7 The theory and mechanism of the controlled synthesis of diverse morphologies of NaMF4 (M = Y, Gd, La, Yb, Tb and Ce) have been identified through numerous experimental approaches. The reaction model for NaYF4 is a microemulsion system with reverse micelles, which contain Y3+ ions and sodium oleate and form a microemulsion together with NaF, oleic acid, and water. The formation of NaYF4 in the reaction system was described as a dissolution–reconstruction process as shown in Fig. 6. The carboxy groups of the oleate anions are typically electron donors and can coordinate at the surfaces of the nanocrystals with metal atoms with electron deficiency. Thus, the Y3+ ions could react with oleate groups and F− ions simultaneously (Fig. 6a). During the process, α-NaYF4 exists as a metastable phase, which will be irreversibly transformed to the β-NaYF4 phase as the temperature increases. Disperse and uniform α-NaYF4 nanocrystals can be easily formed in the system at low temperature in the 100–130 °C range (Fig. 6b). The cylindrical β-NaYF4 seeds quickly nucleate and grow at temperatures above 160 °C. Moreover, α-NaYF4 and β-NaYF4 will coexist at higher temperature. The β-NaYF4 crystals tend to grow along the [0001] direction due to their anisotropic crystalline structure and this preferential growth results in a rod-shaped morphology with high aspect ratios. The preferential growth in the [0001] direction can be inhibited by selective adsorption of OA molecules on the seeds’ surfaces for increasing OA concentration.
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of arrays of hexagonal nanotubes of NaYF4, (b) TEM image of the nanotubes and the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray patterns, (c) SEM image of arrays of flower-patterned hexagonal disks of NaYF4, (d) TEM image of the disks and the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray pattern, (e) SEM image of arrays of hexagonal nanorods of β-NaYF4 and (f) TEM image of the nanorods and the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray pattern. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission of Wiley. 
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the proposed process for the formation of arrays of NaYF4 nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission of Wiley. 
Accordingly, the growth aligns along the perpendicular direction [1000], and thus a disk-like morphology is obtained. A particular case is the hexagonal nanodisk with symmetric flower-like patterns inside its concave surface (see Fig. 6). At high pressure, particles from the dissolution will attach to some preferential points near the corners of the hexagonal disks, which is similar to the formation process of snowflakes.8 The formation of Na1.23Ca0.12Y1.28Er0.24F6 tubes occurs due to the preferential growth at the perimeter of cylindrical seeds, and the mechanism is a dissolution–reconstruction process, as shown in Fig. 7. The fast growth on the perimeter leads to the depletion of reagents in the center and eventually produces monocrystalline tubes of Na1.23Ca0.12Y1.28Er0.24F6 with constant cross section. The evolution clearly indicates that the formation of the final crystalline structure is due to the dissolution–reconstruction process.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of Na1.23Ca0.12Y1.28Er0.24F6 nanodisks (1a), (1b), (1c), nanorods (2a), (2b), (2c) and nanotubes (3a), (3b), (3c) of the time-dependent morphology evolution of the dissolution–reconstruction process at different time intervals of 1 h, 6 h and 36 h. Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The F− concentration influences the dissolution–reconstruction process and different morphologies are determined by the competition between F− and Ln3+ towards various facets.44 A spherical shape is formed at a low molar ratio of 1:1 between F− and Ln3+, where the growth of each facet is similar because all the F− ions are used in the nucleation. A concave octadecahedral shape occurs when increasing the ratio to 2:1, because the remaining F− ions bound preferentially to the peripheral edges. At a ratio of 3:1, the [101] facet appears, leading to conical ends with a raised ridge. However, for a ratio as high as 5:1, a large amount of F− ions binds strongly to [0001] surfaces, which speeds up the growth, and uniform nano-rods are produced.
Based on the above mentioned fundamental theory of morphology control using surfactants, diverse morphologies of NaYF4 can be obtained by adjusting the reaction time, temperature, ratio of reactants, and content and type of surfactant. Oleic acid (OA) is the most widely-used surfactant to modify the morphology due to its long hydrophobic alkyl chains and hydrophilic groups. In 2006, Wang et al.45 reported the controlled synthesis of regular hexagonal nanoplates and nanorods with OA molecules as templates. The other NaYF4 nanorod synthesis parameters have been consequently identified as excess NaF content, a high Y3+/Ln3+ ratio, a long hydrothermal time and an appropriate temperature. The effect of OA to form diverse shapes and sizes was exhaustively studied by Shang et al.44 In brief, microrods can be synthesized when the OA content is relatively low and their size shortens when the OA content increases. When more OA is introduced into the system, microplates will be formed. Besides, an extra small size (less than 10 nm) can be obtained via OA capping with a relatively low hydrothermal temperature and short reaction time.
In 2014, Xu46 published a study exclusively focused on extra small nanoparticle size. The morphology can also be controlled by using oleic acid (OA) with other surfactants. For instance, Wang et al.47 published the controlled synthesis of a rod-shaped morphology with a surfactant combination of OA and OM (octadecylamine). It is mentioned that a high OA/OM ratio decreases the interfacial free energy of the system and the excess OA will bind to the crystal surface, decreasing the available surface to obtain β-NaYF4. The extra small size of cubic α-NaYF4 can be obtained by the hydrothermal method using OA with ODE (octadecene).28 As is well-known, NaYF4 in a hexagonal (β) phase is more stable. The α → β phase transition was researched by Shan et al.48 by introducing oleic acid (OA), trioctylphosphine (TOP) and octadecene (ODE) as solvents. The conclusion is that an appropriate OA/TOP ratio is beneficial for obtaining β-NaYF4 probably due to the reaction of OA with the Lewis base TOP to form a ligand, which would lead to a reduced energy barrier beneficial for the phase transition.
In addition, other surfactants such as cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), octadecylamine (OM), trisodium citrate (Na3Cit), and ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA), among others, have also been used for the controlled synthesis of diverse morphologies. Trisodium citrate (Cit) is used as a chelating agent and a capping agent,27 in conjunction with change in the pH to adjust the morphology of β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+. The complexing ability of Cit3−–Y3+ will decrease as some of the Cit3− ions combine with H+ at low pH. Irregular morphologies are produced without Cit addition. As the amount of Cit gradually increases, microplate, micro-rod and prism morphologies appear in this order. The phase and morphology are investigated using EDTA49 (ethylenediaminetetraacetic) as a dispersant at several reaction temperatures and times. EDTA is a representative substance of the chelating agent. The adsorption of EDTA on the surfaces of the metal ions can form stable water-soluble complexes with alkali metals, rare earth elements and transition metals. It can also disperse metal ions and prevent the accumulation of precipitates during the process of reaction, promoting the generation of nano-morphologies. Crossed micro-rods and crossed spheres can be obtained at high hydrothermal temperature and long reaction time, as shown in Fig. 8a–c. Peculiarly, branched or multiarmed β-NaYF4 structures (Fig. 8d) are also successfully synthesized using CTAB as a regulating reagent in a methanol/water system.50 The HRTEM images of different parts of the structure demonstrate that the branches constitute a single crystal and the growth directions of the branches are consistent with the direction of the diffraction dots. In the case of Na1.23Ca0.12Y1.28Er0.24F6, fine microtubes can be synthesized when CTAB8 is introduced into the hydrothermal system.
 Fig. 8  (a–c) Crossed microrods and spherical crossed morphologies; (d) branched or multiarmed structure of a β-NaYF4 crystal. Reproduced from ref. 49 and 50 with permission of Trans Tech Publications and American Chemical Society. 
Diverse morphologies and sizes of NaGdF4,51 NaCaF4,52 NaYbF4,53 NaTbF4,54 and NaCeF455 have been investigated. All the basic morphologies of NaYF4, such as prisms, rods, disks, tubes and particles, from nano- to microsize, can also be synthesized in a controlled manner in these materials. Generally, these morphologies are achieved by changing the ratio of reactants, introducing surfactants, and controlling the reaction temperature, time and pH.
2.2 Modification of the morphology of fluorides by doping with metal ions for inner charge redistribution
Wang56 and his group reported that the morphology and phase of NaYF4 nanocrystals could be simultaneously controlled by doping with lanthanide ions of Gd3+ with various doping concentrations from 0 to 60 mol%, as shown in Fig. 9. Two distinct morphologies, small nanocubes and large nanorods, were formed without Gd3+ doping ions for 2 h reaction time, as shown in Fig. 9a. This mixture of nanocubes (cubic phase) and nanorods (hexagonal phase) was still obtained after 5 and 10 h. However, the phase conversion from cubic to hexagonal is complete after only 2 h when doping with 30 mol% Gd3+ ions. Fig. 9d–f clearly shows that highly uniform nanorods with gradually smaller sizes were formed upon increasing the Gd3+ doping concentration from 30 to 60 mol%. The nanorods formed with 60 mol% Gd3+ exhibited a highly crystalline hexagonal phase. Lattice fringes associated with (001) planes (d-spacing of 0.36 nm) appear along the nanorods, indicating that the nanorods grew along the c axis.
 Fig. 9  TEM characterization of NaYF4:Yb/Er (18/2 mol%) nanocrystals. (a–c) Products obtained after heating for 2, 5 and 10 h without Gd3+ doping. (d–f) Products obtained after heating for 2 h in the presence of 30, 45 and 60 mol% Gd3+ ions. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission of Nature. 
Similarly, Ye et al.57 reported the effect of substituting Y3+ (r = 1.159) with Gd3+ (r = 1.193) on the phase transformation and size of NaYF4 crystals. Two different structures co-existed when synthesizing NaYF4 crystals without Gd3+ doping ions. However, the hexagonal phase became dominant with the introduction of 20% Gd3+, and a pure hexagonal phase with smaller size was formed when the Gd3+ doping concentration was increased to 50%. Furthermore, Hao31 reported that the size of NaYF4 nanoparticles is tunable by varying the Yb3+ doping concentration from 10 to 70 mol%. The size of the hexagonal-shaped nanoparticles increased from 29 nm to 153 nm when the Yb3+ concentration was increased from 10% to 70%. To investigate the influence of doping ions on size, Yu et al.58 synthesized hexagonal NaYF4 nanorods doped with different kinds of rare earth ions. NaYF4 nanospheres were obtained without doping ion introduction. When 10% Gd3+ ions were added, hexagonal short irregular nanorods with a length of 70 nm were synthesized. When 10% La3+ ions were introduced into the crystals, the resulting NaYF4:10%La became long nanorods with a length of 1100 nm. Additionally, the NaYF4 nanorods doped with different Ce3+ ion concentrations of 4%, 7% and 10% were also investigated. The nanorods’ length increased from 200 nm to 1100 nm when the doping concentration increased from 4% to 10%.
Fluorides are always considered beneficial host materials for upconversion due to their low phonon energy. Except for NaYF4 crystals, the morphology and size of other NaREF4 (RE = Lu, Yb, Gd) can also be modified by doping with metal ions, such as NaLuF459 modified by adding Yb3+ ions, NaGdF460 modified by doping with Mo3+ ions and NaYbF461,62 modified with Gd3+ or Y3+ ions. The particle size of the NaLuF4 crystals is continuously decreased and the crystals change into uniform hexagonal nanoplates for increasing Y3+ concentration. The morphology and size of NaGdF4 can be controlled by the doping concentration of the transition metal Mo3+. NaGdF4 nanocrystals change from elliptical to hexagonal with increasing crystal size by doping with various amounts of Mo3+ as far as 20 mol%. The NaYbF4 nanoparticle size is decreased from 250 nm to 15.8 nm by Y3+ or Gd3+ doping from 0% to 40%. The effect of decreasing the particle size is more efficient via Gd3+ doping than Y3+ addition. Uniform and monodisperse NaYbF4 nanoparticles were further investigated for Gd3+ doping concentrations from 0% to 70%, and ultrasmall diameters around 10 nm were formed when using 70% Gd3+ ions.
To explore the mechanism of the morphology and phase modification of fluoride crystals via metal ion doping, Wang et al.63 systematically investigated the morphology change through unequal-valent substitution. The irregular polyhedrons of BaF2 can be converted into uniform cubes, petaloids, and spherical nanoparticles after doping with trivalent Bi3+, Al3+, Gd3+ and Yb3+ ions. Furthermore, the irregular polyhedrons of SrF2 were converted into uniform carambola-like and spherical nanoparticles. Moreover, monocrystalline irregular GdF3 polyhedrons can be converted into spindle-shaped particles and polycrystalline hollow spheres with uniform sizes by doping with Ba2+ and Al3+ ions. Hexagonal phase NaGdF4 nanorods were converted into nanotubes and bamboo-clamp crystals with uniform sizes after doping with Ca2+ and Er3+ ions.
The change in charge distribution was theoretically studied by applying density functional theory (DFT) with ultra-soft pseudopotentials for further exploration of the mechanism of the morphology and phase transformation of fluoride crystals via metal ion doping. The resulting charge density distributions are shown in Fig. 10. The charges are transferred from the Ba2+ to the Bi3+, Al3+, Gd3+ and Yb3+ doping ions in BaF2 crystals, as seen in Fig. 10a–e. The direction of the charge transfer is reversed for the Al3+, Gd3+ and Yb3+ doped SrF2 crystals. For Bi3+ doping in SrF2 the charges are transferred from Sr2+ to Bi3+ ions as seen in Fig. 10f–j. Thus, the amount of charge on the F-atom decreases by doping with metal ions. In contrast to the situation of BaF2 or SrF2, for a NaGdF4 crystal the charge accumulation is increased on the F− atom when Ba2+ and Al3+ ions are added. The F− ion, the source of negative ions, plays a critical role in controlling the crystal growth orientation and rate during the hydrothermal process. And its charge density can be controlled by doping with metal ions. Finally, the change in charge density of the cations suggests that the crystal core can absorb F− ions from the liquid in different ways.
 Fig. 10  Iso-surfaces of charge density differences in (a) BaF2, (b) BaF2:25%Bi3+, (c) BaF2:25%Al3+, (d) BaF2:25%Gd3+, (e) BaF2:25%Yb3+, (f) SrF2, (g) SrF2:12.5%Bi3+, (h) SrF2:12.5%Al3+, (i) SrF2:25%Gd3+, (j) SrF2:25%Yb3+, (k) NaGdF4, (l) NaGdF4:Al3+ and (m) NaGdF4:Ba2+ crystals. (Positive and negative charges are drawn in yellow and blue, respectively). Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The mechanism for modifying the morphology and phase of the nanocrystals through metal ions is based on inducing electric charge transfer, as shown in Fig. 11. The substitution of M2+ (such as Ba2+ and Sr2+) with R3+ (such as Bi3+ and Gd3+) in BaF2 or SrF2 crystals introduces an extra hole in the lattice, and consequently, it absorbs an extra F− ion for charge compensation. Thus, transient electric dipoles may be generated because the F− ions on the grain surface present outward negative poles. These transient electric dipoles prevent F− diffusion from the solution to the growing surface of the crystals via repulsion interaction, resulting in smaller crystal size and oriented growth for BaF2 and SrF2. By contrast, Gd3+ ions are replaced by R2+ (Ba2+ or Ca2+) in GdF3 and NaGdF4, which requires an extra electron, and it induces the absorption of an extra M3+ ion for charge compensation. M3+ ions in the grain surface can induce transient electric dipoles with inward negative poles. This facilitates the F− ion diffusion from the solution to the growing crystal surface due to charge attraction, which leads to the oriented growth of GdF3 and NaGdF4. The substitution of Gd3+ with Al3+ in NaGdF4 crystals results in distorted lattices, which induces inner charge redistribution in the lattices and surfaces. In consequence, generated transient electric dipole moments are the driving force for promoting the oriented growth of GdF3 and NaGdF4 crystals.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the role of inner electric charge transfer in controlling the shape and size of fluoride nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Additionally, Chen et al.64 modified the shape and size of alkaline-earth fluoride (SrF2) nanocrystals by lanthanide doping and obtained similar results. Undoped SrF2 nanocrystals consist of some large irregular particles and other smaller particles with multiple shapes. After lanthanide doping, the size distribution and shape of SrF2 nanocrystals were remarkably modified, producing monodisperse spheres with a diameter of 5 nm. The modification mechanisms are also related to the above mentioned inner charge redistribution.
The phase transition and morphology transformation of other materials than fluorides, such as phosphate YPO4:Eu3+ and YPO4:Tb3+, have been investigated by Du et al.65via Ce3+ co-doping. Spherical and prismatic particles of several micrometers in size are obtained for single Eu3+ or Tb3+ doped YPO4. When the samples are co-doped with Ce3+ ions, all the crystals become nanoprisms with 200–500 nm length. This means that not only the above discussed fluoride, but also other compounds present morphologies that can be modified by doping with metal ions thanks to the inner charge redistribution.
2.3 Modification of the morphology of oxides
Yang et al.9 reported the controlled synthesis of Y2O3:Eu3+ hexagonal prisms through a particular two phase approach, which involves a phase of water and an oil phase of oleylamine. As shown in Fig. 12, the morphology is influenced by the ratio of water and oleylamine. When the volume ratio of water to oleylamine increases, the length of the hexagonal prisms first increases and then decreases. The aspect ratio of the hexagonal prisms reaches even 19.3 when the water to oleylamine ratio is 7:8. The reaction rate is accelerated initially; however, excessive water leads to oleylamine insufficiency in the reaction, which results in a decrease of the aspect ratio from 19 to 4. The mechanism of the two phase synthetic process is illustrated in Fig. 12e. Yttrium nitrate is dissolved in the aqueous phase and the upper oil phase seems to play the role of an alkalescent medium and a coordinating solvent. Obviously, an interface exists between the aqueous phase at the bottom and the oil phase in the upper layer. Initially, yttrium ions combine with oleylamine at the interface to form yttrium–oleylamine complexes. Then, the yttrium–oleylamine complexes concentrate and the crystal nuclei of Y4O(OH)9(NO3) are formed at the interface during the hydrothermal process. The nuclei will continuously consume the monomers to increase the particle size according to the Gibbs–Thomson equation,10 which implies that larger particles will grow at the expense of small ones due to their different solubility and long reaction time. Then, the size of the particles will gradually increase and uniform hexagonal prisms will be obtained. During heat treatment, the monoclinic Y4O(OH)9(NO3) gradually releases some elements and evolves into cubic Y2O3, and the morphology of the Y2O3 is almost the same as the precursors of the hexagonal prisms.
 Fig. 12  SEM images of annealed Y2O3:Eu3+ hexagonal prisms that were synthesized with various volume ratios of H2O and oleylamine: (a) 1:14; (b) 5:9; (c) 9:6; and (d) 13:2. (e) The formation mechanism of Y4O(OH)9(NO3):Eu3+ hexagonal prisms. Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission of Elsevier. 
pH plays an important role in the morphologies of oxides in hydrothermal reactions. Li et al.11 reported the controlled synthesis of different GaOOH:Dy3+ morphologies, including spindles, ellipsoids and aggregated microspheres, for different pHs. The SEM images of the different GaOOH:Dy3+ morphologies obtained by precipitation synthesis at different pHs are shown in Fig. 13. Highly homogeneous spindles were obtained at pH = 4.0 with rough surfaces covered with large amounts of microcrystals. The size of the spindle-shaped particles increased but the aspect ratio decreased for pH = 6.0. Ellipsoidal particles with a small aspect ratio of 1.3 were formed when the pH increased to 7.0. However, at pH 9, 5.5 μm microspheres composed of aggregated spindles were obtained. The formation mechanisms of the different morphologies for the various pH values are shown in Fig. 13e. The amount of OH− ions is limited for the low pH of 4.0, and certain facets of the crystal have relatively high free energy to absorb them. The crystal grows at a higher rate along a certain facet to form spindle-shaped crystals. When the pH value increases to 6.0 or 7.0, the probability of each facet to absorb the OH− ions is the same; therefore, ellipsoid or sphere-shaped morphologies are formed due to isotropic growth. The branched and crossed spindles can be aggregated together and form microspheres at prolonged reaction times and pH = 9.0. Notably, the GaOOH:Dy3+ precursor can easily be transformed into β-Ga2O3:Dy3+ crystals under heat treatment at 1000 °C, keeping almost the same morphologies. Similarly, Wan et al.66 reported the morphology change of the Y2O3:Eu3+ crystal by changing the pH. The Y2O3:Eu3+ morphology gradually evolves from sheet-shaped to needle-shaped with increasing pH. Li et al.67 reported that the size and morphology of homogeneous precipitation oxides, such as Gd(OH)3, were significantly influenced by the addition of urea CO(NH2)2. As shown in Fig. 14, monodisperse hexagonal submicroprisms were synthesized with 0.40 μm prism length in the absence of urea at pH = 9.0. After adding urea into the reaction system, the average length of the prisms decreased to about 0.2 μm with concave centers in the top or bottom surfaces of the prisms. The possible formation mechanism for the Gd(OH)3 hexagonal prisms is shown in Fig. 15e. A metastable supersaturated solution of Gd(NO3)3 mixed with NH3·H2O or CO(NH2)2 is produced and a large amount of Gd(OH)3 crystal nuclei is formed through a continuous stirring and heating process. Next, these colloidal particles dissolve and re-crystallize to form hexagonal seeds of Gd(OH)3. The hexagonal seeds grow into uniform, crystalline prism-like structures along the c-axis due to their highly anisotropic hexagonal structure.
 Fig. 13  FE-SEM images of GaOOH:Dy3+ precursors synthesized at different pH values: (a) pH 4.0, (b) pH 6.0, (c) pH 7.0 and (d) pH 9.0 (insets: magnified images). (e) The formation mechanism of the various morphologies with various pH values of 4, 6, 7, and 9 for fixed conditions. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 14  SEM images of Gd(OH)3:Eu3+ prepared (a and b) in the absence of urea and (c and d) in the presence of urea at pH = 9.0. (e) The mechanism of the possible formation process for the hexagonal prism-like structures of Gd(OH)3. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 15  (a) Modified NaY(MoO4)2 crystal morphologies by adjusting the Y(OH)3/MoO42− molar ratio and the water/ethanol volume ratio and (b) proposed formation mechanism of NaY(MoO4)2 morphologies. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Furthermore, the NH4+ ions can be selectively adsorbed on specific facets of the crystal seeds and change their surface energy; thus a preferential orientation exists for growth along a certain direction. The morphologies and sizes of the products are different in the absence or presence of CO(NH2)2 due to the fact that CO(NH2)2 could coordinate with Gd3+ ions to form Gd(CO(NH2)2)x3+ complexes, which influences the diffusion rate of Gd3+ ions at the surfaces of the crystal seeds. Therefore, the size of the crystal is modified due to the different growth rate induced by the absence or presence of urea. Similarly, Tian et al. obtained spherical Gd2O3:Yb3+/Er3+ with different particle sizes by adjusting the urea to rare earth ratio.68 When the urea/RE3+ molar ratio is increased, monodisperse spherical Gd2O3:Yb3+/Er3+ particles are obtained and the crystal size decreases, which agrees with the above mentioned phenomenon. Li et al. synthesized Gd2O3:Eu3+ size-tunable crystals via urea-based homogeneous precipitation and with the co-solvents ethylene glycol, 1-propanol, 2-propanol and 1-butanol as the reaction media.69 Monodisperse spherical Gd2O3:Ln3+ (Ln = Eu, Tb, Dy, Sm, Er, Tm and Ho) particles were synthesized by Gai et al.70 The morphology and size were almost invariant to doping with different rare earth ions or prolonging the reaction time for the Gd2O3:Ln3+ particles.
The morphologies and formation mechanisms of Y2O3, Ga2O3 and Gd2O3 have been systematically described. Besides, other oxides such as ZnO,71 CeO2:Sm3+,72 and Lu2O3:Yb3+/Er3+26 with spherical, hexagonal, nanorod and nanocube morphologies have been successfully synthesized through similar approaches like the above mentioned.
2.4 Modification of the morphology and size of multi-metal compounds
Monodisperse spherical CaWO4:Sm3+ crystals32 were synthesized with the addition of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The crystal morphology changed from monodisperse spheres to irregular aggregated particles at various SDS concentrations. NaY(MoO4)2 microparticles with sheaf-like, rhombic polyhedron and bipyramid structures were successfully synthesized through a simple hydrothermal process without the addition of surfactants.29 The morphologies were influenced by two critical factors: the Y3+/MoO42− molar ratio and the water/ethanol volume ratio, as shown in Fig. 15a. When the Y3+/MoO42− molar ratio was fixed at 1:2.5, the NaY(MoO4)2 crystal morphology changed from microrods to sheaf-like structures with loose big nanoflakes with increasing water/ethanol volume ratio. When the Y3+/MoO42− molar ratio was fixed at 1:3, the morphology evolved from nanoflakes to quasi cubic with coarse surfaces and then to rhombic for increasing water/ethanol volume ratio. When the Y3+/MoO42− molar ratio was fixed at 1:4, the crystals grew into perfect bipyramid structures with smooth surfaces and sharp edges.
Generally, there are two possible approaches to explain the formation process: template-aided nucleation–growth process and dissolution–renucleation growth mechanism. The second explains the NaY(MoO4)2 crystal formation process, as illustrated in Fig. 15a. Firstly, the Na+ and MoO42− adhere to the surface of the Y(OH)3 precursor. When the pH was adjusted at 3–4, the Y3+ ions were released from the Y(OH)3 precursor. Then, the released Y3+ ions reacted with Na+ and MoO42− to form NaY(MoO4)2 nuclei and these nuclei created NaY(MoO4)2 nanoparticles that grow at the expense of smaller particles. Notably, the initial Na2MoO4/Y(OH)3 mole ratio was higher than the stoichiometric 2/1 ratio, which is beneficial for stimulating the nuclei formation. The MoO42+ concentration is always much higher than that of released Y3+, resulting in the suppression of the nucleation and growth stages. The increased effective concentration of MoO42+ ions induced preferential axial growth. Thus the different Na2MoO4/Y(OH)3 ratios would result in the evolution of the NaY(MoO4)2 morphology from cubes to truncated bipyramids to perfect bipyramids.
Xu et al.13 reported the structure of NaGd(WO4)2:Yb3+/Tm3+/Ho3+, which is similar to the above mentioned. A spindle-like morphology was synthesized with the addition of different amounts of glycerine via the microwave hydrothermal process and the size of the spindles decreased as the volume of glycerine increased. Microflower and dandelion-like morphologies from Y2(MoO4)3:Eu3+ were synthesized through hydrothermal treatment and influenced by surfactant EDTA. The Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ crystal morphologies and sizes14 are shown in Fig. 16. In the absence of EDTA the obtained Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ crystals exhibited hierarchical microflower structures, which were built from nanoflakes. In the presence of EDTA, Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ microspheres with coarse surfaces were obtained. At higher magnification it was observed that the dandelion-like microspheres were composed of self-assembled nanoplate arrays. The formation mechanism of the different morphology from EDTA is illustrated in Fig. 16c.
 Fig. 16  (a) Flower-like morphology of Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ crystals synthesized by a hydrothermal method in the absence of EDTA; (b) dandelion-like morphology of Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ crystals in the presence of EDTA ((b1) detailed view of dandelion-like architectures); and (c) growth evolution processes of different morphologies influenced by EDTA. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
Chen et al.12 successfully synthesized diverse morphologies of CaWO4:Eu3+ crystals with the assistance of surfactant disidium citric (Cit3+). Fig. 17 shows the diverse CaWO4:Eu3+ morphologies and the related mechanisms. The morphologies drastically changed when the Ca2+/Cit3− molar ratio was modified from 1/0.5, 1/1, 1/2 to 1/4. The CaWO4:Eu3+ crystals grew as hollow spheres formed by spindle-like particles at Ca2+/Cit3− = 1/0.5 or 1/1. When the Ca2+/Cit3− ratio was set at 1/2, a uniform rice-like morphology with rough surfaces was obtained. The rough surface indicates that compactly assembled nanospindles compose the structure. The size of the rice-like particles increased with increasing Cit3− concentration.
 Fig. 17  (a–d) The morphologies of CaWO4:Eu3+ crystals with various Ca2+/Cit3− molar ratios of 1/0.5, 1/1, 1/2, and 1/4; and (e) the formation mechanism of CaWO4:Eu3+ microstructures with different morphologies. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The growth mechanism of CaWO4:Eu3+crystals is illustrated in Fig. 17e. The diverse morphologies are obtained by changing the amount of the surfactant sodium citrate. The structure of the citrate molecule involved one hydroxyl and three carboxyl groups. The carboxyl groups tend to combine with Ca2+ ions to form a 3Ca2+–2Cit3− complex, and then the free Ca2+ concentration decreases. Under hydrothermal conditions of high temperature and pressure, the Ca2+ ions are gradually released and the CaWO4 nucleus is then formed in the presence of WO42−. The competing reaction between WO42− and Cit3− groups slowed down the nucleation and growth processes. The diverse morphologies were determined by different Ca2+/Cit3− ratios. The Cit3− ions preferentially bound to the (001) and (101) facets, resulting in growth in the [100] direction. The fast growing surfaces were not expressed in the final morphology but only surfaces with slow growth rates. However, the increased Cit3− concentration resulted in adsorption of more Cit3− ions on the non-preferential facets. Thus, the resulting increased steric hindrance induced diverse morphologies.
The microflower and dandelion-like morphologies evolved from tiny particle aggregates, nanoflakes, and hierarchical architectures by means of self-assembly in the EDTA free process. However, when the surfactant EDTA is present in the reaction system, a morphological evolution process appears, which includes amorphous nanoparticles, nanospindles and microspheres with a dandelion-like appearance. An appropriate amount of EDTA is required for the formation of dandelion-like Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ crystals because excessive surfactant EDTA would be adsorbed on the Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ surface and prevent nuclei growth.
Tian et al.73 also synthesized similar flower-like microspheres from Y2(MO4)3:Eu3+ through a simple co-precipitation method. The flower-like particles were formed by the intersection of many flakes and the morphology was almost invariant for different Eu3+ doping concentrations. Besides the microsphere morphologies from aggregated nanoflakes that have been reviewed above, stratiform microstructures were also successfully synthesized by Leng et al.15 The types of boron sources played an important role for the different GdBO3:Eu3+ stratiform morphologies. As shown in Fig. 18, monodisperse pancake-like, flower-like and leaf-like morphologies were obtained by using H3BO3, Na2B4O7·10H2O and NaBO2·4H2O as boron sources, respectively. When H3BO3 was used as a boron source, the GdBO3:Eu3+ morphologies showed uniform micropancakes with a well-defined round shape and a pancake-like structure, consisting of many piled nanodisks. The flower-like morphology of GdBO3:Eu3+ crystals was synthesized by using Na2B4O7·10H2O as a boron source. The flower-like GdBO3:Eu3+ structures consisted of many stacked flakes face-to-face. When Na2B4O7·10H2O was used as a boron source, the GdBO3:Eu3+ morphology resembled leaves constructed from several nanoflakes connected by sharing a common center.
 Fig. 18  The morphologies of GdBO3 crystals synthesized with different boron sources (a) H3BO3, (b) Na2B4O7·10H2O, (c) NaBO2·4H2O and Gd(OH)3 as precursors in the hydrothermal process. (d) Schematic of the formation processes of GdBO3 micropancakes/microflowers/microleaves. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission of Elsevier. 
The formation mechanisms of the morphologies induced by the different boron sources are illustrated in Fig. 18d. Initially, the Gd(OH)3 precursor was approached by the different boron sources (H3BO3, Na2B4O7·10H2O and NaBO2·4H2O). The active facet of the hexagonal Gd(OH)3 is confined by OH− ions, which results in preferential growth of the crystals in the other directions. Thus, the nanoflake structure formed due to kinetic control. The nanoflakes tend to aggregate as stacked arrangements for reducing the interfacial and surface energy. Stratiform morphologies were consistent with the atomic arrangement of the vaterite hexagonal GdBO3 phase, which presents a lamellar structure.
The formation of GdBO3:Eu3+ leaf-like structures was influenced by the pH value.74 Nanofibres, microspheres, microflowers and lotus leaf-like microstructures were formed at different pH values with the assistance of the organic reagent glycine. Several factors that influence the formation process should be taken into consideration including crystal-face attraction, electrostatic and dipolar fields, van der Waals force, hydrophobic interactions, and hydrogen bonds. In addition, other borate nanoparticles have been synthesized, such as YBO3:Eu3+16 obtained through a reverse micelle method and YBO3:Ce3+,Tb3+17 by using a 1,4-butanediol/water mixed solvent.
The diverse morphologies of vanadates have also been extensively investigated, such as spherical YVO4:Eu3+,18 ellipsoidal YVO4:Dy3+/Eu3+,19 and rod-like and flower-like YVO4:Eu3+.20 And nanocubic GdVO4:Sm3+,21 ellipsoidal GdVO4:Eu3+,22 nanosized and bulk GdVO4:Dy3+23 and various LaVO4:Eu3+24 have also been successfully synthesized. Typically, the LaVO4:Eu3+ hollow spheres are similar to the above mentioned CaWO4:Eu3+ hollow spheres.
3. Morphology-dependent luminescence properties
3.1 Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Er3+ ions
The luminescent properties are influenced by the morphologies and sizes due to the peculiar characteristics of crystal surface area. The typical luminescent performance of β-NaYF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ crystals27 is shown in Fig. 19. β-NaYF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ crystals with different morphologies, including submicrorods, microplates, microprisms and microrods, have been obtained. The luminescent intensities of the crystals obviously decrease with decreasing size. Microrods present stronger emission intensity than submicrorods. The emission color also depends on the morphology, as shown by the CIE chromaticity diagram. The decay time decreases with decreasing size, which agrees well with the tendency of the luminescence intensity.
 Fig. 19  Luminescence properties of β-NaYF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ crystals with different morphologies: (a) the peak areas of green and red emissions; (b) upconversion (UC) emission spectra (c); CIE chromaticity diagram of samples; and (d) decay profiles of samples monitored at 652 nm. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission of Elsevier. 
These results can be explained as follows: the lifetime of an excited state (τm) is determined by the nonradiative relaxation rate (WNR) and the radiative transition rate (1/τR), which can be expressed as 1/τm = 1/τR + WNR. The different morphologies have barely no effect on the radiative decay rate due to the nearly constant local crystal field around Er3+ ions.75 Therefore, the change in lifetimes is due to the difference in nonradiative rate. Larger specific areas introduce surface defects and this induces an increment of nonradiative rate. Thus, the luminescence intensity and decay time decrease with decreasing size and increasing specific area. Therefore, the morphology-dependent luminescent properties of β-NaYF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ crystals are attributed to the different specific areas and different amounts of surface defects.
Shang et al.44 synthesized NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+ crystals with morphologies such as quantum wires, nanorods, microrods and microplates by modulating the OA/Ln3+ and F−/Ln3+ molar ratios during the crystal growth process, as shown in Fig. 20. The positions and shapes of the UC emission bands were similar for all the crystals, with the only difference in the relative emission intensities. The strongest emission was usually observed for crystals with relatively large size and high crystallinity. The different UC luminescence intensities for various morphologies were attributed to the surface area-to-volume ratio of microcrystals, which determined the amount of surface defects. The crystals with large size and high crystallinity have small surface area-to-volume ratios, which are efficient in restraining the photon quenching. Therefore, the microplates with a low surface area-to-volume ratio and a relatively small amount of surface defects display the strongest UC emission intensity.
 Fig. 20  NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+ microcrystals with various morphologies and their corresponding UC emission spectra: (a) microcrystals with different morphologies synthesized at different OA/Ln3+ molar ratios; (b) UC emission spectra of the samples in (a); (c) microcrystals with different morphologies synthesized at different F−/Ln3+ molar ratios; and (d) UC emission spectra of samples in (c). Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission of MDPI. 
Similar luminescence behavior has been observed for BaYF5:Yb3+/Er3+ nanocrystals,76 Lu2O3:Yb3+/Er3+ nanospheres26 and LiYF4:Er3+/Yb3+ crystals.77 The emission intensity of the BaYF5:Yb3+/Er3+ nanocrystals increased for increasing nanocrystal size due to their smaller surface area to volume ratios. The overall emission intensity of Lu2O3:Yb3+/Er3+ nanospheres increased and the Red/Green (R/G) ratio decreased for increasing particle size, which means that the smaller size favors the red emission band. In the same way, the R/G ratio for LiYF4:Er3+/Yb3+ crystals also exhibited a decrease for increasing crystal size.
Remarkably, Li et al.28 discovered the enhancement of the UC luminescence in hexagonal phase NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ crystals with increasing temperature. The temperature effect for hexagonal phase NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ was dependent on the crystal size, as shown in Fig. 21. The emission intensity normally increased as the crystal size increased under identical measurement conditions. When the measured temperature increased, the enhancement of the emission intensity was almost negligible for 32 nm crystals and it slightly decreased for larger sizes. However, the integrated emission intensity significantly increased even by 3.3 times for ultrasmall crystals of 7 nm.
 Fig. 21  Temperature-dependent UC emission spectra of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ with various morphologies – (a) bulk, (b) 66 nm nanoparticles, (c) 32 nm nanoparticles, and (d) 7 nm NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles; (e) UC emission spectra of crystals with various sizes measured at room-temperature; (f) integrated intensities of different-sized crystals as a function of temperature. (Integrated intensities at 25 °C were normalized.) Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
Thermal quenching dominates the UC emission change with temperature and leads to its gradual decrease with increasing temperature. However, ultrasmall crystals exhibited anomalous enhanced emission intensity for increasing temperature. This behavior was explained by phonon confinement effects on the energy transfer process. Upconversion is the spectral process that can convert two or more photons with lower energy and longer wavelengths into one photon with higher energy and a shorter wavelength by a multi-photon process.40 The low energy phonons play an important role in compensating the energy differences between Yb3+ and Er3+ ions. The energy differences are not completely equal between the 2F7/2 → 2F5/2 (∼10260 cm−1) of Yb3+ ions and the 4I15/2 → 4I11/2 (∼10300 cm−1) or 4I11/2 → 4F7/2 (∼10350 cm−1) of Er3+ ions. So, low energy phonons are required to assist the energy transfer process between Yb3+ and Er3+ ions. For ultrasmall crystals, the phonon density of states is discrete and low-energy phonon modes are cutoff. The limited phonon-assisted energy transfer process leads to a decrease of the UC efficiency in ultrasmall crystals.27–29 At higher temperatures, the phonon confinement effect is weakened and the energy transfer efficiency increases, which increases the UC emission with increasing temperature. Therefore, the anomalous UC enhancement for ultrasmall crystals is attributed to the changes in phonon-assisted energy transfer efficiency for different temperatures.
Additionally, in the excitation process, it has the energy mismatch between Yb3+ energy level and the energy of excitation sources in different materials. Thus, the energy transfers between Yb3+ and Er3+ are multiphonon-assisted processes, as shown in Fig. 23. To describe the multiphonon-assisted energy transfer model,41–43 the rate equations are set up as follows: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)where neCdi (n3C3d) are defined as the energy-transfer rates of the acceptor, which are dependent on temperature. WNRij is described as the probability of nonradiative transition. τi represents the lifetime of level i. Φ represents power flux. σab(T) is the absorption cross-section of the donor, which is temperature-dependent. σ0ab indicates absorption cross-section at resonance.
The process of multiphonon-assisted sideband excitation is considered and it is defined as σge(T) = σ0ab[exp(hωp/kBT) − 1]−P(6) WNRij(T) = WNRij(0)[1 − exp(−hωp/kBT)]−P(7) (8) (9)where hωp indicates the phonon energy. kB indicates the Boltzmann constant and T indicates the absolute temperature. p is the number of optical phonons in the sensitizer excitation.
So, the ratio of the 4S3/2 and 4F9/2 emitting levels is presented in (10) through the solution for the set of (1)–(9) (10)Therefore, from eqn (10) one can find that the ratio of the red and green emissions of the Er3+ is dependent on the phonon energy and temperature. The upconversion process for the Yb3+–Er3+ doped materials may be a multiphonon-assisted energy transfer process. It needs low energy phonons to make up for the energy mismatch.
Yu et al.50 synthesized in a controlled manner NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ materials with small size and modulated the luminescence properties by doping with Ce3+ or La3+ ions. As shown in Fig. 22, under the same synthesis conditions, the cubic sphere-shaped particles of the undoped case became hexagonal nanorods, and the crystal size decreased differently after doping with Ce3+ or La3+ ions. Obviously, the NaYF4:(Yb3+,Er3+)/La3+ and NaYF4:(Yb3+,Er3+)/Ce3+ materials exhibited stronger emission intensity than NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+, in which the Yb3+,Er3+ doping ions acted as sensitizers/emitters and the Ce3+/La3+ ions as phase controllers.
 Fig. 22  The different morphologies of crystals synthesized with the same conditions and the related luminescence properties: (a) morphology and size of the undoped NaYF4 crystals; (b) morphology and size of NaYF4:(Yb3+,Er3+)/La3+ crystals; (c) morphology and size of NaYF4:(Yb3+,Er3+)/Ce3+ crystals; and (d) the corresponding emission spectra. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission of Springer. 
 Fig. 23  The multiphonon-assisted energy transfer between Yb3+ and Er3+. The solid arrows up and down indicate the absorption and emission of phonons, respectively. Bold arrows indicate energy-transfer processes. Tilted arrows represent the absorption and emission mechanisms of multiphonons. 
Similarly, the NaLuF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er2+ morphologies were modulated by doping with Y3+ ions.59 As shown in Fig. 24, the size of the hexagonal particles gradually decreased with increasing Y3+ doping concentration. The maximum intensity of the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 transition (550 nm) was normalized and the UC emission intensity first increased until the Y3+ concentration exceeded 30%, and then it decreased. The R/G ratio increased with decreasing crystal size. The variation of the NaLuF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ UC intensity after Y3+ doping originated from the change in symmetry around the rare earth ions, which can be demonstrated by observing the ratio of magnetic dipole and electric dipole transitions of the Eu3+ ions in the same host material. The variation of the R/G ratio with decreasing crystal size was explained by the enhancement of the nonradiative rate across the relevant energy gaps, which originated from the high surface area to volume ratio for smaller crystal size.
 Fig. 24  (a) Emission spectra of the NaLuF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er2+,xY3+ crystals (x = 0%, 20%, 30%, 40%) (the maximum intensity of the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 transition was normalized); and (b–f) the corresponding morphologies after doping with various Y3+ concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Usually, small crystals with high surface area-to-volume ratios exhibit high R/G ratios, because more surface defects affect the high multi-phonon relaxation probability. However, Chen et al.78 observed abnormal size-dependent upconversion emission in (1 − x)CaF2–xYbF3:Er3+ crystals, as shown in Fig. 25. The R/G emission ratio unexpectedly decreased with gradually decreasing hexagonal particle size. For further investigation of the abnormal performance, UC emission spectra for the samples with various Ca2+/Yb3+ ratios were measured for 210 °C reaction temperature. The R/G ratio gradually increased with increasing Yb3+ content. The increased Yb3+ content in the host lattice decreased the inter-atomic distances between Yb3+ and Er3+ and it facilitated back energy transfer from Er3+ to Yb3+. The back energy transfer subsequently suppressed the population in excited levels 2H11/2 and 4S3/2, which resulted in a decrease of green emission. The results pointed out other factors affecting the R/G ratio from CaF2–YbF3:Er3+ solid–solutions besides specific surfaces of the crystals. Some of the Yb3+ ions in the CaF2–YbF3 were substituted with non-activator Lu3+ ions to study the influential factors. The R/G ratio increased gradually upon increasing the Lu3+ ion content from 0 to 40 mol% in the (0.8 − x)CaF2–xLuF3:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ disordered solid–solution. These results confirmed that the abnormal size-dependent UC luminescence properties were due to the structural uniqueness of the disordered solid–solution hosts.
 Fig. 25  (a) Morphologies of 0.4CaF2–0.6YbF3:Er crystals with different mean sizes synthesized at different temperatures. (b) UC emission spectra of 0.4CaF2–0.6YbF3:Er crystals with different mean sizes in (a). (c) UC emission spectra of (1 − x)CaF2–xYbF3:Er3+ crystals obtained at 210 °C (539 nm emission bands were normalized). (d) Dependence of the R/G ratio on Lu3+ content for the (0.8 − x) CaF2–xLuF3:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ prepared at 210 °C. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission of IOP publishing. 
Wang et al.79 investigated the UC luminescent properties of individual β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ microcrystals for size and crystal orientation by confocal micro-photoluminescence. Fig. 26 shows the hexagonal β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ microcrystals with increasing diameter and decreasing length. The UC emission spectra of the individual microcrystals with different diameters were measured when the (100) crystal plane was excited with the microcrystal on a silicon wafer. The integrated intensity of the emission bands increased and the intensity ratio of the red and green bands (R/G) decreased with increasing diameter. The UC emission spectra of the individual microcrystals were measured for (100) and (001) crystal plane excitation. The emission intensity and the R/G ratio were different when the microcrystals were excited in a different plane. In particular, for the microcrystal with the largest diameter, the emission intensity and the R/G ratio were very different when the incident light excited the different crystal planes.
 Fig. 26  (a) Lengths and diameters of β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ microcrystals. (b) UC emission spectra of microcrystals with different morphologies as horizontally settled. (c) UC spectra of microcrystals with different sizes as horizontally settled (H) and vertically settled (V). (d) Integrated intensities of the green and red emission bands and the R/G ratios of the samples from (c). Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission of AIP Publishing. 
The R/G ratio of the individual microcrystals was affected by the crystal geometry, which is attributed to the optical path and optical loss during the propagation in the microcrystals. The emitted photons from the excited location experienced refraction, scattering and reabsorption. The relationship between the R/G ratio and the propagation distance was deduced in accordance with Bouguer–Lambert–Beer law80 as follows: lnγ = lnγ0·[α(green) − α(red)]·L(11)where I(red) and I(green) represent the integrated intensities of the red and green bands, I0(red) and I0(green) represent the intrinsic intensities of the red and green bands of the luminescence center, α represents the optical loss coefficient, L represents the propagation distance, γ represents I(red)/I(green) and γ0 represents I0(red)/I0(green). The logarithmic value of the R/G ratio varied in a linear way with the propagation distance which was in accordance with the above experimental results.
Schietinger et al.81 reported the investigation of the upconversion emission of single NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocrystals with the help of an atomic force microscope, which determined the nanocrystal size simultaneously. The spectral properties of the upconversion signal strongly depend on individual nanocrystal size, as shown in Fig. 27. Apparently, the R/G ratio was lower for the smaller nanocrystal compared to the larger one, which was in contradiction to conventional results. The emission intensities of four individual nanocrystals as a function of size were further investigated. The overall integrated intensity increased with increasing height with a nonlinear dependence. With decreasing nanocrystal size the green emission component from the total emission increased, i.e. the R/G ratio decreased. The results indicated that the nonradiative relaxation processes could not be enhanced by the surface-groups of the NaYF4 nanoparticles, even for ultrasmall size. The R/G ratio evolution was explained as a size-related phonon bottleneck for nonradiative phonon relaxation processes. The phonon confinement effects were taken into account if the dimensions of the particle are below 20 times the lattice constant and the spatial distribution of phonon modes was also considered. The coupling of ions near the surface with confined phonon modes was reduced as the phonon mode was reduced at the particle boundaries, which resulted in the overall reduction of the multi-phonon processes. Therefore, the lower R/G ratio of smaller particles can be explained as follows: the energy gap of about 5000 cm−1 was bridged by multi-phonons that assisted in populating the red-emitting level, while for the green-emitting level, the gap was just around 2000 cm−1. There were not enough phonons in the smaller particles to efficiently populate the red-emitting level. Therefore, the phonon bottleneck reduced the excitation rates and it slowed down the population of the relevant emitting levels. The corresponding results of Er3+ ion doped phosphors are summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 27  UC emission spectra of single NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocrystals with heights of (a) 47.1 nm and (b) 5.6 nm (insets: AFM scans to determine the size of the particles); (c) integrated UC emission intensity versus crystal height; and (d) R/G intensity ratio versus crystal height. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Er3+ ion doped phosphors, including the atomic fraction of doping ions, transitions from coupled energy levels, excitation wavelength and emission wavelength




Rare-earth ions
Host
Transitions

λ
ex (nm)

λ
em (nm)
Ref.




20%Yb3+
β-NaYF4

2H11/2 → 4I15/2
980
520, 539, 652

27



2%Er3+

4S3/2 → 4I15/2





4F9/2 → 4I15/2


10%Nd3+
β-NaYF4

2H9/2 → 4I15/2
808
410

44



10%Yb3+

4H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2


2%Er3+

4H9/2 → 4I15/2


20%Yb3+
BaYF5

2H9/2 → 4I15/2
980
410, 520, 540, 653

76



2%Er3+

2H11/2 → 4I15/2





4S3/2 → 4I15/2





4F9/2 → 4I15/2


5%Yb3+
Lu2O3

2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2
980
547, 667

26



1%Er3+

4F9/2 → 4I15/2


20%Yb3+
LiYF4

4G11/2 → 4I15/2,
976
379, 408, 522, 550

77



1%Er3+

2H9/2 → 4I15/2





4H11/2 → 4I15/2





4S3/2 → 4I15/2





4F9/2 → 4I15/2


20%Yb3+
NaYF4

4H11/2 → 4I15/2
975
525, 545, 660

28



2%Er3+

4S3/2 → 4I15/2





4F9/2 → 4I15/2


20%Yb3+
NaYF4

4H11/2 → 4I15/2
975
550, 660

58



5%Er3+

4S3/2 → 4I15/2





4F9/2 → 4I15/2


20%Yb3+
NaLuF4

2H11/2 → 4I15/2
980
520, 540

59



2%Er3+

4S3/2 → 4I15/2




As shown in Fig. 28, the green emission is attributed to the 4H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2 transition and the red emission is attributed to the 4F9/2 → 4I15/2 transition under 980 nm excitation in the upconversion of Er3+. It is necessary to build the rate equation model37–39 to understand the process of energy transfer under 980 nm excitation. Therefore, the rate equations are as follows: (12) (13) (14) (15)where N1, N2, N3, N4, N5, N6 and N7 are defined as the population densities of the 4I15/2, 4I13/2, 4I11/2, 4F9/2, 4S3/2/2H11/2, and 4F7/2 levels, respectively. σi is defined as the 980 nm light absorption cross-section of Ni states. Wab is defined as the nonradiative decay rates between levels a and b, and Aab represents the radiative transition rates between a and b. According to the above equations, N4, N5 and IR/IG are as follows: (16) (17)So, we can get (18) (19)Therefore, from eqn (19) one can find that the ratio of the red and green emissions of the Er3+ is dependent on the nonradiative decay rate (W54) and the radiative transition rate (A51). The nanocrystals with the different size have different crystal field and transition probability.1,3,8 Thus, the R/G ratio changed with the size as shown in Fig. 24–26.
 Fig. 28  Brief energy level distribution and schematic diagram of energy transfer of Er3+/Yb3+ in the up-conversion luminescence mechanism. 
3.2 Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Eu3+ ions
The emission spectra of rare earth Eu3+ ions exhibit sharp lines in the red spectrum area, which enables various applications like catalysts, lasers, optoelectronic devices and so on.12 As shown in Fig. 30, the morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Eu3+ doped crystals were widely investigated for some materials, such as Eu3+ into Y2O3, Gd2O3, YBO3, GdBO3, YVO4, GdVO4, CaWO4, Y2(WO4)3, Gd2MoO6, and NaY(MoO4)3 crystals. A variety of crystal morphologies, such as spherical, flower-like, flake-shaped and hexagonal crystals, were controllably synthesized among these Eu3+ doped materials. The total luminescence intensity, the intensity of the electronic dipole transition peak, and the spectrum band shift of crystals were affected by the different morphologies.
Leng et al.15 synthesized GdBO3:0.05Eu3+ crystals with diverse morphologies, such as micropancakes, microflowers and microleaves, and they found that the overall luminescence intensity was obviously influenced, as shown in Fig. 29. The spectral shape of the Eu3+ doped luminescent materials was not affected by their morphology because all the emission bands originated from intra-4f transitions. However, the emission intensity was greatly influenced by their morphology. Microflower shaped crystals exhibited the strongest relative emission intensity, while micropancake-like crystals showed the weakest intensity. The relative intensity of the strongest one was almost 2.6 times higher than the weakest one. This was attributed to their higher crystallinity and lower specific surface area. The crystals with higher crystallinity generally present fewer trap sites and stronger luminescence.
 Fig. 29  Photoluminescence excitation and emission spectra of GdBO3:0.05Eu3+ with different morphologies. S1 – micropancakes; S2 – microflowers; S3 – microleaves. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 30  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of various Eu3+ doped phosphor materials. (a) GdBO3:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission of Elsevier. (b) NaYF4:Eu3+/Tb3+. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission of American Chemical Society (d) GdVO4:Ln3+ (Ln3+ = Dy3+, Eu3+, Sm3+, Tm3+). Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, morphology-controlled luminescence intensity was also observed among other materials. The luminescence intensity varied for GdBO3:Eu3+ crystals74 as nanofibres, microspheres, microflowers and lotus leaf-like microstructures. The smallest nanofibres emitted the lowest emission intensity due to their large surface and defects.
Microflowers present the highest emission intensity because their geometry minimizes surface scattering. NaYF4:20%Eu3+nanorods47 exhibited the strongest emission intensity, which arose from their nanorod uniform morphology, low surface roughness and high crystallinity. The nano-rod crystals showed low emission intensity due to their lower crystallinity and higher surface roughness. Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ microflower, spindle and dandelion morphologies presented different emission intensities. The dandelion-like microspheres exhibited the highest emission intensity,14 while the spindle-like structures exhibited the lowest intensity.
This was attributed to the difference of the effects of crystal field perturbation on the individual f–f transition. The spindle-like structures were the smallest but their sizes were still large enough to avoid quantum confinement. Microflowers composed of numerous nanoflakes possess especially large surface areas and surface energies, which leads to a higher degree of disorder and lower symmetry of the crystal field. Thus, the enhanced luminescence intensity of electronic dipole transition was observed in microflower crystals rather than in spindle-like structures. The dandelion-like microspheres exhibited the highest emission intensity because microspheres minimize surface scattering. The emission intensity of GdVO4:Ln3+ (Ln3+ = Dy3+, Eu3+, Sm3+, Tm3+) crystals was increased with increasing particle size,21 because the smaller particles have greater surface area to volume ratios and thus the non-radiative transition rate is greater compared to the larger particles.
Morphology controlled emission intensity has also been observed in Eu3+ doped NaY(MoO4)2,29 Y2O3,82 CaWO412 and ZnO71 materials. Bipyramid and cube NaY(MoO4)2:Eu3+ crystals had a strong emission intensity, while the nanoflakes and sheaf-like crystals had comparatively weak emission, as shown in Fig. 31. It is confirmed that the intensity was influenced by the crystallinity and the light scattering of the host materials due to interleaved exposed faces in the flakes and sheaf-like structures. The emission intensity of nanospherical Y2O3:Eu3+ crystals exhibited lower intensity than flower-like crystals, which was explained as the effect of the crystallinity and surface defects of the nanospherical Y2O3:Eu3+ materials. The emission intensities from 5D0 → 7F1 and 5D0 → 7F2 were modified by changing the shape from rod-shaped to spherical and to hexagonal.
 Fig. 31  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of various Eu3+ doped phosphor materials. (a) NaY(MoO4)2:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Y2O3:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) CaWO4:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) ZnO:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission of Elsevier. 
Luminescent materials generally exhibit decreased emission intensity when the crystal size decreases. However, the intensities of YBO3:Eu3+ nanocrystals16 and CdS:Eu3+ nanocrystals75 show an irregular evolution with increasing size in the nanoregime, as shown in Fig. 32. The maximum intensity was observed when the YBO3:Eu3+ and CdS:Eu3+ crystal sizes were close to 5 nm. This abnormal phenomenon is explained by the transformation of the local symmetry around the Eu3+ activator ion. The change in symmetry of the nanocrystal surface was clearly shown in the emission spectra. Lattice expansion occurred with decreasing particle size, which meant that the phonon energy decreased. This leads to a reduced non-radiative decay rate and increased emission intensity with decreasing particle size.
 Fig. 32  Size-dependent emission spectra of (a) YBO3:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission of OSA. And (b) CdS:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission of Elsevier. 
The intensity of the electric dipole transition 5D0 → 7F2 has been proven to be influenced by the crystal morphology.9,69 As shown in Fig. 33, the 5D0 → 7F2 emission intensity of Y2O3:Eu3+ crystals9 first increases abruptly, then decreases and finally remains constant with gradually increasing aspect ratio. This was attributed to the nonradiative transition decrease when the aspect ratio increases. The longer the hexagonal prisms were, the higher the integrated emission intensity will be.
 Fig. 33  (a) 5D0 → 7F2 emission intensity, decay time and quantum yield as functions of aspect ratios for Y2O3:Eu3+ crystals. (b) 5D0 → 7F2 emission intensity (filled circles) and asymmetry factor (open circles) as functions of crystal size for Gd2O3:Eu3+ crystals. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The Judd–Ofelt theory predicted that the magnetic dipole transition 5D0 → 7F1 was allowed, while the electric dipole transition5D0 → 7F2 was forbidden.84,85 The intensity of the magnetic dipole transition 5D0 → 7F1 hardly changes with the site symmetry of Eu3+ ions, while the intensity of the hypersensitive electric dipole transition 5D0 → 7F2 is highly sensitive to structural changes and environmental effects.86 Therefore, the I(5D0 → 7F2)/I(5D0 → 7F1) relative intensity ratio was regarded as the asymmetry factor, which can be effectively used as the probe of the site asymmetry. The asymmetry factor gives the distortion degree of the inversion symmetry for the local environment of Eu3+. The larger the value of the asymmetry factor, the lower the symmetry around Eu3+ ions in the host. Gd2O3:Eu3+ crystals with different morphologies were chosen to investigate their local environment.87 When the crystal size decreases, the increased specific surface enables more Eu3+ ions near crystal surfaces. The lost centrosymmetry in the surface region induced the 5D0 → 7F2 emission enhanced, while lowering the 5D0 → 7F1 transition at the same time, leading to increased asymmetry factors. In addition, the asymmetry factor was also investigated for YVO4:Eu3+ crystals19 with different morphologies, such as nanobox-shaped, nanogrape-shaped and nanoraisin-shaped crystals. Moreover, the varied asymmetry factors confirmed that the site symmetry around the Eu3+ was different.
Significant size-related effects were observed in Lu2O3:Eu3+ crystals.88 Some additional emission lines clearly tracked the particle sizes. Their intensity decreased for gradually increased nanocrystal size, and the lines were completely absent for the sintered ceramic material. The line located at 582.5 nm identified as due to Eu3+ ions located in the S6 site symmetry, which consists of 25% of all Lu-ion sites, and the remaining were located in the C2 symmetry. The energy transfer from the S6 site to the C2 site became more and more efficient when the crystallites became smaller. When the crystallites become smaller, the appearance of the extra emission lines seems to indicate that the emissions had their origin at the Eu3+ ions located in the vicinity of the distorted crystallites surface.
It was reported that the spectral band location shifted for various crystal morphologies and sizes. Ray et al.89 reported that the Raman spectra of Y2O3:Eu3+ exhibited a shift towards smaller frequencies as the size decreased, and the Raman bands became broader on the low-frequency side, as shown in Fig. 34. The change in bandwidth was due to the inhomogeneous strain broadening associated with the small dispersion in particle size. The decreased Raman frequency with decreasing nanocrystal size was related to the Y–O bond elongation due to the increased lattice parameter for decreasing size. The absorption spectra of YVO4:Eu3+ nanocrystals18 correspond to the charge transfer transition from the oxygen to the central vanadium atoms. The peak location slightly changed with particle size, which implies that the energy gap between the ground and excited states slightly changed. For Y2O3:Eu3+ nanocrystals,90 the excitation band position of charge transfer shifted as the crystal size decreased to 9 nm. The local structure became complicated for ultrasmall particles, in which the average bond lengths and the coordination numbers increased, and the local disorder was much larger. The Mo–O excitation band location of R2MoO6:Eu3+ (R = La, Gd, Y)91 also shifted to a shorter wavelength with decreasing nanocrystal size. The blue shift of the Mo–O excitation band was attributed to the widening of the band gap of the Mo–O groups.
 Fig. 34  Spectral bands shifted with the various crystal sizes. (a) Raman spectra of Y2O3:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission of Elsevier. (b) Absorption spectra of YVO4:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission of American Chemical Society. (c) Charge transfer band of excitation spectra for the Y2O3:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission of Elsevier. (d) The peak locations of the Mo–O excitation for R2MoO6:Eu3+ (R = La, Gd, Y). Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
In addition, Wei et al.92 investigated the correlation between size-dependent luminescent properties and local structure through X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy for YBO3:Eu3+ nanocrystals. The controlled YBO3:Eu3+ chromaticity was explained as due to the higher levels of disorder in the nanocrystals, which resulted from the low levels of crystallization. Williams et al.93 focused on size-dependent luminescence spectra and dynamics for Y2O3:Eu3+ nanocrystals, which showed increased line broadening and the disordered phase with decreasing particle size. Dominika et al.94 reported luminescence properties for Gd2O3:Eu3+ nanoparticles with spherical, nanodisk, nanotripod, and nanotriangle-like morphologies, and discussed the impact of the crystal structure and coordinating environment of luminescent ions. The corresponding results of Eu3+ ion doped phosphors are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Eu3+ ion doped phosphors, including the atomic fraction of doping ions, transitions from coupled energy levels, excitation wavelength and emission wavelength




Rare-earth ions
Host
Transitions

λ
ex (nm)

λ
em (nm)
Ref.




5%Eu3+
GdBO3

5D0 → 7F1
391
591, 610, 625

15




5D0 → 7F2


Eu3+
GdBO3

5D0 → 7F1
395
595, 613, 627, 652, 675, 708

74




5D0 → 7F2



5D0 → 7F3



5D0 → 7F4


20%Eu3+
NaYF4

5D0 → 7F1
394
590, 614, 650, 690

47




5D0 → 7F2



5D0 → 7F3



5D0 → 7F4


3%Sm3+
GdVO4

6H5/2 → 4D5/2
310
364, 380, 393, 407, 420, 422, 468

21



2%Dy3+

6P7/2, 4G11/2, 4F7/2


5%Eu3+

6P5/2, 4G9/2, 4I13/2


2%Tm3+




Eu3+
Y2(WO4)3

5G0 → 7F2
614
394

14



5%Eu3+
NaY(MoO4)2

5D0 → 7F2
276
615

29



5%Eu3+
Y2O3

5D0 → 7F1
611
552, 586, 611, 630

82




5D0 → 7F2



5D0 → 7F3


5%Eu3+
CaWO4

5D0 → 7F1
396
617

12




5D0 → 7F2



5D0 → 7F3



5D0 → 7F4


1%Eu3+
ZnO

5D0 → 7F1
396
588, 613

71




5D0 → 7F2


0.5%Eu3+
CdS

5D0 → 7F1
347
614, 590

83




5D0 → 7F2


0.5%Eu3+
La2MoO6

5D0 → 7F1
612
530, 550, 583

91




5D0 → 7F2



5D0 → 7F3




3.3 Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Tb3+ ions
NaCeF4:Tb3+ crystals with various aspect ratios exhibited different excitation band characteristics.55 The excitation spectra contained two components and the relative intensity exhibited significant change with various aspect ratios. This was attributed to the local symmetry surrounding the Ce3+ modified at various aspect ratios. The luminescence properties of Tb3+ activators were influenced by various crystal fields around the Ce3+ ions. It exhibited a more efficient energy transfer for the Tb3+ ions, and the emission intensity was enhanced (Fig. 35).
 Fig. 35  Morphology-dependent photoluminescence excitation and emission spectral properties of various Tb3+ doped phosphor materials. (a) YBO3:Ce3+,Tb3+ nanophosphor. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission of Springer. (b) KGdF4:Ce3+,Tb3+ nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) NaCeF4:Tb3+ crystals. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission of American Chemical Society. 
Additionally, Song et al.96 investigated the luminescence properties of Y2O3:Tb3+ crystals with various sizes. For Y2O3:Tb3+ crystals with very small size, the sharp emission lines from 5D4–7FJ transitions became relatively weak and broader due to the disordered local environments surrounding Tb3+ ions. The emission intensity of the 5D4–7F5 transition was strongly dependent on temperature. Luminescence quenching was observed with decreased crystal size. The maximum emission intensity appeared at different temperatures for different crystal sizes. This was attributed to the great number of surface defects involved in nanocrystals. Fast nonradiative energy transfer occurred from the excited Tb3+ centers to the nearby surface defects. Most of the Tb3+ centers located in or near the surface became quenching centers. Thus, the overall emission intensity transitions decreased with particle size, and the emissions from defect states increased (Fig. 36).
 Fig. 36  Size-dependent luminescence properties of Y2O3:Tb3+ nanocrystals: (a) emission spectra and (b) temperature-dependent integral intensity of the 5D4–7F5 transition. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission of Elsevier. 
Similarly, the morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Y2O3:Tb3+ crystals were also studied by Meng et al.97 and Goldburt et al.98 Meng et al. found that the energy transfer quenching from the 5D3 level was greatly affected by size confinement, while the 5D4 level was slightly affected. Goldburt et al. reported the size-dependent luminescence efficiency due to the modification in the quantum confinement. The corresponding results of Tb3+ ion doped phosphors are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Tb3+ ion doped phosphors, including the atomic fraction of doping ions, transitions from coupled energy levels, excitation wavelength and emission wavelength




Rare-earth ions
Host
Transitions

λ
ex (nm)

λ
em (nm)
Ref.




15%Tb3+
YBO3

5D4 → 7F5
360
544

17



3%Ce3+


4%Tb3+
KGdF4

5D4 → 7F5
273
545

95



1%Tb3+
Y2O3

7F6 → 5D4
488
620

96



0.05%Tb3+
Y2O3

5D3 → 7F5
273
423, 543

97




5D4 → 7F5




3.4 Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Tm3+ ions
Tm3+ doped phosphor materials emitted broad emission bands from ultraviolet, through visible to infrared, due to their abundant energy levels. Thus, the morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Tm3+ doped materials were investigated. The size-dependent luminescence properties of CaF2:Yb3+,Tm3+ crystals were studied by Jiang et al.,30 as shown in Fig. 37. The emission intensities in the ultraviolet and visible regions first increased and then decreased as the crystal size increased and the maximum emission value was observed at about 600 nm. However, it exhibited contrary change tendencies in the infrared region and the minimum value of the emission intensity was observed at 600 nm. The unusual change in emission intensity was attributed to the small size effect. The real excited power density in small-size crystals was higher than that in a bulk sample due to the relatively large surface area to volume ratio.99 Furthermore, the amount of inner defects in nanocrystals was usually lower than that in bulk materials, which resulted in higher symmetry inside nanocrystals.100 Thus, as the crystal sizes were more than 600 nm, the emission intensities in the ultra-violet and visible regions increased as the sizes decreased. However, when the crystal sizes were less than 600 nm, a large number of surface defects existed with further decreased crystal size. The surface defects acted as quenching centers and the luminescence centers near the surfaces were quenched.
 Fig. 37  Size-dependent luminescence properties of CaF2:Yb3+,Tm3+ crystals: (a) 250–400 nm; (b) 400–740 nm; and (c) 740–900 nm and (d) crystal morphologies with various sizes. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission of Elsevier. 
Similarly, the morphology-controlled luminescence properties were also observed in Tm3+ ion doped materials, such as NaYbF4:Tm3+ nanocrystals,62 NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ crystals49 and YF3:Yb3+/Tm3+ nanobundles,101 as shown in Fig. 38. Damasco et al. reported that the luminescence properties of NaYbF4:Tm3+ nanocrystals were controlled by their various morphologies and sizes. The strongest peak was located at 801 nm. The emission intensity first increased then decreased with increasing Gd3+ ion concentration, since the phase transition and morphology were modified by Gd3+ doping. The first factor of the increased intensity was related to increased size. The nanocrystals with larger size meant fewer surface quenching centers due to their smaller surface area-to-volume ratio, thus exhibiting a higher emission intensity. The phase transition from the cubic to pure hexagonal phase induced by Gd3+ doping increased the luminescence efficiency. Similarly, the size- and shape-dependent luminescence properties were also observed in NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ with nanosphere, hexagonal-prismatic microrod, and hexagonal microrod morphologies.49 The NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ crystals exhibited the highest emission efficiency due to their high crystallinity.
 Fig. 38  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of various Tm3+ ion doped phosphor materials. (a) NaYbF4:Tm3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ crystals. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission of Trans Tech Publications. (c) YF3:Yb3+/Tm3+ nanobundles (aging time: a – 24 h, b – 48 h, c – 72 h). Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission of Elsevier. 
Wang et al. investigated the morphology-dependent luminescence properties of YF3:Yb3+/Tm3+ nanobundles.101 The band position in the red emission region slightly shifted and a weak band existed on the short wavelength side of the main peak in the infrared region in YF3:Yb3+/Tm3+ nanobundles with different sizes. The weak band became illegible with increasing nanowhisker size. The relative intensity of the ultraviolet band and the near infrared band inversely changed with different morphologies. The luminescence phenomenon was explained by the fact that the crystallinity was improved to decrease the nonradiative transition rate. The population of the level, which was assisted by nonradiative transition, was decreased, and thus the relative emission intensity decreased with improved crystallinity.
The overall and relative emission intensities of ZnO:Yb3+,Tm3+ nanocrystals were observed to be highly dependent on nanocrystal diameter.102 Furthermore, the emission intensity of the YF3:Yb3+/Tm3+ microcrystals exhibited a rapidly increasing trend with decreased sizes, which was attributed to the small-size effect.103 The average energy density of each luminescence center ion increased as the crystal size decreased, which led to increased populations of Tm3+ energy levels. Thus, YF3:Yb3+/Tm3+ exhibited rapidly increasing emission with decreasing crystal size. The corresponding results of Tm3+ ion doped phosphors are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 Tm3+ ion doped phosphors, including the atomic fraction of doping ions, transitions from coupled energy levels, excitation wavelength and emission wavelength




Rare-earth ions
Host
Transitions

λ
ex (nm)

λ
em (nm)
Ref.




20%Tb3+
CaF2

1I6 → 3H6
980
291, 347, 362

30



0.5%Tm3+

1I1 → 3F4



1D2 → 3H6


0.5%Tm3+
NaYbF4

1I6 → 3F4
975
358, 450, 471, 650

62




1D2 → 3F4



1G4 → 3H6



1G4 → 3F4


20%Tb3+
NaYF4

1D2 → 3F4
980
450, 461, 469, 492, 552, 537, 656

49



0.5%Tm3+

1G4 → 3H6



1D2 → 3H5



1F2 → 3H6


20%Tb3+
YF3

1D2 → 3H4
980
643, 649, 687

101



1%Tm3+

1G4 → 3F4



3F3 → 3H6




3.5 Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Dy3+ ions
The Dy3+ ions were sensitive to the local symmetry of the surrounding environment due to the 4F9/2 → 6H15/2, and 4F9/2 → 6H13/2 transitions, which were, respectively, ascribed to magnetic dipole transition and electric dipole transition.23 Hence, the doping Dy3+ could serve as an efficient structural probe. The morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Dy3+ doped materials were investigated in GdVO4:Dy3+ as shown in Fig. 39. The excitation and emission spectra of GdVO4:Dy3+ exhibited different intensities in nanocrystal and bulk materials. The ratio of the yellow (4H9/2 → 6H13/2) and blue (4H9/2 → 6H15/2) emission bands (Y/B ratio) for the nanocrystals exhibited a higher value than that for the bulk material. The Y/B ratio strongly depended on the local symmetry of the Dy3+ sites: when the Dy3+ ions occupied the inversion sites, the yellow band centered at 574 nm showed weak intensity; when occupying the non-inversion sites, the yellow band showed relatively strong intensity. The probability of Dy3+ occupying the sites on the surface or near the surface was larger in the nanocrystals due to their large specific area. Therefore, a large number of surface and near-surface sites with low symmetry in nanocrystals led to the increased intensity of the yellow emission band, and the Y/B ratio increased as well.
 Fig. 39  Size-dependent luminescence properties of GdVO4:Dy3+: (a) the PL-PLE spectra; (b) the SEM photographs; (c) the concentration-dependent integral intensity (inset: the log–log plot of Dy3+ concentration and intensity for the 4F9/2 → 6H13/2 transition); and (d) fluorescence decay curves of the 4F9/2. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission of Springer. 
The quenching concentration also exhibited different values for nanocrystals and bulk materials. The inset log(I/C)–log(C) plot for the 4F9/2 → 6H13/2 transition showed the different slope values in nanosized and bulk materials in Fig. 39c. The different slopes meant that the exchange interaction mechanism was dominant in the nanocrystals, whereas the dipole–dipole interaction was the main mechanism for bulk materials. The effective distance of the multipole interaction is much longer than that of the exchange interaction. Thus, when the nanocrystal size was smaller than the possible energy transfer distance, the dipole–dipole interaction was restricted due to the surface boundaries in the nanoparticles, which led to an increased quenching concentration. The concentration quenching was attributed to non-radiative energy transfers and the different quenching concentration meant the change in energy transfer processes.
Generally, the multiphonon relaxation probability of nanocrystals was higher than that of bulk materials, which led to decreased decay lifetimes in nanocrystals due to more CO2 and H2O molecules with larger phonon energies adsorbed on the nanocrystal surface. However, an abnormal phenomenon was observed in that the average lifetime of the 4F9/2 level in nanosized GdVO4:Dy3+ was longer than that shown in Fig. 39d. This was explained as due to the changes induced by the medium surrounding the nanocrystals when the crystal size was much smaller than the excitation wavelength. The local electric field acting on the rare earth ion was determined by the combined effects of the nanocrystals and the medium filling the voids. A similar mechanism was reported by Meltzer et al. in 1999.104
Similarly, the morphology-dependent luminescence properties of various kinds of Dy3+ doped materials, such as YVO4:Dy3+ nanocrystals, Gd2O3:Dy3+ nanocrystals and Sr2ZnSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+ crystals were investigated, as shown in Fig. 40. Ray et al.19 observed that the Y/B ratios were dependent on the host morphologies of YVO4:Dy3+ crystals, such as nanoraisins, nanograpes and nanoboxes. Peng et al.105 also reported that the Y/B ratio of Gd2O3:Dy3+ nanocrystals varied with size from 300 nm to 400 nm. Moreover, the emission line became broader with decreasing crystal size, which was attributed to the surface effect of the doping ions easily assembled on the surfaces of the small-size nanocrystals.107 Furthermore, varied spectral shapes of Sr2ZnSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+ phosphors were observed in different nanocrystal sizes.106 It was shown that the spectral bands contained two components and the relative intensity of low-energy components decreased with increasing crystal size. The corresponding results of Dy3+ ion doped phosphors are summarized in Table 5.
 Fig. 40  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of various kinds of Dy3+ doped materials: (a) YVO4:Dy3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission of Elsevier. (b) Gd2O3:Dy3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission of Elsevier. (c) Sr2ZnSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+ crystals. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission of Elsevier. 
Table 5 Dy3+ ion doped phosphors, including the atomic fraction of doping ions, transitions from coupled energy levels, excitation wavelength and emission wavelength




Rare-earth ions
Host
Transitions

λ
ex (nm)

λ
em (nm)
Ref.




2%Dy3+
GdVO4

4H9/2 → 6H15/2
277
483, 574

23




4H9/2 → 6H13/2


2%Dy3+
YVO4

4F9/2 → 6H15/2
280
480, 572

19



4%Eu3+

4F9/2 → 6H13/2


Dy3+
Gd2O3

4F9/2 → 6H15/2
350
486, 573

105




4F9/2 → 6H13/2




3.6 Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Pr3+ ions
Hao et al.31 reported that the crystal sizes of NaYF4:Yb3+,Pr3+ could be varied by adjusting the Yb3+ doping concentration from 10% to 70%, as shown in Fig. 41. It was found that the up-conversion luminescence intensity of the NaYF4:Yb3+, Pr3+ nanocrystals gradually increased with increasing Yb3+ concentration. Furthermore, Ye et al. observed that the phase and morphology of the NaYF4:Pr3+,Yb3+ nanocrystals were controlled by doping with Gd3+ ions.57 After doping Gd3+ ions into a host lattice, the cubic NaYF4:Pr3+,Yb3+ nanorods changed into hexagonal nanorods with decreased sizes and enhanced emissions.
 Fig. 41  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Pr3+ doped materials. (a) NaYF4:Yb3+/Pr3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) NaYF4:Pr3+–Yb3+nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission of Trans Tech Publications. 
Similarly, the size effect on luminescent properties for CaTiO3:Pr3+ nanocrystals was investigated by Zhang et al.108 In comparison to the bulk materials, the O(2p)–Ti(3d) transition band shifted to a short wavelength in the nanocrystals, which was attributed to the size confinement effect. The emission intensities of the nanocrystals were lower in nanoparticles than those in bulk materials, due to the existence of a large amount of nonradiative defect centers. Moreover, the abnormal lifetime was observed to be a longer lifetime at room temperature than that at low temperature. This was explained as due to the existence of a phosphorescent component originating from shallow surface traps which shortened the lifetime at low temperature. Hakim et al.109 observed the distinct luminescence properties of BaY2F8:Pr3+ nanocrystals and bulk materials. The emission peaks of high-energy transition exhibited stronger intensity in nanocrystals than that in bulk materials. And the decay curve of 3P0 → 3H4 transition in the bulk material was fitted as an exponential function, but as a non-exponential function in the nanocrystals. It was explained that the transition probabilities were influenced by the crystal sizes due to the surface modification induced by the modified nonradiative relaxation rate or the crystal potential. The corresponding results of Pr3+ ion doped phosphors are summarized in Table 6.
Table 6 Pr3+ ion doped phosphors, including the atomic fraction of doping ions, transitions from coupled energy levels, excitation wavelength and emission wavelength




Rare-earth ions
Host
Transitions

λ
ex (nm)

λ
em (nm)
Ref.




0.5%Pr3+
NaYF4

3P0 → 3H4
980
486, 523, 540, 605

31



10%–70%Yb3+

1I6 → 3H5



3P1 → 3H5



3P0 → 3H6



3P0 → 3F2


1%Pr3+
NaLnF4

3P0 → 3H6
466
603, 980

57



3%Yb3+

2F5/2 → 2F7/2


0.4%Pr3+
CaTiO3

1D2 → 3H4
355
615

108





3.7 Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Ho3+, Sm3+ and Nd3+ ions
The morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Ho3+ or Sm3+ doped materials were summarized. Chen et al.110 reported that the up-conversion luminescence properties of NaYF4:Yb3+,Ho3+ phosphors were controlled by crystal morphologies, as shown in Fig. 42. The emission intensities increased with increasing crystal size. Xu et al.13 reported that the up-conversion emission intensities of the NaGd(WO4)2:Yb3+/Tm3+/Ho3+ crystals were obviously influenced by crystal morphologies. The decreased sizes induced decreased up-conversion emission intensity, since the luminescent properties of the phosphors had close relationships with specific surface area and crystallinity. Additionally, the luminescence properties of NaYF4:Ho3+,Yb3+ in crystals and nano-colloids were investigated by Patel et al.,111 which exhibited distinct emission intensities and spectral shapes in crystals and nano-colloids.
 Fig. 42  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of (a) NaYF4:Yb3+,Ho3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission of Elsevier. (b) CaWO4:Sm3+ microspheres. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission of Springer. 
The morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Sm3+ ions were investigated in materials of CaWO4:Sm3+ microspheres32 and CeO2:Sm3+ nanophosphors.72 The decreased emission intensity of the CaWO4:Sm3+ microspheres was observed with decreasing crystal size, as shown in Fig. 42. The decreased emission intensity was attributed to the decreased crystallinity, organic quenching and non-uniform self-assembly of the CaWO4:Sm3+ microspheres.32 The absorption of organic chains into the crystal surface assembly served as an energy sink for vibrational relaxation. Yoshida et al. observed that the luminescence properties greatly depended on the shape and size of the CeO2:Sm3+ crystals,72 and the nano-cubes were observed to exhibit better luminescence properties than the nanorods. The crystal morphology and intensity simultaneously changed with increasing Sm3+ content.
The luminescence spectra of LaAlO3:Nd3+ nanocrystals were investigated for different crystal sizes.112 The difference was associated with the band intensity ratio of 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 and 4F3/2 → 4I11/2 transitions, which was observed to be smaller than that of the single crystal. The intensity ratio of 4F5/2 → 4I9/2 and 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 also decreased with the increase of nanocrystal size. The corresponding results of Ho3+, Sm3+ and Nd3+ ion doped phosphors are summarized in Table 7.
Table 7 Ho3+, Sm3+ and Nd3+ ion doped phosphors, including the atomic fraction of doping ions, transitions from coupled energy levels, excitation wavelength and emission wavelength




Rare-earth ions
Host
Transitions

λ
ex (nm)

λ
em (nm)
Ref.




1%Ho3+
β-NaYF4
5F5 → 5I8
980
644, 747

110



25%Yb3+

5S2 → 5I7


5%Sm3+
CaWO4

4G5/2 → 6H5/2
240
645

32



1%Sm3+
CeO2

4G5/2 → 6H5/2
350
574

72



1%Nd3+
LaGaO3

4F3/2 → 4I11/2
792
909, 1080

112




4F3/2 → 4I9/2




4. Applications
Upconversion materials have several obvious advantages due to their ability to convert infrared radiation into visible luminescence with sharp emission bands. It was easy to tune the emission colors and lifetimes of the emission peaks of upconversion nanoparticles from the microsecond range to the millisecond range. Recently, more and more attention has been attracted to rare earth ion-doped phosphors because of their wide range of applications in optogenetics,113,126 nanolasing,113 optical anticounterfeiting,113–115 sensors,120 document encoding,121 light-emitting diodes,122 cell imaging,123 nanoprobes124,125 and so on.
For example, the development of anticounterfeiting techniques113,116–119 has been in great demand recently due to global counterfeiting and forgery. The luminescent materials with lanthanide ions have been used as effective agents to prevent counterfeiting. Yao et al.114 reported the technique of multicolor anticounterfeiting by using NaYF4:Yb/Er and NaYF4:Yb/Tm nanoparticles under irradiation with a 980 nm laser, as shown in Fig. 43a. Meruga et al.115 reported that an arbitrary emission color was obtained by mixing red, green and blue emission upconversion nanoparticles in appropriate proportions, which has potential application in anticounterfeiting techniques, as shown in Fig. 43b and c. Yao et al.129 reported that a novel transparent ceramic phosphor doped with Ce3+ was prepared by using nano-sized raw materials in a vacuum.
 Fig. 43  Different types of upconversion anticounterfeiting associated with nanocrystals. (a) Optical decoding of the encrypted paper that was performed by near-infrared light exposure. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Four groups of RGB patterns were printed. (c) The upconversion luminescence images were obtained under 980 nm excitation. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gu et al.120 reported the development of several organic phosphors, which featured color-tunable, ultra-long organic phosphorescence in single-component molecular crystals, providing a convenient platform for developing multiplexed biological labelling, multicolour displays, anti-counterfeiting and others. The emission color was manipulated by controlling the wavelength of excitation to tune the dynamic color from the violet to the green in the visible spectrum. Various patterns, such as a dove, a panda and a butterfly, as shown in Fig. 44a, were fabricated by a simple technique of silk-screen printing by grinding TMOT (2,4,6-trimethoxy-1,3,5-triazine) and DClCzT (9-(4,6-dichloro-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-9H-carbazole) powder as the solid ink. The phosphorescence image was tuned from blue to green by controlling the wavelength of excitation from 254 nm to 365 nm, as indicated in Fig. 44b. Compared with the patterns in Fig. 44b, a constant yellow color was obtained by the control phosphorescence imaging of DClCzT, which was independent of the wavelength of excitation, as shown in Fig. 44c.
 Fig. 44  The color-tunable ultra-long organic (UOP) phosphorescence for visual detection under ultraviolet light and multicolor displays were demonstrated. (a) The process of screen printing. (b) The schematic diagrams of the experimental facility for multicolor display by varying the excitation wavelength from 250 to 400 nm. (c) The patterns of a peace dove and a panda inked with TMOT (left) and DClCzT (right). Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission of Nature. 
Liu et al.121 reported a new method to improve the luminescence properties of Mn2+ in multilayer nanoparticles by doping Ca2+ or Mg2+ ions to expand the application of conventional lanthanide-doped upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) in various aspects such as data storage, bioimaging, and multiplexing. Several 2D covert patterns were fabricated on a card by using nanoparticles as ink solutions, as shown in Fig. 45a. After steady irradiation, the set of patterns showed two kinds of color that are characteristic color output of lanthanides (i and ii) and a mixed color of lanthanides and Mn2+ (iii and iv), as shown in Fig. 45b. It was found that a strong emission of Tm3+ from nanoparticles resulted in a similar whitish color readout, which was displayed in patterns ii, iii, and iv. However, the dynamic excitation yielded made a significant difference in the optical readout, as shown in Fig. 45c. The analysis of the experimental and calculated results showed that the doped A2+ changed the occupancy site of Mn2+ from Na+ to Gd3+ and the emissions changed from green (520 nm) to yellow (583 nm) under 980 nm excitation. The increase in the doping levels of these metal ions resulted in an improvement in the crystal field around Mn2+ ions, and caused a change in the color output from green to yellow with an increase in luminescence lifetime.
 Fig. 45  The Ca2+/Mn2+co-doped multilayer nanoparticles are used to encrypt multilevel data. (a) Using different kinds of UCNPs to create 2D covert patterns on a card. The patterns of optical scenarios generated on (b) steady and (c) dynamic excitation. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission of Wiley. 
Wu et al.122 reported that various modulating effects of photonic crystal dimensions, structure types of photonic crystal and so on were studied in order to evaluate the fundamental principles, which determined light propagation. In a 3D photonic crystal with internal light emitters, the emission was suppressed at the center wavelength of the photonic bandgap, while it was enhanced at the edge of the photonic bandgap. The emission intensities could be enhanced without change in spectrum shapes by locating light emitters on the top of 3D photonic crystals. In more and more applications like light-emitting diodes and sensors, the spontaneous emission was tuned by using photonic crystals.
Li et al.123 reported that a series of β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNPs were synthesized by using specific recognition to develop many biomedical applications including biological and multimodal bioimaging. The immunolabeling schematic diagram of HeLa cells is shown in Fig. 46A. It is obvious that the HeLa cells showed bright and dark green upconversion fluorescence, as shown in Fig. 46B and C, which indicated that the antibody–UCNPs were attached to the surfaces of the cells. This proved that the UCNPs with good biocompatibility could recognize targets because of the conjugation of the antibody. Moreover, the overlaid bright field and dark field images overlapped well, as shown in Fig. 46D. The results of this work revealed that in combination with appropriate cell-targeting, potential applications could be found by the β-NaYF4:Yb3+, Er3+ UCNPs in in vivo imaging and detection.
 Fig. 46  (A) An immunolabeling schematic of HeLa cells was indicated on the basis of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNPs. Upconversion fluorescence imaging of HeLa recorded in (B) bright and (C) dark fields, and (D) overlay of both (B) and (C). Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Chen et al.124 reported a novel class of upconversion nanoparticles doped with lanthanides and without Yb3+ or Nd3+ sensitizers, providing a new route to study the development of excitable upconversion nanocrystals that could be applied to various biomedical and security applications. The mechanistic study indicated that the luminescence quenching of Er3+-based nanocrystals was mainly attributed to the rapid energy migration instead of cross-relaxation in conventional nanocrystals. In NaErF4:Tm@NaYF4 nanoparticles, energy migration between Er3+ ions was observed to restrain the effect of the concentration quenching on the surface of the coating. As shown in Fig. 47a, the nanocrystals based on Er3+ were excited at different wavelengths: 808, 980 and 1532 nm, respectively. In this case, the upconversion nanoprobe based on Er3+ ions was allowed to use three different laser sources for in vivo imaging, as shown in Fig. 47b. Additionally, the control of excitation and emission in a wide optical window would take detection sensitivity, light penetration, and photothermal effects into optimal consideration under the background of in vivo imaging, as indicated in Fig. 47c.
 Fig. 47  (a) The emission spectra were recorded for NaErF4:Tm@NaYF4 nanoparticles under excitation at 808, 980, and 1532 nm. (b) The in vivo optical images of NaErF4:Tm@NaYF4 nanoparticles coated with silicate were recorded. (c) Luminescence profiles of the nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission of Wiley. 
Han et al.125 developed an image-guided upconversion nanothermometry approach by means of combining the photothermal effect and single-band anti-Stokes emission that was near-infrared, which is suited to simultaneously release drug molecules and have deep-tissue imaging. These NIR to NIR upconversion nanoconjugates were regarded as an ideal choice for both ex vivo and in vivo biological imaging and labeling applications because the penetration depth of the NIR emission was much greater than that of the short-wavelength visible light emission. As shown in Fig. 48a, the penetration depth of the green emission near 540 nm was observed to be approximately 2 mm. Moreover, the penetration depth of the red emission near 660 nm was observed to be approximately 5 mm. As shown in Fig. 48b, the upconverted NIR emission could be observed by detecting the injection site. Next, Dox-loaded nanoconjugates were injected into the tumor site by 980 nm laser irradiation to examine the therapeutic effects of synthetic nanoconjugates on drug release in tumor-bearing mice. As shown in Fig. 48c and d, the size of the tumor gradually decreased when exposed to the NIR laser, revealing that the drug was successfully released into the tumor site.
 Fig. 48  The images of deep tissue and photothermal therapy of a subcutaneous tumor in corpora were recorded. (a) CCD imaging of NIR, red, and green emissions. (b) The upconversion images of the tumor-bearing mouse were recorded in corpora. (c) The volume change of the HeLa tumor. (d) Photographs of the tumor-bearing mice taken after different treatments. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission of Wiley. 
Bharat et al.127 reported a method to detect and enhance latent fingerprints at crime scenes by using CaMoO4 nanoparticles doped with Eu3+ and Tb3+ ions. The fresh and powder fingerprint images are shown in Fig. 49a and b. The samples under UV light showed strong red and green visible emissions, as shown in Fig. 49c and d. The minutiae in the green color latent fingerprint image are shown in Fig. 49e–h. It follows that the enhanced fingerprints have high contrast. Liu et al.128 reported a facile way to develop new multicolor luminescent materials with long lives. In his work, multicolor long-lived luminescence emissions in dye-encapsulated metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) were achieved through the transfer of phosphorescence energy from the MOFs to the dye. This work established the foundation for developing a series of advanced luminescent anticounterfeiting materials, for example anticounterfeiting stamps.
 Fig. 49  The fingerprint images for optical anti-counterfeiting under ultraviolet light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission of Nature. 
5. Conclusion and challenges
In this review, the controllable synthesis of diverse morphologies of phosphor crystals through a variety of approaches and their morphology-dependent luminescence properties were systematically discussed. Many applications of rare earth ion-doped phosphors were indicated. The shape and size of phosphor crystals were determined by complicated hydrothermal conditions during the synthesis process, including the temperature, the reaction time, the pH value, the addition of surfactants, and the adjustment of the reactant ratio, and doping ions. The morphology-dependent luminescence properties for rare earth-doped crystals were investigated including their emission intensity and emission band ratio.
The modification mechanisms of crystal morphologies were summarized in materials of fluorides, oxides and multi-metal compounds. The crystal formation experienced a dissolution–reconstruction process and the morphology could be efficiently adjusted by the selective absorption of surfactant molecules. The various growth rates for different crystal faces induced preferential orientations to certain morphologies. Moreover, the mechanisms of morphology-dependent luminescence properties were investigated in different rare earth-doped crystals. The specific surface area of crystals played an important role in their luminescence properties. Not only did a large amount of nonradiative defect centers exist, but the symmetry of the crystal field also became distorted due to the larger surface area, which led to luminescence properties being influenced by various morphologies.
Rare earth ion-doped phosphors have attracted more attention due to their outstanding and extensive applications in biological nanoprobes, optical anticounterfeiting, upconversion nanomaterials and so on. However, these new technologies will still face great challenges in the future when translated to real-world applications and products. For example, although high-quality lanthanide doped upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) have become increasingly prominent in a wide range of application fields, the low upconversion efficiency of lanthanide UCNPs has remained the major limitation for their related applications.
Although individual crystal morphologies could be well controllably synthesized and relevant mechanisms could also be illustrated, the influencing factors were too much complicated. There was no versatile approach to easy control materials to be a certain shape or size. If more general or simple control methods were realized, the morphology effects and morphology-dependent application would spread into broader fields. On the other hand, some of the morphology-dependent effects on photo-luminescent properties were addressed but more effects that are physical did not attract sufficient attention. It is a potential research topic to explore the morphology or surface effects from a new and special viewpoint.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (11404171), the Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation for Excellent Young Scholars (BK20170101), and the Scientific Research Foundation of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications (NY220011, NY220034).
References
P. Wang, R. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Su and H. Luo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 866–870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, W. Zheng, S. Zhou, D. Tu, Z. Chen, H. Zhu and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1252–1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Liao, T. Wang, H. Wu, J. Qiu, Z. Song and D. Zhou, Mater. Express, 2014, 4, 172–176 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gutiérrez-Martín, F. Fernández-Martinez, P. Díaz, C. Colón and A. Alonso-Medina, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 501, 193–197 CrossRef .
G. A. Kumar, M. Pokhrel and D. K. Sardar, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 395–398 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Tao, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 551, 485–489 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Wan, T. Yu, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, S. Xie, Y. Li, L. Xu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7976–7979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Yan, T. Wang, Y. Bu, C. Kan and Y. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7137–7144 RSC .
E. Yang, G. Li, C. Fu, J. Zheng, X. Huang, W. Xu and L. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 647, 648–659 CrossRef CAS .
L. Makkonen, Adv. Sci. Focus, 2013, 1, 367–368 CrossRef .
G. Li, C. Peng, C. Li, P. Yang, Z. Hou, Y. Fan, Z. Cheng and J. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 1449–1457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. W. Park, B. K. Moon, B. C. Choi, J. H. Jeong and C. Guo, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 8255–8261 RSC .
H. Xu, K. Xu, A. Lu, X. Wang and J. Hu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 3921–3925 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, J. Shen, C. Lu, Y. Chen and W. Hou, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3129–3136 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Leng, N. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Li and S. Gan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 330, 270–279 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Sharma, R. K. Dutta and A. C. Pandey, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 2331–2333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nohara, S. Takeshita, Y. Iso and T. Isobe, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 3311–3317 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, Y. Wang, X. Bai, B. Dong, Q. Liu, J. Chen and H. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14018–14024 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ray, A. Banerjee and P. Pramanik, Mater. Sci. Eng., 2009, 156, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bao, H. Lai, Y. Yang, W. Xu, C. Tao, H. Zhang and H. Yang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2008, 310, 4394–4399 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Singh, R. Ningthoujam, G. Phaomei, S. D. Singh, A. Vinu and R. Vatsa, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 4404–4412 RSC .
L. Yang, L. Li, M. Zhao and G. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9956–9965 RSC .
Y. Tian, B. Chen, B. Tian, Y. Mao, J. Sun, X. Li, J. Zhang, S. Fu, H. Zhong and B. Dong, J. Nano Res., 2013, 15, 1757 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, Y. Ni and E. Sheng, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 8994–9000 RSC .
D. Evans, D. Mitchell and B. Ninham, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 2817–2825 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zheng, W. Song, C. Lv, Z. Liu and W. Qin, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 4329–4337 RSC .
M. Ding, S. Yin, Y. Ni, C. Lu, D. Chen, J. Zhong, Z. Ji and Z. Xu, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 7411–7420 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Q. Shao, Y. Dong and J. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22807–22813 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, B. Xu, C. Song, H. Luo, X. Zou, L. Han and X. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 2936–2943 RSC .
T. Jiang, W. Qin and D. Zhao, Mater. Lett., 2012, 74, 54–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hao, W. Shao, H. Qiu, Y. Shang, R. Fan, X. Guo, L. Zhao, G. Chen and C. Yang, RSC Adv., 2014, 46, 56302–56306 RSC .
G. S. Ningombam and R. S. Nongmaithem, Int. Nano Lett., 2017, 7, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
W. Strek, D. Hreniak, A. Bednarkiewicz, P. Mazur, P. J. Deren and W. Lojkowski, Inter. Soc. Opt. Pho., 2004, 5508, 238–245 CAS .
M. P. Pileni, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zeng, Z. H. Li, J. Su, L. Wang, R. Yan and Y. Li, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3549 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. S. Liu, T. Yu and X. Yan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13440–13446 RSC .
Y. Tian, B. Tian, P. Huang, L. Wang and B. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 14123–14128 RSC .
X. Bai, H. Song, G. Pan, Y. Lei, W. Tie, X. Ren, S. Lu, B. Dong, Q. Dai and L. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13611–13617 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ting, G. Chong and L. Lin, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 18281–18289 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Da Silva, M. T. De Araujo, E. A. Gouveia and A. S. Gouveia-Neto, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2000, 70, 185–188 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Dos Santos, E. A. Gouveia, M. T. De Araujo, A. S. Gouveia-Neto, A. S. Sombra and J.A. Medeiros Neto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 3607–3609 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Gouveia, M. T. de Araujo and A. S. Gouveia-Neto, Braz. J. Phys., 2001, 31, 89–101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shang, S. Hao, J. Liu, M. Tan, N. Wang, C. Yang and G. Chen, Nanomaterials, 2015, 5, 218–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 727–734 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, W. Xu, H. Song and S. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 6139–6147 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Liu, Z. Chai, G. Xu, S. Yu and J. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 8262–8272 RSC .
J. Shan and Y. Ju, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 123103 CrossRef .
T. Pornphatdetaudom and K. Serivalsatit, Key Eng. Mater., 2016, 690, 120–125 Search PubMed .
X. Liang, X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6050–6055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Li, D. Yang and J. Lin, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 354, 429–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Quan, P. Yang, S. Huang, H. Lian and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13395–13404 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. Quan, P. Yang, J. Yang, H. Lian and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1353–1361 RSC .
Y. Luo, R. Yang, X. Zhang, B. Hu, S. Hu, L. Zhou and J. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 7762–7771 RSC .
X. Qu, H. K. Yang, G. Pan, J. W. Chung, B. K. Moon, B. C. Choi and J. H. Jeong, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 3387–3393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Han, C. S. Lim, Y. Lu, J. Wang, J. Xu, H. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Hong and X. Liu, Nature, 2010, 463, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, R. Hu, H. Wang and D. Wang, Mater. Res. Express, 2014, 2, 015001 CrossRef .
X. Yu, M. Li, M. Xie, L. Chen, Y. Li and Q. Wang, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 51–60 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiang, J. Zhang, Z. Hao, X. Zhang, G.-H. Pan, Y. Luo and H. Zhao, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 3103–3109 RSC .
W. Zhu, Q. Wu, S. Zhao, Z. Liang, Y. Yang, J. Zhang and Z. Xu, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 3001–3007 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 2165–2176 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Damasco, G. Chen, W. Shao, H. Ågren, H. Huang, W. Song, J. F. Lovell and P. N. Prasad, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13884–13893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Bu, Y. Xiao, C. Kan, D. Lu and X. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3158–3166 RSC .
D. Chen, Y. Yu, F. Huang, P. Huang, A. Yang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9976–9978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Du, W. Guo, J. M. K. Al-zyadi, Y. Han, P. Liu and Z. Liu, J. Nano Res., 2013, 15, 1619 CrossRef .
J. Wan, Z. Wang, X. Chen, L. Mu and Y. Qian, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 284, 538–543 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Liang, M. Zhang and D. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 6670–6679 RSC .
Y. Tian, B. Tian, P. Huang, L. Wang and B. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 14123–14128 RSC .
J.-G. Li, Q. Zhu, X. Li, X. Sun and Y. Sakka, Acta Mater., 2011, 59, 3688–3696 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gai, P. Yang, D. Wang, C. Li, N. Niu, F. He and X. Li, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 5480–5487 RSC .
S. Sadhu, T. Sen and A. Patra, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 440, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yoshida and S. Fujihara, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 1577–1583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, X. Qi, X. Wu, R. Hua and B. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10767–10772 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Zhou, Y. Huang and Z. Tang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 131, 477–484 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Cohen, A. D. Ostrowski, E. M. Chan, D. J. Gargas, E. M. Katz, P. J. Schuck and D. J. Milliron, US Pat. Appl. Publ., 2017, 556, 379 Search PubMed .
J. Sun, J. Xian, X. Zhang and H. Du, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 2348–2354 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Xue, S. Uechi, R. N. Tiwari, Z. Duan, M. Liao, M. Yoshimura, T. Suzuki and Y. Ohishi, Conf. on., IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–2.
D. Chen, L. Lei, J. Xu, A. Yang and Y. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 085708 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, J. Wang and Y. Mei, AIP Adv., 2017, 7, 025009 CrossRef .
I. Botev, J. Anal. Chem., 1979, 297, 419 CAS .
S. Schietinger, L. D. S. Menezes, B. R. Lauritzen and O. Benson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2477–2481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Zou, B. Xu, H. Luo, H. Lv, L. Han and X. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3149–3155 RSC .
S. Sadhu, P. S. Chowdhury and A. Patra, J. Lumin., 2007, 126, 387–392 CrossRef CAS .
B. Judd, Phys. Rev., 1962, 127, 750 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ofelt, J. Chem. Phys., 1962, 37, 511–520 CrossRef CAS .
G. Blasse and B. Grabmaier, Lumin. Mater., 1994, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. L. Debasu, D. Ananias, A. G. Macedo, J. Rocha and L. D. Carlos, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15297–15303 CrossRef CAS .
W. Strek, E. Zych and D. Hreniak, J. Alloys Compd., 2002, 344, 332–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ray, S. F. Leon-Luis, F. J. Manjon, M. A. Mollar, O. Gomis, U. R. Rodríguez-Mendoza, S. Agouram, A. Munoz and V. Lavin, Broadband, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 72–81 CrossRef .
C. Shang, X. Shang, Y. Qu and M. Li, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 501, 480–484 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Zhang, S. Zhou, X. Cao and Y. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13115–13120 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Wei, L. D. Sun, X. C. Jiang, C. S. Liao, C. H. Yan, Y. Tao, J. Zhang, T. D. Hu and Y. N. Xie, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3011–3017 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Williams and H. Yuan, J. Lumin., 1999, 83, 297–300 CrossRef .
D. Wawrzynczyk, M. Nyk, A. Bednarkiewicz, W. Strek and M. Samoc, J. Nano Res., 2014, 16, 2690 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yang, G. Li, X. Kang, Z. Cheng, C. Peng, H. Lian, C. Li and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3450–3459 RSC .
H. Song and J. Wang, J. Lumin., 2006, 118, 220–226 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Meng, B. Chen, W. Xu, Y. Yang, X. Zhao, W. Di, S. Lu, X. Wang, J. Sun and L. Cheng, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 093505 CrossRef .
E. Goldburt, B. Kulkarni, R. Bhargava, J. Taylor and M. Libera, J. Lumin., 1997, 72, 190–192 CrossRef .
G. Wang, W. Qin, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Cao, L. Wang, G. Wei, P. Zhu and R. Kim, Opt. Mater., 2008, 31, 296–299 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, W. Qin, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, C. Cao, L. Wang, G. Wei, P. Zhu and R. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12161–12167 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, W. Qin, Y. Xu, L. Wang, G. Wei, P. Zhu and R. Kim, J. Fluorine Chem., 2008, 129, 1110–1113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Xu and Q. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 084701 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, K. Zheng, D. Zhao, N. Liu and W. Qin, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 9584–9587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Meltzer, S. Feofilov, B. Tissue and H. Yuan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, R14012 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ling, H. Tao, C. Hui and T. Zhang, J. Rare Earths, 2013, 31, 235–240 CrossRef .
X. J. Wang, Z. He, D. Jia, W. Strek, R. Dariusz, D. Hreniak and W. Yen, Microelectron. J., 2005, 36, 546–548 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Dalpian and J. R. Chelikowsky, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 226802 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. Wang, H. Zhao, S. Lu and X. J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18044–18048 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hakim, K. Damak, M. Gemmi, S. Luin, R. Maalej and A. Toncelli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2844–2851 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, X. Hao, J. Zhou, Y. Jiao, W. He, H. Wang, J. Lu and S. E. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2012, 83, 49–51 CrossRef CAS .
D. Patel, A. Lewis, D. Wright, M. Velentine, D. Lewis, R. Valentine and S. Sarkisov, Inter. Soc. Opt. Pho., 2014, 8982, 898221 Search PubMed .
P. J. Dereń, A. Bednarkiewicz, P. Goldner and O. Guillot-Noël, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 043102 CrossRef .
X. Qin, X. Liu, W. Huang, M. Bettinelli and X. Liu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 29–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yao, Q. Tian, J. Liu, Z. Wu, S. Cui, J. Ding, Z. Dai and W. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6327–6335 RSC .
J. M. Meruga, A. Baride, W. Cross, J. J. Kellar and P. S. May, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2221–2227 RSC .
D. Chen, Y. Liu, J. Chen, H. Huang, J. Zhong and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1321–1329 RSC .
D. Yang, Z. Peng, Q. Zhan, X. Huang, X. Peng, X. Guo and J. Qiu, Small, 2019, 15, 1904298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, Q. Pan, S. Kang, G. Dong and J. Qiu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2019, 102, 6027–6037 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Y. Peng, X. Li, J. Zhong, H. Huang and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30053–30064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gu, H. Shi, L. Bian, M. Gu, K. Ling, X. Wang, H. Ma, S. Cai, W. Ning, L. Fu, H. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Gao, W. Yao, F. Huo, Y. Tao, Z. An, X. Liu and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Z. Yi, X. Qin, H. Liu, W. Huang and X. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900519 CrossRef .
S. Wu, H. Xia, J. Xu, X. Sun and X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803362 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6831–6847 RSC .
Q. Chen, X. Xie, B. Huang, L. Liang, S. Han, Z. Yi and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 7713–7717 CrossRef .
S. Han, A. Samanta, X. Xie, L. Huang, J. Peng, S. J. Park, D. B. Teh, Y. Choi, Y. Chang, A. H. All, Y. Yang, B. Xing and X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700244 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, A. Z. Weitemier, X. Zeng, L. He, X. Wang, Y. Tao and L. K. Parajuli, Science, 2018, 359, 679–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Bharat, G. S. Raju and J. S. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Zhuang, L. Wang, T. Zhou, N. Hirosaki and R. J. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1802–1809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yao, P. Hu, P. Sun, M. Liu, R. Dong, Y. F. Liu, K. Chao, Y. Liu and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, A. Dong, J. Sun, R. Tang, H. Yu and W. E. Buhro, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7511–7521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
Table Content:

Xiangfu Wang
	Xiangfu Wang received his PhD degree from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2012. From 2012 to present, he has worked as an associate professor in the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China. His current research concentrates on optoelectronic devices and sensors and the photoluminescence of rare-earth ion doped nano-materials and transparent glass ceramics.

Jintang Xu
	Jintang Xu obtained his bachelor's degree from the Nanjing Jinling Institute of Technology in 2017. From 2017 to present, he has worked for his master's degree in Xiangfu Wang's group. His current research concentrates on the optical properties of rare earth ion doped perovskite phosphors.

Jihong Yu
	Jihong Yu obtained his bachelor's degree from the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2018. From 2018 to present, he has worked for his master's degree in Xiangfu Wang's group. His current research concentrates on the design of flexible capacitive pressure sensors.

Yanyan Bu
	Yanyan Bu obtained her PhD degree from the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2017. From 2017 to present, she has worked as a senior engineer in the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Her current research concentrates on the optical temperature sensing of rare-earth ion doped transparent glass ceramics.

Jose Marques-Hueso
	Jose Marques-Hueso received his MSc degree in physics from the University of Valencia, Spain, and his PhD degree with the Optoelectronic Materials and Devices Group, Materials Institute, University of Valencia, in 2011, where he completed the PG Cert. on photonics in 2006. From 2002 to 2005, he was with the Soft-Matter Group, Johannes Gutenberg Universität Mainz, Germany. In 2011, he joined Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK, as a Research Associate to apply photon-managing technologies to materials for solar cells. In 2015, he commenced a position as a Research Fellow to study the use of metallic nanocomposites. Since 2017, he has been an assistant professor with the Institute of Sensors, Signals and Systems, Heriot-Watt University. He has published over 60 journal and conference papers, two book chapters, and an international patent. He has participated in more than 50 conferences and scientific events, including symposium and conference organization and several invited oral presentations. His research interests include the use of luminescent and functional materials for optoelectronic devices, sensors, and manufacturing processes.

Xiaohong Yan
	Xiaohong Yan received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 1997. From 2010 to present, he has worked as a professor in the College of Electronic Science and Engineering at the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His current research concentrates on the transport and manipulation of quantum systems and new energy materials.

 	Fig. 1  Surfactant shapes and various self-assemblies in colloidal solution. (a) Cone-shaped surfactant resulting in (b) normal micelles. (c) Champagne cork shaped surfactant resulting in (d) reverse micelles with controlled size by water content tuning. (e) Interconnected cylinders. (f) Planar lamellar phase. (g) Onion-like lamellar phase. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission of Nature.	 

 	Fig. 2  Scheme of the liquid–solid–solution (LSS) phase transfer synthetic strategy. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission of Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of nanocrystals. (a) Noble metal nanocrystals: Ag, Au, Rh and Ir. (b) Semiconductor nanocrystals: Ag2S, PbS, ZnSe, and CdSe. (c) Magnetic and dielectric nanocrystals: Fe3O4, CoFe2O4, BaTiO3 and TiO2. (d) Rare earth fluorescent nanocrystals: NaYF4, YF3, LaF3 and YbF3. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission of Nature.	 

 	Fig. 4  Cyclohexane solutions of nanoparticles with a typical concentration of 2%. (a–c) Cyclohexane solutions of noble metals (a), semiconductors (b), and rare earth fluorescent and magnetic nanocrystals (c). Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission of Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of arrays of hexagonal nanotubes of NaYF4, (b) TEM image of the nanotubes and the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray patterns, (c) SEM image of arrays of flower-patterned hexagonal disks of NaYF4, (d) TEM image of the disks and the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray pattern, (e) SEM image of arrays of hexagonal nanorods of β-NaYF4 and (f) TEM image of the nanorods and the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray pattern. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission of Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the proposed process for the formation of arrays of NaYF4 nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission of Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of Na1.23Ca0.12Y1.28Er0.24F6 nanodisks (1a), (1b), (1c), nanorods (2a), (2b), (2c) and nanotubes (3a), (3b), (3c) of the time-dependent morphology evolution of the dissolution–reconstruction process at different time intervals of 1 h, 6 h and 36 h. Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a–c) Crossed microrods and spherical crossed morphologies; (d) branched or multiarmed structure of a β-NaYF4 crystal. Reproduced from ref. 49 and 50 with permission of Trans Tech Publications and American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  TEM characterization of NaYF4:Yb/Er (18/2 mol%) nanocrystals. (a–c) Products obtained after heating for 2, 5 and 10 h without Gd3+ doping. (d–f) Products obtained after heating for 2 h in the presence of 30, 45 and 60 mol% Gd3+ ions. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission of Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  Iso-surfaces of charge density differences in (a) BaF2, (b) BaF2:25%Bi3+, (c) BaF2:25%Al3+, (d) BaF2:25%Gd3+, (e) BaF2:25%Yb3+, (f) SrF2, (g) SrF2:12.5%Bi3+, (h) SrF2:12.5%Al3+, (i) SrF2:25%Gd3+, (j) SrF2:25%Yb3+, (k) NaGdF4, (l) NaGdF4:Al3+ and (m) NaGdF4:Ba2+ crystals. (Positive and negative charges are drawn in yellow and blue, respectively). Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the role of inner electric charge transfer in controlling the shape and size of fluoride nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of annealed Y2O3:Eu3+ hexagonal prisms that were synthesized with various volume ratios of H2O and oleylamine: (a) 1:14; (b) 5:9; (c) 9:6; and (d) 13:2. (e) The formation mechanism of Y4O(OH)9(NO3):Eu3+ hexagonal prisms. Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  FE-SEM images of GaOOH:Dy3+ precursors synthesized at different pH values: (a) pH 4.0, (b) pH 6.0, (c) pH 7.0 and (d) pH 9.0 (insets: magnified images). (e) The formation mechanism of the various morphologies with various pH values of 4, 6, 7, and 9 for fixed conditions. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of Gd(OH)3:Eu3+ prepared (a and b) in the absence of urea and (c and d) in the presence of urea at pH = 9.0. (e) The mechanism of the possible formation process for the hexagonal prism-like structures of Gd(OH)3. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Modified NaY(MoO4)2 crystal morphologies by adjusting the Y(OH)3/MoO42− molar ratio and the water/ethanol volume ratio and (b) proposed formation mechanism of NaY(MoO4)2 morphologies. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Flower-like morphology of Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ crystals synthesized by a hydrothermal method in the absence of EDTA; (b) dandelion-like morphology of Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+ crystals in the presence of EDTA ((b1) detailed view of dandelion-like architectures); and (c) growth evolution processes of different morphologies influenced by EDTA. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a–d) The morphologies of CaWO4:Eu3+ crystals with various Ca2+/Cit3− molar ratios of 1/0.5, 1/1, 1/2, and 1/4; and (e) the formation mechanism of CaWO4:Eu3+ microstructures with different morphologies. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  The morphologies of GdBO3 crystals synthesized with different boron sources (a) H3BO3, (b) Na2B4O7·10H2O, (c) NaBO2·4H2O and Gd(OH)3 as precursors in the hydrothermal process. (d) Schematic of the formation processes of GdBO3 micropancakes/microflowers/microleaves. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  Luminescence properties of β-NaYF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ crystals with different morphologies: (a) the peak areas of green and red emissions; (b) upconversion (UC) emission spectra (c); CIE chromaticity diagram of samples; and (d) decay profiles of samples monitored at 652 nm. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+ microcrystals with various morphologies and their corresponding UC emission spectra: (a) microcrystals with different morphologies synthesized at different OA/Ln3+ molar ratios; (b) UC emission spectra of the samples in (a); (c) microcrystals with different morphologies synthesized at different F−/Ln3+ molar ratios; and (d) UC emission spectra of samples in (c). Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission of MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 21  Temperature-dependent UC emission spectra of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ with various morphologies – (a) bulk, (b) 66 nm nanoparticles, (c) 32 nm nanoparticles, and (d) 7 nm NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles; (e) UC emission spectra of crystals with various sizes measured at room-temperature; (f) integrated intensities of different-sized crystals as a function of temperature. (Integrated intensities at 25 °C were normalized.) Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
σge(T) = σ0ab[exp(hωp/kBT) − 1]−P	(6)
WNRij(T) = WNRij(0)[1 − exp(−hωp/kBT)]−P	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 22  The different morphologies of crystals synthesized with the same conditions and the related luminescence properties: (a) morphology and size of the undoped NaYF4 crystals; (b) morphology and size of NaYF4:(Yb3+,Er3+)/La3+ crystals; (c) morphology and size of NaYF4:(Yb3+,Er3+)/Ce3+ crystals; and (d) the corresponding emission spectra. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission of Springer.	 

 	Fig. 23  The multiphonon-assisted energy transfer between Yb3+ and Er3+. The solid arrows up and down indicate the absorption and emission of phonons, respectively. Bold arrows indicate energy-transfer processes. Tilted arrows represent the absorption and emission mechanisms of multiphonons.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Emission spectra of the NaLuF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er2+,xY3+ crystals (x = 0%, 20%, 30%, 40%) (the maximum intensity of the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 transition was normalized); and (b–f) the corresponding morphologies after doping with various Y3+ concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Morphologies of 0.4CaF2–0.6YbF3:Er crystals with different mean sizes synthesized at different temperatures. (b) UC emission spectra of 0.4CaF2–0.6YbF3:Er crystals with different mean sizes in (a). (c) UC emission spectra of (1 − x)CaF2–xYbF3:Er3+ crystals obtained at 210 °C (539 nm emission bands were normalized). (d) Dependence of the R/G ratio on Lu3+ content for the (0.8 − x) CaF2–xLuF3:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+ prepared at 210 °C. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission of IOP publishing.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Lengths and diameters of β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ microcrystals. (b) UC emission spectra of microcrystals with different morphologies as horizontally settled. (c) UC spectra of microcrystals with different sizes as horizontally settled (H) and vertically settled (V). (d) Integrated intensities of the green and red emission bands and the R/G ratios of the samples from (c). Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission of AIP Publishing.	 
lnγ = lnγ0·[α(green) − α(red)]·L	(11)

 	Fig. 27  UC emission spectra of single NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocrystals with heights of (a) 47.1 nm and (b) 5.6 nm (insets: AFM scans to determine the size of the particles); (c) integrated UC emission intensity versus crystal height; and (d) R/G intensity ratio versus crystal height. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 

20%Yb3+	β-NaYF4	
2H11/2 → 4I15/2	980	520, 539, 652	
27

2%Er3+	
4S3/2 → 4I15/2

	
4F9/2 → 4I15/2
10%Nd3+	β-NaYF4	
2H9/2 → 4I15/2	808	410	
44

10%Yb3+	
4H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2
2%Er3+	
4H9/2 → 4I15/2
20%Yb3+	BaYF5	
2H9/2 → 4I15/2	980	410, 520, 540, 653	
76

2%Er3+	
2H11/2 → 4I15/2

	
4S3/2 → 4I15/2

	
4F9/2 → 4I15/2
5%Yb3+	Lu2O3	
2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2	980	547, 667	
26

1%Er3+	
4F9/2 → 4I15/2
20%Yb3+	LiYF4	
4G11/2 → 4I15/2,	976	379, 408, 522, 550	
77

1%Er3+	
2H9/2 → 4I15/2

	
4H11/2 → 4I15/2

	
4S3/2 → 4I15/2

	
4F9/2 → 4I15/2
20%Yb3+	NaYF4	
4H11/2 → 4I15/2	975	525, 545, 660	
28

2%Er3+	
4S3/2 → 4I15/2

	
4F9/2 → 4I15/2
20%Yb3+	NaYF4	
4H11/2 → 4I15/2	975	550, 660	
58

5%Er3+	
4S3/2 → 4I15/2

	
4F9/2 → 4I15/2
20%Yb3+	NaLuF4	
2H11/2 → 4I15/2	980	520, 540	
59

2%Er3+	
4S3/2 → 4I15/2
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)

 	Fig. 28  Brief energy level distribution and schematic diagram of energy transfer of Er3+/Yb3+ in the up-conversion luminescence mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 29  Photoluminescence excitation and emission spectra of GdBO3:0.05Eu3+ with different morphologies. S1 – micropancakes; S2 – microflowers; S3 – microleaves. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of various Eu3+ doped phosphor materials. (a) GdBO3:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission of Elsevier. (b) NaYF4:Eu3+/Tb3+. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Y2(WO4)3:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission of American Chemical Society (d) GdVO4:Ln3+ (Ln3+ = Dy3+, Eu3+, Sm3+, Tm3+). Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of various Eu3+ doped phosphor materials. (a) NaY(MoO4)2:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Y2O3:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) CaWO4:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) ZnO:Eu3+. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 32  Size-dependent emission spectra of (a) YBO3:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission of OSA. And (b) CdS:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) 5D0 → 7F2 emission intensity, decay time and quantum yield as functions of aspect ratios for Y2O3:Eu3+ crystals. (b) 5D0 → 7F2 emission intensity (filled circles) and asymmetry factor (open circles) as functions of crystal size for Gd2O3:Eu3+ crystals. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 34  Spectral bands shifted with the various crystal sizes. (a) Raman spectra of Y2O3:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission of Elsevier. (b) Absorption spectra of YVO4:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission of American Chemical Society. (c) Charge transfer band of excitation spectra for the Y2O3:Eu3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission of Elsevier. (d) The peak locations of the Mo–O excitation for R2MoO6:Eu3+ (R = La, Gd, Y). Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 

5%Eu3+	GdBO3	
5D0 → 7F1	391	591, 610, 625	
15


5D0 → 7F2
Eu3+	GdBO3	
5D0 → 7F1	395	595, 613, 627, 652, 675, 708	
74


5D0 → 7F2

5D0 → 7F3

5D0 → 7F4
20%Eu3+	NaYF4	
5D0 → 7F1	394	590, 614, 650, 690	
47


5D0 → 7F2

5D0 → 7F3

5D0 → 7F4
3%Sm3+	GdVO4	
6H5/2 → 4D5/2	310	364, 380, 393, 407, 420, 422, 468	
21

2%Dy3+	
6P7/2, 4G11/2, 4F7/2
5%Eu3+	
6P5/2, 4G9/2, 4I13/2
2%Tm3+	

Eu3+	Y2(WO4)3	
5G0 → 7F2	614	394	
14

5%Eu3+	NaY(MoO4)2	
5D0 → 7F2	276	615	
29

5%Eu3+	Y2O3	
5D0 → 7F1	611	552, 586, 611, 630	
82


5D0 → 7F2

5D0 → 7F3
5%Eu3+	CaWO4	
5D0 → 7F1	396	617	
12


5D0 → 7F2

5D0 → 7F3

5D0 → 7F4
1%Eu3+	ZnO	
5D0 → 7F1	396	588, 613	
71


5D0 → 7F2
0.5%Eu3+	CdS	
5D0 → 7F1	347	614, 590	
83


5D0 → 7F2
0.5%Eu3+	La2MoO6	
5D0 → 7F1	612	530, 550, 583	
91


5D0 → 7F2

5D0 → 7F3

 	Fig. 35  Morphology-dependent photoluminescence excitation and emission spectral properties of various Tb3+ doped phosphor materials. (a) YBO3:Ce3+,Tb3+ nanophosphor. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission of Springer. (b) KGdF4:Ce3+,Tb3+ nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) NaCeF4:Tb3+ crystals. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission of American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  Size-dependent luminescence properties of Y2O3:Tb3+ nanocrystals: (a) emission spectra and (b) temperature-dependent integral intensity of the 5D4–7F5 transition. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission of Elsevier.	 

15%Tb3+	YBO3	
5D4 → 7F5	360	544	
17

3%Ce3+
4%Tb3+	KGdF4	
5D4 → 7F5	273	545	
95

1%Tb3+	Y2O3	
7F6 → 5D4	488	620	
96

0.05%Tb3+	Y2O3	
5D3 → 7F5	273	423, 543	
97


5D4 → 7F5

 	Fig. 37  Size-dependent luminescence properties of CaF2:Yb3+,Tm3+ crystals: (a) 250–400 nm; (b) 400–740 nm; and (c) 740–900 nm and (d) crystal morphologies with various sizes. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 38  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of various Tm3+ ion doped phosphor materials. (a) NaYbF4:Tm3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission of Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ crystals. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission of Trans Tech Publications. (c) YF3:Yb3+/Tm3+ nanobundles (aging time: a – 24 h, b – 48 h, c – 72 h). Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission of Elsevier.	 

20%Tb3+	CaF2	
1I6 → 3H6	980	291, 347, 362	
30

0.5%Tm3+	
1I1 → 3F4

1D2 → 3H6
0.5%Tm3+	NaYbF4	
1I6 → 3F4	975	358, 450, 471, 650	
62


1D2 → 3F4

1G4 → 3H6

1G4 → 3F4
20%Tb3+	NaYF4	
1D2 → 3F4	980	450, 461, 469, 492, 552, 537, 656	
49

0.5%Tm3+	
1G4 → 3H6

1D2 → 3H5

1F2 → 3H6
20%Tb3+	YF3	
1D2 → 3H4	980	643, 649, 687	
101

1%Tm3+	
1G4 → 3F4

3F3 → 3H6

 	Fig. 39  Size-dependent luminescence properties of GdVO4:Dy3+: (a) the PL-PLE spectra; (b) the SEM photographs; (c) the concentration-dependent integral intensity (inset: the log–log plot of Dy3+ concentration and intensity for the 4F9/2 → 6H13/2 transition); and (d) fluorescence decay curves of the 4F9/2. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission of Springer.	 

 	Fig. 40  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of various kinds of Dy3+ doped materials: (a) YVO4:Dy3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission of Elsevier. (b) Gd2O3:Dy3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission of Elsevier. (c) Sr2ZnSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+ crystals. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission of Elsevier.	 

2%Dy3+	GdVO4	
4H9/2 → 6H15/2	277	483, 574	
23


4H9/2 → 6H13/2
2%Dy3+	YVO4	
4F9/2 → 6H15/2	280	480, 572	
19

4%Eu3+	
4F9/2 → 6H13/2
Dy3+	Gd2O3	
4F9/2 → 6H15/2	350	486, 573	
105


4F9/2 → 6H13/2

 	Fig. 41  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of Pr3+ doped materials. (a) NaYF4:Yb3+/Pr3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) NaYF4:Pr3+–Yb3+nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission of Trans Tech Publications.	 

0.5%Pr3+	NaYF4	
3P0 → 3H4	980	486, 523, 540, 605	
31

10%–70%Yb3+	
1I6 → 3H5

3P1 → 3H5

3P0 → 3H6

3P0 → 3F2
1%Pr3+	NaLnF4	
3P0 → 3H6	466	603, 980	
57

3%Yb3+	
2F5/2 → 2F7/2
0.4%Pr3+	CaTiO3	
1D2 → 3H4	355	615	
108


 	Fig. 42  Morphology-dependent luminescence properties of (a) NaYF4:Yb3+,Ho3+ nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission of Elsevier. (b) CaWO4:Sm3+ microspheres. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission of Springer.	 

1%Ho3+	β-NaYF4	5F5 → 5I8	980	644, 747	
110

25%Yb3+	
5S2 → 5I7
5%Sm3+	CaWO4	
4G5/2 → 6H5/2	240	645	
32

1%Sm3+	CeO2	
4G5/2 → 6H5/2	350	574	
72

1%Nd3+	LaGaO3	
4F3/2 → 4I11/2	792	909, 1080	
112


4F3/2 → 4I9/2

 	Fig. 43  Different types of upconversion anticounterfeiting associated with nanocrystals. (a) Optical decoding of the encrypted paper that was performed by near-infrared light exposure. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Four groups of RGB patterns were printed. (c) The upconversion luminescence images were obtained under 980 nm excitation. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 44  The color-tunable ultra-long organic (UOP) phosphorescence for visual detection under ultraviolet light and multicolor displays were demonstrated. (a) The process of screen printing. (b) The schematic diagrams of the experimental facility for multicolor display by varying the excitation wavelength from 250 to 400 nm. (c) The patterns of a peace dove and a panda inked with TMOT (left) and DClCzT (right). Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission of Nature.	 

 	Fig. 45  The Ca2+/Mn2+co-doped multilayer nanoparticles are used to encrypt multilevel data. (a) Using different kinds of UCNPs to create 2D covert patterns on a card. The patterns of optical scenarios generated on (b) steady and (c) dynamic excitation. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission of Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 46  (A) An immunolabeling schematic of HeLa cells was indicated on the basis of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNPs. Upconversion fluorescence imaging of HeLa recorded in (B) bright and (C) dark fields, and (D) overlay of both (B) and (C). Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) The emission spectra were recorded for NaErF4:Tm@NaYF4 nanoparticles under excitation at 808, 980, and 1532 nm. (b) The in vivo optical images of NaErF4:Tm@NaYF4 nanoparticles coated with silicate were recorded. (c) Luminescence profiles of the nanocrystals. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission of Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 48  The images of deep tissue and photothermal therapy of a subcutaneous tumor in corpora were recorded. (a) CCD imaging of NIR, red, and green emissions. (b) The upconversion images of the tumor-bearing mouse were recorded in corpora. (c) The volume change of the HeLa tumor. (d) Photographs of the tumor-bearing mice taken after different treatments. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission of Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 49  The fingerprint images for optical anti-counterfeiting under ultraviolet light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission of Nature.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
