Design of functional polymer nanomaterials for antimicrobial therapy and combatting resistance  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00837K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00837K
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1236-1252Design of functional polymer nanomaterials for antimicrobial therapy and combatting resistance

        
          
            Zelin 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Haotian 
            Bai†
b, 
      
        
          
            Shaochuan 
            Jia
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huanxiang 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Li-Hua 
            Gao
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Haiyan 
            Liang
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Materials Engineering, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing 100048, P. R. China. E-mail: yhx@iccas.ac.cn
bKey Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China
Received 
      19th October 2020
    , Accepted 10th November 2020First published on 10th November 2020AbstractHuman health is facing a severe threat from pathogenic infections, particularly the emergence of antibiotic-resistant microorganisms has deepened the public's fear. The series of clinical diseases caused by microbial infections is constantly increasing. Therefore, they have become one of the hot topics of public health. Polymer materials display unprecedented advantages as effective antimicrobial materials due to their good biocompatibility, easy structure modification, and little proneness to developing drug resistance of pathogens. Herein, we put forward a summarization of research focused on conjugated and non-conjugated polymer materials in the field of killing pathogens in recent years with various therapeutic modes including non-photo inductive therapy, photothermal therapy (PTT) and photodynamic therapy (PDT). The current status, challenges, and future prospects of antimicrobial nanostructured materials (aNSMs) are addressed at the same time, devoted to the design and synthesis of aNSMs for ever-increasing demand of killing pathogens.
Zelin Li
Zelin Li received her BS degree in Chemistry from Beijing Institute of Fashion Technology in 2019 and she is now pursuing a MS degree under the supervision of Prof. Huanxiang Yuan at the College of Chemistry and Materials Engineering, Beijing Technology and Business University. Her current research is focused on conjugated materials for antimicrobial applications.
Haotian Bai
Haotian Bai received his BS degree in Chemistry from Hunan University (China) in 2012 and completed his PhD under the tutelage of Prof. Shu Wang at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (China), in 2017. He worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of California, Los Angeles (USA), and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HK, China). His research is focused on designing and constructing supramolecular multi-functional materials for biological detection and medical treatment.
Shaochuan Jia
Shaochuan Jia received her BS degree in Chemistry from Beijing Technology and Business University in 2020 and she is now pursuing a MS degree under the supervision of Prof. Huanxiang Yuan at the College of Chemistry and Materials Engneering, Beijing Technology and Business University. Her current research is focused on the design and preparation of conjugated polymer materials for detection of microbes.
Huanxiang Yuan
Huanxiang Yuan is an associate professor at Beijing Technology and Business University. She obtained her PhD from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2014. Then, she worked at Beijing Technology and Business University as a lecturer and became an associate professor in 2017. Her research interests include detection and discrimination of microorganisms, design of novel water-soluble conjugated polymers for antimicrobial and anticancer applications, and preparation of organic fluorescent nanoparticles for biomedical applications.
1. Introduction
Bacteria and fungi are widely distributed in nature, and pathogenic microorganisms are ones that can produce pathogenic substances and induce host infections. To date, pathogenic infections remain one of the leading causes of chronic infections and deaths across the world. It is reported that about two million people are infected with bacteria in American hospitals yearly, and 90 thousand die every year because of it. Furthermore, in most European countries, the incidence of infections associated with Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) can reach up to 40% to 50% in some situations.1 Once infected, it will result in serious consequences, such as expensive medical care, fatal diseases, and even death. Taking Escherichia coli (E. coli) for example, which is the most important and accounts for the largest proportion of bacteria in the intestines of humans and animals, it can cause diseases such as extraintestinal infections and acute diarrhea under certain conditions. The US Centers for Disease Control reported that infections arising from S. aureus accounted for one of the majority places.2S. aureus is a kind of Gram-positive bacteria with no spores and flagella, and it may cause systemic infections like endocarditis, osteomyelitis and even sepsis.3 For fungal infections, Candida albicans (C. albicans) is a vital cause of fungal infections accounting for 70–90% of all cases.4C. albicans may bring about vaginal infections, invasive bloodstream infections and deep organ infections in patients with immunodeficiency. Keeping this serious issue in consideration, the clinical killing of pathogenic microorganisms has become highly imperative.
Antibiotics have been the first choice of treatment for pathogenic infections due to their excellent sterilizing effect. Despite amazing progress in diagnostic and therapeutic strategies, various studies have provided direct evidence that the widespread use of antibiotics has led to the emergence of multi-drug resistant strains, such as vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) and multiresistant S. aureus (MRSA).5 In addition, even “super bacteria” and “super fungi” with multi-drug resistance have emerged due to the abuse or misuse of antibiotics. Current antimicrobial materials mainly include inorganic antibacterial agents based on copper, zinc, silver, etc., organic antibacterial agents (derivatives of vanillin compounds, acylanilines, imidazoles,6 thiazoles, quaternary ammonium salts,7 phenols, etc.), antibacterial nanomaterials,8etc. However, pathogens are generating new mechanisms of drug-resistance, which is also becoming increasingly dangerous. Hence, it is still crucial to develop new materials with high and fast antimicrobial efficacy which are less likely to cause resistance.
Nanomaterials are a category of material with at least one phase in the microstructure whose one-dimensional size is in the range of 1–100 nm. On account of the small average size, surface atoms in great number, large specific surface area, and high surface energy, nanomaterials exhibit unique characteristics and have attracted widespread attention. In antimicrobial systems, the application of polymer nanomaterials helps to improve the bioaffinity and antimicrobial efficiency, and nanoparticles with high surface energy are readily modified by a great number of ligands to endow them with specific functions; thus, many researchers believe that polymer nanomaterials would be one of the most promising materials in the future.9 In recent years, for the sake of further improving the germicidal efficacy and overcoming the resistance of bacteria, it has been widely reported that ideal antimicrobial agents at the nanometer level with large surface area have been designed and prepared.10–12 These nanomaterials with enriched antimicrobial groups are expected to strongly interact with bacteria, and then penetrate the bacterial membranes to show highly effective antibacterial activity.13 It is worth noting that the antibacterial mechanism of nanomaterials is direct interaction with the bacterial cell wall and nanomaterials would not penetrate and enter cells. Based on this, the antibacterial mechanism of nanomaterials would be less prone to facilitating the development of bacterial resistance than that of antibiotics.14 This greatly increases the hope for the development of antibacterial therapy. Therefore, new polymer nanomaterials with antimicrobial activity have become a research focus drawing continuous attention.
At present, in order to control the phenomenon of resistance caused by antibiotics, one of the methods is to decrease the dosage of antibiotics and increase the bioavailability in the meantime. To achieve this purpose, traditional antibiotics can be combined with diverse synthetic polymers. For instance, antibiotics are encapsulated in polymer nanoparticles such as vesicles, micelles, nanogels,15,16etc. so that the encapsulated drugs can be enriched in the microbe infection region, and then they are able to effectively release and kill pathogens. But this approach cannot fundamentally tackle the limitation of antibiotic resistance; synthesizing polymer materials with microbicidal ability has been attached enormous importance. Some polymer-based nanomaterials contain inherently microbicidal components, such as antimicrobial enzymes (AMEs), antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs), etc.17–20 Researchers can make various modifications to the functional groups on the polymer chains via amidation, Michael addition reactions, ring-opening reactions, etc.21 The polymers after modification are given long circulation stability, biocompatibility, and specific bacterial recognition. Other polymer materials do not have the properties of killing pathogens, whereas as photoactive agents they can absorb light energy to sensitize the surrounding oxygen to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) to induce irreversible damage to microorganisms, or convert light into local heat to kill microbes, which are known as photodynamic therapy (PDT) or photothermal therapy (PTT). PDT and PTT have the advantages of high specificity, minimum invasiveness, low proneness to developing drug resistance and space–time selectivity, and these phototherapy techniques are considered to be one of the most effective methods for microbe killing and disinfection.22
This review focuses on the antimicrobial application of polymer nanomaterials (including conjugated polymer nanomaterials and non-conjugated polymer nanomaterials) in the absence and presence of light irradiation. Investigation of polymer nanomaterials is of great significance for therapeutics of pathogenic infections, especially the killing of drug-resistant microbes. Alternatively, this review briefly discusses the current status of antimicrobial nanostructured materials (aNSMs), limitations of their study and their future prospects.
2. Conjugated polymer materials
Conjugated polymers (CPs) are a category of compounds with a high molecular weight, which are generally composed of one or several various types of conjugated structural units through covalent bonds. Most CPs are composed of two parts. One part is the conjugated skeleton with delocalized π-electrons, which mainly determines the excellent optical properties of the material such as the absorption and emission spectra, fluorescence quantum yield and light-harvesting ability. The other part is the side chains, which can tune the conformations and constitution of backbones and be modified with functional components. The modifiability greatly enriches the variety of CPs,23 and simultaneously the side chains will play a crucial role in solubility. For example, a cationic quaternary ammonium salt (QAS) group can be attached on the side chains of CPs to increase water solubility and promote the interactions between CPs and biological macromolecules, microorganisms or cells.24 More importantly, the hydrophobic framework of CPs makes it easy to form conjugated polymer nanoparticles (CPNs) in water, which allows nanoparticles to obtain more functions through surface modifications and core modifications. Currently, conjugated polymers have been widely used in detection systems with high-sensitivity, biological imaging, solar cells, optical and electronic biosensors, anticancer and antimicrobial treatments, etc.25,26 This section mainly focuses on the application status of conjugated polymer materials in antimicrobial fields in the past three years.
2.1 Antimicrobial conjugated materials without photo-induction
A proportion of polymers with antimicrobial effects are bonded with some cationic groups (QAS, imidazole groups, etc.), which can effectively adsorb on the negatively charged pathogens to intercalate their membrane, so that the substances inside pathogens outflow owing to changes in membrane permeability, causing irreversible damage and eventually killing the microbes.
Zehra et al.27 reported a conjugated polymer containing a cationic imidazolium group in the side chain (Fig. 1) with intramolecular aggregation-induced fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), which can be used in wash-free imaging and inhibition of microbes. The polymer (PFBT-MI) is mainly composed of a donor fluorine unit and acceptor benzothiadiazole unit with the modification of N-methylimidazole in the side chain. The cationic imidazolium groups can increase the water solubility of the polymer and interact with the microbial membrane through electrostatic attraction, resulting in the aggregation of PFBT-MI on the surface of microbes and turning on its bright yellow emission. When PFBT-MI was bound to the surface of negatively charged bacteria, aggregation-induced FRET occurred from the fluorine unit to the benzothiadiazole unit, and it could be clearly seen that the color of PFBT-MI changed from blue to bright yellow under UV light (365 nm). The MIC values of PFBT-MI toward Gram-positive bacteria and Gram-negative bacteria are respectively 23.7 μg mL−1 and 47.7 μg mL−1, which are much lower than the values reported in literatures.28 Cell membrane damage was observed through FESEM images, suggesting that its antibacterial effect was due to the disintegration of the bacterial cell membrane, causing leakage of intracellular components and ultimately death. As an effective antibacterial agent, PFBT-MI has good antibacterial activity against S. aureus (Gram-positive) and E. coli (Gram-negative). PFBT-MI can effectively image while killing bacteria, and is a multifunctional conjugated polymer material.
 Fig. 1  Structure of PFBT-MI. 
A polymer with a similar backbone was synthesized by Wang et al.29 to construct multi-functional cationic fluorescent nanoparticles, which was fast, efficient and cost-effective to kill bacteria by physically destroying the bacterial membrane without the requirement of light and chemical energy. The cationic surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) was wrapped around the conjugated polymer PPVBT to form a positively charged shell layer, and then co-assembled spherical conjugated polymer nanoparticles CA-CPNs were obtained (Fig. 2). CTAB could increase the hydrophilicity of nanomaterials and provide positive charges. More than 91% of E. coli incubated with 0.80 μg mL−1 CA-CPNs for 30 minutes was killed, while 1.0 μg mL−1 CA-CPNs killed over 96% of S. aureus, indicating that CA-CPNs can efficiently kill bacteria at low concentrations and avoid environmental pollution or damaging other healthy cells. In addition, CA-CPNs had bright red fluorescence and could be successfully used for imaging of MCF-7 cells with good biocompatibility. CA-CPNs triumphed over the shortcoming of the low antibacterial activity of most CPs and CPNs in darkness, and had broad-spectrum and efficient antibacterial ability.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the preparation and schematic diagram of the antibacterial activity of CA-CPNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Antimicrobial conjugated materials for photothermal therapy (PTT)
Conjugated molecules and polymers can be designed to absorb near infrared (NIR) light with strong penetration into tissues to convert light energy into heat through nonradiative decay, leading to an increase in local ambient temperature and irreversible damage to cells, namely photothermal therapy (PTT). Excellent PTT agents are expected to meet the following conditions: (1) strong photostability; (2) good biocompatibility; (3) easy to modify; (4) high photothermal conversion efficiency (PCE); and (5) strong absorption in the NIR region.30 Because the non-biodegradability of traditional inorganic photothermal nanomaterials (gold nanomaterials and carbon nanotubes)31,32 limits their practical applications, recently, conjugated polymer materials have emerged as new photothermal reagents due to their good biocompatibility, potential biodegradability, optical stability, and high PCE. The technique of assisting sterilization through phototherapy also has great effects in the field of biomedicine like wound treatment.
Wang and co-workers33 reported two conjugated oligoelectrolytes (COEs), WMG1 and WMG2, with high photothermal conversion efficiency for photothermally combating bacteria. Thiophene (electron-rich) and benzo [1,2-c:4,5-c′]bis[1,2,5] thiadiazole subunits (electron-poor) were introduced in the conjugated structure. The conjugated backbone of the donor–acceptor–donor unit sequence is used to adjust the optical gap and reduce the fluorescence emission efficiency (Fig. 3). The maximum absorption peaks of WMG1 and WMG2 are around 800 nm, and research has proved that WMG1 and WMG2 have photothermal conversion efficiencies of 60% and 54%, respectively. When irradiated with NIR light (808 nm, 0.75 W cm−2) for 6 min, the temperatures of WMG1 and WMG2 (100 μg mL−1) can reach 56.58 °C and 57.88 °C. Antibacterial experiments have shown that WMG1 has dark toxicity to Gram-positive Bacillus subtilis (the membrane interference mechanism works in the dark), but the hyperthermia mechanism under NIR light means that WMG1 had a higher fatality rate. For E. coli, WMG1 has no dark toxicity, but its bactericidal condition shows a high correlation with the concentration of WMG1 under NIR light with the highest killing efficiency of 96%. The excellent characteristics of the COEs in this study indicate the great potential of COE molecular design in photothermal applications.
 Fig. 3  The structure and antibacterial process of COEs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Although conjugated polymers as antimicrobial agents have achieved remarkable results, the low photothermal conversion efficiency is still one of the difficult questions. Some PTT reagents will damage normal tissues due to excessive temperature when they are heated under light. Therefore, it is vital to develop a new material with high PCE and the capacity of killing bacteria at low ambient temperature. Xiao et al.34 synthesized composite materials that can kill pathogens at a low temperature and have a high PCE (about 88%). They grafted a cationic conjugated polymer (P3TOPA) and an anionic conjugated polymer (P3TOPS) onto graphene oxide (RGO) sheets, respectively, to obtain two composite materials RGO-g-P3TOPA and RGO-g-P3TOPS. Due to the strong electrostatic attraction between the cationic RGO-g-P3TOPA and E. coli, they combine with each other to directly conduct heat. An RGO-g-P3TOPA suspension with a low concentration (2.5 μg mL−1) was irradiated at 532 nm and 0.79 W cm−2 for 10 minutes to elevate the ambient temperature to 32 °C, resulting in killing more than 99% of E. coli, while anionic RGO-g-P3TOPS only exhibits antibacterial activity with a much higher concentration (40 μg mL−1) under the same illumination conditions (Fig. 4). Therefore, this is a new method to effectively kill bacteria by combining the photothermal effect and electrostatic attraction, and the strategy provides inspiration for designing antimicrobial materials.
 Fig. 4  RGO-g-P3TOPA combines with bacteria through electrostatic attraction to directly conduct heat, resulting in bacterial death. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Using PTT in practical applications of killing microbes, the temperature of the infected part and the surrounding healthy tissue heated by the photothermal agent under irradiation with NIR light generally would exceed 50 °C or higher. Moreover, when the photothermal reagents do not have the ability to target microbes, non-local heat causes different degrees of impact on healthy tissues while killing bacteria. Thus, it is particularly important to design photothermal reagents with microbial targeting ability to limit the heat formation to the infection site. Hu and co-workers35 reported a polydopamine nanoparticle (PDA-PEG-Van) targeting bacteria, which could be used to kill methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) at a mild temperature by photothermy. Such nanoparticles are obtained by modifying polydopamine nanoparticles with mercaptopolyethylene glycol (mPEG-SH) and vancomycin (Van) molecules. The polyethylene glycol shell gives the nanoparticles good long-term cyclic stability and specific targeted sterilization can be achieved through the interaction of hydrogen bonding between Van and the MRSA cell wall. The macroscopic temperature of the infected area is 44 °C while the surrounding healthy tissue maintain 37 °C treated with 200 μg mL−1 PDA-PEG-Van under 808 nm irradiation at a fluence of 0.78 W cm−2 for 20 min and the bactericidal efficiency of PDA-PEG-Van on MRSA was 84.6% under the above circumstances. When the concentration of PDA-PEG-Van reached 300 μg mL−1, the sterilization ratio reached 98.9%. The damage to the surrounding healthy tissue is negligible because PDA-PEG-Van nanoparticles used as a nano-positioning heat source could quickly target and adhere to the surface of MRSA after entering the site of bacterial infection and PDA-PEG-Van could kill a large number of bacteria at the site of infection even under low-power NIR light irradiation (Fig. 5). In vivo experiments in mice further proved that PDA-PEG-Van nanoparticles have good biocompatibility and excellent antibacterial activity at mild temperatures, showing great potential for the treatment of MRSA infections.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the synthetic route of PDA-PEG-Van nanoparticles and their mechanism of clearing MRSA-related infections under near infrared light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
With the gradual improvement of the PCE, conjugated polymer materials as a kind of excellent PTT reagents have made a lot of contributions in sterilization. But these PTT reagents usually only kill limited types of bacteria, like E. coli or S. aureus. The majority of materials have the most remarkable effect on them, and few researchers have reported materials that can kill fungi. The design and preparation of broad-spectrum antimicrobial materials has become an urgent task.
Wang et al.36 developed CPN-Tat with broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, which is a polymer nanoparticle covalently modified with a positively charged peptide (Tat), based on the near-infrared (NIR) activity and photothermal response (Fig. 6). In the antimicrobial experiment, the temperature of the polymer nanoparticles could reach 58 °C at a concentration of 6 μg mL−1 after 5 min irradiation with a laser density of 2 W cm−2. Under this condition, the killing rates of E. coli, S. aureus and C. albicans were 99.8%, 90% and 100%, respectively. It was a rare antimicrobial agent that also has a significant inhibitory effect on fungi.
 Fig. 6  The detailed structure of CPN-Tat and its schematic diagram as a photothermal agent to kill microorganisms under NIR light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.3 Antimicrobial conjugated materials for photodynamic therapy (PDT)
The concept of bacterial photodynamic inactivation was proposed more than 100 years ago.37 With the emergence of a variety of drug-resistant bacteria, this antibacterial strategy has once again attracted considerable attention of researchers. Because conjugated polymer materials (CPs) have the capability of strong light absorption, some CPs can sensitize the surrounding oxygen to produce cytotoxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) under light irradiation. ROS could destroy the membrane of the pathogens and kill the nearby pathogenic microorganisms or cancer cells, and this process is named PDT. PDT generally consists of three parts: a light source, a photosensitizer and oxygen molecules, and the nature of the photosensitizer is the key to determining the therapeutic effect of PDT. Photosensitizer molecules are used to absorb the energy of photons to generate ROS, such as hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), singlet oxygen (1O2), superoxide anions (˙O2−), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), etc., which can kill bacterial pathogens. The existing photosensitizers mainly contain phthalocyanines, porphyrin, etc., but their weaknesses of small absorption cross section and poor solubility limit their practical application.38 CPNs have a large absorption cross section, which can efficiently transfer energy to the surrounding oxygen to improve the generation of ROS in comparison with small molecule photosensitizers and make full use of the light energy. The ROS generation ability of CPs depends on the π-conjugated skeleton structure and the side chain. Therefore, the performance of the photosensitizers is critical to PDT. In the development of PDT, more sensitive and biocompatible photosensitizers need to be explored.
In order to find a fast and effective method for identifying and killing pathogens, Zhu et al.39 synthesized a conjugated polymer PFDBT-BIMEG with an inherent intra-FRET backbone and functional BIMEG side chains (Fig. 7). When PFDBT-BIMEG contacted bacteria, the FRET efficiency from energy donor poly(fluorene) (PF) to energy acceptor 1,4-diphenylbenzothiadiazole (DBT) was significantly enhanced. Due to the different degree of aggregation of PFDBT-BIMEG on the microbial surface, it showed different fluorescence emission, and LDA analysis was used to quantify the fluorescent signal to accurately classify pathogens. This sensing strategy could sensitively and quickly identify pathogens within 15 min. Studies found that the FRET efficiency is attributed to the aggregation speed and compactness of PFDBT-BIMEG and the microbial surface, and the side chains can induce electrostatic attraction between them to interact with each other through a salt bridge. PFDBT-BIMEG binds to E. coli faster and stronger and could kill more than 95% of E. coli within 1 min illumination. The killing efficiencies of PFDBT-BIMEG against S. aureus and C. albicans reach more than 95% after irradiation for 5 min and 15 min, respectively, at a fluence of 25 mW cm−2, which is much lower than previous reports, indicating the high antimicrobial efficacy.40 This method combines pathogen identification and killing, which is a potential replacement strategy for current diagnosis and treatment platforms.
 Fig. 7  Chemical structure of PFDBT-BIMEG and the schematic diagram of the combination of different microorganisms and PFDBT-BIMEG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Ma et al.41 prepared a polycationic polymer DBPE-DBO with typical AIE characteristics (Fig. 8), which can be used as an efficient microbial imaging and killing material, and DBPE-DBO has low toxicity to mammalian cells. The fluorescence intensity of DBPE-DBO is significantly enhanced in the aggregated state, and it exhibits yellow fluorescence. The polymer has a large Stokes shift (160 nm), which is conducive to fluorescence imaging, and can be used as a nuclear imaging probe with excellent permeability of the cell membrane. DBPE-DBO could reach 100% killing efficiency of E. coli and S. epidermidis under indoor light for one hour. The antibacterial activity of DBPE-DBO mainly arose from the dark toxicity of positively charged polymers and the formation of ROS under light. This study could provide new ideas for designing advanced biological materials with a variety of antibacterial and cell imaging capabilities.
 Fig. 8  Synthesis of polymer DBPE-DBO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
As mentioned above, the currently reported work on antimicrobial materials mainly concentrated on in vitro studies, and in vivo studies are less explored. Therefore, it is imperative to synthesize materials with good biocompatibility and non-toxicity to normal tissues, and explore their applications in vivo. Wang et al.24 synthesized a series of red fluorescent conjugated polymers (P1, P2, and P3) containing QAS groups with different side chain lengths, demonstrating excellent antibacterial activity in mice. The two absorption peaks of these polymers are at about 350 nm and 550 nm, and the maximum fluorescence emission peak is at 650 nm. The photophysical properties and ROS generation ability of the three polymers were examined to find that P3 with the longest side chain can produce the most ROS. Antibacterial experiments showed that P3 only took 15 min to kill 100% of E. coli with extremely low concentrations of 5 μM under white light at a relatively low fluence of 25 mW cm−2, and P3 had good broad-spectrum bactericidal properties against Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria and fungi. Anti-infection characterization in mice had proven that P3 could effectively kill bacteria in vivo and promote wound healing without damaging normal tissues and organs (Fig. 9). The contributions of the work provided broad-spectrum and efficient antimicrobial materials which have lower light doses (22.5 J cm−2) and light intensity (25 mW cm−2) than other existing photosensitizers,42 and exhibited great potential for the treatment of clinical pathogenic infection.
 Fig. 9  (a) Structure diagram of polymers 1–3. (b) The Petri dish photos of AmprE. coli treated with P3 under different conditions. (c) Schematic diagram of wound healing in mice infected with S. aureus within 12 days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Wang et al.43 explored a human-friendly bactericide with adjustable bactericidal activity. They found that changing the skeleton structure of the polymer can regulate the generation capacity of ROS, and the interaction between the donor and acceptor has a significant impact on the performance of CPs. Therefore, combinations of fluorene-co-phenylene and itself, thiophene and benzothiazole, respectively, were synthesized to obtain three conjugated polymers (P1, P2, and P3) that possess different bactericidal activities. P3 has the best ROS generation ability and optical stability (Fig. 10). The bacteriostatic fraction of E. coli resistant to ampicillin at 3 μM of P3 under white light (25 mW cm−2) for 15 min was as high as 97%, and the antibacterial rate could reach up to 100% at a concentration of 5 μM. The bacteriostasis is a result of the ROS production sensitized by the polymers, which can damage bacterial membranes and then kill pathogens. After 5 days of treatment of mouse wounds with P3 under light conditions, the wounds substantially healed, which is consistent with the results of in vitro antibacterial experiments, suggesting that P3 has the preeminent anti-infection effect.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the chemical structures and antibacterial activity of P1–P3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, aggregation-induced emission (AIE) polymers also demonstrated excellent antimicrobial activity.44–46 In 2019, Qin and Tang et al. designed and synthesized a conjugated polymer containing a tetraphenylthene unit in the backbone (PTB-APFB) with AIE properties46 (Fig. 11). The polymer introduces D–π–A structure on the molecular skeleton and introduces 4-azido perfluorobenzoate (APFB) groups in the side chain, which makes the polymer exhibit super strong ROS generation ability under light irradiation. In addition, placing the quaternary ammonium salt group in the middle of the side chain rather than at the end gives the polymer good biocompatibility and proper hydrophilicity. This allows the molecule to selectively bind to microorganisms over mammalian cells. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments show that PTB-APFB can effectively inhibit the growth of pathogenic microorganisms and promote the healing rate. Compared with the current antibacterial drugs, it is found that the polymer can recover infections in vivo faster than cephalexin. Therefore, PTB-APFB has broad prospects as an antimicrobial agent for preclinical research and clinical application.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of the chemical structure of PTB-APFB and its selective antibacterial activity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
2.4 Antimicrobial conjugated materials for dual mode (PTT and PDT) synergistic antimicrobial applications
PDT and PTT can reduce surgical wounds and toxicity to tissues, and overcome the problems of microbial resistance that have always troubled medical practitioners. Phototherapy has aroused extensive interest in the fields of biology and medicine. However, researchers found that in the actual application of PDT, the consumption of local oxygen influences the therapeutic effect. For example, some pathogenic infections might occur in an oxygen-deficient environment, or scarce oxygen will reduce the production of ROS after treatment via PDT. Meanwhile, PTT also has various difficulties like controlling the tissue temperature and solving the problem of bacterial resistance to high temperature. Therefore, in order to improve the treatment efficiency, it is essential to develop promising materials with synergistic PDT and PTT effects. Peng et al.47 designed and synthesized a low-bandgap green D–A–D conjugated oligomer (OF-Green-N), which has broad absorption in the visible and near-infrared bands (600–850 nm). The main chain was composed of a donor (two fluorene units) and an acceptor (one electron-deficient segment), and the side chains were modified with trimethylamine to improve its water solubility and interaction with bacteria (Fig. 12). OF-Green-N showed good photothermal performance with a PCE of 37.7% under 808 nm laser irradiation, and also had excellent photodynamic behavior to sensitize oxygen to form a variety of ROS (including singlet oxygen and hydroxyl radicals). Because of the united action of QAS groups, PTT and PDT after incubating with E. coli, OF-Green-N displayed significant antibacterial activity with an efficiency of approximately 100%.
 Fig. 12  Structure of OF-Green-N. 
In addition, CPs with different functions could be encapsulated into a kind of nanoparticles via a nanoprecipitation strategy, and every CP plays its own role in biological applications to achieve better results. Zhang et al.48 designed dual-mode antibacterial CPNs (DMCPNs) with strong NIR absorption, and superior capacities of photothermal conversion and ROS generation to enhance the antibacterial activity. The DMCPNs were synthesized by a co-precipitation method using two conjugated polymers (PDPPTT and MEH-PPV), and PSMA could make the nanoparticles disperse well in water as a matrix. The size of the spherical nanoparticles obtained in this experiment is 50.4 ± 0.6 nm. The absorption peaks are at 428 nm (MEH-PPV) and 782 nm (PDPPTT), and the maximum emission peak is at 569 nm with excitation at 428 nm. The temperature of the DMCPN solution could reach 62.4 °C under irradiation with an 808 nm laser (550 mW cm−2) for 5 min, and the PCE was 69% (Fig. 13). Antibacterial experiments showed that the inhibition ratios of DMCPNs with concentrations of 9.6 × 10−4 μM and 13 × 10−4 μM on AmprE. coli can reach 93% and 98% under co-irradiation with NIR light (550 mW cm−2) and white light (65 mW cm−2). DMCPNs can successfully bind to AmprE. coli through the hydrogen bonding between the carboxyl groups on the nanoparticles and bacterial surface proteins. AmprE. coli had small holes and severe depressions on the surface after incubation with DMCPNs, indicating a significant destructive effect on bacteria. The DMCPNs in this study are simple to prepare, which have good potential to deal with bacterial infections of deep tissues. DMCPNs combine the superiorities of PDT and PPT, providing the possibility for clinical treatment of pathogenic infections.
 Fig. 13  (a) Preparation process of DMCPNs. (b) Schematic diagram of the antibacterial synergy between photothermal therapy and photodynamic therapy of DMCPNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2029, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
In addition to CPNs, CPs can be combined with hydrogels. Hydrogels could promote wound healing at a high rate of speed, since they have sufficient mechanical strength, a large specific surface area, and especially a three-dimensional network structure which is similar to biological soft tissue. Xiang et al.49 made an injectable hydrogel from folic acid (FA) and dopamine (DA) cross-linked by transition metal ions. Two carboxyl groups in FA or catechol in PDA easily chelated Zn2+, and the formation of metal ligand coordination allows the hydrogel to be formed in just a few seconds, which could be matched to the wound characteristics (Fig. 14). Modified with carbon quantum dot-decorated ZnO, a DFT-C/ZnO-hydrogel could be obtained, and the antibacterial ratio against S. aureus and E. coli was as high as 99.9% under dual light sources of 660 nm and 808 nm within 15 min. The DFT-C/ZnO-hydrogel has both high PCE and ROS generation efficiency. In particular, the DFT-C/ZnO-hydrogel could release Zn2+ within 12 days to produce a sustained antibacterial effect. The hydrogel has a strong role in promoting wound repair, and the rat wounds treated with the DFT-C/ZnO-hydrogel exhibit obvious epidermal regeneration and the wound closure rate reaches 95.7% (Fig. 15). The injected hydrogel could perfectly match the shape of the wound and provide a three-dimensional environment for cell growth at the same time. Therefore, this hybrid hydrogel has great potential in treating wound infections in the clinic.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the molecular structure of the DFT-hydrogel. (b) Schematic diagram of the antibacterial effect and promotion of wound healing of the DFT-C/ZnO hydrogel under mixed light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the treatment of rat wounds. (b) Plate photo of S. aureus after incubation with different samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Taken together, researchers have been continuously developing various conjugated polymer materials hoping to treat microbial infections efficiently and quickly. As mentioned in the above parts, some researchers modified and functionalized CPs, or combined with PTT/PDT therapies to give extensive applications. Others encapsulated CPs into nanoparticles or combined CPs with hydrogels to improve the utilization efficiency and achieve double effects. These studies provided promising methods for the treatment of microbial infection (especially multidrug resistant microbes), and therefore CPs have attracted widespread attention from researchers.
3. Non-conjugated polymer materials
The application of non-conjugated polymer materials in sterilization has also been continuously reported. This section mainly focuses on the research situation of the past three years and reviews antimicrobial applications of this class of materials. Recently, researchers have developed a variety of antimicrobial materials including inorganic metal based materials, cationic compound or polymer materials, photothermal materials, photocatalytic materials, antibacterial peptides (AMPs), antibacterial enzymes (AMEs), etc.20,50,51 Antimicrobial cationic polymers composed of cationic groups and hydrophobic groups are especially important, whose mechanisms mainly rely on the cationic groups to adsorb on the membrane of microorganisms, and then the hydrophobic groups of the materials insert into and destroy the cell membrane, causing the death of pathogens.52 Antimicrobial polymers could be obtained by polymerizing monomers with antimicrobial active functional groups or introducing antimicrobial groups into natural polymers. Antimicrobial group-containing polymers have good stability, low toxicity and a greater antimicrobial effect than small-molecule antimicrobial agents.53
Later, researchers also combined antimicrobial polymers with nanoparticles to achieve better effects than polymers alone. As an example, metal (Cu or Ag) and metal oxide (TiO2 or ZnO) nanoparticles or salts are embedded into the polymer substrate or surface,54 and the excellent properties of nanoscale materials could be used to increase their toxicity to microorganisms. This section mainly introduces the application status of non-conjugated polymer materials in antimicrobial aspects according to different treatment strategies.
3.1 Non-photo inductive therapy
Most antimicrobial peptides are alkaline small molecule peptides with broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity which could quickly find and kill targets. Many peptides are purely natural, making them quickly become a potential therapeutic material with excellent biocompatibility and activity in the antimicrobial field.55
Amphiphilic antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have received widespread attention in recent years due to their broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity and less likely development of resistance for drug-resistant bacteria. However, the high toxicity of AMPs to mammals and the need to obtain them through natural isolation limit the clinical application of AMPs.56 Zhen et al.57 obtained a class of amphiphilic peptide polymers p2, p4 and p5 (Fig. 16) based on fruit acid peptides through the ring-opening polymerization of N-carboxyanhydrides (NCA-ROP), which were self-assembled into positively charged nanoparticles via hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonding. The nanoparticles increase the local concentration of positive charges and the mass of peptides, and have a relatively high surface area that could increase the antimicrobial efficiency. The nanoparticles formed by p2 have excellent effects on six species of common clinical bacteria, reflecting the broad-spectrum antibacterial effects. The MIC of p2 was 16 μg mL−1 (lower than previously reported MIC values27,58), and the killing ratios of E. coli and S. aureus reached 94.7% and 95.6%. These polymers rely on the positively charged amino group and hydrophobic phenylalanine working together. Positive charges accelerated the polymer adsorption on the surface of the bacterial cell membrane, and then phenylalanine penetrated and destroyed the cell membrane, causing the contents to flow out, which eventually led to the death of the bacteria. In particular, these nanoparticles did not cause drug-resistance development even after 14 passages in both normal bacteria and drug-resistant bacteria.
 Fig. 16  (a) Structures of p2, p4, p5. (b) Schematic diagram of the antibacterial mechanism of polymer nanoparticles formed by p2 assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to using electrostatic interaction to achieve the effects of killing microbes through attraction between antimicrobial polymers and pathogens, researchers also found that a sudden decrease in pH can rapidly increase the pressure of the pathogenic membrane, resulting in membrane damage in a short time, which is very effective against microorganisms with a typical anionic outer membrane. Peddinti et al.59 synthesized a series of charged multi-block polymers (TESET polymers) in which the middle block was selectively sulfonated (Fig. 17) so they were hydrophilic and water-swellable. The TESET polymers were able to provide an antimicrobial surface, which could be naturally antibacterial and antiviral without any additives. It is worth noting that these polymers are a thermoplastic elastomer that could spontaneously self-assemble into a nanostructured substrate. The TESET polymers could achieve a bactericidal ratio of 99.9999% within 5 minutes against three drug-resistant strains (A. baumannii, K. pneumoniae, and E. coli), and inactivate three viruses (VSV, HAd-5, and influenza A virus). The hydrated sulfonic acid groups greatly reduce the pH value of the bacterial suspension, which would increase the pressure of the outer membrane and damage it, leading to enzyme damage, protein denaturation and microbial death. The TESET polymers have strong mechanical properties, and could be shaped into various shapes to coat onto different surfaces and recycled. However, these materials are a threat to living cells of mammals, and direct contact with living cells should be avoided during use. These midblock-sulfonated polymers suggest an alternative and comprehensive approach to antimicrobial strategies that can respond to the global threat of drug-resistant infectious microorganisms without damaging the environment.
 Fig. 17  Structures of the TESET polymers. 
Cationic polymers have good sterilization performance in pure water or buffer solution as a kind of effective bactericide. Many commercial formulations require the use of anionic surfactants to improve the overall performance of the products, but this condition usually makes the cationic polymer invalid and greatly reduces the antimicrobial effect. To address this problem, Wei et al.60 found that PAMPTMA cationic polymers could generate polyionic complex (PIC) nanoparticles in the presence of anionic surfactants. The PIC nanoparticles could quickly kill 99.99% of E. coli within 10 min (Fig. 18). PIC nanoparticles attached to the surface of anionic bacteria on account of the large volume and high local positive charge concentration, so holes could be formed inside and outside the membrane to cause rapid death of bacterial cells. They found that some cationic polymers with anionic surfactants had better bactericidal effects than cationic polymers alone, laying the foundation for the potential application of synthetic cationic polymers in commercial formulations.
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the process of preparing PIC nanoparticles and antibacterial testing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Besides, polymer materials with pH responsive ability play an important role in regulating the antibacterial activity toward various species of bacteria. pH-responsive poly(vinyl alcohol) linked AIEgens in the side chains to form ammonium salt groups demonstrated selective antibacterial activity in different pH conditions. Ren and coworkers synthesized a poly(vinyl alcohol) derivative (PVA-TPE) with TPE as pendants through a quaternarization reaction.61 With the connection of AIEgens, PVA-TPE simultaneously has the capacities of fluorescence imaging and damaging bacteria. Importantly, PVA-TPE could selectively interact with Gram (+) bacteria rather than Gram (−) bacteria at a pH value of 7.4 and further kill them, while PVA-TPE displays broad-spectrum antibacterial activity when the pH value decreases to 5.5. In addition, PVA-TPE possesses great biocompatibility without obvious cytotoxicity on cells and in vivo experiments showed that PVA-TPE could accelerate the wound recovery, indicating the high antibacterial efficiency of PVA-TPE. Because of the biocompatible PVA component, PVA-TPE has the potential to treat bacterial infections in the clinic.
3.2 Photothermal therapy (PTT)
Heating could kill pathogens by destroying the microbial membranes and inactivating proteins or nucleic acids. Therefore, PTT uses this feature to generate heat under the action of photothermal agents with light irradiation to achieve the effect of killing microbes. The NIR wavelength used for PTT is generally from 700 to 1000 nm, so PTT is suitable for applications of biological infection treatment due to its high penetration depth into tissues and low side effects on normal organs.22 Cai et al.62 used co-precipitation to obtain acetylcysteine-modified Prussian blue nanoparticles (AC-PB) that can be used for effective NIR radiation photothermal sterilization and local infection treatment. The temperature of the AC-PB solution could reach 70 °C under irradiation with a 980 nm near-infrared laser within 10 minutes. 50 μg mL−1 of AC-PB would kill 74% of S. aureus and 75% of E. coli, and irradiation at 980 nm is minimally cytotoxic to mammalian cells. Subcutaneous injection of AC-PB in mice effectively transformed near-infrared radiation into local heat and killed bacteria in the body for local infection treatment avoiding the use of antibiotics. The good antibacterial effect of AC-PB may be due to the fact that AC could destroy the biological film of bacteria, and it may damage the lipids on the cell membrane under the near-infrared photothermal effect, which eventually leads to the death of bacteria (Fig. 19). This study provides a new method for photothermal sterilization of Pussian blue-based nanoparticles modified with acetylcysteine on mammalian cell abscesses, and comes up with a promising strategy for clinically effective bacteria eradication.
 Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of the antibacterial activity of AC-PB. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. 
Protein nanomaterials have been found to have great potential in biomedical applications. The amino or carboxyl groups in proteins connect with organic components through chemical reactions. What's more, imidazole or histidine modified proteins could form stable metal–protein complexes through coordination between the amino-acid groups and metal ions. Therefore, the synthesis of metal–protein complexes is an efficient method to construct functional materials. Mu et al.63 have developed a new protein microfiber (MS@BDA@Au) which possessed the ability to inactivate bacteria under NIR irradiation. Three kinds of MS@BDA microfibers were obtained through the assembly of proteins with M2+ (M2+ = Fe2+, Mn2+ or Cu2+)/Na2S and the auxiliary effect of dopamine (DA). In order to improve the photothermal ability and affinity of microfibers to bacteria, the microfibers were modified with gold nanoparticles to get MS@BDA@Au (Fig. 20). The temperature of these materials could reach 58 °C under 808 nm irradiation after 10 minutes, and the antibacterial efficiencies of the protein fibers could achieve 99%. Furthermore, FeS2@DBA@Au has the best performance to capture bacteria among the three materials. This paper proposes a new method for preparing protein nanostructures to realize bacteria filtration and PTT sterilization.
 Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of the synthesis of gold nanoparticle modified MS@BDA microfibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. 
3.3 Photodynamic therapy (PDT)
In the past, it has been reported that zinc(II) phthalocyanine, methylene blue, eosin and other photosensitizers have the effect of removing bacteria on solid surfaces.37 Lately, photosensitizer molecules are often embedded in polymer matrices to obtain various types of stable and efficient PDT materials, demonstrating great potential in the disinfection and antibacterial field.
Under the action of the solar light source, some semiconductors with high excitation binding energy and large band gaps have a higher quantum efficiency and wider absorption range, and they can be complexed with polymers to be utilized as a class of excellent PDT materials. A graphitic carbon-nitride polymer (g-C3N4) that has proved its great application for the degradation of organic pollutants and reduction of carbon dioxide has shown potential for antibacterial disinfection technology as a photocatalytic material driven by visible light. Heo et al.64 synthesized different morphologies of g-C3N4, namely rosette-type, rod-type, two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) structures. The ROS generation ability of 2D g-C3N4 was the strongest after direct irradiation with visible light (5-fold higher than other forms of g-C3N4). 2D g-C3N4 could effectively kill E. coli within 30 minutes and completely kill S. aureus and Salmonella typhimurium (S. typhimurium). Filter paper coated with 2D g-C3N4 could remove microbes in water to realize purification and be reused (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Schematic diagram of g-C3N4 disinfection through a photodynamic strategy and application diagram of 2D g-C3N4 as coated filter paper in a water purification system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. 
TiO2, as a common photocatalyst, has poor antimicrobial activity under irradiation with visible light. Studies have shown that adding a small amount of silver to TiO2 could increase the sterilization efficiency of the Ag/TiO2 system by extending the life of electrons and holes. Moreover, TiO2 could limit the release of silver ions to reduce the cytotoxicity.65,66 Using this discovery, Wang et al.67 designed PVA hydrogels doped with Ag/TiO2 to generate ROS under photoactivation to effectively fight drug-resistant bacteria. First, Ag/TiO2 nanoparticles were prepared by chemical reduction conversion, followed by dispersing them in PVA for 5 freeze–thaw cycles to obtain an Ag/TiO2 mixed hydrogel. A larger amount of ROS could be released from the porous Ag/TiO2 hydrogel under irradiation with 660 nm (0.6 W cm−2) light than that under visible light. The Ag/TiO2 hydrogel containing 0.5% Ag (0.5%HD) had an antibacterial efficiency of 100% against E. coli and S. aureus within 5 minutes under 660 nm light, while the pure PVA hydrogel and TiO2 hydrogel demonstrated no obvious antibacterial activity. Experiments on rats further proved that 0.5%HD could prevent wound infection associated with S. aureus in the body and significantly accelerate wound healing (Fig. 22). Additionally, this hydrogel had good biocompatibility and was non-toxic to organs, providing great potential for healing of chronic wounds induced by clinical bacterial infections.
 Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of the synthetic route of the PVA hydrogel doped with Ag/TiO2 and the sterilization during wound healing using a photodynamic strategy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In the process of using photodynamic sterilization, some thick biofilm bacteria are less sensitive to ROS, so it is necessary to develop a photosensitizer that efficiently removes biofilms. Therefore, Chen and co-workers68 grafted a cationic porphyrin (Por) derivative (a small molecule photosensitizer) onto a block polymer backbone (BPB) through host–guest interactions in the presence of CB[8] to obtain a degradable supramolecular photodynamic polymer (SPP) with addition of CB[7], which improved the removal efficiency of biofilms. The efficiency of SPP to remove biofilms reached 100% and SPP almost completely killed S. aureus under irradiation with white light (20 mW cm−2) for 3 minutes. SPP has as high a ROS generation capacity as Por, indicating that the combination of Por and BPB does not affect the original photosensitizer characteristics of Por, and this strategy could greatly reduce the toxicity of Por to mammals. After adding CB[7], SPP could be degraded in a controlled manner to slow down the progress of bacterial resistance. Thence the supramolecular photodynamic polymer could enhance the antibacterial efficacy and degradability, and may become a promising biofilm elimination material against drug-resistant bacteria.
3.4 Dual mode (PTT and PDT) synergistic antimicrobial applications
Many NPs could absorb NIR light to simultaneously produce heat and ROS. There are some common PTT agents such as copper-, gold-, and silver-based NPs. Moreover, a hydrogel has a three-dimensional network structure with a large pore size and a large specific surface area, which can mechanically support NPs. At the same time, a hydrogel has a large water content, which can maintain the moist environment around the wound and facilitate wound healing. Hence, the application of various metal–hydrogel composites in sterilization has gradually become a hot spot in recent years.
Copper nanoparticles (Cu NPs), as a good class of PTT reagents, could also promote cell proliferation and angiogenesis to help wound healing. Li et al.69 constructed a hybrid CuS/mSiO2 hydrogel composed of mesoporous silica (mSiO2) and 3-(trimethoxysilyl) propyl methacrylate (MPS) modified copper nanoparticles (CuS/mSiO2-MPS/poly(NIAAm-co-AAm) hydrogel) (Fig. 23). Under irradiation with NIR light (808 nm, 2 W cm−2), the NP hydrogel could realize PTT and PDT, obtaining antibacterial ratios against S. aureus and E. coli of 99.80% and 99.94%, respectively. Furthermore, copper ions are released from the NP hydrogel under NIR radiation to facilitate wound healing of rats. In addition, the volume change of this mixed hydrogel could be controlled by NIR light to change the release rate of copper ions, thereby regulating the wound healing process. Therefore, the hybrid hydrogel with the characteristics of moisturizing and promoting cell survival has dual functions of antimicrobial effects and wound healing for wide application prospects.
 Fig. 23  (a) Synthetic route of the hybrid hydrogel. (b) Schematic diagram of the sterilization process of the NP hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Mao et al.70 reported a new type of phototherapy system based on a PAM-PDA/Ag@AgCl hydrogel that can be used for the rapid healing of wounds with severe bacterial infections. This system, which achieves photothermal/photodynamic synergy, could efficiently kill bacteria at a relatively low temperature (52.1 °C) and mild conditions of ROS production. The PAM-PDA/Ag@AgCl hydrogel is obtained through embedding Ag@AgCl in a PAM-PDA hydrogel made of a polyacrylamide (PAM) hydrogel and dopamine (PDA) with a dense and uniform macroporous sponge structure. Within 10 minutes of exposure to light, E. coli and S. aureus were almost completely eliminated with bacterial killing efficiencies of 99.91% and 99.97%, which are much higher than single mode treatment (the antibacterial ratios of PTT or PDT are 50% and 70%.). The antibacterial mechanism is mainly to destroy the membrane of bacteria respectively through photothermy and ROS, and the permeability of bacterial membranes is effectively enhanced, finally resulting in serious loss of proteins in bacteria, causing bacterial death. After treatment with this system, rat spinal trauma healed well within 12 days and this method did not damage other organs of the rat during the treatment process (Fig. 24). Therefore, this synergistic treatment system through the combination of PTT and PDT is a clinical sterilization treatment platform with great potential and safety.
 Fig. 24  (a) PAM-PDA/Ag@AgCl hydrogel sterilization mechanism based on photothermal/photodynamic synergy. (b) Schematic diagram and data of the growth of bacteria on a Petri dish after being treated with the samples. (c) Photographs of rat trauma after treatment with different dressings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
4. Summary and outlook
A lot of energy investment has been devoted to the development of polymer materials in the application of killing pathogens to cope with the huge threat posed by more and more multidrug-resistant microorganisms. Almost all conjugated polymer antimicrobial materials with self-luminescence properties could be visualized under fluorescence microscopy after adsorption on microbes, but sometimes the high preparation yield of this type of materials is a challenge, while non-conjugated polymers which could be easily obtained in a large amount hardly display fluorescence except for association with fluorescent molecules to simultaneously realize detection and killing of pathogens. Polymer materials with extremely low cytotoxicity have priority to be potentially used in the clinic. This review highlights the design strategies of polymer materials for killing pathogens that appeared in the past three years. It should be noticed that the sterilizing methods of polymer materials in this article are expecting to slow down the occurrence of microbial resistance. A bactericidal polymer material combined with a hydrogel could not only promote wound healing, but also release growth factors, so these materials and photo-activated polymer materials are expected to be used in antimicrobial treatment on the skin surface and in vivo disinfection with good controllable ability. In addition, some polymer materials are used in water bodies, which could inhibit the transmission of harmful pathogens and repair environmental pollution. Some non-conjugated polymer materials similar to surfactants or inorganic–organic polymer complexes with no need for light have prospects for use as antiseptic additives and as coatings for medical device antimicrobial prevention. Especially, these strategies have high sterilization efficiency and neglectable harm to the organism, which paves the way for the clinical treatment of microbial infections and pathogenic bacteria killing.
Although surprising progress has been made in polymer materials, there are still some limitations that need to be studied and solved in the future. Most studies of antimicrobial polymer materials are currently conducted in ordinary mouse models and they still have a large gap with humans and other organisms. Thus, in vitro models cannot fully simulate the conditions in the body and accurately replicate the intercellular interactions in the body.71 The other limitation is that the mechanisms of antimicrobial agents are also different72 and need to be further investigated. Although there have been reports of degradable antimicrobial agents, their long-term biosecurity, degradation mechanisms and metabolic pathways have no further research results. Therefore, we can start from this perspective in the future to synthesize antimicrobial materials that can be rapidly metabolized by organisms and study their metabolic mechanisms in detail.
Furthermore, there is no uniform standard for evaluating the effects of antimicrobial agents to prove their respective potential, which limits the development of more efficient antimicrobial agents to a certain extent. Generally, the antimicrobial effects of polymer materials against various pathogens are tested under different research conditions, which makes it difficult to compare the antimicrobial activities of different materials.
In the future, targeted, rapidly degradable and highly efficacious bactericides and fungicides have broad application prospects in the clinic. High yield and mass-produced antimicrobial polymer materials are expected to achieve better in vivo and practical applications, and reducing the cytotoxicity of polymer materials is indispensable. Polymer materials are still one of the research hot spots based on their excellent characteristics in various aspects, and there are many potential characteristics that are worth being developed. In summary, we hope this review would give readers a systematic and detailed understanding of the application status of polymer materials in killing microorganisms in the past three years to meet their different needs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Beijing Municipal Education Commission project (PXM2019_014213_000007, KM201910011008) and Postgraduate Research Capacity Enhancement Program of BTBU.
References
I. Armentano, C. R. Arciola, E. Fortunati, D. Ferrari, S. Mattioli, C. F. Amoroso, J. Rizzo, J. M. Kenny, M. Imbriani and L. Visai, The interaction of bacteria with engineered nanostructured polymeric materials: a review, Sci. World J., 2014, 2014, 410423 CrossRef .
J. A. Jernigan, K. M. Hatfield, H. Wolford, R. E. Nelson, B. Olubajo, S. C. Reddy, N. McCarthy, P. Paul, L. C. McDonald, A. Kallen, A. Fiore, M. Craig and J. Baggs, Multidrug-Resistant Bacterial Infections in US Hospitalized Patients, 2012–2017, N. Engl. J. Med., 2020, 382, 1309–1319 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kubica, K. Guzik, J. Koziel, M. Zarebski, W. Richter, B. Gajkowska, A. Golda, A. Maciag-Gudowska, K. Brix, L. Shaw, T. Foster and J. Potempa, A potential new pathway for Staphylococcus aureus dissemination: the silent survival of S. aureus phagocytosed by human monocyte-derived macrophages, PLoS One, 2008, 3, e1409 CrossRef .
F. Pereira Gonzales and T. Maisch, Photodynamic inactivation for controlling Candida albicans infections, Fungal Biol., 2012, 116, 1–10 CrossRef .
A. N. Neely and M. P. Maley, Survival of enterococci and staphylococci on hospital fabrics and plastic, J. Clin. Microbiol., 2000, 38, 724–726 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, H. C. Pappas, L. Zhang, S. Wang, R. Cai, W. Tan, S. Wang, D. G. Whitten and K. S. Schanze, Selective Imaging and Inactivation of Bacteria over Mammalian Cells by Imidazolium-Substituted Polythiophene, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6389–6395 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, P. He, J. Wang, H. Chen, F. Lv, L. Liu, S. Wang and J. Yoon, Antimicrobial activity of a conjugated polymer with cationic backbone, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 160, 519–523 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xin, H. Shah, A. Nawaz, W. Xie, M. Z. Akram, A. Batool, L. Tian, S. U. Jan, R. Boddula, B. Guo, Q. Liu and J. R. Gong, Antibacterial Carbon-Based Nanomaterials, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804838 CrossRef .
L. Liu, X. Wang, S. Zhu, C. Yao, D. Ban, R. Liu, L. Li and S. Wang, Controllable Targeted Accumulation of Fluorescent Conjugated Polymers on Bacteria Mediated by a Saccharide Bridge, Chem. Mater., 2019, 32, 438–447 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, T. Qiu, F. Lv, L. Liu, J. Ying and S. Wang, Self-Assembled Nanomedicines for Anticancer and Antibacterial Applications, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, e1800670 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, Y. Tang, T. Wang and K. Liang, Nano CuAl2O4 spinel mineral as a novel antibacterial agent for PVDF membrane modification with minimized copper leachability, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 368, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
K. Varaprasad, G. M. Raghavendra, T. Jayaramudu and J. Seo, Nano zinc oxide-sodium alginate antibacterial cellulose fibres, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 135, 349–355 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Zhen, P. W. Kang, M. H. Zhao and K. W. Yang, Silver Nanoparticle Conjugated Star PCL-b-AMPs Copolymer as Nanocomposite Exhibits Efficient Antibacterial Properties, Bioconjugate Chem., 2020, 31, 51–63 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. Hu and L. Shao, The antimicrobial activity of nanoparticles: present situation and prospects for the future, Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 1227–1249 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Zou, Q. M. Liu, J. Chen and J. Z. Du, Silver-decorated biodegradable polymer vesicles with excellent antibacterial efficacy, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 405–411 RSC .
M. Morteza, S. Roya, H. Hamed, Z. Amir and A. Abolfazl, Synthesis and evaluation of polymeric micelle containing piperacillin/tazobactam for enhanced antibacterial activity, Drug Delivery, 2019, 26, 1292–1299 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Gerba, Quaternary Ammonium Biocides: Efficacy in Application, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2015, 81, 464–469 CrossRef .
S. A. Schallenhammer, S. M. Duggan, K. R. Morrison, B. S. Bentley, W. M. Wuest and K. P. C. Minbiole, Hybrid BisQACs: Potent Biscationic Quaternary Ammonium Compounds Merging the Structures of Two Commercial Antiseptics, ChemMedChem, 2017, 12, 1931–1934 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bazina, A. Maravic, L. Krce, B. Soldo, R. Odzak, V. B. Popovic, I. Aviani, I. Primozic and M. Sprung, Discovery of novel quaternary ammonium compounds based on quinuclidine-3-ol as new potential antimicrobial candidates, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2019, 163, 626–635 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. da Costa, M. Cova, R. Ferreira and R. Vitorino, Antimicrobial peptides: an alternative for innovative medicines?, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2015, 99, 2023–2040 CrossRef .
X. Ding, A. Wang, W. Tong and F. J. Xu, Biodegradable Antibacterial Polymeric Nanosystems: A New Hope to Cope with Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria, Small, 2019, 15, e1900999 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, T. Wei, Y. Qu, Y. Zhou, Y. Zheng, C. Huang, Y. Zhang, Q. Yu and H. Chen, Smart, Photothermally Activated, Antibacterial Surfaces with Thermally Triggered Bacteria-Releasing Properties, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 21283–21291 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, F. Lv, L. Liu, Y. Ma and S. Wang, Strategies to design conjugated polymer based materials for biological sensing and imaging, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 354, 135–154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Wang, L. Guo, Y. Pang and L. Feng, Red Fluorescence Conjugated Polymer with Broad Spectrum Antimicrobial Activity for Treatment of Bacterial Infections In Vivo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34878–34885 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, K. Amin, Z. An, Z. Cai, H. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Dong, X. Feng, W. Fu, J. Gu, Y. Han, D. Hu, R. Hu, D. Huang, F. Huang, F. Huang, Y. Huang, J. Jin, X. Jin, Q. Li, T. Li, Z. Li, Z. Li, J. Liu, J. Liu, S. Liu, H. Peng, A. Qin, X. Qing, Y. Shen, J. Shi, X. Sun, B. Tong, B. Wang, H. Wang, L. Wang, S. Wang, Z. Wei, T. Xie, C. Xu, H. Xu, Z.-K. Xu, B. Yang, Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Zhan, G. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Q. Zhang, X.-Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, W. Zhao, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Advanced functional polymer materials, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1803–1915 RSC .
P. He, F. T. Lv, L. B. Liu and S. Wang, Cationic conjugated polymers for detection and inactivation of pathogens, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 1567–1574 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zehra, D. Dutta, A. H. Malik, S. S. Ghosh and P. K. Iyer, Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer-Based Wash-Free Bacterial Imaging and Antibacterial Application Using a Cationic Conjugated Polyelectrolyte, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27603–27611 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Ruparelia, A. K. Chatteriee, S. P. Duttagupta and S. Mukherji, Strain specificity in antimicrobial activity of silver and copper nanoparticles, Acta Biomater., 2008, 4, 707–716 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Q. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Z. Lu, Y. Zhao and Y. Tang, Fluorescent Conjugated Polymer/Quarternary Ammonium Salt Co-assembly Nanoparticles: Applications in Highly Effective Antibacteria and Bioimaging, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 1478–1486 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, F. Lv, L. Liu, Q. Gu and S. Wang, Conjugated Polymer Materials for Photothermal Therapy, Adv. Ther., 2018, 1, 1800057 CrossRef .
N. Fernandes, C. F. Rodrigues, A. F. Moreira and I. J. Correia, Overview of the application of inorganic nanomaterials in cancer photothermal therapy, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 2990–3020 RSC .
H. Chu, L. Wei, R. Cui, J. Wang and Y. Li, Carbon nanotubes combined with inorganic nanomaterials: Preparations and applications, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 1117–1134 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, G. X. Feng, M. Seifrid, M. Wang, B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, Antibacterial Narrow-Band-Gap Conjugated Oligoelectrolytes with High Photothermal Conversion Efficiency, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16063–16066 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, J. Sun, L. Liu, R. Hu, H. Lu, C. Cheng, Y. Huang, S. Wang and J. Geng, Enhanced Photothermal Bactericidal Activity of the Reduced Graphene Oxide Modified by Cationic Water-Soluble Conjugated Polymer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5382–5391 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu, L. Zou, B. Li, M. Hu, W. Ye and J. Ji, Photothermal Killing of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus by Bacteria-Targeted Polydopamine Nanoparticles with Nano-Localized Hyperpyrexia, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 5169–5179 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Li, L. Liu and L. Feng, Photothermal-Responsive Conjugated Polymer Nanoparticles for the Rapid and Effective Killing of Bacteria, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tong, Y. H. Xiong, S. Duan, X. K. Ding and F. J. Xu, Phthalocyanine functionalized poly(glycidyl methacrylate) nano-assemblies for photodynamic inactivation of bacteria, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 1905–1918 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Feng and S. Wang, Conjugated Polymer Nanoparticles for Imaging, Cell Activity Regulation, and Therapy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806818 CrossRef .
S. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Yang, H. Bai, Q. Cui, H. Sun, L. Li and S. Wang, Conjugated Polymer with Aggregation-Directed Intramolecular Förster Resonance Energy Transfer Enabling Efficient Discrimination and Killing of Microbial Pathogens, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS .
T. Briggs, G. Blunn, S. Hislop, R. Ramalhete, C. Bagley, D. McKenna and M. Coathup, Antimicrobial photodynamic therapy-a promising treatment for prosthetic joint infections, Lasers Med. Sci., 2018, 33, 523–532 CrossRef .
H. Ma, Y. Ma, L. Lei, W. Yin, Y. Yang, T. Wang, P. Yin, Z. Lei, M. Yang, Y. Qin and S. Zhang, Light-Enhanced
Bacterial Killing and Less Toxic Cell Imaging: Multicationic Aggregation-Induced Emission Matters, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15064–15071 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Strassert, M. Otter, R. Q. Albuquerque, A. Hone, Y. Vida, B. Maier and L. De Cola, Photoactive Hybrid Nanomaterial for Targeting, Labeling, and Killing Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7928–7931 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Wang, L. X. Guo, Y. X. Wang and L. H. Feng, Bactericidal activity-tunable conjugated polymers as a human-friendly bactericide for the treatment of wound infections, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 3788–3794 RSC .
R. Hu, X. Chen, T. Zhou, H. Si, B. He, R. T. K. Kwok, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, Lab-in-cell based on spontaneous amino-yne click polymerization, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 1198–1203 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hu, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, AIE polymers: Synthesis and applications, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2020, 100, 101176 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, R. Hu, L. Wang, Y. Qiu, G. Zhang, Q. Deng, H. Zhang, P. Yin, B. Situ, C. Zhan, A. Qin and B. Z. Tang, An AIE-Active Conjugated Polymer with High ROS-Generation Ability and Biocompatibility for Efficient Photodynamic Therapy of Bacterial Infections, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9952–9956 CrossRef CAS .
R. Peng, Y. Luo, Q. Cui, J. Wang and L. Li, Near-Infrared Conjugated Oligomer for Effective Killing of Bacterial through Combination of Photodynamic and Photothermal Treatment, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 1305–1311 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Liang, H. Zhao, R. Qi, Z. Chen, H. Yuan, H. Liang and L. Wang, Dual-Mode Antibacterial Conjugated Polymer Nanoparticles for Photothermal and Photodynamic Therapy, Macromol. Biosci., 2020, 20, e1900301 CrossRef .
Y. Xiang, C. Mao, X. Liu, Z. Cui, D. Jing, X. Yang, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Zhu, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, D. Zheng, X. Wang and S. Wu, Rapid and Superior Bacteria Killing of Carbon Quantum Dots/ZnO Decorated Injectable Folic Acid-Conjugated PDA Hydrogel through Dual-Light Triggered ROS and Membrane Permeability, Small, 2019, 15, e1900322 CrossRef .
A. K. Marr, W. J. Gooderham and R. E. W. Hancock, Antibacterial peptides for therapeutic use: obstacles and realistic outlook, Curr. Opin. Pharmacol., 2006, 6, 468–472 CrossRef CAS .
M. Janczarek, M. Endo, D. Zhang, K. L. Wang and E. Kowalska, Enhanced Photocatalytic and Antimicrobial Performance of Cuprous Oxide/Titania: The Effect of Titania Matrix, Materials, 2018, 11, 2069 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Z. Cai, Z. Huang, X. Tang and X. Zhang, Antimicrobial cationic polymers: from structural design to functional control, Polym. J., 2017, 50, 33–44 CrossRef .
Q. L. Li, S. Mahendra, D. Y. Lyon, L. Brunet, M. V. Liga, D. Li and P. J. J. Alvarez, Antimicrobial nanomaterials for water disinfection and microbial control: Potential applications and implications, Water Res., 2008, 42, 4591–4602 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Varma and A. K. Sharma, Modern Tools and Techniques to Understand Microbes,  2017ch. 20, pp. 297–320,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-49197-4_20 .
K.-Y. Choi and N. Mookherjee, Multiple Immune-Modulatory Functions of Cathelicidin Host Defense Peptides, Front. Immunol., 2012, 3, 149 Search PubMed .
H. Ulm, M. Wilmes, Y. Shai and H. G. Sahl, Antimicrobial host defensins - specific antibiotic activities and innate defense modulation, Front. Immunol., 2012, 3, 249 Search PubMed .
J. B. Zhen, M. H. Zhao, Y. Ge, Y. Liu, L. W. Xu, C. Chen, Y. K. Gong and K. W. Yang, Construction, mechanism, and antibacterial resistance insight into polypeptide-based nanoparticles, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 4142–4152 RSC .
S. Liu, R. J. Ono, H. Wu, J. Y. Teo, Z. C. Liang, K. Xu, M. Zhang, G. Zhong, J. P. Tan, M. Ng, C. Yang, J. Chan, Z. Ji, C. Bao, K. Kumar, S. Gao, A. Lee, M. Fevre, H. Dong, J. Y. Ying, L. Li, W. Fan, J. L. Hedrick and Y. Y. Yang, Highly potent antimicrobial polyionenes with rapid killing kinetics, skin biocompatibility and in vivo bactericidal activity, Biomaterials, 2017, 127, 36–48 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. T. Peddinti, F. Scholle, M. G. Vargas, S. D. Smith, R. A. Ghiladi and R. J. Spontak, Inherently self-sterilizing charged multiblock polymers that kill drug-resistant microbes in minutes, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 2056–2062 RSC .
G. Wei, D. Nguyen, S. Reghu, J. Li, C. Chua, Y. Ishida and M. B. Chan-Park, Fast-Bactericidal Effect of Polyion Complex Nanoparticles on Gram-Negative Bacteria, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 2654–2664 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. Gao, Z.-K. Cui, Y.-G. Jia, S. Liu, K.-F. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Fang, Y. Chen, K. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Wang and L. Ren, One-pot quaternization of dual-responsive poly(vinyl alcohol) with AIEgens for pH-switchable imaging and killing of bacteria, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 2635–2645 RSC .
S. Y. Cai, J. Qian, S. Yang, L. J. Kuang and D. B. Hua, Acetylcysteine-decorated Prussian blue nanoparticles for strong photothermal sterilization and focal infection treatment, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 181, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Mu, R. Akrofi and Q.-Y. Chen, Near-infrared-driven Au-decorated polymer-metal protein microfibers with bacterial filtration ability for use in photothermal sterilization, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124236 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Heo, S. Shukla, S. Y. Oh, V. K. Bajpai, S. U. Lee, H. J. Cho, S. Kim, Y. Kim, H. J. Kim, S. Y. Lee, Y. S. Jun, M. H. Oh, Y. K. Han, S. M. Yoo and Y. S. Huh, Shape-controlled assemblies of graphitic carbon nitride polymer for efficient sterilization therapies of water microbial contamination via 2D g-C3N4 under visible light illumination, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 104, 109846 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Hou, H. Y. Ma, F. Liu, J. Deng, Y. K. Ai, X. L. Zhao, D. Mao, D. J. Li and B. Liao, Synthesis of Ag ion-implanted TiO2 thin films for antibacterial application and photocatalytic performance, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 299, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, Mechanisms and applications of plasmon-induced charge separation at TiO2 films loaded with gold nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, A. Fan, R. Chi, J. Shi and X. Zhang, Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) hydrogel incorporated with Ag/TiO2 for rapid sterilization by photoinspired radical oxygen species and promotion of wound healing, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 494, 708–720 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Yang, P. Zhang, S. Wang, J.-F. Xu and X. Zhang, Degradable Supramolecular Photodynamic Polymer Materials
for Biofilm Elimination, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 2920–2926 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. M. Liu, L. Tan, Z. D. Cui, X. J. Yang, Z. Y. Li, Y. F. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, P. K. Chu and S. L. Wu, Noninvasive rapid bacteria-killing and acceleration of wound healing through photothermal/photodynamic/copper ion synergistic action of a hybrid hydrogel, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6, 2110–2121 RSC .
C. Y. Mao, Y. M. Xiang, X. M. Liu, Y. F. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, Z. D. Cui, X. J. Yang, Z. Y. Li, Y. Q. Liang, S. L. Zhu and S. L. Wu, Local Photothermal/Photodynamic Synergistic Therapy by Disrupting Bacterial Membrane to Accelerate Reactive Oxygen Species Permeation and Protein Leakage, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17902–17914 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baranwal, A. Srivastava, P. Kumar, V. K. Bajpai, P. K. Maurya and P. Chandra, Prospects of Nanostructure Materials and Their Composites as Antimicrobial Agents, Front. Microbiol., 2018, 9, 422 CrossRef .

          K. M. Varier, M. Gudeppu, A. Chinnasamy, S. Thangarajan, J. Balasubramanian, Y. Li and B. Gajendran, Advanced Nanostructured Materials for Environmental Remediation,  2019, ch. 12, pp. 321–355 DOI:10.1007/978-3-030-04477-0_12 .

Footnote† Zelin Li and Haotian Bai contributed equally.This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Zelin Li
	Zelin Li received her BS degree in Chemistry from Beijing Institute of Fashion Technology in 2019 and she is now pursuing a MS degree under the supervision of Prof. Huanxiang Yuan at the College of Chemistry and Materials Engineering, Beijing Technology and Business University. Her current research is focused on conjugated materials for antimicrobial applications.

Haotian Bai
	Haotian Bai received his BS degree in Chemistry from Hunan University (China) in 2012 and completed his PhD under the tutelage of Prof. Shu Wang at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (China), in 2017. He worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of California, Los Angeles (USA), and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HK, China). His research is focused on designing and constructing supramolecular multi-functional materials for biological detection and medical treatment.

Shaochuan Jia
	Shaochuan Jia received her BS degree in Chemistry from Beijing Technology and Business University in 2020 and she is now pursuing a MS degree under the supervision of Prof. Huanxiang Yuan at the College of Chemistry and Materials Engneering, Beijing Technology and Business University. Her current research is focused on the design and preparation of conjugated polymer materials for detection of microbes.

Huanxiang Yuan
	Huanxiang Yuan is an associate professor at Beijing Technology and Business University. She obtained her PhD from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2014. Then, she worked at Beijing Technology and Business University as a lecturer and became an associate professor in 2017. Her research interests include detection and discrimination of microorganisms, design of novel water-soluble conjugated polymers for antimicrobial and anticancer applications, and preparation of organic fluorescent nanoparticles for biomedical applications.

 	Fig. 1  Structure of PFBT-MI.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the preparation and schematic diagram of the antibacterial activity of CA-CPNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  The structure and antibacterial process of COEs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 4  RGO-g-P3TOPA combines with bacteria through electrostatic attraction to directly conduct heat, resulting in bacterial death. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the synthetic route of PDA-PEG-Van nanoparticles and their mechanism of clearing MRSA-related infections under near infrared light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  The detailed structure of CPN-Tat and its schematic diagram as a photothermal agent to kill microorganisms under NIR light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structure of PFDBT-BIMEG and the schematic diagram of the combination of different microorganisms and PFDBT-BIMEG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Synthesis of polymer DBPE-DBO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Structure diagram of polymers 1–3. (b) The Petri dish photos of AmprE. coli treated with P3 under different conditions. (c) Schematic diagram of wound healing in mice infected with S. aureus within 12 days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the chemical structures and antibacterial activity of P1–P3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of the chemical structure of PTB-APFB and its selective antibacterial activity. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of OF-Green-N.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Preparation process of DMCPNs. (b) Schematic diagram of the antibacterial synergy between photothermal therapy and photodynamic therapy of DMCPNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2029, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the molecular structure of the DFT-hydrogel. (b) Schematic diagram of the antibacterial effect and promotion of wound healing of the DFT-C/ZnO hydrogel under mixed light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the treatment of rat wounds. (b) Plate photo of S. aureus after incubation with different samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Structures of p2, p4, p5. (b) Schematic diagram of the antibacterial mechanism of polymer nanoparticles formed by p2 assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structures of the TESET polymers.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the process of preparing PIC nanoparticles and antibacterial testing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of the antibacterial activity of AC-PB. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of the synthesis of gold nanoparticle modified MS@BDA microfibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic diagram of g-C3N4 disinfection through a photodynamic strategy and application diagram of 2D g-C3N4 as coated filter paper in a water purification system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of the synthetic route of the PVA hydrogel doped with Ag/TiO2 and the sterilization during wound healing using a photodynamic strategy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Synthetic route of the hybrid hydrogel. (b) Schematic diagram of the sterilization process of the NP hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) PAM-PDA/Ag@AgCl hydrogel sterilization mechanism based on photothermal/photodynamic synergy. (b) Schematic diagram and data of the growth of bacteria on a Petri dish after being treated with the samples. (c) Photographs of rat trauma after treatment with different dressings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Zelin Li and Haotian Bai contributed equally.

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
