Surface functionalization – a new functional dimension added to 3D printing  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC02850A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC02850A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 12380-12411Surface functionalization – a new functional dimension added to 3D printing

        
          
            Pan 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhongying 
            Ji
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaolong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Feng 
            Zhou
          
        
      a
aState Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China. E-mail: wangxl@licp.cas.cn
bCenter of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      16th June 2020
    , Accepted 14th August 2020First published on 17th August 2020AbstractVarious requirements for 3D printing raised by actual applications in different fields have provoked the rapid development of technologies together with various specific materials. A protocol combining 3D printing with surface modification has stood out recently due to its outstanding capabilities to meet requirements in fields where surface properties are critical, allowing the surface performances of 3D-printed architectures to be controlled. So-called surface-functionalized 3D printing, via adding a new functional dimension to the surface of 3D-printed objects, is believed to be a robust, time-saving, cost-effective, and highly desirable approach for 3D printing, meeting a variety of demands, compared to developing special-purpose materials for each solo case. The general strategy and methods, including etching, deposition processing, micro-/nano-composition coating, and polymer brush assisted surface modification, are summarized in this review, as are the various applications and feasibilities for use in biomedicine, engineering, flexible electronics, smart devices, and so forth, due to the acquired features originating from postprocessing, including wettability, biocompatibility and bioactivity, high strength and conductivity, etc.
Pan Jiang
Pan Jiang received his BS in 2016 from the College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Northwest Normal University. He is current a PhD candidate at the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, studying under Prof. Xiaolong Wang's supervision at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His major research interests mainly focus on the 3D printing of functional hydrogels, smart actuators and devices, and surface-functionalized 3D printing.
Xiaolong Wang
Dr Xiaolong Wang is a full professor at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), CAS. He joined the LICP in 2007 when he got his PhD with a major in polymer chemistry and physics at Lanzhou University. During his stay at the LICP, he spent a year (2010–2011) at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University as a Research Associate and then two years (2011–2013) at the University of Western Ontario (Canada) as a Visiting Professor. His research interests focus on 3D printing, biomimetic lubrication, functional soft materials, and flexible electronics, and his work has been published in more than 80 peer-reviewed papers with a current h-index of 32.
1. Introduction
Additive manufacturing (AM), popularly known as three-dimensional (3D) printing, has powerful capabilities to assist the manufacturing of complex architectures and virtual 3D objects via a continuous process involving 3D-scan or tomography data, sliced computer-aided design, and layer-by-layer manufacturing, respectively.1,2 Low costs, speed, and high efficiency are remarked features of 3D printing, which has great potential in many fields, such as industrial design and the engineering, automotive, aerospace, and medical industries.3 However, the universal demands relating to practical applications in different fields focus not only on complex structures and tailored objects but also on special functions and comprehensive performance. For instance, the 3D printing of synthetic biomaterials for medical devices and components, tissue replacement, and pharmaceutical products needs to include favorable and unique physical and chemical characteristics, resulting in compatible materials/cellular interactions with hard or soft tissue.4–6 Notably, the surface functionalities of printed products, as key and advantageous features, play a very important role in their implementation. It is therefore essential to develop and extend 3D printing capabilities to meet the specific demands of various applications. Hence, exploring functionalized 3D printing technology may disclose facile yet significant strategies to broaden the opportunities for use in mechanical engineering, biomedicine, energy and the environment, electronic devices and sensors, and so forth.
Commonly, as illustrated in Fig. 1, there are three reasonable strategies, designing functional materials, manufacturing optimized structures, and developing versatile postprocessing approaches, when implementing functionalized 3D printing for practical applications. Firstly, when the intrinsic performance of a material, such as ceramics,7,8 polymers,9 metals10,11 and other compositions,1,12 is critical for the printed 3D structure and components, developing advanced functional materials for 3D printing might be a direct and robust way to provide opportunities in many fields. However, developing various functional material/ink systems together with specific printing technologies is quite costly and time-consuming. Secondly, due to the advantages of layer-by-layer additive manufacturing over traditional machining approaches, 3D printing can be used to manufacture complex, fine, and artistic objects easily, which has great potential in term of metamaterials. The 3D printing of metamaterials13–15 and materials with bioinspired architectures16–18 intently focuses on exquisite structures, such as bionic structures and topological features, which can endow the resultant metamaterials with superior properties in terms of mechanics, optics, flexibility, wettability, and so on. The final strategy combines advanced rapid manufacturing technologies with various postprocessing methods (i.e., functional surface modification), paying more attention to the effects of surface functionalization on the comprehensive performance of the printed 3D architecture. Specifically, the physical aspects, as well as the chemistry, of the surface are paramount to obtaining the superior and special functionalities of many 3D printed devices and components. In addition, surface functionalization can simply circumvent limitations in the intrinsic performance of the available 3D printing materials and desired structures manufactured using expensive materials and advanced equipment, which can lead to the extension of the practical applications, especially as some unique features are difficult or impossible to realize via printing materials and structures alone.
 Fig. 1  The basic strategies for functionalized 3D printing: (I) the development of printable functional materials; (II) the construction of bioinspired topological structures; and (III) the implementation of surface modification. 
Accordingly, present postprocessing approaches fall under the two banners of top-down processing and bottom-up modification, which have been widely employed in many bulk material systems to develop surface functionalization.4 Top-down strategies, such as physical etching, polishing, grit-blasting, etc., concentrate on changes to the micro-/nano-structures of surfaces without obvious changes to the chemical compositions. To the contrary, bottom-up processing, including physical/chemical deposition, self-assembly, coating, grafting, and so forth, can result in tailored and purposeful surface functionalization based on optional chemical compositions and favourable reactions. To date, some of these methods have also been successfully adopted in the surface functionalization of 3D printed materials, resulting in the individual or integrated characteristics of biocompatibility, conductivity, superwettability, and tonicity being obtained in 3D devices and components in a facile yet efficient manner. Therefore, we herein review significant advances in surface-functionalized 3D printing with powerful methodologies, outstanding characteristics, and potential applications. We firstly introduced the dominant methods of surface functionalization together with the invested functionalities. Then, plenty of emerging applications of 3D printed devices and components with unique surface functionalization, as well as our outlook towards the directions of future studies, are also discussed and elaborated on.
2. Methodologies of surface-functionalized 3D printing
In the process of technological development, surface modification, as an important topic, has been widely developed and applied to a number of practical applications in industry and daily life. Generally, the synthetic approaches for fabricating functional surfaces and interfaces refer to individual physical or chemical processes under some specific conditions.19 However, for surface-functionalized 3D printing, it should be pointed out that the employed surface modification technology must be compatible with the 3D printed structure and show efficiency for the anticipated use. Considering both the 3D printing characteristics and expected unique features, various surface functionalization postprocessing approaches for 3D printing have been uncovered, as summarized in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  The methodologies for surface functionalization for 3D printing. 
2.1 Etching treatment
Etching treatment is one of the most universal top-down techniques that can be implemented for surface modification that is based on different mechanisms, including phase transition, topological micro-/nano-structures, oriented surface structures, surface hanging bonds, functional groups, and so on.19 In particular, etching postprocessing methods can efficiently endow the surfaces and interfaces of printed products with acquired functionality based on the inherent material used in 3D printing rather than using external materials on the surface. The popular chemical etching approach can be easily carried out to achieve structured surfaces via directly immersing specimens in acidic or basic solution.20 NaOH-etched 3D-printed polymer, such as polycaprolactone (PCL), scaffolds showed enhanced cellular attachment and proliferation, which was attributed to an increase in surface porosity and roughness with the etching treatment intensity.21,22 Laser and electronic beam etching are commonly performed for two purposes: one is to obtain a textured surface with topological or oriented micro-/nano-structures; the other is to reduce surface roughness to improve the comprehensive quality of the printed parts. Mingareev and coauthors postprocessed 3D-printed metal parts using femtosecond and picosecond laser radiation; this was advantageous because it allowed the postprocessing of highly exact parts made of thermally and mechanically sensitive materials owing to the ultrafast laser-processing regime and the small heat-affected zone.23 Ultrasonic nanocrystal surface modification (UNSM) is an effective technology to guide surface severe plastic deformation (SSPD) on metal alloys via using low-amplitude, high-frequency (20 kHz) peening superimposed with static loads,23 which produces grain refinement and high compressive residual stresses in a thin layer on the surface of a 3D-printed metallic sample, resulting in an excellent surface finish,24 wear resistance,25 and anti-fatigue performance.26 Plasma modifications based on different gaseous media, such as oxygen,27,28 atmospheric,29 nitrogen,30 and ammonia31,32 gases, were applied to endow surfaces with biocompatibility, hydrophilicity, chemical reactivity, surface roughness, interfacial adhesion, etc. In addition, plasma treatment is also an important assistive method to enhance other secondary postprocessing approaches used on printed products made of inert materials, resulting in desired surface functionality and performance.
Chlanda et al. investigated qualitatively and quantitatively how low-temperature plasma affected the adhesion forces between a chemically attached ceramic layer and the surface of a 3D printed scaffold made of a polycaprolactone–nanohydroxyapatite composite.33Fig. 3a and b show the apparatus used for the low-temperature plasma modification, with hexamethyldisilazane and oxygen media used to treat the 3D-printed PCL scaffolds, respectively. After the dual plasma treatment, the 3D-printed samples possessed rather smooth surfaces on the microscale and, meanwhile, there were no visible apparent differences between all the specimens, as exhibited in Fig. 3c and e. Subsequently, a wet chemical deposition process using precursors containing Ca2+ and PO43− was conducted to deposit a hydroxyapatite (HAp) bioactive layer onto the surface of the scaffolds. The HAp layer can effectively form on the surface of the modified scaffolds (Fig. 3g and h) in comparison with the lack of formation on the unmodified ones (Fig. 3f). Notably, the printed scaffold surface modified via the two-step low-temperature plasma approach showed the largest HAp coverage ratio (ca. 78% of the fiber area), which indicates that it had the best surface adhesion properties and induced chemical activity. Fig. 3i and j quantitatively show that the modified PCL scaffolds exhibited better performance in terms of adhesion and induced deposition in comparison with the other specimens. In brief, etching, especially plasma treatment, plays an important role in surface modification, as well as assisting other postprocessing approaches. However, the drawback of these top-down strategies is how to modify complex 3D structures, especially hierarchical porous structures, evenly and efficiently.
 Fig. 3  Enhancing nanohydroxyapatite adhesion to the surface of 3D-printed bone tissue engineering scaffolds modified using low-temperature plasma. Diagrams of the apparatus used for conducting low-temperature plasma treatment for hexamethyldisilazane modification (a) and oxygen modification (b). (c–e) SEM images of 3D-printed scaffolds: PCLc (unmodified), PCLH (treated with hexamethyldisilazane plasma), and PCLHO (treated with both hexamethyldisilazane and oxygen plasma), respectively. (f–h) SEM images of 3D printed scaffolds loaded with nanohydroxyapatite: followed PCLC/HA, PCLH/HA, and PCLHO/HA, respectively. (i) The adhesion force between the tip of the scanning probe and the surface measured through atomic force microscopy. (j) Scratch measurements of the deposited hydroxyapatite particles on scaffold surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33; copyright: 2019, Elsevier. 
2.2 Deposition processing
Deposition processing, as a bottom-up approach, focuses on the direct overlap of external inorganic and organic compounds to construct a functional surface by using a polyelectrolyte and nanomaterial assembly.19 Deposition methods commonly take into account both the surface chemistry (i.e., functional chemical compositions) and topological micro-/nano-structures (i.e., nanoparticles, nanotubes, nanoarrays, nanosheets, etc.), which can result in achieving desired all-around performance from the 3D-printed components, originating from enhanced synergistic mechanisms based on components and micro-/nano-structures. Accordingly, large numbers of deposition methods, such as atomic layer deposition (ALD), induced adsorption, dip coating, spraying coating, spin coating, electrochemical deposition, electroplating, electroless plating, and self-assembly, have been widely employed to endow 3D-printed parts with surface characteristics. Browne et al. confirmed that ALD, as a general method, enabled any 3D-printed inert electrodes to be turned into the desired active electrodes with outstanding photoelectrochemical properties via the deposition of TiO2 or other photoelectronic materials, and these can be used for photoelectrochemical applications such as PEC water oxidation.34 A surface entrapment process was conducted via soaking 3D-printed polylactic acid (PLA) scaffolds in a chitosan precursor to deposit a chitosan active layer, which was used to form bioactive hydroxyapatite (HA) in a simulated body fluid (SBF) environment, resulting in outstanding biocompatibility and no cytotoxicity.35 Lee and his coauthors constructed a superhydrophobic surface via dip coating silica nanoparticles on 3D-printed PLA specimens.36 The microscale structures on the surface were constructed via designing the printing path, while nanoscale structures with low surface energy were prepared via dip coating hydrophobic silica nanoparticles onto the priorly obtained microstructures. This strategy can guide the 3D printing of superhydrophobic devices and components used for liquid position control, low water adhesion, and so on. The electrodeposition of a Au layer onto a 3D-printed electrode enhanced electrical conductivity and ionic transport during its operation.37 Spin coating was also used to construct a mesoporous bioactive glass (MBG) nanolayer on the surfaces of 3D-printed β-tricalcium phosphate scaffolds used for bone regeneration.38,39 The MBG nanolayer on the scaffolds can significantly upregulate the physicochemical and biological properties, such as the mechanical, osteogenesis, angiogenesis, and protein expression properties for bone tissue regeneration in comparison with traditional bioactive glass (BG)-modified β-TCP (BG-β-TCP) and pure β-TCP scaffolds.
Despite these successes, it is difficult or impossible to endow inert materials with surface functionality via individual deposition processes. Additionally, hierarchical micro-/nano-structures or multi-composition surfaces are critical for further improving the tailored performance of 3D-printed devices for practical applications. One paradigm of this is work by Xue and coauthors,40 in which a plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PEALD) method was integrated with hydrothermal surface engineering to construct well-ordered nanoarrays on the surfaces of 3D printed earplugs that have outstanding antibacterial ability, low cytotoxicity, and good wear-resistance, as shown in Fig. 4. The main fabrication process contains three steps: (1) 3D customized earplugs were manufactured via fused deposition modeling (FDM) technology according to digital models from patients; (2) a ZnO thin film, acting as a nucleation “seed” layer for subsequent nanofiber growth, was prepared via PEALD and deposited on the non-epitaxial 3D printed specimens; and (3) subsequent hydrothermal growth was conducted to fabricate the well-order ZnO nanoarrays based on the prior ZnO seeds, as shown in Fig. 4a–c, respectively. Fig. 4d shows that the printed earplug possessed high printing resolution and integrity. After surface modification via PEALD followed by hydrothermal growth, the ZnO seed layer and oriented well-ordered nanoarrays were successfully deposited on the surface of the 3D-printed earplug, as exhibited in Fig. 4e and f. The resultant surface modified products can meet the critical biocompatibility requirement for clinical applications owing to the lack of toxic additives or harmful residues in all of the above-mentioned processes. Most importantly, the stable and well-ordered ZnO nanoarrays loaded on the surfaces of the 3D-printed earplugs are prone to efficaciously restraining the growth of five major pathogens, E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, B. subtilis, and S. epidermidis, derived from the otitis media. Therefore, various 3D printing technologies in cooperation with multi-deposition processing have great potential for manufacturing 3D products with excellent surface functionalization and can broaden the corresponding practical applications in many fields.
 Fig. 4  The 3D printing of an earplug modified with well-ordered nanoarrays using PEALD-assisted hydrothermal surface engineering. (a) The 3D printing of an earplug via FDM. (b) ZnO nanoparticles were loaded onto the surface of the 3D-printed earplug through PEALD processing. (c) The well-ordered ZnO nanoarrays were grown quickly via a subsequent hydrothermal method. (d) An optical photograph of the printed earplug. (e and f) SEM images of surfaces treated via PEALD and hydrothermal processing, where green and purple represent ZnO seeds and nanoarrays, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40; copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society. 
2.3 Self-assembly polymerization
Self-assembly polymerization, as a central and powerful strategy, has been extensively used for constructing specific polymer coatings to achieve surface functionalization in chemistry. The development of generalized methods for surface modification needs to meet the requirements of the multiple classes of materials that are used in 3D printing and have widespread practical use. A simple and versatile strategy for surface modification is inspired by the adhesive proteins of mussels, which exhibit strong attachment to multiple inorganic and organic surfaces, even wet ones.41 Specifically, Lee and coauthors identified that the small molecule dopamine (DA), mimicking Mytilus edulis foot protein 5 (Mefp-5), contains catechol (DOPA) and amine (lysine) groups, which can spontaneously deposit as thin polymer films on pervasive bulk material surfaces via oxidative self-polymerizing in DA/tris solution at a pH of 8.5, resulting in adaptation for various functional applications.42 Based on the excellent adhesion of the poly(dopamine) (PDA) layer, Chen et al. fabricated functional 3D-printed poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) scaffolds modified with quercetin–polydopamine for bone tissue engineering.43 Briefly, as shown in Fig. 5a, the 3D-printed PLLA porous scaffold was first fabricated via FDM, and it was then decorated in situ with quercetin (Qu; a herb used in Chinese medicine) through a PDA intermediate layer prepared via the typical oxidative self-polymerization of DA. Originating from surface modification with different components, the color of the 3D-printed scaffolds changed from white to black after being coated with PDA and transformed to yellow when further immobilized with Qu, agreeing with the natural colours of the corresponding components (Fig. 5b). Thus, considering the versatility and reliability of the PDA coating, prior-formed PDA-based layers modified on 3D-printed scaffolds made from different materials can act as platforms for secondary reactions and then facilely immobilize a wide variety of functional compounds, such as functional drugs, nanoparticles, bioactive factors, and so on.
 Fig. 5  Two classical surface modification strategies to construct polymer coatings via self-assembly polymerization. (a) The scheme and mechanism of the oxidative self-polymerization of DOPA on 3D-printed PLLA scaffolds. (b) A photograph of the 3D-printed PLLA scaffold, PDA–PLLA (modified with a PDA coating), and Qu–PDA–PLLA (modified with quercetin). Reproduced with permission from ref. 43; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic diagram of surface modification via a lysozyme phase-transition strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44; copyright: 2012, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) A schematic illustration of the Pd-catalyzed electroless deposition (ELD) of Cu and Ag on nanofilm-coated complex 3D structures. SEM images of Cu (e) and Ag (f) patterns on nanofilm-coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film. Photographs of the complex architectures deposited using Cu (g) and Ag (h) layers; the insets display the original structures without the coatings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45; copyright: 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another self-assembly polymerized coating was developed by Yang, in which a novel lysozyme phase transition had the ability to play a crucial role in biomolecule immobilization on solid supports with low cost and via a simple strategy. Fig. 5c shows the key step; the lysozyme was dissolved in a neutral buffer solution contained 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) and tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), and then a rapid phase transition process occurred and the primary spherical particles aggregated into novel fiber-like hierarchical supramolecular assemblies,44 which could function as a “superglue” to modify bulk materials.46 Specifically, the amyloid-like coating, as a reliable universal approach, can modify metal, organic, and inorganic material surfaces based on novel multiplexes or respective bonding models on different surfaces and chemical structures, including via metal–sulfur coordination bonding, hydrogen bonding, and electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions.47 In addition, compared with other surface modification postprocessing approaches, the most advantageous feature of this method is the mild and non-toxic reaction conditions, which can even be employed to modify the surfaces of living matter.46 As a paradigm, combining the 2D protein supramolecular lysozyme nanofilm with an electroless deposition (ELP) process (Fig. 5d) could easily lead to the construction of metal coatings on 3D-printed complex architectures, as shown in Fig. 5e–h. Therefore, the resultant nanofilm coating with stable adhesion strength can, in turn, provide versatile opportunities for secondary-surface-mediated reactions in 3D structures made of different materials.
2.4 Surface grafting
Surface grafting has been widely used to perform surface and interfacial modifications to endow materials or products with excellent features, including superwetting,48 tunable friction,49 drag-reduction,50 antifouling,51 antibacterial,52 and biocompatible53 features, which leads to wide ranging applications in biomedicine, mechanical engineering, and the environment. A typical and universal surface grafting agent is a silanization reagent, which can enhance surface/interface adhesion and change the surface wetting properties of a wide variety of materials, including inorganic and organic matter. As an example, octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) was grafted onto a 3D-printed oil-skimmer to achieve superhydrophobicity, thus allowing it to be used in oil collection, which has great potential for use in daily life, such as collecting gutter oil, swill oil, and gathering oily dyes from factory wastewater.54 The obvious disadvantage of this approach is that it only results in a single surface functional feature, which significantly depends on the functional groups in the silanization reagent, limiting its applications in reality.
As one of the most common surface grafting technologies, polymer brushes are being widely used in many fields, such as in surface modification, tissue engineering, and biomimetic membranes, owing to their advantageous features of controllable chemical components, density, thickness, conformation, and structure on the nanoscale with facile preparation.55–58 Moreover, the configuration of the polymer brushes can be readily adjusted using external physicochemical stimuli,59 displaying the great potential to construct “smart” surfaces/interfaces based on such stimuli-responsive features of polymer brushes, resulting in widespread practical properties, including tunable superwetting, responsive actuation, adjustable cell adhesion, reversible friction, and lubrication.55 Therefore, the surface grafting polymer brushes technique, as a powerful surface modification strategy, has been commonly applied to endow bulk materials and components with diverse functionality based on surface-initiated polymerization (SIP) methods. For instance, Wang and colleagues developed a novel “i3DP” concept (integrating the initiators with 3D printing products), which produced 3D-printed devices with excellent superwetting via grafting hydrophilic or hydrophobic polymer brushes on the surfaces of the polymer structures.60 The basic strategy of i3DP, as shown in Fig. 6a, is to blend a vinyl-terminated bromine-containing initiator with a commercial ultraviolet (UV) photocurable resin in advance, and then to manufacture 3D-initiator-integrated structures and objects with further modifiable surfaces, which can be used to realize various surface performances via post-modification through surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization (SI-ATRP). Accordingly, two typical monomers with opposing wetting features were used to graft polymer brushes onto the 3D printed lattices. One is poly(ethylene glycol)methacrylate (PEGMA), which can improve the biocompatibility of the structural material, and the other is 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyl methacrylate (PFMA), which can result in surfaces with low surface energy. As a result, owing to the enhancement of wetting due to the surface roughness, an iLattice modified with poly(PEGMA) polymer brushes possessed superhydrophilicity, while another example grafted with poly(PFMA) polymer brushes exhibited superhydrophobicity (Fig. 6b). As proof-of-concept, an iBall modified with poly(PFMA) polymer brushes also showed excellent superhydrophobicity, and it could hold water without any leakage, even when undergoing violent shaking, as shown in Fig. 6c. However, conventional surface-initiated polymerization only grafts a very thin layer of polymer brushes (commonly of nanometer-scale thickness) on the outmost surface of materials via tethering a single linkage plane, which results in weak interfacial bonding and poor mechanical stability for practical applications, especially when subjected to abrasion, high loads, and long-term shearing. To address these issues, Zhou's group constructed an interfacial interpenetrating network made up of polymer brushes and substrates to improve the comprehensive performance.61,62 Similarly, Yadavalli and co-authors also successfully demonstrated the photo-induced grafting polymerization of poly(PEGMA) functionalities onto the photoinitiator absorbed surface of a 3D-printed acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) microfluidic device, resulting in an increase in the hydrophilicity of ABS and resistance to non-specific protein adhesion.63 SI-ATRP surface modification can also be triggered by many types of surface-initiated mechanisms, such as reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT), ‘click’ polymerization, and ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP), through selecting initiator monomers with different functional groups. Expectedly, this facile, versatile, and cost-effective i3DP method has the ability to make 3D printing and the resultant products more practical, especially in fields where the surface/interface properties are critical.
 Fig. 6  Surface grafting for surface functionalization for 3D printing. (a) A schematic diagram of the i3DP approach for obtaining functional structures via initiator-integrated 3D printing and subsequent SI-ATRP. (b) The superwetting of an iLattice modified with poly(PEGMA) brushes and poly(PFMA) brushes, respectively. (c) Entrapped dyed water remained in a poly(PFMA)-grafted iBall, even undergoing violent shaking. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60; copyright: 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) A schematic illustration of the hydrogel skin preparation procedure on 3D-printed architecture. (e) A complex 3D Ecoflex structure coated with a hydrogel skin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68; copyright: 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Considering the great significance of slippery and hydrophilic device surfaces for biomedical applications, hydrogel coatings can also be used to modify the surfaces of devices due to the favorable physicochemical properties of hydrogels and their similarities with biological tissues.64 Moreover, interfacial bonding between hydrogels and polymer substrates, as a direct and robust strategy, has been widely employed to fabricate tough hydrogel coatings on various polymer substrates to address issues such as poor hydrogel-substrate adhesion and poor mechanical stability.65,66 For example, Kowalczyk et al. demonstrated 3D-printed PLA scaffolds coated with a poly(vinylphenol) (PVP) hydrogel layer via a Fenton-type reaction that enables the polymeric scaffold to be grafted to the hydrogel in two easy steps.67 The resultant PLA–PVP materials exhibited hydrophilicity and non-toxicity, which is promising considering their biomedical applications, including drug delivery and tissue regeneration. However, there are still unresolved challenges in effectively preparing even hydrogel coatings with tunable thickness on diverse complex 3D polymer structures. Zhao and colleagues developed a novel strategy to fabricate a hydrophilic polymer interpenetrating layer (named “hydrogel skin”) on the surfaces of various polymers, including silicone rubber, polyurethane, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), nitrile rubber, natural rubber, and even 3D polymeric structures with arbitrary shapes.68 Specifically, as shown in Fig. 6d, there are three major steps, as follows: (1) loading the initiator on the polymer substrate through soaking in a hydrophobic initiator solution; (2) immersing the treated polymer substrate in a hydrogel monomer aqueous solution containing hydrophilic initiators; and (3) forming uniform and thin hydrogel skins on the polymer surface via the surface-bound formation of hydrogel-polymer interpenetrating networks after curing and washing the hydrogel monomer solution. Pointedly, the ingenious integration of hydrophobic (i.e., water insoluble) initiators absorbed on the substrate surface and hydrophilic (i.e., water soluble) initiators dissolved in the hydrogel precursor plays a key role in the in situ formation of the hydrogel skin on the surface, conformally adapting polymer substrates with complex and fine geometries. In addition, the resultant hydrogel skins possessed tunable thicknesses (5–25 μm) with tissue-like softness (Young's modulus ≈ 30 kPa) and mechanical robustness, which can circumvent the mismatch between polymer devices and the human body for biomedicine implementation. As a paradigm, a hydrogel skin (dyed with green dye) was successfully coated on a complex 3D Ecoflex structure (Fig. 6e). As a result, this proposed method can endow polymer devices with superior low-friction, antifouling, and ionically conductive surfaces without changing or damaging the original bulk mechanical properties or geometries.
In brief, the surface grafting of polymer brushes and hydrogel coatings can be used to efficiently achieve functional surfaces with various unique features. However, there are still some drawbacks to this strategy, as follows. In order to trigger surface grafting reactions, some selected active materials, such as initiators, must be compatible with the 3D-printing inks to make sure there is minimal impact on the 3D-printing process, resolution, and intrinsic properties of the 3D-printed structure. Moreover, there can be a lot of residual metal catalyst, initiators, unsaturated monomers, and unreacted compounds that commonly not only need to be removed completely through complicated leaching processes for further practical applications, but also can cause chemical waste and pollution risks, setting up barriers to practical applications. Fortunately, Johnson and co-workers are currently proposing a “living additive manufacturing” strategy, called photoredox catalyzed growth (PRCG), which can spatiotemporally insert monomers into dormant “parent” materials to generate more complex and diversely functionalized “daughter” materials.69 This protocol provides significant guidance for resolving surface/interface bonding issues relating to traditional free radical and iniferter polymerization in comparison with the abovementioned grafting of polymer brush strands and interpenetrating hydrogel coating interfaces.
In summary, universal postprocessing methodologies for surface functionalized 3D printing, such as etching, deposition, self-assembly polymerization, surface grafting, etc. have been widely introduced to create a variety of 3D-printed structural materials, including inorganic and organic materials, metal alloys, and even living matter, with unique characteristics. Some of the approaches were chosen as first-level modification methods to preferentially alter the surface physicochemical properties and morphologies for secondary functional postprocessing, while others were used for second-level postprocessing to generate other versatile features. Moreover, different methods have different functionalization capabilities in relation to the surface features. It is necessary to point out that combined surface modification methods can invoke synergistic mechanisms to achieve comprehensive 3D-printed device and component performance. Therefore, these powerful routes can expand and improve the possibility that 3D printing and the corresponding products can obtain widespread practical use. The best surface functionalized 3D-printing approaches should be used to develop generic methodologies for the surface modification of universal 3D-printing materials. Meanwhile, obtaining a deep understanding of the interfacial bonding mechanisms between the functional surface layers and the 3D-printed structural substrates is believed to be of great significance for enhancing the overall performance of 3D functional devices and components.
3. Unique surface features achieved via surface functionalized 3D printing
The special surface features of 3D-printed structures and objects, including physicochemical performance and topological morphologies, originate from the deployment of postprocessing methodologies, and these can then decide the potential applications. Specifically, the surface superwetting, biocompatibility, mechanical, catalytic, and conductivity properties play critical roles in determining the areas of application, being as important as the properties of the bulk materials, and even more important sometimes. Meanwhile, endowing 3D-printed structural devices and components with unique surface features may promote them to becoming more practical in real-life in comparison with the fabrication of functional bulk materials or bare structural materials.
3.1 Wetting
The surface wettability of a material is extremely critical for its practical applications, as it defines how the functional surfaces/interfaces of devices and components interact with external matter and the surroundings. For instance, hydrophilic surfaces have critical applications in fields as varied as biomedical devices, microfluidics, antifouling, and underwater robots, whereas hydrophobic examples have great potential for use in self-cleaning, anti-icing, corrosion protection, water–oil separation, drag reduction, water collection, and liquid transportation surfaces.68,70 Currently, favorable methods for surface functionalized 3D printing have been demonstrated and applied to regulate the wettability of the surfaces of 3D structures and objects. 3D-printed hydrophobic polymer (e.g., polylactic acid (PLA) and ABS) scaffolds grafted with hydrophilic natural macromolecules35 and synthetic polymer coatings63,67 exhibit excellent hydrophilicity that is suitable for promoting biocompatibility and interacting with physiological fluid environments. The water contact angle (WCA) of a generic 3D-printed PLA scaffold dramatically dropped after cold atmospheric plasma (CAP) postprocessing from 70° ± 2° to 24° ± 2°.29 Nelson et al. confirmed that combining a breath-figure (BF) approach together with wet surface treatment is an effective method to control the surface microtopography (pore size) and the surface functionality (types of functional groups and distribution) of 3D-printed objects.71 As an example, chlorosulfonated surfaces exhibited a dramatic change in surface hydrophilicity, with the WCA dropping from 95° to less than 10°, due to chlorosulfonation and the subsequent formation of more hydrophilic SO3Na functional groups via basic hydrolysis. Weems et al. reported that 3D-printed polymyrcene has the potential for post-polymerization and functionalization, such as introducing tunable surface wetting.72 Based on special wetting phenomena shown by living creatures, such as lotus leaves, water striders, and desert beetles, extensive bioinspired wetting surfaces with properties such as superhydrophobicity, superhydrophilicity, superoleophobicity, superoleophilicity, and slipperiness have been developed. Yan et al. reviewed the 3D printing of bioinspired textured surfaces with superamphiphobicity,16 mostly focusing on the structural characteristics of the 3D printing of superamphiphobic surfaces. In fact, enhanced superwetting can also be controlled via the combination of a 3D-printed structure and suitable surface modifications, which is attributed to hierarchical surface micro-/nano-structures.
Wu and coworkers reported a simple, diverse, and low-cost method to prepare oriented 3D-printed polymer patterns with outstanding hydrophilicity for guiding cell orientation.73 The basic strategy is that 3D-printed PLA patterns with different stripe widths were modified via a PDA interlayer to firmly immobilize halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) on the surfaces of the PLA patterns, as shown in Fig. 7a. As a result, the HNTs were uniformly distributed with an arbitrary arrangement on the surface of the PLA pattern due to interactions between PDA and the HNTs; meanwhile, the striped structure of the PLA pattern was not destroyed, originating from the mild self-assembly postprocessing (Fig. 7b). The water contact angle of the surface of the 3D-printed PLA pattern modified with a functional HNT coating was as low as 33.3° ± 0.70°, owing to the surface roughness, which was determined by the stripe width, and the excellent hydrophilicity of the silanol groups on the surfaces of the HNTs and the phenolic hydroxyl groups of PDA (Fig. 7c). The oriented 3D-printed polymer patterns with outstanding hydrophilicity had the ability to guide cell orientation and cell–material interactions for biomedical applications. Alternatively, Lee et al. developed a superhydrophobic surface via 3D printing, followed by dip coating with silica nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 7d.36 The resultant surface possessed a hierarchical micro-/nano-structural surface model, with a microscale structure formed via methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) dipping and a nanoscale structure formed based on hydrophobic silica nanoparticles (Fig. 7e), which led to the outstanding superhydrophobicity (e.g., a WCA of about 158°). In addition, the 3D-printed surface pattern combined with surface modification also showed superhydrophobicity (Fig. 7f). As a paradigm, a 3D-printed porous hemisphere with isotropic superhydrophobic surfaces could hold water (Fig. 7g). In brief, surface functionalized 3D printing can easily endow 3D-printed devices and components with the desired surface wetting properties, allowing them to be applied in many fields, such as tissue implants, oil–water separation, drag reduction, and so on.
 Fig. 7  Constructing wetting surfaces on 3D parts through additive manufacturing via surface modification. (a) A schematic diagram of the preparation of a HNT-coated PLA pattern. (b) FE-SEM images of HNT-coated PLA patterned surfaces at different magnifications. (c) Contact angle images of PLA patterned surfaces with different stripe widths before and after loading with the HNT coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73; copyright: 2019, Elsevier. (d) The fabrication of a superhydrophobic surface using 3D printing followed by dip coating with silica nanoparticles; the inset images show the superhydrophobicity. (e) SEM images of a printed surface before (top) and after modification with MEK (middle) or silica (bottom) nanoparticles. (f) Optical images of a dyed water droplet on a line-patterned surface with a 1.0 mm step size before (i) and after (iii) dip coating, and on a grid-patterned surface with a 1.0 mm step size before (ii) and after (iv) dip coating. (g) An investigation of isotropic superhydrophobic surfaces with a half-sphere porous bowl. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36; copyright: 2019, Elsevier. 
3.2 Biocompatibility
Due to powerful manufacturing capabilities, 3D printing has promise for fabricating complex and tailored biomedical devices and components based on computer-assisted design (CAD) using patient-specific clinical data, such as computed tomography (CT) or nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data, which has attracted much attention for fabricating replacement devices, implants, scaffolds for tissue engineering, medical detection system, in vitro diagnostic platforms, and drug delivery and release systems.74 Obviously, these 3D-printed biomedical products are directly used in close contact with the human body, and even in an internal body fluid environment. The success of implanted medical devices and components strongly depends on favorable material–tissue interactions under physiological conditions.4 Therefore, suitable cell–material interactions, and the bioactivity and biocompatibility of biomedical devices and components are critical factors for both basic medical research and further clinical implementation. In addition, any stark mismatch in mechanical properties between polymers and tissue can cause serious issues and complications during clinical use.75–77 To address these problems, many efforts have been made to enhance the biocompatibility of 3D-printed scaffolds and other medical instruments. Lerman et al. obtained aminated 3D-printed polystyrene scaffolds via plasma treatment to maintain stem cell proliferation and osteogenic differentiation.32 “Hydrogel skins” were coated on medical polymer devices to match the Young's modulus of the contact interface, reducing friction for insertion and removal during surgery.68 The alkaline surface post-treatment of 3D-printed PCL grafts can improve the surface morphology and cellular response (e.g., attachment and proliferation), resulting in good implant-tissue bonding.21 Important medical implants made of titanium and alloys via electron beam melting (EBM) were used to confirm that vertical- and inclined-orientation-induced surface modifications exhibited higher biocompatibility than horizontally orientated surfaces.78
Jaidev and Chatterjee demonstrated the 3D printing of a PLA scaffold with 70% porosity modified via grafting polyethyleneimine (PEI) and citric acid (CA), followed by the deposition of calcium phosphate,79 as shown in Fig. 8a. The resultant PLA–HaP scaffolds (Fig. 8b) displayed bright near-spherical structures, which originated from the mineralization of apatite on the surfaces of the scaffolds during incubation in SBF. In order to evaluate the biocompatibility, human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) were employed for cell culturing (Fig. 8c). As shown in Fig. 8d, the hMSCs exhibited characteristic stem cell morphology with good attachment to the scaffolds after 7 days, indicating favorable cell proliferation, differentiation, adhesion, and cell–material interactions. Fig. 8e supports the idea that the PLA–Hap scaffold exhibited the highest mineralization in comparison with other scaffolds, convincingly manifesting its potential for use in bone tissue engineering. Compared with surface modification using special chemistry, many biological factors can also improve the biocompatibility of 3D-printed medical devices and components. Teixeira et al. proposed a direct strategy to enhance biocompatibility via using a mussel-inspired PDA interlayer associated with type I collagen,80 as illustrated in Fig. 8f. MSCs seeded on the functional scaffolds showed high viability and healthy cell morphologies (Fig. 8g). To investigate cell attachment and spreading on the scaffold surface, immunofluorescence studies of vinculin (green), actin (red), and nuclei (blue) were carried out, which indicated that MSCs seeded on scaffolds with a collagen coating exhibited efficient adhesion and migration (Fig. 8h). Meanwhile, extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition was more apparent on the collagen-modified 3D culture scaffolds after 14 days, which is critical for cell behavior and morphology. Additionally, other bioactive factors, including RGD protein,81 osteogenic growth peptide (OGP),82 and N3-OGP, together with N3-BMP-2,83 were also employed to enhance the biocompatibility of 3D-printed objects for cell proliferation, differentiation, attachment, response, and functional activity.
 Fig. 8  Enhancing the biocompatibility of 3D-printed polymeric scaffolds via surface modification. (a) The functionalization of PLA-OH scaffolds modified via grafting polyethyleneimine (PEI) conjugated with citric acid (CA), with the subsequent deposition of hydroxyapatite (Hap). (b) SEM images of the modified 3D-printed scaffolds at different magnifications. (c) Biocompatibility testing using hMSCs. (d) A confocal microscopy image of fluorescently labeled hMSCs. (e) The osteogenic potential of the 3D scaffolds assessed using hMSCs on the scaffolds; PLA@Hap*: without cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79; copyright: 2018, Elsevier. (f) The functionalization of scaffolds modified with a collagen coating; the inset shows a printed scaffold. (g) Cell viability on pure PLA and collagen-modified scaffolds. (h) An immunofluorescence picture of cell cultures. (i) Cell ingrowth on a collagen-modified scaffold. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80; copyright: 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.3 Antibacterial activity
The 3D printing of biomedical devices and implants with tailored structures and accurate manufacturing resolutions has provided many opportunities to overcome supply shortages of tissues and organs and to meet immunological requirements for orthopedic surgery. Although many biocompatible materials, such as PLA, poly-ether-ether-ketone (PEEK), and titanium (Ti) and magnesium (Mg) alloys, have been widely used in a variety of embedding-related operations, the original implants still retain the risk of introducing postoperative infection, resulting in surgical failure and medical disputes.84,85 For instance, previous studies showed that 22% of revision operations involving orthopedic implants faced failure owing to implant-based infections.86 Moreover, antimicrobial devices have attracted more and more attention because antibiotics are no longer an ideal and effective enough solution to deal with postoperative infections associated with medical implants.87 Therefore, it is necessary to improve the antibacterial properties of medical implants to reduce embedding-related infection risks, as well as clinical surgery complications, through favorable surface modification approaches. Currently, reducing bacterial adhesion and killing bacteria are typical approaches to enhance the antibacterial performances of materials. Li and coworkers reported that enriched argentum nanoparticles (AgNPs) could be deposited on 3D-printed biomaterial scaffolds with self-assembled micro-/nano-surfaces for antibacterial and bone regeneration purposes.88 The Ag/PDA/PCL scaffolds showed decreased bacterial adhesion and reproduction, displaying potential to act as a candidate for treating infected bone defects. Guo and coauthors used the “i3DP” concept to fabricate 3D functional structures with antimicrobial functionality.89 Specifically, 3-sulfopropyl methacrylate potassium salt (SPMA) was grafted onto the surface via the SI-ATRP technique, which resulted in a significant reduction in the adhesion of bacteria and further inhibited the growth of bacteria on the surface. 3-Poly-L-lysine (EPL), an antimicrobic cationic polypeptide, was also used for the surface modification of 3D-printed PCL/HA scaffolds to enhance the antibacterial properties.90 Berberine-loaded 3D scaffolds showed the controllable sustained release of antimicrobial drugs.91 In addition, the natural antibacterial compound ponericin G1, isolated from the venom of ponerine ants (P. goeldii), was loaded onto the surface to endow the scaffolds with a broad spectrum of activity against bacteria and fungi while being lenient toward most other eukaryotic cells.92–95
Although many antibacterial protocols have been developed based on a single release model in recent years, controllable antibacterial release depending on the recovery period is critical for practical clinical applications. Miao et al. modified the surfaces of 3D-printed PEEK and PLA medical implants through the bio-inspired integration of a ZnO nanorod array (NR) layer together with a ZnO nanoslice array (NS) layer using a simple hydrothermal method,96 as shown in Fig. 9a. Expectably, the ZnO dual-layered nanoarray (DLN) system possessed two-stage release characteristics: a quick release model (within the first 48 hours) and a slow release model (approximately 2 weeks) (Fig. 9b). As a result, four types of 3D-printed medical implants modified with ZnO DLN exhibited outstanding antibacterial effects with early release and long-term sustained release in comparison with other antibacterial release models (Fig. 9c). As a paradigm, an incision treated with the ZnO DLN implant exhibited good healing as well as no apparent scab formation during healing (Fig. 9d). Briefly, developing favorable antibacterial strategies in combination with 3D-printed medical devices and implants can open up new opportunities for practical clinical applications, circumventing the abuse of antibiotics and related drug-resistance issues.
 Fig. 9  “Dandelion” inspired dual-layered nanoarrays (DLNs) with a dual-release model for the functionalization of 3D printing implants with long-lasting antibacterial performance. (a) A schematic illustration of the bioinspired ZnO DLN system on a 3D printed medical implant. (b) The mechanisms of the quick-release model within 48 hours and the slow-release model within approximately 2 weeks. (c) The antibacterial effectiveness of different 3D-printed implants including: (i) a lumbar intervertebral disc fusion device, (ii) an internal fixation plate, (iii) a bone nail, and (iv) a wafer. (d) In vivo implantation experiments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96; copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Metallization
Metallic structures, especially ultralight cellular metals, have attracted a great deal of interest because of their superior electrical, mechanical and thermal properties and light weight, which are desirable for uses related to thermal insulation, battery electrodes, structural circuits, acoustics, vibrations, shock energy damping, catalytic carriers, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), and so forth.97,98 Because of the complex structural requirements of practical devices and components and the advantages of 3D printing for manufacturing complex structures, metalizing the surfaces of 3D printed structures with highly conductive yet relatively lightweight coatings can be readily realized via additional surface metallization. Currently, several methods, such as vacuum evaporation and sputtering, and plating, for surface metallization have been demonstrated using 3D structures and objects. Wang's group developed a novel strategy named polymer-assisted photochemical deposition (PPD), in which the 2D- and 3D-printing of silver, gold, and platinum structures with feature sizes as small as 5 μm were demonstrated on various substrates, including silicon, glass, polymers, and biocompatible hydrogels.99 Compared with the abovementioned methods that are performed on conductive substrate surfaces, electroless plating (ELP), a simple wet chemical process, is a more cost-effective and suitable technology for metal deposition onto insulating materials, which can be further assisted by high-quality electroplating. For instance, Torrents et al. modified a polymer waveguide template via electroless Ni deposition, possibly followed by Ni electroplating.100 ABS and ABS-like parts developed via AM processes have been widely explored for plating applications.101,102 Moreover, Wang et al. developed metallic 3D-printed structures via a 2D protein supramolecular nanofilm assisted ELP process.45 Kim et al. developed a simple, highly efficient route to electroless gold plating on complex 3D printed polyacrylate plastics.103 However, most of these ELP cases were only triggered by physically absorbed catalysts, which may cause the drawbacks of poor reliability, uniformity, and durability in the resultant metallic structures due to the weak interfacial bonding of the metal coating to the substrate.
Polymer-assisted metal deposition (PAMD), as a versatile method, has been widely used to construct high-performance compliant metal conductors from a wide variety of organic substrates, including plastics, elastomers, paper, and textiles.104 As a representative paradigm, Wang et al. demonstrated the use of the i3DP strategy to fabricate metallic structures/materials with complex geometries and enhance the adhesion of the metallic layer to the polymer substrate.105 Specifically, as shown in Fig. 10a, high-quality metallic coatings, such as copper (Cu) and nickel (Ni), can be evenly deposited onto complex structures through the grafting of polyelectrolyte brushes onto the 3D-printed structures via SI-ATRP using previously embedded initiators followed by ELP via an autocatalytic redox reaction, using Pd4+ cations loaded on the polyelectrolyte brushes as catalysts.106–108 As examples, a metallic lattice was coated with a Cu layer while a mini Eiffel tower was modified with a Ni coating. The metallic complex structures exhibited excellent electrical conductivity, revealing the promise of this approach for the 3D printing of micro-circuitries for structural electronics and even functional electromagnetic metamaterials. Additionally, metallic structures and objects can also be used as further electroplating and electrochemical platforms, paving the way toward real applications in engineering, energy, and the environment.
 Fig. 10  Surface metallic 3D printing. (a) The fabrication of complex metallic architectures through i3DP via polyelectrolyte grafting with SI-ATRP and the subsequent electroless plating of metal. (b) A Cu-coated microlattice and corresponding SEM images of the local features in the x, y, and z directions. (c) A Ni-coated Eiffel tower. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105; copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic illustration of the selectively programmed electrostatic charge deposition of materials in 3D. 3D complex structures with desirable metallic traces: an Eiffel Tower model (e), a 3D antenna array (f), a circuit on an arbitrary 3D pyramid substrate (g), and an interpenetrating metal–dielectric double gyroid (h). Reprinted with the permission from ref. 109; copyright: 2020, Springer Nature. 
Another novel paradigm for selective surface metallization was shown by Zheng and his colleagues, in which volumetric deposition was carried out to modify multiple functional materials within arbitrary 3D layouts.109 Specifically, 3D-printed structures with programmable mosaics of distinct surface charge regions, including negative, positive, and neutral parts, were created as platforms for depositing functional materials onto complex architectures based on localized electrostatic attraction, as shown in Fig. 10d. A programmable 3D deposition-platform emerges based on simple rules: when the sub-domain and deposition material have opposite charge polarity, there is attraction and then deposition in the corresponding areas, while like polarity or no polarity (neutral) repels and gives no significant plating. As examples, a series of complex 3D structures with programmable metallic areas was successfully obtained via this proposed charge-programmed 3D printing and plating method (Fig. 10e–h). This approach shows great potential for readily fabricating multi-material electronic devices, for uses such as tactile sensing, internal wave mapping, and shape self-sensing. This work provides a versatile strategy for developing 3D functional deices and components via inducing special selective interactions between the substrate materials and deposited materials, which supports a novel approach for achieving local patterned metallization and even other functionalization. Briefly, although many achievements have been made in recent years, the 3D printing of structural materials suited to patterning electronic circuits, especially containing flexible and robust features, remains challenging, and more effort should be focused on this in the future.
3.5 Mechanical strengthening
The mechanical performance of 3D-printed devices and components commonly plays a major role in their real-life application, especially when the load-bearing performance is critical. However, the layer-by-layer methodology of the printing process may increase the risk of defects related to the bonding between layers in the resultant printed products.110 Thus, the mechanical properties, such as strength and stiffness, of 3D-printed structures and objects are usually lower than those obtained via conventional processing, such as moulding, which seriously hinders the 3D-printing of devices and components for practical applications.111–113 Many efforts have been made to improve the mechanical performance of 3D-printed objects made of different materials through optimizing the printing technology and materials, including the use of additives,114 molecular design,115 and ultrasound-assisted 3D printing.116 Compared with the above-mentioned protocols, a more direct strategy to enhance the mechanical performance of 3D-printed components is surface modification. Leite et al. found that treatment with an acrylic-based varnish can reduce the open porosity and further maintain the compressive and tensile properties of 3D-printed ABS specimens.117 Additionally, electroplating and electroless plating have been confirmed to improve the mechanical properties of polymer products.118,119 As an example, Jiang and colleagues demonstrated the effects of polymer-brush-assisted electroless plating on the mechanical properties of 3D-printed lattice structures.120 The results showed that a nano-metal coating (∼100 nm) can improve the strength up to 3–4 fold. For the enhancement of metal or alloy components, ultrasonic nanocrystal surface modification (UNSM) is a generic strategy.23 Zhang and coauthors investigated the effects of UNSM on the fatigue performance of 3D-printed Ti64, which led to a significant improvement in the rotation bending fatigue performance.26 Cho et al. demonstrated the effects of UNSM on 3D-printed AISI H13 tool steel samples, and treated samples showed better friction and wear behavior than untreated ones.25 As expected for strengthening 3D-printed bulk materials via surface modification, a combination of so-called mechanical metamaterials and favorable postprocessing approaches can be used to develop novel structural materials with high mechanical strength and light weight, leading to widespread practical use in many fields.
Inspired by natural lightweight materials, such as bones, that are cellular solids with optimized architecture, Bauer et al. demonstrated a composite cellular ceramic (shell)/polymer (core) with a complex 3D microstructure and high specific compressive strength.121 Specifically, 3D topological polymer structures were fabricated using 3D direct laser writing (DLW) and then modified accurately with an alumina (Al2O3) nanocoating through advanced ALD technology, as displayed in Fig. 11a. Regardless of the ceramic coating thickness, the mechanical properties of all the polymeric core structures with different structural features remained unaltered, based on the five types of microarchitecture possessing different densities. Interestingly, the bulk compressive strength and corresponding stiffness strongly depended on the thickness of the deposited alumina layer. Specifically, the compressive strength of the microarchitectures coated with a 100 nm alumina layer was 17 times higher than the pure polymeric structures. Simultaneously, the Young's modulus increased from about 0.1 to 1.4 GPa. More importantly, the specific strengths of several designs were also found to be related to the thickness of the alumina layer. As shown in Fig. 11b, the shape-optimized honeycomb microstructure exhibited a specific modulus of up to 280 MPa at 810 kg m−3, which was comparable to those of technical ceramics and high-strength steels, as well as natural cellular materials. Although integrating the scale-effects of topological hierarchical microarchitectures together with surface modification is an effective strategy to improve the global mechanical performance, exactly how to introduce these combinations into 3D printed devices and components used for engineering is still a fundamental challenge.
 Fig. 11  High-strength cellular Al2O3-coated ceramic composites fabricated via ALD deposition on 3D-printed microarchitectures. (a) SEM images of the examined cellular microarchitectures with different structural characteristics (scale bars: 10 μm). (b) A compressive strength-density Ashby chart showing the cellular ceramic composite materials described in this report compared with other materials (comparison via CES EduPack, Granta Design Ltd). Reproduced with permission from ref. 121; copyright: 2013, National Academy of Sciences. 
3.6 Catalytic performance
Catalysis plays a significant role in a wide range of applications, especially industrial processes.122 However, clean and efficient sustainable chemistry requires effective catalytic reactions with the following basic characteristics: (1) good stability and adaptability for continuous catalysis under various conditions; and (2) reusability and the ability for facile separation from the reaction system. Therefore, supported catalysts have been investigated in depth, immobilizing catalysts onto hierarchical porous carrier materials to solve these problems. Considering the advantageous features of 3D printing for constructing complex and highly accurate ordered multilevel cellular structures, many efforts relating to the 3D printing of supported catalysts have been made in recent years. Figuerola and coworkers demonstrated 3D-printed functional devices coated with a metal–organic framework (MOF) mixed matrix, which were assisted by peroxymonosulfate activation; these were applied to the catalytic degradation of organic dyes in water with high degradation efficiency (97–98%), and excellent reusability and reproducibility.123 Ambrosi and coworkers deposited IrO2 on helical 3D-printed metal electrodes to construct a 3D electrochemical platform.124 Also, via adjusting an ALD process involving TiO2, any 3D-printed stainless steel electrode can be turned into a desired catalyst.34 Meanwhile, the larger the number of ALD cycles, the higher the photoelectrochemical water oxidation activity. Similarly, Schmieg et al. developed a 3D printable poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate (PEGDA) hydrogel used for enzyme entrapment, which was then applied to long-term biocatalytic processing.125 Although many surface modification approaches can endow 3D-printed architectures with high catalytic performance, researchers must pay more attention to three key points to further enhance the catalytic efficiency and practicality for chemical engineering. Firstly, a catalytic carrier with a large surface area is needed to increase the amount of immobilized catalyst, resulting in more catalytically active sites. Secondly, an integrated reaction system based on a one-pot multi-catalytic process is essential to achieve efficient, green, low-cost chemical engineering. Finally, the adhesion between the catalyst and 3D-printed structural carrier must be improved to avoid separation and to generate outstanding durability over a long time period.
Díaz-Marta and colleagues made efforts to create bicatalytic multicomponent reactions via combining 3D heterogeneous copper and palladium catalysts.126 Subsequently, Díaz-Marta et al. further described a compartmented and reusable tricatalytic system consisting of three individual components: (1) 3D-printed polystyrene-supported TBD (PS-TBD) loaded with copper, (2) a 3D-printed SiO2–polyimide–palladium monolith, and (3) chitosan–Fe3O4 (CS–Fe3O4) nanoparticles (NPs),127 as shown in Fig. 12a and b. As a result, the tricatalytic system (Cu2+, Cu1+, and Pd0) could be used to perform sequential one-pot catalytic reactions based on the Cu(II)-mediated Chan–Lam azidation/copper alkyne–azide cycloaddition (1,3-copper alkyne–azide cycloaddition, CuAAC)/Suzuki reaction (Fig. 12c). More importantly, the compartmentalized Cu(II)/Cu(I)/Pd(0) tricatalytic system could be used to carry out one-pot processes for catalytic applications under the optimized conditions, while each individual supported catalyst could be easily separated and reused. Instead of developing multicatalytic systems, Ye and co-workers demonstrated immobilization using chemically modified 3D-printed scaffolds to display an example of highly efficient biocatalysis.128 Specifically, the 3D-printed polymer carrier was chemically modified to improve the specific surface area up to 2.2 m2 g−1, inducing an abundance of surface-active groups for final enzyme immobilization (Fig. 12d). Fig. 12e shows that various desired polymer scaffolds, including cubes (diamond and honeycomb structures), spheres, and pyramids, were easily produced via 3D printing, indicating that this strategy can provide any desired architecture to meet the requirements of a practical reaction system. As examples, penicillin G acylase (PGA) and glycosidase were successfully immobilized onto the 3D-printed carriers to synthesize amoxicillin (AMO) and lactosucrose, respectively, with high yields and excellent reusability (Fig. 12f and g). In brief, the 3D printing of supported catalysts is a promising strategy for building tailored, low-cost, and significantly durable reactor platforms to accommodate various enzymes for industrial applications, such as for food, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, etc.
 Fig. 12  The surface functionalized 3D printing of catalytic components. (a) The 3D printing of a capsule for the entrapment of PS-TBD–Cu(II) (green powder). (b) The 3D-SiO2–polyimide–Pd structure. (c) A general strategy for Cu(II)/Cu(I)/Pd(0) one-pot sequential multicatalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic diagram of surface-modified 3D-printed scaffolds for enzyme immobilization. (e) 3D-printed scaffolds used for enzyme immobilization. (f) Amoxicillin (AMO) synthesis vs. time using immobilized PGA on 3D-printed scaffolds. (g) Lactosucrose synthesis vs. time using immobilized glycosidase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. 
3.7 Other areas
Apart from the above-mentioned surface characteristics, other functional surface physicochemical properties of 3D-printed components have also been realized, all exhibiting great significance for practical applications and summarized as follows. Thiol-group-grafted 3D-printed micro-containers were further modified with ferromagnetic Ni–Au core–shell nanowires (NWs), which can be expanded for direct applications in the biomedical and pharmaceutical fields as a reaction platform for functional nanostructures.129 Fe3O4 NP and graphene oxide (GO) decorated β-tricalcium phosphate (TCP) composite scaffolds demonstrate good photothermal effects together with significantly improved bone-forming ability.130 The surface finish, microstructure, porosity, and in-depth hardness were improved via electrically assisted ultrasonic nanocrystal surface modification (EA-UNSM).24 The surface modification of 3D-printed parts with nano-clay and dimethyl ketone resulted in reduced surface roughness and enhanced UV absorbance in the wavelength range from 350 nm to 380 nm.131 Hyper-porous carbon132 and Cu-BTC MOF133 coated 3D printed devices and components possessed outstanding absorbance properties for organic pollution in water, showing great potential for environmental remediation.
In summary, 3D-printed devices and components with complex structures can acquire critical surface features, such as superwettability, biocompatibility, bioactivity, conductivity, and antibacterial and catalytic properties, through favorable surface modifications, which are closely related to the corresponding applications. As mentioned above, a single functional feature can be achieved using different approaches based on reasonable mechanisms. Thus, it should be considered how to choose a surface modification process that shows high efficiency, low cost, good stability, and facile operability. More importantly, it should be pointed out that the further development of novel methodologies to achieve surface multifunctionality, and even local surface functionalization, is attracting more and more interest at present, and this may open up more opportunities for 3D printing with practical outcomes.
4. Emerging applications
Surface functionalized 3D printing, as a combination of 3D-printing technology with versatile surface postprocessing, focuses on endowing 3D-printed structures and objects with unique surface characteristics when fabricating functional devices and components, leading to potential applications in many fields, such as biomedicine, engineering, electronics, the environment, energy, and chemical engineering. For emerging applications, surface-functionalized 3D printing has two significantly advantageous aspects in comparison with traditional monolithic approaches. Firstly, developing 3D-printed parts with unique surface features aims to address the issue that the general 3D printing of architectures and objects commonly focuses on structure, size, and accuracy, but neglects potential functionality, resulting in the field being out-of-touch with practical concerns. Secondly, surface-functionalized 3D printing can lead to 3D-printed products with desirable structures, closer to the real application requirements, in comparison with traditional surface-modified bulk materials, where more attention is commonly paid to developing novel methods and mechanisms. Herein, many efforts have been made to provide convincing evidence of 3D-printed functional devices and components fabricated via surface-functionalized 3D printing and used for various applications in recent years, as follows.
4.1 Biomedicine
Due to worldwide aging populations and life-expectancy extensions, the demand for synthetic medical devices, pharmaceutical products, tissue replacement materials, and reconstruction techniques are steadily growing year by year.4 Fortunately, the demand for patient-matched devices and components can to some extent be achieved through the availability and integration of surface-functionalized 3D printing, which focuses on fabricating medical instruments and obtaining favorable material-tissue responses. At present, many biomedical device and component advances have been developed from different aspects via 3D printing assisted by surface modification. Bose et al. developed calcium-phosphate-coated 3D-printed porous titanium with nanoscale surface modifications for orthopedic and dental applications.134 Park and colleagues demonstrated cell proliferation and the corresponding cell behavior on a macro-/nano-surface structure and collagen immobilization on 3D PCL scaffolds, which has great significance for the prior simulation of animal experiments.135 Currently, as relatively mature clinical application examples, 3D-printed scaffolds made of biocompatible polymers, ceramics, and metals have been postprocessed with different functional components, such as hydroxyapatite (HA),136 HA together with poly(propylenefumarate),137 medicine,43,138 bioactive factors,83,139,140 a mesoporous bioactive glass nanolayer,38,39 and surface micro-/nano-structures,22,29,141,142 to assist the healing of bone defects and bone regeneration in a post-surgical context. Moreover, multifunctional 3D scaffolds not only show excellent osseointegration but also accompanying properties, such as antibacterial ability,143 hemocompatibility, and anti-infection potency,144 reducing the risk of complications such as inflammation, metallosis, osteolysis, and so forth.
Cui and colleagues reported the comprehensive design of an engineered vascularized bone construct in vitro via integrating a biomimetic 3D bio-printed fluid perfused microstructure with a biologically inspired smart-release nanocoating.145 According to the native bone structure and biological features, a 3D PLA scaffold was modified via the layer-by-layer coating of gelatin and polysine and via the sequential encapsulation of bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP2) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) through a genipin crosslinking reaction; this can be used to construct in vitro engineered vascularized bone in a fluid surrounding, as shown in Fig. 13a. The most important point of this design is that angiogenesis and osteogenesis can be successively induced through a matrix-metalloprotease-2-regulated mechanism via the sequential release of the two growth factors triggered by the secretion of matrix metallopeptidase 2 (MMP2) by human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) in a spatiotemporal manner. Also, to treat major bone diseases, namely malignant bone tumors, Ma et al. developed a “therapy-regeneration” collaborative strategy,146 as shown in Fig. 13b. Specifically, a 3D-printed TCP scaffold was postprocessed via the deposition of graphene oxide (GO), resulting in both the photothermal therapy of bone tumors and the reconstruction of bone defects. As a result, the distinct photothermal effect of the resultant scaffold kills more than 90% of osteosarcoma cells (MG-63) in vitro, thus effectively inhibiting tumor growth. Meanwhile, the GO-modified TCP scaffolds can stimulate osteogenic differentiation to significantly promote new bone formation in bone defects. In addition, the combination of the 3D-printing of a sacrificial template and subsequent surface post-fabrication can be used to prepare some hollow or tube-like tissue engineering scaffolds.147 In a typical approach, Qian and co-workers fabricated an integrated multi-layer 3D-structure of PDA/RGD-coated graphene loaded onto a PCL nano-scaffold, which was used for peripheral nerve restoration.148 As shown in the schematic illustration in Fig. 13c, the inner-most and outer-most layers of RGD and PDA sandwich the graphene/PCL double layer; the RGD/PDA layers support cell adhesion and proliferation, while the graphene/PCL double layer can intensify the tubular structure and allow for a certain stiffness during long-term in vivo studies. After the polymer template was removed, the multilayered 3D graphene conduit with multiple aligned macropores could be used for axonal regeneration and remyelination after physical nerve injuries, showing potential for clinical peripheral nerve restoration. Similarly, Xu et al. developed a biodegradable tubular scaffold for urethra tissue engineering via 3D printing and subsequent surface coating.149
 Fig. 13  The surface functionalization of 3D-printed structures used for tissue engineering reparation. (a) A biologically inspired smart-release system based on 3D-printed scaffolds for enhancing vascularized tissue regeneration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145; copyright: 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) A bifunctional biomaterial scaffold showing photothermal effects for tumor therapy and bone regeneration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146; copyright: 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) An integrated multi-layer 3D PDA/RGD-coated graphene-loaded PCL nanoscaffold for peripheral nerve restoration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148; copyright: 2018, Springer Nature. 
Biomedical devices and components are also another essential area for clinical applications. Pan et al. fabricated tracheal scaffolds made of PCL via 3D printing and surface modification,150 as shown in Fig. 14a. The resulting nano-silicon dioxide (NSD)-modified porous tracheal scaffolds (PTSs) with an optimized pore size of 200 μm exhibited outstanding biocompatibility, cytotropism, and biomechanical properties, and a low immune rejection response. Currently, although stent implantation therapy has been widely employed clinically, especially in the cardiovascular field, developing patient-matched stents is still highly necessary, owing to differences in the physical conditions of patients. Lee and colleagues manufactured a functional 3D-printed PLA biodegradable cardiovascular stent via a mussel-inspired method assisted by PEI and heparin (Hep) chemicals for coronary artery implantation,151 as shown in Fig. 14b. The heparinized 3D stents possessed excellent anti-coagulant activity, showing hemocompatibility and thromboresistance, and modulated smooth muscle cell (SMC) and endothelial cell (EC) proliferation. In addition, microdevices for oral drug delivery (ODD) systems are critical for increasing bioavailability. Vaut et al. reported an assembly-line process for producing reservoir devices for ODD, including the 3D printing of microdevices, and automated drug loading and sealing (Fig. 14c).152 Due to the 3D-printed drug storage structure with anchor-like surface architecture, mucoadhesion and intestinal retention can be enhanced in comparison with traditional ODD structures such as cubes and cylinders. More importantly, unilaterally textured structures can raise the probability for the unidirectional attachment of devices, resulting in the unidirectional release of drugs toward the intestinal mucosa. Briefly, surface-functionalized 3D printing has the ability to fabricate biomedical devices and components with personalized structural design and favorable biocompatibility and bioactivity, paving the way toward individual medical products in the future.
 Fig. 14  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of medical devices. (a) Porous tracheal scaffolds (PTSs) fabricated using 3D-printing technology and surface modification. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150; copyright: 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) The fabrication of heparinized 3D-printed biodegradable PLA stents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151; copyright: 2019, Elsevier. (c) The 3D printing of drug-loaded polymeric microreservoirs and (d and e) the corresponding mucoadhesion performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Electronics
The trend in electronic system development is toward miniaturization, integration, scaling, free assembly, and low energy consumption, which are significant requirements for use in wearable devices, robotics, micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), and so forth.153Via applying the surface-functionalized 3D printing of structural electronics to expedite prototyping, the development cycle and cost can be reduced in comparison with traditional methods.154 Moreover, 3D-structured electronic components and electronic circuits are essential parts of functional electronic systems. For example, Tian et al. developed a novel fabrication method for implantable carbon electrodes with good electrical conductivity and tailored shapes via a 3D-printing and chemical-modification process.155 Additionally, a 3D-printed actuator was fabricated via the deposition of a carbon nanotube (CNT) layer on the surface of a 3D-printed device, which achieved heat-induced shape deformation behavior when a voltage of 50 V was applied.156 Factually, surface-metallization 3D printing, as a next-generation technology, enables the fabrication of electronic devices and structural circuits with tailored shapes and traces on a complex structure. ELP-assisted 3D printing, as an efficient approach, has been widely employed to manufacture 3D electronics. A 3D-printed ball was selectively coated with silver nanoparticles to fabricate a 3D-printed flexible switch, which can switch an LED on/off upon compressing the 3D-printed flexible switch.157 Wang and colleagues developed ultralight copper foams with complex structures via an ELP-assisted i3DP strategy, which display outstanding electrical conductivity and even compressibility, indicating their potential use in stretchable conductors.105
Another typical example attempting to expand the availability of micro-circuitry for 3D structural electronics was demonstrated by Lee et al.,158 as shown in Fig. 15a. Specifically, the ELP of copper was implemented via the direct ink writing of catalyst microstructures with a functional catalyst ink containing Ag ions. Importantly, silver nitrate (AgNO3), 2-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTMS), and hydroxypropylcellulose (HPC) were blended together to prepare the catalytic ink, in which HPC, as a special additive, can regulate the rheology behavior and stability in thermal solution due to its low critical solution temperature (LCST). As a result, two-dimensional (2D) and 3D Cu micro-circuitry with high conductivity (∼65% of the bulk value) was constructed only along the designed catalyst traces on the 3D substrates after dipping the printed catalyst microstructures into a Cu ELD bath; this can be directly integrated with electronics, including light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photoresistors, transistors, and resistors, on 3D plastic substrates for fabricating functional electronic systems, such as automatic LED switch systems, “KERI-signals”, and “KERI-watches”. This work supports the potential of surface metallic 3D printing for integrating electronics into complex 3D structures and functional systems.
 Fig. 15  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of electronic devices and components. (a) The ELD-assisted 3D printing of micro-circuitry for structural electronics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) The selective ELP of 3D-printed plastic structures for 3D microwave metamaterials and the corresponding microwave response performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161; copyright: 2017, American Institute of Physics. 
Also, electronic communication devices, such as 3D-printed lightweight waveguide filters based on spherical resonators159 and metal-pipe rectangular waveguides,160 can also be successfully manufactured via 3D-printing assisted by ELP. Surface metallic waveguides with polymer cores possess an excellent frequency response but are considerably more lightweight than similar metallic waveguides. As an interesting paradigm, Ishikawa and coauthors investigated the use of ELP on PLA–ABS composite structures fabricated via FDM to construct 3D microwave metamaterials, in which the selectively enhanced ELP process with Sn2+ guided the metallization, leading to the formation of a highly conductive Ag-plated membrane only on the PLA surface with non-plated ABS parts,161 as shown in Fig. 15b. The resulting 3D microwave metamaterial with self-standing split-ring resonators (SRRs) revealed important bi-anisotropic responses arising from the 3D nature of the metallodielectric structures. Briefly, the surface-modified 3D printing of structural electronics offers the advantages of light weight, rapid manufacturing, miniaturization, and relatively low cost when compared with traditional (micro)machining, resulting in practical applications in advanced communication and remote sensing technologies.
4.3 Sensing systems
Post-fabrication-functionalized 3D printed devices with specific active sites can readily respond to external stimuli, compounds, and biomacromolecules, and they can be further implemented as sensors in many intelligent monitoring/detection systems applied in analytical chemistry, biological testing, mechanical engineering, and so forth. The design and fabrication of functional sensors, especially those coupled with integrated electrical systems, must focus on three critical aspects: (1) the 3D printing of sensor supports with unique structures and tailored shapes based on the specific application conditions; (2) the construction of surface modified active recognition sites with highly selective responses to the targets in the surroundings; and (3) excellent compatibility and durability with other electrical systems for real applications. Under the guidance of these essential aspects, many advances in the surface-functionalized 3D printing of sensors and systems have been investigated in depth in recent years. 3D-printed graphene electrodes modified with Prussian blue (PB) nanoparticles were used as a novel electrochemical sensing platform for the analysis of peroxide in practical samples, including milk and mouthwash, without interference from the typical species found in milk, cosmetics, and biological samples.162 Similarly, electrochemically treated 3D-printed graphene electrodes exhibited enhanced electron transfer kinetics and electrocatalytic activity, and these were employed for dopamine sensing with a linear response from 2.0 μmol L−1 to 10.0 μmol L−1 and a detection limit of 0.24 μmol L−1.163 Manzanares-Palenzuela presented proteinase-sculptured 3D-printed graphene/PLA electrodes modified with the enzyme alkaline phosphatase for detecting 1-naphthol in aqueous media.164 A 3D-printed stainless-steel helical-shaped electrode was modified with a thin gold film via plating to detect paracetamol and the neurotransmitter dopamine (DA) in aqueous solutions.165 Moreover, modified 3D-printed devices have been used to extract mercury (Hg)166 and uranium (U)167 for the determination of their presence in water. However, the abovementioned contributions just support the possibility for sensing and detection through the selective implementation of specific response couples in static surroundings. It is necessary to explore deployable sensing systems with analytical and monitoring features for real applications.
Cardoso and colleagues reported 3D-printed graphene/PLA electrodes modified with glucose oxidase (GOx) and mechanical polishing that were used for glucose sensing in blood plasma and the direct detection of nitrite and uric acid under flow conditions.168 Moreover, Su et al. developed an efficient analytical strategy for the real-time monitoring of the dynamic fluctuations of brain extracellular glucose and lactate in living rats.169 Specifically, 3D-printed flow reactors were modified with GOx and lactate oxidase (LOx) on the surfaces of the inner structures of the reactors, respectively, playing a critical role for the biosensing of glucose and lactate in the dynamic analytical system (Fig. 16a). The highly sensitive system for the online monitoring of energy metabolites involved microdialysis (MD) sampling and fluorescence determination in integration with the 3D functional bioreactors, as shown in Fig. 16b. When rat brain microdialysate flowed through either a GOx- or LOx-immobilized bioreactor, the biochemical oxidation of glucose/lactate led to the continuous online generation of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which could be recorded as a response signal by the H2O2-sensing molecular probe. To confirm the capabilities for the real-time monitoring of the targets, the in vivo dynamic monitoring of rat brain extracellular glucose/lactate was carried out when a depolarization simulation was suddenly conducted in the rat brain via perfusing a high-K+ medium through the implanted MD probe. As shown in Fig. 16c, the results suggested that the concentration of extracellular glucose decreased while the concentration of extracellular lactate increased in the process of introducing the depolarization stimulus, which was attributed to an energy consumption process dominated by an anaerobic glycolysis pathway, gradually resulting in Na+/K+ homeostasis.
 Fig. 16  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of functional sensing systems. (a) The surface modification of a 3D-printed ABS bioreactor with enzymes for the online monitoring of rat brain extracellular glucose and lactate. (b) Schematic diagrams of the optimized online glucose/lactate monitoring systems. The top one is used for the determination of lactate while the bottom one is for the determination of glucose. (c) The evolution of rat brain extracellular glucose and lactate concentrations with time following the implantation of the MD probe and treatment through perfusion with a high-K+ medium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169; copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic illustration of a CNT-coated 3D microspring force sensor for a variety of biomedical applications. (e) The 3D functional microspring used for ECG and pressure sensing. (f) The 3D functional microspring using for monitoring the tissue contact-force during intraluminal intervention. (g) The 3D functional microspring used for multi-position force sensing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the combination of electronic materials with micro-3D fabrication also opens up new opportunities for wearable biosensors, medical devices, electro-mechanical sensors, and MEMS, leading to the sensing of physical signals such as pulse, breath, motion, force, flow, temperature, etc. Zarek and co-workers presented a temperature sensor prepared via the inkjet printing of silver nanoparticles onto the surface of a 3D-printed device, in which the shape memory behavior of the sensor is the key point determining its response to a temperature change in the surroundings.156 Faller developed a position sensor based on a multilayer inkjet-printed electrode on 3D-printed copper housing for spectrometer applications.171 Inspired by the first 3D-printed z-axis accelerometers with differential capacitive sensing abilities,172 Zega and colleagues developed the first three-axis accelerometer with differential capacitive sensing abilities via 3D printing and wet metallization, which exhibited the advantages of having relatively small dimensions (features as small as 450 μm), very high capacitive sensitivity (>200 fF g−1), and low theoretical thermo-mechanical noise.173
To monitor various physical signals for medical applications, Li et al. investigated a CNT-coated 3D microspring sensor manufactured via two-photon polymerization (TPP) printing and subsequent spray-coating with a CNT conductive layer.170 As shown in Fig. 16d, the force sensor consisted of three components, functional springs, supporting springs and alignment pins. Due to the high force sensitivity, the 3D-printed microspring force sensor was employed for biomedical applications. Firstly, an optimized force sensing system was placed on the chest for electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring (bipolar lead) and inside a plaster for arterial pulse monitoring, simultaneously (Fig. 16e). The fluctuation of the carotid pressure wave agreed with a single lead ECG signal acquired at the same time for temporal synchronization. Secondly, the single-step force sensor was integrated with the tip of a bespoke steerable catheter to measure the tissue contact-force in a porcine lung model during intraluminal intervention, with sensitivities in the μN to mN range (Fig. 16f). Finally, multilocation force detection was implemented via placing three sensors with different resistance values between two parallel wires, in which the contact numbers and positions were distinguished individually based on current signals in real-time, as exhibited in Fig. 16g. Briefly, the combination of the 3D printing of fine microstructures and functional surface modification can promote advances in next-generation sensors for intelligent detection and monitoring in many fields.
4.4 Water decontamination
Myriad organic pollutants, heavy metal ions, oil spills, and so on commonly cause serious water pollution, which subsequently threaten the environment and safety of biological life. Although many efforts have been made to develop wastewater treatment techniques and materials, e.g., traditional filtration and sedimentation, advanced adsorption,174 degradation,175 catalysis,176etc., the poor stabilities and unsuitable bulk materials needed for these advances mean it is still a challenge to fabricate structural devices and components for engineering-oriented practical applications. To address these problems, surface-functionalized 3D printing has been introduced to construct highly efficient and durable devices without delay for new water decontamination approaches.
For oil/water separation, Yan and colleagues carried out the on-site building of an oil-skimmer for oil collection from spills54 and an oil/water mixture separator with in situ demulsification and separation abilities177via 3D printing and surface grafting. Moreover, Yuan and co-workers obtained superhydrophobic structural polysulfone membranes with switchable wettability via 3D printing and the self-assembly deposition of candle soot for efficient gravity-derived oil/water separation.178 Due to the limitations of polymer in complex environments, Chen et al. demonstrated 3D-printed ceramic structures with in situ grown whiskers for effective oil/water separation.179 Specifically, the 3D printing of geometrically complex alumina structures with flexible inner channel and strut configurations, on which aluminum borate whiskers with the features of superhydrophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity were obtained, was carried out via surface chemical engineering, as shown in Fig. 17a. As a result, 3D-printed functional separators were proposed for effective oil/water separation in different models, including a free oil/water mixture, for oil purification, and for the separation of an oil-in-water emulsion with good oil/water separation efficiency (over 99%) and a high flow rate. More importantly, the all-ceramic structural devices also possess outstanding durability for long-term use and resistance to harsh environments, revealing their potential as engineering parts for practical water treatment.
 Fig. 17  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of water treatment devices. (a) A 3D-printed ceramic alumina woodpile scaffold modified with whiskers of All8B4O33 used for highly efficient oil/water separation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179; copyright: 2019, Elsevier. (b) Polyoxometalate-functionalized 3D-printed hierarchical porous devices applied to the removal of heavy metal ions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181; copyright: 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) MOF-decorated 3D-printed hierarchical porous ceramics for the high-efficiency catalytic degradation of organic dyes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182; copyright: 2020, Elsevier. 
To remove dissolved heavy metal ions in water, physical adsorption based on coordination has commonly been employed using structured adsorbents for water decontamination. Zhang et al. investigated a chitosan-grafted 3D porous monolith with a high content of amine and hydroxyl groups, which played the role of removing metal ions due to their polymer chelation properties. As a result, the chitosan-modified monolithic filter possessed a maximum adsorption capacity of 13.7 mg g−1 and superior adsorption kinetics of 2.2 mg g−1 min−1 for Cu(II) removal.180 Besides, Ji and colleagues developed polyoxometalate-functionalized 3D-printed hierarchical porous devices for removing heavy metal ions.181 More specifically, the 3D functional device was fabricated as follows: (1) 3D-printed ABS prototypes were obtained via partial hydrolysis in a basic hydrolysis solution, resulting in the formation of surface carboxylate and amide groups to act as hydrogen-bonding sites for polyoxometalate binding; and (2) tri-lacunary Keggin anions, [α-PW9O34]9−, were deposited on the active ABS surface as heavy metal binding sites to coordinate the binding of metal cations (Fig. 17b). The surface functionalized 3D porous devices exhibited the excellent adsorption of various metal ions, such as Co2+, Cu2+, and Ni2+, which confirms that 3D-printed, POM-modified composites with porous features and complex structures are promising materials for heavy metal adsorption from aqueous solutions.
Compared with the aforementioned wastewater treatment processes, other organic pollutants, including organic dyes, antibiotics, phenolic compounds, and so forth, are commonly treated via physical separation, adsorption, and chemical catalytic degradation. Sun et al. demonstrated the 3D printing of Fe-doped PLA structures followed by surface activation via etching and oxidation to fabricate reactive agitating impellers (AIs), which can not only catalyze a Fenton-like reaction for the catalytic degradation of organic dyes (i.e., MB), but can also remove heavy metal ions (Cu2+, Hg2+) via a galvanic replacement reaction with a high removal rate of nearly 100%.183 Moreover, a Cu-MOF-loaded 3D-printed PLA skeleton was used to adsorb malachite green (MG) with a removal efficiency of more than 90%.184 However, the surface adhesion of functional components on 3D-printed supports defines the stability and durability for practical water decontamination applications. For optimization, Liu and colleagues developed a 3D printing strategy assisted by surface engineering to fabricate catalytic devices with high performance for wastewater treatment.182 More specifically, 3D-printed hierarchical porous ceramics (3DP-HPC) modified with a mussel-inspired PDA coating that can in situ load MOF-based catalysts via facile hydrothermal treatment, in which the catalysts can be stably decorated onto the surface of the catalytic carriers, resulted in high catalytic performance and durability. As a paradigm, a multi-material DIW 3D-filter with hierarchical porous core struts and a dense hollow thin-walled cylinder was modified with MIL-100 (Fe) via a hydrothermal process; this was combined with a transparent silicone hose to fabricate a dynamic catalytic reactor for simulating engineering treatment (Fig. 17c). As a result, the dynamic catalytic device exhibited extremely superior catalytic degradation efficiency in Rh-B-containing wastewater. In brief, surface-functionalized 3D printing provides a generic approach for fabricating structured devices and components for water treatment, paving the way toward miniaturized, large-scale, integrated, and intelligent environmental engineering.
4.5 Electrochemical energy
Due to increasingly serious energy and climate crises, many efforts have been made to develop next-generation materials/electrodes for electrochemical energy-conversion and energy-storage applications.185 The crucial topic in energy conversion is water splitting, also referred to as electrolysis, which can generate hydrogen (H2) energy, leading to the greater possibility of directly generating electricity for use in buildings, transportation, and industry. However, catalysts, including expensive and rare platinum group metals (PGMs), show low H2 production abilities in water electrolysis.186,187 Developing electrodes and devices that can lower the cost of water splitting is necessary via integrating electrochemically active materials.188 Meanwhile, energy storage (i.e., supercapacitors and batteries) is also an alternative approach to distribute energy for different applications in reality189 that requires next-generation devices and components possessing rapid charge–discharge efficiencies and usable lifetimes while undergoing charge–discharge cycling. An available protocol is to increase the mass loading of functional materials or to enhance the footprint area of electrodes to generate high energy density.153 In particular, 3D porous electrodes can be used to increase the surface area without increasing the ion transport length, in comparison with stacking multiple electrodes together. Currently, surface-functionalized 3D printing has been employed for the fabrication of electrodes and devices for electrochemical energy applications owing to the enhanced performance associated with tailored geometries in practical devices.
To create 3D-printed electrodes that are highly active for water splitting, additional processes must be carried out to alter the electrode surfaces for these reactions. Optimized strategies commonly involve altering the structure of the electrode support and improving the electrochemically active surface via surface modifications to the catalyst simultaneously.185 Both of these routes will be discussed below. Given the significance of geometry for an efficient water splitting process, a series of electrochemical electrodes with different shapes, such as mesh,190 square with conical surface structures,191 ribbon,124 and ring,192 have been fabricated via the 3D printing of polymer or metal supports followed by surface activation for water splitting applications. Compared with functional electrochemical electrodes, developing centralized installations made via surface-functionalized 3D printing has more potential for practical water splitting. A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera showed that the combination of commercial 3D printing techniques with facile electrochemical surface deposition can be convenient for tuning the catalytic performance of 3D-printed metallic electrodes, allowing them to be applied as electrocatalysts for water splitting applications,193 as shown in Fig. 18a. Pt- and IrO2-modified steel electrodes exhibited excellent electrocatalytic properties for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in comparison with others. As a paradigm, an electrolyzing device consisting of a Pt-modified 3D basket as a cathode and an IrO2-modified 3D basket as an anode was applied for efficient water splitting in 1 M KOH solution, which was powered by a commercial AA alkaline battery with a nominal voltage of 1.5 V. A more centralized water splitting cell was proposed by Su and colleagues.194 Specifically, the water splitting full cell (WSFC) consisted of four parts: an OER truss electrode with walls as the outer shell; a HER truss electrode as the core; a semipermeable gas-bubble separator; and a gas collection system (Fig. 18b). The nickel–iron–(oxo)hydroxide nanosheets (NFNS)@nickel–phosphorous (NiP)@Truss electrode showed a low overpotential of 197 mV with a Tafel slope of 51 mV dec−1, which can result in effective water splitting. In addition, the semipermeable separating mesh can address the issue of the separation of H2 and O2 gases effectively in the WSFC. This study provides a great example of how 3D printing and functional postprocessing can be utilized to create highly efficient electrochemical devices and components for water splitting.
 Fig. 18  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of electrochemical energy-conversion components and devices. (a) A self-contained 3D-printed electrochemical platform with metal electrodes and polymer electrochemical cells for tailored water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193; copyright: 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) An integrated 3D-printed electrochemical water splitting cell obtained via a full 3D-printing strategy and surface functionalization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194; copyright: 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
For electrochemical storage applications, 3D printing assisted by surface modification can readily be used to fabricate electrochemically active electrodes with functional materials and optimized geometry designs to build supercapacitors and batteries, resulting in higher electrochemical performance in comparison with traditional 2D planar or film electrodes. 3D-printed titanium interdigitated electrodes modified with polypyrrole (PPy) were assembled as solid-state symmetric supercapacitor electrodes with a (PVA)–H3PO4 polymer electrolyte, exhibiting a volumetric capacitance of 2.4 F cm−3, an energy density of 213.5 W h m−3 at a current density of 3.74 mA cm−3, and a power density of 15.0 kW m−3 at 37.4 mA cm−3.195 Similarly, Wang et al. constructed a micro-pseudocapacitor using a 3D-printed interdigitated graphene framework loaded with metal oxide (e.g., NiO) nanostructures, which shows a high areal capacity of 197.5 mC cm−2 and cycling stability during 10000 charge–discharge cycles.196 Supercapacitors should have a good loading of active material, typically higher than 10 mg cm−2. However, as reported, a large mass loading (>1 mg cm−2) of pseudocapacitive material (e.g., manganese oxide (MnO2)) on current collectors can drastically impede the capacitive performance due to sluggish ion diffusion in the bulk material. To address this, Li and co-workers deposited MnO2 on a 3D-printed graphene aerogel electrode to fabricate a pseudocapacitor,197 as shown in Fig. 19a. Interestingly, although the 3D-printed graphene aerogel electrode was loaded with MnO2 at a value as high as 182.2 mg cm−2, the resultant pseudocapacitor still exhibited an excellent high areal capacitance of 44.13 F cm−2. Most importantly, the capacitive performance of the pseudocapacitor is not limited by ion diffusion, even at a high mass loading, owing to the engineered porous structure allowing efficient ion diffusion. As a result, the areal capacitance increases linearly with the mass loading of MnO2 and the electrode thickness, while the gravimetric capacitance remains almost unchanged. This work confirms that the 3D-printed monolithic electrodes show great potential for use in the practical fabrication of electrodes and devices with high efficiency. Factually, the mechanical properties of electrodes become more and more important in extreme application environments. Chang et al. developed 3D-printed electrodes via creating active Cu(OH)2 nanostructures on a metallized ceramic support,198 as illustrated in Fig. 19b. As a result, 3D-printed Cu(OH)2/Cu/ceramic octet truss lattice electrodes displayed a high volumetric capacitance of 8.46 F cm−3 at 5 mA cm−3 and an outstanding rate capacity with 68% capacitance retention at 1 A cm−3, as well as excellent stability, with ∼84% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles. The assembled supercapacitor showed both high energy and power densities of 24.4 W h kg−1 and 4039.2 W kg−1, respectively, which are comparable to or higher than other symmetric/asymmetric supercapacitors recently reported. More importantly, the octet-truss lattice electrodes could bear a highest compressive strength of 30 MPa and dissipate a maximum energy absorption of 264.7 kJ m−3, which was attributed to the robust ceramic support. Besides, surface active graphene/PLA electrodes made with FDM can also be used as porous anodes for utilization within lithium-ion batteries with a specific capacity of 500 mA h g−1 at a current density of 40 mA g−1.199 Briefly, surface-functionalized 3D printing opens up new opportunities for developing next-generation electrochemical energy-storage devices with high electrochemical performance and designed geometries, which could be extremely crucial for the miniaturized electronics and aerospace industries.
 Fig. 19  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of electrochemical energy storage devices. (a) The 3D printing of graphene electrodes decorated with MnO2 used in a pseudocapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197; copyright: 2018, Elsevier. (b) 3D structured strengthened urchin-like Cu(OH)2-based symmetric supercapacitors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198; copyright: 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.6 Chemical reactors
Due to the principles of green chemistry and process intensification, heterogeneous catalytic reactions are widely applied to efficiently carry out organic synthesis in modern chemical engineering in a way in which reactions occur when reactants flow through catalysts in centralized installations.200,201 Novel chemical reactors play important roles in the development of continuous flow chemical systems (FCSs), especially laboratory-scale continuous flow processing, which show benefits over traditional batch procedures.202 The 3D printing of structured devices modified with functional materials with catalytic activities has the advantageous features of efficiency, miniaturization, stability, and designability in comparison with monoliths with embedded catalysts for particular applications. At present, some chemical reactors have been developed for catalytic processes. Coelho and colleagues developed a 3D-printed chemical reactor modified with Pd for Sonogashira and Suzuki reactions, which exhibited outstanding efficiency and reusability during operation.203 Wu and coworkers designed polymeric ionic liquids (PILs) assisted by Pd-modified 3D-printed agitating impellers with prismatic structures for chemical reactions, such as Suzuki coupling, and dye decolorization reactions.204 Although both advances display the possibility of using surface-functionalized 3D printing for chemical reactors, the compatibility of the chemical reactors with continuous flow chemical systems is not mentioned.
Herein, a lot of attention has been focused on the modules for continuous flow chemical systems. Kazenwadel and coauthors obtained a 3D-printed modular reactor setup via 3D printing and surface engineering, which consisted of temperature and pH control, as well as enzyme cascades.205 The active enzymes, such as GOx and horseradish peroxidase (HRP), were immobilized on the surface of 3D-printed housing, with integrated fluid distributors forming a compact module to implement a biotransformation step. Schmieg et al. developed a chemical modular reactor made of 3D-printed hydrogel lattices for enzyme entrapment, as well as 3D-printed matching housing for continuous flow operation.206 Although this system can be loaded with different enzymes to produce products with good stability, the biocatalytic performance was limited by the mass transfer ability. To address this issue, Peris and colleagues reported the first example of a functionalized 3D-printed device for the immobilization and application of ω-transaminase (ω-TA) enzymes in a continuous-flow process.207 As shown in Fig. 20a, the key point is that the 3D-printed device possesses an inherent fluid channel, which has great benefits for efficient mass transport in comparison with commonly used external porous catalytic carriers. As a paradigm, the ATA 177 enzyme was immobilized on the channel surface for the kinetic resolution of rac-methylbenzylamine under continuous flow. During these periods, the activity and enantioselectivity of the bioreactor was maintained, with production of about 7.5 μmol h−1 mgenz and enantiomeric excess of >94% (Fig. 20b), which indicated that the 3D-printed continuous flow biocatalytic reactor possessed high enzyme activity and stability under continuous-flow streams.
 Fig. 20  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of chemical reactors. (a) A 3D-printed bioreactor for transamination under continuous flow. (b) A continuous-flow biocatalytic reactor loaded with the ATA 117 enzyme for the kinetic resolution of rac-methylbenzylamine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207; copyright: 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The 3D printing of catalytic static mixers modified with Ni or Pt catalysts used for continuous flow hydrogenation. (d) Different catalyst set-ups in 3D-printed reactors for the hydrogenation of oleic acid (yellow bars) and vinyl acetate (blue bars). Reprinted with permission from ref. 208; copyright: 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3D-printed polymer-based chemical reactors commonly encounter the risk of failure under high temperatures and pressures, as well as in the presence of harsh solvents. However, metal scaffolds have suitable intrinsic features, including good mechanical properties, scratch resistance, and superior temperature and solvent stabilities. Thus, laser sintered porous 3D metal structures, namely designed porous structured reactors (DPSRs), have been widely applied to catalytic reactions, especially hydrogenation reactions. Elias and coauthors reported a DPSR made via selective laser sintering (SLS) followed by the deposition of aluminium oxide–zinc oxide assisted with PbNPs, which can be utilized for the selective hydrogenation of 2-methyl-3-butyn-2-ol (MBY) to 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol (MBE) under solvent-free conditions.209 Avril et al. fabricated novel metal catalytic static mixers (CSMs) packaged in a tubular reactor for continuous flow hydrogenation.208 Specifically, CSMs with different structural designs were readily manufactured via electron beam melting (EBM) technology, which were then modified with metal catalysts, including Ni and Pt, via electroplating (EP) or cold spraying (CS). The prepared CSMs were coupled into a tubular flow reactor set-up for continuous flow hydrogenation, as shown in Fig. 20c. Oleic acid (OA) and vinyl acetate (VAc) were chosen as the substrates to evaluate the performance of this continuous flow hydrogenation system. Fig. 20d shows that the catalytic performance can be optimized via structural design and surface postprocessing, providing convincing evidence showing how to design highly efficient chemical reactors for practical applications.
In summary, as expected, surface-functionalized 3D printing possesses powerful abilities to promote the combination of advanced manufacturing technology and surface engineering, and to generate useful devices and components for different applications, including tissue engineering scaffolds, medical instruments, electronic devices, intelligent sensors, water treatment components, electrochemical devices, and chemical reactors. It can be found that some 3D-printed devices and components only acquire specifically essential surface features to possess excellent performance for some particular application. However, others have to meet multiple requirements simultaneously for real-life implementation due to the complex application conditions in some demanding fields. In other words, the real-life applications determine what to design with 3D printing and how to modify these designs through subsequent surface engineering. Given this finding, the key point for surface-functionalized 3D printing research in the future is to design and fabricate 3D functional devices and components that are strongly dependent on corresponding real-life utilization. In addition, although surface-functionalized 3D printing has been widely used to manufacture potential prototypes for different applications in reality, the stability of functional layers on the surfaces of some 3D printed structural substrates is still worrying under some conditions, such as abrasion, shearing, or other mechanical loading.
5. Conclusions and outlook
Surface-functionalized 3D printing, as a versatile strategy, has been intensively applied in the development of 3D functional devices and components for practical applications with input from various disciplines. Physical and chemical surface modifications, such as etching, deposition, self-assembly polymerization, and surface grafting, have been introduced, together with their characteristics, endowing 3D-printed structures and objects with unique surface features, including superwettability, biocompatibility, bioactivity, conductivity, and antibacterial and catalytic properties. Compared with traditional bulk materials and surface postprocessing approaches carried out individually, the combination of 3D-printed structures and favorable surface modification displays potential for directly fabricating useful 3D devices and components, and even commercial products for practical applications, such as tissue engineering scaffolds, medical instruments, electronic devices, intelligent sensors, water treatment components, electrochemical devices, and chemical reactors. Although this strategy has seen more attention focused on proof-of-concept and prototyping outcomes during some potential demonstrations in various fields at present, there is no doubt that surface-functionalized 3D printing is an extremely critical strategy to promote emerging and innovative 3D printing methods for industrial goals.
Despite the numerous achievements, grand challenges and opportunities still remain when it comes to improving the strengths of surface-functionalized 3D printing from the following aspects, as summarized in Fig. 21. Firstly, the interfacial adhesion between the acquired surface functional layer and the 3D printed substrate has a great influence on the stability and durability of the resultant structure. However, fabricating a robust functional layer on various substrates is still a fundamental challenge. Further investigations are needed to reveal the basic mechanisms of surface/interfacial engineering when applied to surface-functionalized 3D printing. Potential strategies include inducing interfacial bonding via a chemical approach, which suits polymer materials. Besides, 3D-printed substrates also play an important role in defining the apparent structural features in functional devices. Thus, it is necessary to consider the stability of 3D-printed objects for some specific applications. Secondly, many aforementioned advances in surface-functionalized 3D printing have focused on specific functions as well as corresponding applications. In fact, 3D-printed devices probably need to meet multiple demands simultaneously for practical implementation, due to the complex conditions in some demanding fields. A direct strategy to address this issue is attempting to modify the surface via a self-consistent methodology for depositing different functional materials. The best example of this is the current surface-functionalized 3D printing of tissue engineering scaffolds and medical instruments. However, a basic problem is how to develop a general/universal method that can work with various materials. Moreover, with the capability to manufacture structures with high complexity and feature resolution, the 3D printing of bioinspired textured surfaces has been used to develop various functional applications in many fields, such as self-cleaning, liquid transport, microfluidics, oil/water separation, and drag reduction. Hence, an expected strategy that is worth exploring for multifunctional 3D devices and components is combining bionic-structure-induced functionality and surface-modified functionality simultaneously. To the best of our knowledge, there are few studies describing this topic to date. Additionally, it needs to be pointed out that many efforts should be made to develop local surface functionalization methods assisted by optimized 3D structures. Thirdly, residual amounts of metal catalyst, initiator, unsaturated monomer, unreacted compound, etc. commonly not only cause chemical waste and pollution risks, but they also create barriers toward practical applications, especially in the biomedical field. Meanwhile, another problem is that these existing approaches are only at the basic research stage in the laboratory, and it is difficult or impossible for them to be employed for large-scale engineering preparations. Therefore, it is necessary to demonstrate some novel and facile surface modification strategies based on the principle of green chemistry. Finally, one should explore the versatility of surface-functionalized 3D printing for developing potential commercial products in reality. Currently, complex prototyping can be readily achieved via a series of relatively mature 3D-printing techniques, such as FDM, stereo-lithography appearance (SLA), SLS, DIW, TPP, and so on, with metals, polymers, ceramics, and their composites. Meanwhile, surface modification can also be employed to endow materials with unique functionality based on actual demands. Developing a principle for standard manufacturing may pave the way toward potential commercial products. In addition, surface-functionalized 3D printing should be explored in depth for use for some emerging applications that focus on surface features, such as solar water purification, smart actuators, water harvesting from air, and so forth.
 Fig. 21  A summary of remarks and the future outlook. 
Briefly, surface-functionalized 3D printing has great potential to be widely employed for directly fabricating functional devices and components. As for the ultimate utilization goals, there are two critical aspects: developing advanced 3D-printing technology for low-cost manufacturing prototyping with high accuracy; and demonstrating universal and robust surface modification processes for constructing functional surfaces. The integration of unique functions together with desirable structures for easily scaled up and green processes will be a key task in the near future. It is believed that surface-functionalized 3D printing will play an essential role in the production of functional devices, components, and even centralized intelligent installations with excellent performance, and desirable architectures, stability, and compatibility for various applications in real life.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51775538 and 51935012) and the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, CAS (QYZDY-SSW-JSC013).
References
R. D. Farahani, M. Dube and D. Therriault, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5794–5821 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Ligon, R. Liska, J. Stampfl, M. Gurr and R. Mulhaupt, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10212–10290 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lewis, J. E. Smay, J. Stuecker and J. Cesarano, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 3599–3609 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bose, S. F. Robertson and A. Bandyopadhyay, Acta Biomater., 2018, 66, 6–22 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Stevens and J. H. George, Science, 2005, 310, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Hussey, J. L. Dziki and S. F. Badylak, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 159–172 CrossRef CAS .
N. Travitzky, A. Bonet, B. Dermeik, T. Fey, I. Filbert-Demut, L. Schlier, T. Schlordt and P. Greil, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2014, 16, 729–754 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moini, J. Olek, J. P. Youngblood, B. Magee and P. D. Zavattieri, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802123 CrossRef .
R. L. Truby and J. A. Lewis, Nature, 2016, 540, 371–378 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barriobero-Vila, J. Gussone, A. Stark, N. Schell, J. Haubrich and G. Requena, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3426 CrossRef .
T. DebRoy, H. L. Wei, J. S. Zuback, T. Mukherjee, J. W. Elmer, J. O. Milewski, A. M. Beese, A. Wilson-Heid, A. De and W. Zhang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 92, 112–224 CrossRef CAS .
N. Adly, S. Weidlich, S. Seyock, F. Brings, A. Yakushenko, A. Offenhäusser and B. Wolfrum, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 15 CrossRef .
M. Bechthold and J. C. Weaver, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17082 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bauer, L. R. Meza, T. A. Schaedler, R. Schwaiger, X. Zheng and L. Valdevit, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701850 CrossRef .
K. Bertoldi, V. Vitelli, J. Christensen and M. van Hecke, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17066 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, P. Jiang, X. Jia and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2924–2938 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. He, G. Chen, W. R. Leow and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12893–12941 CrossRef CAS .
A. Velasco-Hogan, J. Xu and M. A. Meyers, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800940 CrossRef .
C. R. Szczepanski, F. Guittard and T. Darmanin, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 241, 37–61 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garcia, T. Berthelot, P. Viel, A. Mesnage, P. Jegou, F. Nekelson, S. Roussel and S. Palacin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1177–1183 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gupta, A. K. Singh, N. Kar, A. Dravid and J. Bellare, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 98, 602–611 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kosik-Kozioł, E. Graham, J. Jaroszewicz, A. Chlanda, P. T. S. Kumar, S. Ivanovski, W. Święszkowski and C. Vaquette, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 5, 318–328 CrossRef .
A. Cherif, Y. Pyoun and B. Scholtes, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2009, 19, 282–286 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, J. Zhao, J. Liu, H. Qin, Z. Ren, G. L. Doll, Y. Dong and C. Ye, Addit. Manuf., 2018, 22, 60–68 CAS .
I.-S. Cho, C.-S. Lee, C.-H. Choi, H.-G. Lee, M. Lee and Y. Jeon, Metals, 2017, 7, 510 CrossRef .
R. C. Hao Zhang, H. Qin, Z. Ren, X. Hou, D. Lin, G. L. Doll, V. K. Vasudevan, Y. Dong and C. Ye, Int. J. Fatigue, 2017, 103, 136–146 CrossRef .
Y.-S. Goo, Y.-I. Lee, N. Kim, K.-J. Lee, B. Yoo, S.-J. Hong, J.-D. Kim and Y.-H. Choa, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 205, S369–S372 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Roh, S.-C. Jung, M.-S. Kook and B.-H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 388, 321–330 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, P. Favi, X. Cheng, N. H. Golshan, K. S. Ziemer, M. Keidar and T. J. Webster, Acta Biomater., 2016, 46, 256–265 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mohsenimehr, M. R. Khani, N. Fani, M. R. Baghaban Eslaminejad, B. Shokri and A. Ghassami, Surf. Topogr.: Metrol. Prop., 2020, 8, 015012 CrossRef .
C. Bergemann, M. Cornelsen, A. Quade, T. Laube, M. Schnabelrauch, H. Rebl, V. Weissmann, H. Seitz and B. Nebe, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 59, 514–523 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lerman, B. T. Smith, A. G. Gerald, M. Santoro, J. A. Fookes, A. G. Mikos and J. P. Fisher, Tissue Eng., Part C, 2020, 26, 118–131 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chlanda, P. Oberbek, M. Heljak, Ż. Górecka, K. Czarnecka, K.-S. Chen and M. J. Woźniak, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2019, 375, 637–644 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Browne, J. Plutnar, A. M. Pourrahimi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900994 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Z. Nor Hidayah, S. I. A. Razak, M. R. A. Kadir, N. H. M. Nayan, Y. Li and K. A. M. Amin, Compos. Interfaces, 2018, 26, 465–478 CrossRef .
K.-M. Lee, H. Park, J. Kim and D.-M. Chun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467–468, 979–991 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Foo, H. N. Lim, M. A. Mahdi, M. H. Wahid and N. M. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 7399 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, L. Xia, D. Zhai, M. Shi, Y. Luo, C. Feng, B. Fang, J. Yin, J. Chang and C. Wu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19207–19221 RSC .
S. Yang, J. Wang, L. Tang, H. Ao, H. Tan, T. Tang and C. Liu, Colloids Surf., B, 2014, 116, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xue, X. Shi, X. Fang, H. Tao, H. Zhu, F. Yu, X. Ding, M. Liu, F. Fang, F. Yang, Z. Wei, T. Chen, Z. Wang, G. Wang, X. Cheng, J. Wei, Y. Lin, K. Deng, X. Wang and H. Xin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8393–8400 CrossRef CAS .
J. Herbert Waite and M. L. Tanzer, Science, 1981, 212, 1038–1040 CrossRef .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, L. Zhu, W. Wen, L. Lu, C. Zhou and B. Luo, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 2506–2518 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, Macromol. Biosci., 2012, 12, 1053–1059 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Ha, J. Gu, Q. Li, L. Zhang and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7414–7423 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, J. Zhao, Q. Han, X. Hu, D. Wang, X. Zhang and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802851 CrossRef .
J. Gu, S. T. Miao, Z. G. Yan and P. Yang, Colloid Interface Sci. Commun., 2018, 22, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
T. Du, S. Ma, X. Pei, S. Wang and F. Zhou, Small, 2017, 13 Search PubMed .
R. A. Wright, K. Wang, J. Qu and B. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8656–8660 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Z. Liu, Y. Liang, X. Pei, F. Zhou and Q. Xue, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 6463–6468 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, Q. Ye, B. Yu, X. Pei and F. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 3599–3606 RSC .
G. Cheng, G. Li, H. Xue, S. Chen, J. D. Bryers and S. Jiang, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 5234–5240 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, Y. Wu, Y. Cheng, H. Ma and S. Wei, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12069–12073 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, Z. Ji, S. Ma, X. Wang and F. Zhou, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600015 CrossRef .
S. Ma, X. Zhang, B. Yu and F. Zhou, NPG Asia Mater., 2019, 11 CrossRef .
O. Azzaroni, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 3225–3258 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, B. Yu, Q. Ye and F. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 48, 229–237 CrossRef .
R. Barbey, L. Lavanant, D. Paripovic, N. Schuwer, C. Sugnaux, S. Tugulu and H. A. Klok, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5437–5527 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Welch and C. K. Ober, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 1457–1472 CrossRef .
X. Wang, X. Cai, Q. Guo, T. Zhang, B. Kobe and J. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10064 RSC .
T. Du, B. Li, X. Wang, B. Yu, X. Pei, W. T. S. Huck and F. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4260–4264 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Ma, W. Yang, X. Pei and F. Zhou, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 112, 146–152 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. McCullough and V. K. Yadavalli, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2013, 213, 947–954 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Lee and D. J. Mooney, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1869–1880 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuk, T. Zhang, G. A. Parada, X. Liu and X. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7 Search PubMed .
G. A. Parada, H. Yuk, X. Liu, A. J. Hsieh and X. Zhao, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700520 CrossRef .
P. Kowalczyk, P. Trzaskowska, I. Łojszczyk, R. Podgórski and T. Ciach, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 179, 136–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, H. Yuk, G. A. Parada, Y. Wu, X. Liu, C. S. Nabzdyk, K. Youcef-Toumi, J. Zang and X. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807101 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Y. Gu, A. Singh, M. Zhong, A. M. Jordan, S. Biswas, L. T. Korley, A. C. Balazs and J. A. Johnson, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 124–134 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kirillova, R. Maxson, G. Stoychev, C. T. Gomillion and L. Ionov, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703443 CrossRef .
N. Vargas-Alfredo, H. Reinecke, A. Gallardo, A. del Campo and J. Rodríguez-Hernández, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 98, 21–27 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Weems, K. R. Delle Chiaie, R. Yee and A. P. Dove, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 21, 163–170 CrossRef .
F. Wu, J. Zheng, Z. Li and M. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 672–683 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Chia and B. M. Wu, J. Biol. Eng., 2015, 9, 4 CrossRef .
R. Feiner and T. Dvir, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 17076 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Lacour, G. Courtine and J. Guck, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16063 CrossRef CAS .
C. Desrousseaux, V. Sautou, S. Descamps and O. Traore, J. Hosp. Infect., 2013, 85, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Sidambe, I. Todd and P. V. Hatton, Powder Metall., 2016, 59, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Jaidev and K. Chatterjee, Mater. Des., 2019, 161, 44–54 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Teixeira, P. Aprile, R. H. Mendonca, D. J. Kelly and R. Thire, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2019, 107, 37–49 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ouyang, C. B. Highley, C. B. Rodell, W. Sun and J. A. Burdick, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 1743–1751 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saska, L. C. Pires, M. A. Cominotte, L. S. Mendes, M. F. de Oliveira, I. A. Maia, J. V. L. da Silva, S. J. L. Ribeiro and J. A. Cirelli, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 89, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Xu, J. Yu and M. L. Becker, Biomaterials, 2017, 141, 176–187 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kurtz, E. Lau, K. L. Ong, L. Carreon, H. Watson, T. Albert and S. Glassman, J. Neurosurg., 2012, 17, 342–347 Search PubMed .
Z. Xiong, F. Liu, H. B. Lin, J. L. Li and Y. Wang, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 2, 2207–2216 CrossRef CAS .
R. Coello, A. Charlett, J. Wilson, V. Ward, A. Pearson and P. Borriello, J. Hosp. Infect., 2005, 60, 93–103 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Fernandes, P. Gentile, R. A. Pires, R. L. Reis and P. V. Hatton, Acta Biomater., 2017, 59, 2–11 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Li, J. Zhou, Z. Zhou, X.-l. Wu, L. Wang and Q. Yao, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 17, 206–215 CrossRef .
Q. Guo, X. Cai, X. Wang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 6644 RSC .
L. Tian, Z. Zhang, B. Tian, X. Zhang and N. Wang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 4805–4816 RSC .
H. Sun, C. Hu, C. Zhou, L. Wu, J. Sun, X. Zhou, F. Xing, C. Long, Q. Kong, J. Liang, Y. Fan and X. Zhang, Mater. Des., 2020, 189, 108540 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Wang, M. Guo, Z. Wang, N. Shao, P. Zhang, X. Chen and Y. Huang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 6, 2047–2054 CrossRef .
H. G. Boman and D. Hultmark, Trends Biochem. Sci., 1981, 6, 306–309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Orivel, V. Redeker, J. P. Le Caer, F. Krier, A. M. Revol-Junelles, A. Longeon, A. Chaffotte, A. Dejean and J. Rossier, J. Biol. Chem., 2001, 276, 17823–17829 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ekengren and D. Hultmark, Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol., 1999, 29, 965–972 CrossRef CAS .
X. Miao, H. Liao, Z. Deng, C. Li, T. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Liu, X. Cheng and X. Wang, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 2259–2266 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Schaedler, A. J. Jacobsen, A. Torrents, A. E. Sorensen, J. Lian, J. R. Greer, L. Valdevit and W. B. Carter, Science, 2011, 334, 962–965 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vaezi, H. Seitz and S. Yang, Int. J. Adv. Des. Manuf. Technol., 2012, 67, 1721–1754 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, J. Bai, Y. Yao and C. Wang, Mater. Today, 2020, 37, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
A. Torrents, T. A. Schaedler, A. J. Jacobsen, W. B. Carter and L. Valdevit, Acta Mater., 2012, 60, 3511–3523 CrossRef CAS .
A. Equbal and A. Sood, Coatings, 2014, 4, 574–586 CrossRef .
A. Equbal and A. K. Sood, J. Manuf. Process., 2015, 19, 22–31 CrossRef .
S. H. Kim, J. A. Jackson, J. S. Oakdale, J. B. Forien, J. M. Lenhardt, J. H. Yoo, S. J. Shin, X. Lepro, B. D. Moran, C. M. Aracne-Ruddle, T. F. Baumann, O. S. Jones and J. Biener, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10463–10466 RSC .
Y. Yu, C. Yan and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5508–5516 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Guo, X. Cai, S. Zhou, B. Kobe and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 6, 2583–2587 CrossRef .
Q. Ye, X. Wang, H. Hu, D. Wang, S. Li and F. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7677–7683 CrossRef CAS .
O. Azzaroni, Z. Zheng, Z. Yang and W. T. S. Huck, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Hu, B. Yu, M. Chen, Z. Zheng and F. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 492–495 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hensleigh, H. Cui, Z. Xu, J. Massman, D. Yao, J. Berrigan and X. Zheng, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 216–224 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gojzewski, Z. Guo, W. Grzelachowska, M. G. Ridwan, M. A. Hempenius, D. W. Grijpma and G. J. Vancso, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8908–8914 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Lee, S. G. Kim, H. J. Kim and S. H. Ahn, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2007, 187, 627–630 CrossRef .
W. E. Frazier, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2014, 23, 1917–1928 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Z. Ji, Y. Zhang, X. Wang and F. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16307–16314 RSC .
D. Zhang, D. Qiu, M. A. Gibson, Y. Zheng, H. L. Fraser, D. H. StJohn and M. A. Easton, Nature, 2019, 576, 91 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Xu, C. Yan, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Jia, Y. Liu, X. Wang and F. Zhou, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2019, 21, 1801314 CrossRef .
C. J. Todaro, M. A. Easton, D. Qiu, D. Zhang, M. J. Bermingham, E. W. Lui, M. Brandt, D. H. StJohn and M. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leite, A. Varanda, A. R. Ribeiro, A. Silva and M. F. Vaz, Rapid Prototyping J., 2018, 24, 195–203 CrossRef .
S. Olivera, H. B. Muralidhara, K. Venkatesh, K. Gopalakrishna and C. S. Vivek, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 3657–3674 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kulkarni, K. Elangovan and R. K. Hemachandra, Int. J. Plast. Technol., 2013, 17, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, Z. Ji, C. Yan, X. Wang and F. Zhou, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2018, 16, 420–427 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bauer, S. Hengsbach, I. Tesari, R. Schwaiger and O. Kraft, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 2453–2458 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ciriminna, P. D. Carà, M. Sciortino and M. Pagliaro, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 677–687 CrossRef CAS .
A. Figuerola, D. A. V. Medina, A. J. Santos-Neto, C. P. Cabello, V. Cerdà, G. T. Palomino and F. Maya, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 16, 21–27 CrossRef .
A. Ambrosi, J. G. S. Moo and M. Pumera, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 698–703 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schmieg, A. Schimek and M. Franzreb, Eng. Life Sci., 2018, 18, 659–667 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Díaz-Marta, C. R. Tubío, C. Carbajales, C. Fernández, L. Escalante, E. Sotelo, F. Guitián, V. L. Barrio, A. Gil and A. Coelho, ACS Catal., 2017, 8, 392–404 CrossRef .
A. Sanchez Díaz-Marta, S. Yáñez, C. R. Tubío, V. L. Barrio, Y. Piñeiro, R. Pedrido, J. Rivas, M. Amorín, F. Guitián and A. Coelho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25283–25294 CrossRef .
J. Ye, T. Chu, J. Chu, B. Gao and B. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18048–18054 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Gill, B. H. An, J. S. Lee, D. Ali, M. S. Khalil, J. Park, Y. S. Choi, Y. K. Kim and D. S. Choi, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1600887 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, D. Zhai, M. Xu, Q. Yao, J. Chang and C. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 2874–2886 RSC .
V. Francis and P. K. Jain, Mater. Manuf. Processes, 2017, 33, 1080–1092 CrossRef .
D. A. V. Medina, A. Figuerola, F. Rodriguez, Á. J. Santos-Neto, C. P. Cabello, G. T. Palomino, V. Cerdà and F. Maya, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 14, 29–34 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, J. Wang, M. Li, K. Sun and C.-j. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4 CAS .
S. Bose, D. Banerjee, A. Shivaram, S. Tarafder and A. Bandyopadhyay, Mater. Des., 2018, 151, 102–112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. O. Park, S. W. Myung, M. S. Kook, S. C. Jung and B. H. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 1415–1419 CrossRef .
C. Yang, Z. Huan, X. Wang, C. Wu and J. Chang, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 4, 608–616 CrossRef CAS .
S. Buyuksungur, T. Endogan Tanir, A. Buyuksungur, E. I. Bektas, G. Torun Kose, D. Yucel, T. Beyzadeoglu, E. Cetinkaya, C. Yenigun, E. Tonuk, V. Hasirci and N. Hasirci, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5, 2144–2158 RSC .
C. H. Yeh, Y. W. Chen, M. Y. Shie and H. Y. Fang, Materials, 2015, 8, 4299–4315 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Lee, H. H. Jo, S. K. Kwon, J. H. Lee, W. D. Kim, J. H. Lee, I. K. Kwon and S. A. Park, Macromol. Res., 2016, 24, 305–308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, J. Li, C. K. Poh, H. C. Tan, E. San Thian, J. Y. Hsi Fuh, J. Sun, B. Y. Tay and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 5971 RSC .
C. Yang, X. Wang, B. Ma, H. Zhu, Z. Huan, N. Ma, C. Wu and J. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5757–5767 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, C. Wang, F. Chen, X. Wang and K. Lin, Bioact. Mater., 2020, 5, 9–16 CrossRef .
Z. Jia, W. Zhou, J. Yan, P. Xiong, H. Guo, Y. Cheng and Y. Zheng, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 5, 244–261 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, W. Zhou, Z. Jia, Q. Wei, D. Fan, J. Yan, C. Yin, Y. Cheng, H. Cai, X. Liu, H. Zhou, X. Yang, Y. Zheng and Z. Liu, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 579–592 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cui, W. Zhu, B. Holmes and L. G. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600058 CrossRef .
H. Ma, C. Jiang, D. Zhai, Y. Luo, Y. Chen, F. Lv, Z. Yi, Y. Deng, J. Wang, J. Chang and C. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1197–1208 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, C. Yan, M. Cai, J. Yang, X. Wang, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803371 CrossRef .
Y. Qian, X. Zhao, Q. Han, W. Chen, H. Li and W. Yuan, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 323 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, Q. Meng, X. Jin, F. Liu and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 2007–2016 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pan, Y. Zhong, Y. Shan, X. Liu, Y. Xiao and H. Shi, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2019, 107, 360–370 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Lee, H. H. Jo, K. S. Lim, D. Lim, S. Lee, J. H. Lee, W. D. Kim, M. H. Jeong, J. Y. Lim, I. K. Kwon, Y. Jung, J.-K. Park and S. A. Park, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122116 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vaut, J. J. Juszczyk, K. Kamguyan, K. E. Jensen, G. Tosello and A. Boisen, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 6, 2478–2486 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, Z. Ji, X. Zhang, Z. Liu and X. Wang, Prog. Addit. Manuf., 2017, 3, 65–86 CrossRef .
E. Macdonald, R. Salas, D. Espalin, M. Perez, E. Aguilera, D. Muse and R. B. Wicker, IEEE Access, 2014, 2, 234–242 Search PubMed .
P. Tian, C. Chen, J. Hu, J. Qi, Q. Wang, J. C.-M. Chen, J. Cavanaugh, Y. Peng and M. M.-C. Cheng, Biomed. Microdevices, 2017, 20, 4 CrossRef .
M. Zarek, M. Layani, I. Cooperstein, E. Sachyani, D. Cohn and S. Magdassi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4449–4454 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Patel, A. H. Sakhaei, M. Layani, B. Zhang, Q. Ge and S. Magdassi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606000 CrossRef .
S. Lee, M. Wajahat, J. H. Kim, J. Pyo, W. S. Chang, S. H. Cho, J. T. Kim and S. K. Seol, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7123–7130 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, X. Shang, M. J. Lancaster and J. Xu, IEEE Microw. Wirel. Comp., 2015, 25, 442–444 Search PubMed .
M. D'Auria, W. J. Otter, J. Hazell, B. T. W. Gillatt, C. Long-Collins, N. M. Ridler and S. Lucyszyn, IEEE Trans. Compon., Packag., Manuf. Technol., 2015, 5, 1339–1349 Search PubMed .
A. Ishikawa, T. Kato, N. Takeyasu, K. Fujimori and K. Tsuruta, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 183102 CrossRef .
V. Katic, P. L. dos Santos, M. F. dos Santos, B. M. Pires, H. C. Loureiro, A. P. Lima, J. C. M. Queiroz, R. Landers, R. A. A. Muñoz and J. A. Bonacin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35068–35078 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. dos Santos, V. Katic, H. C. Loureiro, M. F. dos Santos, D. P. dos Santos, A. L. B. Formiga and J. A. Bonacin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 281, 837–848 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Manzanares-Palenzuela, S. Hermanova, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 12124–12131 RSC .
B. R. Liyarita, A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Electroanalysis, 2018, 30, 1319–1326 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mattio, N. Ollivier, F. Robert-Peillard, R. Di Rocco, C. Branger, A. Margaillan, C. Brach-Papa, J. Knoery, D. Bonne, J. L. Boudenne and B. Coulomb, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1082, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rodas Ceballos, F. Gonzalez Serra, J. M. Estela, V. Cerda and L. Ferrer, Talanta, 2019, 196, 510–514 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Cardoso, P. R. L. Silva, A. P. Lima, D. P. Rocha, T. C. Oliveira, T. M. do Prado, E. L. Fava, O. Fatibello-Filho, E. M. Richter and R. A. A. Muñoz, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 307, 127621 CrossRef .
C.-K. Su, S.-C. Yen, T.-W. Li and Y.-C. Sun, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 6265–6273 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, B. Gil, M. Power, A. Gao, S. Treratanakulchai, S. Anastasova and G.-Z. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35577–35586 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Faller, M. Lenzhofer, C. Hirschl, M. Kraft and H. Zangl, Sensors, 2019, 19, 443 CrossRef .
V. Zega, C. Credi, R. Bernasconi, G. Langfelder, L. Magagnin, M. Levi and A. Corigliano, IEEE Sens. J., 2018, 18, 53–60 CAS .
V. Zega, M. Invernizzi, R. Bernasconi, F. Cuneo, G. Langfelder, L. Magagnin, M. Levi and A. Corigliano, IEEE Sens. J., 2019, 19, 9131–9138 CAS .
S. Xie, S. Wu, S. Bao, Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, D. Deng, L. Huang, L. Zhang, M. Lee and Z. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800683 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, C. F. Tan, M. Gao and G. W. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7713–7719 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mushtaq, X. Chen, H. Torlakcik, C. Steuer, M. Hoop, E. C. Siringil, X. Marti, G. Limburg, P. Stipp, B. J. Nelson and S. Pane, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901378 CrossRef .
C. Yan, S. Ma, Z. Ji, Y. Guo, Z. Liu, X. Zhang and X. Wang, Polymers, 2019, 11 Search PubMed .
S. Yuan, D. Strobbe, J.-P. Kruth, P. Van Puyvelde and B. Van der Bruggen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25401–25409 RSC .
Z. Chen, D. Zhang, E. Peng and J. Ding, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 1223–1232 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, J. Xiao, Q. Guo and J. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 6728–6741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, Y. Ma, Y. Ma, J. Asenbauer, S. Passerini and C. Streb, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3018–3021 RSC .
D. Liu, P. Jiang, X. Li, J. Liu, L. Zhou, X. Wang and F. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125392 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Y. Yan, L. Zhang, G. Ma, Y. Liu, Y. Yu, Q. An and S. Tao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701626 CrossRef .
Z. Shi, C. Xu, F. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Li, Q. Meng and R. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 49947–49952 RSC .
M. P. Browne, E. Redondo and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2783–2810 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shiva Kumar and V. Himabindu, Mater. Sci. Energy Technol., 2019, 2, 442–454 Search PubMed .
H. N. Sun, X. M. Xu, G. Chen, Y. P. Zhou, H. J. Lin, C. T. Chen, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. P. Shao, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ayers, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 18, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 16968–16975 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lee, A. C. Taylor, S. Beirne and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900433 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Browne, F. Novotny, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40294–40301 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1700655 CrossRef .
X. Su, X. Li, C. Y. A. Ong, T. S. Herng, Y. Wang, E. Peng and J. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801670 CrossRef .
C. Zhao, C. Wang, R. Gorkin, S. Beirne, K. Shu and G. G. Wallace, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 41, 20–23 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, L. Li, X. Tian, H. Jin, K. Tang, S. Hou, H. Zhou and X. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yao, S. Chandrasekaran, J. Zhang, W. Xiao, F. Qian, C. Zhu, E. B. Duoss, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 459–470 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chang, H. Mei, Y. Zhao, W. Huang, S. Zhou and L. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903588 CrossRef .
C. W. Foster, G. Q. Zou, Y. Jiang, M. P. Down, C. M. Liauw, A. Garcia-Miranda Ferrari, X. Ji, G. C. Smith, P. J. Kelly and C. E. Banks, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 448–453 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pal and A. Bhaumik, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 24363–24391 RSC .

          A. J. Blacker, J. R. Breen, R. A. Bourne and C. A. Hone, Green and Sustainable Medicinal Chemistry: Methods, Tools and Strategies for the 21st Century Pharmaceutical Industry, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2016, pp. 140–155 Search PubMed .

          T. Glasnov, Continuous-Flow Chemistry in the Research Laboratory, Springer New York, Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London,  2016,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-32196-7 .
A. S. Díaz-Marta, S. Yañez, E. Lasorsa, P. Pacheco, C. R. Tubío, J. Rivas, Y. Piñeiro, M. A. G. Gómez, M. Amorín, F. Guitián and A. Coelho, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 1762–1771 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Y. Yan, L. Zhang, Z. Qin and S. Tao, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4 Search PubMed .
F. Kazenwadel, E. Biegert, J. Wohlgemuth, H. Wagner and M. Franzreb, Eng. Life Sci., 2016, 16, 560–567 CrossRef .
B. Schmieg, J. Dobber, F. Kirschhofer, M. Pohl and M. Franzreb, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2018, 6, 211 CrossRef .
E. Peris, O. Okafor, E. Kulcinskaja, R. Goodridge, S. V. Luis, E. Garcia-Verdugo, E. O'Reilly and V. Sans, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 5345–5349 RSC .
A. Avril, C. H. Hornung, A. Urban, D. Fraser, M. Horne, J. P. Veder, J. Tsanaktsidis, T. Rodopoulos, C. Henry and D. R. Gunasegaram, React. Chem. Eng., 2017, 2, 180–188 RSC .
Y. Elias, P. Rudolf von Rohr, W. Bonrath, J. Medlock and A. Buss, Chem. Eng. Process., 2015, 95, 175–185 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Pan Jiang
	Pan Jiang received his BS in 2016 from the College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Northwest Normal University. He is current a PhD candidate at the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, studying under Prof. Xiaolong Wang's supervision at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His major research interests mainly focus on the 3D printing of functional hydrogels, smart actuators and devices, and surface-functionalized 3D printing.

Xiaolong Wang
	Dr Xiaolong Wang is a full professor at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), CAS. He joined the LICP in 2007 when he got his PhD with a major in polymer chemistry and physics at Lanzhou University. During his stay at the LICP, he spent a year (2010–2011) at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University as a Research Associate and then two years (2011–2013) at the University of Western Ontario (Canada) as a Visiting Professor. His research interests focus on 3D printing, biomimetic lubrication, functional soft materials, and flexible electronics, and his work has been published in more than 80 peer-reviewed papers with a current h-index of 32.

 	Fig. 1  The basic strategies for functionalized 3D printing: (I) the development of printable functional materials; (II) the construction of bioinspired topological structures; and (III) the implementation of surface modification.	 

 	Fig. 2  The methodologies for surface functionalization for 3D printing.	 

 	Fig. 3  Enhancing nanohydroxyapatite adhesion to the surface of 3D-printed bone tissue engineering scaffolds modified using low-temperature plasma. Diagrams of the apparatus used for conducting low-temperature plasma treatment for hexamethyldisilazane modification (a) and oxygen modification (b). (c–e) SEM images of 3D-printed scaffolds: PCLc (unmodified), PCLH (treated with hexamethyldisilazane plasma), and PCLHO (treated with both hexamethyldisilazane and oxygen plasma), respectively. (f–h) SEM images of 3D printed scaffolds loaded with nanohydroxyapatite: followed PCLC/HA, PCLH/HA, and PCLHO/HA, respectively. (i) The adhesion force between the tip of the scanning probe and the surface measured through atomic force microscopy. (j) Scratch measurements of the deposited hydroxyapatite particles on scaffold surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33; copyright: 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  The 3D printing of an earplug modified with well-ordered nanoarrays using PEALD-assisted hydrothermal surface engineering. (a) The 3D printing of an earplug via FDM. (b) ZnO nanoparticles were loaded onto the surface of the 3D-printed earplug through PEALD processing. (c) The well-ordered ZnO nanoarrays were grown quickly via a subsequent hydrothermal method. (d) An optical photograph of the printed earplug. (e and f) SEM images of surfaces treated via PEALD and hydrothermal processing, where green and purple represent ZnO seeds and nanoarrays, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40; copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Two classical surface modification strategies to construct polymer coatings via self-assembly polymerization. (a) The scheme and mechanism of the oxidative self-polymerization of DOPA on 3D-printed PLLA scaffolds. (b) A photograph of the 3D-printed PLLA scaffold, PDA–PLLA (modified with a PDA coating), and Qu–PDA–PLLA (modified with quercetin). Reproduced with permission from ref. 43; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic diagram of surface modification via a lysozyme phase-transition strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44; copyright: 2012, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) A schematic illustration of the Pd-catalyzed electroless deposition (ELD) of Cu and Ag on nanofilm-coated complex 3D structures. SEM images of Cu (e) and Ag (f) patterns on nanofilm-coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film. Photographs of the complex architectures deposited using Cu (g) and Ag (h) layers; the insets display the original structures without the coatings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45; copyright: 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  Surface grafting for surface functionalization for 3D printing. (a) A schematic diagram of the i3DP approach for obtaining functional structures via initiator-integrated 3D printing and subsequent SI-ATRP. (b) The superwetting of an iLattice modified with poly(PEGMA) brushes and poly(PFMA) brushes, respectively. (c) Entrapped dyed water remained in a poly(PFMA)-grafted iBall, even undergoing violent shaking. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60; copyright: 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) A schematic illustration of the hydrogel skin preparation procedure on 3D-printed architecture. (e) A complex 3D Ecoflex structure coated with a hydrogel skin. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68; copyright: 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  Constructing wetting surfaces on 3D parts through additive manufacturing via surface modification. (a) A schematic diagram of the preparation of a HNT-coated PLA pattern. (b) FE-SEM images of HNT-coated PLA patterned surfaces at different magnifications. (c) Contact angle images of PLA patterned surfaces with different stripe widths before and after loading with the HNT coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73; copyright: 2019, Elsevier. (d) The fabrication of a superhydrophobic surface using 3D printing followed by dip coating with silica nanoparticles; the inset images show the superhydrophobicity. (e) SEM images of a printed surface before (top) and after modification with MEK (middle) or silica (bottom) nanoparticles. (f) Optical images of a dyed water droplet on a line-patterned surface with a 1.0 mm step size before (i) and after (iii) dip coating, and on a grid-patterned surface with a 1.0 mm step size before (ii) and after (iv) dip coating. (g) An investigation of isotropic superhydrophobic surfaces with a half-sphere porous bowl. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36; copyright: 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Enhancing the biocompatibility of 3D-printed polymeric scaffolds via surface modification. (a) The functionalization of PLA-OH scaffolds modified via grafting polyethyleneimine (PEI) conjugated with citric acid (CA), with the subsequent deposition of hydroxyapatite (Hap). (b) SEM images of the modified 3D-printed scaffolds at different magnifications. (c) Biocompatibility testing using hMSCs. (d) A confocal microscopy image of fluorescently labeled hMSCs. (e) The osteogenic potential of the 3D scaffolds assessed using hMSCs on the scaffolds; PLA@Hap*: without cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79; copyright: 2018, Elsevier. (f) The functionalization of scaffolds modified with a collagen coating; the inset shows a printed scaffold. (g) Cell viability on pure PLA and collagen-modified scaffolds. (h) An immunofluorescence picture of cell cultures. (i) Cell ingrowth on a collagen-modified scaffold. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80; copyright: 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  “Dandelion” inspired dual-layered nanoarrays (DLNs) with a dual-release model for the functionalization of 3D printing implants with long-lasting antibacterial performance. (a) A schematic illustration of the bioinspired ZnO DLN system on a 3D printed medical implant. (b) The mechanisms of the quick-release model within 48 hours and the slow-release model within approximately 2 weeks. (c) The antibacterial effectiveness of different 3D-printed implants including: (i) a lumbar intervertebral disc fusion device, (ii) an internal fixation plate, (iii) a bone nail, and (iv) a wafer. (d) In vivo implantation experiments. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96; copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Surface metallic 3D printing. (a) The fabrication of complex metallic architectures through i3DP via polyelectrolyte grafting with SI-ATRP and the subsequent electroless plating of metal. (b) A Cu-coated microlattice and corresponding SEM images of the local features in the x, y, and z directions. (c) A Ni-coated Eiffel tower. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105; copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic illustration of the selectively programmed electrostatic charge deposition of materials in 3D. 3D complex structures with desirable metallic traces: an Eiffel Tower model (e), a 3D antenna array (f), a circuit on an arbitrary 3D pyramid substrate (g), and an interpenetrating metal–dielectric double gyroid (h). Reprinted with the permission from ref. 109; copyright: 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  High-strength cellular Al2O3-coated ceramic composites fabricated via ALD deposition on 3D-printed microarchitectures. (a) SEM images of the examined cellular microarchitectures with different structural characteristics (scale bars: 10 μm). (b) A compressive strength-density Ashby chart showing the cellular ceramic composite materials described in this report compared with other materials (comparison via CES EduPack, Granta Design Ltd). Reproduced with permission from ref. 121; copyright: 2013, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 12  The surface functionalized 3D printing of catalytic components. (a) The 3D printing of a capsule for the entrapment of PS-TBD–Cu(II) (green powder). (b) The 3D-SiO2–polyimide–Pd structure. (c) A general strategy for Cu(II)/Cu(I)/Pd(0) one-pot sequential multicatalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic diagram of surface-modified 3D-printed scaffolds for enzyme immobilization. (e) 3D-printed scaffolds used for enzyme immobilization. (f) Amoxicillin (AMO) synthesis vs. time using immobilized PGA on 3D-printed scaffolds. (g) Lactosucrose synthesis vs. time using immobilized glycosidase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  The surface functionalization of 3D-printed structures used for tissue engineering reparation. (a) A biologically inspired smart-release system based on 3D-printed scaffolds for enhancing vascularized tissue regeneration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145; copyright: 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) A bifunctional biomaterial scaffold showing photothermal effects for tumor therapy and bone regeneration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146; copyright: 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) An integrated multi-layer 3D PDA/RGD-coated graphene-loaded PCL nanoscaffold for peripheral nerve restoration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148; copyright: 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of medical devices. (a) Porous tracheal scaffolds (PTSs) fabricated using 3D-printing technology and surface modification. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150; copyright: 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) The fabrication of heparinized 3D-printed biodegradable PLA stents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151; copyright: 2019, Elsevier. (c) The 3D printing of drug-loaded polymeric microreservoirs and (d and e) the corresponding mucoadhesion performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of electronic devices and components. (a) The ELD-assisted 3D printing of micro-circuitry for structural electronics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) The selective ELP of 3D-printed plastic structures for 3D microwave metamaterials and the corresponding microwave response performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161; copyright: 2017, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 16  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of functional sensing systems. (a) The surface modification of a 3D-printed ABS bioreactor with enzymes for the online monitoring of rat brain extracellular glucose and lactate. (b) Schematic diagrams of the optimized online glucose/lactate monitoring systems. The top one is used for the determination of lactate while the bottom one is for the determination of glucose. (c) The evolution of rat brain extracellular glucose and lactate concentrations with time following the implantation of the MD probe and treatment through perfusion with a high-K+ medium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169; copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic illustration of a CNT-coated 3D microspring force sensor for a variety of biomedical applications. (e) The 3D functional microspring used for ECG and pressure sensing. (f) The 3D functional microspring using for monitoring the tissue contact-force during intraluminal intervention. (g) The 3D functional microspring used for multi-position force sensing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170; copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of water treatment devices. (a) A 3D-printed ceramic alumina woodpile scaffold modified with whiskers of All8B4O33 used for highly efficient oil/water separation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179; copyright: 2019, Elsevier. (b) Polyoxometalate-functionalized 3D-printed hierarchical porous devices applied to the removal of heavy metal ions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181; copyright: 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) MOF-decorated 3D-printed hierarchical porous ceramics for the high-efficiency catalytic degradation of organic dyes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182; copyright: 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of electrochemical energy-conversion components and devices. (a) A self-contained 3D-printed electrochemical platform with metal electrodes and polymer electrochemical cells for tailored water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193; copyright: 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) An integrated 3D-printed electrochemical water splitting cell obtained via a full 3D-printing strategy and surface functionalization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194; copyright: 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of electrochemical energy storage devices. (a) The 3D printing of graphene electrodes decorated with MnO2 used in a pseudocapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197; copyright: 2018, Elsevier. (b) 3D structured strengthened urchin-like Cu(OH)2-based symmetric supercapacitors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198; copyright: 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  The surface-functionalized 3D printing of chemical reactors. (a) A 3D-printed bioreactor for transamination under continuous flow. (b) A continuous-flow biocatalytic reactor loaded with the ATA 117 enzyme for the kinetic resolution of rac-methylbenzylamine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207; copyright: 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The 3D printing of catalytic static mixers modified with Ni or Pt catalysts used for continuous flow hydrogenation. (d) Different catalyst set-ups in 3D-printed reactors for the hydrogenation of oleic acid (yellow bars) and vinyl acetate (blue bars). Reprinted with permission from ref. 208; copyright: 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  A summary of remarks and the future outlook.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
