Ionic liquids membranes for liquid separation: status and challenges  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3GC01533E View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3GC01533E
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2023, Advance Article Ionic liquids membranes for liquid separation: status and challenges

        
          
            Shangqing 
            Chen
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Yanan 
            Dong
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Jingjing 
            Sun
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Gu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Junfeng 
            Wang
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Suojiang 
            Zhang
          
        
      bc
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Pharmacy, Wuhan Institute of Technology, Wuhan 430205, PR China
bBeijing Key Laboratory of Ionic Liquids Clean Process/State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Complex Systems, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China. E-mail: qschen@ipe.ac.cn; junfwang@ipe.ac.cn
cInnovation Academy for Green Manufacture, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China
dTienMicro (Shandong) Co., Ltd., Binzhou, 256600, PR China
Received 
      9th May 2023
    , Accepted 16th June 2023First published on 17th June 2023AbstractIonic liquid-based membranes (ILMs) have garnered significant attention due to the unique coordination properties offered by both ILs and membranes. This makes them a promising area of research with a wide range of potential applications. In recent years, there has been a surge of exciting research activities in the field of ILMs in liquid separation, ranging from fabrication strategies to the development of separation applications. In this review, targeting different types of ILMs, i.e., supported ionic liquid membranes (SILMs), ionic liquid-polymer membranes (ILPMs), poly(ionic liquid) membranes (PILMs), and ionic liquid polymer inclusion membranes (ILPIMs), the preparation strategy, applicability, stability, transport mechanism, and future perspectives are summarized. By providing a comprehensive overview of the different types of ILMs and their applications in liquid separation, this review aims to serve as a valuable resource for researchers and engineers seeking to develop new-type and innovative ILMs for specific separation tasks. It highlights the advantages and limitations of each type of ILMs as well as the various preparation strategies and performance criteria used to evaluate their effectiveness. Ultimately, this information is expected to guide the design and optimization of novel advanced ILMs with enhanced functional properties for real-world applications.
1. Introduction
Ionic liquids (ILs) are considered as an innovative class of organic molten salts with low melting point, negligible vapor pressure, high thermal stability, ideal solubility for organic/inorganic substances, and excellent solvation power.1–5 Moreover, the physicochemical properties of ILs could be tailored by varying the anions, cations, and substituents to satisfy the specific demands. In this case, a series of Ils have been developed, which undergoes three stages of development, i.e., the first generation Ils (AlCl3 system, before the 1990s), the second generation Ils (air/water-tolerant system, the 1990s), and the third generation ILs (task-specific systems, 21st century).6,7 ILs have gained extensive attention in various fields such as materials science, catalysis, electrochemistry, separation processes, and biomass pretreatment due to their unique and fascinating characteristics.8–15
However, the large-scale applications of ILs are often limited by the high price or cost in synthesis and tedious post-separation process for ILs recycling, especially in the homogeneous process. For example, in the solvent extraction process using ILs as co-extractants, there inevitably exists dissolution loss of ILs even with low solubility in the solvents, such as water or other solutions. This could seriously affect the economic viabilities in ILs applications. In addition to the high cost and tedious recycling process for ILs, the limitations of the application of ILs also include their toxicity, wide viscosity, and melting points, which can make them hazardous to handle and dispose, remains to be a significant challenge for processing and practical applications. A feasible strategy is the graft or immobilization of ILs in substrates with different functionalities in an attempt to address dissolution loss and recycling issues. Along this line, the IL-based composites in the form of gels, particles, fibers, and membranes have been prepared, which could meet the diverse requirement in different fields, such as separation and catalysis.16–18
Membrane processes are well-established separation technologies in various fields of chemical engineering and environmental sciences beyond adsorption, solvent extraction, etc.19–21 In the membrane-based separation process, the membrane serves as a semipermeable barrier that permits the passage of specific components while rejecting others under the influence of pressure, concentration, or potential differences. Owing to their environmental friendliness, low waste generation, and energy consumption process, membrane processes have been extensively used in gas separation, wastewater treatment, seawater desalination, and resource recycling.22–26 In membrane processes, permeability and selectivity are two crucial and opposing factors known as the trade-off effect.27,28 Therefore, the focus of research has been on developing new membrane materials or modifying existing materials to improve selectivity while maintaining permeability.
Considering the fascinating features of ILs, a series of IL-based membranes (ILMs) have been developed by incorporating functionalized ILs with support membranes.29,30 Due to the benign stability and versatility of ILs, the ILMs exhibit superiority in membrane performance and stability compared with traditional organic solvents-based membranes. During the last decade, ILMs have been reported to be used in the fields of gas separation (carbon capture, utilization, and storage, CCUS for example), water treatment, resources recovery, fuel cells, solar cells, electrochemical devices, etc.31–38 (Fig. 1). The publication concerning the fabrication and application of ILMs also followed an exponential growth. Among them, the topic on gas separation, such as CCUS and VOCs, account for the major, and there are comprehensive reviews on relative progress. For example, Marrucho et al. provided a comprehensive evaluation of the efficacy of various ionic liquid membranes in separating CO2 and offers insights into different approaches that use materials based on ionic liquids as a flexible platform for creating advanced, task-specific CO2 separation membranes.39 Our group also presented a detailed overview of the latest developments in IL-based materials, encompassing pure ILs, IL-based solvents, and membranes for the purpose of CO2 capture, covering perspectives from the molecular to the engineering level.40 J. C. Jansen and colleagues provided a comprehensive survey of the significant advancements in the realm of ionic liquid membranes with the focus on the gas and vapor separation.41 In addition to this, the applications of ILMs on liquid separation including the recovery or removal of metal ions and organic substances from aqueous solutions and seawater desalination are of great significance in view of resources recycling and environmental remediation. Toward this, Imdad et al. presented the recent progress on heavy metal removal using ILMs from the industrial wastewater, and Zheng et al. discussed the recent advances in the functions of ILs in preparing membranes for liquid separation focusing on the preparation process.42,43
 Fig. 1  The versatile applications of ILMs in different fields. 
Over the last decade, a considerable amount of research has been conducted on the development and use of ILMs for liquid separation. Despite this, comprehensive reviews comparing the various preparation strategies and separation performances of ILMs for liquid separation have been lacking. In this review, we intend to provide an overview of the most recent developments in ILMs for liquid separation, with a specific focus on the extraction or elimination of metal ions and organic substances from solutions as well as seawater desalination, among other topics. Targeting at different types of ILMs, including supported ionic liquids membranes (SILMs), ionic liquids-polymer membranes (ILPMs), poly(ionic liquid)s membranes (PILMs), and ionic liquid polymer inclusion membranes (ILPIMs), the preparation strategy, applicability, stability, transport mechanism, and further development tendency are summarized. In summary, this review aims to serve as a preliminary database for ILMs and their performance in liquid separation. This review covers recent developments in ILMs, compares various preparation strategies, and identifies potential areas for further development. By providing insights into existing structures and functionality, it is expected to guide the design of more ILMs with excellent separation performance in respective fields.
2. Ionic liquids membranes and preparation strategy
Indeed, there has been a growing interest in the combination of ILs and membranes to improve the performance and efficiency of different separation processes. Such combinations can enhance selectivity, increase permeability, and reduce fouling, among other benefits. While the high production costs and environmental concerns associated with ILs may limit their industrial applications; using them in combination with membranes has the potential to facilitate the recovery and reusability of ILs, which may mitigate some of these limitations. As such, continued research into IL-membrane composites is expected to yield new and innovative approaches to separation processes.44 In this review, the synthesis, scalability and stability of different types of ILMs, i.e., supported ionic liquids membranes (SILMs), ionic liquids-polymer membranes (ILPMs), poly(ionic liquid)s membranes (PILMs), and ionic liquid polymer inclusion membranes (ILPIMs) are discussed. For each configuration, the fabrication methods, advantages, and disadvantages in liquid separation are presented, especially for the recovery or removal of metal ions and organic substances from liquid and seawater desalination.
2.1 Supported ionic liquids membranes (SILMs)
Supported ionic liquids membranes (SILMs) are a kind of membrane with ILs impregnating in the membrane pores.45 The basement of the membranes could be inorganic or organic with porous structures. As reported, there are mainly three physical methods for the preparation of SILMs, i.e., impregnation, pressure-induced, and vacuum-induced methods. In brief, the key issue is how to immobilize ILs on the pores of the support membrane through the physical method.
(i) Impregnation method. Impregnation is one of the most convenient and cost-effective method, where the immobilization of IL is achieved by soaking the support membrane in a specific IL under ambient conditions. The residual ILs on the surface could be further removed by washing and wiping with a filter paper. For example, Zhang et al. prepared the SILMs by immersing PVDF in the IL to saturate the porous structure.46 Shahkaramipour et al. reported that the pr[mim]2[Tf2N]2 and h[mim]2[Tf2N]2 SILMs were obtained by soaking the alumina membrane in the ionic liquid overnight.47 This is an interesting finding from Fortunato et al. as it highlights a limitation of the impregnation method when using ILs with high viscosity. The decrease in capillary forces means that the ILs will not be able to penetrate the pores of the membrane effectively, resulting in lower performance.48 Despite the preparation process by impregnation is simple, the loading amount of ILs and stability of SILMs remain critical issues, which would seriously affect the membrane performance and stability. In this case, the impregnation method-based SILMs are considered to be suitable for gas separation, such as CO2/CH4 and H2S/CH4, but those for liquid separation are limited.49,50
(ii) Pressure-induced method. For this method, the ILs are introduced into the pores of membrane by applying nitrogen pressure, and the pressure is released until the thin layer of IL is apparent on the membrane surface. After that, the excess ILs are removed and the SILMs are finally obtained. Recently, the pressure method was extensively used to prepare imidazole ILs-supported Nylon organic membrane.43 In addition, SILMs by pressure-induced method was further verified by Hernández-Fernández et al.51 For this method, the property of IL did not affect the loading amount of ILs in the membrane so that it is suitable for the immobilization of high viscosity of ILs on support membranes.
(iii) Vacuum-induced method. The immobilization of ILs by vacuum-induced method includes several steps: (1) placing the support membrane in a vacuum chamber to remove the air in the pores; (2) spreading out specific ILs on the surface of membrane under vacuum; (3) removing the excess ILs on the membrane surface. Using this method, Santos et al. investigated the immobilization of acetate-based RTILs on microporous PVDF membrane to perform the selective separation of CO2 from N2.52 However, for ILs with high viscosity, it is not suitable due to which ILs tend to distribute on the outer surface of the membrane for their hydrophobic nature, which makes them more likely to detach from the support when subjected to pressure, resulting in the loss of ILs.
While supported ionic liquid membranes (SILMs) offer high selectivity and low solvent holding, membrane stability remains a critical challenge in large-scale and long-term operations. The membrane performance and selectivity could suffer from a marked decline due to the loss of functionalized ILs from the support during continuous operation. In this case, the research concerning the improvement of the process stability of SILMs should be strengthened, which would be discussed in the following section.
2.2 Ionic liquids-polymer membranes (ILPMs)
Ionic liquids-polymer membranes (ILPMs) are synthesized by the incorporation of ILs into a polymer matrix, which is considered as a successful approach to overcome the drawbacks of SILMs, especially the insufficient stability. The ILPMs could be also mentioned as ionic liquids gel membrane (ILGMs).53,54 The ILs are stabilized into a polymeric membrane through physical or chemical process. For ILPMs, the polymer membranes serve as mechanically stable support and the functionalized ILs exhibit a certain trade-off between permeability and selectivity, resulting in enhanced membrane performance. The main difference between the SILMs and ILPMs lies in their structures and preparation method. SILMs are prepared by immobilizing ionic liquids onto porous support materials through physical methods, while ILPMs are prepared by physical or chemical blending ionic liquids with common polymers to form free-standing membranes. In general, the main preparation strategies cover physical blending and chemical grafting, including surface-grafting and filler-grafting.
(i) Physical blending. For this method, the ILs and polymer matrix are co-dissolved in suitable solvents and then form a homogeneous polymer solution. After that, the casting solution is poured into a glass plate and form mechanically stable dense membranes, where the thickness of the ILPMs is controlled by the casting knife. Then, the membrane is dried in an oven or allowed to air dry in a controlled environment to remove any remaining solvent. Since the facile blending process, this method has been extensively used in the preparation of ILPMs. For example, Mannan et al. demonstrated that a homogeneous membrane could be created by blending PES with [EMIM][Tf2N].55 Similarly, Kim et al. successfully incorporated [EMIM][BF4] into the PVDF-HFP copolymer, which resulted in remarkable gas separation performance.56 However, the application potential of this ILPMs in liquid separation should be evaluated in view of the stability of ILs.
(ii) Chemical grafting. Besides physical blending, the chemical grafting is another effective method for ILPMs owing to the abundant active functional groups of membrane components. Due to their electrostatic nature of ILs, they could interact with polymers through pronounced hydrogen bonding, coulombic forces, and van der Waals interactions. These interactions make ILs ideal candidates as membrane additives as they could be chemically grafted to the surface of the membrane or inner filler to enhance various properties.43 For the former, the support membrane is first synthesized using solvent casting or interfacial polymerization. After that, the ILs are poured onto the membrane surface and react with the active group of membrane under specific conditions or activation by radiation and UV light process.57,58 Through the chemically bonding of ILs to the surface of the membrane after membrane formation, the surface properties of the membrane surface could be tuned by choosing different ILs, and the separation performance, antifouling properties, and stability are expected to be improved (Fig. 2). The modification of polyamide membranes using ILs has been extensively explored in the fabrication of ILPMs. This approach is particularly suitable for polyamide membrane modification by the breakage of the polyamide chains through the hydrogen bonds or acyl chloride-amine esterification reaction. With this approach, He et al. successfully grafted the imidazolium IL (1-aminoethyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide, AMIB) onto the polyamide layer of a NF membrane, resulting in satisfactory water flux and salt rejection, as shown in Fig. 2a–c.59 The modified thin film composite membranes (PIP-TMC-AMIB) showed a permeance of 135 LMH, which is approximately 4 times higher than that of lab-made pristine PIP-TMC-TFCM (34 LMH). In addition, another quaternized bipyridine (QBPD) monomer was utilized to modify interfacially polymerized polyethyleneimine (PEI) membranes (Fig. 2d). The increased thickness observed in the QBPD membrane is due to a secondary interfacial polymerization process of the amino groups of QBPD and the residual acid chloride groups. This results in favorable performance when compared to other nanofiltration membranes.60
 Fig. 2  (a) The surface modification process of PA membranes by AMIB, (b) the nanofiltration performance of initial and modified membranes, (c) pore size distribution of PIP-TMC and PIP-TMC-AMIB TFCMs, (d) synthesis of the QBPD membrane,59 (e) effect of pressure on the performance of PEI and QBPD membranes, and (f and g) cross-section and surface images of PEI and QBPD membranes.60 
In addition to that, the grafting of ILs on specific solid filler and further assembling into support membrane is another approach to obtain the ILPMs. This kind of membrane could also be recognized as ionic liquid-composited mixed matrix membranes (ILMMMs). The fillers could be polymer or porous inorganic materials, such as MOFs, COFs, CNTs, GO, zeolites, and silica (Fig. 3). The addition of fillers is expected to provide synergistic effect to the membrane performance. For instance, the ILs-modified GO nanosheets was incorporated into the PES membrane, and the PE-iGO composite membrane was used for dye/salt fractionation (Fig. 3a). It is suggested that the dispersed graphene oxide (GO) serves as an ideal support for ionic liquids (ILs) due to its excellent surface properties and chemical stability. The modification of GO with ILs has been shown to improve the elution of dye molecules at higher pH values, possibly due to the increased hydrophilicity of the modified membrane.61 Shi et al. fabricated the IL-TiO2 by functionalizing TiO2 with carboxyl-functionalized IL in the chemical process and used them to fabricate a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) microfiltration membrane (Fig. 3b).62 Compared with the chemical grafting on the membrane surface, the filler-grafting process is simpler due to the more active and designable functional groups of the filler. However, the compatibility and adhesion between filler and polymer membrane remain challenging. To ensure effective selective separation in composite membranes, it is crucial to achieve sufficient interfacial contact between the filler and polymer matrix. Failure to do so could result in gaps and voids within the membrane, which would decrease its selectivity by allowing permeating species to bypass the functional phase. Last but not least, the chemically bonding of ILs to polymer chains before membrane formation was also adopted for ILPMs. However, the modification process was complicated and the use of toxic organic solvents was not environment friendly.
 Fig. 3  (a) The schematic illustration of GO, pGO, iGO nanosheets, and PE-GO membranes,61 (b) the formation process of IL-TiO2.62 
Due to the diversity of ILs and polymer matrices, a series of ILPMs has been fabricated and applied in the fields of gas or liquid separation.63,64 The stability of chemical grafting ILPMs are more satisfactory with those of the SILMs by virtue of the chemical interaction of ILs and membranes. Moreover, the synergistic effects of ILs, membranes, and fillers provide more opportunities for the application of ILPMs. The selection of suitable fillers and polymer matrices, the filler dispersion, and the compatibility between fillers and membrane should be considered for different application scenarios in further research.
2.3 Poly(ionic liquid)s membranes (PILMs)
Poly(ionic liquids) (PILs) are a type of polyelectrolyte polymer that contain repeating units with either a cation or an anion, and they are synthesized from IL monomers.65–69 PILs are a promising class of materials due to their unique combination of properties inherited from both ILs and polymers, such as the benign thermal and chemical stability, ion conductivity, and exclusive solubility in polar organic solvents. In this case, PILs have found applications in a wide range of fields such as catalysis, thermal responsive materials, porous base polymers, and separations.70–73 Benefiting from the preeminent properties of PILs, poly(ionic liquid) membranes are further developed to resolve the mechanical stability issue. Their polymer macrostructure provides them with both enhanced processability, durability, and mechanical stability.
The recent advances in PILMs for CO2 separation have been well documented and different types of PILMs have been prepared including PIL-polymer membranes, PIL/IL composite membranes, and PIL-based mixed matrix membranes.74,75 In PILMs, the imidazolium cations are often tethered as side chains to the poly(acrylate) or poly(styrene) backbone, creating a network of ionic bonds, which is responsible for the high mechanical stability. The fabrication strategy of PILMs is similar with that of ILGMs subject to the synthesis of PILs. On the one hand, the PILs are primarily synthesized through various ways, such as radical polymerization, photopolymerization of IL monomers, and rapid counter-ion exchange (Fig. 4). Tang et al. fabricated a poly(ionic liquid) complex membrane by grafting PCMVImBr on the sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (CMCNa) support (Fig. 4a). The poly(ionic liquid) was first synthesized by the radical polymerization of the IL monomer, and then the composite membrane was further obtained.76 A new method has been developed to create positively charged NF membranes by the rapid counter-ion exchange of hydrophilic PIL on a polysulfone (PSf) substrate (Fig. 4e). The formation of the thin film of the hydrophobic PIL layer at the interface of the hydrophilic PIL and KPF6 aqueous phase is a result of the phase separation process, coupled with the self-inhibiting effect due to the transformation of the PIL chains from hydrophilic to hydrophobic (Fig. 4f).77
 Fig. 4  (a) Synthesis of VImBr, PCMVImBr and schematic preparation of the PILC membranes, (b and c) SEM and AFM images of PILC membrane, (d) dynamic water contact angle of CMCNa, PCMVImBr, and PILC membranes,76 (e) the formation mechanism of the preparation process of PIL/PSf and (f) AFM and TEM images of PIL/PSf.77 
The anion exchange process involves the exchange of halide anions in the pre-synthesized PILs with the desired non-halide anions, which provides an efficient and convenient approach for the synthesis of PILs containing non-halide anions. The PILs could be further incorporated into the support membrane using a similar strategy discussed above. On the other hand, the in situ polymerization method using IL-substance mixtures could be performed in one step, which typically involves a series of reactions including immobilization, polymerization, and curing. Compared to multistep methods, this one-step approach offers several advantages, such as reduced reaction time and simplified processing. In addition, the choice of polymerization technique could be tailored to the specific application requirements, allowing for greater flexibility in material design. The thermal polymerization, radical polymerization, and UV light polymerization are often employed. For example, a SiO2-PIL/PES hybrid membrane was synthesized by PIL brush modification via atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) and PES incorporation (Fig. 5a and b).78 This positively charged PILMs exhibited higher water flux and salt permeability. Besides, PIL-modified Mg–Al hydrotalcite (HT) was also used to prepare HT-PIL/PES membrane (Fig. 5c–g). By finely tuning the separation layer of the mixed matrix PES membranes with mHT, the transport of salts was improved without negatively affecting the rejection of dyes. The modified membrane exhibited improved performance in terms of increased hydrophilicity, better stability against mechanical stress, and high temperatures. Moreover, it demonstrated impressive dyes retention capabilities with a rejection rate of over 95% for reactive black 5 and about 90% for reactive red 49, while also maintaining near-zero salt rejection levels.79 This demonstrates the potential for developing membranes with enhanced salt rejection and high dye rejection for various applications, including water treatment and dye removal from industrial wastewater.
 Fig. 5  (a) The fabrication for SiO2-PIL/PES hybrid membrane, (b) effect of SiO2-PIL content on the removal performance for target substances,78 (c) the process of the fabrication for mHT mixed PES NF membrane, (d–g) SEM images of the unfilled PES membrane.79 
The versatility of PILs and membranes has led to the development of PILMs for various applications, including metal ion separation, solid polymer electrolytes, and gas separation. However, further research is necessary to explore new chemical structures of PILs and compatible carrier polymers for PILM synthesis. In addition, there should be a focus on preparing PILMs with lower costs to increase their economic feasibility in commercial applications.
2.4 Ionic liquid polymer inclusion membranes (ILPIMs)
Ionic liquid polymer inclusion membranes (ILPIMs) and SILMs share a similar principle in which an immobilized IL phase is incorporated into a polymer matrix to create a selective barrier for transport processes. However, in ILPIMs, the liquid phase is present as droplets or dispersed phase within the polymer matrix, while in SILMs, the liquid phase is in the form of a thin film that coats the surface of a porous support material. ILPIMs have been successfully employed for metal ion separation, and electrically driven ILPIMs were also developed (Fig. 6).80–82 ILPIMs are fabricated by casting a mixture consisting of a base polymer, an extractant (carrier), and a plasticizer, where the base polymers ensure the mechanical strength, extractants transport, and bind the substances passing through the membrane, and the plasticizers are used for the enhancement of the plasticity or fluidity. ILs could act as both a carrier and a plasticizer, allowing for efficient transport while also improving the mechanical properties of the membrane. This results in ILPIMs that are more chemically resistant and thermally stable than traditional polymeric membranes.
 Fig. 6  (a) The schematic diagram of PIM in metal ion separation and (b) the separation process using electrically driven PIMs.80–82 
For the preparation of ILPIMs, the base polymer is dissolved, and a certain quantity of extractant and plasticizers (i.e., ILs) are further added to obtain a homogenous solution. The final solution is poured into a glass Petri dish, and the result ILPIMs are obtained after solvent evaporation. Tricaprylmethylammonium chloride (Aliquat 336) is a commercial metal extraction reagent with plasticizing effect, which has been widely in ILPIMs fabrication. For example, Güell et al. prepared a CTA-based ILPIM with 47.6% of Aliquat 336 and obtained high efficiency for As(V) removal.83 Similarly, Sellami et al. evaluated the influence of the composition of Aliquat 336 in the CTA/PBAT-based ILPIMs on the Cr(VI) removal performance.84
ILPIMs have also been considered to be environment friendly and greener than traditional solvent extraction methods because they require minimal amounts of carrier and have negligible leakage from the membrane. In addition, functionalized ILs can be used to selectively remove target substances, making them useful for the recovery and removal of metal ions from waste streams. Overall, ILPIMs have great potential for use in sustainable and efficient separation processes.
3. Application for liquid separation
3.1 Metal separation
The recovery of scarce metals including rare metal (Li for example) and the elimination of heavy metals (Hg, Cr, Cd, etc.) from aqueous solutions have been universal in the industrial process. These metal separation processes are critical in view of sustainable development and environment issues. Compared to traditional solvent extraction and adsorption methods, membrane processes are known for being more energy-efficient, producing fewer carbon emissions and having easier and more convenient operating procedures.85,86 Moreover, the ILMs have been used in such a metal separation process for the unique superiority, such as high selectivity and stability.
The increasing demand for lithium-ion batteries in the energy sector has highlighted the importance of efficient and sustainable methods for lithium extraction from liquid resources such as seawater, salt lake brines, and geothermal water. Developing efficient and cost-effective separation processes for extracting lithium from these sources could help to alleviate the potential supply shortage and reduce the environmental impact of lithium mining.87–95 However, the similarity of Li+ and Mg2+ in chemical property along with the high Mg/Li ratio limit effective lithium separation. As reported, the NF process exhibited application potential for Li/Mg separation due to the synergistic effects of Donnan and dielectric and steric hindrance effects.96,97 The surface functionalization of positively-charged commercial NF membrane represents a feasible approach to promote the permeability and selectivity. In this case, a series of ILs with cationic functional groups, such as imidazoliums, quaternary ammonium, or quaternized bipyridine groups were adopted for the grafting and modification of NF membranes, and the representative ILPMs were prepared. By grafting amine-functionalized [MimAP][Tf2N] onto the surface of the PA/PAN membrane, Wu and coworkers prepared a positively charged NF membrane (Fig. 7a).98 The grafting of [MimAP][Tf2N] onto the surface of the PA/PAN membrane effectively reduced the surface pore size and introduced positive charge to the membrane surface. This modification greatly enhanced the Li/Mg selectivity and efficiency of lithium extraction from liquid resources with high water permeance (37.8 LMH) and Li/Mg selectivity (SLi/Mg, 8.12). A strong electrolyte monomer (diaminoethimidazole bromide salt, DAIB) was further introduced to the nascent polyamide membrane and a nanoheterogeneous membrane (DAIB/PEI-TMC) was synthesized (Fig. 7c).99 The DAIB modification was incorporated both on the surface and within the structure of the PEI-TMC membrane. This resulted in the creation of membranes with a more positive charge as well as enhanced hydrophilicity. As a result, the water permeance of the DAIB/PEI-TMC membrane was improved 5 times with favorable survivability in continuous Li/Mg nanofiltration process. In addition, Soyekwo utilized the unique properties of the N1-(6-aminohexyl)-N1,N1,N6,N6,N6-pentamethylhexane-1,6-diaminium bromide ionic liquid (DABIL) to modify the polyamide network. The addition of DABIL allowed for the creation of a nanoheterogeneous microenvironment, leading to improved local ion concentration and membrane properties such as hydrophilicity, water permeance, selectivity, and antimicrobial properties.100 Moreover, the bis-quaternary ammonium salt (QEDTP), multiamino quaternary ammonium salt (3,5-dimethylhydrazide-benzyl trimethyl ammonium bromide, DHTAB), and triquaternary ammonium-based ionic liquid (TQAIL) were also used for the preparation of ILPMs.97,101,102 ILs modification introduces nanoscale structural heterogeneity, which improves the surface hydrophilicity of the membrane and reduces internal resistance within the selective layer. As a result, the modified membrane shows improved permeance, selectivity, and antifouling properties, making it more efficient for different separation processes.
 Fig. 7  (a) The preparation process of [MimAP][Tf2N]-PA/PAN NF membrane and application in Li+ recovery, (b) the separation performance of the published work, commercial NF membranes and NF-IL membranes,99 (c) the absorption and transport of H2O and hydrated ions through DAIB membranes, (d) the two-step nanofiltration process developed and (e) Li+ flux and Mg2+/Li+ in the permeate of the 1st and 2nd nanofiltration.100 
In addition, Zante and coworkers developed an SILM that incorporates a mixture of hydrophobic ionic liquid [BMIM][NTf2] and tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) as a carrier for the extraction of lithium.103 The same solvent phase composed of TBP and [BMIM][NTf2] was also applied for the transport of rare earth elements (REEs), such as La, Ce, and Sc.43 Last but not least, ILPIMs also play important roles in rare metal recovery. For example, the use of Cyphos IL 104 embedded in the PIM allows for the selective transport of adjacent heavy rare earth elements Lu(III) and Yb(III).104 Fajar et al. were able to achieve the efficient recovery of Pt(IV), Pd(II), and Rh(III) through ILPIMs. This was done through sequential transport and the use of the IL trioctyl(dodecyl) phosphonium chloride (P88812Cl) as a metal carrier.105
Heavy metal removal from water bodies is a serious concern in environmental protection and human health. Heavy metals such as Hg, Pb, Cr, Zn, Cd, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, and As are toxic substances that could cause adverse effects to the food chain and ecosystem. These metals can accumulate in living organisms, leading to adverse health effects on both humans and animals, which could lead to terrible human diseases.106–110 Thus far, membrane processes are an important innovation in wastewater treatment, offering a highly effective and economical solution for cleaning and purifying water. Imdad has given a comprehensive review on heavy metal removal using ILMs from the industrial wastewater, with focus on the SILMs (Fig. 8). For example, Zante and colleagues’ study demonstrated the potential of using SILMs to extract cobalt and nickel with an undiluted hydrophobic ionic liquid (tri(hexyl)tetradecyl phosphonium chloride P66614Cl) as a carrier and PVDF as a support membrane (Fig. 8).111 Malas et al. prepared impregnated commercial hydrophobic polyethylene membranes with 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide ([BMIM][DCA]) for Cd2+, Ni2+, and Zn2+ removal.112 The introduction of [BMIM][DCA] remarkably changed the properties of the PE membrane surface and obtained enhanced metal rejection. The findings of Jean et al. suggested that SILMs could effectively extract heavy metal ions (Hg2+, Cd2+, and Cr3+) from acidic wastewater streams using isooctylmethylimidazolium bis-2-ethylhexylphosphate as the carrier, highlighting their potential in industrial wastewater treatment applications.113
 Fig. 8  (a) The heavy metal removal performance of the PE and PE/[BMIM][DCA] SILM,111 (b) proposed mechanism of cobalt transport across the [P66614][Cl]-based SILM, and (c) interaction of heavy metals with the PE/[BMIM][DCA] SILM.112 
ILPIMs also play significant role in heavy metal removal from water environment, and different kinds of ILs were used. The symmetric imidazolium ILs was used in the fabrication of PIMs for the removal of Cr(VI).114 The IL greatly facilitated the transport of the metal and the formation of the PIMs membrane structure. Aliquat 336 was also used as the extractant for the preparation of PVC and cellulose triacetate (CTA)-based ILPIM and used for As removal.115 Sellami et al. developed CTA and poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT)-based ILPIMs containing Aliquat 336 for Cr(VI) removal.116 These intermolecular interactions between CTA and PBAT are crucial for the formation and stability of the polymer blend and for the enhancement of the mechanical and thermal properties of the resulting material. As a result, this ILPIM transported almost all Cr(VI) in only 6 h and accumulated negligible Cr(VI) ions with a high initial flux. In addition, ILPIM containing Aliquat 336 as a carrier was found to be efficient for fluoride removal. With similar polymer matrix of CTA, the reactive ionic liquids (RILs) were introduced as carriers by Szczepanski and used for Cd(II), Cu(II), Pb(II), and Zn(II) ion removal.117 The effect of the alkyl chain length of the RILs on the removal performance was further investigated. The selective separation of heavy metal including Hg could also be achieved using ILPIMs.118 In addition, ILPMs have been also used in heavy metal removal. Zheng et al. prepared 1-vinyl-3-butyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate (VBImBF4)-grafted PES nanofibrous membranes (PES-g-IL), which exhibited excellent Cd(III) removal ability.57 Besides heavy metals removal, Wang and colleagues successfully developed a new type of membrane for the removal of ReO4−/TcO4− using Gemini ionic liquid-modified nacre-like reduced graphene oxide click membranes.58 The comparison of different ILMs for ion separation, including rare metal, heavy metal, and anion are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Relevant ILMs and separation performance for ion separation




ILMs
Target ions
Separation performancea
Ref.


 
Base membrane
ILs





a 
P, permeability coefficients; R, recovery or removal efficiency; SF, separation factor; F, flux; qe, adsorption capacity; LMH, L m−2 h−1.





SILMs
PVDF
[C4mim][NTf2]
Li

P = 12 × 10−7 m s−1

103



PVDF
[P66614][Cl]
Co, Ni

R
Co = 86%, SF = 218

111



PE
[BMIM][DCA]
Cd, Ni, Zn

R
Cd = 52.87%, RNi = 51.47% RZn = 68.05%

112



PVDF
iOMim D2EHP
Hg, Cd, Cr

P = 40.3 × 10−7 cm2 s−1, R = 35%

120



ILPMs
PA
DHTAB
Li/Mg

S
F = 60.1

95



PA
[MimAP]Tf2N
Li/Mg

P = 5.7 LMH, SF = 9.57

96



PEI
QEDTP
Li/Mg

P = 126.9 LMH, SF = 15.6

111



PES
TQAIL
Li/Mg

P = 26.11 LMH, SF = 23.17

112



PEI
HMTAB
Li/Mg

P = 97.9 LMH, SF = 10.1

121



PEI
[AEMIm][Cl]
Y

P = 79.1 LMH, R = 97.5%

122



PES
VBImBF4
Cd

q
e = 187.3 mg g−1

58



PILMs
ACA-ACN
VBImBr
H

F = 7.3 m h−1

119a



PVDF
[A336][SCN]
Au

R = 96.4%

123



ILPIMs
CTA
Aliquat 336
F

R = 85%, F = 2.3 × 10−6 mol m−2 s−1

124



PVDF
Cyphos IL 104
Yb, Lu

P = 156 μm s−1 (Yb), 114.82 μm s−1 (Lu) qe = 19.22 mg g−1 (Yb), 20.53 mg g−1 (Lu)

104



PVDF
P88812Cl
Pt, Pd, Rh

R
Pt, Pd = 90%, RRh = 67%

105



CTA
RILC8_Br
Cu, Pb, Zn

F = 2.7 × 10−10 mol cm−2 s−1

117



CTA
TOMATS
Hg
—

118





3.2 Organic separation
As of now, ILMs show great potential for the separation and purification of a wide range of organic compounds due to their unique properties such as tunable solubility and selectivity, e.g., acetone, butanol, and ethanol (ABE), aromatic hydrocarbons, organic acids, and dyes.44 Among them, the SILMs account for major in the previous reports. For example, Mai et al. fabricated 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ([OMIM][Tf2N])/polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) SILM through vacuum-induced method and used for ABE recovery from aqueous solution.125 Rdzanek et al. successfully demonstrated the use of a blend of trihexyl (tetradecyl)phosphonium tetracyanoborate (P6,6,6,14 tcb) and 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium tetracyanoborate (Im6,1 tcb), along with polyether block amide (PEBA), for the recovery of ABE from water. These blends were immobilized into the pores of PSf or polypropylene membranes.126 In addition, three kinds of trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium ionic liquids (i.e., [THTDP][Br], [THTDP][N(CN)2], and [THTDP][Tf2N]) were immobilized on PVDF membranes and used for ethanol recovery from dilute aqueous solution. The impressive stability and performance of the selected SILM at 2 wt% ethanol for ∼240 hours with high ethanol flux (>2.2 kg m−2·h−1) and selectivity (>320) highlights its potential for industrial applications such as biofuel production or recovery of high purity ethanol from fermentation broth.
Zhang et al. successfully developed an SILM system using hollow fiber membrane and ILs for the separation of toluene and cyclohexane. The N-butylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate ([BPy][BF4]) showed a stronger interaction with toluene and demonstrated excellent long-term stability for up to 100 hours.127 Kamaz et al. achieved successful fabrication of SILMs for the separation of benzene, naphthalene, and phenanthrene by trapping various 1-alkyl-3-vinylimidazolium bromides in polypropylene membrane pores. The π electron cloud density of the aromatic solutes affected the imidazolium cation, as found by research, affecting the transport kinetics.128 Li et al. synthesized two SILMs based on [OMIM][Tf2N] and N-octyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(triuoromethanesulfonyl) imide the separation of dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and methanol.129 In addition, Xi and coworkers also developed an ILPM by copolymerizing an IL with waterborne polyurethane for benzene and cyclohexane separation.130
In our previous review, we discussed how the ILM technique has been successfully employed for the selective separation of organic acids, including but not limited to lactic acid (LA), salicylic acid (SA), and 3-phenoxyproionic acid.47 For example, Matsumoto and colleagues employed the impregnation method to prepare multiple SILMs using six different commercial ILs impregnated into the pores of a PVDF MF membrane support for separating lactic acid.131 In a separate study, Pilli and team used hydrophilic PVDF and the same set of ILs to fabricate SILMs capable of removing phenol from aqueous solutions.132 In addition, Fortunato et al. conducted a study on amino acid separation by the [OMIM][PF6]-containing SILMs.133 Liu et al. developed the poly(amino acid ionic liquid) membranes (PAAILMs) and used to separate the amino acid.134 However, relevant reports on the separation of organic acid are limited in the lasted decades.
Dye removal from wastewater is crucial due to the severe harm it poses to both human health and the ecological environment, making it an urgent matter that needs to be addressed. Panigrahi et al. aimed to address the issue of dye removal from wastewater by fabricating several SILMs with PVDF support through the impregnation method. These SILMs were then utilized for the separation of Bisphenol A (BPA) from aqueous solutions.135 The PES-g-IL synthesized by Zhang et al. not only exhibited high Cd(III) removal ability but also benign anionic dyes Congo Red (CR) adsorption capacity. Also, Naik et al. developed a PIL/PSf blend-selective filtration membrane that utilizes nanochannels for the low-pressure removal of dyes such as Congo red and Eriochrome Black T. The membrane, made up of poly(itaconic acid-co-styrene-co-sulfobetaine vinylimidazole), was reported to be effective in filtering out these dyes. Based on their size and charge, the removal efficiencies of 99% were achieved (Fig. 9a).119b Yu et al. created two novel hybrid membranes for the retention of dyes, including reactive black 5 and reactive red 49 using the nonsolvent induced phase separation (NIPS) method. The first was a SiO2-PIL/PES hybrid membrane, while the second was a Mg/Al hydrotalcite-PES membrane containing PIL brushes.78,79 Furthermore, Deng's work showed that PILMs (polymeric ionic liquid membranes) can be effective for oil/water separation. The hydrophobic PILM-5 membrane, which was created using poly(1-vinyl-3-octylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate), demonstrated excellent efficiency (above 99%) in separating oil and water in batch processes.136
 Fig. 9  (a) The process and mechanism of the PIL/PSf membrane for dye removal, (b) separation efficiency and flux of CR over MO by the PIL/PSf membrane,119b (c) the process for PILMs fabrication by photopolymerization, and the application in oil/water separation, (d and e) separation efficiency of PILM-1 and PILM-5 in oil/water mixtures.136 
3.3 Water desalination
Water desalination has attracted considerable interest to tackle water scarcity, which remains a significant challenge jeopardizing human health and sustainability.137,138 Various methods such as disinfection, distillation, photothermal conversion, and membrane filtration have been developed to overcome the water crisis. Among them, the NF process represents an emerging technology for water desalination, waste water reclamation, and clean water production. Limited by the unsatisfactory performance of commercial NF membranes, functionalized ILs were introduced for surface modification and different ILPMs were further developed. Peng et al. reported the quaternized diaminoethylpiperzine (QAEP)-based polyamide nanofiltration membranes (Fig. 10). The roughness of the PIP-TMC-QAEP membrane increases by almost two times compared to the pristine membrane, with an RMS value of 29.2 nm versus 15.3 nm. The PIP-TMC-QAEP membrane exhibit high salt rejection coupled with high permeate flux that is 3 times as high as that of the pristine membranes without IL.138 This group also explored the 1-aminoethyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide (AMIB)-grafted polyamide membrane, and the water permeance was improved by ∼4 times with high salt rejection (Na2SO4, 95%).59 Similarly, Zambare and coworkers fabricated a composite membrane using the methylimidazolium ionic liquid for water purification.140 In such work, the graphene oxide (GO) was also introduced as the carrier of IL, and the mimG-GO membrane was obtained. The combination of mimG and GO nanosheets has a synergistic effect that improves membrane stability through cation–π interactions and creates nanofluidic channels, thus enabling easy water transport. This combination also leads to a significant improvement in salt rejection performance. The chemically-modified graphene oxide was further used by Liu et al. for the preparation of the PE-iGO composite membrane. The iGO nanosheets binding methylimidazolium were assembled with the PES support membrane, and the resulting membrane could be operated at a low operating pressure with high permeability and salt rejection.141 The amino acid ionic liquid (AAIL) was also employed to modify the NF membrane. The introduction of AAIL increased the water permeability, slightly larger pore size, and high Na2SO4/NaCl selectivity.142 More recently, Shao et al. produced hierarchically porous carbon membranes (HCMs) with micrometer-sized pores using a charged porous membrane containing PILs, which was achieved through the process of one-step vacuum pyrolysis.143 These HCMs have high potential to act as photothermal membranes, which would enhance their seawater desalination performance. This presents an exciting opportunity to develop advanced functional nanomaterials for portable water production.
 Fig. 10  (a) ATR-FTIR spectra, (b) N 1s spectrum, (c) water flux and (d) salt rejection of PIP-TMC-QAEP and PIP-TMC membrane, (e and f) AFM images of PIP-TMC and PIP-TMC-QAEP,59 (g) the modification process of PIP-TMC and PIP-TMC-QAEP membranes.139 
3.4 Others
Except the applications in metal/organic separation and water desalination, there are still some other application scenarios of ILMs.43,44 For example, 1-aminopropyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([AEMIm][Cl]) and 1-aminopropyl-3-methylimidazolium bis((trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl)imide ([AEMIm][Tf2N]) ILs were used for the fabrication of acid-resistant NF membrane with improved permeance. The coordination of ILs provides the membrane with uniform smaller pore, higher porosity, and good acid stability. Thus, this membrane could be used in the recycling and removal of compounds in low pH conditions and even extremely acidic environment.122 Moreover, Naik et al. prepared a poly(ionic liquid)-based anion exchange membranes for acid recovery from industrial wastewater/effluent.119a The PIL-based membrane demonstrated excellent acid dialysis coefficient and separation factors due to the development of a highly conductive layer and efficient ion migration channels formed at the interface of the polymer–polymer. In addition, the ILMs were also used in the separation of specific substances from other solution systems, such as pervaporation, biomass separation, electrolyte, and cyanidation leaching solutions.123,129 Pervaporation is assigned to separate binary or multicomponent liquid mixtures, such as azeotropes, isomers, and components with close boiling point.129 A novel polyvinyl alcohol-based hydrophilic ionic liquid membrane was developed for the recovery of biobutanol through pervaporation.144 Kohoutová et al. investigated dense polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-based membranes containing benzyl-3-butylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([BBIM][BF4]) for the removal of butanol from aqueous solution.145 Similarly, Matsumoto et al. studied the PVC membrane doped with Aliquat 336 PILM for the pervaporative separation of butan-1-ol and propan-2-ol, and the butan-1-ol flux (26.08 g m−2 h−1) and total flux Jt (1193 g m−2 h−1) were obtained.146 As for biomass separation, the [BMIM][DBP]-PTFE SILMs were fabricated for the selective transport of Kraft lignin, lignosulphonate, xylose, and glucose in aqueous solutions by Abejón and coworkers.147,148 Although there are only a few reports of ILMs for these applications at present, further investigation is expected to unlock the potential applications and progress in this area.
4. Stability and transport mechanism
4.1 Stability
The stability of ILMs is crucial for the long-term application in the separation of target substances from aqueous solutions, which has been evaluated in the form of recycling experiments by evaluating the separation performance and characterizations. The stability of the membrane could be influenced by the characteristics of the support membranes, the functionalized ILs used, and the techniques employed during the synthesis process (Fig. 11). The stability of ILMs is heavily dependent on the properties of the support membrane, including the base materials used, surface charge, pore size, and porosity. These factors can significantly impact the structural integrity and durability of the ILMs. Thus, the organic polymer matrices with high thermal stability and mechanical strength are widely used, including PP, PVDF, and PES. For the effect of ILs, the hydrophobicity and surface tension, concentration, and viscosity of IL would affect the stability of ILMs to different degrees. In case of SILMs, ILMs containing high-viscosity ILs can be challenging to remove from pores under a cross-membrane pressure difference because of their immobilization by large van der Waals forces. On the other hand, low-viscosity ILs are more likely to be transformed from the pores of the support, which can lead to the instability of SILMs. Therefore, finding the appropriate viscosity of ILs and the stable support membranes with high mechanical strength is crucial for the stability of ILMs.149,150
 Fig. 11  The factors affecting the stability of ILMs. 
For ILPMs, PILMs, and ILPIMs, the species and concentrations of ILs are important parameter contributing to the stability. For example, Ni et al. found that the long chain nature of PILNH2 polymers contributed to the stable microstructures in PILNH2-TMC nanomembranes with stable flux versus pressure.151 In their study, Chen et al. analyzed how the different amounts of [EMIM][B(CN)4] impacted the mechanical properties of ILPMs made with PVDF. They found that as the IL content increased, the Young's modulus, tensile strength, and extension at break decreased. This suggests that there is a negative correlation between the amount of IL and the mechanical properties of ILPMs.152 Soyekwo and coworkers figured out the effect of the concentration of DABIL on the properties of the membranes, which affected the roughness, hydrophilicity, charge, and further stability in the separation process.100 In general, the larger the mass fraction of ILs, the less the proportion of the support skeleton, thus resulting in decreasing stability. Thus, further work is expected to balance the loading amount of IL, separation performance, and stability.
In addition, the compatibility of ILs and the support membranes, which determines the preparation methods of ILMs, is of great significance in stability evaluation. As discussed above, the stability of chemical grafting ILPMs are more satisfactory with those of the SILMs by virtue of the chemical interaction of ILs and membranes. However, the selection of suitable ILs, fillers, and polymer matrices along with the compatibility between ILs, fillers, and membrane should be considered in view of stability. The thermal stability of ILPMs tends to decrease with longer alkyl chains attached to the imidazolium cation. This is due to the fact that ILs with longer alkyl chains are less compatible with the polymer matrix and tend to cause phase separation. Therefore, it is important to choose an appropriate IL with a shorter alkyl chain to improve the thermal stability of ILPMs.153 In addition, Kasahara and coworkers found that PVP was more compatible with [P4444][Pro] in membrane fabrication compared with the PDMAA polymer.154
4.2 Transport mechanism
In the traditional membrane separation process, the Donnan-Steric Pore Model with Dielectric Exclusion (DSPM-DE) is currently a better match for the study (Fig. 12).155–157 Solute transport can be broken down into four primary steps: (i) partitioning at the interface between the solution and membrane in contact with the feed solution; (ii) movement within the nanopore, which can be described by the extended Nernst-Planck equation; (iii) partitioning at the interface between the solution and membrane in contact with the permeate; and (iv) diffusion away from the membrane on the permeate side. In the model, the first four membrane property parameters needed are effective membrane thickness (Le), membrane pore radius (rp), volumetric charge density (X), and pore dielectric constant (εp), the exact values of which are determined from the fitted experimental data. Secondly, parameters related to the solute and solution need to be known, including the species and concentration of the feed solute (ci,f), solute valence (zi), bulk diffusion coefficient (Di), solute Stokes radius (ri), and the temperature (T). Finally, the operating condition is the hydraulic pressure across the membrane (ΔP). The perm-selectivity ratio in the model can be similarly defined by equating the water permeability and the solute permeability in the solution–diffusion model.158,159 The variation of the trade-off curve between this ratio and the water permeability can be used to show the variation pattern of the separation results caused by changing different experimental factors, such as the effect of membrane structural and charging properties, operating pressure, and feed concentration. In addition, the model can predict the selectivity of various ions when the solute contains many different valence ions when the above conditions are changed. The main mechanisms for the separation of ions and organics from the aqueous solutions through membrane process include size sieving, electrostatic effects, and Donnan effects.160 Two functional relationships were obtained by molecular dynamics simulations, which are the radial distribution functions (RDFs) and the spatial distribution functions (SDFs) describing water molecules and the system fragments, indicating that the addition of ionic liquids can affect the binding energy and interaction energy of specific group fragments with water molecules and change the energy barrier of transport inside the membrane, while it would form nanoheterogeneous structures inside the membrane and affect the transport mechanism.
 Fig. 12  The DSPM-DE model used for the prediction of the transport of the substances across the selective layers of the membrane. 
For ionic liquids-based membranes, the addition of ionic liquids can change the structure and pore size, chargeability, hydrophobicity, and other properties of the membrane. For the application of SILMs in metal extraction reported by Özevci et al., the [Bmim][NTf2] IL served as the cation exchanger with the extracted metal complex to maintain the electrical neutrality.161 Such behavior is unfavorable at the feed/membrane interface due to progressive IL dissolution in the aqueous phase. In case of ILPMs and PILMs, the functionalized ILs exhibited strong chemical interaction with the target component in the aqueous solutions, resulting in improved rejection ratio for specific metals or organic substances. Moreover, the surface charge, hydrophobicity, and pore size were different with the pristine support membrane. The DAIB membranes have been found to exhibit higher hydrophilicity and a higher positive charge due to the positive nature of the DAIB monomer.99 The molecular weight cut-off of PEI-TMC (447 Da) was smaller than that of the DAIB membranes (672 Da). Correspondingly, the mean pore sizes of the DAIB membrane and the PEI-TMC membrane were 0.4 nm and 0.3 nm, respectively. The results indicate that the membrane's surface region experienced enhanced wetting and swelling of water and hydrated ions, leading to decreased “water–membrane” interaction within the membrane. Ultimately, this improved the separation performance of the membrane. As for PILMs, ILs have the ability to act as plasticizers, interacting with the polymer backbone via their own polar groups, which can reduce intramolecular forces. This interaction can have an impact on the membrane's roughness and hydrophobicity, altering the membrane's overall properties. In addition, Ils can also be utilized as extracting agents, which provide a cost-effective source of IL cations that can be combined with a wide range of anions. This allows for the transport of presumed anionic species.162 In general, the mass transport process and mechanism of the substances for traditional membranes and ILMs undergo similar steps; however, the addition of ILs facilitated the mass transfer process, either the interaction between target component with the membrane surface (step i) or the transport in the membrane pores (step ii).44 In this case, further work focusing on the transport model or mechanism is particularly encouraged to develop more accurate models for the description and prediction of the mass transport process in specific ILMs.
Of course, there are some limitations of the present models, whether the solute transport is comprehensively described in the separation process and, secondly, the effect in the practical use. Thus, for further and better development of this model, it can be combined with advanced characterization techniques to improve the mechanical description of solute transport in the model, to predict more accurately, to build a perfect relationship between membrane structure and performance, and to guide the development and design of high-performance membranes to provide a theoretical ground.
5. Conclusion and perspectives
ILs and ILMs possess immense potential to revolutionize the development of more efficient, safer, and environment-friendly technologies and processes. By virtue of the combined advantages of ILs and membranes, such as benign stability and versatile functionalities, the ILMs exhibited promising application in the fields of separation, especially target substances separation from aqueous solutions discussed in this review, covering the recovery or removal of metal ions and organic substances from aqueous solutions, seawater desalination, etc. The preparation strategy, applicability, and transport mechanism for different kinds of ILMs, including supported ionic liquids membranes (SILMs), ionic liquids-polymer membranes (ILPMs), poly(ionic liquid)s membranes (PILMs), and ionic liquid polymer inclusion membranes (ILPIMs), are summarized. Although remarkable advances have been achieved in ILMs for the separation of target substances from aqueous solutions, there are significant challenges that need to be addressed, which also create excellent opportunities for researchers in this field.
(1) For the preparation of ILMs. The present ILMs were mainly prepared on the basis of “random trying and screening”, for example, the specific support membrane was first confirmed, a series of ILs were used to check the coordination feasibility in the preparation of ILMs. Moreover, the optimal loading methods and amount of IL in the composite were determined through several conditional experiments, which was time-consuming and inefficient. Various effective approaches have been proposed and implemented to tackle these challenges. For example, introducing the theoretical calculation for the interaction between ILs and the surface groups of support membranes before experiments, precisely and rationally screening the optimal structure and loading amount of ILs, and then designing the optimal preparation route for specific purposes. Such strategies have been used in the synthesis of MOFs, COFs, etc., which may also achieve progress in breaking the precise preparation limitations on ILMs to yield highly new-type, efficient, and cost-effective ILMs.
(2) For the separation performance of ILMs. The trade-off effect between the permeability and selectivity remains to be one of the biggest challenges in the separation performance of ILMs. How to coordinate the trade-off effect by ILMs interface regulation and mass transfer process optimization is urgently demanded. The development of innovative ILs and ILMs seems to be a promising trend. In addition, the potential for uncontrolled ion exchange of ILMs could lead to reduced separation efficiency and there is a need for better understanding of the underlying mechanisms governing ion exchange to improve the design and performance of ILMs. The significance of developing new methods for characterization and analysis of ILMs to enable more informed decision-making in their application for liquid separation is also highlighted. Moreover, the stability of the ILMs seriously affect the further application of ILMs, including the compatibility between ILs and membranes, the environmental effect of ILs loss during the separation process and stability in extreme conditions. Although some studies have investigated the long-term stability of ILMs in acidic or basic environments as well as in organic solvents, there is still a lack of research on their stability under realistic separation conditions. In addition, membrane fouling phenomenon exists extensively in the membrane process, which should be also considered for ILMs. The interaction mechanism between the contaminant, ILs, and membrane need to be further revealed. Along this line, the development of specific cleaning strategies for different contaminant and ILs are intensively recommended.
(3) For the scale-up application of ILMs. One of the major obstacles to the practical application of ILMs in industrial manufacturing is the high cost associated with the production of high-quality ILs. To overcome this challenge, it is important to develop new synthetic strategies that are both economically viable and environmentally sustainable. These techniques should also focus on using readily available and safe raw materials rather than relying on expensive or rare resources. Moreover, the design of membrane module, system integration, and the coupling with other separation process should be also reinforced. Along this way, the overall cycle evaluation considering performance and economic benefits is expected to be established. Explorations on the novel applications of ILMs in the fields of separation of target substances from aqueous solutions and other advanced areas are suggested.
In summary, we have discussed the various separation applications of ILMs and their potential advantages over other separation techniques, with focus on the target substances separation from solutions. Our goal is to create a preliminary database for ILMs and their liquid separation performance. This database will serve as a valuable resource for designing new ILMs that have superior separation capabilities in specific applications. By helping researchers understand the structures and functions of existing ILMs, we hope to facilitate the development of more advanced materials in this field. We share the belief that new ILMs will continue to be synthesized and tested for practical applications as advances in synthetic chemistry, materials chemistry, and chemical engineering will likely drive further innovation in this field. As the benefits of ILMs become increasingly apparent, we anticipate that more industries and research areas will begin to explore their potential uses in various applications.
Abbreviations

TMC1,3,5-Trimesoyl chloride
ABEAcetone, butanol, and ethanol
ACAAcrylic acid
ACNAcrylonitrile

q
e
Adsorption capacity
ATRPAtom transfer radical polymerization
QEDTPBis-quaternary ammonium salt
CCUSCarbon capture, utilization and storage
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
CTACellulose triacetate
COFsCovalent organic frameworks
DMCDimethyl carbonate
EDElectrodialysis

F
Flux
FOForward osmosis
GOGraphene oxide
HTHydrotalcite
ILMsIL-based membranes
ILMMMsIonic liquid composited mixed matrix membranes
ILPIMsIonic liquid polymer inclusion membranes
ILsIonic liquids
ILGMsIonic liquids gel membrane
ILPMsIonic liquids-polymer membranes
MOFsMetal organic frameworks
MFMicrofiltration
NFNanofiltration

P
Permeability coefficients
PVPervaporation
PIPPiperazine
PEIPoly(ethyleneimine)
PESPoly(ether sulfone)
PILsPoly(ionic liquid)s
PILMsPoly(ionic liquid)s membranes
PVDFPoly(vinylidene fluoride)
PANPolyacrylonitrile
PAPolyamide
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
PILCPoly(ionic liquid)s composite
[MimAP][Tf2N]ILs 1-(3-aminopropyl)-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
pr[mim]2[Tf2N]21,3-Di(3-methylimidazolium)propane bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
h[mim]2[Tf2N]21,6-Di(3-methylimidazolium)hexane bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
AMIB1-Aminoethyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide
[AEMIm][Tf2N]1-Aminopropyl-3-methylimidazolium bis((trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl)imide
[AEMIm][Cl]1-Aminopropyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride
[BMIM][NTf2]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
[BMIM][Cl]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride
[BMIM][DCA]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide
[BMIM][BF4]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[BMIM][BF4]1-Benzyl-3-butylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[BMIM][DBP]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium dibutylphosphate
VImBr1-Cyanomethyl-1-vinylimidazolium bromide
[EMIM][Tf2N]1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis((trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl)imide
[EMIM][BF4]1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
Im6,1 tcb1-Hexyl-3-methylimidazolium tetracyanoborate
[OMIM][Tf2N]1-Octyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
VBImBF41-Vinyl-3-butyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate
DHTAB3,5-Dimethylhydrazide-benzyl trimethyl ammonium bromide
DAIBDiaminoethimidazole bromide
DABIL
N
1-(6-Aminohexyl)-N1,N1,N6,N6,N6-pentamethylhexane-1,6-diaminium bromide ionic liquid
[BPy][BF4]
N-Butylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate
PCMVImBrPoly[1-cyanomethyl-3-vinylimidazolium bromide]
P66614Cltri(hexyl)tetradecyl phosphonium chloride
Aliquat 336Tricaprylmethylammonium chloride
P6,6,6,14 tcbTrihexyl (tetradecyl) phosphonium tetracyanoborate
P88812ClTrioctyl(dodecyl) phosphonium chloride
TQAILTriquaternary ammonium-based ionic liquid

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U20A20149, 21978302), CAS Project for Young Scientists in Basic Research (YSBR-038), National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFC3201404) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2022M713174).
References
J. Dupont, R. F. de Souza and P. A. Z. Suarez, Ionic liquid (molten salt) phase organometallic catalysis, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3667–3691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Hallett and T. Welton, Room-temperature ionic liquids: solvents for synthesis and catalysis, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3508–3576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Rogers and K. R. Seddon, Ionic liquids-solvents of the future?, Science, 2003, 302, 792–793 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Welton, Room-temperature ionic liquids solvents for synthesis and catalysis, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Zhang, J. Sun, X. C. Zhang, J. Y. Xin, Q. Q. Miao and J. J. Wang, Ionic liquid-based green processes for energy production, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7838–7869 RSC .
J. Dupont, From molten salts to ionic liquids: A “Nano” Journey, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1223–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hayes, G. G. Warr and R. Atkin, Structure and nanostructure in ionic liquids, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6357–6426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Passos, M. G. Freire and J. A. P. Coutinho, Ionic liquid solutions as extractive solvents for value-added compounds from biomass, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4786–4815 RSC .
A. E. Visser, R. P. Swatloski, W. M. Reichert, R. Mayton, S. Sheff, A. Wierzbicki, J. H. Davis and R. D. Rogers, Task-specific ionic liquids for the extraction of metal ions from aqueous solutions, Chem. Commun., 2001, 135–136 RSC .
Z. H. Luo, W. J. Li, J. P. Yan and J. Sun, Roles of ionic liquids in adjusting nature of ionogels: A mini review, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2203988 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Zhu, J. F. Huang, Z. W. Pan and S. Dai, Ionothermal synthesis of hierarchical ZnO nanostructures from ionic-liquid precursors, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4473–4477 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, J. H. Yu and S. Dai, Preparation of inorganic materials using ionic liquids, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 261–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Bates, R. D. Mayton, I. Ntai and J. H. Davis, CO2 capture by a task-specific ionic liquid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 926–927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Seitkalieva, D. E. Samoylenko, K. A. Lotsman, K. S. Rodygin and V. P. Ananikov, Metal nanoparticles in ionic liquids: Synthesis and catalytic applications, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 445, 213982 CrossRef CAS .
H. Weingaertner, Understanding ionic liquids at the molecular level: facts, problems, and controversies, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 654–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Kang, J. L. Zhang, W. T. Shang, T. B. Wu, P. Zhang, B. X. Han, Z. H. Wu, G. Mo and X. Q. Xing, One-step synthesis of highly efficient nanocatalysts on the supports with hierarchical pores using porous ionic liquid-water gel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3768–3771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Kang, X. F. Sun and B. X. Han, Synthesis of functional nanomaterials in ionic liquids, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1011–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Diaz, A. Ortiz and I. Ortiz, Progress in the use of ionic liquids as electrolyte membranes in fuel cells, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 469, 379–396 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Diallo, M. R. Kotte and M. Cho, Mining critical metals and elements from seawater: opportunities and challenges, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 9390–9399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Zhang, H. L. Liu and L. Jiang, Membrane-based strategy for efficient ionic liquids/water separation assisted by superwettability, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606544 CrossRef .
A. Somrani, A. H. Hamzaoui and M. Pontie, Study on
lithium separation from salt lake brines by nanofiltration (NF) and low pressure reverse osmosis (LPRO), Desalination, 2013, 317, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, F. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Lin and L. Han, A tight nanofiltration membrane with multi-charged nanofilms for high rejection to concentrated salts, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 537, 407–415 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bai, X. Wang, Y. Nie, H. Dong, X. Zhang and S. Zhang, Study on the recovery of ionic liquids from dilute effluent by electrodialysis method and the fouling of cationexchange membrane, Sci. China: Chem., 2013, 56, 1811–1816 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Sun, Y. Hu and H. Tang, Membrane technologies for Li+/Mg2+ separation from salt-lake brines and seawater: a comprehensive review, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2020, 81, 7–23 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ounissi, L. Dammak, C. Larchet, J. F. Fauvarque and E. S. Hmida, Novel lithium selective composite membranes: synthesis, characterization and validation tests in dialysis, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 16111–16128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pawlowski, R. M. Huertas, C. F. Galinha, J. G. Crespo and S. Velizarov, On operation of reverse electrodialysis (RED) and membrane capacitive deionisation (MCDI) with natural saline streams: a critical review, Desalination, 2020, 476, 114183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Ying, Y. Mao, X. Peng and B. Chen, Polystyrene sulfonate threaded through a metal–organic framework membrane for fast and selective lithium-ion separation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15120–15124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. G. Donnan, Theory of membrane equilibria and membrane potentials in the presence of nondialysing electrolytes.A contribution to physical-chemical physiology, J. Membr. Sci., 1995, 100, 45–55 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Tomé and I. M. Marrucho, Ionic liquid-based materials: a platform to design engineered CO2 separation membranes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2785–2824 RSC .
W. Qian, J. Texter and F. Yan, Frontiers in poly(ionic liquid)s: syntheses and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1124–1159 RSC .
L. Lei, F. Pan, A. Lindbråthen, X. Zhang, M. Hillestad, Y. Nie, L. Bai, X. He and M. D. Guiver, Carbon hollow fiber membranes for a molecular sieve with precisecutoff ultramicropores for superior hydrogen separation, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Ahmad and K. Chanda, Ionic liquid coordinated metal-catalyzed organic transformations: A comprehensive review, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 472, 214769 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Cowan, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Poly(ionic liquid)/Ionic liquid ion-gels with high “free” ionic liquid content: platform membrane materials for CO2/light gas separations, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 724–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zunita, R. Hastuti, A. Alamsyah, K. Khoiruddin and I. G. Wenten, Ionic liquid membrane for carbon capture and separation, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2021, 51, 261–280 CrossRef .
X. L. Li, W. Guo, Y. F. Liu, W. X. He and Z. H. Xiao, Spinel LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 as superior electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries: Ionic liquid assisted synthesis and the effect of CuO coating, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 278–283 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Qian, L. Xia, L. F. Yang, X. B. Wang, X. Suo, X. L. Cui and H. B. Xing, Defect-free mixed-matrix membranes consisting of anion-pillared metal-organic frameworks and poly(ionic liquid)s for separation of acetylene from ethylene, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 611, 118329 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, X. Suo, Z. L. Yang, L. F. Yang, X. L. Cui and H. B. Xing, Engineering the pore structure and functionality of ionic porous polymers for separating acetylene over carbon dioxide, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 33, 2214887 CrossRef CAS .
X. Suo, Y. Yu, S. H. Qian, L. Zhou, X. L. Cui and H. B. Xing, Tailoring the pore size and chemistry of ionic ultramicroporous polymers for trace sulfur dioxide capture with high capacity and selectivity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 6986–6991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Tomé and I. M. Marrucho, Ionic liquid-based materials: a platform to design engineered CO2 separation membranes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2785–2824 RSC .
S. J. Zeng, X. P. Zhang, L. Bai, X. C. Zhang, H. Wang, J. J. Wang, D. Bao, M. D. Li, X. Y. Liu and S. J. Zhang, Ionic-liquid-based CO2 capture systems: structure, interaction and process, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 9625–9673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Friess, P. Izák, M. Kárászová, M. Pasichnyk, M. Laňc, D. Nikolaeva, P. Luis and J. C. Jansen, A review on ionic liquid gas separation membranes, Membranes, 2021, 11, 97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Imdad and R. K. Dohare, A critical review on heavy metals removal using ionic liquid membranes from the industrial wastewater, Chem. Eng. Process, 2022, 173, 108812 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Zheng, D. Hua, Y. P. Hong, A. R. Ibrahim, A. Yao, J. Y. Pan and G. W. Zhan, Functions of ionic liquids in preparing membranes for liquid separations: A Review, Membranes, 2020, 10, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Wang, J. Q. Luo, S. C. Feng, H. R. Li, Y. H. Wan and X. P. Zhang, Recent development of ionic liquid membranes, Green Energy Environ., 2016, 1, 43–61 CrossRef .
K. Y. Zhang, L. X. Zhou, Z. C. Wang, H. Y. Li, Y. G. Yan and J. Zhang, Molecular insight into CO2/N2 separation using a 2D-COF supported ionic liquid membrane, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 23690–23698 RSC .
X. M. Zhang, Z. H. Tu, H. Li, K. Huang, X. B. Hu, Y. T. Wu and D. R. MacFarlane, Selective separation of H2S and CO2 from CH4 by supported ionic liquid membranes, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 543, 282–287 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shahkaramipour, M. Adibi, A. A. Seifkordi and Y. Fazli, Separation of CO2/CH4 through alumina-supported geminal ionic liquid membranes, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 455, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fortunato, C. A. M. Afonso, M. A. M. Reis and J. G. Crespo, Supported liquid membranes using ionic liquids: study of stability and transport mechanisms, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 242, 197–209 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Yan, S. Anguille, M. Bendahan and P. Moulin, Ionic liquids combined with membrane separation processes: A review, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 222, 230–253 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fatyeyeva, S. Rogalsky, O. Tarasyuk, C. Chappey and S. Marais, Vapour sorption and permeation behaviour of supported ionic liquid membranes: application for organic solvent/water separation, React. Funct. Polym., 2018, 130, 16–28 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Hernández-Fernández, A. P. de los Ríos, F. Tomás-Alonso, J. M. Palacios and G. Víllora, Preparation of supported ionic liquid membranes: Influence of the ionic liquid immobilization method on their operational stability, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 341, 172–177 CrossRef .
E. Santosn, J. Albo and A. Irabien, Acetate based Supported Ionic Liquid Membranes (SILMs) for CO2 separation: Influence of the temperature, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 452, 277–283 CrossRef .
B. Sasikumar, G. Arthanareeswaran and A. F. Ismail, Recent progress in ionic liquid membranes for gas separation, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 266, 330–341 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kasahara, E. Kamio, A. Yoshizumi and H. Matsuyama, Polymeric ion-gels containing an amino acid ionic liquid for facilitated
CO2 transport media, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2996–2999 RSC .
H. A. Mannan, 
            et al., Synthesis, characterization, and CO2 separation performance of polyether sulfone/[EMIM][Tf2N] ionic liquid-polymeric membranes (ILPMs), J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2017, 54, 98–106 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, I. H. Baek, S. U. Hong and H. K. Lee, Study on immobilized liquid membrane using ionic liquid and PVDF hollow fiber as a support for CO2/N2 separation, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 372, 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, C. J. Ni, W. W. Xiao, Y. Y. Liang and Y. J. Li, Ionic liquid grafted polyethersulfone nanofibrous membrane as recyclable adsorbent with simultaneous dye, heavy metal removal and antibacterial property, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 132111 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Wang, Z. Y. Yan, L. L. Fu, D. L. Li, L. W. Gong, Y. J. Wang and Y. Xiong, Gemini ionic liquid modified nacre-like reduced graphene oxide click membranes for ReO4− /TcO4− removal, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 302, 122073 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. He, H. W. Peng, Y. Chen and Q. Zhao, High performance polyamide nanofiltration membranes enabled by surface modification of imidazolium ionic liquid, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 608, 118202 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Feng, H. W. Peng and Q. Zhao, Fabrication of high performance Mg2+/Li+ nanofiltration membranes by surface grafting of quaternized bipyridine, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 280, 119848 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, X. Xie, R. S. Zambare, A. P. J. Selvaraj, B. N. Sowrirajalu, X. Song, C. Y. Tang and C. Gao, Functionalized graphene oxide modified polyethersulfone membranes for low-pressure anionic dye/salt fractionation, Polymer, 2018, 10, 795 Search PubMed .
F. Shi, Y. Ma, J. Ma, P. Wang and W. Sun, Preparation and characterization of PVDF/TiO2 hybrid membranes with ionic liquid modified nano-TiO2 particles, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 427, 259–269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Martinez-Izquierdo, C. Tellez and J. Coronas, Highly stable Pebax® Renew® thin-film nanocomposite membranes with metal organic framework ZIF-94 and ionic liquid [Bmim][BF4] for CO2 capture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 18822 RSC .
X. Liang, H. Wu, H. L. Huang, X. Y. Wang, M. D. Wang, H. Z. Dou, G. W. He, Y. X. Ren, Y. T. Liu, Y. Z. Wu, S. Y. Wang, H. L. Ge, C. L. Zhong, Y. Chen and Z. Y. Jiang, Efficient ethylene/ethane separation through ionic liquid-confined covalent organic framework membranes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 5420–5429 RSC .
W. Qian, J. Texter and F. Yan, Frontiers in poly(ionic liquid)s: syntheses and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1124–1159 RSC .
J. Yuan, D. Mecerreyes and M. Antonietti, Poly(ionic liquid)s: An update, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1009–1036 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mecerreyes, Polymeric ionic liquids: Broadening the properties and applications of polyelectrolytes, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1629–1648 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Qiu, J. Li, H. N. Wu, Y. Huang, H. J. Guo, D. Gao, L. J. Shi and Q. Yi, One-pot non-covalent heterogenization and aromatization of poly(ionic liquids) for metal-/cocatalyst-free and atmospheric CO2 conversion, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 322, 122125 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yi, T. T. Liu, X. B. Wang, Y. Y. Shan, X. Y. Li, M. G. Ding, L. J. Shi, H. B. Zeng and Y. C. Wu, One-step multiple-site integration strategy for CO2 capture and conversion into cyclic carbonates under atmospheric and cocatalyst/metal/solvent-free conditions, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 283, 119620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, M. Fan, F. Zhang, Y. Xu, H. Tang, C. Huang and H. Zhang, Aminefunctionalized poly(ionic liquid) brushes for carbon dioxide adsorption, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 316, 903–910 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Q. Xu, Z. Zheng, S. Zhou, H. Mao, B. Wang and F. Yan, Intrinsically Antibacterial poly(ionic liquid) membranes: the synergistic effect of anions, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, M. Yin, A. P. Zhang, S. Prescher, M. Antonietti and J. Yuan, Hierarchically structured nanoporous poly(ionic liquid) membranes: facile preparation and application in fiber-optic pH sensing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5549–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Yuan and H. Wang, All-Poly (ionic Liquid) membrane-derived porous carbon membranes: scalable synthesis and application for photothermal conversion in seawater desalination, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11704–11710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Zhang, R. Semiat and X. Z. He, Recent advances in Poly(ionic liquids) membranes for CO2 separation, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 299, 121784 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zunita, R. Hastuti, A. Alamsyah, G. T. M. Kadja, K. Khoiruddin, K. A. Kurnia, B. Yuliarto and I. G. Wenten, Polyionic liquid membrane: Recent development and perspective, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2022, 113, 96–123 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Tang, Z. Y. Dong, X. W. Zhu and Q. Zhao, A poly(ionic liquid) complex membrane for pervaporation dehydration of acidic water-isopropanol mixtures, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 576, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, B. Tang and P. Wu, Preparation of a positively charged nanofiltration membrane based on hydrophilic–hydrophobic transformation of a poly(ionic liquid), J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12367–12376 RSC .
L. Yu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Zhang and J. Liu, High flux, positively charged loose nanofiltration membrane by blending with poly (ionic liquid) brushes grafted silica spheres, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 287, 373–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, J. Deng, H. Wang, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, Improved salts transportation of a positively charged loose nanofiltration membrane by introduction of poly(ionic liquid) functionalized hydrotalcite nanosheets, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 3292–3304 CrossRef CAS .
E. Radzyminska-Lenarcik and M. Ulewicz, Polymer inclusion membranes (PIMs) doped with alkylimidazole and their application in the separation of non-ferrous metal ions, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Elias, S. Díez and C. Fontàs, System for mercury preconcentration in natural waters based on a polymer inclusion membrane incorporating an ionic liquid, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 371, 316–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Liu, S. Li and L. Tang, 
            et al., Improved transport of gold(I) from aurocyanide solution using a green ionic liquid-based polymer inclusion membrane with in situ electrodeposition, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2020, 153, 136–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Güell, E. Anticó, S. D. Kolev, J. Benavente, V. Salvadó and C. Fontàs, Development and characterization of polymer inclusion membranes for the separation and speciation of inorganic as species, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 383, 88–95 CrossRef .
F. Sellami, O. Kebiche-Senhadji, S. Marais, N. Couvrat and K. Fatyeyeva, Polymer inclusion membranes based on CTA/PBAT blend containing Aliquat 336 as extractant for removal of Cr(VI): Efficiency, stability and selectivity, React. Funct. Polym., 2019, 139, 120–132 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. X. Liu, J. Wang, J. Gascon, J. S. Li and B. V. der Bruggen, Metal–organic frameworks based membranes for liquid separation, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7124–7144 RSC .
S.
S. Yuan, X. Li, J. Y. Zhu, G. Zhang, P. V. Puyvelde and B. V. der Bruggen, Covalent organic frameworks for membrane separation, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2665–2681 RSC .
D. Draaisma, Lithium: A doctor, a drug, and a breakthrough, Nature, 2019, 572, 584–585 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pasta, A. Battistel and F. L. Mantia, Batteries for lithium recovery from brines, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9487–9491 RSC .
A. Kumar, H. Fukuda, T. A. Hatton and J. H. Lienhard, Lithium recovery from oil and gas produced water: a need for a growing energy industry, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1471–1474 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Z. W. Zhao and L. H. He, Highly selective lithium recovery from high Mg/Li ratio brines, Desalination, 2020, 474, 114185 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. L. Ying, Y. Y. Mao, X. S. Peng and B. L. Chen, Polystyrene sulfonate threaded through a metal-organic framework membrane for fast and selective lithium-ion separation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15120–15124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. M. Chen, P. Y. Wan, K. Gasem, K. Y. Wang, T. He, H. Adidharma and M. H. Fan, Extraction of lithium with functionalized lithium ion-sieves, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 84, 276–313 CrossRef CAS .
B. Swain, Recovery and recycling of lithium: A review, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 172, 388–403 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Chen, Z. S. Chen, Z. W. Wei, J. Y. Hu, Y. F. Guo and T. L. Deng, Titanium-based ion sieve with enhanced post-separation ability for high performance lithium recovery from geothermal water, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 128320 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Chen, J. Y. Hu, S. J. Han, Y. F. Guo, N. Belzile and T. L. Deng, A review on emerging composite materials for cesium adsorption and environmental remediation on the latest decade, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 251, 117340 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khalil, S. Mohammed, R. Hashaikeh and N. Hilal, Lithium recovery from brine: Recent developments and challenges, Desalination, 2022, 528, 115611 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Gu, R. N. Zhang, S. Y. Zhang, B. B. Shi, J. H. Zhao, Z. Wang, M. Y. Long, G. Z. Wang, T. Qiu and Z. Y. Jiang, Quaternary ammonium engineered polyamide membrane with high positive charge density for efficient Li+/Mg2+ separation, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 659, 120802 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Wu, Y. K. Lin, W. Y. Feng, T. Y. Lin, L. Wang, H. Yao and X. L. Wang, A novel nanofiltration membrane with [MimAP][Tf2N] ionic liquid for utilization of lithium from brines with high Mg2+/Li+ ratio, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 603, 117997 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Peng and Q. Zhao, A nano-heterogeneous membrane for efficient separation of lithium from high magnesium/lithium ratio brine, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009430 CrossRef CAS .
F. Soyekwo, H. Wen, D. Liao and C. K. Liu, Nanofiltration membranes modified with a clustered multiquaternary ammonium-based ionic liquid for improved magnesium/lithium separation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 32420–32432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, H. W. Peng, H. Luo, Q. Zhang, Z. T. Liu and Q. Zhao, High performance Mg2+/Li+ separation membranes modified by a bis-quaternary ammonium salt, Desalination, 2022, 526, 115519 CrossRef CAS .
F. Soyekwo, H. Wen, D. Liao and C. K. Liu, Fouling-resistant ionic graft-polyamide nanofiltration membrane with improved permeance for lithium separation from MgCl2/LiCl mixtures, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 659, 120773 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zante, M. Boltoevaa, A. Masmoudia, R. Barillona and D. Trébouet, Lithium extraction from complex aqueous solutions using supported ionic liquid membranes, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 580, 62–76 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Wang, L. Chen, Y. S. Yan, J. Chen, J. D. Dai and X. H. Dai, Separation of adjacent heavy rare earth Lutetium(III) and Ytterbium(III) by task-specific ionic liquid Cyphos IL 104 embedded polymer inclusion membrane, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 610, 118263 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. N. Fajar, T. Hanada and M. Goto, Recovery of platinum group metals from a spent automotive catalyst using polymer inclusion membranes containing an ionic liquid carrier, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 629, 119296 CrossRef CAS .
I. Brekalo, W. Yuan, C. Mottillo, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, J. Casaban, K. Holman, S. James, F. Duarte, P. Williams, K. Harris and T. Frišcić, Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks and their derived materials for sequestration of radionuclides in the environment: a review, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 11, 2141–2147 CAS .
B. N. Bhadra, A. Vinu, C. Serre and S. H. Jhung, MOF-derived carbonaceous materials enriched with nitrogen: preparation and applications in adsorption and catalysis, Mater. Today, 2019, 25, 88–111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bolisetty and R. Mezzenga, Amyloid–carbon hybrid membranes for universal water purification, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 365–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Canivet, A. Fateeva, Y. Guo, B. Coasne and D. Farrusseng, Water adsorption in MOFs: fundamentals and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5594–5617 RSC .
Y. Huang, X. Zeng, L. Guo, J. Lan, L. Zhang and D. Cao, Heavy metal ion removal of wastewater by zeolite-imidazolate frameworks, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 194, 462–469 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zante, M. Boltoevaa, A. Masmoudia, R. Barillona and D. Trébouet, Selective separation of cobalt and nickel using a stable supported ionic liquid membrane, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 252, 117477 CrossRef CAS .
R. Malas, Y. Ibrahim, I. AlNashef, F. Banat and S. W. Hasan, Impregnation of polyethylene membranes with 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide ionic liquid for enhanced removal of Cd2+, Ni2+, and Zn2+ from aqueous solutions, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 318, 113981 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jean, D. Villemin, M. Hlaibi and L. Lebrun, Heavy metal ions extraction using new supported liquid membranes containing ionic liquid as carrier, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 201, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
H. I. Turgut, V. Eyupoglu, R. A. Kumbasar and I. Sisman, Alkyl chain length dependent Cr(VI) transport by polymer inclusion membrane using room temperature ionic liquids as carrier and PVDF-co-HFP as polymer matrix, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 175, 406–417 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Vázquez, V. Romero, C. Fontàs, E. Anticó and J. Benavente, Polymer inclusion membranes (PIMs) with the ionic liquid (IL) Aliquat 336 as extractant: Effect of base polymer and IL concentration on their physical–chemical and elastic characteristics, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 455, 312–319 CrossRef .
F. Sellami, O. Kebiche-Senhadjia, S. Maraisb, N. Couvratc and K. Fatyeyeva, Polymer inclusion membranes based on CTA/PBAT blend containing Aliquat 336 as extractant for removal of Cr(VI): Efficiency, stability and selectivity, React. Funct. Polym., 2019, 139, 120–132 CrossRef CAS .
P. Szczepanski, H. P. Guo, K. Dzieszkowsk, Z. Rafinski, A. Wola, K. Fatyeyeva, J. Kujawa and W. Kujawski, New reactive ionic liquids as carriers in polymer inclusion membranes for transport and separation of Cd(II), Cu(II), Pb(II), and Zn(II) ions from chloride aqueous solutions, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 638, 119674 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eliasa, S. Díezb and C. Fontàs, System for mercury preconcentration in natural waters based on a polymer inclusion membrane incorporating an ionic liquid, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 371, 316–322 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) N. S. Naik, M. Padaki, S. Deon and D. H. Murthy, Novel poly (ionic liquid)-based anion exchange membranes for efficient and rapid acid recovery from industrial waste, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 401, 126148 CrossRef ; 
  (b) N. S. Naik, M. Padaki, A. M. Isloor, K. K. Nagaraja and K. A. Vishnumurthy, Poly(ionic liquid)-Based charge and size selective loose nanofiltration membrane for molecular separation, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 418, 129372 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jean, D. Villemin, M. Hlaibi and L. Lebrun, Heavy metal ions extraction using new supported liquid membranes containing ionic liquid as carrier, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 201, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
H. Luo, H. W. Peng and Q. Zhao, High flux Mg2+/Li+ nanofiltration membranes prepared by surface modification of polyethylenimine thin film composite membranes, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 579, 152161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, W. Lai, L. L. Gong, L. Q. Xiao, G. S. Wang, L. L. Shan and S. J. Luo, Ionic liquid regulated interfacial polymerization process to improve acid-resistant nanofiltration membrane permeance, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 641, 119882 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Z. Y. Wang, Y. T. Wang, M. Liu, S. J. Li, L. H. Tang, S. X. Wang, X. J. Yang and S. P. Ji, Improved transport of gold(I) from aurocyanide solution using a green ionic liquid-based polymer inclusion membrane with in situ electrodeposition, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2020, 153, 136–145 CrossRef CAS .
B. Alcalde, E. Antico and C. Fontas, Fluoride removal from natural waters by polymer inclusion membranes, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 644, 120161 CAS .
N. L. Mai, S. H. Kim, S. H. Ha, H. S. Shin and Y.-M. Koo, Selective recovery of acetone-butanol-ethanol from aqueous mixture by pervaporation using immobilized ionic liquid polydimethylsiloxane membrane, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2013, 30, 1804–1809 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rdzanek, S. Heitmann, A. Górak and W. Kamiński, Application of supported ionic liquid membranes (SILMs) for biobutanol pervaporation, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 155, 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, W. Sun, J. Liu, W. Zhang and Z. Ren, Extraction separation of toluene/cyclohexane with hollow fiber supported ionic liquid membrane, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2014, 31, 1049–1056 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamaz, R. J. Vogler, M. Jebur, A. Senguptaa and R. Wickramasinghe, π Electron induced separation of organic compounds using supported ionic liquid membranes, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 236, 116237 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Molina-Fernández, J. Estager, J.-C. M. Monbaliu, D. P. Debecker and P. Luis, Supported ionic liquid membranes for the separation of methanol/dimethyl carbonate mixtures by pervaporation, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 598, 117790 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xi, Y. Lu, X. Ai, L. Tang, L. Yao, W. Hao and P. Cui, Ionic liquid copolymerized polyurethane membranes for pervaporation separation of benzene/cyclohexane mixtures, Polymer, 2019, 185, 121948 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsumoto, A. Panigrahi, Y. Murakami and K. Kondo, Effect of ammonium- and phosphonium-based ionic liquids on the separation of lactic acid by supported ionic liquid membranes (SILMs), Membranes, 2011, 1, 98–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Pilli, T. Banerjee and K. Mohanty, Performance of different ionic liquids to remove phenol from aqueous solutions using supported liquid membrane, Desalin. Water Treat., 2014, 54, 3062–3072 CrossRef .
R. Fortunato, M. J. Gonzalez-Munoz, M. Kubasiewicz, S. Luque, J. R. Alvarez, C. A. M. Afonso, I. M. Coelhoso and J. G. Crespo, Liquid membranes using ionic liquids: the influence of water on solute transport, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 249, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Liu, S. H. Xiong, L. B. Zeng, C. Y. Cai, F. F. Li and Z. J. Tian, Two birds with one stone: Porous poly(ionic liquids) membrane with high efficiency for the separation of amino acids mixture and its antibacterial properties, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 548, 866–874 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Panigrahi, S. R. Pilli and K. Mohanty, Selective separation of Bisphenol A from aqueous solution using supported ionic liquid membrane, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 107, 70–78 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, J. S. Zhang, L. R. Zhang, G. R. Cheng, B. H. Chen, Y. Y. Zhang and G. H. Gao, Poly(ionic liquid)-Coated Meshes with Opposite Wettability for Continuous Oil/Water Separation, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 6672–6680 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, The Future of Seawater Desalination: Energy, Technology, and the Environment, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Lin, H. Y. Zhao, L. P. Zhu, T. He, S. F. Chen, C. J. Cao and L. Zhang, Seawater desalination technology and engineering in China: A review, Desalination, 2021, 498, 114728 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Peng, Q. Q. Tang, S. H. Tang, J. Gong and Q. Zhao, Surface modified polyamide nanofiltration membranes with high permeability and stability, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 592, 117386 CrossRef .
R. S. Zambare, X. X. Song, S. Bhuvana, C. Y. Tang, J. S. A. Prince and P. R. Nemade, Ionic Liquid-Reduced Graphene Oxide Membrane with Enhanced Stability for Water Purification, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 43339–43353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, X. Xie, R. S. Zambare, A. P. J. Selvaraj, B. N. Sowrirajalu, X. Song, C. Y. Tang and C. Gao, Functionalized graphene oxide modified polyethersulfone membranes for low-pressure anionic dye/salt Fractionation, Polymer, 2018, 10, 795 Search PubMed .
H. F. Xiao, C. H. Chu, W. T. Xu, B. Z. Che, X. H. Ju, W. H. Xing and S. P. Sun, Amphibian-inspired amino acid ionic liquid functionalized nanofiltration membranes with high water permeability and ion selectivity for pigment wastewater treatment, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 586, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Yuan and H. Wang, All-poly(ionic liquid) membrane-derived porous carbon membranes: Scalable synthesis and application for photothermal conversion in seawater desalination, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11704–11710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sajjad, M. A. Gilani, A. S. Nizami, M. R. Bilad and A. L. Khan, Development of novel hydrophilic ionic liquid membranes for the recovery of biobutanol through pervaporation, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 251, 109618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kohoutová, A. Sikora, Š. Hovorka, A. Randová, J. Schauer, M. Tišma, K. Setničková, R. Petričkovič, S. Guernik, N. Greenspoon and P. Izák, Influence of ionic liquid content on properties of dense polymer membranes, Eur. Polym. J., 2009, 45, 813–819 CrossRef .
M. Matsumoto, Y. Murakami and K. Kondo, Separation of 1-butanol by pervaporation using polymer inclusion membranes containing ionic liquids, Solvent Extr. Res. Dev., Jpn., 2011, 18, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abejón, J. Rabadán, A. Garea and A. Irabien, Comparison of supported ionic liquid membranes and polymeric ultrafiltration and nanofiltration membranes for separation of lignin and monosaccharides, Membranes, 2020, 10, 29 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Abejón, J. Rabadán, S. Lanza, A. Abejón, A. Garea and A. Irabien, Supported ionic liquid membranes for separation of lignin aqueous solutions, Processes, 2018, 6, 143 CrossRef .
M. Matsumoto, W. Hasegawa, K. Kondo, T. Shimamura and M. Tsuji, Application of supported ionic liquid membranes using a flat sheet and hollow fibers to lactic acid recovery, Desalin. Water Treat., 2010, 14, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .

          V. S. Kislik, Liquid Membranes principles and applications in chemical separations and wastewater treatment, Elsevier B.V., Oxford, UK,  2010, ISBN: 978-0-444-53218-3 Search PubMed .
Y. X. Ni, H. W. Peng and Q. Zhao, Ultrathin poly(ionic liquid) nanomembranes for high performance Mg2+/Li+ separation, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 9, 2201797 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Chen, P. Li and T. S. Chung, PVDF/ionic liquid polymer blends with superior separation performance for removing CO2 from hydrogen and flue gas, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 11796–11804 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Jansen, G. Clarizia, P. Bernardo, F. Bazzarelli, K. Friess, A. Randova, J. Schauer, D. Kubicka, M. Kacirkova and P. Izak, Gas transport properties and pervaporation performance of fluoropolymer gel membranes based on pure and mixed ionic liquids, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 109, 87–97 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kasahara, E. Kamio, A. Yoshizumi and H. Matsuyama, Polymeric ion-gels containing an amino acid ionic liquid for facilitated CO2 transport media, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2996–2999 RSC .
B. Mi, Graphene oxide membranes for ionic and molecular sieving, Science, 2014, 343, 740–742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Bowen and J. S. Welfoot, Modelling the performance of membrane nanofiltration-critical assessment and model development, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2002, 57, 1121–1137 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tan, S. Chen, X. Peng, L. Zhang and C. Gao, Polyamide membranes with nanoscale turning structures for water purification, Science, 2018, 360, 518–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Labban, C. Liu, T. H. Chong and J. H. Lienhard, Fundamentals of low-pressure nanofiltration: membrane characterization, modeling, and understanding the multi-ionic interactions in water softening, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 521, 18–32 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Qiu, L. F. Fang, Y. J. Shen, W. H. Yu, B. K. Zhu, C. H. Nielsen and W. J. Zhang, Ionic dendrimer based polyamide membranes for ion separation, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7522–7535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Zhu, C. Liu, K. R. Lee, W. S. Hung, Z. Wang, Y. Li, M. Elimelech, J. Jin and S. Lin, Polyamide nanofiltration membrane with highly uniform sub-nanometre pores for sub-1 Å precision separation, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zante, M. Boltoeva, A. Masmoudi, R. Barillon and D. Trébouet, Supported ionic liquid and polymer inclusion membranes for metal separation, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2022, 51, 100–116 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pospiech, Facilitated transport of palladium(II) across polymer inclusion membrane with ammonium ionic liquid as effective carrier, Chem. Pap., 2018, 72, 301–308 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The versatile applications of ILMs in different fields.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The surface modification process of PA membranes by AMIB, (b) the nanofiltration performance of initial and modified membranes, (c) pore size distribution of PIP-TMC and PIP-TMC-AMIB TFCMs, (d) synthesis of the QBPD membrane,59 (e) effect of pressure on the performance of PEI and QBPD membranes, and (f and g) cross-section and surface images of PEI and QBPD membranes.60	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The schematic illustration of GO, pGO, iGO nanosheets, and PE-GO membranes,61 (b) the formation process of IL-TiO2.62	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Synthesis of VImBr, PCMVImBr and schematic preparation of the PILC membranes, (b and c) SEM and AFM images of PILC membrane, (d) dynamic water contact angle of CMCNa, PCMVImBr, and PILC membranes,76 (e) the formation mechanism of the preparation process of PIL/PSf and (f) AFM and TEM images of PIL/PSf.77	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The fabrication for SiO2-PIL/PES hybrid membrane, (b) effect of SiO2-PIL content on the removal performance for target substances,78 (c) the process of the fabrication for mHT mixed PES NF membrane, (d–g) SEM images of the unfilled PES membrane.79	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The schematic diagram of PIM in metal ion separation and (b) the separation process using electrically driven PIMs.80–82	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The preparation process of [MimAP][Tf2N]-PA/PAN NF membrane and application in Li+ recovery, (b) the separation performance of the published work, commercial NF membranes and NF-IL membranes,99 (c) the absorption and transport of H2O and hydrated ions through DAIB membranes, (d) the two-step nanofiltration process developed and (e) Li+ flux and Mg2+/Li+ in the permeate of the 1st and 2nd nanofiltration.100	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The heavy metal removal performance of the PE and PE/[BMIM][DCA] SILM,111 (b) proposed mechanism of cobalt transport across the [P66614][Cl]-based SILM, and (c) interaction of heavy metals with the PE/[BMIM][DCA] SILM.112	 



SILMs	PVDF	[C4mim][NTf2]	Li	
P = 12 × 10−7 m s−1	
103

PVDF	[P66614][Cl]	Co, Ni	
R
Co = 86%, SF = 218	
111

PE	[BMIM][DCA]	Cd, Ni, Zn	
R
Cd = 52.87%, RNi = 51.47% RZn = 68.05%	
112

PVDF	iOMim D2EHP	Hg, Cd, Cr	
P = 40.3 × 10−7 cm2 s−1, R = 35%	
120

ILPMs	PA	DHTAB	Li/Mg	
S
F = 60.1	
95

PA	[MimAP]Tf2N	Li/Mg	
P = 5.7 LMH, SF = 9.57	
96

PEI	QEDTP	Li/Mg	
P = 126.9 LMH, SF = 15.6	
111

PES	TQAIL	Li/Mg	
P = 26.11 LMH, SF = 23.17	
112

PEI	HMTAB	Li/Mg	
P = 97.9 LMH, SF = 10.1	
121

PEI	[AEMIm][Cl]	Y	
P = 79.1 LMH, R = 97.5%	
122

PES	VBImBF4	Cd	
q
e = 187.3 mg g−1	
58

PILMs	ACA-ACN	VBImBr	H	
F = 7.3 m h−1	
119a

PVDF	[A336][SCN]	Au	
R = 96.4%	
123

ILPIMs	CTA	Aliquat 336	F	
R = 85%, F = 2.3 × 10−6 mol m−2 s−1	
124

PVDF	Cyphos IL 104	Yb, Lu	
P = 156 μm s−1 (Yb), 114.82 μm s−1 (Lu) qe = 19.22 mg g−1 (Yb), 20.53 mg g−1 (Lu)	
104

PVDF	P88812Cl	Pt, Pd, Rh	
R
Pt, Pd = 90%, RRh = 67%	
105

CTA	RILC8_Br	Cu, Pb, Zn	
F = 2.7 × 10−10 mol cm−2 s−1	
117

CTA	TOMATS	Hg	—	
118


 	Fig. 9  (a) The process and mechanism of the PIL/PSf membrane for dye removal, (b) separation efficiency and flux of CR over MO by the PIL/PSf membrane,119b (c) the process for PILMs fabrication by photopolymerization, and the application in oil/water separation, (d and e) separation efficiency of PILM-1 and PILM-5 in oil/water mixtures.136	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) ATR-FTIR spectra, (b) N 1s spectrum, (c) water flux and (d) salt rejection of PIP-TMC-QAEP and PIP-TMC membrane, (e and f) AFM images of PIP-TMC and PIP-TMC-QAEP,59 (g) the modification process of PIP-TMC and PIP-TMC-QAEP membranes.139	 

 	Fig. 11  The factors affecting the stability of ILMs.	 

 	Fig. 12  The DSPM-DE model used for the prediction of the transport of the substances across the selective layers of the membrane.	 
TMC	1,3,5-Trimesoyl chloride
ABE	Acetone, butanol, and ethanol
ACA	Acrylic acid
ACN	Acrylonitrile

q
e
	Adsorption capacity
ATRP	Atom transfer radical polymerization
QEDTP	Bis-quaternary ammonium salt
CCUS	Carbon capture, utilization and storage
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
CTA	Cellulose triacetate
COFs	Covalent organic frameworks
DMC	Dimethyl carbonate
ED	Electrodialysis

F
	Flux
FO	Forward osmosis
GO	Graphene oxide
HT	Hydrotalcite
ILMs	IL-based membranes
ILMMMs	Ionic liquid composited mixed matrix membranes
ILPIMs	Ionic liquid polymer inclusion membranes
ILs	Ionic liquids
ILGMs	Ionic liquids gel membrane
ILPMs	Ionic liquids-polymer membranes
MOFs	Metal organic frameworks
MF	Microfiltration
NF	Nanofiltration

P
	Permeability coefficients
PV	Pervaporation
PIP	Piperazine
PEI	Poly(ethyleneimine)
PES	Poly(ether sulfone)
PILs	Poly(ionic liquid)s
PILMs	Poly(ionic liquid)s membranes
PVDF	Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
PAN	Polyacrylonitrile
PA	Polyamide
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PILC	Poly(ionic liquid)s composite
[MimAP][Tf2N]	ILs 1-(3-aminopropyl)-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
pr[mim]2[Tf2N]2	1,3-Di(3-methylimidazolium)propane bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
h[mim]2[Tf2N]2	1,6-Di(3-methylimidazolium)hexane bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
AMIB	1-Aminoethyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide
[AEMIm][Tf2N]	1-Aminopropyl-3-methylimidazolium bis((trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl)imide
[AEMIm][Cl]	1-Aminopropyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride
[BMIM][NTf2]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
[BMIM][Cl]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride
[BMIM][DCA]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium dicyanamide
[BMIM][BF4]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[BMIM][BF4]	1-Benzyl-3-butylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[BMIM][DBP]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium dibutylphosphate
VImBr	1-Cyanomethyl-1-vinylimidazolium bromide
[EMIM][Tf2N]	1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis((trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl)imide
[EMIM][BF4]	1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
Im6,1 tcb	1-Hexyl-3-methylimidazolium tetracyanoborate
[OMIM][Tf2N]	1-Octyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
VBImBF4	1-Vinyl-3-butyl imidazolium tetrafluoroborate
DHTAB	3,5-Dimethylhydrazide-benzyl trimethyl ammonium bromide
DAIB	Diaminoethimidazole bromide
DABIL	
N
1-(6-Aminohexyl)-N1,N1,N6,N6,N6-pentamethylhexane-1,6-diaminium bromide ionic liquid
[BPy][BF4]	
N-Butylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate
PCMVImBr	Poly[1-cyanomethyl-3-vinylimidazolium bromide]
P66614Cl	tri(hexyl)tetradecyl phosphonium chloride
Aliquat 336	Tricaprylmethylammonium chloride
P6,6,6,14 tcb	Trihexyl (tetradecyl) phosphonium tetracyanoborate
P88812Cl	Trioctyl(dodecyl) phosphonium chloride
TQAIL	Triquaternary ammonium-based ionic liquid

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
