Progress in theoretical and experimental investigation on seawater electrolysis: opportunities and challenges  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE01347E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01347E
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 5915-5945Progress in theoretical and experimental investigation on seawater electrolysis: opportunities and challenges

        
          
            Saikat 
            Bolar
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Subhasis 
            Shit
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Naresh 
            Chandra Murmu
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Tapas 
            Kuila
          
          
        
      *ab
aSurface Engineering & Tribology Division, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur, 713209, India. E-mail: tkuila@gmail.com
bAcademy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, 201002, India
Received 
      1st September 2021
    , Accepted 12th October 2021First published on 12th October 2021AbstractHydrogen energy is considered as an renewable and interminable source to combat the present energy crises and it is capable of balancing the environmental impact due to the extensive use of fossil fuels. Hydrogen production emerges as a contemporary technique to get rid of this energy crises and environmental issues. This review focuses on the clean/fresh-water electrolysis and its commercialization aspects. Seawater is a great source of water that can be used for electrolysis as a substitute of clean water. Several issues impede the widespread use of seawater electrolysis as the substitute of fresh water. In this review, an extensive discussion on theoretical and experimental investigations has been presented to explore the most effective pathway to achieve the highest performance of seawater electrolysis. The basic parameters such as pH of seawater, use of buffer solution over the electrolyte, applied potential, effect of dissolved ions, and nature of electrocatalyst are systematically studied to explore the most effective route for direct seawater electrolysis. The overview of this article offers a through understanding of the existing shortcomings and the possible way out related to seawater electrolysis for the benefit of mankind.Saikat BolarSaikat Bolar completed his BSc in Chemistry from University of Burdwan, in 2013. He received his MSc in Chemistry from Sidho-Kanho-Birsha University, in 2015. He qualified the NET (National Level Eligibility Test) conducted by CSIR, New Delhi. He is currently pursuing his PhD from the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR) in Chemical Sciences under the supervision of Dr Tapas Kuila and Dr Pranab Samanta at the Surface Engineering & Tribology Division, CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur, India. Currently, he is working on transition metal dichalcogenide-based electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction in different pH media.Subhasis ShitSubhasis Shit is currently pursuing PhD in Chemical Sciences under the supervision of Dr Tapas Kuila and Dr Naresh Chandra Murmu at the Surface Engineering & Tribology Division, CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur, India. He completed his BSc in Chemistry from University of Burdwan, West Bengal, India, in 2014. He received his MSc in Chemistry from University of North Bengal, West Bengal, India, in 2016. His research interest includes the development of transition metal-based and carbon-based materials with potential target application in electrochemical water splitting.Naresh Chandra MurmuDr Naresh Chandra Murmu is working as Senior Principal Scientist in CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur since 2003. Previously, he was a Scientist in the National Aerospace Laboratories, Bangalore, for 9 years. He received his B.E. from Calcutta University in 1992, M.E. from IISc Bangalore in 1994, and PhD in Mechanical Engineering from IIT (BHU), Varanasi in 2010. Dr Murmu is working in the areas of graphene supercapacitor, graphene/epoxy composite, graphene lubricant, electrocatalytic water splitting, and graphene-enhanced phase change materials.Tapas KuilaDr. Tapas Kuila is working as Senior Scientist at CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur, India. Dr Kuila completed his PhD in Chemistry from Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur in 2009. Then, he moved to Chonbuk National University, South Korea for postdoctoral study. Dr Kuila is working in the areas of graphene supercapacitor, graphene/epoxy composite, graphene lubricant, electrocatalytic water splitting, and graphene-enhanced phase change materials.
1. Introduction
The rapid depletion of fossil fuel is alarming for the future global energy crisis.1 Therefore, the search for eco-friendly and enduring energy sources is a challenging task to the scientific community.1–3 Hydrogen (H2) is one of the most promising green and efficient energy resources, having a high gravimetric energy density of 120 kJ g−1.4 Therefore, hydrogen production technology is very important to fulfil the ever increasing demand of energy and carbon footprint reduction.5 In 1972, J. Bockris introduced the term ‘Hydrogen Economy’, which refers to the vision of using hydrogen as a carbon free fuel to replace fossil fuels.6 Although hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe, its generation at room temperature is a challenging task.3–6 Presently, ∼96% of hydrogen is produced from fossil fuel via carbon intensive processes and ∼4% is produced from water electrolysis.7–9 Therefore, more thrust should be given on hydrogen production by the water electrolysis technology. Water splitting is an encouraging approach that produces H2 and O2 through the electrocatalytic or photocatalytic pathway.5–9 Several hydrogen production techniques such as the electrolysis of alkaline liquid electrolyte, solid oxide electrolysis, proton exchange membrane electrolysis, and anion exchange membrane electrolysis were acquired based on the electrocatalytic method.10–12 These electrolyzers involve two basic processes, namely, hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), at the respective electrodes. Recently, the solar-driven water-splitting process has attracted more attention worldwide. Generally, the water electrolysis processes are carried out with fresh water. About 3% of water on the earth is fresh water, of which ∼2.5% is unusable. In particular, fresh/clean water is directly used to meet our daily requirements. Therefore, the extensive use of fresh water for hydrogen production would put drastic pressure on useable water resources. On the contrary, seawater is the most abundant source on earth (96.5%); thus, it should be utilized to grow the world hydrogen economy.13–17 Hence, the preferential use of seawater for H2 production through the electrocatalytic method is extremely overwhelming. The preliminary work on seawater splitting was carried out in 1980.18 At present, several research groups are involved in hydrogen production from seawater by electrocatalytic or photocatalytic methods.5–9 The unlimited water resource near the coastal area could be considered as the ideal region for electrocatalytic or photocatalytic hydrogen production utilizing different renewable energy sources such as photovoltaic electricity and wind powder-based electricity. However, seawater electrolysis is more complicated than fresh/clean water electrolysis.
Seawater contains different ionic salts (alkali and alkaline earth metal salts), organic moiety, and microorganisms, which trouble the preferential use of seawater as an electrolyzer. Therefore, the competition within the dissolved ions toward the respective electrode impede the preferential use of seawater as an electrolyte.9,16 The chemical composition of seawater is region-specific and the concentration of ions is ∼3.5% at pH 8 (Table 1).19–22 Similar to the electrocatalytic process, photocatalytic seawater splitting is also affected by the dissolved ions, organic species, and microorganisms as they deactivate the active catalyst as well as the photogenerated carriers.9,19 Therefore, the three foremost catalytic properties such as activity, selectivity, and durability of the electrocatalytic and photocatalytic processes are hindered for seawater splitting. Moreover, the challenges in the scaled-up production of hydrogen via seawater splitting should be explored. In order to achieve the highest catalytic performance and overcome the shortcomings related to seawater electrolysis, a more detailed discussion based on theoretical and experimental investigation should be critically reviewed. The development and commercialization of seawater electrolyzer are emerging to combat the energy crisis scenario. It is high time to obtain enough knowledge about the various types of electrolyzers, opportunities, and challenges related to seawater electrolysis. Therefore, the present review emphasizes on the recent progress on electrocatalytic seawater splitting based on its mechanistic insight, performance of the developed electrocatalysts, effect of pH at the respective electrode, different necessary and sufficient (customized) conditions to obtain the highest catalytic activity, and the future scope, which compel us to focus in this emerging field. The aim of this review is entirely dependent on the progress of the comprehensive understanding and selection of the appropriate electrocatalyst for OER and HER by seawater electrolysis. Therefore, the overview of the article may assist in overcoming the challenges and shortcomings related to seawater electrolysis from the perspective of experimental and theoretical investigation.
Table 1 Different chemical components and their concentration in seawater (ppm and percentage unit)




Chemical component
Concentration in ppma
Concentration in %b





a ppm = parts per million.
b % = percentage.





Cl−
∼20057.9
∼2.01


Br−
∼69.5
∼0.01


SO42−
∼2811.7
∼0.28


F−
∼1.3
∼0


HCO3−
∼111.7
∼0.01


CO32−
∼16.2
∼0


OH−
∼0.2
∼0


B(OH)4−
∼7.9
∼0


Na+
∼11176.8
∼1.12


K+
∼413.7
∼0.04


Mg2+
∼1330.7
∼0.13


Ca2+
∼426.8
∼0.04


Sr2+
∼7.9
∼0


Al3+
0.16–1.9
∼0




2. Electrocatalytic opportunities and challenges
2.1 Mechanism of anodic and cathodic process over the electrode surface
Electrocatalytic water splitting is a thermodynamically uphill chemical process with the measured Gibbs free energy of ∼237.2 kJ mol−1. Therefore, an external energy is required to make it thermodynamically favorable.23 A theoretical potential value of 1.23 V is required to carry out the overall water splitting process.5,23 The process consists of two half-reactions, namely, hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). The individual reactions occur simultaneously at the cathode (HER process) and anode (OER process) compartments of the electrolyzer cell. Cathodic HER is a two-electron transfer process with the production of molecular hydrogen. The OER at the anode is a multi-electron transfer process that involves several intermediate species. It progresses with the removal of four protons from the intermediate species for the production of each molecular oxygen. The overpotential is the excess potential than the thermodynamic value of 1.23 V to carry out the overall water splitting.24 The water-splitting process can be followed through different pH environments, as described by the following eqn (1)–(4).
In alkaline pH medium (1) (2)
In acidic pH medium (3) (4) E° = 1.23 VSHE = 1.23 V − 0.059pH(5)
Water splitting in acidic and alkaline pH is reported in the literature.5,23,24 The OER process is favorable in the alkaline medium due to the availability of OH− ions, whereas the HER is more practical in acidic pH. The four-electron transfer OER process is kinetically sluggish irrespective of the nature of the electrolyte. Nevertheless, the nature of the electrolyte plays a key role in the electrocatalytic water splitting process. Moreover, seawater splitting becomes more challenging with the increase in the dissolved ions involved in competition with the H+ and OH− species toward the corresponding electrode during the electrolysis process. In this context, optimized kinetic and thermodynamic parameters along with the mechanistic pathway of the electrocatalyst should be taken into consideration for the selective anodic and cathodic processes at different electrolyte medium. The standard reduction potential (SRP) values suggested that the anodic process is complicated than the cathodic one due to the presence of competitive ions in seawater (Tables 1 and 2). The presence of different dissolved ions influences the performance of the electrocatalyst. The SRP values of different dissolved ions prevent the facial progress of the water-splitting process in seawater (Table 2).25,26 The SRP values and different concentrations of the dissolved ions in seawater play a vital role in the electrolysis process. The optimized electrical parameters are considered to achieve the highest catalytic performance. It is observed from the SRP values that hydrogen can be produced from seawater through direct electrolysis. Williams et al. showed that chlorine (Cl2) evolution predominates over the desired oxygen evolution at the carbon (anode) electrode setup. The OER is dominating over CER, only when the current density achieved is >90 mA cm−2.27 Therefore, it is very difficult to determine the efficiency of the two competitive anodic reactions using conventional instrumental techniques. A series of experiments by Bennett et al. in seawater electrolysis confirmed that certain variable parameters influence the faradaic efficiency of CER and OER for a specific electrode.18 A typical faradaic current efficiency curve represents the chlorine production using different electrode materials (Fig. 1a). The relative efficiency of CER and OER is determined by the extrapolation of each curve back to the zero chlorine concentration (Cl−, ClO−, and chlorite ClO2−). The electrochemical oxidation and reduction of ClO− ions is considered to be the foremost accountable factor for lowering the chlorine efficiency (Table 2) in seawater electrolysis. The chlorine evolution efficiency depends on the diffusion limit current and sweater salinity. However, at higher chlorine concentration, the efficiency is found to be decreased with increasing reduction of cathodic hypochlorite (ClO−). These are two primary conditions for successful OER from seawater electrolysis. In this regard, oxygen evolution is expected to occur at very low current density, especially <1 mA cm−2 from the anode counterpart in the presence of chloride ions (Cl−) (Fig. 1b). This achievement is practically impossible due to the requirement of large sized electrodes. The OER process is predominant over CER when the current density reaches above the limiting current for chlorine formation. Moreover, the proposed pathway is not feasible as the IR (ohmic potential) drop, heating, and power consumption is very high at such high current density values in the range of 100–1000 mA cm−2. To get rid of this series of problem, it is necessary to design anode materials that are kinetically active for OER at a moderate current density, which make the overall electrolysis process economically and environmentally feasible.18,27 In this consequence, critical thermodynamic and kinetic considerations are compulsory to recognize the selective anodic reaction electrocatalyst. An in-depth understanding of the experimental kinetic data in the form of free energy diagram facilitates the critical assessment and validation of the computational free energy values obtained for OER and CER over the state-of-the-art electrocatalyst, the RuO2 surface (110). The anodic oxidation of brine water over the RuO2 surface encounters two simultaneous processes, namely, the thermodynamically stable OER (equilibrium potential U° = 1.23 V) and the kinetically facile CER (equilibrium potential U° = 1.36 V) process.
Table 2 Standard Reduction Potential (SRP) of different ions in seawater at acidic and alkaline pH environments




Moiety
Reaction at pH = 0



 (V)
Reaction at pH = 14





Reda ⇔ Oxb
Reduction ⇔ oxidation





a Reduction = Red.
b Oxidation = Ox.
c SHE = standard hydrogen electrode.





K+
K ⇔ K+ + e−
−2.931
K ⇔ K+ + e−
−2.931


Sr2+
Sr ⇔ Sr2+ + 2e−
−2.899
Sr ⇔ Sr2+ + 2e−
−2.899


Ca2+
Ca ⇔ Ca2+ + 2e−
−2.868
Ca ⇔ Ca2+ + 2e−
−2.868


Na+
Na ⇔ Na+ + e−
−2.71
Na ⇔ Na+ + e−
−2.71


Mg2+
Mg ⇔ Mg2+ + 2e−
−2.372
Mg ⇔ Mg2+ + 2e
−2.372


H+
H2 ⇔ 2H+ + 2e−
0
4OH− ⇔ O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
—


OH−
—
—
4OH− ⇔ O2 + 2H2O + 4e−
0.401


H2O
2H2O ⇔ O2 + 4H+ + 4e−
1.229
1/2H2 + 2OH− ⇔ H2O + 2e−
−0.828


F−
2F− ⇔ F2 + 2e−
2.866
2F− ⇔ F2 + 2e−
2.866


Cl−
2Cl− ⇔ Cl2 + 2e−
1.358
Cl− + 4OH− ⇔ ClO2− + 2H2O + 4e−
0.76


Cl− + 4H2O ⇔ ClO4− + 8H+ + 8e−
1.389
Cl− + 2OH− ⇔ ClO− + H2O + 2e−
0.81


Cl− + 3H2O ⇔ ClO3− + 6H+ + 6e−
1.451
2Cl− ⇔ Cl2− + 2e−
1.358


Cl− + H2O ⇔ HClO + H+ + 2e−
1.482






Cl− + 2H2O ⇔ HClO2 + 3H+ + 4e−
1.570






SO42−
S2O62− + 2H2O ⇔ 2SO42− + 4H+ + 2e−
−0.22
SO32− + 2OH−⇔SO42− + H2O + 2e−
−0.93


H2SO3 + H2O ⇔ SO42− + 4H+ + 2e−
0.172
2SO42− ⇔ S2O82− + 2e−
2.010


2SO42− ⇔ S2O82− + 2e−
2.010








 Fig. 1  (a) Current efficiency vs. chlorine concentration in seawater; (b) log current vs. voltage for chlorine and oxygen in seawater (reproduced with permission from ref. 18 copyright© 1980 published by Elsevier Ltd). (c) Top view of the (110) surfaces of the rutile-structured RuO2 and IrO2 where Ocus and Olat denote the active sites on which AEM and LOM are examined; (d) free energy diagrams for OER via AEM (solid red line) and LOM (dashed blue line) for RuO2(110); (e) free energy diagrams for OER via AEM (solid red line) and LOM (dashed blueline) for IrO2 (110) (reproduced with permission from ref. 31 copyright© 2018, American Chemical Society). (f) Cyclic voltammogram recorded on Pt (reproduced with permission from ref. 60 copyright© 2019 The Authors). (g) Arrhenius plot for Pt (110) (circle), Pt (100) (square), and Pt (111) obtained by cyclic voltammetry (reproduced with permission from ref. 52 copyright© 2006 Elsevier B. V.). (h) The mechanism of hydrogen evolution on the surface of an electrode in acidic and alkaline medium. 
The two-electron transfer CER (chloro-alkali process) is kinetically faster than the OER process.28,29 The catalytic performance of four electron transfer OER on noble metal oxide (MO2) depends on the adsorption ability of the reaction intermediates over the surface of the electrocatalyst, which predicts the reaction energy barriers in overall OER kinetics.30 The nature of the d-band of the metal active sites and the O 2p band of the reaction intermediates has a pronounced effect on the OER performance of the electrocatalyst. The literature study shows that in comparison to the (211) plane, the (110) plane of metal oxides such as IrO2, TiO2, and RuO2 are considered to be the most active planes for OER (Fig. 1c).31 More specifically, the (110) crystal plane of RuO2 is composed of co-ordinately unsaturated Ru sites (Rucus) capped with on-top oxygen (Oot) and bridging oxygen Obr, partially saturated with hydrogen as OHbr.32 The oxidation state (O. S.) of the metal ions varies from 3 to 7 as energetically favorable adsorbates formed in each step of water dissociation for OER.33 The change in the O. S. is considered as proton desorption while the water dissociation–adsorption hardly alter the nominal O. S. of the electrocatalyst (considering all bond ionic). The 1st dissociation step over the metal oxide-based electrode is exothermic with the formation of the O* phase.33 The second water dissociation occurs on the *O phase, forming *OOH on the Mcus and *H on the Obr sites, which is exothermic for RuO2 but endothermic for IrO2 and RuO2@IrO2, respectively.33 The theoretical and experimental calculation for the free energy diagram confirmed that the metal oxides are the most active electrocatalyst, which follow through the O–O bond formation via sequential water dissociative adsorption on the metal site. For OER-active electrode surface, the originated O* phase should have sufficient stability on the electrode surface at low overpotential and should be reactive, which forms O–O bond with the water-dissociated adsorbed O. The *O is formed for the OER electrocatalyst after the 2nd water dissociation step should be stable at low overpotentials and reactive enough with the adsorbed O in forming the O–O bond. Therefore, the OER activities of IrO2 and RuO2@IrO2 are limited within the formation of the O adsorbed phase, while the OOH formation on adsorbed O limits the reaction rate on RuO2.33 The modified OER mechanism proposed a conventional pathway for the RuO2 (110) surface, which consists of concerted proton–electron transfer over the Rucus active site, resulting in the formation of –O, –OH, and –OOH intermediates. Deprotonating the –OH groups present in the uncoordinated or bridging Ru sites and oxygen release is considered as the rate-limiting step for the anodic process.33–37 In addition, the binding of oxygenated species on RuO2 (110) from the surface precursor –OO species for molecular oxygen released during water electrolysis. The Rucus site density on the surface of the RuO2 (110) plane specifically monitors the OER performance.34–37 Atomistic thermodynamic approach demonstrated that the OER reaction barrier over the RuO2 (110) surface can be significantly reduced by lowering the adsorption free energy of oxygen on the catalytically active Rucus. The catalytic activity of RuO2 can be modified by tuning the catalytically active Rucus sites by substituting the attached O atoms at the surface by other anionic moiety or substituting underneath the Ru atoms (Ru2f) with other transition metal atoms due to the decrease in the Rucus–Oot bond strength, resulting the decrease in the thermodynamic control reaction barrier.32,38 Theoretical studies carried out by Halck35et al. and Chen et al. showed that the oxygen-bound sites (Obr) effectively participate in the reaction mechanism as a proton donor/acceptor in the OER process over the RuO2 surface. The OER activity truly depends on the adsorbates evolution mechanism (AEM) and lattice-oxygen participation mechanism (LOM) (Fig. 1c–e) as evidenced from the OER process for RuO2/IrO2 system. The calculated Gibbs free energy value can be altered depending on the two plausible OER mechanisms occurring over the specific MO2-based surface (Fig. 1d and e).31 The OER on the MO2 surface progress at the coordinatively undersaturated site (Ocus) in case of AEM and at the lattice site (Olat) in case of LOM. The Gibbs free energy value suggests that the predominant OER mechanism depends on the nature of the electrocatalyst and the corresponding active crystal plane.31 For the coupled electron–proton transfer in the OER, the reaction mechanism is broadly progressed along the Rucus rows, i.e., the 1st coordination shell. Hence, the OER process over the MO2 surface proceeds through the following eqn (6)–(9).  2Oot + H2O → 1Oot1OOHot + H+ + e−(6) (7) (8) 1Oot1OHot → 2Oot + H+ + e−(9)
The OER activity of IrO2 depicts the similar characteristic as RuO2, where the active sites are on the top (over the metal oxide surface) oxygen atoms with the unpaired spin state having the maximum number of unsaturated Ir atoms. The comparatively high kinetic activities of RuO2 and IrO2 are ascribed to their optimized binding energy with the OER intermediates and relatively low resistivity.39 Considering the activity and stability factors, Ir shows the best performance in acidic electrolyzer. Surface hydroxylation, lattice vacancies, bond covalency, and external potential bias play a significant role in the electrochemical OER process for IrO2.39,40 These factors significantly monitor the OER performance and stability of IrO2- and IrO2-based electrode materials. In an advanced study, Stoerzinger et al. proposed that the OER activity of IrO2 and RuO2 is the highest known to date.41 Contemporary experimental results suggest that the (100) surface of IrO2 and RuO2 is more active than the thermodynamically stable (110) plane in an alkaline electrolyzer. Therefore, the intrinsic OER performance is primarily correlated with the density of the coordinately unsaturated metal sites of each crystallographic facet. The surface-orientation-dependent activities are helpful to design the OER catalysts.41,42 In order to find out the optimal electrocatalyst for OER in seawater electrolysis, understanding of the most effective CER electrocatalyst and mechanism of the competitive anodic process on the corresponding substrate is very important. To date, the most active CER electrocatalyst is noble metal-based oxides such as RuO2, IrO2, Co3O4, and TiO2.43,44 In particular, the dimensionally stable anode (DSA) is used for the industrial CER process to improve the stability of the electrocatalyst compared to the previously used anode materials. Unfortunately, several reports show that most of the OER electrocatalysts also have potential catalytic activity toward CER. These findings suggest an activity overlap of the two competitive anodic reactions during seawater electrolysis. The anodic CER at the RuO2 electrode has been widely studied in the past few years. The experimental results based on the Tafel slope analysis and the order of the reaction confirmed that the CER progressed with a different reaction mechanism.45 In 1972, Krishtalik et al. anticipated the 1st mechanistic study based on the Tafel slope analysis for anodic CER over the noble metal oxide surfaces. This technique is considered to be the classical method of the CER process.46 These steps consist of (eqn (10)–(12)). Cl− → Clads + e−(10) Clads + Cl− → Cl2 + e−(11) Clads + Clads → Cl2(12)
However, the recent report proposed different reaction pathways based on the indirect experimental parameters such as the order of the reaction and the Tafel slope.47 The most possible reaction pathway A* represents the active site, eqn (13)–(15), which maybe surface oxygen and/or metal atoms.47,48
Volmer–Tafel reaction:  2A* + 2Cl− → 2Cl* + 2e−(13) 2Cl* + 2e− → 2A* + Cl2 + 2e−(14)
Volmer Heyvrosky reaction:  A* + 2Cl− + e− + Cl− → Cl2 + 2e− + A*(15)
The most stable reaction environment using the 1Obr1OHbr + 2Oot surface of RuO2 was proposed by Over et al.48 DFT calculations employing the harmonic transition theory (HTT) and microkinetic modelling provide the kinetics of different reaction mechanism as discussed.48 The energy profile diagram favored the Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway consisting of adsorption and discharge of Cl− ions (Volmer step) on the Oot site, followed by the direct recombination of the adsorbed Cl− species (Oot–Cl) with a chloride anion from the electrolyte solution, accompanied by the electron transfer and spontaneous release of Cl2 from the adsorbed surface (Heyrovsky step) (eqn (16) and (17)).48–50 Oot + 2Cl− → Oot–Cl− + e− + Cl− (Volmer step: adsorption and discharge of chloride ion)(16) Oot–Cl + Cl− → Oot + Cl2 + e− (Heyrovsky step: direct recombination of anionic species)(17)
The results of the mechanistic outcome helped to select the most efficient electrode material for seawater splitting in different pH media. The pH of the electrolyte eventually monitors the selective performance of the electrode for seawater splitting. Therefore, we should consider the effect of pH along with the applied potential. The HER by seawater electrolysis is rather more complicated compared to that of the pure water due to the diverse dissolved cations (Na+, K+, Sr2+, Ca2+, and Mg2+), microbes/bacteria, small particulates, etc. The catalytic degradation is one of the major issues in this circumstance. The catalytic selectivity, stability, and efficiency of the electrodes are hampered by the competitive movement of dissolved ions during HER in seawater.51–54 The local pH value increases with increasing current density during electrolysis and plays a vital role for selective HER in seawater splitting.55 The formation of metal hydroxide (M(OH)x) near the electrode surface blocks the active surface sites and eventually restricts the selective cathodic reaction.18,56 It is imperative to identify the most suitable electrode material to overcome the obstacles and find out the optimized method to improve the HER performance through seawater electrolysis. The HER proceeds through a two-step electron transfer reaction on the catalyst surface through Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel mechanism.57,58 The HER in an acidic environment is associated with the adsorption–desorption of hydrogen intermediate involving the following step (eqn (18)–(20)).57–62
Volmer step:  H+ + e− → H* (* denotes hydrogen adsorbed active sites of the electrode)(18)
Heyrovsky step:  H* + H+ → H2(19)
Tafel step:  H* + H* → H2(20)
Similarly, the alkaline HER moves through a similar mechanism with different intermediates in each step (eqn (21)–(23)).
Volmer step:  H2O + e− → H* + OH(21)
Heyvrosky step:  H2O + H* + e− → H2 + OH−(22)
Tafel step:  H* + H* → H2(23)
It is worth noting that in alkaline or neutral HER, the H–O–H covalent bond must break before H* is adsorbed on the catalyst surface, which is different from the readily available hydronium ion (H3O+) in acidic solutions. In comparison to the acidic media, the HER kinetics in alkaline media is always slower due to the extra water dissociation in the Volmer step. It is noteworthy that the kinetics is subject to the variations with different determining factors such as the character of the electrolyte, crystalline or amorphous nature of the electrode, and orientation of the electrode (single-crystal, polycrystalline, amorphous, etc.). Moreover, for selective HER from seawater splitting, the pH of the electrolyzer has a promising impact on the stability and efficiency, as discussed in this review. A typical cyclic voltammetry (CV) study for polycrystalline Pt electrode in the acidic medium affords the hydrogen underpotential deposition (HUPD) region, which is characterized by the discharge of protons on the Pt surface according to the reaction: H+ + e− + Pt* → Pt–HUPD.59–61 Among the three distinct characteristic regions, the HUPD region (<0.35 V vs. RHE) has special features toward the active crystal plane assignment. The large plateau is ascribed as HUPD for the Pt (111) facets, while the other two peaks are related to the Pt (110) and Pt (100) facets (Fig. 1f). Markovic et al.58 measured different activation energies for the HER on different Pt single crystal facets and the Pt (110) facets showed the lowest activation energy (9.5 kJ−1), confirming the most promising electrode material for HER. Nevertheless, most of the theoretical considerations predominately focus on the Pt (111) plane. Interestingly, it was found that during the electrochemical performance, the (111) plane of Pt remained electrochemically active, whereas the morphology and crystallographic parameter of the other facets are altered.62 In order to find out an optimized HER electrocatalyst, the morphology and crystal parameters should be maintained under any catalytic conditions. Similarly, with OER, the Tafel slope measurements for HER were considered to determine the rds step of Pt (110) and Pt (100) (Fig. 1g).52 The Tafel slope value for Pt (111) does not match with the expected values obtained from the microkinetic analysis. In case of polycrystalline Pt, the Tafel slope value (30 mV dec−1) matches well with the expected values, which are designated as the rds.61 A thorough kinetic analysis concluded that the Tafel slope is not sufficient to determine the mechanism of HER (Fig. 1h).63 In this context, the HER activity trend of different Pt facets were attributed to the structure-sensitive of the active intermediate toward the adsorbent. A typical Volcano plot, obtained by comparing the hydrogen binding energy (HBE) on the electrode surface with the exchange current density, suggests the characteristic property of an ideal HER catalyst, which should attach the hydrogen atoms from the electrolyte medium.61–63 The H adsorption and desorption on the electrode surface should be optimized for limiting the HER kinetics, as confirmed by the HBE, a principal physical descriptor for HER. More importantly, the HBE is pH-dependent, which has been confirmed by the pH-dependent shift of the voltammetry peaks in the HUPD region of the Pt electrode. Based on these studies, the pH-dependent HBE values of the electrocatalyst should be kept under consideration to develop an HER active electrocatalyst for seawater. The catalyst with d-band energy level near the Fermi level and their interaction with the adsorbent play a key role in the active electrochemical HER process.64 These findings were supported by the observation of Santos et al. where they employed a new model to explain the catalytic activity, mostly depending on the interaction between the metal d-band and local states of the reactants, resulting in the lowering of the activation barriers for HER, irrespective of the pH of the electrolyte.65
2.2 Thermodynamic and kinetic aspect for selective anodic (CER or OER) and cathodic reaction
The direct electrolysis of seawater produces a large amount of chlorite and hypochlorite (Table 2) due to the oxidation of Cl− ions, irrespective of the pH of the electrolyte. The CER becomes predominant over the OER and creates a major concern in overall water splitting.66 In this connection, a clear understanding of various kinetic parameters that control the OER and CER process are: (a) mixed potential, (b) surface porosity and morphology, (c) ion specific adsorption, (d) bubble formation, and most importantly, (e) pH of the electrolyte.45,66 The kinetics of the anodic CER process is influenced by the pH-dependent behavior of the oxide and the solution interface. A Pourbaix diagram of anodic OER in 0.5 M brine solution (Fig. 2a) suggests that the OER is thermodynamically more facile than the kinetically favorable CER process at any pH medium.29 The hypochlorite species plays a vital role for selective seawater electrolysis in alkaline medium as the observed potential difference between the OER and CER is the lowest at pH ∼ 7.5. Fig. 2a and b suggest that less than 480 mV is the most efficient condition for selective seawater splitting.7 Seawater electrolysis at pH < 3 becomes challenging due to the unfavorable OER process at the narrow potential gap (350 to 180 mV). The desired OER occurs at faster kinetics only when the electrocatalytic oxidation is carried at an overpotential of less than 480 mV in an alkaline pH due to the lesser possibility of hypochlorite formation. The non-noble metal electrocatalyst are stable in alkaline medium compared to the acidic medium, which establishes a general design criterion for selective OER at the electrode surface operating at pH > 7.5.7,29 On the contrary, the CER at low pH and hypochlorite formation at high pH are the foremost competing reactions for OER.
 Fig. 2  (a) Pourbaix diagram of the oxygen evolution reaction and chloride chemistry at 0.5 M NaCl aqueous solution, the electrode potential for OER is also included; (b) maximum allowed overpotential of OER electrolyzer catalysts to ensure 100% selective water splitting. Potential-dependent anodic process at various pH (reproduced with permission from ref. 29 copyright© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) Gibbs energy diagram for the CER (gray) and the OER (black) over the fully O-covered RuO2 (110) surface (dashed line); (d) Pourbaix diagram for the model catalyst RuO2 (110) with 2Ru2f2Obr + 2Rucus2Oot constituting the thermodynamically most stable surface under the reaction conditions for the CER (in red) and for the OER (in green); (e) Volcano plot for the CER (gray) and the OER (black) over RuO2 (110) (reproduced with permission from ref. 28 copyright© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
CER process:  2Cl− → Cl2 + 2e−E° = 1.36 V vs. SHE, pH = 0(24)
Hypochlorite formation:  Cl− + 2OH− → ClO− + H2O + 2e−E° = 0.89 V vs. SHE, pH = 14(25)
Thus, Fig. 2b summarizes the condition (100% at 480 mV) for selective oxygen evolution reaction from the overpotential vs. pH plot. The OER selectivity within the dashed/marked area is thermodynamically feasible. Nevertheless, the competitive chloride oxidation processes are thermodynamically feasible only above 1.72 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE).7
About 100% faradaic efficiency of desired OER over CER in seawater electrolysis is found under certain electrochemical conditions that should be imposed during the electrochemical process.7,29 The electrode potential U is measured at different pH values for the thermodynamically stable surface structure of the catalyst (Fig. 2d), which reveals that oxygen bound on top of Rucus atoms (2Ru2f2Obr + 2Rucus2Oot) is stable over a wide potential and pH range. In particular, the CER and OER take place above U > 1.36 V.28 The possibility of CER is favored over the OER at a slightly higher potential (U > 1.49) and pH < 4, where the terminal adsorption of Cl− on top of O-atoms energetically favors the formation of the adsorbate structure (2Ru2f2Obr + 2Rucus1OClot1Oot) for the CER process.28,36 Therefore, the preferred surface structure for the CER is active above 1.49 V, followed by different possible mechanistic pathways, as described (equation) in the previous section. The surface structure of 2Ru2f2Obr + 2Rucus2OOHot with the OOHot reaction intermediate is preferred and energetically favors the OER for the RuO2 (110) at pH > 4 and U > 1.4, while the CER is not possible under these certain circumstances. The conversion of fully O-covered RuO2 (110) surface to 2Ru2f2Obr + 2Rucus2OOHot is considered as the OER active electrode at a certain pH.28,36,45 The thermodynamic aspects of the two competitive anodic processes provide the selective understanding of the electrocatalyst. The variation of the ΔG values of the RuO2-based electrocatalyst favors the understanding of the most energy-demanding step for OER and CER. The steps with unfavorable ΔG change at the equilibrium potential describes the loss of ΔG (ΔGloss).67 In between the Volmer (eqn (1)) and Heyrovsky steps (eqn (2)), the Volmer step is the most energy-demanding in the CER, as evidenced from the ΔGloss (for CER) value (+0.13 eV), as shown by the dotted line (Fig. 2c). For an effective CER process, the adsorption of Cl− ions over the on-top oxygen atoms Oot of RuO2 (110) plane is a primary criterion. Moreover, for the Ti-modified RuO2 (110) surface, the formation of gaseous chlorine (Cl2) defines the ΔGloss. For OER over RuO2 (110), the step with the highest Gibbs free energy change constitutes the splitting of the second water molecule accompanied by the formation of the OOHot adsorbate structure (ΔGloss = 0.50 eV), whereas the Ti-modified RuO2-(110) surface of the Oot adsorbate suffers from the highest change in the Gibbs energy (ΔGlossOER) (Fig. 2c). The decrease in the ΔGloss value is an essential thermodynamic parameter to develop and modify the anodic electrode materials for the selective CER or OER. The adsorption energies of OClot (for the CER), OHot, and OOHot (for the OER) as a function of the free adsorption energy of Oot on the catalyst's surface (ΔG°(Oot)) was determined by the Volcano plot and therefore predicts the activity of the catalyst in the competitive anodic process. The experimental and theoretical investigations carried out by Rossmeisl et al.36 and several other research groups confirm that the free adsorption energy of oxygen is indeed an appropriate descriptor for anodic oxidation reactions. Therefore, the activity of an electrode toward CER or OER in terms of ΔGloss develops the so-called Volcano plots as a function of the free oxygen adsorption energy. The difference in the Gibbs energy loss obtained from the Volcano plot describes the selectivity of the electrodes, which is designated as ΔGsel (Fig. 2e). The loss of ΔGsel suggests that the weakening of the metal–oxygen bond order, leading to the enhancement of the CER performance and the lowering of the OER activity for an identical catalytic surface. Therefore, with the shift in the free Oot adsorption energy, the activity of the CER is preserved, while the ΔGloss (OER) increases substantially. The Gibbs energy diagram and the Volcano plot confirm that the CER is more efficient in case of the monolayer metal oxide-based substrate than the modified metal oxide. It may be due to the large Gibbs energy drop in the Heyrovsky step and the weak bonding between the Oot and the terminal Cl−.
A kinetic understanding of the two competitive anodic processes (OER and CER) provides information about the most favorable transition state (TS) and its parallel reaction intermediate (RI) during the electrode process.69 Tamura et al.70 discussed the electrolysis of CER on the metal oxide surface based on the activation energy. The CER activation energy values for different metal oxide electrodes were acquired through the coordination chemistry approach by calculating (crystal field stabilization energy) the CFSE values.70 The activated complex on RuO2- and IrO2-based electrodes proceeds through a pentagonal bi-pyramidal reaction intermediate and the calculated activation energy agrees well with the experimental data (Table 3).70 Parsons et al. have proposed that the electrocatalyst having stabilized TS is related to the rate-determining step of the respective electrochemical process.71 The Tafel slope value is an efficient tool to infer the different rds (rate determining step) measured from the linear regions of the overpotential in Tafel plot. Nevertheless, a hypothetical energy profile diagram suggests that every elementary reaction step becomes rate-determining at a specific overpotential region. Therefore, the active surface composition of the electrocatalyst changed at a certain applied potential, which alters the Tafel slope of the OER and CER processes and consequently changes the T. S. of the corresponding reaction. In the CER, the Volmer–Heyrovsky proceeds through the adsorption and discharge of chloride ions on the active surface of the metal oxide catalyst, which forms the potential intermediate M–OClot. The T. S. free energy and transfer coefficient of the Volmer and Heyrovsky steps for CER over the RuO2 surface depends on the change in the overpotential (Fig. 3a).69 The T. S. free energy values of the Volmer and Heyrovsky steps determine the rate-limiting step of CER, which again varies with the change in the Tafel slope at a specific overpotential region. To identify the stable electrode surface under a specific reaction environment, the overpotential range in the linear Tafel region should be considered. The free energy value of the stable reaction intermediate (M–OClot) for CER is obtained from the Pourbaix diagram and it provides information about the most stable electrode surface structure (Fig. 3b).69 Castelli et al.72 experimentally derived two different Tafel slope of the OER on RuO2 (110) single crystal at various overpotential regions.
Table 3 Activation energy for chlorine evolution reaction on the oxide-based electrode at the equilibrium potential70




Electrode

E
a cal (kcal per mole)

E
a cal (kcal per mole)

E
a exp (kcal per mole)


Square pyramidal
Pentagonal bipyramide




RuO2
∼4.5
∼9.4
∼9 or 8.5


IrO2
∼3.4
∼6.8
∼7.1




 Fig. 3  (a) Free energy diagram of the CER over RuO2 (110) via the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism at different overpotentials, the free energy of the reaction intermediate OClot (red) is obtained from the ab initio Pourbaix diagram; (b) Pourbaix diagram for CER for a single-crystalline RuO2 (110) model electrode; (c) Pourbaix diagram for OER for a single-crystalline RuO2 (110) model; (d) free energy landscape for the OER over a single-crystalline RuO2 (110) model electrode based on the experimental kinetic measurements and ab-initio thermodynamics DFT calculations (reproduced with permission from ref. 69 copyright© 2018, American Chemical Society). 
Pourbaix diagram represents the most favorable surface structure of the RuO2 (110) plane for the OER process at a low pH (pH = 0.3). Fig. 3c reveals that the first Tafel slope values obtained from the low overpotential region (0 V < ηOER < 0.3 V, pH = 0.3) and the anodic process proceeds from the oxygen-covered RuO2 (110)-Oot surface, in which the Obr positions are partially covered by hydrogen (OHbr + Ru–Oot).69 The thermodynamically most stable adsorbate structure (Obr + Ru–Oot) is formed at a higher overpotential region, which provides a higher Tafel slope value. Therefore, the formation of the OOH reaction intermediate over the active RuO2 (110)-Oot surface is considered to be the rate-determining step, which has been experimentally identified.
In this context, it is observed from Fig. 3d that the OER is followed by two competing reactions: (a) chemical pathway, and (b) electrochemical pathway.69 The choice of the reaction pathway depends on the applied overpotential; thereby, the surface structure composition is also varied with the alternation in the rate limiting step. At a low overpotential, the OER starts from (OHbr + Ru–Oot) the surface via the chemical pathway, while at a higher overpotential, the active surface switches to a fully oxygen-covered (Obr + Ru–Oot) surface; thereby, OER proceeds via an electrochemical pathway. The reaction pathway for the OER on the RuO2 (110) surface agreed well with the mechanism proposed by Fang et al.73 Therefore, to develop an OER active material, a notably high overpotential is required to attain the current density value in the same order of magnitude as in the polarization regime of the CER.
Recently, Exner et al.74 applied a contemporary theoretical approach to address the OER and CER selectivity issue by introducing the overpotential-dependent Volcano plot, which shows excellent conventional Volcano analysis.75,76 The advanced Volcano analysis demonstrates that the ΔGO (free formation energy of oxygen) to be more suitable than the most commonly applied descriptor ΔEO (binding energy of oxygen) for the judgment of.
The selective anodic process, i.e., the OER and CER selectivity.76,77 Therefore, ΔGO emerged as a crucial parameter to judge the selective CER and OER, and assists in designing the improved electrode materials based on the modified Volcano concept. This overview was also supported by Joo et al.78 where the development of a single-atom-based electrocatalyst was involved for the selective anodic oxidation process.78,79 A unifying approach of the ESSI (electrochemical-step symmetry index)-descriptor activity maps were derived by Exner and co-workers to understand the activity trends of CER and OER by connecting different perspectives in the field of the electrocatalyst.80 The combined approaches of the ESSI-ΔG2 activity maps merge the concepts of linear scaling relationships (binding energies),37,73 kinetic scaling relations (rate-determining step),81,82 overpotential-dependent Volcano plots (measured overpotential),76 and the electrochemical-step symmetry index/ESSI (catalytic symmetry),83,84 thereby combining different electrochemical outlook for the selection of electrode materials for specific OER and CER processes at the anode. To date, there is no direct relationship within these diverse methods and it remains unclear as to how to predict the most suitable material-screening approach for the selective anodic process in seawater electrolysis. Exner et al.74 investigated the OER on transition metal oxide, perovskites, porphyrin, and functionalized carbonaceous materials through a powerful combination of linear scaling relationships, kinetic scaling relations, overpotential-dependent Volcano plots, and ESSI.74 The most widely accepted OER mechanism proceeds through the stabilization of the –O, –OH, and –OOH adsorbate (Fig. 4a) on the active surface (Mcus) of the electrocatalyst as proposed by Rossmeisl et al. by the following equations.36 H2O + Mcus → Mcus–OHot + H+ + e−(26) Mcus–OHot → Mcus–Oot + H+ + e−(27) Mcus–Oot + H2O → Mcus–OOHot + H+ + e−(28) Mcus–OOHot → Mcus + O2 + H+ + e−(29)
 Fig. 4  (a) The electrocatalytic OER cycle consists of four elementary reaction steps, in which the OHot, Oot and OOHot adsorbate need to be stabilized on the catalytically active Mcus sites of the MO2(110) surface (reproduced with permission from ref. 74 copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society). (b) The ESSI-ΔG2 activity map for the OER over transition-metal oxides via the OOH adsorbate at ηOER = 0.18 V; (c) the methodology of ESSI-ΔG2 activity maps is translated to the CER over transition-metal oxides via the OCl adsorbate at ηCER = 0.05 V (d) & (e) the methodology of ESSI-ΔG2 activity map for the CER over transition-metal oxides via (a) the ClO2 adsorbate and (b) the Cl adsorbate at ηCER = 0.05 V (Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 copyright© 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The formation of the ESSI-ΔG2 activity maps anticipates the mechanistic pathway as discussed by equations; thereby, material screening framework beyond the conventional Volcano analysis reveals no reproduction of the activity trends in the OER on transition metal oxides (Fig. 4b).80,85 The ESSI-ΔG2 activity map of OER for the transition metal oxide is preferably determined from the –OOH adsorbate than –O or –OH at an applied overpotential. The most promising electrocatalyst can be evaluated from the green and yellow highlighted area corresponding to the optimum situation as the ESSI value is reasonably small and the free energy change (ΔG2) subsists near the top of the overpotential-dependent Volcano plot at the applied potential. The electrode materials residing at the yellow highlighted region with very small ESSI values are considered as the potential electrocatalyst toward OER (Fig. 4b–e). However, kinetics might represent an adverse Tafel behavior as a large Tafel slope was observed at small overpotentials.74,80 A low catalytic performance was observed for the electrocatalyst present within the red highlighted region, which can be ascribed to the strong asymmetry of the free energy change.83,84 The previous discussion confirms that the CER process is mostly governed by the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism. The CER consists of OCl−, ClO2−, and Cl− adsorbates over the surface of the electrode. Each adsorbate has a definite adsorbent, which eventually comes to an end through the Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway. In a harsh anodic CER environment, most of the transition metal oxides are oxidized; thereby, the under-coordinated Mcus sites are capped by the surface oxygen (Oot).28,36,74,85,86 Therefore, the CER proceeds through the formation of the OCl− adsorbate by the following mechanistic pathway (eqn (30) and (31)).
Volmer step:  Mcus–Oot + Cl− → Mcus–OClot + e−(30)
Heyrovsky step:  Mcus–OClot + Cl− → Mcus–Oot + Cl2 + e−(31)
In another possibility, the Cl− can attach in between the two neighboring oxygen surface and appear as a peroxide species between the adjacent Mcus atoms, which gives the ClO2 adsorbate (eqn (32) and (33)).
Volmer step:  2Mcus–(O2)ot,ot + Cl− → 2Mcus–(O2)ot,ot + e−(32)
Heyrovsky step:  2Mcus–(O2)ot,otCl + Cl− → Mcus–(O2)ot + Cl2 + e−(33)
In another way, Cl− can directly adsorb on the oxygen-uncapped undercoordinated Mcus sites, resulting in the formation of a Cl adsorbate (eqn (34) and (35)).36,86
Volmer step:  Mcus + Cl− → Mcus–Clot + e−(34)
Heyrovsky step:  Mcus–Clot → Mcus + Cl2 + e−(35)
The ESSI-ΔG2 activity maps for CER via the OCl−, ClO2−, and Cl− adsorbate reveal that the optimum free energy range of ΔG2 is varied with the alteration in the adsorbate on the active sites of the transition metal oxide (Fig. 4c–e). Fig. 4b proposes that RuO2 and VO2 are only the most promising electrode materials and prefer the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanistic pathway, as illustrated by previous equations. IrO2 is found to be the most promising material for the ClO2 adsorbate. However, the ab initio thermodynamic considerations show that the IrO2 (110) surface is capped by surface oxygen, Oot, rather than by a lying molecular O2 species, (O2)ot, which contravenes the formation of the ClO2 intermediate during the CER process. Similar findings were observed for different oxide systems and the formation of the ClO2− intermediate is unfavored.28,86,87Fig. 4e shows that the Cl− adsorption on the VO2, RuO2, and IrO2 surface is energetically unfavorable and the formation of OCl− intermediate depends on the electrode surface composition as evidenced by the high oxygen binding energy (small ΔG2 value). The weak oxygen binding energy (large ΔG2 value) of the other transition metal oxide electrodes, i.e., RhO2, PtO2, and TiO2 demonstrate an affinity toward the Cl− intermediate during the CER. The outcome of the ESSI-ΔG2 activity maps proposed that the electrode materials forming the OCl− intermediate in the CER reveals significant OER activity as the optimum binding energy of the two competing processes is close. The CER is dominated over the OER in strongly acidic electrolyte (pH ≤ 1). In contrast, the OER predominates over CER by decreasing the proton activity.76,88 The optimum free energy values for the two competing anodic reactions reside far away if the CER process is governed by the Cl− intermediate, thereby indicating the CER selectivity. Therefore, the Cl− intermediate is more promising than the OCl− intermediate for selective CER. The definite explanation for this observation is that at higher pH, the equilibrium potential of the OER is reduced, while the equilibrium potential of the CER is independent of the pH. Thus, the OER overpotential at a fixed applied electrode potential on the SHE scale increases, whereas the driving force for the CER remains unaffected, resulting in a decrease in the CER selectivity.
Sabatier's principle states that the interaction of the reaction intermediates/reactants with the catalyst has to be optimal in potency. The intermediate's adsorption energy has key significance over the catalyst efficiency. In case of HER, this correlates with the adsorption energy of atomic hydrogen (Eads(H)). Trasatti et al.89 established the relationship between the exchange current density (jo) and the energy of hydride formation (EM–H) encounter as the “Volcano” curve and provided information on the HER electrocatalyst. Recent research suggests that EM–H is preferably used instead of Eads(H) to determine the selective seawater-based HER electrocatalyst.90 Likewise, the Tafel slope value and the exchange current density are important parameters, which are able to judge the catalytic efficiency of the developed electrocatalyst toward the selective OER and HER process in seawater. Based on the current studies, the HER exchange current density varies by 5–6 orders of magnitude depending on the electrode material. The enhanced rates on the electrode materials are due to the optimal interaction of the hydrogen intermediate with the catalyst surface.
3. Electrolyzer design for seawater electrolysis
The selection of a suitable electrocatalyst, operating potential, use of buffer solution, and operating pH are crucial parameters that assist in designing a suitable electrolyzer for scaled-up seawater electrolysis.51 Depending on the operating temperature, ionic agents, and electrolytes, electrolyzers can be classified into four different categories, namely, proton exchange membrane water electrolyzer (PEMWE), anion exchange membrane water electrolyzer (AEMWE), alkaline water electrolyzer (AWE), and high-temperature water electrolyzer (HTWE) (Fig. 5a–d).11,12,51,91
 Fig. 5  (a) PEMWE consists of a solid acid electrolyte polymer sandwiched between the anode and cathode and water is fed to the anode, (b) AEMWE, OH− transporting membrane between the anode and the cathode and water is supplied from either from the cathode or the anode side, (c) AWE operates as a 2-compartment cell with 20–30% KOH liquid alkaline electrolyte pumped around both the electrode and a porous diaphragm allows hydroxyl ion (OH−) migration, (d) HTWE includes proton-conducting ceramic electrolysis (∼150–400 °C) and solid oxide electrolysis (∼800–1000 °C), (e) digital image of the developed electrolyzer with Nafion membrane; (f) the NaCl production rate in 6 M NaOH electrolyte with saturated NaCl (reproduced with permission from ref. 94 copyright© 2020 The Authors). 
A solid acid polymer electrolyte is present in between the cathode and anode in PEMWE. Water is fed into the anode compartment to oxidize into O2. The local pH at the cathode increases with the migration of protons through the proton exchange membrane (PEM), which eventually affects the anodic process and a competition between the CER and OER may occur. Although the PEM is selective toward protons, several foreign cationic species can pass through it, resulting in a decrease in the proton conductivity.11,91,92 Alkaline earth metal ions (Ca, Mg) present in seawater migrate toward the cathode side from the anode compartment, thus producing the metal deposition. The PEMWE are economically beneficial for large scale applications at high pressures (30–45 bar), temperature (25–90 °C), and high current density (2 A cm−2). The most frequently utilized membranes in PEMWE cell are perfluorosulfonic acid polymer membranes such as Nafion®, Fumapem®, Flemion®, and Aciplex®, which acquire high strength, high efficiency, high thermal stability, high oxidative stability, high proton conductivity, and exceptional operational durability.93
The AEMWE has structural similarity with PEMWE. In brief, the AEMWE anion exchange membrane (AEM) is sandwiched between the two electrodes and water is passed from the cathode side. Hydrogen and hydroxide ions are formed at the cathode compartment and the OH− ions move toward the anode side through the AEM, which produces oxygen at the anode.51 AEM plays a vital role in selective seawater electrolysis in AEMWE; thus, the choice of AEM has to be taken into account for the selective migration of the two competitive ions, Cl− and OH−.91–94 AEMWE technology is governed by AEM and ionomers. The anion selectivity AEM depends on the anchored cationic groups over the polymer backbone. The anion exchange group comprises of trialkyl quaternary ammonium salts attached to polymeric backbones such as polysulfone, polystyrene, poly(ether sulfone), or poly(phenylene oxide) by benzylic methylene groups.95 Dionigi et al. proposed that the alkaline pH is bifacial for selective OH− oxidation, thus minimizing Cl− migration through the AEM, leading to high oxygen selectivity.51 Therefore, AEMWE is considered as a promising electrolyzer compared to PEMWE for seawater splitting where the pH and choice of membrane are the key parameters to manipulate the CER at the anode. However, AEM has limited thermal stability at higher pH medium, which includes the degradation of anion-exchange groups at high temperature under basic conditions.95 A stable anion exchange polymeric membrane for water electrolysis includes the selective screening of the cationic ion-selective groups.
Alkaline water electrolyzer (AWE) consists of a two-compartment cell separated by a porous diaphragm, which permits the migration of hydroxyl ions but prevents the passage of gas molecule. An alkaline electrolyte is pumped to both the compartment of the AWE cell.51,90,92 Hydrogen and hydroxyl ions are formed at the cathode on electrolysis of alkaline water. The OH− ions pass through the diaphragm at the anode compartment and oxygen is formed at the anode. For seawater electrolysis, the membrane should have definite selectivity toward the ions. In AWE, the used diaphragm materials (Zirfon) are reported to be physically robust but incapable of preventing the migration of the impurity ions/species (ions such as Cl− and Na+).51 Therefore, the design of a porous diaphragm has emerged as an enormous challenge to develop AWE for seawater electrolysis.
HTWE comprises of proton-conducting ceramic membrane (PCCM) electrolysis operating within ∼150–400 °C and solid oxide membrane electrolysis operating at 800–1000 °C.51 The electrolyzer can be distinguished based on the transported ions through the specific membrane. A ceramic or solid oxide membrane selectively passes O2− to the anode and is oxidized to O2.11,12,51,91 This arrangement offers an opportunity to purify the water source and generating a ‘clean’ steam before it reaches the cathode compartment. Moreover, the present technology has the potential to build an electrolyzer that operates beyond electrode materials and specifically depends on the operating temperature and the efficiency of the membrane. However, the high operating temperature corresponds to higher energy demand and a higher operational cost compared to contemporary technologies that usually function below 100 °C.51,91,92 The high temperature limits the type of electrode materials and other electrolyzer components to meet the stability requirements for long-term operation.
It is well established that the four different commercially available electrolyzers are specifically designed for clean/fresh water for electrolysis. For seawater electrolysis, the preferential use of the electrolyzer become complicated due to the presence of dissolved ions in seawater; thereby, the choice of electrolyzer is the most important for the commercialization of seawater electrolysis technology.51,91 The available commercial electrolyzers consist of their own demerits in the selective performance of seawater electrolysis, which leads to the precipitation of different metal hydroxides at the electrode (for PEMWE) and the degradation of membrane performance on the migration of the impurity species (AEMWE and AWE). Moreover, the presence of different living organisms in seawater decreases the electrolysis performance of the individual components due to the physical blockage phenomenon. The above discussion shows that the stability of the AEM is one of the prime parameters for selective seawater electrolysis as it monitors the specificity, selectivity, and durability of a commercial electrolyzer.93–95 In this context, the improvement of the ion exchange membrane for seawater electrolysis is a challenging task to a researcher for direct seawater electrolysis. Therefore, pre-filtration is the most promising approach to resolve the problem related to physical blockages from solid impurities, precipitates at the electrode, and microorganism contaminations affecting either the electrode or ion exchange membranes in the electrolyzers.16,29,51,91 Under these circumstances, the use of an RO-coupled seawater electrolyzer can be a definite choice to overcome the current shortcomings. Even economical assessment supports the RO-coupled seawater electrolysis compared to direct seawater electrolysis.96
The use of seawater vapor in both PEMWE and AEMWE cell for selective electrolysis exhibits high efficiency compared to the use of direct seawater feedstock.11,12,29,51,91,92 Therefore, gas-phase electrolysis was carried out for the commercial electrolyzer to avoid the difficulties (Fig. 5e). Considering that the average salinity of seawater is ∼3.5% (∼0.599 M) with NaCl being the predominant entity, an innovative idea was proposed by Sun et al. by introducing “common ion effect” to design an electrolyzer prototype to overcome the excess concentration of NaCl.94 NiCoFeP exhibits enhanced catalytic performance as the electrode material in the presence of common ions. About 6 M NaOH is used as the common ion salt to promote the electrolyzer activity. The efficiency of the designed electrolyzer can be improved using Nafion (can only pass Na+ ion) membrane due to the formation of NaCl crystals, as evidenced from Fig. 5f.
4. Key parameters for selective seawater electrolysis
Seawater electrolysis is governed by different parameters such as the nature of the electrolyte, the pH of the electrolyte, the use of the buffer solution, the effect of external ions, and several other electrochemical parameters such as overpotential and current density. The progress of selective cathodic and anodic reactions depends on these key parameters. In case of direct water electrolysis, local pH values near the vicinity of the electrode shift due to the change in the proton concentration. Henstridge et al.97 confirmed that the reaction rate is monitored by the pH near the electrode surface.98 Seawater electrolysis creates a regular increase in the pH at the cathode compartment and decreases at the anode side. Thus, such pH alteration reduces the stability of the electrocatalyst even at a very low current density of <10 mA cm−2.51 However, the efficiency of the electrode is improved at reverse pH value.51,99 For seawater HER, the major problem is related to the presence of various dissolved cations such as Mg2+, Na+, and Ca2+, which reduces the catalytic activity and stability of the electrocatalyst.91,100 The pH at the electrode interface (solid–liquid interface) increases with increasing current density, which facilitates the formation of the hydroxide species on the electrode surface and blocks the surface active sites at the cathode.91 Katsounaros et al.101 have drawn a relationship between the applied potential and the rate of the reaction, which is concluded by the large increase in the reaction rate at bulk pH (Fig. 6a).101 This situation can be handled by the use of buffer solution or additives that stabilize the pH fluctuations during seawater electrolysis. In the anodic compartment, the OER is followed by the systematic transformation of the adsorbate species (-OH, –O, and –OOH), which causes a continuous decrease in the pH at the electrode surface. CER is a parallel anodic process and the efficiency is also pH-dependent such as OER, as observed from the Pourboix diagram (Fig. 2a). The CER is a two-electron oxidation reaction having a single intermediate that exhibits a much faster evolution rate than the OER. Chlorine (Cl2) and hypochlorite are normally evolved at the anode by the oxidation of Cl− under acidic and basic conditions instead of O2 evolution by the oxidation of seawater (eqn (36)–(38)). Therefore, CER is considered as a major anodic reaction in acidic electrolytes on a variety of metal oxide catalysts.29,99,100 2Cl− → Cl2 + e−E° = 1.36 V (vs. SHE) at pH = 1–3(36) Cl− + 2OH− → OCl− + H2O + 2e−E° = 0.89 V (vs. SHE) at pH = 14 or E° = 1.72–0.059 pH(37) 4OH− → 2H2O + O2 + 4e−E° = 0.40 V (vs. SHE) at pH = 14(38)
 Fig. 6  (a) Current density vs. surface pH relation from cyclic voltammetry (reproduced with permission from ref. 101 copyright© 2011 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved). (b) Voltammetric response recorded for a hydrous nickel oxyhydroxide thin film on the Ni support electrode at various pH values (reproduced with permission from ref. 104 copyright© 2012 The Authors). (c) Electrochemical characterization of NiFe-LDH on carbon Vulcan by cyclic voltammetry in 0.1 M KOH, pH 13 (solid black), 0.1 M KOH + NaCl, pH 13 (dashed red), borate buffer, pH 9.2 (solid blue), borate buffer + NaCl, pH 9.2 (dashed green) (reproduced with permission from ref. 29 copyright© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Image of the seawater electrolyzer set-up (reproduced with permission from ref. 109 copyright© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) Nyquist plots of Co–Fe LDH/GCEs in seawater and aqueous solutions including MgCl2, NaCl, or Na2SO4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 110 copyright© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved). (f) Comparison between the catalytic activity of the HER in acidic, neutral, and basic solutions for MoP700, MoP2, MoP, Mo3P, and Pt/C (reproduced with permission from ref. 116 copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society). (g) Current density and maximum current related percentage after 50 h, 100 h, initial first recovery effect, after 1 h of first recovery effect, initial second recovery effect, and after 1 h of second recovery effect of NaCl free and the addition of 0.5 M NaCl (reproduced with permission from ref. 109 copyright© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
On the contrary, OER is thermodynamically favorable in alkaline medium but hypochlorite formation is kinetically facile. The Pourbaix diagram suggests that the standard redox potential for the formation of hypochlorite species is pH-dependent in contrast with CER, and the pH dependence slope is equivalent with the OER potential.29
Previously, the electrode potential difference within ∼0.48 V at basic pH is the most preferable region toward OER, thereby reducing the possibility of hypochlorite formation. Therefore, the pH and applied potential are crucial parameters that should be monitored for the selective seawater anodic process. Thus, a general design criterion for selective OER operation at pH > 7.5 in seawater is given by ηOER ≤ 0.48 V at pH > 7.5 (the blue region) (Fig. 2a).7,29 The acidic medium is less pronounced for selective OER performance as hypochlorous acid formation becomes predominant over the hypochlorite ion at a lower pH region (≤7.5), and the potential difference of the undesired side reaction due to the OER becoming slightly smaller.7,29–37 However, the electrode potential operating at ηOER ≤ 480 mV and current density (j) = 10 mA cm−2 are as the technological targets for the commercialization of seawater splitting to attain the current density value closer to the state-of-the-art electrolyzer.7,29 Therefore, the j value has a certain influence over the seawater splitting. The achieved current density value is related to the change in the pH of the electrolyte. Previous results suggested that the change in the pH is the function of the current density.102,103 More specifically, Knoedler et al.103 obtained a periodic change in the pH with the change in the current density up to 40 mA cm−2.103 A continuous change in anodic peak shifting at various pH was observed from the voltammetric response recorded on hydrous nickel oxyhydroxide thin film on the Ni support electrode (Fig. 6b).104 Therefore, the change in the pH can affect the current density as well as the overpotential of the experimental electrocatalyst. Therefore, the use of the buffer solution is essential to get control over the electrocatalyst. For pure seawater, the addition of the buffer solution is essential as the trace amount of carbonate and borate ions present in seawater is unable to maintain the pH of the electrolyte.51 Thereby, the addition of the buffer solution is necessary to maintain the pH and to enhance the catalytic performance of the electrocatalyst by neglecting the arriving problem during the electrolysis of seawater. Buffers such as borate (pH = 9.2), carbonate (pH = 8.6), and phosphate (pH = 7) have a significant impact on the local pH at the anode; thereby, anodic performance in seawater is influenced by the change in the local pH (Fig. 6c).29,51,105–108 A detailed analysis of the effect of the pH on the electrocatalyst was carried out by Strasser et al. by CV analysis of the Fe–Ni-based LDH system.109 The potential values at a certain current density shift toward higher potentials with the change in the pH, irrespective of the nature of the electrodes. Interestingly, this shift is measured at a rate of ∼88 mV per unit change in pH.29,51,105 The CV also suggests that the presence of chloride and sodium ions accelerates the electrochemical performance on the activation of the active sites of the electrocatalyst. An increase in the OER catalytic activity at higher current density was observed in case of borate buffer, which supports its preferential use over the unbuffered solution. The local acidity (electrode surface) slows the selectivity as well as the stability of the electrocatalyst, thereby mass transportation is a predominant factor in seawater electrolysis. In order to investigate the effect of pH in water electrolysis, Strasser et al.109 developed an electrolyzer set up for seawater (Fig. 6d) using a Tokuyama A201 membrane as the ionomer and Tokuyama AS-4 as the anion exchange membrane, where Ni–Fe-LDH is used as the anode material. The OER activity in saline water is higher than that of pure water as the presence of Cl− influences the ionic mobility of OH− through the membranes. On the contrary, the LSV plot suggests that NaCl has no potential impact on the HER performance and the performance truly depends on the concentration of the OH− ions. The catalytic performance of the NaCl free electrolyte is always higher than the NaCl-containing electrolyte. A 100 h chronoamperometry study of the NiFe-LDH electrocatalyst at different KOH concentration suggests the presence and absence of NaCl solution at a constant potential of 1.6 V (Fig. 6g).109 Yang et al. investigated the effect of multiple ions (Mg2+, Na+, Cl−, and SO42−) in seawater with the addition of respective electrolytes in seawater.110 The semicircle in the Nyquist plot of Co–Fe LDH suggests lower charge transfer resistance due to the complex multiple ions present in seawater facilitating proton transfer in combination with electron transfer (Fig. 6e).110 This report opens up a new paradigm to enhance the performance of the LDH-based electrocatalyst toward seawater OER. The abundance of ions adsorbed on the surface or exchange with the interlayer ions of LDH, resulting in an increase in the basicity as well as the elevation of the active sites, which is further confirmed by the spectroscopic study. Muller et al. demonstrated an analogous outcome comprising the tuning of the water oxidation activity of Ni–Fe-LDH nanosheets by the incorporation of anions with different basicities.111 They assume that Lewis or Brønsted basicity is the determining parameter in the water oxidation reaction through the LDH electrolyte. Previous investigation reported by Strasser's group proposed that the Cl− ion enhances the OER activity of the nickel–iron hydroxide catalyst material. A recent study on Ni–Fe-LDH elucidates that the dissolved Cl− ions in simulated or real seawater has the potential ability to modify the structural feature and effective metal oxidation charge; thereby, the OER activity is significantly improved.112 A similar understanding of Co–Fe-LDH can be recognized by the adsorbed chloride ions, which helps to stabilize the higher valence state of the Co element and the active site of OER, as confirmed by deconvoluted XPS spectroscopy. Moreover, the increased conjugate base concentration of weak acids can mediate H+ transfer along with electron transfer; thereby, the reaction rate and stability of the electrocatalysis for OER under neutral pH become beneficial.113–115 To date, several reports are available on HER in different pH media of seawater. Shao et al. reported a series of molybdenum phosphide-based electrocatalysts for seawater electrolysis with ∼10% higher current response and more stability compared to the Pt-based electrocatalyst.116 A comparison between the catalytic performance of MoP2, MoP, Mo3P, and Pt/C catalysts shows that the HER activity increases in the order acidic > basic > neutral (Fig. 6f) medium. However, the HER activity of MoP700 in alkaline medium is reversed; thereby, a decrease in the HER activity due to the presence of the P-terminated surface with less H+ adsorption capability. In another investigation, Wu et al. found that at a fixed current density, Co0.31Mo1.69C/MXene/NC exhibits enhanced catalytic performance at neutral pH than in acidic or alkaline medium.117 This study further confirmed that the HER at buffered pH is more suitable. Nonetheless, this perception may be altered or varied depending on the nature of the electrocatalyst.116,118
5. Material design for selective OER and HER process from impure water
Several strategies were employed for the selective OER and HER from seawater. Thermodynamic and kinetic outcomes should be considered while designing an efficient electrocatalyst for selective seawater electrolysis. Cathodic and anodic materials should have enough potential, which can overcome the inconvenience related to the dissolved impurities in seawater. Therefore, the selectivity and stability are the most significant parameters for the electrocatalyst, which has to be optimized while designing an electrode material for electrolysis.
5.1 Selection of anode material for OER
The competing CER is a major drawback over OER in seawater electrolysis. Various paramount approaches were followed to carry out the saline/seawater electrolysis to achieve the desired performance. The potential strategies are as follows.
(a) Maximizing the thermodynamic potential difference between the CER and OER by operating the electrolyzer in alkaline pH, which enhances the OER performance and provides the required current density at or below 480 mV overpotential.
(b) Design the potential catalyst for OER with surface active sites and optimize the binding energy toward O, OH, and OOH adsorbate on the surface of the electrocatalyst. These strategies are supported by the theoretical understanding of the developed materials. Therefore, the evolution of different thermodynamic parameters such as ΔGo, ΔEo, and ESSI by the numerous computational studies may be an option for catalyst design for seawater electrolysis.
(c) Developing such an electrocatalyst to create a Cl− blocking layer is present next to the OER active catalyst to avoid the diffusion of Cl− ions from the electrolyte to the surface of the OER catalyst. The Cl− blocking layer should be stable in both acidic and alkaline medium, which impedes the preferential use of anodic material in any kind of presently available electrolyzer. The dissolved ions in seawater have a pronounced effect on the stability and selectivity of the electrocatalyst. The electrode materials are degraded through the chloride corrosion mechanism. The chloride ions in seawater can corrode many catalysts and substrates through metal chloride–hydroxide formation mechanisms.5Adsorption of Cl− by surface polarization: M + Cl− → MClads + e−Dissolution by further coordination: MClads + Cl− → MClx−Conversion from chloride to hydroxide: MClx− + OH− → M(OH)x + Cl−where M represents the metal atom in the catalyst used as a cathode or an anode. Among the different dissolved ions, chloride ions (with highest concentration) creates corrosion; thereby, the electrochemical performance decreases. In addition, the degradation of electrode materials also hampered the stability of the respective electrode. The anodic compartment is affected more than the cathode. Therefore, the prevention of chloride ions is needed to achieve the highest catalytic efficiency during seawater electrolysis. The choice of cathode and anode materials has played a significant role to inhibit chloride corrosion. In addition, chloride corrosion can be neglected by the systematic synthesis of electrode materials (both for cathode and anode), which is capable of inhibiting the chloride ions toward the respective electrode during seawater electrolysis.
Based on the above discussion, numerous electrocatalysts have been designed for selective OER activity in the presence of Cl− ions. Previous studies proposed that the OER of seawater occurs in alkaline medium (≥7.5 pH) at an overpotential of ≤480 mV. The achievement of high current density at <480 mV overpotential is an important factor for the selection of OER electrocatalyst for seawater electrolysis.7,29 Based on this perspective, several electrocatalysts have been developed for selective OER in seawater. This section provides a series of OER active electrocatalysts to find out the advantages and disadvantages of seawater electrolysis (Table 4). Bennett and his co-workers conducted direct seawater electrolysis using unbuffered electrolytes and non-diaphragm cells, which results in predominant Cl2 evolution at high current density region.18 OER is only favorable at low current density below 1 mA cm−2. The MnO2-coated electrode showed 95–99% efficiency for selective OER from seawater and saturated NaCl solution.18 A more convenient comparison between the two competitive anodic reactions has been demonstrated by Trasatti et al.119 by plotting the overpotential of reactions for different oxide-based electrocatalysts (Fig. 7a).119 They anticipated that CER and OER follow the adsorption of the reactive intermediate on the surface of the electrocatalyst; thereby, a change in the electronic structure with increasing valence state determines the kinetics as well as the activity of the metal oxide-based materials. The nature of the slope suggests that the catalytic selectivity is hardly dependent on the nature of the electrode material, which may vary with the change in the pH and Cl− ions concentration. Based on these studies, Hashimoto and his co-workers studied the effect of various ions on the manganese oxide-based OER electrocatalyst in 0.5 M NaCl at pH 8.120 The addition of a small amount of transition metal, f-block element, and noble metal can significantly enhance the OER performance of the electrocatalyst with 91% efficiency; thereby, the formation of single-phase Mn2O3 on the addition of ions is considered to be an accountable reason for improvement, while the experimental finding proposed that at higher concentration, the formation of Mn–M–O4 and/or double oxide composite made OER unfavorable.
Table 4 Summary of the recent reports on OER electrocatalysts for seawater electrolysis




Catalyst
Electrolyte composition and experimental condition
Catalyst preparation
Performance/efficiency
Key finding
References




Mn–Mo/IrO2/Ti
0.5 M NaCl (pH = 8) at 30 °C
Electrodeposition
91% increase
Metal additives enhance the activity

120



Co–Fe LDH
Seawater (pH = 8)
Nucleation and aging steps
530 mV@10 mA cm−2
(a) Catalytic activity in unbuffered solution, (b) synergistic action of Co–Fe LDH and multiple ions of sea salt

110



Mn0.929Mo0.067Sn0.004O2.067/Ir0.84Sn0.16O2/Ti
0.5 M NaCl (pH = 1) at 30 °C
Anodic deposition
99.9% OER efficiency for 4200 h at current density of 1000 A m−2
Prevention of the oxide to retain OER performance

121



(Mn–W)Ox/IrO2/Ti
0.5 M NaCl at pH 8
Anodic deposition
99.6% efficiency at 20 mA cm−2
(a) Tungsten addition enhances MnO2 OER performance, (b) low pH accelerates the anodic deposition of tungsten over MnOx

122



(Mn–Mo)Ox/IrO2/Ti
1.5 M NaCl at pH 12 at 30 °C
Anodic deposition
—
(a) Mo addition decreases the OER performance

123



(b) Mo addition increases the durability


(c) Lower current density η increases with the Mo content


Mn1−x−yMoxWyO2+x+y/IrO2/Ti
1.5 M NaCl at pH 2
Anodic deposition at pH = 0.1–1.0 (H2SO4 medium)
99.8% after electrolysis for 691.2 ks
(a) Mo & W prevent the CER, (b) stable at acidic pH

125



Mn1−x−yMoxFeyO2−x−0.5y/IrO2/Ti
0.5 M NaCl at pH 12
Anodic deposition
100% OER efficiency within 30–90 °C at pH 12
Addition of Fe enhances OER at higher temperature

126



Mn–Mo–W triple oxide over IrO2/Ti
0.5 M NaCl at pH 8.7
Anodic deposition at pH = 0
—
(a) Tungsten improves the electrical conductivity

127



(b) Single phase triple oxide increases the OER


MnOx/IrOx
Aqueous chloride solution (pH ∼ 0.9)
Electrodeposition at pH = 0.9
CER selectivity decrease 86% to 7%
(a) MnOx decreases the catalytic activity

131



(b) MnOx increases the OER selectivity


NM/IrO2/Ti and NS/IrO2/Ti
0.5 M NaCl, 30 °C and pH = 8.3
Thermal decomposition method
—
Nafion membrane or solution coating monitor the selective OER by protecting Cl−

133



Mg|Co–MnO2/α-Co(OH)2
(1) 0.5 M NaCl
Electrodeposition and ion exchange process
∼79%
(a) Mg|Co–MnO2 poses no OER and CER activity

134



(2) seawater
∼58%
(b) Mg|Co–MnO2 prevent Cl− ion


(3) 0.25 MgCl2
∼39%


NiFe-LDH
Cathode (0.5 M NaCl, pH 7–8) & anode (0.5 M KOH, pH 12–13) - electrolyzer
—
94%
Achieve high cell voltage (4.0 V) and high current densities

135



GO@Fe@Ni–Co@NF
1 M KOH + 0.5 M NaCl
Hydrothermal, annealing, and electrodeposition

η = 247 mV@50 mA cm−2 &
(a) Graphene oxide layer blocks the Cl− ion intercalation

136




η = 303 mV@500 mA cm−2
(b) Fe species enhance the OER performance


(c) Synergy effect between interfacial FeOOH NP and Ni–Co hydroxide 2D sheets effectively lowers the OER overpotentials


Ru1−xNixO2−y (0.02 < x < 0.30)
0.1 M HClO4 + 0.3 M NaCl
Sol–gel process
—
>10% Ni content favor O2 evolution

139



Cu-doped RuO2
1.5 M NaCl
Electrodeposition
—
(a) Cu modulates Ru active sites

140



(b) Binding energy of OER intermediates reduces and favors CER


RuO2–TiO2/Ti
0.1 M HClO4 + X M NaCl, (X = different value)
—
—
(a) RuO2, TiO2 redox property influence the CER selectivity

141



(b) Cl− concentration increase the OER over CER


(c) Increase RuO2 loading and increase the OER ratio


Ru0.8Zn0.2O2
0.1 M HClO4
Solution mixing and heat treatment
—
Zn prevent peroxo-bridge formation; affect OER and CER process

142



0.15 M NaCl


Co-OEC
(a) Charles river (Cambridge, MA)
Electrodeposition
(a) ∼470 mV@1 mA cm−2
Anode-functionalized catalyst show appreciable current density

143



(b Seawater (Woods hole, MA)
(b) ∼550 mV@1 mA cm−2


Binary NiCo alloy DEA (DEA = diethanolamine)
Seawater (pH = 6.64, ionic conductivity = 33.9 mS cm−1, T = 25 °C)
Hydrothermal

η
onset = 80 mV
(a) –NH2 group in DEA promote NiCo alloy formation

145



(b) Ni, Co interaction (Brewe's theory) increase bonding with O


Ti-supported PtPd alloy
Seawater (pH = 6.64, ionic conductivity = 33.9 mS cm−1, T = 25 °C)
Cyclic voltammetry deposition

η
onset = 690 mV
Increase M-O bond strength and oxygen binding energy enhance the OER performance

146



CoPx@FeOOH
1 M KOH + natural seawater (Galveston bay, Texas, USA, (29.364°N, 94.810°W)
Phosphidation and electrodeposition

η
10 = 235 mV
(a) FeOOH shell enhances electron transport

147




η
100 = 283 mV
(b) CoPx provides mechanical strength with high surface area address low conductivity and insoluble precipitates



η
500 = 337 mV
(b) Negatively charge P atoms moderates the absorption energy of FeOOH and help to avoid CER



η
800 = 354 mV


NCFPO/C@CC
KOH + seawater (pH = 12.7, Incheon, South Korea)
Sol–gel, heat treatment and ball milling

η
10 ≈ 340 mV
(a) Higher catalytic efficiency than (oxy)hydroxyl material

148



(b) Co/Fe ratio control OER performance


CoFe-LDH nanosheets
KOH + seawater (pH = 12.7, Incheon, South Korea)
Co-precipitation and hydrothermal

η
10 ≈ 450 mV
Fe3+ forms a new phase of hydrotalcite-like layer structure responsible for the OER process

148



NiMoN@NiFeN
1 M KOH + seawater (Galveston bay near houston, Texas, USA)
Hydrothermal & nitridation

η
100 = 307 mV
(a) In situ generated amorphous NiFe oxide and NiFe oxy (hydroxide) layers play a positive role in improving the resistance to corrosion by chloride anions

149




η
500 = 369 mV
(b) Amorphous layers of NiFe oxide and NiFe oxy (hydroxide)



η
1000 = 398 mV


S-(Ni,Fe)OOH
1 M KOH + seawater (pH = 14, Galveston bay near houston, Texas, USA
One-step solution-phase method at room temperature

η
100 = 300 mV
(a) NiOOH and FeOOH real active species for OER

150




η
500 = 398 mV
(b) Hydrophilic S-(Ni,Fe)OOH layer with pores of different sizes contributes to efficient electrolyte diffusion and the fast release of gas bubbles




 Fig. 7  (a) Cl2 and O2 evolution performance at the same current density for a number of oxides, alkaline (circle), and acidic (black circle) solutions (reproduced with permission from ref. 119 copyright© 1984 Published by Elsevier Ltd.). (b) Deposited MnOx onto IrOx decreases the CER selectivity and is performed as a highly OER-selective electrocatalyst. (c) Mass spectrometry measurements of an IrOx/GC disk electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 131 copyright© 2018 The Authors). (d) Cross-section TEM image of CeOx-coated NiFeOx. (e) Electrocatalytic stability test at controlled current electrolysis of 20 mA cm−2 (reproduced with permission from ref. 132 copyright© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (f) O2 concentration, detected by mass spectroscopy in an optimized electrolyzer set up (reproduced with permission from ref. 135 copyright© 2020 The Authors). 
A series of Mn-based bi or trimetallic oxides (MMO) on IrOx/Ti electrodes were prepared to focus on the selective OER at pH 1, and an electrochemical anodization technique is employed over the IrOx that operates as the protective layer to prevent the oxidation of the Ti substrate during the anodic deposition of mixed metal oxides under a variety of experimental conditions.121–129 The prevention of the oxide layer formation is a necessary step to neglect the CER during OER from seawater electrolysis. In a similar report, the MnMoW-triple oxide catalyst was prepared by the repeated anodic deposition of their oxides on the Ti/IrO2 substrate for preferential OER on seawater electrolysis. A remarkable stability in 0.5 M NaCl solution at a higher current density of 100 mA cm−2 was found due to the formation of single-phase oxide deposits with optimized thickness, composition, and the degree of defects thereby allows the reduction of the electrode overpotential for oxygen evolution. The OER catalytic activity of the MnOx-based electrocatalyst depends on the pH of the electrolyte.130 Thereafter, Koper et al.131 optimized the MnOx coating thickness of ∼5–20 nm on the glossy carbon-supported hydrous iridium oxide (IrOx/GC) in an aqueous chloride solution at pH ∼0.9 through the electrodeposition technique. The MnOx layer plays a crucial role in blocking the diffusion of Cl− ions, making it a highly OER selective catalyst (Fig. 7b), as evidenced by the online electrochemical mass spectroscopy study (Fig. 7c).131 This may be a promising approach for seawater electrolysis. In contrast, an OER catalyst breaks the intrinsic scaling between the activity and selectivity. Like MnOx, the anodic deposition of the CeOx layer protects the loss of Fe species in NiFeOx without affecting the OER activity of the catalyst; thereby, the stability of the anodic material is improved (Fig. 7d).131 The CeOx layer performs as the permselective membrane, permitting the movement of OH− and O2 toward the active catalyst while preventing the diffusion of redox ions through the layer and function as the selective O2 evolving electrode (Fig. 7e).132 Another approach includes the selective oxidation of seawater using a cation-selective polymer membrane. The IrO2/Ti electrode surface modified by a permselective polymer (Nafion) repels Cl− ions from the electrode surface and thereby enhances the oxygen evolution at 0.5 M NaCl solution at 8.03 pH with 100% efficiency.133 The catalytic inertness of the Nafion membrane supports the preferential use on the MnOx and CeOx. Nakayama et al.134 have shown Co–MnO2/α-Co(OH)2 as the OER active electrode with ∼79% efficiency in 0.5 M NaCl solution. Interestingly, the upper Mg|Co–MnO2 layer shows no catalytic activity for both the OER and CER but functioned as the permselective coating, which can permit H2O to penetrate and contact with the catalytic sites in the underlying Co(OH)2, whereas Cl− ions can be excluded.
Dionigi et al.29 tailored noble-metal-free Ni–Fe-LDH electrocatalysts for OER selective seawater electrolysis considering the thermodynamic and kinetic approach. According to this theory, LDH nanoplates selectively operate at pH ∼13 with pronounced OER performance at <480 mV overpotential, which can attain the targeted current density of 10 mA cm−2. Seawater electrolysis using the LDH electrode at neutral pH is limited and noticeably unstable, whereas better stability is observed at near-neutral pH in chloride-free borate buffer. Strasser et al. integrated FeNi-LDH as a commercial anode material and tested in 0.5 M KOH with and without NaCl for 100 h at a maximum current density of 200 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V.109
Kuanga et al.5 demonstrated a multilayer anode consisting of a nickel-iron hydroxide (NiFe) layer uniformly coated on the OER active pre-deposited nickel sulfide (NiSx) layer on porous Ni foam (NiFe/NiSx–Ni). An enhanced catalytic performance with corrosion resistance efficiency was observed in solar-driven alkaline seawater electrolysis operating at higher current density (0.4 to 1 A cm−2) for 1000 h. Interestingly, the Raman spectra showed the appearance of in situ generated carbonate and the sulfate-rich cation-selective polyatomic anion-rich anode (Fig. 8b).5 FeNi-LDH based OER electrocatalyst has limited the anode potential of 1.72 V to ensure ∼100% O2 selectivity, resulting in a low electrolyzer cell current density of 200 mA cm−2. This issue can be solved using different electrolytes at the cathode and anode, even though the O2 faradaic efficiency is compared with the Ir-based benchmark catalysts (Fig. 7f).135 Lee and co-workers reported a multilayered GO@Fe@Ni–Co@NF electrode as the 3D anode catalyst where GO is responsible for superior chloride corrosion resistance at the anode and FeOOH moiety facilitated to interact between the two-layer system, thereby requires a low overpotential of 303 and 345 mV to deliver a large current density of 500 and 1000 mA cm−2 in alkaline medium (Fig. 8a).136 Co–Fe-LDH, synthesized by nucleation and aging steps, was loaded on the Ti mesh electrode for selective seawater oxidation at pH ∼8. It requires a moderate overpotential of 530 mV at 10 mA cm−2 without the addition of any buffer solution and exhibits acceptable stability for the diurnal cycle (8 h per day) under the given operating conditions.110
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the synthesis procedure for freestanding GO@Fe@NiCo@NF electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 136 copyright© The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020). (b) Raman spectra of Ni3+ and NiSx/Ni (reproduced with permission from ref. 5 copyright© 2019 the Author(s) published by PNAS). (c) The DEMS-based onsets of the chlorine (squares) and oxygen (circles) detection as a function of the average Ni content (reproduced with permission from ref. 139 copyright© 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved). (d) Threshold potential for each gas evolution against the Cl− concentration of NaCl aqueous solution with the 0.1 M HClO4 on RuO2 (100%)/Ti electrode (• Cl2 evolution, ○ O2 evolution); (e) Threshold potential for each gas evolution against RuO2 loading (reproduced with permission from ref. 141 copyright© 2021 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature). (f) Measured current density and its components corresponding to chlorine (red) and oxygen (blue) evolution during the anodic polarization of RuO2:Zn nanocrystal (reproduced with permission from ref. 142 copyright© 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (g) XPS survey spectra of Ti-supported PtM (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Pd) alloy electrodes (reproduced with permission from ref. 146 copyright© 2017 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved). 
The choice of an active site-selective electrocatalyst is also a major challenge as the active site of OER and CER are analogous to each other; thereby, two parallel reactions are allowed at the anode compartment irrespective of the pH medium. This issue can be addressed by the theoretical understanding of the prescribed electrocatalyst. A theoretical study on the RuO2 (110)-based surface brings a linear scaling relationship between the adsorption energies of O and Cl−, implying higher overpotential of OER than that for the CER.68 From the Volcano plot analysis, Over et al.28 confirmed the impracticality of the OER active electrocatalyst. Therefore, it is essential to find out a new catalytically active electrocatalyst to overcome the scaling relationships that include (a) introducing p states, (b) introducing second adsorption sites, (c) introducing proton acceptor group, (d) the strain generation, (e) altering the solvent composition, (f) nanoscopic confinement, and (g) O–O direct coupling in the absence of *OOOH, which accelerates the OER activity and selectivity.81 Ru-based catalysts show immense activity and selectivity for both OER and CER. Several groups focused on the Ru-based electrocatalyst irrespective of CER and OER to obtain the preferred seawater electrocatalyst for OER.137–140 Interestingly, the shifting of the CER onset potential toward higher value with increasing Ni content (Fig. 8c) suggests the enhancement of O2 evolution than Cl2 evolution. Takasu et al.141 reported chlorine and oxygen evolution at the RuO2/TiO2–Ti anode. The chloride ions' concentration as the electrolyte and the RuO2 loading at the anode decide the predominant anodic reaction (Fig. 8d and e).141 The OER process is more dominant over CER at higher Cl− ion concentration and RuO2 loading as the anode material.141 Zn substitution in the RuO2 lattice protects from the formation of peroxo bridges between the Ocus sites; thus, a re-arrangement of the neighboring metal atoms in the (111) direction and enhancement in the oxygen evolution efficiency was observed from the polarization plot (Fig. 8f).142 Recently, Co-based catalysts have been considered as potential materials for selective OER electrocatalyst due to their performance at neutral pH in the presence of a buffer solution. Nocera et al.143,144 developed a series of highly active cobalt phosphate and borate-based oxygen-evolving catalysts operating in neutral water or real seawater medium. The exceptional catalytic performance in seawater can be ascribed to the anode-functionalized catalyst with improved current density. Recently, metal alloy-based nanostructures have potential OER activity due to their exposed active sites and low charge transfer resistance; thus, the NiCo-alloy exhibits improved stability and activity toward seawater electrolysis.145 The electronic structure of noble metal Pt can be tuned by alloying with Pd, Ni, Co, or Fe with Pt; thereby, the charge transfer resistance of the Ti-supported Pt alloy decreases and the OER activity of the electrocatalyst is improved in seawater. The high-resolution XPS study exhibits a red shift for Pt and blue shift for the transition metal, suggesting the electronic interactions of the atomic orbitals between the Pt and alloying elements, which could transfer the charge from the alloying elements to Pt, thus causing electronic redistribution on the Pt surface (Fig. 8g).146 The success of seawater electrolysis depends on the OER performance and thus, most of the studies are focusing on seawater OER compared to simulated seawater.147–150 Bimetallic phosphate,148 core shell structure of metal (oxy)hydroxide,147 LDH,148 doped bimetallic (oxy)hydroxide,150 and 3D core–shell trimetallic nitride149 are considered as potential OER electrocatalysts for seawater electrolysis with pronounced stability and selectivity (Table 4). Finally, seawater OER not only depends on the catalytic performance but also on the selective optimization of the experimental conditions as discussed in the earlier section.
5.2 Selection of cathode material for HER
Previous studies showed that seawater HER will hardly face any competing reactions such as those in the anode chamber. However, the main problems of cathodic HER are the low faradaic efficiency and operating stability due to the impurities present in seawater, leading to the blockage of active sites and catalytic corrosion.151 The concentration of cationic moieties (Table 1) decreases the achieved current density value by the cathode due to the formation of hydroxides species on the electrode surface during the electrochemical process (Fig. 9a). On the contrary, the anodic counterpart, being contaminated by continuous electrodeposition and reduction of the dissolved ions during the reaction, again depends on the operational condition such as the applied potential window and the scan rate. The formation of a precipitate during seawater electrolysis can be prevented by optimizing the experimental conditions to obtain high faradaic efficiency for HER. High fluid (electrolyte) flow rate and current density are helpful in reducing the tendency of precipitate formation at high solution concentration while the total precipitate is proportional to the ionic concentration of seawater (Fig. 9e–g).152
 Fig. 9  (a)–(d) Challenges and potential solutions to improve the long-term stability of HER in low-grade water, (e) effect of the electrolyte flow rate on the precipitate formation; (f) effect of the current density on the precipitate formation; (g) effect of the concentration on the precipitate formation (reproduced with permission from ref. 152 copyright© 1982 published by Elsevier Ltd). 
In order to resolve this problem, several techniques such as (a) inherent corrosion resistance material (Fig. 9c), (b) selective membrane designing, (Fig. 9b), and (c) electrocatalyst-containing permselective membrane (Fig. 9d) have been employed for the development of HER active electrocatalysts for seawater electrolysis.56,151,152 The HER performances of recently developed electrocatalysts are summarized in Table 5 to obtain the up-to-date knowledge to design a potential HER electrocatalyst for seawater electrocatalysis. To date, Pt is considered as the most promising state-of-the-art electrocatalyst for HER on account of its high electrical conductivity, durability, and low ΔG for hydrogen adsorption.4 The low kinetic energy barrier (0.89 eV) for the dissociation of water molecules over the surface of Pt (111) and the position of Pt in the Volcano plot (Pt–H binding energy) suggests that Pt is the most promising electrode material even in seawater electrolysis compared to the rest of the noble metal-based electrocatalysts.4,59,62 A series of Pt-based electrocatalysts was designed for seawater electrolysis considering certain issues related to seawater splitting. Zheng et al.146,153,156 prepared Pt-based metal alloy on the Ti surface. They used different transition metals such as Fe, Co, Ni, Pd, Cr, and Mo to design different Pt-based alloys and found enhanced HER activity over pristine Pt in seawater (Fig. 10a).146,153 The long-term stability of the Ti/Pt-M electrodes in seawater, i.e., the corrosion resistance performance in the presence of unwanted ions can be verified by the chronoamperometric study at a constant potential vs. RHE in seawater (Fig. 10b).146 Another report suggests the alloying effect of transition metals (Cr, Fe, Co, Ni, and Mo) with Pt and Ru, which can be confirmed by the enhanced HER performance with long-term stability.154 The Ti surface has a minor effect on the stability of the Pt–Ru-M alloy, as confirmed by the chronoamperometric study for Pt–Ru–M than the Ti-supported electrode. Likewise, the Pt- and Ni-based alloys (NiM where M = Co, Cu, Mo, Au, Pt) can be prepared by the electrodeposition technique for seawater HER. The Volcano plot suggests that metallic nickel (Ni) has a better catalytic performance in comparison to the other transition metals; thus, the investigation on Ni-based alloys is required to replace the expensive Pt-based electrocatalysts for seawater HER.155 The alloying of Pt or Ni could modify the electronic structure and make the charge transfer process easier. Therefore, the developed nanostructure could expose the abundant active sites, which could enhance the HER performance. While tuning the ratio of Pt and Ni in the alloy, a maximum catalytic performance of PtNi5 was obtained through a simple and green chemical reduction method, which represents the extremely low overpotential of HER in seawater.156 The optimized PtNi5 represents a face-centered-cubic structure (FCC) of Pt, while on the incorporation of alloying guest atoms into Pt host lattices an alteration of crystallite size of Pt was observed, suggesting the influence of the alloying process on the modified catalytic performance. The HER activity of RuCo and RuCoMox alloys in filtered seawater were compared, which were found to exhibit excellent stability at different current densities.157 Graphene-supported trimetallic NiRuIr alloy nanoparticles (average diameter: 8 mm) were synthesized in a surfactant-free approach, exhibiting excellent HER catalytic performance and stability in real seawater (Fig. 10c).158 The Ir metal and graphene play a vital role for developing the HER electrocatalyst.
Table 5 Summary of the recent reports on seawater based HER electrocatalysts




Catalyst
Electrolyte
Catalyst preparation
Performance/efficiency
Key finding
References




MoP700
1.0 M PBS (pH = 7.4)
Solution mixing, reductive route, and calcinations at 700 °C for 5 h

η
onset = 75 mV
High neutral HER activity for MoP2, MoP synergistic mechanism

116




η
10 = 196 mV


Mn–NiO–Ni/Ni–F
(a) 1 M phosphate buffer (pH = 7)
Hydrothermal and pyrolysis in Ar atmosphere
(a) η = 200 mV@35 mA cm−2
(a) Mn doping increases the HER activity on free energy decrease

151



(b) Seawater (pH ∼8.2)
(b) η = 170 mV@10 mA cm−2
(b) Mn-blended NiO composite provides enhanced stability


Ti-supported PtPd alloy
Seawater (pH = 6.64, ionic conductivity = 33.9 mS cm−1, T = 25 °C)
Electrode position (−0.6 to 1.4 V potential window)

η
onset = 51 mV
Increasing M–O bond strength and oxygen binding energy enhance OER performance

146



Ti/PtMo alloy
Seawater
Electrodeposition (potential window of −0.8 to +0.6 V)
(a) η10 = 254.6 mV
(a) Highly negative ΔrGm, 25 °C in seawater beneficial for HER

153



(b) Conserve 91.13% of initial current density upon 172 h operation
(b) Increased anticorrosion increases stability


Pt–Ru–Mo alloy on Ti mesh
Seawater
Electrodeposition (potential window −0.8 to 0.6 V)
Achieve 69.54 mA cm−2 current density at 0.8 V
(a) Synergistic effect enhances HER

154



(b) Labile d-orbital e− assist in breaking the O–H bond


Ti/NiPt
Seawater
Electro deposition at −0.8 V for 1800 s

η
onset = 230 mV
The Tafel slope suggests that Ti/NiPt electrodes obey the Volmer mechanism

155



PtNi5
Natural seawater
Solution mixing, ultrasonic vibration, agitation for 2 h

η
10 = 380 mV
Tuning the Pt, Ni ratio enhances the HER performance with durability

156



Ti-supported RuCo alloy
Seawater (33.9 mS c−1 at 25 °C, pH = 6.44)
Electrodeposition

η
10 = 387 mV
High Ru (active site) content enhance the HER

157




η
onset = 25 mV


Ti supported RuCoMox alloy
Seawater (33.9 mS c−1 at 25 °C, pH = 6.44)
Electrodeposition

η
onset = 37 mV
(a) Low Ru (active site) content decrease the HER

157



(b) Strong Mo–H bond decrease effective active site


Graphene-supported NiRuIr alloy
Seawater
Surfactant-free approach and autoclave treatment (3 h, 205 °C)

η = 80 mV
(a) Graphene decreases the Rct value

158



(b) Electron rich Ir repels the Cl− ion


(c) Trimetallic alloy increases the anticorrosion properties


T@Td–ReS2 nanosheets
Fresh water + Na2SO4
Thermal treatment

η
10 = 173 mV
Metallic phase and Re vacancies monitor the HER

159



0.5Rh-GS1000
• 1 M PBS (pH = 7)
Wet impregnation method and heat treatment
• η10 = 19 mV
(a) N,S co-doped carbon nanosheets enhance the HER

160



• Seawater (pH = 8.32, from Zhangzhou, Fujian, China)
• η10 = 320 mV
(b) Higher Rh loading lead to nonlinear HER improvement


Mo2C–MoP NPC/CFP-800
Seawater (from East China sea)
Electro-polymerization, solution soaking, annealing

η
10 = 346 mV
Synergistic effect between MoP and Mo2C enhances the HER

161



Co3Mo3C/CNT
Seawater (yellow sea, China)
Heat-treatment under AR atmosphere

η
10 = 124 mV
(a) Interconnected structure modifies the HER

162




η
200 = 782 mV


CoMoP@C
Seawater (yellow sea, China)
One-step pyrolysis method
(a) Faradic efficiency 92.5% over 10 h
Synergistic effect between CoMoP nanocrystalline core and N-doped graphitic carbon shells improves the H adsorption free energy value

163



(b) η10 = 41 mV


Mo5N6
Seawater
Metal-induced salt template method, annealing

η
10=257 mV
Additional N incorporation leads to higher Mo valence state, a Pt-like electronic structure

164



Ni–Mo–S/C
Neutral electrolyte (pH ∼ 7)
Biomolecule-assisted hydrothermal method

η
10=250 mV
Ni creates defect and regulates MoS2 growth

165



3D MoS2QD aerogel-100
Seawater (Pacific ocean, pH = 8.8)
Hydrothermal method
0.15 V more positive than Pt at 80 mA g−1 current density
(a) HER activity MoS2 QD-aerogel-100 superior to Pt

166



(b) 3D porous configuration provides conductive pathways to enhance the electron and ion transport during the electrochemical HER process


NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN
Seawater (pH ∼ 7.2, Galveston bay at houston)
Phosphorization, nitridation

η
10 = 165 mV
Inner NixP microsheets show chloride-corrosion resistance

167





 Fig. 10  (a) The polarization curves of the Pt-alloy based electrocatalyst (reproduced with permission from ref. 153 copyright© 2018 The Authors). (b) Chronoamperometric study of the Pt-based metal alloy (reproduced with permission from ref. 146 © 2017 Elsevier B. V.). (c) TEM images of the NiRuIr-G nanocomposite and the EDX maps of ruthenium, nickel, and iridium (reproduced with permission from ref. 158 copyright© 2020 Elsevier B. V.). (d) Calculated cationic impurity adsorption energies of T@Td-ReS2 with VS and VRe (reproduced with permission from ref. 159 copyright© 2018 Elsevier Ltd). (e) Schematic representation of the neutral pH HER on MoP700 (reproduced with permission from ref. 116 copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society). (f) Illustration of the preparation of the CoMoP@C catalyst (reproduced with permission from ref. 163 copyright© Royal Society of Chemistry 2017). (g) d-band center position of Pt (111), Mo5N6, and MoN, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 164 copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society). (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure for the sandwich-like NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN catalyst (reproduced with permission from ref. 167 copyright© 2020 American Chemical Society). 
Graphene can reduce the charge transfer resistance, and the repulsion of Cl− ion occurs due to the negatively charged Ir surface.158 Wu et al.159 developed a highly efficient HER active heterostructure, namely, T/Td phase ReS2 nanosheets (T@Td-ReS2) with cationic vacancies (Fig. 10d). Theoretical investigation confirmed that the absorption energy of the H+ ions by cation vacancies is the lowest compared to the dissolved cationic impurities in seawater. ESR spectroscopy suggests that the existence of a dangling bond caused by the Re vacancies improves the H-adsorption performance in seawater. Pure T@Td-ReS2 delivers a stable HER performance for more than 12 h in a wide range of salinity. XPS and other physicochemical analysis support that the incorporation of S into the carbon matrix forms the N/S-codoped carbon nanosheets and is found to promote the electron transfer of Rh nanoparticles to the interface between Rh and the C-support, thereby exhibiting high HER catalytic activity and delivering 15 mA cm−2 current density for 10 h in seawater (pH = 8.32).160
Recently, Mo-based inorganic materials (phosphides, carbides, borides, nitrides, oxides, and dichalcogenides) have gained enormous attention as selective HER catalysts due to their high natural abundance, similar d-band electronic structure with Pt, and high activity toward electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution.151 Xie et al. demonstrated a dual active Mo2P/MoP mixed-phase catalyst with enhanced HER at neutral pH (1.0 M phosphate buffer).116 Due to the electrostatic affinity within Moδ+ to –OH and Pδ− to –H, the Mo2P phase accelerates the dissociation of H2O, while for MoP, the exposed Mo atoms act as the active sites, resulting in the recombination of Hd. A more HER-active electrocatalyst can be obtained by the phase-controlled phosphidation of Mo-rich polyoxometalate (rPOM) nanoclusters at a certain temperature of 700 °C (this catalyst is designated as MoP700). It is conceptualized that the strong Moδ+–Pδ− networks in MoP700 could potentially mimic the catalytic behavior for efficient H2O dissociation over the surface and promotes the HER performance of the MoP2/MoP-heterostructured catalyst in seawater (Fig. 10e).116 Novel Mo2C/MoP hybrid nanoparticles were implanted in P,N co-doped carbon nanofibers grown on carbon fiber paper (Mo2C–MoP NPC/CFP-800) for seawater HER. The Mo2C/MoP hybrid nanoparticles exhibit pronounced HER performance compared to MoP nanoparticles.161 Wu et al.117 have shown that the perfect dispersion of CoxMo2−xC/NC nanocrystallites on the MXene nanosheets (denoted as CoxMo2−xC/MXene/NC, the NC represents N-doped carbon) affords synergistic behavior with high conductivity and intimate H+/water adsorption. Therefore, an overall improvement in the initial Volmer step is observed, which could balance the adsorption–desorption phenomenon within the H* and H2, charge transfer rate, and stability of the abundant exposed active sites. Therefore, CoxMo2−xC/NC emerged as a superior cathodic material for seawater electrolysis with ∼98% faradaic efficiency, which is comparable with that of commercial Pt/C.117 CNT is also used as the conductive surface; cobalt–molybdenum carbide decorated on CNT (Co3Mo3C/CNT) provides a highly efficient seawater electrocatalyst for HER.162 Li et al.163 demonstrated the preparation of CoMoP@C by a one-step pyrolysis method and the catalytic performance in seawater exhibited ∼92.5% faradaic efficiency. The augmented HER performance of CoMoP@C is attributed to the high adsorption ability of the central CoMoP crystalline core and the multiple functionalities of the outer N-doped C shell. The exceptional stability in seawater can be ascribed to the presence of N-doped carbon shells on the surface of the nanocrystals (Fig. 10f).163 Atomically thin crystalline two-dimensional nitrogen-rich Mo5N6 nanosheets with abundant metal–nitrogen electroactive sites exhibit remarkable HER performance in natural seawater. The d-band center position suggests Mo5N6 as the competitive cathode material such as Pt/C for HER in seawater (Fig. 10g).164 2D MoS2 is a promising electrocatalyst for HER as the edge-exposed S atoms are the active sites for HER.165,166 Moreover, the Volcano plot also supports the finding. The incorporation of Ni atoms plays a fundamental role in designing the Ni–Mo–S nanostructures by forming substantial desirable defect sites as well as regulating the growth rate of layered MoS2.165 The stability and flexibility parameters are introduced in Ni–Mo–S by integrating with the C fiber cloth. Moreover, such an approach can exhibit potential practical applications; thus, laboratory-scale hydrogen production is possible with a rolled-Mo-S/C electrode with high mechanical strength.165 Chang et al.166 reported MoS2QD-aerogel as a potential electrocatalyst for HER in seawater. The porous network structure of the MoS2QD-aerogel has high H adsorption capabilities; thus, the catalytic performance is improved. A recent report includes the design of hierarchical sandwich-like catalyst (NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN) constructed by decorating both sides of nickel phosphide (NixP) microsheet arrays with nickel–cobalt nitride (NiCoN) nanoparticles (Fig. 10h)167 This sandwich-like material provides a high active surface area, intrinsic active sites for H, and elevated electrical conductivity for efficient charge transportation from the electrode to the electrolyte, thereby benefiting the HER process. Moreover, the improved stability is ascribed to the good corrosion resistance property of the inner NixP skeleton and the anticorrosive NiCoN nanoparticles.167
6. Symmetric & asymmetric cell electrocatalyst and commercial electrolyzer design
The design of suitable electrolyzer for seawater electrolysis is necessary to combat the present energy crises and related environmental issues. The electrolyzers are able to split water electrochemically into hydrogen and oxygen. As discussed in the earlier section, seawater electrolysis is more complicated than fresh/clean water electrolysis due to the presence of several cationic and anionic species. In addition, most of the designed catalysts are selective toward either OER or HER. Thus, it is necessary to design a two-electrode set-up at the lab scale so that the preliminary outcome and challenges can end with a commercial electrolyzer. In this context, the one-step calcination technique was employed to design a series of cobalt selenide (CoSe and Co9Se8 phases)-based electrodes by varying the Co and Se mass ratio. The synchrotron-based mechanism study over a cobalt-selenide-based electrode material revealed high Co charge state favors the OER performance and the low Co charge state promotes the HER activity (Fig. 11a).168 An optimized two-electrode setup attained 10.3 mA cm−2 current density at 1.8 V, where the cathode and anode selection was done based on the charge on the metal ion.167 Liu et al. designed a device consisting of transition-metal hexa-cyano-metallated with basic cobalt carbonate (BCC) as the conductive core grown on the pretreated carbon cloth (MHCM-z-BCC) as the anode and NiMoS as the cathode, which demonstrated excellent durability and specific selectivity compared to the Pt‖Pt or Pt‖IrO2 couple. This earth-abundant catalyst depicts 17.9% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency in seawater photoelectrolysis (Fig. 11b).169 It is considered that the thin shell of MHCM provides good catalytic activity while the conductive core of basic cobalt carbonate (BCC) facilitates efficient charge transfer; thus, the OER performance is enhanced as reflected in the polarization curve.169 Interestingly, the amount of Cl2 produced at the anode for the MHCM-z-BCC and NiMoS integrated system is negligible compared to most of the state-of-the-art electrocatalyst, which us again confirmed by the UV-Vis study at a constant applied potential of 2.5 V (Fig. 11c).169 Overall seawater splitting has been performed by a two-electrode seawater electrolyzer that consists of a 3D sandwich-like NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN catalyst paired with OER-active S-doped Ni/Fe (oxy)hydroxide [S-(Ni,Fe)OOH], which delivers a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a small voltage of 1.81 V at room temperature (Fig. 11d).167 Notably, no hypochlorite is formed in the electrolyte after seawater electrolysis at a constant current density of 20 mA cm−2 due to the presence of NixP microsheets in sandwich-like NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN, confirming zero Cl2 evolution from the anode (Fig. 11e).167 Therefore, the as-described asymmetric setup provides the selective evolution of O2 and H2 at a volume ratio of 1:2 in seawater electrolysis; therefore, no chlorine or hypochlorite formation is observed.
 Fig. 11  (a) Synchrotron-based Co K-edge XANES spectra and (insert) enlarged pre-edge spectra for Co–Se1 and Co–Se4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 168 copyright© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinhei). (b) J–V curve of a triple-junction solar cell under simulated AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination and the polarization curve of MHCM-z-BCC/NiMoS seawater splitting device in a two-electrode configuration; (c) UV-Vis spectra of the testing solutions after the addition of the electrolyte at different electrolysis systems under a constant applied voltage of 2.5 V (reproduced with permission from ref. 169 copyright© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Polarization curve of the S-(Ni,Fe)OOH‖NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN electrolyzer (inset: schematic of the electrolyzer); (e) hypochlorite detection result for the electrolyte after 1 h seawater electrolysis at 20 mA cm−2 (reproduced with permission from ref. 167 copyright© 2020 American Chemical Society). (f) 100 h longtime measurement at +1.6 V in different electrolytes using the loading of 0.5 mg Pt cm−2 46.7 wt% Pt on carbon (TKK) on the cathode and 2.5 mg cm−2 NiFe-LDH at the anode (reproduced with permission from ref. 109 copyright© 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Lee et al.136 developed a GO@Fe@Ni–Co@NF(+)‖‖GO@Fe@Ni–Co@NF(−) alkaline seawater electrolyzer, which exhibits low cell voltages of 1.57 and 2.02 V to reach the current densities of 20 and 1000 mA cm−2, respectively. The low interlayer spacing in β-Ni–Co LDH, GO coating, and the in situ generated carbon oxide layer effectively improved the chloride corrosion resistance. Therefore, the developed electrolyzer depicts satisfactory performance in alkaline seawater at high current densities as evidenced from the negligible change in the stability test recorded up to 378 hours.136 The NiFe/NiSx/Ni-based seawater electrolyzer achieves a current density of 400 mA cm−2 under 2.1 V in salt-accumulated seawater or seawater at room temperature with no activity loss for 1000 h. The present NiSx formed a stable cation-selective polyatomic anion-rich electrode that block the Cl− ions, thereby enhancing the overall seawater electrolysis efficiency and stability by reducing chloride corrosion.5 Strasser et al. selected Ni–Fe-LDH and Pt nanoparticles as the anode and cathode as the asymmetric cell electrocatalyst. This asymmetric electrolyzer setup provides 200 mA cm−2 current density at 1.6 V for 100 h. They also investigated the effect of the membrane on the electrolyzer to reveal the drop in the current density during electrolysis.109 An optimized KOH concentration to achieve the highest performance with the stability of the electrolyzer was found to be 0.5 M (Fig. 11f), as confirmed from the systematic electrochemical study.109 The electrolytic cell design using the electrocatalyst developed for overall seawater splitting (Table 6) is the most significant challenge. As discussed in the previous section, it is affirmed that seawater filtration is an essential approach to avoid membrane rupture and to obtain the highest efficiency of the electrolytic cell. Therefore, seawater must be desalinated before being used in the electrolytic cell, which is an expensive process. This can be maintained by periodically resting an electrolyzer at an open circuit potential; therefore, the corrosion activity of unwanted ions decreases. The use of RO-coupled seawater electrolysis technology may be a preferable approach to cope with this issue. In the PEMWE electrolyzer, the current collectors and separator plates are typically made of graphite, titanium, or coated stainless steel, which helps to overcome the shortcomings related to this electrolyzer.170 An in-depth knowledge from the chlorine industry shows Ti as the most promising current collector both as the cathode and anode through the formation of an oxide layer. In case of AEMWE, the choice of the membrane is crucial for successful electrolyzer design. To circumvent this issue, the use of efficient, eco-friendly, and cost-effective membranes obtained from mangrove roots may be capable of filtering seawater. Therefore, the membranes of these plants can be used as potential electrolytic cell membranes to reduce the salt concentration on the surface of the catalytic electrode.171 The use of steam may be an alternate choice compared to direct seawater in an electrolytic cell to avoid the adverse effects associated with undesired dissolved ions in seawater.
Table 6 Electrocatalyst for overall seawater electrolysis process




Electrocatalyst for two electrode cell set up
Electrolyte
Cell voltage
Key findings
Reference




3D cobalt selenide electrode (CoSe & Co9Se8 phase)
Seawater
1.8 V at 10.3 mA cm−2
Rapid charge transfer and 3D network with lacunose surface benefiting overall water splitting

168



Cell Set Up: Co–Se1‖Co–Se4


S-(Ni,Fe)OOH‖NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN
Sea water
1.81 V at 10 mA cm−2
NixP microsheets prevent the CER process

167



MHCM-z-BCC‖‖NiMoS
Seawater (pH = 8.0, NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4 acid/base conjugate pair)
2.1 V at 10 mA cm−2
17.9% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency

169



GO@Fe@Ni–Co@NF‖‖GO@Fe@Ni–Co@NF
Alkaline seawater
1.57 at 10 mA cm−2
GO layer blocks Cl− and Na+ ion

136



NiFe/NiSx/Ni‖‖ Ni–NiO–Cr2O3
Seawater
2.1 V at 400 mA cm−2
Ni3 layer acts as the Cl− corrosion inhibitor

5



NiFe-LDH‖‖Pt nanoparticles
Seawater
1.6 V at 200 mA cm−2
Higher oxidation state and an ordered structure

109



CoPxIICoPx@FeOOH p
1 M KOH seawater
1.710 and 1.867 V at 100 and 500 mA cm−2
(a) The CoPx core in particular can act as a protection layer in the CoPx@FeOOH catalyst to repel the chloride ions

147



(b) CoPx@FeOOH exhibits enhanced conductivity, enriched active sites, sufficient mechanical strength, and accelerated bubble-release ability


S-(Ni,Fe)OOHIINiMoN nanowire arrays supported on Ni foam
1 M KOH + seawater
1.661 and 1.837 V at 100 and 500 mA cm−2
Porosity and hydrophilic nature enhance the overall electrolysis

150





7. Conclusions & outlook/future outlook
Nowadays, due to limited sources, the electrolysis of seawater is more demanding than that of fresh/clean water. Therefore, seawater can be used as an endless energy source through electrocatalytic hydrogen production, and the energy crisis could be mitigated through hydrogen production. In his regard, several crucial issues on seawater electrolysis need to be considered to make it technically and economically viable. The existence of several impurities and their interference during the splitting make the electrolysis more complex than pure/fresh water electrolysis. In comparison to anodic CER, OER is mainly responsible for the sluggish seawater splitting. Successive theoretical and experimental investigations assist in optimizing the conditions for selective seawater electrolysis, i.e., the thermodynamically facile OER rather than kinetically favorable CER. The most favorable conditions for selective anodic electrolysis is dependent exclusively upon the applied potential (≤480 mV) and pH (>7.2) of seawater. Experimental and computational investigations assist in uncovering the optimized pH conditions during the seawater electrolysis; thus, it is customary to add buffer solution during electrolysis as the local pH differs near the vicinity of the electrode and electrolyte interface. Similar to OER, the HER proceeds through several difficulties; thus, the cathodic reaction should be kept in mind while the control design of the electrolyzers. Another approach for operating anodes and cathodes in seawater electrolysis consists of the selective transport of interfering ions through membranes, use of permselective membranes/barriers over the surface of the respective electrode, and accounting for selective electrode materials with catalytically active sites, which suggest the preferred reactions over side-reactions and catalyst poisoning. It would be advantageous for the society to design new materials for seawater electrolysis considering the standardized condition, as discussed in the literature and applicable irrespective of the region of the sea. The design of suitable electrode material could overcome the entire shortcomings related to seawater splitting. In this context, a series of electrocatalysts have been investigated with good activity and selectivity toward seawater electrolysis. However, long-term stability remains a vital parameter to commercialize the proposed electrocatalyst as a seawater electrode. It is well documented that the undesired ions present in seawater decrease the stability of the electrode. Therefore, the enhanced catalytic selectivity, efficiency, and stability of seawater splitting are achieved by the filtration or removal of undesired ionic species before electrolysis. The chloride corrosion process can be ignored by this approach. However, the preferential use of ion-selective membranes shows some opportunities to defeat these issues. The costs and sustainability of the selective membranes impede the preferential use of the membrane during seawater electrolysis. The development of potential electrocatalysts with selective active sites is required to commercialize the seawater electrolysis technology. The investigation of the potential electrode material and distinctive membrane technology are the most fundamental prospects for seawater-based electrolysis. Recently, RO-coupled seawater electrolysis has attracted immense attention that can help to overcome the shortcomings related to the dissolved ions. RO-coupled seawater electrolysis is more promising than direct seawater electrolysis considering the cost effectiveness and percentage of product between these two different approaches. The previous investigation suggests that the asymmetric reactor with two different electrolytes is more promising over the symmetric reactor as in an asymmetric reactor, the membrane impedes the diffusion of unwanted ions toward the opposite electrode, thereby enhancing the selectivity and stability of the electrode. However, this approach is not accountable as a promising technique as along with seawater, neutral /fresh water is also required, which disregards the preferential use of this technique. Although the performance of presently reported electrocatalysts for seawater electrolysis is still far from reaching the benchmark, it is assumed that breakthroughs could be achieved in the near future after in-depth research and optimization of electrocatalyst systems. A more fundamental theoretical and experimental investigation is required to reach the goal for mankind. In this review, thorough discussion on the theoretical aspects of the possible electrode reactions that occur during seawater electrolysis is presented. This discussion enriches the broad idea of the researcher and assists in designing more selective electrode materials. Therefore, this review provides comprehensive knowledge on electrode material selection, parametric optimization, and electrolyzer design to find the solutions of alternative green energy fuel compared to fossil fuels for the benefit of mankind.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Authors acknowledge Deference Research and Development Organization (DRDO), India for the financial support [DFTM/02/3111/M/01/JCBCAT/1288/D(R&D), dated: 07/07/2017] through the GAP219012 project. The authors are also thankful to CSIR-CMERI, Durgapur.
References
Q. Shi, C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3181–3192 RSC .
F. Yu, L. Yu, I. K. Mishra, Y. Yu, Z. F. Ren and H. Q. Zhou, Mater. Today Phys., 2018, 7, 121–138 CrossRef .
B. You and Y. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuanga, M. J. Kenney, Y. Meng, W. H. Hung, Y. Liu, J. E. Huang, R. Prasanna, P. Li, Y. Li, L. Wang, M. C. Lin, M. D. McGehee, X. Sun and H. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 6624–6629 CrossRef PubMed .
J. O. Bockris, Science, 1972, 176, 1323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Shunichi Fukuzumi, Y.-M. Lee and W. Nam, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4264–4276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vignesh and A. A. Wahab, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 6423–6437 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, W. Hu, S. Cao and L. Piao, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2313–2322 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
A. Buttler and H. Spliethoff, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 2440–2454 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vincent and D. Bessarabov, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1690–1704 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Chini, K. L. Schreiber, Z. A. Barker and A. S. Stillwell, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 9003–9012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Schwarzenbach, B. I. Escher, K. Fenner, T. B. Hofstetter, C. A. Johnson, U. Gunten and B. Wehrli, Science, 2006, 313, 1072–1077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Vorosmarty, P. Green, J. Salisbury and R. B. Lammers, Science, 2000, 289, 284–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dresp, F. Dionigi, M. Klingenhof and P. Strasser, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 933–942 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. A. El-Bassuoni, J. W. Sheffield and T. N. Veziroglu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1982, 7, 919–923 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Bennett, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1980, 5, 401–408 CrossRef CAS .
S. Min Ji, H. Jun, J. S. Jang, H. C. Son, P. H. Borse and J. S. Lee, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 189, 141–144 CrossRef .
M. Cuartero, G. A. Crespo, T. Cherubini, N. Pankratova, F. Confalonieri, F. Massa, M. L. T. Waeber, M. Abdou, J. Schaefer and E. Bakker, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 4702–4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Kester, I. W. Duedall, D. N. Connors and R. M. Pytkowicz, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1967, 12, 176–179 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, H. Masuda and K. Domen, Catal. Today, 2009, 147, 173–178 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555 RSC .
J. Li and G. Zheng, Electrocatalyst, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600380 CrossRef PubMed .

Handbook of Methods for the Analysis of the Various Parameters of the Carbon Dioxide System in Sea Water, Version 2, ed. A. G. Dickson and C. Goyet, San Diego, ORNL/DCIAC-74,  1994 Search PubMed .

          P. Vanysek, Electrochemical series. in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, ed. D. R. Lide, CRC press: Boca Raton, FL,  2005 Search PubMed .

          L. A. Williams, Electrolysis of Sea Water. Hydrogen Energy, Part A, ed. T. N. Vezirolu, Plenum Press, New York,  1975, p. 417 Search PubMed .
K. S. Exner, J. Anton, T. Jacob and H. Over, Angew. Chem., 2014, 53, 11032–11035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dionigi, T. Reier, Z. Pawolek, M. Gliech and P. Strasser, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 962–972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shan, Y. Zheng, B. Shi, K. Davey and S. Qiao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2719–2730 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zagalskaya and V. Alexandrov, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3650–3657 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Exner, J. Anton, T. Jacob and H. Over, Chemelectrochem, 2015, 13, 707–713 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, W. Xu, L. Wu, Y. C. Hsieh, P. Liu, Y. Zhu, K. Sasaki, J. N. Renner, K. E. Ayers, R. R. Adzic and J. X. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 819, 296–305 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Rao, M. J. Kolb, N. B. Halck, A. F. Pedersen, A. Mehta, H. You, K. A. Stoerzinger, Z. Feng, H. A. Hansen, H. Zhou, L. Giordano, J. Rossmeisl, T. Vegge, I. Chorkendorff, I. E. L. Stephensd and Y. S. Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2626–2637 RSC .
N. B. Halck, V. Petrykin, P. Krtil and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13682–13688 RSC .
J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. Zhu, G. J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Man, H. Y. Su, F. C. Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martinez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Wachs, Catal. Today, 2005, 100, 79–94 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Nong, H. P. Tran, C. Spöri, M. Klingenhof, L. Frevel, T. E. Jones, T. Cottre, B. Kaiser, W. Jaegermann, R. Schlögl, D. Teschner and P. Strasser, Z. Physiol. Chem., 2019, 234, 787–812 CrossRef .
H. N. Nong, L. J. Falling, A. Bergmann, M. Klingenhof, H. P. Tran, C. Spöri, R. Mom, J. Timoshenko, G. Zichittella, A. Knop-Gericke, S. Piccinin, J. Pérez-Ramírez, B. R. Cuenya, R. Schlögl, P. Strasser, D. Teschner and T. E. Jones, Nature, 2020, 587, 408–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Stoerzinger, L. Qiao, M. D. Biegalski and Y. S. Horn, Orientation-Dependent Oxygen Evolution Activities of Rutile IrO2 and RuO2, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1636–1641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ping, R. J. Nielsen and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 149–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. W. Schultze, Electrodes of Conductive Metallic Oxides. Parts A, ed. S. Trasatti, Elsevier, Amsterdam, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .

          S. Dresp and P. Strasser, Electro-catalysts for oxygen electrodes in seawater electrolyzers (OER) and reversible electrolyzers (OER/ORR), Metal Oxide-Based Nanostructured Electrocatalysts for Fuel Cells, Electrolyzers, and Metal-Air Batteries, ed. T. Napporn and Y. Holade, Elesiver,  2021 Search PubMed .
V. Consonni and S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem, 1987, 228, 393–406 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Erenburg, L. I. Krishtalik and V. I. Bystrov, Elektrokhimiya, 1972, 8, 1740 CAS .
B. A. van Hassel and A. J. Burggraaf, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 1667–1675 CrossRef .
K. S. Exner, J. Anton, T. Jacob and H. Over, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7501–7504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin and S. Ye, Electrochim. Acta, 1996, 41, 827–834 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. J. Janssen, L. M. C. Starman, J. G. Visser and E. Barendrecht, Electrochim. Acta, 1977, 22, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tong, M. Forster, F. Dionigi, S. Dresp, R. S. Erami, P. Strasser, A. J. Cowan and P. Farràs, Electrolysis of low-grade and saline surface water, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 367–377 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ishikawa, J. Juan, Mateo, D. A. Tryk and C. R. Cabrera, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Oh, S. G. Oh, Y. Y. Hwang, H. W. Yu, J. W. Kang and I. S. Kim, Sci. Total Environ., 2010, 408, 5958–5965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Abdel-Aal and I. A. Hussein, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1993, 18, 485–489 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Kuhn and C. Y. Chan, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1983, 13, 189–207 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kirk and A. E. Leads, Precipitate formation during sea water electrolysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1982, 7, 925–932 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K. Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Markovic, B. N. Grgur and P. N. Ross, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5405–5413 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ishikawa, J. J. Mateo, D. A. Tryk and C. R. Cabrera, J. Electroanal. Chem, 2007, 607, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dubouis and A. Grimaud, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 9165–9181 RSC .

          E. Gileadi, Physical Electrochemistry, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. J. Ungerer, D. S. Carballal, A. C. Essadek, C. G. C. E. Sittert and N. H. de Leeuw, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 27465–27476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shinagawa, A. T. G. Esparza and K. Takanabe, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–21 Search PubMed .
S. J. Gutić, A. S. Dobrota, E. Fako, N. V. Skorodumova, N. López and I. A. Pašti, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 290 CrossRef .
E. Santos and W. Schmickler, d Band
Catalysis in Electrochemistry, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 70, 2282–2285 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1987, 32, 369–382 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Anderson, Electrocatalysis, 2012, 3, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Hansen, I. C. Man, F. Studt, F. A. Pedersen, T. Bligaardac and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 283–290 RSC .
K. Exner, I. S. Eskan and H. Over, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1864–1879 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inai, C. Iwakura and H. Tamura, Electrochim. Acta, 1979, 24, 993–996 CrossRef CAS .
R. Parsons, Trans. Faraday Disc., 1951, 47, 1332–1334 RSC .
P. Castelli, S. Trasatti, F. H. Pollak and W. E. O'Grady, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1986, 210, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Fang and Z. P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18214–18222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Exner, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7991–8001 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Exner, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5320–5329 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Exner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 16921–16928 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Exner, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1448–1455 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lim, G. Y. Jung, J. H. Kim, S. O. Park, J. Park, Y. T. Kim, S. J. Kang, H. Y. Jeong, S. K. Kwak and S. H. Joo, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 412 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Exner, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1528–1530 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Exner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 22451–22458 RSC .
Z. F. Huang, J. Song, S. Dou, X. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, Matter, 2019, 1, 1494–1518 CrossRef .
K. S. Exner and H. Over, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 6755–6765 CrossRef CAS .
O. Piqué, F. Illas and F. C. Vallejo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 6797–6803 RSC .
K. S. Exner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 822–828 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Hansen, I. C. Man, F. Studt, F. A. Pedersen, T. Bligaardac and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 283–290 RSC .
V. Sumaria, D. Krishnamurthy and V. Viswanathan, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9034–9042 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Exner, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2330–2344 CAS .
I. S. Eskan, A. Goryachev, K. S. Exner, L. A. Kibler, E. J. M. Hensen, J. P. Hofmann and H. Over, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2403–2411 CrossRef .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1972, 39, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
P. Quaino, F. Juarez, E. Santos and W. Schmickler, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 846–854 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, Y. Xu, T. Yang and L. Jiang, Nano Mater. Sci., 2021 DOI:10.1016/j.nanoms.2020.12.003 .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kumar and V. Himabindu, Mater. Sci. Technol., 2019, 2, 442–454 Search PubMed .
P. Li, S. Wang, I. A. Samo, X. Zhang, Z. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Du, Y. Zhong, C. Cheng, W. Xu, X. Liu, Y. Kuang, Z. Lu and X. Sun, Research, 2020 DOI:10.34133/2020/2872141 .
H. A. Miller, K. Bouzek, J. Hnat, S. Loos, C. I. Bernacker, T. Weißgarber, L. Rontzsch and J. Meier-Haack, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2114 RSC .
M. A. Khan, T. Al-Attas, S. Roy, M. M. Rahman, N. Ghaffour, V. Thangadurai, S. Larter, J. Hu, P. M. Ajayan and Md G. Kibria, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4831–4839 RSC .
M. C. Henstridge, G. G. Wildgoose and R. G. Compton, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1340–1346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Henstridge, G. G. Wildgoose and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14285–14289 CrossRef CAS .

          D. R. Lide, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press, New York, 96th edn,  2015 Search PubMed .
P. Gayen, S. Saha and V. Ramani, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3978–3983 CrossRef CAS .
I. Katsounaros, J. C. Meier, S. O. Klemm, A. A. Topalov, P. U. Biedermann, M. Auinger and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 634–637 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. C. Neto, M. C. Lopes and E. C. Pereira, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 765, 92–99 CrossRef .
A. Knoedler and K. W. Neugebohren, Metalloberflaeche, 1970, 24, 78 CAS .
M. E. G. Lyons, R. L. Doyle, z I. Godwin, M. O'Brien and L. Russell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, H932–H944 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. G. Lyons, A. Cakara, P. OBrien, I. Godwin and R. L Doyle, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 11768–11795 CAS .
B. J. Trzesń iewski, O. D. Morales, D. A. Vermaas, A. Longo, W. Bras, M. T. M. Koper and W. A. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15112–15121 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dincă, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 10337–10341 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Smith, L. Trotochaud, M. S. Burke and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5261–5263 RSC .
S. Dresp, F. Dionigi, S. Loos, J. F. de Araujo, C. Spöri, M. Gliech, H. Dau and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800338 CrossRef .
F. Cheng, X. Feng, X. Chen, W. Lin, J. Rong and W. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 25, 336–343 CrossRef .
B. M. Hunter, W. Hieringer, J. R. Winkler, H. B. Gray and A. M. Muller, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1734–1743 RSC .
S. Dresp, F. Dionigi, M. Klingenhof, T. Merzdorf, H. Schmies, J. Drnec, A. Poulain and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 6800–6809 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dey, B. Mondal and A. Dey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12221–12227 RSC .
Y. Zhang, B. Cui, C. Zhao, H. Lin and J. Liac, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7363–7369 RSC .
D. Kwabena Bediako, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3662–3674 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xie, M. Song, L. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, L. Luo, A. Miller, Y. Zhang, L. Du, H. Pan, Z. Nie, Y. Chu, L. Estevez, Z. Wei, H. Liu, C. Wang, D. Li and Y. Shao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8712–8718 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, S. Zhou, Z. Wang, J. Liu, W. Pei, P. Yang, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901333 CrossRef .
S. Gao, G. D. Li, Y. Liu, H. Chen, L. L. Feng, Y. Wang, M. Yang, D. Wang, S. Wangd and X. Zou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2306–2316 RSC .
S. Trasatti, Electrocatalysis in the anodic evolution of oxygen and chlorine, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1503–1512 CrossRef CAS .
K. Izumiya, E. Akiyama, H. Habazaki, N. Kumagai, A. Kawashima and K. Hashimoto, Mater. Trans., JIM, 1997, 38, 899–905 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Katoa, M. Sato, Y. Sasaki, K. Izumiya, N. Kumagai and K. Hashimoto, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 152–157 CrossRef .
K. Izumiya, E. Akiyama, H. Habazaki, N. Kumagai, A. Kawashima and K. Hashimoto, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 3303–3312 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujimura, T. Matsui, K. Izumiya, N. Kumagai, E. Akiyama, H. Habazaki, A. Kawashima, K. Asami and K. Hashimoto, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1999, 267, 254–259 CrossRef .
K. Fujimura, T. Matsui, H. Habazaki, A. Kawashima, N. Kumagai and K. Hashimoto, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2297–2303 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. El-Moneim, N. Kumagai, K. Asami and K. Hashimoto, Mater. Trans., 2005, 46, 309–316 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Abdel Ghany, N. Kumagai, S. Meguro, K. Asami and K. Hashimoto, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 48, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. El-Moneim, N. Kumagai and K. Hashimoto, Mater. Trans., 2009, 50, 1969–1977 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. El-Moneim, J. Bhattarai, Z. Kato, K. Izumiya, N. Kumagai and K. Hashimoto, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 127–137 CrossRef .
Z. Katoa, J. Bhattarai, N. Kumagai, K. Izumiya and K. Hashimoto, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 8230–8236 CrossRef .
G. N. Martelli, R. Ornelas and G. Faita, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1551–1558 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Vos, T. A. Wezendonk, A. Jeremiasse and M. T. M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10270–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Obata and K. Takanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1616–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Balaji, B. S. Kannan, J. Lakshmi, N. Senthil, S. Vasudevan, G. Sozhan, A. K. Shukla and S. Ravichandran, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1700–1702 CrossRef CAS .
T. Okada, H. Abe, A. Murakami, T. Shimizu, K. Fujii, T. Wakabayashi and M. Nakayama, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 5227–5235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dresp, T. N. Thanh, M. Klingenhof, S. Brückner, P. Hauke and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1725–1729 RSC .
A. R. Jadhav, A. Kumar, J. Lee, T. Yang, S. Na, J. Lee, Y. Luo, X. Liu, Y. Hwang, Y. Liu and H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24501 RSC .
K. J. Chae, M. Choi, F. F. Ajayi, W. Park, In S. Chang and In S. Kim, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 169–176 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Zeradjanin, N. Menzel, W. Schuhmann and P. Strasser, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13741–13747 RSC .
K. Macounová, M. Makarova, J. Jirkovský and J. F. P. Krtil, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 6126–6134 CrossRef .
K. Kishor, S. Saha, A. Parashtekar and R. G. S. Pala, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, J3276–J3280 CrossRef CAS .
T. Arikawa, Y. Murakami and Y. Takasu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1998, 28, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
V. Petrykin, K. Macounova, O. A. Shlyakhtin and P. Krtil, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4813–4815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Esswein, Y. Surendranath, S. Y. Reecea and D. G. Nocera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 499–504 RSC .
Y. Surendranath, M. Dinca and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2615–2620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 247, 381–393 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 413, 72–82 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, L. Yu, B. McElhenny, X. Xing, D. Luo, F. Zhang, J. Bao, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 294, 120256 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Song, H. Yoon, B. Ju, D. Y. Lee and D. W. Kim, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 702–709 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, Q. Zhu, S. Song, B. McElhenny, D. Wang, C. Wu, Z. Qin, J. Bao, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5106 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, L. Wu, B. McElhenny, S. Song, D. Luo, F. Zhang, Y. Yu, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3439–3446 RSC .
X. Lu, J. Pan, E. Lovell, T. H. Tan, Y. H. Ng and R. Amal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1898–1910 RSC .
D. W. Kirk and A. E. Ledas, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1982, 7, 925–932 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, Y. Zhao, H. Xi and C. Li, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 9423–9429 RSC .
H. Li, Q. Tang, B. He and P. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6513–6520 RSC .
Y. Zhang, P. Li, X. Yang, W. Fa and S. Ge, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 732, 248–256 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 413, 360–365 CrossRef CAS .
X. Niu, Q. Tang, B. He and P. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 208, 180–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sarno, E. Ponticorvo and D. Scarp, Electrochem. Commun., 2020, 111, 106647 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, Z. Guo, Y. Shan, S. Wu, J. Zhang, K. Yan, L. Liu, P. K. Chu and X. Wu, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Hu, B. Huang and Z. Xie, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18835–18843 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Liu, H. Liu, X. J. Wu, Y. L. Niu, B. M. Feng, W. Li, W. H. Hu and C. M. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 710–716 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Q. Tang, B. Hea and P. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 93267–93274 RSC .
Y. Y. Ma, C. X. Wu, X. J. Feng, H. Q. Tan, L. K. Yan, Y. Liu, Z. H. Kang, E. B. Wang and Y. G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 788–798 RSC .
H. Jin, X. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12761–12769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Miao, F. X. Xiao, H. B. Yang, S. Y. Khoo, J. Chen, Z. Fan, Y. Y. Hsu, H. M. Chen, H. Zhang and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500259 CrossRef PubMed .
I. W. P. Chen, C. H. Hsiao, J. Y. Huang, Y. H. Peng and C. Y. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14159–14169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, L. Wu, S. Song, B. McElhenny, F. Zhang, S. Chen and Z. Ren, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2681–2689 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Jin, Y. Zheng, H. Jin, Y. Jiao and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801926 CrossRef .
S. H. Hsu, J. Miao, L. Zhang, J. Gao, H. Wang, H. Tao, S. F. Hung, A. Vasileff, S. Z. Qiao and B. Liu, Adv.
Mater., 2018, 30, 1707261 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, H. Kim, J. H. Lim and S. J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11428–11433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Saikat Bolar	Saikat Bolar completed his BSc in Chemistry from University of Burdwan, in 2013. He received his MSc in Chemistry from Sidho-Kanho-Birsha University, in 2015. He qualified the NET (National Level Eligibility Test) conducted by CSIR, New Delhi. He is currently pursuing his PhD from the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR) in Chemical Sciences under the supervision of Dr Tapas Kuila and Dr Pranab Samanta at the Surface Engineering & Tribology Division, CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur, India. Currently, he is working on transition metal dichalcogenide-based electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction in different pH media.
Subhasis Shit	Subhasis Shit is currently pursuing PhD in Chemical Sciences under the supervision of Dr Tapas Kuila and Dr Naresh Chandra Murmu at the Surface Engineering & Tribology Division, CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur, India. He completed his BSc in Chemistry from University of Burdwan, West Bengal, India, in 2014. He received his MSc in Chemistry from University of North Bengal, West Bengal, India, in 2016. His research interest includes the development of transition metal-based and carbon-based materials with potential target application in electrochemical water splitting.
Naresh Chandra Murmu	Dr Naresh Chandra Murmu is working as Senior Principal Scientist in CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur since 2003. Previously, he was a Scientist in the National Aerospace Laboratories, Bangalore, for 9 years. He received his B.E. from Calcutta University in 1992, M.E. from IISc Bangalore in 1994, and PhD in Mechanical Engineering from IIT (BHU), Varanasi in 2010. Dr Murmu is working in the areas of graphene supercapacitor, graphene/epoxy composite, graphene lubricant, electrocatalytic water splitting, and graphene-enhanced phase change materials.
Tapas Kuila	Dr. Tapas Kuila is working as Senior Scientist at CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur, India. Dr Kuila completed his PhD in Chemistry from Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur in 2009. Then, he moved to Chonbuk National University, South Korea for postdoctoral study. Dr Kuila is working in the areas of graphene supercapacitor, graphene/epoxy composite, graphene lubricant, electrocatalytic water splitting, and graphene-enhanced phase change materials.


Cl−	∼20057.9	∼2.01
Br−	∼69.5	∼0.01
SO42−	∼2811.7	∼0.28
F−	∼1.3	∼0
HCO3−	∼111.7	∼0.01
CO32−	∼16.2	∼0
OH−	∼0.2	∼0
B(OH)4−	∼7.9	∼0
Na+	∼11176.8	∼1.12
K+	∼413.7	∼0.04
Mg2+	∼1330.7	∼0.13
Ca2+	∼426.8	∼0.04
Sr2+	∼7.9	∼0
Al3+	0.16–1.9	∼0
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
E° = 1.23 VSHE = 1.23 V − 0.059pH	(5)



K+	K ⇔ K+ + e−	−2.931	K ⇔ K+ + e−	−2.931
Sr2+	Sr ⇔ Sr2+ + 2e−	−2.899	Sr ⇔ Sr2+ + 2e−	−2.899
Ca2+	Ca ⇔ Ca2+ + 2e−	−2.868	Ca ⇔ Ca2+ + 2e−	−2.868
Na+	Na ⇔ Na+ + e−	−2.71	Na ⇔ Na+ + e−	−2.71
Mg2+	Mg ⇔ Mg2+ + 2e−	−2.372	Mg ⇔ Mg2+ + 2e	−2.372
H+	H2 ⇔ 2H+ + 2e−	0	4OH− ⇔ O2 + 2H2O + 4e−	—
OH−	—	—	4OH− ⇔ O2 + 2H2O + 4e−	0.401
H2O	2H2O ⇔ O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	1.229	1/2H2 + 2OH− ⇔ H2O + 2e−	−0.828
F−	2F− ⇔ F2 + 2e−	2.866	2F− ⇔ F2 + 2e−	2.866
Cl−	2Cl− ⇔ Cl2 + 2e−	1.358	Cl− + 4OH− ⇔ ClO2− + 2H2O + 4e−	0.76
Cl− + 4H2O ⇔ ClO4− + 8H+ + 8e−	1.389	Cl− + 2OH− ⇔ ClO− + H2O + 2e−	0.81
Cl− + 3H2O ⇔ ClO3− + 6H+ + 6e−	1.451	2Cl− ⇔ Cl2− + 2e−	1.358
Cl− + H2O ⇔ HClO + H+ + 2e−	1.482	
	

Cl− + 2H2O ⇔ HClO2 + 3H+ + 4e−	1.570	
	

SO42−	S2O62− + 2H2O ⇔ 2SO42− + 4H+ + 2e−	−0.22	SO32− + 2OH−⇔SO42− + H2O + 2e−	−0.93
H2SO3 + H2O ⇔ SO42− + 4H+ + 2e−	0.172	2SO42− ⇔ S2O82− + 2e−	2.010
2SO42− ⇔ S2O82− + 2e−	2.010	
	


 	Fig. 1  (a) Current efficiency vs. chlorine concentration in seawater; (b) log current vs. voltage for chlorine and oxygen in seawater (reproduced with permission from ref. 18 copyright© 1980 published by Elsevier Ltd). (c) Top view of the (110) surfaces of the rutile-structured RuO2 and IrO2 where Ocus and Olat denote the active sites on which AEM and LOM are examined; (d) free energy diagrams for OER via AEM (solid red line) and LOM (dashed blue line) for RuO2(110); (e) free energy diagrams for OER via AEM (solid red line) and LOM (dashed blueline) for IrO2 (110) (reproduced with permission from ref. 31 copyright© 2018, American Chemical Society). (f) Cyclic voltammogram recorded on Pt (reproduced with permission from ref. 60 copyright© 2019 The Authors). (g) Arrhenius plot for Pt (110) (circle), Pt (100) (square), and Pt (111) obtained by cyclic voltammetry (reproduced with permission from ref. 52 copyright© 2006 Elsevier B. V.). (h) The mechanism of hydrogen evolution on the surface of an electrode in acidic and alkaline medium.	 
2Oot + H2O → 1Oot1OOHot + H+ + e−	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
1Oot1OHot → 2Oot + H+ + e−	(9)
Cl− → Clads + e−	(10)
Clads + Cl− → Cl2 + e−	(11)
Clads + Clads → Cl2	(12)
2A* + 2Cl− → 2Cl* + 2e−	(13)
2Cl* + 2e− → 2A* + Cl2 + 2e−	(14)
A* + 2Cl− + e− + Cl− → Cl2 + 2e− + A*	(15)
Oot + 2Cl− → Oot–Cl− + e− + Cl− (Volmer step: adsorption and discharge of chloride ion)	(16)
Oot–Cl + Cl− → Oot + Cl2 + e− (Heyrovsky step: direct recombination of anionic species)	(17)
H+ + e− → H* (* denotes hydrogen adsorbed active sites of the electrode)	(18)
H* + H+ → H2	(19)
H* + H* → H2	(20)
H2O + e− → H* + OH	(21)
H2O + H* + e− → H2 + OH−	(22)
H* + H* → H2	(23)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Pourbaix diagram of the oxygen evolution reaction and chloride chemistry at 0.5 M NaCl aqueous solution, the electrode potential for OER is also included; (b) maximum allowed overpotential of OER electrolyzer catalysts to ensure 100% selective water splitting. Potential-dependent anodic process at various pH (reproduced with permission from ref. 29 copyright© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (c) Gibbs energy diagram for the CER (gray) and the OER (black) over the fully O-covered RuO2 (110) surface (dashed line); (d) Pourbaix diagram for the model catalyst RuO2 (110) with 2Ru2f2Obr + 2Rucus2Oot constituting the thermodynamically most stable surface under the reaction conditions for the CER (in red) and for the OER (in green); (e) Volcano plot for the CER (gray) and the OER (black) over RuO2 (110) (reproduced with permission from ref. 28 copyright© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
2Cl− → Cl2 + 2e−E° = 1.36 V vs. SHE, pH = 0	(24)
Cl− + 2OH− → ClO− + H2O + 2e−E° = 0.89 V vs. SHE, pH = 14	(25)


RuO2	∼4.5	∼9.4	∼9 or 8.5
IrO2	∼3.4	∼6.8	∼7.1

 	Fig. 3  (a) Free energy diagram of the CER over RuO2 (110) via the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism at different overpotentials, the free energy of the reaction intermediate OClot (red) is obtained from the ab initio Pourbaix diagram; (b) Pourbaix diagram for CER for a single-crystalline RuO2 (110) model electrode; (c) Pourbaix diagram for OER for a single-crystalline RuO2 (110) model; (d) free energy landscape for the OER over a single-crystalline RuO2 (110) model electrode based on the experimental kinetic measurements and ab-initio thermodynamics DFT calculations (reproduced with permission from ref. 69 copyright© 2018, American Chemical Society).	 
H2O + Mcus → Mcus–OHot + H+ + e−	(26)
Mcus–OHot → Mcus–Oot + H+ + e−	(27)
Mcus–Oot + H2O → Mcus–OOHot + H+ + e−	(28)
Mcus–OOHot → Mcus + O2 + H+ + e−	(29)

 	Fig. 4  (a) The electrocatalytic OER cycle consists of four elementary reaction steps, in which the OHot, Oot and OOHot adsorbate need to be stabilized on the catalytically active Mcus sites of the MO2(110) surface (reproduced with permission from ref. 74 copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society). (b) The ESSI-ΔG2 activity map for the OER over transition-metal oxides via the OOH adsorbate at ηOER = 0.18 V; (c) the methodology of ESSI-ΔG2 activity maps is translated to the CER over transition-metal oxides via the OCl adsorbate at ηCER = 0.05 V (d) & (e) the methodology of ESSI-ΔG2 activity map for the CER over transition-metal oxides via (a) the ClO2 adsorbate and (b) the Cl adsorbate at ηCER = 0.05 V (Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 copyright© 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
Mcus–Oot + Cl− → Mcus–OClot + e−	(30)
Mcus–OClot + Cl− → Mcus–Oot + Cl2 + e−	(31)
2Mcus–(O2)ot,ot + Cl− → 2Mcus–(O2)ot,ot + e−	(32)
2Mcus–(O2)ot,otCl + Cl− → Mcus–(O2)ot + Cl2 + e−	(33)
Mcus + Cl− → Mcus–Clot + e−	(34)
Mcus–Clot → Mcus + Cl2 + e−	(35)

 	Fig. 5  (a) PEMWE consists of a solid acid electrolyte polymer sandwiched between the anode and cathode and water is fed to the anode, (b) AEMWE, OH− transporting membrane between the anode and the cathode and water is supplied from either from the cathode or the anode side, (c) AWE operates as a 2-compartment cell with 20–30% KOH liquid alkaline electrolyte pumped around both the electrode and a porous diaphragm allows hydroxyl ion (OH−) migration, (d) HTWE includes proton-conducting ceramic electrolysis (∼150–400 °C) and solid oxide electrolysis (∼800–1000 °C), (e) digital image of the developed electrolyzer with Nafion membrane; (f) the NaCl production rate in 6 M NaOH electrolyte with saturated NaCl (reproduced with permission from ref. 94 copyright© 2020 The Authors).	 
2Cl− → Cl2 + e−E° = 1.36 V (vs. SHE) at pH = 1–3	(36)
Cl− + 2OH− → OCl− + H2O + 2e−E° = 0.89 V (vs. SHE) at pH = 14 or E° = 1.72–0.059 pH	(37)
4OH− → 2H2O + O2 + 4e−E° = 0.40 V (vs. SHE) at pH = 14	(38)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Current density vs. surface pH relation from cyclic voltammetry (reproduced with permission from ref. 101 copyright© 2011 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved). (b) Voltammetric response recorded for a hydrous nickel oxyhydroxide thin film on the Ni support electrode at various pH values (reproduced with permission from ref. 104 copyright© 2012 The Authors). (c) Electrochemical characterization of NiFe-LDH on carbon Vulcan by cyclic voltammetry in 0.1 M KOH, pH 13 (solid black), 0.1 M KOH + NaCl, pH 13 (dashed red), borate buffer, pH 9.2 (solid blue), borate buffer + NaCl, pH 9.2 (dashed green) (reproduced with permission from ref. 29 copyright© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Image of the seawater electrolyzer set-up (reproduced with permission from ref. 109 copyright© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) Nyquist plots of Co–Fe LDH/GCEs in seawater and aqueous solutions including MgCl2, NaCl, or Na2SO4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 110 copyright© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved). (f) Comparison between the catalytic activity of the HER in acidic, neutral, and basic solutions for MoP700, MoP2, MoP, Mo3P, and Pt/C (reproduced with permission from ref. 116 copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society). (g) Current density and maximum current related percentage after 50 h, 100 h, initial first recovery effect, after 1 h of first recovery effect, initial second recovery effect, and after 1 h of second recovery effect of NaCl free and the addition of 0.5 M NaCl (reproduced with permission from ref. 109 copyright© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 
Adsorption of Cl− by surface polarization: M + Cl− → MClads + e−
Dissolution by further coordination: MClads + Cl− → MClx−
Conversion from chloride to hydroxide: MClx− + OH− → M(OH)x + Cl−

Mn–Mo/IrO2/Ti	0.5 M NaCl (pH = 8) at 30 °C	Electrodeposition	91% increase	Metal additives enhance the activity	
120

Co–Fe LDH	Seawater (pH = 8)	Nucleation and aging steps	530 mV@10 mA cm−2	(a) Catalytic activity in unbuffered solution, (b) synergistic action of Co–Fe LDH and multiple ions of sea salt	
110

Mn0.929Mo0.067Sn0.004O2.067/Ir0.84Sn0.16O2/Ti	0.5 M NaCl (pH = 1) at 30 °C	Anodic deposition	99.9% OER efficiency for 4200 h at current density of 1000 A m−2	Prevention of the oxide to retain OER performance	
121

(Mn–W)Ox/IrO2/Ti	0.5 M NaCl at pH 8	Anodic deposition	99.6% efficiency at 20 mA cm−2	(a) Tungsten addition enhances MnO2 OER performance, (b) low pH accelerates the anodic deposition of tungsten over MnOx	
122

(Mn–Mo)Ox/IrO2/Ti	1.5 M NaCl at pH 12 at 30 °C	Anodic deposition	—	(a) Mo addition decreases the OER performance	
123

(b) Mo addition increases the durability
(c) Lower current density η increases with the Mo content
Mn1−x−yMoxWyO2+x+y/IrO2/Ti	1.5 M NaCl at pH 2	Anodic deposition at pH = 0.1–1.0 (H2SO4 medium)	99.8% after electrolysis for 691.2 ks	(a) Mo & W prevent the CER, (b) stable at acidic pH	
125

Mn1−x−yMoxFeyO2−x−0.5y/IrO2/Ti	0.5 M NaCl at pH 12	Anodic deposition	100% OER efficiency within 30–90 °C at pH 12	Addition of Fe enhances OER at higher temperature	
126

Mn–Mo–W triple oxide over IrO2/Ti	0.5 M NaCl at pH 8.7	Anodic deposition at pH = 0	—	(a) Tungsten improves the electrical conductivity	
127

(b) Single phase triple oxide increases the OER
MnOx/IrOx	Aqueous chloride solution (pH ∼ 0.9)	Electrodeposition at pH = 0.9	CER selectivity decrease 86% to 7%	(a) MnOx decreases the catalytic activity	
131

(b) MnOx increases the OER selectivity
NM/IrO2/Ti and NS/IrO2/Ti	0.5 M NaCl, 30 °C and pH = 8.3	Thermal decomposition method	—	Nafion membrane or solution coating monitor the selective OER by protecting Cl−	
133

Mg|Co–MnO2/α-Co(OH)2	(1) 0.5 M NaCl	Electrodeposition and ion exchange process	∼79%	(a) Mg|Co–MnO2 poses no OER and CER activity	
134

(2) seawater	∼58%	(b) Mg|Co–MnO2 prevent Cl− ion
(3) 0.25 MgCl2	∼39%
NiFe-LDH	Cathode (0.5 M NaCl, pH 7–8) & anode (0.5 M KOH, pH 12–13) - electrolyzer	—	94%	Achieve high cell voltage (4.0 V) and high current densities	
135

GO@Fe@Ni–Co@NF	1 M KOH + 0.5 M NaCl	Hydrothermal, annealing, and electrodeposition	
η = 247 mV@50 mA cm−2 &	(a) Graphene oxide layer blocks the Cl− ion intercalation	
136


η = 303 mV@500 mA cm−2	(b) Fe species enhance the OER performance
(c) Synergy effect between interfacial FeOOH NP and Ni–Co hydroxide 2D sheets effectively lowers the OER overpotentials
Ru1−xNixO2−y (0.02 < x < 0.30)	0.1 M HClO4 + 0.3 M NaCl	Sol–gel process	—	>10% Ni content favor O2 evolution	
139

Cu-doped RuO2	1.5 M NaCl	Electrodeposition	—	(a) Cu modulates Ru active sites	
140

(b) Binding energy of OER intermediates reduces and favors CER
RuO2–TiO2/Ti	0.1 M HClO4 + X M NaCl, (X = different value)	—	—	(a) RuO2, TiO2 redox property influence the CER selectivity	
141

(b) Cl− concentration increase the OER over CER
(c) Increase RuO2 loading and increase the OER ratio
Ru0.8Zn0.2O2	0.1 M HClO4	Solution mixing and heat treatment	—	Zn prevent peroxo-bridge formation; affect OER and CER process	
142

0.15 M NaCl
Co-OEC	(a) Charles river (Cambridge, MA)	Electrodeposition	(a) ∼470 mV@1 mA cm−2	Anode-functionalized catalyst show appreciable current density	
143

(b Seawater (Woods hole, MA)	(b) ∼550 mV@1 mA cm−2
Binary NiCo alloy DEA (DEA = diethanolamine)	Seawater (pH = 6.64, ionic conductivity = 33.9 mS cm−1, T = 25 °C)	Hydrothermal	
η
onset = 80 mV	(a) –NH2 group in DEA promote NiCo alloy formation	
145

(b) Ni, Co interaction (Brewe's theory) increase bonding with O
Ti-supported PtPd alloy	Seawater (pH = 6.64, ionic conductivity = 33.9 mS cm−1, T = 25 °C)	Cyclic voltammetry deposition	
η
onset = 690 mV	Increase M-O bond strength and oxygen binding energy enhance the OER performance	
146

CoPx@FeOOH	1 M KOH + natural seawater (Galveston bay, Texas, USA, (29.364°N, 94.810°W)	Phosphidation and electrodeposition	
η
10 = 235 mV	(a) FeOOH shell enhances electron transport	
147


η
100 = 283 mV	(b) CoPx provides mechanical strength with high surface area address low conductivity and insoluble precipitates

η
500 = 337 mV	(b) Negatively charge P atoms moderates the absorption energy of FeOOH and help to avoid CER

η
800 = 354 mV
NCFPO/C@CC	KOH + seawater (pH = 12.7, Incheon, South Korea)	Sol–gel, heat treatment and ball milling	
η
10 ≈ 340 mV	(a) Higher catalytic efficiency than (oxy)hydroxyl material	
148

(b) Co/Fe ratio control OER performance
CoFe-LDH nanosheets	KOH + seawater (pH = 12.7, Incheon, South Korea)	Co-precipitation and hydrothermal	
η
10 ≈ 450 mV	Fe3+ forms a new phase of hydrotalcite-like layer structure responsible for the OER process	
148

NiMoN@NiFeN	1 M KOH + seawater (Galveston bay near houston, Texas, USA)	Hydrothermal & nitridation	
η
100 = 307 mV	(a) In situ generated amorphous NiFe oxide and NiFe oxy (hydroxide) layers play a positive role in improving the resistance to corrosion by chloride anions	
149


η
500 = 369 mV	(b) Amorphous layers of NiFe oxide and NiFe oxy (hydroxide)

η
1000 = 398 mV
S-(Ni,Fe)OOH	1 M KOH + seawater (pH = 14, Galveston bay near houston, Texas, USA	One-step solution-phase method at room temperature	
η
100 = 300 mV	(a) NiOOH and FeOOH real active species for OER	
150


η
500 = 398 mV	(b) Hydrophilic S-(Ni,Fe)OOH layer with pores of different sizes contributes to efficient electrolyte diffusion and the fast release of gas bubbles

 	Fig. 7  (a) Cl2 and O2 evolution performance at the same current density for a number of oxides, alkaline (circle), and acidic (black circle) solutions (reproduced with permission from ref. 119 copyright© 1984 Published by Elsevier Ltd.). (b) Deposited MnOx onto IrOx decreases the CER selectivity and is performed as a highly OER-selective electrocatalyst. (c) Mass spectrometry measurements of an IrOx/GC disk electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 131 copyright© 2018 The Authors). (d) Cross-section TEM image of CeOx-coated NiFeOx. (e) Electrocatalytic stability test at controlled current electrolysis of 20 mA cm−2 (reproduced with permission from ref. 132 copyright© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (f) O2 concentration, detected by mass spectroscopy in an optimized electrolyzer set up (reproduced with permission from ref. 135 copyright© 2020 The Authors).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the synthesis procedure for freestanding GO@Fe@NiCo@NF electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 136 copyright© The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020). (b) Raman spectra of Ni3+ and NiSx/Ni (reproduced with permission from ref. 5 copyright© 2019 the Author(s) published by PNAS). (c) The DEMS-based onsets of the chlorine (squares) and oxygen (circles) detection as a function of the average Ni content (reproduced with permission from ref. 139 copyright© 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved). (d) Threshold potential for each gas evolution against the Cl− concentration of NaCl aqueous solution with the 0.1 M HClO4 on RuO2 (100%)/Ti electrode (• Cl2 evolution, ○ O2 evolution); (e) Threshold potential for each gas evolution against RuO2 loading (reproduced with permission from ref. 141 copyright© 2021 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature). (f) Measured current density and its components corresponding to chlorine (red) and oxygen (blue) evolution during the anodic polarization of RuO2:Zn nanocrystal (reproduced with permission from ref. 142 copyright© 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (g) XPS survey spectra of Ti-supported PtM (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Pd) alloy electrodes (reproduced with permission from ref. 146 copyright© 2017 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a)–(d) Challenges and potential solutions to improve the long-term stability of HER in low-grade water, (e) effect of the electrolyte flow rate on the precipitate formation; (f) effect of the current density on the precipitate formation; (g) effect of the concentration on the precipitate formation (reproduced with permission from ref. 152 copyright© 1982 published by Elsevier Ltd).	 

MoP700	1.0 M PBS (pH = 7.4)	Solution mixing, reductive route, and calcinations at 700 °C for 5 h	
η
onset = 75 mV	High neutral HER activity for MoP2, MoP synergistic mechanism	
116


η
10 = 196 mV
Mn–NiO–Ni/Ni–F	(a) 1 M phosphate buffer (pH = 7)	Hydrothermal and pyrolysis in Ar atmosphere	(a) η = 200 mV@35 mA cm−2	(a) Mn doping increases the HER activity on free energy decrease	
151

(b) Seawater (pH ∼8.2)	(b) η = 170 mV@10 mA cm−2	(b) Mn-blended NiO composite provides enhanced stability
Ti-supported PtPd alloy	Seawater (pH = 6.64, ionic conductivity = 33.9 mS cm−1, T = 25 °C)	Electrode position (−0.6 to 1.4 V potential window)	
η
onset = 51 mV	Increasing M–O bond strength and oxygen binding energy enhance OER performance	
146

Ti/PtMo alloy	Seawater	Electrodeposition (potential window of −0.8 to +0.6 V)	(a) η10 = 254.6 mV	(a) Highly negative ΔrGm, 25 °C in seawater beneficial for HER	
153

(b) Conserve 91.13% of initial current density upon 172 h operation	(b) Increased anticorrosion increases stability
Pt–Ru–Mo alloy on Ti mesh	Seawater	Electrodeposition (potential window −0.8 to 0.6 V)	Achieve 69.54 mA cm−2 current density at 0.8 V	(a) Synergistic effect enhances HER	
154

(b) Labile d-orbital e− assist in breaking the O–H bond
Ti/NiPt	Seawater	Electro deposition at −0.8 V for 1800 s	
η
onset = 230 mV	The Tafel slope suggests that Ti/NiPt electrodes obey the Volmer mechanism	
155

PtNi5	Natural seawater	Solution mixing, ultrasonic vibration, agitation for 2 h	
η
10 = 380 mV	Tuning the Pt, Ni ratio enhances the HER performance with durability	
156

Ti-supported RuCo alloy	Seawater (33.9 mS c−1 at 25 °C, pH = 6.44)	Electrodeposition	
η
10 = 387 mV	High Ru (active site) content enhance the HER	
157


η
onset = 25 mV
Ti supported RuCoMox alloy	Seawater (33.9 mS c−1 at 25 °C, pH = 6.44)	Electrodeposition	
η
onset = 37 mV	(a) Low Ru (active site) content decrease the HER	
157

(b) Strong Mo–H bond decrease effective active site
Graphene-supported NiRuIr alloy	Seawater	Surfactant-free approach and autoclave treatment (3 h, 205 °C)	
η = 80 mV	(a) Graphene decreases the Rct value	
158

(b) Electron rich Ir repels the Cl− ion
(c) Trimetallic alloy increases the anticorrosion properties
T@Td–ReS2 nanosheets	Fresh water + Na2SO4	Thermal treatment	
η
10 = 173 mV	Metallic phase and Re vacancies monitor the HER	
159

0.5Rh-GS1000	• 1 M PBS (pH = 7)	Wet impregnation method and heat treatment	• η10 = 19 mV	(a) N,S co-doped carbon nanosheets enhance the HER	
160

• Seawater (pH = 8.32, from Zhangzhou, Fujian, China)	• η10 = 320 mV	(b) Higher Rh loading lead to nonlinear HER improvement
Mo2C–MoP NPC/CFP-800	Seawater (from East China sea)	Electro-polymerization, solution soaking, annealing	
η
10 = 346 mV	Synergistic effect between MoP and Mo2C enhances the HER	
161

Co3Mo3C/CNT	Seawater (yellow sea, China)	Heat-treatment under AR atmosphere	
η
10 = 124 mV	(a) Interconnected structure modifies the HER	
162


η
200 = 782 mV
CoMoP@C	Seawater (yellow sea, China)	One-step pyrolysis method	(a) Faradic efficiency 92.5% over 10 h	Synergistic effect between CoMoP nanocrystalline core and N-doped graphitic carbon shells improves the H adsorption free energy value	
163

(b) η10 = 41 mV
Mo5N6	Seawater	Metal-induced salt template method, annealing	
η
10=257 mV	Additional N incorporation leads to higher Mo valence state, a Pt-like electronic structure	
164

Ni–Mo–S/C	Neutral electrolyte (pH ∼ 7)	Biomolecule-assisted hydrothermal method	
η
10=250 mV	Ni creates defect and regulates MoS2 growth	
165

3D MoS2QD aerogel-100	Seawater (Pacific ocean, pH = 8.8)	Hydrothermal method	0.15 V more positive than Pt at 80 mA g−1 current density	(a) HER activity MoS2 QD-aerogel-100 superior to Pt	
166

(b) 3D porous configuration provides conductive pathways to enhance the electron and ion transport during the electrochemical HER process
NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN	Seawater (pH ∼ 7.2, Galveston bay at houston)	Phosphorization, nitridation	
η
10 = 165 mV	Inner NixP microsheets show chloride-corrosion resistance	
167


 	Fig. 10  (a) The polarization curves of the Pt-alloy based electrocatalyst (reproduced with permission from ref. 153 copyright© 2018 The Authors). (b) Chronoamperometric study of the Pt-based metal alloy (reproduced with permission from ref. 146 © 2017 Elsevier B. V.). (c) TEM images of the NiRuIr-G nanocomposite and the EDX maps of ruthenium, nickel, and iridium (reproduced with permission from ref. 158 copyright© 2020 Elsevier B. V.). (d) Calculated cationic impurity adsorption energies of T@Td-ReS2 with VS and VRe (reproduced with permission from ref. 159 copyright© 2018 Elsevier Ltd). (e) Schematic representation of the neutral pH HER on MoP700 (reproduced with permission from ref. 116 copyright© 2019 American Chemical Society). (f) Illustration of the preparation of the CoMoP@C catalyst (reproduced with permission from ref. 163 copyright© Royal Society of Chemistry 2017). (g) d-band center position of Pt (111), Mo5N6, and MoN, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 164 copyright© 2018 American Chemical Society). (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure for the sandwich-like NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN catalyst (reproduced with permission from ref. 167 copyright© 2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Synchrotron-based Co K-edge XANES spectra and (insert) enlarged pre-edge spectra for Co–Se1 and Co–Se4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 168 copyright© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinhei). (b) J–V curve of a triple-junction solar cell under simulated AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination and the polarization curve of MHCM-z-BCC/NiMoS seawater splitting device in a two-electrode configuration; (c) UV-Vis spectra of the testing solutions after the addition of the electrolyte at different electrolysis systems under a constant applied voltage of 2.5 V (reproduced with permission from ref. 169 copyright© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Polarization curve of the S-(Ni,Fe)OOH‖NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN electrolyzer (inset: schematic of the electrolyzer); (e) hypochlorite detection result for the electrolyte after 1 h seawater electrolysis at 20 mA cm−2 (reproduced with permission from ref. 167 copyright© 2020 American Chemical Society). (f) 100 h longtime measurement at +1.6 V in different electrolytes using the loading of 0.5 mg Pt cm−2 46.7 wt% Pt on carbon (TKK) on the cathode and 2.5 mg cm−2 NiFe-LDH at the anode (reproduced with permission from ref. 109 copyright© 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

3D cobalt selenide electrode (CoSe & Co9Se8 phase)	Seawater	1.8 V at 10.3 mA cm−2	Rapid charge transfer and 3D network with lacunose surface benefiting overall water splitting	
168

Cell Set Up: Co–Se1‖Co–Se4
S-(Ni,Fe)OOH‖NiCoN|NixP|NiCoN	Sea water	1.81 V at 10 mA cm−2	NixP microsheets prevent the CER process	
167

MHCM-z-BCC‖‖NiMoS	Seawater (pH = 8.0, NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4 acid/base conjugate pair)	2.1 V at 10 mA cm−2	17.9% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency	
169

GO@Fe@Ni–Co@NF‖‖GO@Fe@Ni–Co@NF	Alkaline seawater	1.57 at 10 mA cm−2	GO layer blocks Cl− and Na+ ion	
136

NiFe/NiSx/Ni‖‖ Ni–NiO–Cr2O3	Seawater	2.1 V at 400 mA cm−2	Ni3 layer acts as the Cl− corrosion inhibitor	
5

NiFe-LDH‖‖Pt nanoparticles	Seawater	1.6 V at 200 mA cm−2	Higher oxidation state and an ordered structure	
109

CoPxIICoPx@FeOOH p	1 M KOH seawater	1.710 and 1.867 V at 100 and 500 mA cm−2	(a) The CoPx core in particular can act as a protection layer in the CoPx@FeOOH catalyst to repel the chloride ions	
147

(b) CoPx@FeOOH exhibits enhanced conductivity, enriched active sites, sufficient mechanical strength, and accelerated bubble-release ability
S-(Ni,Fe)OOHIINiMoN nanowire arrays supported on Ni foam	1 M KOH + seawater	1.661 and 1.837 V at 100 and 500 mA cm−2	Porosity and hydrophilic nature enhance the overall electrolysis	
150


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
