COF-confined catalysts: from nanoparticles and nanoclusters to single atoms  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA04439G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA04439G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 24148-24174COF-confined catalysts: from nanoparticles and nanoclusters to single atoms

        
          
            Mengyi 
            Xu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Cui 
            Lai
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xigui 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Bisheng 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mingming 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Fuhang 
            Xu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shiyu 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ling 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Qin
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Huan 
            Yi
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yukui 
            Fu
          
        
      ab
aCollege of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, Hunan, PR China. E-mail: laicui@hnu.edu.cn; liuxigui@hnu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-731-88823701;   Tel: +86-731-88822754
bKey Laboratory of Environmental Biology and Pollution Control (Hunan University), Ministry of Education, Changsha 410082, Hunan, PR China
Received 
      26th May 2021
    , Accepted 21st September 2021First published on 21st September 2021AbstractIn heterogeneous catalytic reactions, nano-scale particles (nanoparticles, nanoclusters, and single atoms) display excellent performance due to their different electronic structures, particle sizes, and geometric shapes. However, nano-scale particles are easy to aggregate and inactivate, so confining nano-scale particles in crystalline porous materials is a best way to solve the above problems. Covalent–organic frameworks with high crystallinity, high porosity, and tunable structures will be a potential alternative, and have attracted substantial attention. More importantly, the interaction between nano-scale particles and supports (confinement effect) could be controlled through different synthetic methods. The confinement effect has a great influence on the performance of the catalysts, for example, the size effect for activity promotion, encapsulation effect for stability enhancement, and molecular-sieving effect for selectivity improvement. Therefore, the confinement effect of COF-confined catalysts provides functional sites for catalytic reactions. There has been a major breakthrough in solving the problems of environmental pollution and energy shortage. The efficiency of heterogeneous catalytic reactions such as hydrogen production, carbon dioxide reduction reaction, 4-nitrophenol reduction, hydrogenation reaction, and organic pollutant degradation has been improved by using COF-confined catalysts. Herein, the synthetic methods of nano-scale particles confined in COFs are summarized, and the interaction between nano-scale particles and COFs is discussed to understand their various confinement effects. Then, the interaction between nano-scale particles and the reactant was understood through heterogeneous catalytic reactions. Finally, perspectives on the future developments in COF-confined catalysts in various fields are highlighted.
1. Introduction
Heterogeneous catalysis is the change in activity from one surface to the next.1 This kind of surface catalysis mostly occurs in solid catalysts and is mostly used in industrial environmental purification and energy storage reactions.2 The heterogeneous catalytic system composed of nano-scale particles (nanoparticles, nanoclusters and single atoms) usually display excellent catalytic performance due to their high surface area to volume ratio. However, the nano-scale particles are easy to agglomerate and deactivate, thereby reducing their catalytic performance.3,4 In order to obtain a heterogeneous catalytic system with high catalytic activity, Boudart M. et al. studied the catalytic behavior of supported catalysts from the viewpoint of atomic dispersion,5 which laid a foundation for the development of porous materials as carrier materials for nano-scale particle dispersion. Many porous supports, such as carbon materials,6 metal oxides,7 zeolites,8 graphene,9 porous organic polymers (POPs),10 and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)11 have been reported. These materials have been used for confining nano-scale particles through size control, facet adjustment, and morphology modulation. The interaction between nano-scale particles and porous supports is strong, and can prevent the nano-scale particles from aggregation.12 However, due to the low stability and uneven pore distribution of these materials, they are still not ideal alternatives for stabilizing ultrafine nano-scale particles.13 Therefore, the development of porous materials that can stabilize nano-scale particles is the focus of research on improving the efficiency of the heterogeneous catalytic reaction of materials.
Covalent–organic frameworks (COFs) are a new class of porous and ordered crystalline polymers connected by light elements (C, H, O, and N) through covalent bonds.14–17 Compared with other reported materials, they have the characteristics of high crystallinity, high porosity, coordinated topological structure, and convenient functional design.18–23 Benefiting from these unique advantages, COFs have attracted much attention in the field of heterogeneous catalysis, covering a lot of fields such as gas storage and separation, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and photo-electrocatalysis.23–25 In these studies, the excellent properties of COF-embedded nanoparticles for heterogeneous catalysis were mentioned intermittently, providing a new vision for future research on COFs.26,27 Meanwhile, COFs are also a potential alternative to confine nano-scale particles owing to the following superiorities: (1) the covalent bond between the blocks ensures the physical and chemical stability of nano-sized particles in the COFs;10 (2) the pore size of COF building blocks can be adjusted to accommodate different nanoscale particles;17 (3) the unique channel structure of COFs provide efficient access to active sites;28 (4) the permanent mesoporous structure of COFs can well restrict the nano-scale particles and prevent them from agglomeration and deactivation;22 (5) the conjugated system of COFs facilitates the transport of electrons and optimizes the catalytic performance.29 The superiorities of COFs reflect in the catalytic activity, stability, and selectivity in heterogeneous catalysis.
As we all know, the interaction between nano-scale particles (from nanoparticles and nanoclusters to single atoms) and COF supports is closely relevant to support types, particle types, and support pore size.30–32 Compared with traditional supported catalysts in which metal nanoparticles are supported on solid oxides, the nano-scale particles supported on COF-confined catalysts enrich the structure–reaction relationship (such as structure control, size control, position design, etc.).2,4,33 The activity of these COF-confined catalysts depends on the restriction effects (such as synergistic effect, constraint characteristics, target recognition performance) between the nano-scale particles and the support frameworks, which will change the electronic structure and catalytic activity of the particles.13,34,35 This restriction effect provides researchers with a reasonable design plan, allowing them to more precisely control the structure and stability of the active site.2,36
Thus, in this review, we discuss the incorporation of nano-scale particles into crystalline microporous COFs and COF-based materials. We also summarize in detail the important heterogeneous catalytic applications and structure–reactivity correlations of nano-scale particles confined in COFs or COF-based materials. We start by introducing the strategy of isolating nano-scale particles in COFs, and then the influence of different synthesis strategies on the size of nano-particles and the configuration of the support are described. And the superiority of COFs as a support and the different catalytic activities produced by confinement effects are further explained through different heterogeneous catalytic reactions. Finally, the practical application of COF-confined catalysts is discussed, and the future development is also proposed.
2. Design and synthesis of catalysts
For the metal nanoparticles confined in the porous organic framework, the interaction between metal nanoparticles and porous skeletons exists at the interface (Fig. 1a), and this metal–support interaction can limit the particle growth to a specific size to reduce particle aggregation.37 Therefore, the COF-based materials with nanochannels can be designed and synthesized by precisely controlling the structure of heteroatoms, and nanochannels facilitate the entry of nano-scale particles so that the size and shape of nano-scale particles (nanoparticles, nanoclusters, and single atoms) can be reasonably controlled in the nanochannels.38 This controllable strategy of nano-sized particles breaks the limitation of the pore size of the carriers and realizes the controllable synthesis of ultra-fine nanoparticles and large-size nanoparticles (Fig. 1a). Hence, according to the formation pathway of nano-scale particles, the synthetic methods of COF-confined catalysts are mainly divided into the following categories (Fig. 1b): (1) nano-scale particles were in situ synthesized in the pores of COFs through the formation of particle ligand precursors; (2) the smaller structural units interact with each other to form self-assembled and non-self-assembled COF-confined catalysts; (3) selecting the appropriate construction unit to form COFs or COF-based materials, and then form COF-confined catalysts through the post-modification strategy.
 Fig. 1  (a) For nano-scale particles (nanoparticles, nanoclusters, and single atoms) and metal clusters supported on conventional, open-structure solid carriers; (b) the illustration of the synthesis routes and representative images of different COF-confined catalysts. 
2.1 
          In situ synthetic method
Metal ions can be pre-embedded into the pores of COFs or COF-based materials through special functional groups or bonding with COF constituent units, and then metal ions can be reduced to nano-scale particles in situ by some conventional reducing agents (such as NaBH4).39 This in situ synthetic method can maintain the original crystal porous structure of COFs and control the growth of particles. Although there are a few reports on the in situ synthesis of COF-confined materials, the formation of precursors of the pre-synthesized materials by ion replacement and the in situ reduction of ions to ultrafine nano-scale particles in COFs have attracted wide attention.40,41 Because the former two methods need to add reducing agents and other reagents to assist the synthesis of materials, it not only increases the cost but also introduces new impurities. Therefore, some researchers have prepared nano-scale particles without using external reducing agents by carbon–carbon and carbon–heteroatom bonding reactions (Fig. 2a).42 It not only reduces the experimental steps but also reduces the damage of the external reducing agent to the crystal structure. Although these in situ synthetic methods can synthesize COF-confined materials, the size of nano-scale particles cannot be precisely controlled in the COF pores by in situ methods, which may lead to pore blockage or non-uniformity of the formed nano-scale particles, thereby resulting in the failure of material synthesis.
 Fig. 2  (a) Left: synthesis details of the in situ generation of highly dispersed Pd nanoparticles in the COF skeleton; right: comparison of PXRD patterns of simulated COFs (black) with experimental COFs (blue), Pd nanoparticles (cyan), and experimental Pd@COFs (red) (reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2017, ACS Publications); (b) illustrative procedure for the fabrication of Fe@COF catalysts (reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Elsevier); (c) synthetic scheme of P-COF, S-COF and S-COF supports to load gold nanoparticles (reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2020, Elsevier). 
Allowing nano-scale particles to nucleate and grow spontaneously in the pores of COFs or COF-based materials in a fixed form can avoid tedious pretreatment processes. During the synthetic process, the formation of bond bridges (Au–S-COF) by in situ generating gold nanoclusters (Au NCs) in the optimized COF pores is considered to be the most ideal means to simplify the synthetic process.43 Compared with other examples, Au NCs are more prone to aggregation, leading to a poor loading effect and reducing catalytic activity.44 However, the formed Au–S-COF bridge can well inhibit aggregation and improve the catalytic activity. By selecting the appropriate building blocks to adjust the structure of COFs, the active center can be introduced quickly and conveniently. However, the formed bond bridge is uncertain. In order to develop more accurate and concise in situ synthetic methods, some researchers have found that when well-defined COFs containing triazine groups (CTFs) were designed and synthesized, the replacement or modification of the pyridine nitrogen heteroatoms has no effect on the structure of CTFs, thereby we can effectively synthesise ultrafine Pt or Pd nanoparticles through optimizing the pyridine nitrogen heteroatoms.45 In terms of the crystal growth and particle size of the catalyst, the close interrelationship between pyridine nitrogen and metal leads to the ultrafine synthesis of nanoparticles. The success of the in situ synthesis of COF-confined materials depends on the design of the precursors of COFs or COF-based materials, such as the design of pore size, the choice of anchored nano-scale particles, and the selection of COF building blocks.
2.2 Bottom-up synthetic method
There are many synthetic methods for synthesizing heterogeneous catalysts, and the most used methods are bottom-up synthetic methods, including the sol–gel method, co-precipitation method, solution impregnation method, wet-chemistry impregnation dispersion method, and other chemical methods.46,47 However, the conventional bottom-up synthetic methods cannot satisfy the formation of COF-confined materials. In the case of CTFs as the substrate, the use of impregnation combined with the solvothermal method to deposit cadmium sulfide nanoparticles (CdS NPs) is compared with impregnation combined with the photo-deposition approach of CdS NPs. The nanoparticles formed by the photo-deposition approach are smaller, and they can expose more active sites.48 This method solves the randomness and looseness of CdS NP loading on the support, and precisely controls the loading position of nano-scale particles. Although the bottom-up synthetic method can accurately control the morphology and structure of the material, it is difficult to synthesize a material with dense surface loading.22 But, the calcination method can be used to reduce Fe3+ on the surface of COFs to prepare single-atom Fe embedded in the COFs and reduce the loading amount (Fig. 2b).49 This process requires strict control of the ratios of Fe precursor/COFs to realize strong durability and catalytic activity. In addition, the wet-chemistry immersion dispersion method used to load Pd NPs into the optimized COFs (COF-SO3H) can also achieve a low loading content.50 In the synthetic process, the loading of Pd will not change the structure of the catalyst, and a low-content loading is achieved, thereby providing more easily available active sites.
In some cases, COFs with free active functional groups synthesized by a bottom-up method can be used to anchor nano-scale particles well.51 Nitrogen atoms in COFs with a nitrogen donor function can stabilize metal NPs and control the growth of metal NPs.52 For example, the CTFs synthesized by the bottom-up method are used to anchor Ru NPs well.53 Compared with other synthetic methods, it has the advantages of high catalytic stability and strong recyclability. Moreover, the internal structure of COFs can also be changed by adding triazine groups to provide an effective channel for loading metal nanoparticles.54 The triazine group and COFs can form a two-dimensional (2D) hexagonal system through a one-pot polycondensation method, which makes it easier to infuse silver nanoparticles into the pores of COFs, thereby improving the synthesis efficiency. In a bottom-up synthetic strategy, we can synthesize COF-confined catalysts with good stability and compatibility by modifying COF monomers.
2.3 Post-synthetic modification method
The introduction of nano-scale particles into COFs or COF-based materials by post-synthetic modification is the most common method to obtain COF-confined materials.55 For instance, the bipyridine groups are embedded in COFs by the post-synthetic modification method. This method not only provides binding sites for non-noble metal atoms, but also improves the electron transfer inside COF molecules.56 As a new type of crystalline material, COFs have a large specific surface area, high content of heteroatoms (non-carbon atom), and excellent gas capture performance,38,57 but their charge separation ability needs to be improved. However, the post-synthesis modification method can be used to precisely adjust the electronic properties and energy band structure, and to strengthen the interaction between the nano-scale particles and the COF support, resulting in improved catalytic activity of the heterogeneous catalytic system.58 For some special materials, the corresponding functional catalyst can be obtained by double post-treatment. For example, Zhang et al. introduced gold NPs into a propylene functionalization COF (P-COF) through a post-modification strategy, and gold NPs with a narrow particle size distribution were successfully loaded on the P-COF (Fig. 2c).59 The modification of COFs through these grafting or chemical reactions makes them of great significance for us to achieve a controllable structure and excellent performance of COF-confined catalysts.
Due to the tunability of COFs, the aperture size of COFs can be adjusted arbitrarily by selecting suitable blocks to meet actual needs.60 Therefore, the modified nanoparticles can be loaded into the COFs through post-modification strategies. Two teams are currently exploring this strategy to synthesize COF-confined heterogeneous catalysts.61,62 In these studies, different encapsulation materials (polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8)) are first used to treat the nanoparticles to avoid agglomeration and deactivation. Compared with the stronger bond and function in COFs to control the growth of nanoparticles, this strategy can better control the size and morphology of nanoparticles, thereby accurately controlling the catalytic activity of the catalyst. Besides, R. Vaidhyanathan et al. proposed to load nanoparticles in COF channels using the double solvent method (yielded metallic Ni3N nanoparticles of the size <5 nm),63 which could provide a new idea for precise control of the size of nanoparticles in COF-confined catalysts.
3. COF-confined catalysts
Different nano-scale catalysts (nanoparticles, nanoclusters, and single atoms) have different interactions with COFs owing to their different building blocks (Table 1 and Fig. 3), and thereby an accurate grasp of the relationship between them is the key for improving the catalytic performance of supported catalysts. At present, research on the basic mechanism and structure of supported catalysts is still in the preliminary stage, so it is difficult to analyze them accurately by using conventional analytical methods. In 2008, F. Tao and G. A. Somorjai et al. used surface science and technology to study the structural reconstruction of reaction-driven Rh–Pd and Pt–Pd NPs,64 revealed the questions related to the interaction between nano-scale catalysts and supporting materials and promoted the research process of the structure and reaction mechanism of supported catalysts. In this section, we summarize the recent reports of COF-confined catalysts to understand the structural relationship between the active center and the carrier and to briefly describe the confinement effect of nano-scale particles in COFs.
Table 1 The interaction between nano-scale particles (nanoparticles, nanoclusters, and single atoms) and COFs or COF-based materials in COF-confined catalysts




COFs-confined catalysts
Loading (wt%)
Interaction
Ref.





a S-COF: sulfur-containing COF.
b COF-S-SH: a COF modified with thiol chains.
c PC-COF: nitrogen-rich COF.
d CTF-1: a covalent triazine-based framework.
e TpBpy: COF material constructed from 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp) with 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-diamine palladium chloride (Bpy-PdCl2).
f COF-SO3H: a SO3H-anchored COF.
g TAPB-DMPT-COF: COF material constructed from 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene (TAPB) with 2,5-dimethoxyterephthaldehyde (DMTP).
h H-TpPa: a active yolk–shell COF catalyst material.
i COF-ASB: condensation of benzene-1,3,5-tricarbohydrazide with benzene-1,4-dicarboxaldehyde generated a new COF.
j COF-300-1114: tetrakis(4-anilyl)methane and terephthaldehyde (molar ratio = 11/14) produced a dia-c5 topological COF.
k sp2c-COF: with CC bonds and afford fully p-conjugated frameworks.
l 3d metal atoms: Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu.
m FPy-CON: fluorinated analogues covalent–organic nanosheets.
n TM atoms: transition-metal atoms (Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cr, Ti…).





Pd/Pt NPs@COF
34.36
The pores hold strong anchoring groups (thioether groups)

65



Au NPs@S-COFa
24.00
Au–S-COF bond bridge

59



Au NCs@COF-S-SHb
N

43



Rh NPs@PC-COFc
1.91
The accessible N sites in the pore can connect the nano-scale particles

39



CdS NPs@CTF-1d
19.3

48



Rh NPs@CTF
3.40

53



Pd NPs@TpBpye
15.20

42



Ni3N NPs@COF
N

63



Pd NPs@COF
N

66



Co/Co(OH)2 NPs@COF
16.00

67



Rh NPs@COF
4.00

68



Pd/Pt@CTF
0.10

45



Pd NPs@COF-SO3Hf
0.38
The strong synergism between them enhances the adhesion energy of nano-scale particles

50



Au NPs@TAPB-DMTP-COFg
0.20
Encapsulation or modification of PVP/ZIF-8 to fix nano-scale particles in COF pores

61



Pd NPs@H-TpPah
N

62



Ru NPs@COF-ASBi
4.10
Heteroatom functionalities (hydrazine) in support pores

69



Pd NCs@COF-300-1114j
1.10
Dangling amine groups on the porous support can confine ultrasmall NCs

70



Cu NCs@CTF
4.80
The synergism between the two and the good chemical confinement environment

71



Pd NPs@COF
5.00
Function bond (imine bond) in the porous support

72



Pd NCs@COF
N

73



Pt NPs@ sp2c-COFk
3.00
Interfacial charge transfer

74



Pd@In NCs@N3-COF
4.51 and 5.01

75



Pt atom@CTF
1.02
The rich-N sites of the support can accurately anchor single atoms

76



Fe atom@COF
2.14

49



3d metal atomsl@COF
N

77



Co atom@FPy-CONm
2.10
Strong linkage of the iminopyridine moiety

78



TM atomn@COF
N
The synergistic effect of TM single atoms and the support

79





 Fig. 3  The interaction between nano-scale particles (nanoparticles, nanoclusters, and single atoms) and COFs or COF-based materials in COF-confined catalysts. (a) The pores hold strong anchoring functional groups and functional bonds; (b) the synergistic effect of nano-particles and supports; (c) bond bridge can establish the interaction between nano-particles and support; (d) interfacial charge transfer can establish the interaction between nano-particles and supports; (e) the rich-N sites of the support pores can accurately anchor nano-particles; (f) encapsulation can fix nano-scale particles in COF pores. 
3.1 COF-confined nanoparticles
Nanoparticles (NPs) are ideal candidates for heterogeneous catalysis due to their unique physical and chemical properties, such as large specific surface area, good stability, and many exposed active sites.80,81 However, NPs tend to agglomerate, which reduces their catalytic activity.54,82 However, NPs can be confined by porous supports, enhancing the catalytically active sites to improve the catalytic activity around them. As a new star of porous materials, COFs have excellent properties such as high surface, high porosity, and topological structural designability, showing their great potential as a support for NPs.83–86 We found that the strong interaction between COFs or COF-based materials and NPs can reduce the Ostwald ripening and spillover effect,87,88 and then improve the NP dispersion and stability.

3.1.1 COF-confined single-component nanoparticle catalyst. 
The unique porous organic framework in COF materials is considered to be an important support for active metal NPs, and the abundant nitrogen bonds in the framework can better fix the metal NPs in the pores of COF materials.89,90 The strong interaction between the nitrogen bond and metal NPs can avoid the accumulation of NPs in the internal space of porous scaffolds and make them uniformly dispersed, thus improving the catalytic efficiency of COF-confined catalysts. Herein, Lu and co-workers synthesized a COF-based material with high nitrogen content using piperazine and cyanuric chloride as raw materials.39 The precisely designed N sites can interact with Ru ions to form Ru–N complexes (Fig. 4a). Ru ions could be reduced to Ru NPs in situ, which was due to the adhesion energy of the interface between Ru NPs and COF-based materials, so that the reduced Ru NPs could still be confined in the pores of COF-based materials, which successfully prepared COF-confined catalysts. This peculiar adhesion energy prevents the leaching and aggregation of Ru NPs to provide higher active sites. Apart from the above methods, NPs can also be immobilized through the interaction between the metal surface and solvent. Ma and co-workers successfully synthesized palladium nanoparticles (Pd NPs) and trapped them in the covalent pores of the CCOF according to this strategy (using the interaction between the chiral N-rich COF (CCOF) and palladium nitrate solvents).91 Related data showed that the combination of the CCOF and Pd NPs exhibits a special structure. As shown in the powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) pattern (Fig. 4b), the synthesized Pd NPs were located between the CCOF layers and N atoms in the layers. Through Barrett–Joyner–Halenda analysis, it was found that the loading of NPs significantly changed the interlayer spacing of the framework, the optical properties of the materials were improved, and the catalytic performance of the catalyst did not decrease. Because NPs are embedded in COFs or COF-based material layers, the interaction between them made the interlayer distance increase, thereby improving the absorption ability and catalytic performance. Islam and co-workers successfully synthesized two COFs, which were modified with silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) on their outer surface.54 COF-1 and COF-2 were the precursors of COFs, and these COFs had abundant N centers and interacted closely with the outer surface of Ag NPs according to density functional theory. This interaction between Ag NPs and COF support improves the catalytic activity of the catalyst. Therefore, effectively confining the NPs into the pores of the COFs would help to build a close cooperative relationship between the two to enhance the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 4  (a) XPS spectra of the Rh 3d peak for the 1.91 wt% Rh–N/PC-COF (reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry); (b) simulated and measured PXRD patterns of Pd@CCOF-MPC and CCOF-MPC (reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2017, ACS Publications); (c) XPS N 1s peaks of CTF-HC2 (reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (d) the simulated (black line) and measured PXRD patterns of Ru@COF-SAB (red line) and COF-SAB (purple). Rietveld refinement (blue line), and the difference plot between measured and Rietveld-refined PXRD patterns (dark green line) (reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2018, ACS Publications); (e) the TEM image of the Au–S-COF, the inset histogram is the distribution of Au nanoparticle size (reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2020, Elsevier); (f) powder XRD patterns of the as-synthesized COF and COF composite containing 0.20 wt% 15 nm Au NPs and simulated XRD pattern of the TAPB-DMTP-COF. The inset is the same XRD pattern of the Au/COF composite but with the adjusted intensity scale, where weak peaks associated with the diffraction of the COF can be observed but those assignable to Au NPs cannot be observed (reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2017, ACS Publications); (g) XRD patterns of the as-synthesized samples (reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, Elsevier); (h) Mott–Schottky plots of the COF, bulk CdS, and CdS-COF (90:10) hybrids (reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2014, Britannica); (i) monomers and the IISERP-COF5. The highlighted regions indicate the peaks in the COF due to the unreacted terminal aldehyde/amine functionalities (reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2018, Wiley Online Library). 
One of the common methods for embedding NPs into porous structures is the interaction of abundant nitrogen in COFs or COF-based materials with NPs.92 In addition to N-rich COFs, a series of functionalized COFs (such as triazine, porphyrin, pyridine, imine, etc.) can also effectively immobilize NPs into a mesoporous structure. For instance, an N-rich carbon fiber COF is an ideal support for NPs.93–95 The highly crystalline CTFs synthesized from triazine bonds contain abundant pyridinic nitrogen atoms (aromatic CN), which can fix NPs.95 In order to verify the effect of pyridinic nitrogen of CTFs on stabilizing metal NPs, Jin and co-workers used palladium and platinum NPs (Pd/Pt NPs) as representatives to design and prepare COF-confined catalysts in a tunable CTF platform.45 These studies have found that pyridine nitrogen in CTFs had a pair of isolated electron pairs, which could form a strong interaction with metal NPs and effectively control the size of metal NPs on a tunable CTF platform. Among them, the instability of palladium led to a higher interaction between Pd and pyridine nitrogen, which not only promoted the close connection between Pd NPs and the CTF support to accelerate photoelectron transfer, but also helped to form smaller NPs. The experimental results show that the interaction between Pd NPs and pyridine nitrogen is greater than that of Pt NPs and pyridine nitrogen. Therefore, the catalytic performance of COF-confined catalysts formed by the Pd NP interaction with CTFs is better. The interaction between Pd/Pt and N was further verified and analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. 4c). It can be known that the reason Pd NPs are uniformly dispersed in mesoporous CTFs is that the ordered pyridine metal chelating center on the skeleton has a good immobilization effect on NPs, which further proves that the confinement effect formed by the strong interaction between CTFs and metal NPs is helpful to improve the catalytic performance.
The super-cage structure is used to fix nano-scale particles, and the controllable synthesis of ultra-fine NPs into large-size NPs is realized. The super-cage structure makes the large size NPs stable, showing the stability of the encapsulation effect. Roeffaers and co-workers used electrostatic self-assembly of PVP in imine-based COFs to control the growth of metal NPs.96 Since Pt NPs are usually charged, the use of insulator-terminated Pt NPs can effectively absorb light to excite hot π-electrons in imine-linked COFs and motivate the photocatalytic reaction. In their work, by adding an insulator to imine-connected COF pores, the metal NPs are cleverly wrapped in the COF to achieve absolute stability of the metal NPs. This provides new guidance for the advancement of the artificial optical system. To create new and attractive NP loaded imine-linked COFs, many researchers explore other methods to limit NPs. Gu and co-workers synthesized an imine-linked COF with thioether (thio-COF) through a simple condensation reaction, in which the interaction between the functional groups of sulfides and NPs forms a bond bridge to improve the separation efficiency of photogenerated carriers.65 The functional groups of thioether in the pores promote the close contact between the metal ions (Pt or Pd) and NPs through the metal–sulfur binding interaction, and the formed COF-confined catalysts have excellent performance such as low loading, mild reaction condition, and high yield. The different interactions between COFs or COF-based materials and NPs form a variety of COF-confined catalysts, which lays a foundation for the synthesis of multi-functional catalytic materials.
COFs or COF-based materials are formed by reversible covalent bonds, which can efficiently stabilize metal NPs. In the presence of this covalent bond, it is easy to introduce heteroatom groups for the connection of COF pores, such as imine, triazole, hydrazone, etc. Then, the synergistic effect of these heteroatom groups and COF pores can well confine NPs. A COF-confined catalyst by hydrazone bonds to immobilize ruthenium nanoparticles (Ru NPs) with excellent catalytic properties was developed by Chen and co-workers.69 The energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) mapping image and PXRD pattern, respectively, showed that Ru NPs were uniformly distributed in the hydrazone-linked COFs (Fig. 4d). The loading of Ru NPs had a good consistency with the hydrazone-linked COFs and showed that hydrazone was the link between the COF and Ru NPs, which not only ensured the structural integrity but also improved the dispersion of NPs. The tunability of COFs not only allowed them to be modified by heteroatomic functional groups, but also could use post modification strategies to change the A-COF to B-COF (A-COF and B-COF for different COF-based materials). Ding and co-workers took advantage of this performance to design and synthesize functionalized COFs.59 Transforming the propylene functionalized COF (P-COF) to a sulfur-containing COF (S-COF), the abundant thiol and thioether groups in the materials were used to anchor gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) to form an Au–S-COF. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) directly showed the good dispersibility of Au NPs on a S-COF (Fig. 4e), and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) showed that the interplanar distance of Au NPs anchored on the surface of the S-COF was 0.2 nm, which reflected that the formed bond bridge provided more reaction spaces. However, not all modified COFs or COF-based materials could produce strong interacting bond bridges with all active metals. In addition to using the form of bond bridge to strengthen the interaction between the two, Luo and co-workers proposed a new way to construct COFs that had a strong interaction with active metals.50 This team meticulously designed –SO3H (COF-SO3H) anchored COFs. Due to the presence of –SO3H, the interaction between Pd NPs and COFs was enhanced (Pd/COF-SO3H), thereby reducing the size aggregation and spillover of Pd NPs. It could be seen from the XRD patterns and scanning electron microscope (SEM) image that the loading of Pd NPs did not change the structure of COF-SO3H and still maintained a uniform fiber morphology. This was because the COF skeleton modified by-SO3H could better adapt to the embedding behavior of Pd NPs by the COF, which was closely related to the close interaction between the two. The interface sites around NPs were unique environments because they were directly in contact with supports and reactants to improve the stability of the catalyst. Hence, enhancing its interaction with COFs or COF-based materials is an important strategy to synthesize highly active catalysts.
In most cases, there is no interaction between the scaffold lattice and NPs, thereby resulting in carrier defects or structural collapse. However, the heterogeneous nucleus can treat NPs as small insoluble particles dispersed in the solution, so that the nanoparticle attaches to the COF to generate crystal nuclei.97 Inspired by this, Zhu and co-workers reported a simple encapsulation technology to anchor PVP-modified Au NPs in 2D COF-based materials.61 The surface of Au NPs was functionalized by PVP, which made Au NPs anchor on the surface of the synthesized COFs. It facilitated better adjustment of the composition, size, and shape of the nanoparticles. It was worth noting that the modified Au NPs were first adsorbed on the COF precursor instead of the heterogeneous nucleation. In a good environment, during the high surface energy and unstable of Au nanoparticles, it is easy to attract each other with other Au nanoparticles to form a ball, which then effectively combines with the COF precursor. TEM measurements showed that the central area of each aggregated ball (COF-based materials) contained several Au NPs (Fig. 4f). Control experiments showed that COFs had no reduction performance, and their main reaction site was the surface of active Au NPs. The similar strategy of using COFs as a shell to encapsulate metal NPs attracted the attention of Li and co-workers.98 They introduced a self-template ZIF-8 core–shell nanostructure as the support of metal NPs to synthesize COF-confined catalysts. The ZIF-8 modified metal NPs were encapsulated into the COF cavity, and ZIF-8 could be etched away during the formation of COFs to expose active sites. In addition, the sacrificial template could also enhance the permeability of the COF shell of the outer porous structure, allowing the reactants to fully contact with metal NPs, thereby enhancing the synergistic effect between supports and metal NPs. It is worthy of our attention that this synthesis strategy is suitable for confining a variety of NPs, and it can easily change and adjust the function and performance of the catalyst.


3.1.2 COF-based multi-component nanoparticle catalyst. 
As mentioned above, the single-component NPs can form a strong interaction with special sites in COFs (such as N sites,53 triazine group,99 hydrogen-bonded phenolic group,100 and amine groups101), thereby forming high-stability COF-confined catalysts. It is because the single-component NPs and COFs or COF-based carriers form a strong interaction to improve the dispersibility of single-component NPs. However, most of the single-component NPs are noble metals, resulting in high cost, and it is not suitable for mass production. Therefore, finding multi-component NPs with a reasonable price and simple preparation process is very important for practical application. Zou and others discovered a semiconductor material that can replace single-component NP-CdS (cadmium sulfide), which had the advantages of the strong photoelectric effect, simple preparation, and low price.48 Using CTFs to anchor CdS NPs, the strong metal–nitrogen interaction in the CdS-CTF prevented CdS NPs from photo-corrosion and aggregation, and XRD patterns showed that the addition of nanoparticles did not change CTF structure (Fig. 4g). Therefore, the superior photocatalytic performance of the composite material was attributed to the formation of smaller CdS NPs in the pores of CTFs, which not only maintained the original crystal structure of CTFs, but also exposed more active centers. Anchoring CdS NPs on COFs had also been reported by Kurungot and co-workers;102 they adopted a highly stable 2D-COF as the support of CdS NPs and used the π–π superimposed interaction in 2D-COFs to form a sheet layer, and CdS NPs could be evenly distributed in the COF flake matrix. Mott–Schottky (MS) and photoluminescence (PL) analysis showed that the strong interaction between the 2D-COF support and CdS NPs not only effectively inhibited the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs (Fig. 4h), but also improved the light stability of NPs, so that the nanocomposite had higher catalytic activity.
Immobilization of multi-component NPs on the support to enhance their stability and control their spatial distribution is the most effective way to improve the catalytic performance of NPs. However, the support is usually not inert, and the interaction with NPs will produce new interface phenomena. R. Vaidhyanathan and co-workers synthesized strategically positioned –OH and N-rich COFs.63 This type of COFs interacted strongly with Ni3N NPs, limiting the size of the Ni3N NPs to <2 nm. Surprisingly, the growth sizes (3–5 nm) of a few Ni3N NPs were higher than the limit aperture of COFs (27.0 Å), but they were still smaller than those of naked Ni3N NPs (18–20 nm). These NPs grow in size more quickly than the support pores, thereby generating new boundary phenomena in the catalytic system. Some interface phenomena promote NP loading, and some will produce an Ostwald ripening phenomenon, especially in larger NPs. In 2018, the author led a new team to elaborate on this interface phenomenon,67 which adopted COF-based materials as a support to confine larger Co/Co(OH)2 NPs; the N-rich binding pockets in COFs ensured the strong interaction between Co/Co(OH)2 NPs and COFs (Fig. 4i). These nitrogen bonds could make Co/Co(OH)2 NPs stable in the COF matrix, so that the Co/Co(OH)2 NPs are not filtered out. The synthesized COF composite was modeled by some characterization methods such as DFT calculations and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analysis, and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM), and all of them revealed that COFs were used as porous scaffolds, and the size of Co/Co(OH)2 NPs exceeds the support pores. The authors further studied the effect of the exposed surface of NPs on the heterogeneous catalytic system by calculating the energy associated with the activation of the reactants and substrates. The calculation results revealed that the complex could modulate the catalytic activity through the specific exposed surface of the NPs. These studies can give us a better understanding of the interaction between NPs and COF-based materials, which can highlight the great potential of COFs as a carrier for the synthesis of high-efficiency catalysts.

3.2 COF-confined nanoclusters
Nano-scale particles vary in size; they will exhibit different catalytic behaviors from the traditional catalysts because the nanoparticles are affected by the quantum size effect, that is, the smaller the size is, the greater the surface energy of the NPs have.61,105,106 When the diameter of the nano-scale particles is less than 1 nanometer, they are called nanoclusters (NCs). Their higher surface energy makes the particles remain in an active state, resulting in poor stability and low catalytic performance.62 In order to increase the surface energy of the material, the researchers discovered a new COF-based material containing thiol chains (COF-S-SH), in which the –SH groups were used as nucleation sites to form strong S–Au bonds with gold NCs (Au NCs) to improve the stability of catalysts.43 The strong metal–support interaction (–SH groups anchored to Au NCs to form an Au–S-COF bonding bridge (Fig. 5a)) not only improved the surface adsorption energy of carbon nanotubes, but also promoted the growth of ultra-fine Au NCs, thereby improving the separation of electrons and holes. Generally, most of the NCs anchored on the COF support cannot be efficiently introduced into the pores, and only a small part of NCs is embedded in the support.107 In order to solve this problem, Guo and co-workers used a nonstoichiometric synthetic strategy to efficiently limit the amine functional groups to anchoring platinum NCs (Pd NCs).70 It could be clearly seen from the XRD spectrum that Au NCs had no diffraction peaks, indicating that the growth of Au NCs was well controlled by the COF pores (Fig. 5b), thereby resulting in a small size of NCs. Furthermore, Zou and co-workers found that COFs or COF-based materials had high porosity and good molecular sieving performance, and COF-confined catalysts were successfully synthesized by using these characteristics.71 The X-ray absorption analyses revealed that copper NCs (Cu NCs) were embedded in bipyridine-modified CTF materials (Fig. 5c). The inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) showed that CTFs with a triazine ring could not effectively anchor Cu NCs, while the addition of bipyridyl groups could enhance the interaction between CTFs and Cu NCs. Therefore, CTFs could provide a good environment to stabilize Cu NCs through pre-designed bipyridine organic ligands and porous framework structures. In addition, metal ions could be first adsorbed by special functional groups in building blocks and then reduced to NCs in situ. Liang and co-workers found a COF with imine bonds, which could adsorb palladium ions (Pd2+) to form a Pd2+-COF complex.73 Pd2+ ions adsorbed on the surface were reduced to Pd NCs on COF supports. The strong interaction between the imine bond and Pd NCs confine the growth of the Pd NCs, thereby improving the dispersion of Pd NCs. This strategy not only adjusts the surface electronic structure of the Pd NCs/COF, but also increases the active sites, thereby improving the catalytic effect and stability of the Pd NCs/COF. It was no doubt that the porous structure of COFs provided binding sites for different NCs, so that these nanoclusters could be stably and evenly distributed on the pores. Therefore, it is extremely important to understand the relationship between the support structure and active sites.
 Fig. 5  (a) N2 adsorption isotherms of the COF and COF-S-SH (reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library); (b) comparison of XRD patterns and FT-IR spectra of Pd/COF-300-xy and COF-300-xy (xy = 0714, 0914, and 1114) (reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (c) real-time operando XAS measurements of CTF-Cu-4.8% at −1.45 V vs. SHE (reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (d) the corresponding intensity profiles for the atomically dispersed single Pt atom (reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (e) model structure employed in this study, a porphyrin-type unit cell (M–N4) after structural optimization. Gray: transition metal atoms (M); black: C; white: H; blue: N. The red dotted lines represent the unit cell for each structural model (reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (f) FTIR spectra of the Co-COF before (black) and after (red) photocatalysis (reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (g) projected density of states of the Co-COF. The inset shows the crystal field around the Co atom (reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2018, Britannica); (h) high-resolution XPS spectra of the fresh and used Fe@COF catalysts (reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Elsevier); (i) binding energy (Eb) of transition state elements (reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications). 
The synthesis of COF-confined catalysts for heterogeneous catalysis using multi-component NCs as the active sites, and the growth of NCs also brings great challenges. Recently, P. Kour and S. P. Mukherjee reported perovskite NCs of CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6@EB-COF: Br (EB-COF: Br is a Br-functionalized COF).108 The authors used the Br-functionalized COF as an encapsulation material to control the synthesis of perovskite (CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6) NCs, which had chemical affinity and non-interference with the photoluminescence of brominated perovskites. It not only reduces the toxicity of lead (Pb) in the system, but also improves the stability of the CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 NCs. COFs and COF-based materials play many roles in COF-confined materials. In addition to a support, the COF can also be used as a photosensitizer to improve the light response. Lu et al. used a photosensitizing N3-COF to limit the growth of bimetallic Pd@In NCs and simultaneously catalyze the reduction of CO2 to alcohols.75 The authors indicated that a strong interaction (internal electron transfer) existed in the Pd@In nanostructure, and there were some synergies (external electron transfer) between Pd@In NCs and the N3-COF, which greatly contributed to C–C coupling and interfacial charge transfer. This work highlights the fact that bimetallic NCs are confined into photosensitizing supports that rely on charge transfer between their face, thereby improving the efficiency of photosynthesis.
3.3 COF-confined single-atom
The size effect and the confinement effect are the most important factors in our discussion of the relationship between supports and nano-scale particles. For nano-scale particles, their electronic structure and geometric structure will change with the change of size especially single-atom catalysts with a size smaller than 0.1 nm.4 Hence, the single-atom catalysts have attracted great interest in the field of catalysis due to their unique structure,109 which not only shows the advantages of heterogeneous catalysts, but also retains the performance of homogeneous catalysts. The single-atom catalyst is a catalyst in which the metal component is interdependent with non-porous or microporous/mesoporous materials in the form of single atoms, and the surface reaction is simple. However, it is difficult to control the leaching rate of single atoms in the synthesis and reaction process.110 However, as a new material, COFs have periodic and permanent porosity, which can well accommodate single active sites and effectively transform photogenerated charges into active sites.71 In addition, compared with the support-based single-atom, the COF-based single-atom shows a superior porous structure, which can display better performances. In this section, we summarize the potential of different COFs and COF-based materials to fix different single metal atoms.

3.3.1 COF-based noble single atom. 
A class of interesting N-containing macrocyclic ligands was reported by Zhu et al.53,111,112 They had rich coordination chemistry and could anchor noble single atoms. When noble metal atoms are used as the active center of the catalyst, nitrogen sites are used to stabilize noble metal atoms. Huang and co-workers successfully synthesized a CTF with abundant N3 groups.76 The Pt single-atoms are anchored on the CTF by –N3 sites, thereby effectively controlling the growth of Pt single-atoms in adsorption (Fig. 5d). In addition, the COF can also bond to the –N site to form a CTF in addition to bonding with the –N3 site. Nakanishi and co-workers have prepared CTF-supported Ru single atoms, where Ru atoms were connected by –N to form Ru–N coordination bonds.89 In the cyclic catalytic reaction, Pt and N atoms bonded to form a tight connector Pt–N bond, and the Ru–N bond was oxidized and transformed into a high-valency oxide RuO. Although Ru atom-modified CTFs were oxidized to high-valency RuO, it was highly stable during the long-term electrolysis in an aqueous solution. The choice of monatomic species has a great influence on the success synthesis of COF-confined catalysts, and the strong metal support relationship is the key to materials synthesis. For supported precious metal catalysts, the embedding of precious metals often stops the active sites from blocking because the precious metals can accurately combine with fixed anchor points, thus reducing the effect of single atom embedding on the support.


3.3.2 COF-based non-noble single atom. 
The large-scale development of precious metals as active centers had a fatal disadvantage since the reserves of precious metals in the Earth are very low and the durability of catalysts is poor, which seriously hinder the large-scale production of catalysts. To meet the needs of the society, non-precious metals, as a widespread species in the Earth, have become a research hotspot in the development of low-cost and high-efficiency catalysts. When a non-noble single atom is embedded in a porous material (COFs or COF-based materials), the single atoms usually replace the heteroatoms (such as N, S, O, etc.) or occupy the vacancy formed by other atoms on the supports, so that the atoms can grow and fix well in the porous materials, and then improve the stability of the catalysts.35,113 In recent years, as a kind of microporous polymer, COFs can anchor most non-noble single atoms. The main reason is that they have a large number of heteroatoms and lone pairs of electrons to anchor metal atoms through coordination bonds.67 Based on the characteristics of COF-based materials, Kamiya and co-workers studied the relationship between the 3d non-precious metal (Mn, Fe, Co, and Cu) and COFs through hard exploration and long-term research (Fig. 5e).77 This team established the metal center and N atom model and revealed that a stronger target absorption was achieved when there were fewer d-electrons. By comparing some models such as M–N4 (coordination number = 4), M–N3 (coordination number = 3), and M–N2 (coordination number = 2), they drew a conclusion that the smaller coordination number had stronger adsorption. The non-noble single atom with smaller d-electrons and a coordination number can combine well with oxygen molecules in COF-confined catalysts (according to the theoretical calculation system, Fe and Co–N4 had high catalytic activity, while Cu and Ni had poor catalytic performance because of their weak interaction with oxygen molecules). It can be seen that Fe and Co have a strong interaction with the support, which can significantly enhance the adsorption of reactants and the shedding of products during charge transfer. Therefore, the single atom can be closely combined with the carrier to achieve the purpose of uniform dispersion by adjusting the properties of d electrons or reducing the coordination number. The dispersion of the single atom in COF-confined catalysts is inseparable from the strong interaction between the carrier and single atom, and the weak interaction easily leads to atomic leaching to reduce the practicability of the material.
Although COFs with a multimeric pore structure can provide a clear and coordinated environment to accommodate a non-noble single atom, the instability of the binding site between the metal and support and the existence of non-uniform defects on the support surface result in low loading and uneven distribution of metal atoms.114 Therefore, the load and dispersion of metal atoms by accurately designing the loading sites of metal atoms can be increased. Chen and co-workers used the pyridine units and their adjacent imine groups as the bridge to connect single cobalt (Co) atoms and COFs,78 realizing the precise control of the spatially arranged catalytic sites in the surrounding chemical environment. HAADF-STEM indicated that Co atoms were uniformly distributed in the COF matrix and Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy indicated that the structure of COFs did not change during the delamination and metal loading process (Fig. 5f). Therefore, it is of great practical significance to embed the active site in the pore purposefully in a certain chemical environment. Wang and his colleagues also tried to synthesize functional COFs by using bipyridine functional groups with strong adsorption.56 The synthesized functional COFs not only improved the stability of single metal atoms, but also established donor–acceptor channels with intramolecular electron delocalization and cascade effects with single metal atoms. This was because the –CC– bridging in the sp2c-COFdpy connected the donor–acceptor channel of intramolecular electron delocalization and cascade effects. From the perspective of sunlight utilization, bipyridine instead of the biphenyl skeleton acted as an electron acceptor through intramolecular interaction to realize electron transfer in this system, thereby improving sunlight utilization. Additionally, according to the Kubelka–Munk equation, the band gap of the sp2c-COFdpy was calculated to be 2.03 eV. Therefore, this catalytic system can efficiently utilize solar energy and has higher catalytic activity, thereby laying a good foundation for the development of COF-based materials.
It is well known that the spatial arrangement of active metal centers is precisely manipulated in an ordered organic framework through the combination of organic couples. However, Gao and colleagues integrated the activated metal center into COFs or COF-based materials that contain special functional groups, and successfully synthesized a COF-confined catalyst with excellent performance.115 The main body of the material was constituted by phthalocyanine borate COFs and Co atoms; Co atoms represented active metal sites and they were loaded into the phthalocyanine block before synthesizing COFs (Fig. 5g), since the electronic structure of the synthesized catalyst essentially affects the efficiency of the catalyst. The general characteristics of COFs were explained though the projected density of states (PDOS). The results showed that the 2p orbitals of four nearest nitrogen atoms in Co atoms and Co 3d orbital had a strong resonance, and the energy level of the Co 3d orbital in phthalocyanine was higher than that of porphyrin. The stronger crystal field enhanced the combination of Co and phthalocyanine and improved the stability of the material. The use of functional COFs to anchor non-metal single atoms provides a reasonable way to optimize the catalytic performance of COF-based materials, which has attracted considerable attention. In order to build an efficient catalytic system, Yao and co-workers had proposed a new strategy to prepare COF-confined catalysts, which exhibited outstanding catalytic efficiency and strong durability in acidic and alkaline media.49 This team used abundant pyrrole nitrogen of COFs as adsorption sites for single metal atoms, and the EDS mapping showed that Fe, N, O, and C elements were evenly dispersed on the support (Fig. 5h). The COFs and Fe-embedded COFs are analyzed through field emission SEM (FE-SEM) images. It can be known that the structure of COFs remained unchanged before and after Fe doping, and it could be clearly observed that there was no agglomeration of Fe atoms in the pores of the COFs. In addition, the abundant and stable nitrogen atoms in COFs had a strong interaction with the optimized single atoms, which made COF-confined catalysts exhibit excellent catalytic performance. Inspired by the high-efficiency catalyst for the synthesis of 2D polymerized phthalocyanine with embedded iron atoms, Zhao and co-workers successfully synthesized COFs with a phthalocyanine and pyridine bond,79 and the first principles calculations proved the firmness of COF-based materials for anchoring transition metal (TM) atoms (TM-COF). According to the binding energy (Eb) value range of TM-COFs (−3.44 to −9.43 eV) (Fig. 5i), TM atoms were uniformly fixed in the pore of COFs to avoid their migration and leaching, thereby promoting electron transfer, and increasing reactive sites. The COF-confined single atom catalysts not only provide a new catalytic system, but also open a new chapter for the development of controllable multifunctional catalysts.

4. Heterogeneous catalytic reaction
The efficiency of heterogeneous catalytic reactions is closely related to catalytic materials. With the development of supported catalysts, different confined catalysts have been found in electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and other fields. As shown in Table 2, we can clearly understand the wide application of COF-confined catalysts. In this part, we discussed the application of different types of COF-confined catalysts in heterogeneous catalytic reactions (Table 3) and selected some representative reactions that have attracted attention in practical applications to reflect the catalytic performance.
Table 2 Comparison of catalytic performance of COF-confined catalysts, MOF-confined catalysts, and zeolite-confined catalysts in practical applications




Catalytic property
COF-confined catalysts
MOF-confined catalysts
Zeolite-confined catalysts




Stability
High
Low
High


Confinement effect
Strong
Moderate
Strong


Shape electivity
Yes
Limited
Limited


Scope of reactions
Suitable for all reaction conditions
More suitable for reaction under mild conditions
Widely used for conventional thermal catalysis




Table 3 Summary of typical studies on photo(electro)catalytic applications of COF-confined catalysts




Application
Catalysts
Synthesis method
Reaction environment
Performances
Ref.





a FE: Faraday efficiency.
b MIS: metal–insulator–semiconductor.
c TOF: turnover frequency.
d TEOA: triethanolamine.
e MeOH: methanol.
f DCM: dichloromethane.
g TpPa-1: ketoamine-based COF.
h MeCN: acetonitrile.
i Thio-COF: thioether-containing COF.
j CCOF-MPC: chiral COF carriers synthesized from cyanuric chloride and S-(+)-2-methylpiperazine.
k TON: turnover number.
l TpTta: COF material constructed from 4,4′,4′′-(1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triyl)-trianiline (Tta) and 1,3,5-triformyl phloroglucinol (TFP).
m NIS: N-iodosuccinimide.
n DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide.
o VASP: Vienna ab initio simulation package.
p S-COF: a 2D COF modified with thiol chains.
q EB-COF: Br is the Br-functionalized COF.
r MO: methyl orange.
s Pc-TFPN: Pc is the acronym for 2,3,9,10,16,17,23,24-octahydroxyphthalocyaninato metal, and TFPN is the acronym for tetrauorophthalonitrile.





Hydrogen production
CdS NPs@CTF-1 (photocatalysis)
Impregnation combined with a photo-deposition approach
An aqueous solution containing 8 mL lactic acid
H2 evolution rate of 11.43 mmol g−1 h−1

48



Hydrogen production
Pt NPs@COF (electrocatalysts)
Solvothermal and invasion deposition methods
Ag/AgCl and graphite as the electrode in NaHCO3 electrolyte
H2 produced is 13 times higher than that of Pt/C on the market and FEa is 100%

96



Hydrogen production
CdS NPs@COF (photocatalysis)
Hydrothermal synthesis method
An aqueous solution containing lactic acid and 0.5 wt% Pt
H2 evolution rate of 3678 mmol g−1 h−1

102



Hydrogen production
Pt NPs@TP-COF (photoelectrocatalysis)
An electrostatic self-assembly method
The efficient hot π-electron tunneling of organic MISb nanostructures
H2 evolution rate of 8.42 mmol g−1 h−1 and a TOFc of 789.5 h−1

93



Hydrogen production
Pd NPs@CTFs (photocatalysis)
Solvothermal and in situ deposition methods
An aqueous solution containing 10 mL TEOAd
H2 evolution rate of 10.556 mmol g−1 h−1

45



Hydrogen production
Rh NPs@PC-COF
Ultrasonic impregnation reduction and in situ reduced method
1 mL of MeOHe and DCMf mixed solvent (VMeOH/VDCM = 2/1)
The total TOF of 505 min−1 at 298 K

103



Hydrogen production
Pt NPs@ sp2c-COF (photocatalysis)
Solvothermal and in situ photodeposition methods
An aqueous solution (100 mL) containing triethanolamine (10 vol%)
H2 evolution rate of 1360 μmol h−1 g−1

74



CO2 reduction reaction
Ru NPs@TpPa-1g (photocatalysis)
Solvothermal synthesis method
In a mixed liquid of MeCNh and TEOA with a volume ratio of 10:1
HCOOH evolution rate of 108.8 μmol gcat−1 h−1 (3.0 wt% Ru)

116



CO2 reduction reaction
Pd@In NCs@N3-COF
Solvothermal synthesis method
CO2 photoreactor containing ≥99.995%
Total yield of 798 μmol g−1 for producing CH3OH (74%) and CH3CH2OH (26%)

75



CO2 reduction reaction
Co atoms@sp2c-COFdpy (photocatalysis)
Solvothermal and impregnation deposition
An aqueous solution containing 5 mL TEOA
Achieving up to 17.93 mmol g−1 CO with 81.4% selectivity in a long-range reaction

56



CO2 reduction reaction
Cu atoms@CTF (electrocatalysis)

In situ oxidation method and wet-impregnation method
In an airtight H-type electrolytic cell, which adopts a three-electrode system for constant potential electrolysis
At a potential of −1.3 V and CO and H2 are the main gas products

71



CO2 reduction reaction
Co atoms@FPy-CON (photocatalysis)
Solvothermal and infiltration deposition methods
An aqueous solution containing 2,2′-bipyridyl, acetonitrile and TEOA
CO production of 10.1 μmol (6 h irradiation under visible light) and CO/H2 selectivity of 76%

78



Reduction of 4-nitrophenol
Au NPs@TAPB-DMTP-COF
Solvothermal and encapsulation method
An aqueous solution containing 4-nitrophenol and NaBH4
Apparent rate constant k of 0.12 min−1

61



Reduction of 4-nitrophenol
Pt NPs@thio-COFi
Solvothermal and impregnation deposition
An aqueous solution containing 4-nitrophenol and NaBH4
The full conversion of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol in 8 min

65



Reduction of 4-nitrophenol
Au NPs@S-COF
Synthesis strategy of solvothermal and post-modification
An aqueous solution containing 4-nitrophenol and NaBH4
The full conversion of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol in 7 min

59



Henry reaction and reductive Heck reaction
Pd NPs@CCOF-MPCj
Solvothermal and sequential solution impregnation
An ethanol solution containing Ar–CHO, and nitromethane; an ethanol–H2O solution containing 2-cyclohexen-1-one, and Ar–X
TONk and TOF are 48.5 and 6.1 h−1, respectively; TON and TOF values for the reaction are 30.9 and 3.09 h−1, respectively

104



Organic reaction
Ru NPs@COF-ASB
Solvothermal and impregnation deposition
A mixture of benzyl alcohol and corresponding amine
TON and TOF of N-benzylideneaniline formed from alcohol and amine were 18 and 0.82 h−1

69



Organic reaction
Pd NCs@COF-300-1114
Nonstoichiometric synthon strategy and solvothermal condensation method
The oxidation reactions of benzyl alcohol under 0.1 MPa of O2 at 90 °C in toluene
97.0% conversion of benzyl alcohol and 97.0% selectivity to benzaldehyde after 32 h

70



Organic reaction
Pd NPs@TpBpy
Solvothermal and in situ deposition
Solution containing 2-bromophenol and terminal alkynes
The synthesis of 2-substituted benzofurans from 2-bromophenols and terminal alkynes

42



Organic reaction
Ag NPs@TpPa-1 and Ag NPs@TpTtal
One-pot polycondensation and infiltration deposition
Solution containing allylamine, strong iodinating agent NISm and DMSOn
Synthesis of cyclic carbamate 2a the catalyst in high yield up to 96%

54



Organic reaction
Rh NPs@COF
Facile hydrothermal method
Solution containing 7.2 mmol aromatic aldehydes and 3 mL 2.0 mol L−1 methanolic ammonia
Benzaldehyde with the full conversion of 99% and selectivity of 95% for N-benzylidene(phenyl)methanamine

68



Organic reaction
Pd NPs@COF
Solvothermal and post-modification methods
Solution containing aryl halide, aryl boronic acid, alkalic additive Cs2CO3 and solvent EtOH under a N2 atmosphere
Successful synthesis of halo-substituted beryl products in excellent yield

66



Organic reaction
Ru atoms@CTF (electrocatalysis)
Solvothermal method
Ag/AgCl and titanium wire used as the reference electrode and counter electrode
Gaseous ethylbenzene oxidized to acetophenone

89



Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)
TM atoms@COFs (electrocatalysis)
The VASPo calculations of density functional theory
N/A
Mn-COF and Cr-COF ORR overpotentials of 0.31 and 0.29 V, respectively

79



Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)
3d metal atoms@COFs (electrocatalysis)
Systematic design of catalysts using first principles
N/A
Fe or Co-COFs are already known as efficient ORR catalysts

77



Hydrogenation reaction
Pd NPs @COF-SO3H
Wet-chemistry immersion dispersion method
Under mild reaction conditions (1 bar of H2, 25 °C, 28 min)
The selective hydrogenation of phenylacetylene with 97.06% conversion

50



Hydrogenation reaction
Pd NPs@COF
Static precipitation after ultrasonic treatment
An aqueous solution containing 5 mL (25 μL mL−1) nitrobenzene in ethanol under 1 bar H2
TON for the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene was 906 h−1

72



Organic pollutant degradation reaction
Au NCs@S-COFp (photocatalysis)
Solvothermal and post-modification strategies
An aqueous solution (50 mL) containing rhodamine B (10 mg L−1) or bisphenol A
Rhodamine B and bisphenol A degradation percentage of 97.3% and 90%

43



Organic pollutant degradation reaction
CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6@EB-COF: Brq (photocatalysis)
A simple mechanochemical synthetic method
Various concentrations of MOr aqueous solution (20, 50 and 100 ppm)
MO in aqueous media with a photodegradation rate of about 0.245 min−1

108



Organic pollutant degradation reaction
Au NPs@COF
Solvothermal and post-modification strategies
Solution containing 12 mg L−1 4-NP (25 mg L−1 of congo red and methylene blue)
With high flux (2000 L m−2 h−1) and excellent reduction efficiency (more than 99%)

117



Nitrogen reduction reaction (NNR)
Mo atoms@Pc-TFPNs COF (photoelectrocatalysis)
Solvothermal and post-modification strategies
N/A
Theoretical results demonstrated that this catalyst has a low onset potential of −0.24 V, which is better than those of noble catalysts

118



Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction
Pd NPs@thio-COF
Solvothermal and impregnation deposition
A dimethylformamide/H2O solution containing aryl halide, phenylboronic acid, K2CO3, and Pd NPs@thio-COF are mixed in a Schlenk tube
The coupling reaction of 1-iodine-4-toluene with phenylboric acid was catalyzed and the yield was >99%

65





4.1 Photocatalytic reaction
Since the 1972s, Fujishima discovered the photocatalytic water splitting to produce H2;119 the expansion of photocatalytic systems and the study of photocatalytic mechanisms have become a hot spot in the field of catalysis. Using sunlight as a driving force to resolve the current environmental pollution crisis is a purpose that is fully in line with the “environmentally friendly” development strategy. In recent years, from inorganic semiconductors (TiO2,120 ZnO,121 CdS,122 SrTiO3,81 MOF,123etc.) to organic catalysts (g-C3N4,124etc.) and from the homogeneous catalytic reaction to the heterogeneous catalytic reaction, photocatalysis has drawn a lot of attention. However, these photocatalysts have some disadvantages such as a non-tunable structure, low light capture ability, and poor stability. COFs, as a “new star” in the catalysis industry, can well avoid these shortcomings and show their unique advantages in the photocatalytic reaction system: (1) the functional structure can be tuned through functional building blocks; (2) the covalent bond and π conjugation between the building units not only extend the life of the photoelectrons but also ensure the stability of the catalytic system; (3) the permanent porous structure provides a huge specific surface area for catalytic reactions; (4) it can integrate the photosensitizer and catalyst to promote the rapid development of the photocatalytic system. These excellent properties have attracted scientists' attention and have led to rapid development in recent years. This section briefly introduces the application of COF-anchored NPs, NCs and single atoms for photocatalysis.

4.1.1 Water splitting. 
Secondary energy is the link that connects primary energy. Hydrogen (H2), as the cleanest and most abundant secondary energy source on earth, has attracted much attention of researchers for its production, storage, and transportation. At present, H2 production by photocatalytic water splitting is one of the most potential methods with the advantages of no secondary pollution, green and easy operation, and so on. However, the development of efficient and stable photocatalysts is fraught with challenges. Therefore, the research and development of photocatalysts is the key to the current development of this technology. Because of the advantages of high specific surface area, high stability, high crystallinity, etc., COFs have shown great potential in realizing high-activity artificial photocatalytic systems.
As for photocatalytic water splitting to produce H2, it is necessary to find a stable and efficient catalyst to promote a proton reduction reaction. Besides, some catalysts require an additional photosensitizer (PS) in the catalytic system to broaden the photosensitive performance of the catalysts. Studies have found that the use of a molecular co-catalyst-COF system can produce considerable H2 from solar energy without the addition of a PS.125 In this molecular co-catalyst photocatalytic system, COFs not only work as a support to anchor other active metal sites, but also as a PS to enhance the light absorption in the visible light region, thereby improving long-term H2 evolution ability. The largest rate of H2 produced by this system has increased by 17% compared with that of other photocatalytic systems.126,127 The microkinetic simulation of the reaction system shows that the transfer of outer-sphere electrons from a light absorber to a catalyst is the rate-limiting step. Thus, the COFs or COF-based materials used as the electron transfer and light collector not only improve the efficiency of H2 production, but also simplify the experimental procedures.
By rationally selecting organic and inorganic semiconductors to construct a photocatalytic water splitting system to produce H2, the rate of H2 production can be effectively increased. Due to its good photocatalytic performance, tunable structure, and high porosity, COF/CdS exhibited excellent performance in photocatalytic water splitting.48 Studies have shown that the interfacial charge transfer between CdS and the support played a crucial role in catalytic performance.128 More importantly, the formed semiconductor heterojunction effectively promoted the separation of photogenerated carriers. Therefore, in this special semiconductor–semiconductor heterojunction, the strong interaction between two semiconductors promoted the rapid transfer of photogenerated electrons, thereby increasing the H2 evolution reaction rate. The charge transfer dynamics between COFs and CdS NPs could be more clearly felt through the H2 evolution mechanism exploration (Fig. 7a). It was noted that a classic volcano curve of the H2 evolution rate was obtained with the increase of the loading amount of CdS, by first showing an increase followed by a decrease. Furthermore, R. Banerjee and co-workers used COFs as a substrate for dispersing CdS, which could control the growth of CdS NPs and provide a stable reaction environment.102 And the stability tests of CdS, COFs and the CdS/COF were carried out for three consecutive cycles of 4 hours each. There was no deactivation of the CdS/COF, while the stability of CdS and the COF was poor. The use of COFs as a carrier not only improves their own stability but also makes up for the shortcomings of CdS photo-corrosion.129 This further highlights the excellent characteristics of COFs as a substrate and also explores the potential application of COFs as a sacrificial electron donor.
In the photocatalytic system, in addition to the above-mentioned semiconductor–semiconductor heterojunction, Schottky junction, and another type of heterojunction can also inhibit the recombination of photogenerated electrons andholes.130 However, the traditional Schottky junction has disadvantages such as low efficiency and poor separation of charge carriers.131 In order to further improve the charge separation efficiency, Roeffaers et al. designed a metal–insulator semiconductor (MIS) photosystem based on COF semiconductors.93 It realized the efficient extraction of light-excited hot π-electrons in COFs, which were transferred to active metal sites (Pt NPs) through the ultra-thin PVP insulating layer, and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performance was greatly enhanced (Fig. 7b). It can be seen from Fig. 7b that the carrier separation efficiency in the COF-based MIS optical system is 32 times higher than that of the traditional MIS optical system. It is worth mentioning that the author's evaluation of the stability of this system is “robust”.
According to previous studies, the π conjugation of COFs possesses several advantages, which can decrease the band gap, enhance photosensitivity, promote charge carrier generation, and accelerate carrier transport.94,132 Hence, the researchers used COFs with higher π conjugation to anchor CdS NPs (CdS-COF) for H2 generation by water splitting.102 Compared with pristine CdS and COFs, the photocatalytic activity of the CdS-COF for H2 generation has a substantial improvement. Because the π conjugation in carbon fiber promotes photoelectron stability, the interaction between the π–π stacked layered structure and CdS NPs can not only prevents the aggregation of CdS NPs, but also reduces the photo-corrosion of pure CdS (this phenomenon can be explained by the photoinduced annealing of the composites during photocatalysis, resulting in recrystallization at the conjugated polymer/inorganic nanocrystal interface133). Therefore, the system shows higher activity and stability during the photocatalytic H2 generation. To further highlight the advantages of π conjugation of COFs, Jiang and co-workers synthesized an sp2 carbon-conjugated COF (sp2c-COF) and loaded Pt NPs, and then evaluated the catalytic performance of the Pt NPs@sp2c-COF by photocatalytic decomposition of water for hydrogen production.74 The author verified the following advantages of π conjugation of COFs through experiments: first, the COF skeleton with the CC (sp2 hybridization) covalent bond was very stable and could maintain the crystal structure for a long time. Second, the π conjugation of the COF skeleton could generate a narrow band gap (2.05 eV), thereby expanding the visible light absorption spectrum. Third, the π conjugation lattice can adjust the front track so that excitons could promote forward electron transfer in the π networks to prevent reverse charge recombination. Finally, π conjugation of COFs leads to high porosity, which could provide more active sites for the catalytic reaction. In the photocatalytic H2 evolution system, the sp2c-COF played the role of collecting light, while π conjugation played an important role in separating the light-generating carriers (Fig. 6). The Pt well confined in the pores of the sp2c-COF, as a cocatalyst, improves the hydrogen evolution efficiency. In addition, in most cases where COFs are used to anchor metal active sites, COFs need to link a N-rich functional group to make the metal active sites more stable on the carrier during the water splitting process.45 Scientists use nitrogen-rich COFs to anchor Pd/Pt NPs. Here N is used as the junction to link COFs and metal NPs. This not only promotes the formation of smaller nanoparticles, but also accelerates the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes (Fig. 7c). Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy clearly displays that the material without Pd/Pt NPs shows a strong charge recombination rate. It further illustrates that the metal NPs can be anchored on COFs to form a tight interface, thereby accelerating the photoelectron transfer rate, and increasing the yield of hydrogen. In the water splitting reaction that converts solar energy into hydrogen energy, the use of COF-based materials to construct a reaction system has broad prospects.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of the tetragonal sp2c-COF by CC bond polycondensation, and reconstructed crystalline 2D layer of the sp2c-COF that allows the π conjugation along both the x and y directions (reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2019, Elsevier); (b) assembled light-driven interlocked system for hydrogen production from water based on a crystalline sp2 carbon-conjugated framework and Pt water-reduction centers. The processes of photoenergy harvesting, electron transfer, and water-reduction reaction are seamlessly integrated in the system (reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2019, Elsevier). 
 Fig. 7  (a) The amount of hydrogen evolved over 1, no catalyst, 2, without light irradiation, 3, COF, 4, CdS, 5, 5%CdS-COF, 6, 10%CdS-COF, 7, 20%CdS-COF, 8, 40%CdS-COF and 9, 20%CdS-COF (reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, Elsevier); (b) photocatalytic hydrogen evolution under visible light irradiation in the presence of ascorbic acid (reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library); (c) photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy of COFs, 1 wt% Pt@COF and Pd@CPF (reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (d) CO and H2 production by the Co-FPy-CON over multiple 2 h repeat runs. The sample was degassed, and 1 μmol of (Ir[dF(CF3)ppy]2(dtbpy))PF6 was added after each run (reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (e) amount of produced HCOOH over the prepared catalysts upon 10 h of visible-light irradiation (800 nm ≥ λ ≥ 420 nm). Photocatalyst: 15 mg, MeCN/TEOA volume ratio: 10/1, and total solution volume: 110 mL (reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2021, Elsevier); (f) principles of photogenerated electron transport between Au NCs and the COF support (e@ in the LUMO and h+ in the HOMO represent a photogenerated electron and hole of Au NCs, respectively; e@ in the CB and h+ in the VB represent a photogenerated electron and hole of COF-V, respectively) (reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library). 


4.1.2 Carbon dioxide reduction reaction. 
As we know, CO2 seriously endangers the living environment of human and animals. In order to mitigate this endangerment, reducing CO2 in the atmosphere is one of the most challenging tasks facing all mankind.134,135 Under normal circumstances, CO2 is very stable, and a lot of energy is required to reduce it.136,137 Inspired by the “photosynthesis of plants”, the use of photocatalysis to convert solar energy into the energy required for the CO2RR is currently one of the most economically feasible methods.138 Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 has been extensively studied using heterogeneous catalysts;139 this is because the photocatalytic system for CO2 reduction is relatively stable, and the products can be easily separated. Unfortunately, the low catalytic activity limits its development. Therefore, finding high-activity catalysts has become an important goal for the development of heterogeneous reactions. Recently, the unique characteristics of COFs have been used as anchoring sites for metal species to participate in the heterogeneous reactions. In addition, COFs can not only selectively capture CO2 gas, but also bind metal sites with high activity, thereby creating a better reaction environment for CO2 reduction.140,141 In this section, we review COF-confined catalysts in the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR).
Because COFs alone cannot fix the metal active sites well, some functional groups such as imine and pyridine are usually introduced during the synthesis of COFs. The N-rich sites of these groups can anchor the active site more stably. Chen et al. designed and synthesized a new N-rich COF-based material (FPy-COF) with metal coordination sites which had good adsorption performance for Co.78 Studies showed that the newly synthesized catalyst materials not only improved the adsorption energy of CO2, but also ensured the crystallinity of the materials. Fig. 7d shows that the recovered catalyst still maintained good photocatalytic activity during the reaction process. The DFT calculation further showed that the FPy-COF provided a channel for metal coordination and charge transfer in the photocatalytic system for the reduction of CO2 to CO. In 2016, Baeg and co-workers found that COFs could reduce CO2 to formic acid (HCOOH) under solar light conditions,142 but their selectivity and charge transfer rate were not ideal. Therefore, to improve the catalytic performance of COF-based materials, it is still a hot topic to find efficient and economical catalysts for CO2 reduction.
Since metal centers can activate CO2 molecules under light illumination conditions, most metal catalysts are prone to agglomeration and deactivation.143 Therefore, the development of metal-functionalized COFs is also a promising strategy to promote the CO2RR. Studies have found that ruthenium nanoparticles (Rh NPs) and COFs can build a heterogeneous catalytic system for the CO2RR, which can produce HCOOH with high efficiency (Fig. 7e).116 For most semiconductor materials, the recombination of photo-generated carriers is an important factor affecting the photocatalytic efficiency. UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) displayed that the COF loaded Ru NPs not only improved the charge transfer efficiency, but also enhanced the absorption intensity of visible light. Only HCOOH products can be detected through gas and liquid phases, indicating that this catalytic system has high selectivity. In addition, the crystallinity and stability of composites in the cyclic reaction are also important bases for evaluating photocatalytic efficiency. Therefore, the author carried out five photocatalytic CO2 reduction tests on the Ru NPs/COF, and finally characterized the reaction materials by XRD and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) to verify their high durability.


4.1.3 Organic pollutant degradation reaction. 
Although research on supported catalysts is still in its infancy, it is an effective strategy to use COFs or COF-based materials as support nanomaterials to prepare COF-confined catalysts for the degradation of pollutants.144 Recently, wastewater containing organic dyes has attracted attention, because these organic dyes are complex aromatic compounds, posing a serious threat to public health and the environment.10,145 Therefore, photocatalytic technology is used to degrade organic dye wastewater, which has the advantages of simple operation and no secondary pollution. But in the conventional photocatalytic system, photo-generated electrons and holes are easily recombined.146 Recently, researchers have proposed the Z-scheme system, which can avoid the above phenomenon, and the recombination rate of photogenerated electrons can be effectively reduced, and the rapid migration of photogenerated electrons can be promoted.43 Du and co-workers anchored gold nanoclusters (Au NCs) on thiol-chain-modified COFs to construct the Z-scheme system, and an Au–S-COF bond bridge was formed (Fig. 7f). They found that this system showed excellent performance in the degradation of pollutants (i.e., after 5 cycles, the removal rates of rhodamine B and bisphenol A in water remained above 93.2% and 90%, respectively). Further, the time-resolved photoluminescence emission decay spectra showed that the electron lifetime was very long, which meant that the carrier separation efficiency was high, thereby resulting in high performance for pollutant degradation. Unlike the traditional Z-scheme system, this system did not have a potential difference in charge transfer between energy levels, resulting in a higher redox capability.147 The use of COF-based materials to construct a new Z-scheme system has industrial value for the efficient degradation of pollutants.
In recent years, lead halide perovskites have attracted extensive attention due to their excellent optical properties.148 But the toxicity of lead-based materials inhibits their development. Using the porosity of COFs or COF-based materials to encapsulate perovskite NCs (CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6@EB-COF: Br) to reduce the environmental harm of lead-based materials has been reported.108 The photodegradation rate of MO (10 mL; 100 ppm) by the CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6@EB-COF: the Br catalyst driven by visible light is 0.245 min−1. In the cycle test, this catalyst showed excellent stability. Unfortunately, CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 NC aggregation occurred in the cycle experiment, and the author did not indicate whether the aggregated material was leached or not. It is an important topic that needs to be solved at present when using the catalyst with good photocatalytic performance but containing toxic substances to treat actual water.

4.2 Electrocatalytic reaction
In electrocatalysis, an electrocatalyst with a lower overpotential is usually prepared to reduce voltage loss and improve electrocatalytic efficiency. Research shows that COF-based electrocatalysts not only show a low overpotential,149 but also exhibit good selectivity and durability in electrocatalysis. Hence, in this section, we will focus on summarizing the applications of nanoparticle, nanocluster, and single atom embedded COFs or COF-based materials in electrocatalysis. COF-confined catalysts in the field of electrocatalysis have the advantages of controllable reaction rate and high selectivity, which have promoted the development of the HER,150 ORR,151 OER,152 CO2RR,153etc.

4.2.1 Hydrogen evolution reaction. 
Hydrogen plays an important role in many industrial productions and has excellent properties such as renewability, zero pollution, and high calorific value. At present, platinum (Pt) based material for the HER is considered to be the most efficient catalyst.154 The high-performance Pt-based electrocatalysts for the HER are usually determined by their intrinsic activity and the stability of supporting materials. Recently, COFs with bipyridine groups have shown excellent metal-chelating abilities,96 and ultra-high porosity and stability, which realizes the high dispersion and low leaching rate of ultra-fine metal NPs and effectively improve the electrocatalytic reaction rate. The outstanding performance of COF-based materials is ascribed to the fact that COFs have a strong interaction with Pt NPs (Pt NPs-@COFs) and Pt NPs do not agglomerate, making this catalyst superior to Pt/C in an alkaline environment. The electrocatalytic performance of the Pt NPs@COF (0.071 mg on carbon paper, 6.09 wt% Pt) for hydrogen production is 13 times larger than that of Pt/C (0.071 mg on carbon paper, 10 wt% Pt) (Fig. 8a). The TEM images showed that the structure of the catalyst did not change after reuse for 5 times. Therefore, the catalyst had high stability and resistance to degradation in aqueous solution. In this study, the authors incorporated nanoparticles into COF pores, which provided more metal active centers, thereby improving the electrocatalytic reaction rate.
 Fig. 8  (a) The amount of hydrogen evolution by the Pt NPs@COF (red rectangular) and Pt/C (blue circle) (reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, Elsevier); (b) schematic diagram of a new carbon dioxide electrochemical reduction system (reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2018, Nature); (c) the relationship between the oxygen reduction activity trend and O binding energy (reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2004, ACS Publications). 


4.2.2 Carbon dioxide reduction reaction. 
Using electrocatalysis technology to reduce carbon dioxide and convert it into high value-added chemical products or fuel is an effective way to realize chemical energy storage.155 In order to reduce carbon dioxide efficiently and stably, Zheng and co-workers proposed a two-step electrocatalytic reaction system by imitating the two-step mechanism of “light reaction + carbon reaction” in green plant photosynthesis (Fig. 8b), which could efficiently reduce CO2 to CO.156
Although the efficiency of CO2 reduction and fixation in the above system was satisfactory, it was necessary to effectively solve the problem of the low solubility of CO2 in water to realize large-scale utilization of CO2.156 To solve this problem, researchers have tried a lot and a strategy is developed where CO2 is introduced into the reduction center of the electrocatalytic material, thereby reducing the escape of CO2 from the electrolyte.157 A new type of cobalt-functionalized COF-based material is used to realize the integration of CO2 storage and CO2 reduction. The concentration of CO2 in this new material is 97.7 times higher than the concentration of CO2 in water through the reasonable design and DFT calculations, which not only lowers the reduction barrier (i.e., the overpotential decreased from 0.39 to 0.27 V), but also increases the yield of CO (i.e., the reaction rate increased by 97.7 times). Therefore, integrating the storage unit into the electrode can effectively improve the efficiency.
In the CO2RR, the surface of the electrocatalyst is prone to self-reconstruction.158 This self-reconstruction will make it difficult to identify the active center but easy to carry out error phenomenon analysis. In this context, operando X-ray adsorption fine structure analysis was carried out,71 and this analytical method can accurately determine the location of the active site and reveal the point-driven dynamics. Therefore, the operando identification of the active center and the unique constraint behavior of the COFs provide valuable insights for further research on the structure–performance relationship.


4.2.3 Oxygen reduction reaction. 
The ORR is an important reaction in metal–air batteries and multi-type combustion batteries, which can determine energy conversion efficiency and power density.159–161 At present, only Pt-based materials are used as actual ORR catalysts, but the development of Pt-based ORR catalysts has some problems such as low reserve, high cost, and poor stability, which are not suitable for commercialization.162,163 Therefore, the development of ORR catalysts with earth abundance, good stability and high performance is essential to promote their development.
According to previous studies, it is feasible to use transition metal-containing materials to replace Pt-based materials in the ORR because the d orbitals of transition metal elements are empty, and it is easy to form complexes. Based on the Sabatier principle, when measuring the activity for the ORR on different metal surfaces, the volcanic trend of the ORR activity and the strength of absorbed oxygen are obtained (Fig. 8c).112,164 The ORR activity of the metal surface at the top of the volcanic graph is the highest. This principle shows that there is a suitable interaction between the ORR catalyst and main intermediate. Thus, the development of the ORR catalyst requires precise adjustment of the adsorption energy of the intermediate.77 By selecting appropriate transition state metal atoms (Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) doped in COFs and/or coordination numbers (CN) as parameters, the adsorption strength is adjusted near the volcano peak, thereby improving the catalytic activity. First-principles calculations show that the greater the number of d-electrons of the transition metal atoms and the closer the d-band center is to the Fermi level, the stronger the binding of the resulting reaction intermediate to the surface. For metal atoms with a smaller CN, the ORR intermediates have a strong adsorption effect. According to the correlation between the adsorption strength of the catalyst to the ORR and the number of active sites, while changing the number of d-electrons and CN, an ORR catalyst with higher activity and stability can be obtained. Transition metal atoms have attracted much attention because of their unique d-band center, which can distinguish the changing trend of the interaction energy between different metal surface adsorbates and metals. COFs and COF-based materials acted as carriers of transition metal atoms in this system, providing a good reaction environment, which not only prevented the aggregation of metal atoms, but also prevented metal atoms from being corroded by solvents. This is useful for the rational design and construction of a highly active and stable ORR catalyst, and also laying the cornerstone for the precise design of COF-confined materials.
Although first principles calculations have proven that COFs or COF-based materials can firmly anchor transition metal (TM) atoms during synthesis and catalysis, few studies have shown the interaction mechanism between TM atoms and organic ligands. Recently, some researchers have elaborated on the role of the p-electrons of carbon atoms and the d orbitals of TM atoms by describing the catalytic activity for the ORR.79 Through Bader analysis, a promising method is provided to adjust the adsorption strength of TM atoms and intermediate products. These studies have shown that the best position for adsorption is on the C atom adjacent to the N atom of TM atoms. Because the p-band center of the bone C atom is beneficial to the adsorption of TM atoms and the transfer of electrons, it can be used to describe and optimize the catalytic activity for the ORR. In addition, the π–π conjugation in COFs also helps to improve the electron transport in the reaction. And the p-d hybridization formed by the p-electrons of the C atoms and the inherent d-orbital of the net charge of the TM atoms can also provide additional degrees of freedom to adjust the catalytic performance for the ORR. Based on the above-mentioned analysis about COF-anchored TM atoms, we found that this catalyst possessed excellent performance (i.e., Cr-, Mn-, and Co-COFs have overpotentials of 0.29, 0.31, and 0.24 V), which was comparable to the most famous noble metal catalysts (Pt/C). This study not only provided a new family for the high-efficiency ORR, but also illustrated the excellent quality of COF-confined catalysts through first principles calculations, thereby laying a new foundation for the development of COF-confined catalysts. This will not only increase the cost of the electrocatalytic system, but also leads to the complexity of designing experiments. However it is necessary to find an electrocatalytic system that is in line with the development of practical applications to effectively avoid the above phenomenon.

4.3 Other reactions

4.3.1 Reduction of 4-nitrophenol. 
At room temperature, the use of sodium borohydride (NaBH4) for reducing 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) has high chemical significance.165 This is because reducing highly toxic 4-NP to low-toxic 4-AP not only reduces the harm of 4-NP to the natural environment, but also generates high-value 4-AP, which is an important intermediate to synthesize a variety of fine organic chemical materials.166
Metal NPs have attracted much attention because of their excellent catalytic performance. Among them, Au NPs hold ultra-high surface energy and have become the most potential catalyst for the catalysis industry.167 However, the Au NPs are easy to agglomerate without a suitable support during the catalytic process, resulting in reduced catalytic performance. Zhu's groups reported an encapsulation technology where Au NPs were confined in COFs to prevent their leaching and improve their stability.61 The pseudo-first-order kinetics of the COF-based composite containing 0.2 wt% of 15 nm Au NPs is the strongest. All 4-NP was reduced within 10 min, and the reduction product was just 4-AP. However, the reactivity of this material decreases as the number of cycles increases; XRD and TEM showed that the microstructures and crystallinity of COF composite materials were maintained. Therefore, author concluded that the reduction in reaction activity may be due to the loss of the catalyst during the cycle washing process. In general, this simple and flexible encapsulation technology promotes the development of a heterogeneous catalyst. However, the successful development of stable and highly active catalysts was still the mainstream of heterogeneous catalysis. Recently, Ding's group used sulfur bonds to connect COFs and Au NPs in the Au–S-COF,59 which showed excellent catalytic performance in 4-NP reduction (Fig. 9a). The whole 4-NP was reduced to 4-AP within 7 min. After ten reaction cycles, the catalytic efficiency still remained above 90%, and the structure and morphology did not have obvious changes, indicating that the catalyst had high stability and recyclability. This was because that the sulfur bond in the COFs could well strengthen the interaction between the nanoparticles and the COFs. Using COFs to form a special pore structure to anchor metal NPs for 4-NP reduction promotes the progress of COF-confined catalysts in heterogeneous catalytic reactions.
 Fig. 9  (a) The UV-vis image of the reduction of 4-nitrophenol in the presence of the Au–S-COF (reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Science); (b) time-dependent UV-vis spectra of the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (0.3 μmol) catalyzed by 50 μL unsupported Pt NPs (0.17 mg mL−1) (reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library); (c) catalytic performance of Pd/COF-300-xy series (xy = 0714, 0914, and 1114) in the benzyl alcohol oxidation reaction (reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (d) Pd@COF catalyzes the synthesis of 2-substituted benzofurans from 2-bromophenols and terminal alkynes (reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2017, ACS Publications). 
Li and co-workers used the first encapsulation etching technology to embed palladium nanoparticles (Pd NPs) in COFs.62 The active site was exposed by etching the encapsulation materials, and the yolk–shell nanostructure was formed, which had a chemical significance for the reduction of 4-NP. The formation of internal voids enhanced mass transfer and expanded the adsorption range, leading to increased catalytic efficiency (4-NP was completely converted to 4-AP within 8 min). The first-order reaction kinetic rate constant was 0.41 min−1, further illustrating its high catalytic activity. Meanwhile, there was no obvious loss of catalytic activity after many repeated operations, confirming its high recyclability. However, the catalytic activity was affected by the thickness of the COF shell, and the reaction rate decreased as the thickness increased. Studies showed that anchoring platinum nanoparticles (Pt NPs) on COFs containing sulfide functional groups could well inhibit this phenomenon.62 And this catalyst exhibited outstanding catalytic activity in reducing 4-NP (Fig. 9b). Because the Pt NPs were anchored on the COFs to form an ultra-fine nanometer size, it only took 8 min to reduce 4-NP due to the mesoporous structure of the COFs, and after 4 cycles, the morphological structure and catalytic activity did not change obviously, which highlighted the high crystallinity and stability of the catalyst. The rate constant reflected the catalytic activity of reducing 4-NP.168 The calculations showed that the first-order reaction kinetic constant increased as the size of metal NPs decreased.169 Therefore, it is feasible to obtain NPs with a smaller size to improve the catalytic activity, and COF's crystalline porous network and tunable building blocks170 are important factors for the design and synthesis of ultrafine NPs.


4.3.2 Hydrogenation reaction. 
The selective hydrogenation reaction rate is related to the nanometer size of the metal absorbed on the support.171 The research results show that the interaction between the metal and support affects the activity of the hydrogenation reaction. Optimizing the COF structure to anchor finer Pd NPs can obtain high activity.50 When the average size of Pd NPs reaches 2.2 nm, they can not only generate more active sites, but also enhance the interaction between Pd NPs and COFs, thereby increasing the rate of the hydrogenation reaction. In 2021, Yang and co-workers selected an imine-linked COF with a high specific surface area as the support for Pd NPs to form Pd NPs with a size of 1.8 nm.72 The XPS analysis showed that the imine bond could control the growth of Pd NPs in the catalytic system and build a charge transfer bridge with Pd NPs. Therefore, the catalytic performance of the Pd NPs/COF catalyst in the nitrobenzene hydrogenation reaction is much higher than that of commercial Pd/C (TOF: 906 h−1vs. 507 h−1). Therefore, optimizing COFs to control the size of metal species has important practical significance for realizing the high-efficiency hydrogenation reaction.


4.3.3 Organic reaction. 
H2, as the gas with the smallest density and relative molecular mass known in the world, has led to its diversification.172 Because H2 is widely used in industries, fuels, medicine, etc., the production of H2 has become a hot topic in the scientific community. When using NaBH4 to produce H2, water flooding is usually used to monitor the amount of the released H2, and the use of COF-based (Co@COF) materials has been reported, and these catalysts displayed excellent performance for hydrogen generation.67 The cyclic voltammogram (CV) revealed that the Co@COF had relatively faster redox kinetics. This is due to the mesoporous structure and high crystallinity of COFs, which enhanced the electron transportation. Meanwhile, Co NPs could grow in the pores of COFs to avoid the leaching of Co NPs.
In green organic synthesis, it is challenging to selectively oxidize alcohols using molecular oxygen. The Pd NCs confined in optimized COFs have high activity for this reaction (Fig. 9c).70 The kinetics shows that the conversion rate of benzyl alcohol is 97% after 32 h (2C6H5CH2OH + O2 = 2C6H5CHO + 2H2O).173 As expected, the metal particles with different sizes can be achieved by choosing different COF building blocks. Therefore, it is not difficult to generate ultra-fine Pd NPs in COFs,42 R. Banerjee and co-workers prepared a COF-confined catalyst (Pd NPs@COF) with high catalytic performance for 2-substituted benzofuran synthesis (Fig. 9d). Meanwhile, the prepared Pd NPs@COF showed high reproducibility and excellent stability in the cycle test, proving its strong practicability. This work proposes a strategy for efficient synthesis of organics and demonstrates that suitable COF building blocks can potentially control the growth of NPs. Based on these theoretical supports, Ma et al. selected the COF building blocks containing nitrogen atoms to confine Rh NPs,68 and used ammonia as the nitrogen source and hydrogen as the hydrogen source to catalytically synthesise secondary imines. Surprisingly, the Pd NPs@COF showed universality and recyclability in the conversion of aromatic aldehydes to secondary imines. This greatly encouraged researchers to further explore the universality of COF-confined catalysts in heterogeneous catalysis.
Using heterogeneous catalysts to catalyze the synthesis of imine products, the corresponding catalytic selectivity is related to the morphology and structure of the support. The COFs with excellent performance have high catalytic selectivity for the one-pot synthesis of benzyl alcohol and amine after anchoring Ru NPs.69 In addition, different COFs or COF-based materials as supports are employed to combine coordination metals with linkers to improve the efficiency of heterogeneous catalytic reactions. They are also used in the hydroformylation reaction of 1-octene. The modification of COFs can not only stabilize the metal sites more effectively and increase the reaction space between reactants and active sites, but also improve the catalyst cycle life, thereby further expanding the scope of organic reactions.

5. Conclusion and prospect
The vigorous development of heterogeneous catalysts has provided new opportunities to solve environmental pollution and other problems. These catalyst topography and reaction mechanisms are also diverse. In terms of supported catalysts, the related behavior of substances in the confined space (the confined space formed by nano-particles and confined channels) and related chemical pathways will affect the environmental purification behavior and mechanism of catalysts. For most of the special supported catalysts, zeolite-confined catalysts, MOF-confined catalysts, and COF-confined catalysts, the confined space of these catalysts can form a coordination complex with a single atom or multiple atoms. Therefore, the chemical state and coordination environment of the nano-particles that are confined in the porous material may be different from those of the original catalyst. At present, the information of the limited three-dimensional structure limits us to better understand the relationship between the catalyst structure–reaction. Due to the low stability of MOF-confined catalysts and the narrow reaction range of zeolite-confined catalysts,11,174 the excellent performance of COF-confined catalysts has more practical application for the future development of catalysts.
In this review, based on the structure–reaction relationship of the nano-particles with different sizes supported by COFs, the interaction between nano-scale particles and supports was re-recognized. In this way, we have a deep understanding of the growth process and structural characteristics of functional nano-scale particles in space. This way, we can also analyze the reaction behavior and mechanism of COF limited catalysts in the heterogeneous reaction. But the current academic attention and research in this direction have just begun. In the design of the structure and performance of COF-confined catalysts, the study of the dynamic characteristics of the active site and the reactant or the solvent, and the actual situation of their environmental applications are far from enough. According to the interaction between nano-scale particles and supports, we further outline the influence of the confinement effect on heterogeneous catalytic systems: establish a close cooperative relationship (that is, carrier-based migration) between supports and particles to increase the carrier transfer rate; the interaction between the confined space and the active site can optimize the structure and maximize energy utilization. Therefore, a series of heterogeneous catalytic reactions were proposed to verify the catalytic efficiency of COF-confined catalysts, such as the organic pollutant degradation reactions, water splitting, CO2RR, HER, ORR, reduction of 4-NP, hydrogenation reaction, and organic reaction.
Although the confinement effect plays a huge role in the heterogeneous catalytic system, it is difficult to realize the precise design of COF-confined catalysts functioned with existing methods, and the relationship between the confinement effect and the catalytic system has not yet been clarified. Thus, COF-confined catalysts are of great significance to future heterogeneous catalytic reactions compared to other catalysts, but there are still many challenges to overcome:
(1) For the morphology and structure of COF-confined catalysts. The morphology and structure of the catalyst determine its performance. The morphology and structure of COFs or COF-based materials can be adjusted by selecting different building blocks to better prevent the agglomeration and deactivation. In addition, nano-scale particles have a strong interaction with COFs or COF-based materials, which increases the stability and continuity of the catalytic system. If we have a deeper understanding of the mechanism of this interaction for the adjustment of the supported catalyst's structure, we can adjust the support blocks according to the growth status and position of the anchored active site to optimize the morphology and structure of the COF-confined catalysts. Herein, based on the purposeful synthesis of zeolite materials by Li et al.,175 we put forward a bold idea. Although it is not possible to have a deeper understanding of the internal interactions of the catalyst materials, we can purposefully design the structure of the active site according to the excessive state of the target reaction. The transition state of the heterogeneous catalytic reactions can describe the coordination complex of the active site in the COF-confined catalysts, which is beneficial to our research on the structure of the active sites of COF-confined catalysts.
(2) For the size effect of nano-sized particles (from nanoparticles to single atoms). In this article, most N and S bonds are combined with metals to form a strong N/S–metal bond interaction. Although the metal active site can be fixed well, its growth size cannot be effectively controlled. Therefore, a large number of other technologies have appeared to limit the size effect of optimized particles, but the current improvement is not obvious, and it is difficult to control the growth of particles. This may be due to the fact that nano-sized particles overcome the geometric limitations of COFs or COF-based material supports, which makes it difficult to control the growth process of the particles. In addition, the adjacent active sites in the pores of COFs or COF-based materials can work together to activate the reaction.
(3) For the separation efficiency of carriers. Due to the tunability of COFs or COF-based materials, they can perform dual functions, such as a support, electron donor or carrier, heterogeneous photosensitizer, etc., to improve the separation efficiency of carriers. The separation efficiency of carriers can also be effectively improved by forming bond bridges, heterojunctions, Z-scheme systems, etc. between nano-scale particles and carriers. It is worth noting that the intercalation of transition metals can accelerate the reaction kinetics and promote the separation of electron–hole pairs at the photoelectrode interface, but it is of little value in practical applications. What's more, we can accurately analyze the separation ability of carriers by calculating the relationship between the carrier concentration and the energy of the carriers and the relationship between the catalyst's own parameters. However, the calculation process is complicated, and many uncertain factors will lead to large errors, which cause difficulties in studying the carrier separation mechanism in depth. Therefore, this work is still important for the development of catalysts.
(4) For the methods of theoretical calculations and molecular simulation of COF-confined catalysts. The results of theoretical calculations of the relevant parameters for the modeling of the active sites in the COF-confined catalysts have large errors, which may lead to the misunderstanding of the structure of the COF-confined catalysts and the inconsistency between the reaction mechanism and reality. However, theoretical design and modeling are carried out based on experiments to further demonstrate the reaction mechanism and material properties, which can not only effectively explain the experimental phenomenon, but also provide some parameter data for future development. These established models are static catalytic models rather than dynamic models. Therefore, the interaction between the active sites and reactants or solvents cannot be reasonably explained.
(5) The application of COF-confined catalysts in the environment has shown excellent performance. We can verify the catalytic activity through different heterogeneous catalytic reactions. At the same time, it also shows broad applications of this material, especially in environmental remediation and energy utilization, and the heterogeneous catalyst prepared by the strategy of embedding nano-particles into COFs or COF-based materials is committed to solving environmental problems and facing many urgent problems for example, cost issues, performance issues, application single issues, and environmental risk issues.
Overall, COF-confined catalysts exhibit abnormal thermodynamics, kinetics, and hydrodynamic properties and behaviors, which can achieve the chemical conversion and selectivity of pollutants under milder conditions. Although there is not much research on COF-confined catalysts at present, many researchers have paid attention to the structure–reaction relationship of such supported catalysts. We believe COF-confined catalyst will play a huge role in heterogeneous catalytic reactions in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was financially supported by the Program for the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51779090, 51879101, 51579098, 51709101, 51521006, 51809090, and 51909084), the National Program for Support of Top-Notch Young Professionals of China (2014), the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT-13R17), the Hunan Natural Science Foundation (2020JJ3009), the Hunan Researcher Award Program (2020RC3025), the Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project (2018SK20410, 2017SK2243, and 2016RS3026), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (531119200086, 531118010114, 531118040083, and 541109060031).
References
F. Society, Science, 1983, 193, 19–22 Search PubMed .
Q. Fu, F. Yang and X. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1692–1701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Boudart, Adv. Catal., 1969, 20, 153–166 CAS .
L. Shang, Y. Liang, M. Li, G. I. N. Waterhouse, P. Tang, D. Ma, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606215 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, Q. Lin, Y. Zhong, H. A. Tahini, Z. Shao and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3361–3392 RSC .
G. Eva María, P. M. Teresa, P. Cecilia, L.-E. Alejandro, B. Mercedes, M. Manuel and C. Avelino, Science, 2017, 355, 1051–1054 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, H. Zhang, P. Wu, H. Zhang, B. Zhou and C. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4083–4094 RSC .
T. Zhang, G. Xing, W. Chen and L. Chen, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 332–353 RSC .
L. Liu and A. Corma, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 244–263 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Q. Y. Lin, J. A. Mason, V. P. Dravid and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2018, 14, e1802742 CrossRef PubMed .
B. C. Gates, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, D. A. Dixon and A. Katz, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4259–4275 RSC .
P. J. Waller, F. Gandara and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 3053–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, L. Yang, Z. Wu, C. Chen, J. Jiang and G. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 546–553 RSC .
Z. Xiang, D. Cao and L. Dai, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 1896–1911 RSC .
X. Liu, D. Huang, C. Lai, G. Zeng, L. Qin, H. Wang, H. Yi, B. Li, S. Liu, M. Zhang, R. Deng, Y. Fu, L. Li, W. Xue and S. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5266–5302 RSC .
T. Ma, L. Wei, L. Liang, S. Yin, L. Xu, J. Niu, H. Xue, X. Wang, J. Sun, Y.-B. Zhang and W. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gropp, T. Ma, N. Hanikel and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2020, 370, eabd6406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, C. S. Diercks, C. Zhu, N. Hanikel, X. Pei and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16438–16441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Wang, J. J. Zhou, Y. B. Lan, S. Y. Ding, W. Yu and W. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9443–9447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Jing, Q. Li, S. Li, X. Gao, X. Feng and B. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3565–3604 RSC .
R. K. Sharma, P. Yadav, M. Yadav, R. Gupta, P. Rana, A. Srivastava, R. Zbořil, R. S. Varma, M. Antonietti and M. B. Gawande, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 411–454 RSC .
L. Guo and S. Jin, ChemPhotoChem, 2019, 3, 973–983 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, B. Li, R. Zhu and H. Pang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 602–623 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, Q. Yan, R. Ge and Y. Gao, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 1167–1179 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo and D. Jiang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 869–879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, N. Wang and L. Ma, Chem.–Asian J., 2020, 15, 338–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Tang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, M. Chen, T. Xiong, C. Zhou, X. Li, D. Huang, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4135–4165 RSC .
M. Haruta, N. Yamada, T. Kobayashi and S. Iijima, J. Catal., 1989, 115, 301–309 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valden, X. Lai and D. W. Goodman, Science, 1998, 281, 1647–1650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Gates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 26, 511–522 CrossRef .
J. R. Cabrero-Antonino, R. Adam, V. Papa and M. Beller, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3893 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mitchell, E. Vorobyeva and J. Perez-Ramirez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15316–15329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Parkinson, Catal. Lett., 2019, 149, 1137–1146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, L. Jin-Cheng, L. Langli, W. Yang-Gang, Z. Junfa, D. Yingge, L. Jun, S. X. Mao and W. Chongmin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 7700 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. van Deelen, C. Hernández Mejía and K. P. de Jong, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 955–970 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lin, D. Zhang, Z. Zhao and Z. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703646 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, C. Zhang, M. Luo, Q. Yao and Z.-H. Lu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1298–1306 RSC .
S. Y. Ding, J. Gao, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. G. Song, C. Y. Su and W. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19816–19822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pachfule, M. K. Panda, S. Kandambeth, S. M. Shivaprasad and R. Banerjee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7944–7952 RSC .
M. Bhadra, H. S. Sasmal, A. Basu, S. P. Midya, S. Kandambeth, P. Pachfule, E. Balaraman and R. Banerjee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13785–13792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, Z. Zhang, P. Du, X. Ning, Y. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Liu, S. Zhang and X. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6082–6089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu and Y. J. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, X. Wang, J. Liu, K. Wang, S. Jin and B. Tan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 12774–12782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, K. D. Gilroy, H. C. Peng and X. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 60–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Luo, M. Chen, X. Liu, W. Xu, J. Li, B. Liu and Y. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18408–18424 RSC .
D. Wang, H. Zeng, X. Xiong, M.-F. Wu, M. Xia, M. Xie, J.-P. Zou and S.-L. Luo, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, H. Yin, M. Gao, Y. Hu, H. Hu, M. Yu and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 209, 115211 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Li, Z. W. Yu, Z. Gao, J. Q. Li, Y. Tao, Y. X. Xiao, W. H. Yin, Y. L. Fan, C. Jiang, L. J. Sun and F. Luo, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 10829–10836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, B. Aguila, J. Perman, L. D. Earl, C. W. Abney, Y. Cheng, H. Wei, N. Nguyen, L. Wojtas and S. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2786–2793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Chan-Thaw, A. Villa, P. Katekomol, D. Su, A. Thomas and L. Prati, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 537–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pilaski, J. Artz, H.-U. Islam, A. M. Beale and R. Palkovits, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 227, 219–227 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, T. S. Khan, A. Ghosh, A. H. Chowdhury, M. A. Haider, A. Khan and S. M. Islam, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5495–5513 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiu, Q. Fang, H. Li, X. Guan and Y. Yusran, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 170–190 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xiang, W. Dong, P. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ding, F. Ichihara, Z. Wang, Y. Wada, S. Jin, Y. Weng, H. Chen and J. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 274, 119096 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, X. Zhu, L. Huang, X. Zhang, F. Zhang and W. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bi, B. Xu, L. Sun, H. Huang, S. Fang, L. Li and L. Wu, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 1149–1154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-P. Zhang, Y.-l. Sun, G. Cheng, Z. Wang, H. Ma, S.-Y. Ding, B. Tan, J.-h. Bu and C. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123471 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2017, 355 Search PubMed .
X. Shi, Y. Yao, Y. Xu, K. Liu, G. Zhu, L. Chi and G. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7481–7488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cui, W. Zhong, L. Li, Z. Zhuang, L. Li, J. Bi and Y. Yu, Small, 2019, 15, e1804419 Search PubMed .
S. Nandi, S. K. Singh, D. Mullangi, R. Illathvalappil, L. George, C. P. Vinod, S. Kurungot and R. Vaidhyanathan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 13465–13473 Search PubMed .
M. E. G. Feng Tao, Y. Zhang, D. R. Butcher, J. R. Renzas, Z. Liu, J. Y. Chung, B. S. Mun, M. Salmeron and G. A. Somorjai, Science, 2008, 322, 932–934 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lu, Y. Hu, S. Wan, R. McCaffrey, Y. Jin, H. Gu and W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17082–17088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Zhan, N. Wang, Y. Song, C. Wang, X. Wang, L. Ma and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 6239–6249 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mullangi, D. Chakraborty, A. Pradeep, V. Koshti, C. P. Vinod, S. Panja, S. Nair and R. Vaidhyanathan, Small, 2018, 14, e1801233 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, J. Liu, L. Tang, X. Wei, C. Wang, X. Li and L. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 24966–24975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Chen, X. B. Li, C. C. Zhao, H. C. Ma, J. L. Kan, Y. B. Xin, C. X. Chen and Y. B. Dong, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 2678–2685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, J. Lin, D. Yan, Z. Guo, D. J. Austin, H. Zhan, A. Kent and Y. Yue, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 6416–6422 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, W. Hu, B. Mei, H. Liu, B. Yuan, J. Zang, T. Chen, L. Zou, Z. Zou, B. Yang, Y. Yu, J. Ma, Z. Jiang, K. Wen and H. Yang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4534–4542 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Ren, M. Guo, W. Li, H. Li and Q. Yang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 3873–3879 RSC .
G. Wen, S. Pan, M. Gan, A. Liang and Z. Jiang, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2021, 4, 4582–4590 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jin, Z. Lan, Q. Jiang, K. Geng, G. Li, X. Wang and D. Jiang, Chem, 2019, 5, 1632–1647 CAS .
Y. Huang, P. Du, W.-X. Shi, Y. Wang, S. Yao, Z.-M. Zhang, T.-B. Lu and X. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 288, 120001 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. Liu, Y. Tang, H. Huang, H. Cui, D. Mei and C. Zhong, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2431–2442 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iwase, S. Nakanishi, M. Miyayama and K. Kamiya, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1644–1652 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Fu, L. Zheng, C. Zhao, X. Wang, S. Y. Chong, F. McBride, R. Raval, M. Bilton, L. Liu, X. Wu, L. Chen, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 9107–9114 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Wang, S. Qi and M. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 17675–17683 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lu and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 356, 147–164 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, B. Dong, J. Zhang, H. Song and C. Yan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 12627–12636 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-L. Zhu and Q. Xu, Chem, 2016, 1, 220–245 CAS .
K. Chen, L. Yang, Z. Wu, C. Chen, J. Jiang and G. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 546–553 RSC .
J. Wang and S. Zhuang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 400, 213046 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .
J. L. Segura, M. J. Mancheno and F. Zamora, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5635–5671 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Yang, Y. Sun, J. Song, N. G. Rudawski, X. Chen and W. Tan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7407–7413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Conner and J. L. Falconer, Chem. Rev., 2002, 95, 759–788 CrossRef .
S. Kato, K. Iwase, T. Harada, S. Nakanishi and K. Kamiya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29376–29382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Xiao, E. D. Bloch, J. A. Mason, W. L. Queen, M. R. Hudson, N. Planas, J. Borycz, A. L. Dzubak, P. Verma, K. Lee, F. Bonino, V. Crocella, J. Yano, S. Bordiga, D. G. Truhlar, L. Gagliardi, C. M. Brown and J. R. Long, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 590–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Ma, J.-L. Kan, G.-J. Chen, C.-X. Chen and Y.-B. Dong, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6518–6524 CrossRef CAS .
P. Z. Li, X. J. Wang, J. Liu, J. S. Lim, R. Zou and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2142–2145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ming, A. Liu, J. Zhao, P. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Lin, Z. Xu, X. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Hofkens, M. B. J. Roeffaers and J. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18290–18294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Hai, X. Ding, S. Jin, Y. Xiang, P. Wang, B. Jiang, F. Ichihara, M. Oshikiri, X. Meng, Y. Li, W. Matsuda, J. Ma, S. Seki, X. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Wada, H. Chen and J. Ye, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1149 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mukhtar, S. Saqib, N. B. Mellon, S. Rafiq, M. Babar, S. Ullah, N. Muhammad, A. L. Khan, M. Ayoub, M. Ibrahim, K. Maqsood, M. A. Bustam, A. G. Al-Sehemi, J. J. Klemeš, S. Asif and A. Bokhari, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 277, 123999 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ming, A. Liu, J. Zhao, P. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Lin, Z. Xu, X. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Hofkens, M. B. J. Roeffaers and J. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18290–18294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Murray, T. W. Wilson, S. Dobbie, Z. Cui, S. M. R. K. Al-Jumur, O. Möhler, M. Schnaiter, R. Wagner, S. Benz, M. Niemand, H. Saathoff, V. Ebert, S. Wagner and B. Kärcher, Nat. Geosci., 2010, 3, 233–237 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cui, W. Zhong, L. Li, Z. Zhuang, L. Li, J. Bi and Y. Yu, Small, 2018, 15, 1804419 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bhadra, S. Kandambeth, M. K. Sahoo, M. Addicoat, E. Balaraman and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6152–6156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chakraborty, S. Nandi, D. Mullangi, S. Haldar, C. P. Vinod and R. Vaidhyanathan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15670–15679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Yuan, X. Guo, C. Bai, Y. Zou, H. Long, Y. Qi, S. Li, G. Tao, C. Xia and L. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 12396–12405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Thote, H. B. Aiyappa, A. Deshpande, D. Diaz Diaz, S. Kurungot and R. Banerjee, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 15961–15965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Xiugang Li, M. Luo, Q. Yao and Z.-H. Lu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1298–1306 RSC .
J.-L. K. Hui-Chao Ma, G.-J. Chen, C.-X. Chen and Y.-B. Dong, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6518–6524 CrossRef .
M. B. Ross, J. C. Ku, V. M. Vaccarezza, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 453–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, W. Xu, J. Bai, C. K. Chua, J. Wei, Z. Li, Y. Gao, D. H. Kim and K. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 405703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Han, X. Wu, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8277–8285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kour and S. P. Mukherjee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6819–6826 RSC .
H. Konnerth, B. M. Matsagar, S. S. Chen, M. H. G. Prechtl, F.-K. Shieh and K. C. W. Wu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 416, 213319 CrossRef CAS .
R. Qin, P. Liu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700286 CrossRef .
H. Ma, H. Ren, S. Meng, F. Sun and G. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2611 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, S. Bahn, L. B. Hansen, M. Bollinger, H. Bengaard, B. Hammer, Z. Sljivancanin, M. Mavrikakis, Y. Xu, S. Dahl and C. J. H. Jacobsen, J. Catal., 2002, 209, 275–278 CrossRef .
J. M. Thomas, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 2–5 CrossRef .
L. Liu, D. M. Meira, R. Arenal, P. Concepcion, A. V. Puga and A. Corma, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10626–10639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Yao, J. C. Li, W. Gao and Q. Jiang, Chemistry, 2018, 24, 11051–11058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Guo, X. Zhu, L. Peng, Y. Fu, R. Ma, X. Lu, F. Zhang, W. Zhu and M. Fan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 127011 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, F. Xiao and N. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 565, 107–114 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Z. Zhang, S. Qi, Y. Fan, Y. Yang, W. Li and M. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19949–19957 RSC .
H. K. Fujishima A, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ding, I. S. Yang, Z. Li, X. Xia, W. I. Lee, S. Dai, D. W. Bahnemann and J. H. Pan, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 109, 100620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Ma, Y. Peng and A. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 783, 898–918 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, Q. Xiang, Y. Liao and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1362–1391 RSC .
L. Li, J. J. Wang, Y. Zhao, B. Ding, X. G. Wang, X. J. Zhao and E. C. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2021, 32, 045710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Xiong, X. Gao, J. Huang, Z. Feng, Z. Chen and Y. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 802, 196–209 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Biswal, H. A. Vignolo-Gonzalez, T. Banerjee, L. Grunenberg, G. Savasci, K. Gottschling, J. Nuss, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11082–11092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Banerjee, K. Gottschling, G. Savasci, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 400–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gottschling, G. Savasci, H. Vignolo-Gonzalez, S. Schmidt, P. Mauker, T. Banerjee, P. Rovo, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12146–12156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Achtstein, O. Marquardt, R. Scott, M. Ibrahim, T. Riedl, A. V. Prudnikau, A. Antanovich, N. Owschimikow, J. K. N. Lindner, M. Artemyev and U. Woggon, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9476–9483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cheng, B. He, J. Fan, B. Cheng, S. Cao and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2100317 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhou, S. Wang, Z. Zhao, Z. Shi, S. Yan and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801214 CrossRef .
P. Yating, Q. Yunyang, Z. Xusheng, C. Sheng-Qi, Y. Yijun, D. Chunmei, W. Xi, Y. Shu-Hong and J. Hai-Long, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 42, 107–114 Search PubMed .
L. R. MacFarlane, H. Shaikh, J. D. Garcia-Hernandez, M. Vespa, T. Fukui and I. Manners, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 6, 7–26 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Lee, Y.-P. Lee, C.-J. Chiang, C. Shen, Y.-H. Chen, L. Wang and C.-A. Dai, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 5551–5557 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Deacy, A. F. R. Kilpatrick, A. Regoutz and C. K. Williams, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 372–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Pal, D. De and P. K. Bharadwaj, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 408, 213173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Z. Wang, X. Xu and J. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1956–1969 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kong, Y. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6579–6591 RSC .
Z. Jiang, X. Xu, Y. Ma, H. S. Cho, D. Ding, C. Wang, J. Wu, P. Oleynikov, M. Jia, J. Cheng, Y. Zhou, O. Terasaki, T. Peng, L. Zan and H. Deng, Nature, 2020, 586, 549–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, X. Han, R. Godin, J. Chen, W. Zhou, C. Jiang, J. F. Thompson, K. B. Mustafa, S. A. Shevlin, J. R. Durrant, Z. Guo and J. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-G. Wang, T. Qiu, W. Guo, Z. Liang, H. Tabassum, D. Xia and R. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 14, 688–728 RSC .
W. Zhong, R. Sa, L. Li, Y. He, L. Li, J. Bi, Z. Zhuang, Y. Yu and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7615–7621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Yadav, A. Kumar, N.-J. Park, K.-J. Kong and J.-O. Baeg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9413–9418 RSC .
C. Dong, Y. Li, D. Cheng, M. Zhang, J. Liu, Y.-G. Wang, D. Xiao and D. Ma, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11011–11045 CrossRef CAS .
N. Huang, P. Wang and D. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16068 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Foo and B. H. Hameed, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 159, 130–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, H. Li, J. Lu, F. Meng, C. Ma, Y. Yan and M. Meng, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123275 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, D. Qu, L. An, X. Gao, Y. Wen, X. Wang and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18348–18356 RSC .
X. Zhu, Y. Lin, J. San Martin, Y. Sun, D. Zhu and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2843 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, C. Atish, K. Silambarasan, X. Liu and A. P. OMullane, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 362, 137212 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bae, T. A. Ho, H. Kim, S. Lee, S. Lim, M. Kim, H. Yoo, J. M. Montero-Moreno, J. H. Park and H. Shin, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602215 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dey, B. Mondal, S. Chatterjee, A. Rana, S. Amanullah and A. Dey, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 1–20 CrossRef .
A. P. Dam, G. Papakonstantinou and K. Sundmacher, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 14140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, C. Xia, F. Yang, J. Wang and Y. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay3111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kweon, M. S. Okyay, S. J. Kim, J. P. Jeon, H. J. Noh, N. Park, J. Mahmood and J. B. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Birdja, E. Pérez-Gallent, M. C. Figueiredo, A. J. Göttle, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 732–745 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang and G. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5003 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y. B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, N. Hormann, E. Oveisi, A. Loiudice, G. L. De Gregorio, O. Andreussi, N. Marzari and R. Buonsanti, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3117 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhou, H. L. Wang and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1273–1307 RSC .
X. Han, K. Wang, G. Zhang, W. Gao and J. Chen, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2019, 361, 2804–2824 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, J. Ran, B. Xia, S. Xi, D. Gao and J. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, X. Xu, W. Yang and J. Jia, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 626–634 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, G. Lin, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, T. Zhang, G. Shan, M. Yang and J. Wang, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 78 CrossRef .
Z. Li, H. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Meng, J. Shi, C. Qi, Z. Zhang, L. Feng and C. Li, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 386, 112099 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Xu, H. Yu, H. Yang and T. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 20075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kuroda, T. Ishida and M. Haruta, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 298, 7–11 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta and M. Daté, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 222, 427–437 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gu, Y. Lu, J. Kaiser, M. Albrecht and M. Ballauff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 28137–28143 RSC .
M. Schrinner, F. Polzer, Y. Mei, Y. Lu, B. Haupt, M. Ballauff, A. Göldel, M. Drechsler, J. Preussner and U. Glatzel, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2007, 208, 1542–1547 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. R. Navarro, Science, 2018, 361, 35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, Z. Li, P. Ji, M. Kaufmann, X. Feng, J. S. Chen, C. Wang and W. Lin, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1578–1583 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Abdalla, S. Hossain, O. B. Nisfindy, A. T. Azad, M. Dawood and A. K. Azad, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 165, 602–627 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Fortea-Perez, M. Mon, J. Ferrando-Soria, M. Boronat, A. Leyva-Perez, A. Corma, J. M. Herrera, D. Osadchii, J. Gascon, D. Armentano and E. Pardo, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 760–766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, S. Zhao, Y. Zhang and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800702 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, C. Paris, J. Martínez-Triguero, M. Boronat, M. Moliner and A. Corma, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 547–554 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) For nano-scale particles (nanoparticles, nanoclusters, and single atoms) and metal clusters supported on conventional, open-structure solid carriers; (b) the illustration of the synthesis routes and representative images of different COF-confined catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Left: synthesis details of the in situ generation of highly dispersed Pd nanoparticles in the COF skeleton; right: comparison of PXRD patterns of simulated COFs (black) with experimental COFs (blue), Pd nanoparticles (cyan), and experimental Pd@COFs (red) (reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2017, ACS Publications); (b) illustrative procedure for the fabrication of Fe@COF catalysts (reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Elsevier); (c) synthetic scheme of P-COF, S-COF and S-COF supports to load gold nanoparticles (reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2020, Elsevier).	 


Pd/Pt NPs@COF	34.36	The pores hold strong anchoring groups (thioether groups)	
65

Au NPs@S-COFa	24.00	Au–S-COF bond bridge	
59

Au NCs@COF-S-SHb	N	
43

Rh NPs@PC-COFc	1.91	The accessible N sites in the pore can connect the nano-scale particles	
39

CdS NPs@CTF-1d	19.3	
48

Rh NPs@CTF	3.40	
53

Pd NPs@TpBpye	15.20	
42

Ni3N NPs@COF	N	
63

Pd NPs@COF	N	
66

Co/Co(OH)2 NPs@COF	16.00	
67

Rh NPs@COF	4.00	
68

Pd/Pt@CTF	0.10	
45

Pd NPs@COF-SO3Hf	0.38	The strong synergism between them enhances the adhesion energy of nano-scale particles	
50

Au NPs@TAPB-DMTP-COFg	0.20	Encapsulation or modification of PVP/ZIF-8 to fix nano-scale particles in COF pores	
61

Pd NPs@H-TpPah	N	
62

Ru NPs@COF-ASBi	4.10	Heteroatom functionalities (hydrazine) in support pores	
69

Pd NCs@COF-300-1114j	1.10	Dangling amine groups on the porous support can confine ultrasmall NCs	
70

Cu NCs@CTF	4.80	The synergism between the two and the good chemical confinement environment	
71

Pd NPs@COF	5.00	Function bond (imine bond) in the porous support	
72

Pd NCs@COF	N	
73

Pt NPs@ sp2c-COFk	3.00	Interfacial charge transfer	
74

Pd@In NCs@N3-COF	4.51 and 5.01	
75

Pt atom@CTF	1.02	The rich-N sites of the support can accurately anchor single atoms	
76

Fe atom@COF	2.14	
49

3d metal atomsl@COF	N	
77

Co atom@FPy-CONm	2.10	Strong linkage of the iminopyridine moiety	
78

TM atomn@COF	N	The synergistic effect of TM single atoms and the support	
79


 	Fig. 3  The interaction between nano-scale particles (nanoparticles, nanoclusters, and single atoms) and COFs or COF-based materials in COF-confined catalysts. (a) The pores hold strong anchoring functional groups and functional bonds; (b) the synergistic effect of nano-particles and supports; (c) bond bridge can establish the interaction between nano-particles and support; (d) interfacial charge transfer can establish the interaction between nano-particles and supports; (e) the rich-N sites of the support pores can accurately anchor nano-particles; (f) encapsulation can fix nano-scale particles in COF pores.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) XPS spectra of the Rh 3d peak for the 1.91 wt% Rh–N/PC-COF (reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry); (b) simulated and measured PXRD patterns of Pd@CCOF-MPC and CCOF-MPC (reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2017, ACS Publications); (c) XPS N 1s peaks of CTF-HC2 (reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (d) the simulated (black line) and measured PXRD patterns of Ru@COF-SAB (red line) and COF-SAB (purple). Rietveld refinement (blue line), and the difference plot between measured and Rietveld-refined PXRD patterns (dark green line) (reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2018, ACS Publications); (e) the TEM image of the Au–S-COF, the inset histogram is the distribution of Au nanoparticle size (reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2020, Elsevier); (f) powder XRD patterns of the as-synthesized COF and COF composite containing 0.20 wt% 15 nm Au NPs and simulated XRD pattern of the TAPB-DMTP-COF. The inset is the same XRD pattern of the Au/COF composite but with the adjusted intensity scale, where weak peaks associated with the diffraction of the COF can be observed but those assignable to Au NPs cannot be observed (reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2017, ACS Publications); (g) XRD patterns of the as-synthesized samples (reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, Elsevier); (h) Mott–Schottky plots of the COF, bulk CdS, and CdS-COF (90:10) hybrids (reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2014, Britannica); (i) monomers and the IISERP-COF5. The highlighted regions indicate the peaks in the COF due to the unreacted terminal aldehyde/amine functionalities (reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2018, Wiley Online Library).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) N2 adsorption isotherms of the COF and COF-S-SH (reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library); (b) comparison of XRD patterns and FT-IR spectra of Pd/COF-300-xy and COF-300-xy (xy = 0714, 0914, and 1114) (reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (c) real-time operando XAS measurements of CTF-Cu-4.8% at −1.45 V vs. SHE (reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (d) the corresponding intensity profiles for the atomically dispersed single Pt atom (reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (e) model structure employed in this study, a porphyrin-type unit cell (M–N4) after structural optimization. Gray: transition metal atoms (M); black: C; white: H; blue: N. The red dotted lines represent the unit cell for each structural model (reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (f) FTIR spectra of the Co-COF before (black) and after (red) photocatalysis (reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (g) projected density of states of the Co-COF. The inset shows the crystal field around the Co atom (reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2018, Britannica); (h) high-resolution XPS spectra of the fresh and used Fe@COF catalysts (reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Elsevier); (i) binding energy (Eb) of transition state elements (reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications).	 

Stability	High	Low	High
Confinement effect	Strong	Moderate	Strong
Shape electivity	Yes	Limited	Limited
Scope of reactions	Suitable for all reaction conditions	More suitable for reaction under mild conditions	Widely used for conventional thermal catalysis


Hydrogen production	CdS NPs@CTF-1 (photocatalysis)	Impregnation combined with a photo-deposition approach	An aqueous solution containing 8 mL lactic acid	H2 evolution rate of 11.43 mmol g−1 h−1	
48

Hydrogen production	Pt NPs@COF (electrocatalysts)	Solvothermal and invasion deposition methods	Ag/AgCl and graphite as the electrode in NaHCO3 electrolyte	H2 produced is 13 times higher than that of Pt/C on the market and FEa is 100%	
96

Hydrogen production	CdS NPs@COF (photocatalysis)	Hydrothermal synthesis method	An aqueous solution containing lactic acid and 0.5 wt% Pt	H2 evolution rate of 3678 mmol g−1 h−1	
102

Hydrogen production	Pt NPs@TP-COF (photoelectrocatalysis)	An electrostatic self-assembly method	The efficient hot π-electron tunneling of organic MISb nanostructures	H2 evolution rate of 8.42 mmol g−1 h−1 and a TOFc of 789.5 h−1	
93

Hydrogen production	Pd NPs@CTFs (photocatalysis)	Solvothermal and in situ deposition methods	An aqueous solution containing 10 mL TEOAd	H2 evolution rate of 10.556 mmol g−1 h−1	
45

Hydrogen production	Rh NPs@PC-COF	Ultrasonic impregnation reduction and in situ reduced method	1 mL of MeOHe and DCMf mixed solvent (VMeOH/VDCM = 2/1)	The total TOF of 505 min−1 at 298 K	
103

Hydrogen production	Pt NPs@ sp2c-COF (photocatalysis)	Solvothermal and in situ photodeposition methods	An aqueous solution (100 mL) containing triethanolamine (10 vol%)	H2 evolution rate of 1360 μmol h−1 g−1	
74

CO2 reduction reaction	Ru NPs@TpPa-1g (photocatalysis)	Solvothermal synthesis method	In a mixed liquid of MeCNh and TEOA with a volume ratio of 10:1	HCOOH evolution rate of 108.8 μmol gcat−1 h−1 (3.0 wt% Ru)	
116

CO2 reduction reaction	Pd@In NCs@N3-COF	Solvothermal synthesis method	CO2 photoreactor containing ≥99.995%	Total yield of 798 μmol g−1 for producing CH3OH (74%) and CH3CH2OH (26%)	
75

CO2 reduction reaction	Co atoms@sp2c-COFdpy (photocatalysis)	Solvothermal and impregnation deposition	An aqueous solution containing 5 mL TEOA	Achieving up to 17.93 mmol g−1 CO with 81.4% selectivity in a long-range reaction	
56

CO2 reduction reaction	Cu atoms@CTF (electrocatalysis)	
In situ oxidation method and wet-impregnation method	In an airtight H-type electrolytic cell, which adopts a three-electrode system for constant potential electrolysis	At a potential of −1.3 V and CO and H2 are the main gas products	
71

CO2 reduction reaction	Co atoms@FPy-CON (photocatalysis)	Solvothermal and infiltration deposition methods	An aqueous solution containing 2,2′-bipyridyl, acetonitrile and TEOA	CO production of 10.1 μmol (6 h irradiation under visible light) and CO/H2 selectivity of 76%	
78

Reduction of 4-nitrophenol	Au NPs@TAPB-DMTP-COF	Solvothermal and encapsulation method	An aqueous solution containing 4-nitrophenol and NaBH4	Apparent rate constant k of 0.12 min−1	
61

Reduction of 4-nitrophenol	Pt NPs@thio-COFi	Solvothermal and impregnation deposition	An aqueous solution containing 4-nitrophenol and NaBH4	The full conversion of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol in 8 min	
65

Reduction of 4-nitrophenol	Au NPs@S-COF	Synthesis strategy of solvothermal and post-modification	An aqueous solution containing 4-nitrophenol and NaBH4	The full conversion of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol in 7 min	
59

Henry reaction and reductive Heck reaction	Pd NPs@CCOF-MPCj	Solvothermal and sequential solution impregnation	An ethanol solution containing Ar–CHO, and nitromethane; an ethanol–H2O solution containing 2-cyclohexen-1-one, and Ar–X	TONk and TOF are 48.5 and 6.1 h−1, respectively; TON and TOF values for the reaction are 30.9 and 3.09 h−1, respectively	
104

Organic reaction	Ru NPs@COF-ASB	Solvothermal and impregnation deposition	A mixture of benzyl alcohol and corresponding amine	TON and TOF of N-benzylideneaniline formed from alcohol and amine were 18 and 0.82 h−1	
69

Organic reaction	Pd NCs@COF-300-1114	Nonstoichiometric synthon strategy and solvothermal condensation method	The oxidation reactions of benzyl alcohol under 0.1 MPa of O2 at 90 °C in toluene	97.0% conversion of benzyl alcohol and 97.0% selectivity to benzaldehyde after 32 h	
70

Organic reaction	Pd NPs@TpBpy	Solvothermal and in situ deposition	Solution containing 2-bromophenol and terminal alkynes	The synthesis of 2-substituted benzofurans from 2-bromophenols and terminal alkynes	
42

Organic reaction	Ag NPs@TpPa-1 and Ag NPs@TpTtal	One-pot polycondensation and infiltration deposition	Solution containing allylamine, strong iodinating agent NISm and DMSOn	Synthesis of cyclic carbamate 2a the catalyst in high yield up to 96%	
54

Organic reaction	Rh NPs@COF	Facile hydrothermal method	Solution containing 7.2 mmol aromatic aldehydes and 3 mL 2.0 mol L−1 methanolic ammonia	Benzaldehyde with the full conversion of 99% and selectivity of 95% for N-benzylidene(phenyl)methanamine	
68

Organic reaction	Pd NPs@COF	Solvothermal and post-modification methods	Solution containing aryl halide, aryl boronic acid, alkalic additive Cs2CO3 and solvent EtOH under a N2 atmosphere	Successful synthesis of halo-substituted beryl products in excellent yield	
66

Organic reaction	Ru atoms@CTF (electrocatalysis)	Solvothermal method	Ag/AgCl and titanium wire used as the reference electrode and counter electrode	Gaseous ethylbenzene oxidized to acetophenone	
89

Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)	TM atoms@COFs (electrocatalysis)	The VASPo calculations of density functional theory	N/A	Mn-COF and Cr-COF ORR overpotentials of 0.31 and 0.29 V, respectively	
79

Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)	3d metal atoms@COFs (electrocatalysis)	Systematic design of catalysts using first principles	N/A	Fe or Co-COFs are already known as efficient ORR catalysts	
77

Hydrogenation reaction	Pd NPs @COF-SO3H	Wet-chemistry immersion dispersion method	Under mild reaction conditions (1 bar of H2, 25 °C, 28 min)	The selective hydrogenation of phenylacetylene with 97.06% conversion	
50

Hydrogenation reaction	Pd NPs@COF	Static precipitation after ultrasonic treatment	An aqueous solution containing 5 mL (25 μL mL−1) nitrobenzene in ethanol under 1 bar H2	TON for the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene was 906 h−1	
72

Organic pollutant degradation reaction	Au NCs@S-COFp (photocatalysis)	Solvothermal and post-modification strategies	An aqueous solution (50 mL) containing rhodamine B (10 mg L−1) or bisphenol A	Rhodamine B and bisphenol A degradation percentage of 97.3% and 90%	
43

Organic pollutant degradation reaction	CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6@EB-COF: Brq (photocatalysis)	A simple mechanochemical synthetic method	Various concentrations of MOr aqueous solution (20, 50 and 100 ppm)	MO in aqueous media with a photodegradation rate of about 0.245 min−1	
108

Organic pollutant degradation reaction	Au NPs@COF	Solvothermal and post-modification strategies	Solution containing 12 mg L−1 4-NP (25 mg L−1 of congo red and methylene blue)	With high flux (2000 L m−2 h−1) and excellent reduction efficiency (more than 99%)	
117

Nitrogen reduction reaction (NNR)	Mo atoms@Pc-TFPNs COF (photoelectrocatalysis)	Solvothermal and post-modification strategies	N/A	Theoretical results demonstrated that this catalyst has a low onset potential of −0.24 V, which is better than those of noble catalysts	
118

Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction	Pd NPs@thio-COF	Solvothermal and impregnation deposition	A dimethylformamide/H2O solution containing aryl halide, phenylboronic acid, K2CO3, and Pd NPs@thio-COF are mixed in a Schlenk tube	The coupling reaction of 1-iodine-4-toluene with phenylboric acid was catalyzed and the yield was >99%	
65


 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of the tetragonal sp2c-COF by CC bond polycondensation, and reconstructed crystalline 2D layer of the sp2c-COF that allows the π conjugation along both the x and y directions (reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2019, Elsevier); (b) assembled light-driven interlocked system for hydrogen production from water based on a crystalline sp2 carbon-conjugated framework and Pt water-reduction centers. The processes of photoenergy harvesting, electron transfer, and water-reduction reaction are seamlessly integrated in the system (reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2019, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The amount of hydrogen evolved over 1, no catalyst, 2, without light irradiation, 3, COF, 4, CdS, 5, 5%CdS-COF, 6, 10%CdS-COF, 7, 20%CdS-COF, 8, 40%CdS-COF and 9, 20%CdS-COF (reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, Elsevier); (b) photocatalytic hydrogen evolution under visible light irradiation in the presence of ascorbic acid (reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library); (c) photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy of COFs, 1 wt% Pt@COF and Pd@CPF (reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (d) CO and H2 production by the Co-FPy-CON over multiple 2 h repeat runs. The sample was degassed, and 1 μmol of (Ir[dF(CF3)ppy]2(dtbpy))PF6 was added after each run (reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (e) amount of produced HCOOH over the prepared catalysts upon 10 h of visible-light irradiation (800 nm ≥ λ ≥ 420 nm). Photocatalyst: 15 mg, MeCN/TEOA volume ratio: 10/1, and total solution volume: 110 mL (reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2021, Elsevier); (f) principles of photogenerated electron transport between Au NCs and the COF support (e@ in the LUMO and h+ in the HOMO represent a photogenerated electron and hole of Au NCs, respectively; e@ in the CB and h+ in the VB represent a photogenerated electron and hole of COF-V, respectively) (reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2020, Wiley Online Library).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The amount of hydrogen evolution by the Pt NPs@COF (red rectangular) and Pt/C (blue circle) (reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, Elsevier); (b) schematic diagram of a new carbon dioxide electrochemical reduction system (reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2018, Nature); (c) the relationship between the oxygen reduction activity trend and O binding energy (reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2004, ACS Publications).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The UV-vis image of the reduction of 4-nitrophenol in the presence of the Au–S-COF (reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Science); (b) time-dependent UV-vis spectra of the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (0.3 μmol) catalyzed by 50 μL unsupported Pt NPs (0.17 mg mL−1) (reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2019, Wiley Online Library); (c) catalytic performance of Pd/COF-300-xy series (xy = 0714, 0914, and 1114) in the benzyl alcohol oxidation reaction (reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2020, ACS Publications); (d) Pd@COF catalyzes the synthesis of 2-substituted benzofurans from 2-bromophenols and terminal alkynes (reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2017, ACS Publications).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
