How sustainable is CO 2 conversion to ethanol? – A life cycle assessment of a new electrocatalytic carbon utilisation process   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE01462E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01462E
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 5866-5880How sustainable is CO2 conversion to ethanol? – A life cycle assessment of a new electrocatalytic carbon utilisation process†

        
          
            Daniel 
            Rojas Sánchez
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Kaveh 
            Khalilpour
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Andrew F. A. 
            Hoadley
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia. E-mail: daniel.rojassanchez@monash.edu
bFaculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
Received 
      16th September 2021
    , Accepted 4th October 2021First published on 5th October 2021AbstractAlthough bioethanol production is considered to be sustainable from a global warming perspective, its dependence on agricultural systems, land management, and geographical limitations has sparked concern. The electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) is a promising alternative pathway to produce fuels, such as ethanol, through captured CO2 and electricity. The CO2RR has been studied exhaustively in the literature, but the potential environmental impacts of producing ethanol in a practical process on a large scale are unknown. In this paper, we perform a life cycle assessment to quantify the potential environmental benefits of ethanol production via a proposed electrocatalytic captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) system coupled with an innovative product separation design at a commercially relevant scale. The production of bioethanol via grain fermentation was used as the reference in the comparison of nine environmental impact categories. Results indicate that ethanol via ECCR has a lower or comparable associated impact in all examined environmental categories, depending on the nature of the energy supplied to the system. Specifically for global warming, the ECCR becomes competitive against the reference when the electricity supplied has a carbon intensity lower than 63 gCO2eq per kW h. Overall, the proposed ECCR system is a modular and versatile alternative that presents a clear advantage on land use and water consumption. This early-stage technology has the capability of producing ethanol sustainably whilst offering the associated benefits of a carbon capture and utilisation pathway.
1. Introduction
Biofuels are widely acknowledged to be the form of renewable fuel used for long haulage transport in a carbon-constrained world due to their similarity to petroleum-based products. Biofuels such as ethanol and biodiesel are leading candidates due to the mature industrial process of fermentation of bio-based materials. The most common and mature pathway is through 1st generation feedstocks, which are crops such as maize or sugarcane.1 The 2nd generation feedstocks use lignocellulosic biomass and include residues and by-products of agricultural processes rather than the crop itself, and the emerging 3rd generation feedstocks focus on the use of marine organisms such as algae ponds for the conversion.2,3
Although developments are ongoing for both 2nd and 3rd generation feedstocks for widespread use, the generation of bioethanol using 1st generation feedstocks is still expected to dominate.4 This brings a number of challenges, which relate to the dependence on crops and their variability with geographical and weather conditions,5 the use of pesticides and fertilisers,6 water and land use,7 and the polemic of land for food versus fuel.8
A promising pathway is the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2.9 This process promotes the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) with water in the presence of a catalyser and electricity to produce hydrogen and low-chain hydrocarbons within an electrochemical cell. This technology has the advantage of tuning the reaction rate and products by the selection of external parameters, such as the morphology of the catalyst, the electrolyte, the design of the cell, and the overpotential applied.10 It is also capable of working efficiently under ambient conditions and with environmentally benign electrolytes.11
When captured CO2 is used in the reaction, it receives the additional benefits of being a carbon capture and utilisation (CCU) mechanism, which includes
•• the possibility of better economic viability from incentives to remove CO2 from the atmosphere,
•• the possibility of a more negative global warming potential assuming that the process is powered by renewable energy, and
•• the ability to produce fuel anywhere with a renewable energy source, thus being close to market.
Therefore, the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 could be a promising alternative to produce ethanol that avoids the existing disadvantages of 1st generation bioethanol production. This paper investigates this important option, specifically to answer the question “How sustainable is CO2 conversion to ethanol?” The approach taken is through life cycle assessment (LCA).
1.1 CO2RR to ethanol
The CO2RR in an electrolyser commonly occurs in the interface between solid electrocatalyst electrodes and an aqueous solution saturated with CO2.12 While several metallic elements have the capacity to promote the CO2RR in aqueous electrolytes, only copper-based materials have recorded conversions at relevant faradaic efficiencies (FE) towards oxygenated hydrocarbons, such as ethanol.13
As this phenomenon happens on the surface of the catalyst, its microstructure is key in the rate and selectivity of the reaction.14 The addition of a co-catalyst via doping generates specific sites that promote ethanol generation, as Ren et al.15 proved by doping a Cu-based oxide electrode with zinc dopants and reporting a 29% FE at −1.05 V vs. RHE with a current density of 8.2 mA cm−2. Carbon-based catalysts have also proven to be effective for ethanol production, with the added benefit of using low-cost and abundant materials. Song et al.16 integrated metallic and carbon-based materials to create a nitrogen-doped carbon nanospike electrode with Cu nanoparticles, achieving a FE of 63% at −1.2 V vs. RHE with an approximate current density of 2 mA cm−2. However, the current densities in these studies are too small, limiting their applicability within the lab scale.
Recently, integrating these beneficial characteristics, Wang et al.17 developed a catalyst consisting of Cu nanoparticles with a nitrogen-doped carbon layer and a gas diffusion layer. This shortens the diffusion distance between the layer and the catalyst, thus increasing the local concentration of gaseous CO2 available for reaction. Using a flow cell reactor developed in an earlier study,18 the catalyst was able to achieve 93% FE towards C2+ products at a current density of 300 mA cm−2, with 53% FE to ethanol at −0.68 V vs. RHE. To the authors' knowledge, this catalyst has the highest production rate of ethanol in the literature, considering both FE and current density. Additionally, its proved performance in a flow cell reactor makes it suitable for a scaled-up electrolyser system, allowing better process control and stability.19
1.2 Environmental assessments of CO2RR process designs
While the thermodynamics have been demonstrated and the kinetics have been studied in great detail in the literature, the analysis of practical process design and integration with CO2 capture infrastructure is still required to gauge the potential of using this technology on a global scale.20 Li and Oloman21,22 designed a model for a continuous reactor to produce formate products, focusing on large-scale application and integrating relevant engineering issues for its potential industrial application. Agarwal et al.23 continued with this analysis towards large-scale formic acid production by adding a value chain analysis and identifying the viability of such a process. De Luna et al.24 did a screening analysis for ethanol, ethylene, carbon monoxide, and formic acid. Their analysis looked at technical barriers and market barriers in electrochemical production costs. However, the approach taken in this analysis overlooks the specific details of product separation, which can have a significant weight in the overall suitability of the entire system.
Only a handful of studies have performed a life cycle assessment (LCA) to analyse the potential environmental impacts of an entire electrocatalytic system involving feasible product separation. Dominguez-Ramos et al.25 assessed the global warming footprint of an ECCR system based on the design by Oloman and Li26 to produce formic acid by using captured CO2 from a coal combustion plant and sending excess CO2 to storage. This study, however, does not include a detailed simulation or modelling of the process and focuses only on greenhouse gas emissions. Later, Rumayor et al.27 increased the scope of the LCA on formic acid production to include other environmental impacts and a greater resolution on the inventory of the cell and the cathode. Nabil et al.28 then developed an LCA based on the general product separation mechanism of the previous research groups, but expanded the assessment to eight C1 and C2+ products, including ethanol. However, in order to cover the breadth of the analysis, this assessment only focuses on global warming and incorporates assumptions in electrolyser performance and product separation processes that do not reflect a detailed modelling of existing technologies. A detailed environmental assessment has not yet been performed for large-scale continuous ethanol production via the CO2RR.
In this analysis, an LCA was performed to determine the potential benefits of producing ethanol via a proposed electrocatalytically captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) system integrated with an efficient product separation design and scaled to an industrially relevant scale.29 Special consideration was given to developing comprehensive inventories that reflect the entire life cycle of the processes involved. Even though the maturity of technologies with the CO2RR does not meet commercialisation requirements yet,30 this is a promising pathway that benefits from an early-stage assessment to determine potential environmental improvements against a reference process.
As geographical considerations are key in the assumptions of an LCA, the scope of the analysis is based on the state of Queensland in Australia. In an earlier study,31 we showed that Australia has the potential to reduce global warming through changes in the agricultural and energy sectors, which are relevant to ethanol production and consumption. The focus on Queensland specifically comes from economic, socio-political, and environmental reasons. The market of bioethanol is significant and expected to grow, in part because of the obligatory blending with fuel32 and the Queensland biofutures 10 year roadmap and action plan,33 which primarily intends to increase the presence of biofuels in the state. The largest bioethanol producer in the state is Dalby Biorefinery, which uses red sorghum as feedstock. Red sorghum presents several challenges: the area where it grows is prone to severe droughts,34 the price of sorghum has high fluctuations,35 and there has been a rise in exports over the years.36 Therefore, this is a region that may support more ethanol, but may not be in a position to supply the extra demand in the same way it has done so far.
The research objective of this study is to compare the environmental impacts of two processes that produce ethanol from renewable feedstock: through ECCR and fermentation of crops (Fig. 1). While the CO2RR has been analysed in great detail in the literature, most studies focus on the performance of the electrochemical cell without taking into account the separation process required to supply the product in its intended practical form.37 Therefore, there is no clear understanding of the potential impacts of producing ethanol via ECCR on a commercially relevant scale.38 This paper fills this gap by modelling the feasibility and potential environmental impacts of an ECCR system based on the best performing electrolyser design to the author's knowledge and an innovative product separation design. This theoretical model was based on data from research groups, simulations, literature review, and expert advice. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first study to perform a comprehensive environmental assessment on an entire production plant using this technology to produce ethanol on a large scale.
 Fig. 1  Comparison of ethanol production via electrocatalytic captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) and via the reference process of crop fermentation. 
In order to undertake the LCA, the following section provides the methodology, goal and scope, and description of the system. This is followed by an analysis of the life cycle inventories and impact assessment, after which there is further discussion and conclusions.
2. Methodology
A life cycle assessment (LCA) analyses the interaction among flows in the life cycle stages of a process or product to quantify its associated potential environmental impacts.39 The attributional LCA in this study follows the standardised methodology of ISO 14040 and 14044,40,41 describing its stages in the subsections below. The design of the assessment follows the recommendations in the LCA guidelines for CCU by Zimmermann et al.42 The analysis was performed using Simapro version 9.0.0.48, the ecoinvent 3.5 database,43 and the Australian Life Cycle Initiative (AusLCI) database V1.35.
2.1 Goal and scope
The goal of this LCA is to assess the environmental impacts of producing ethanol through the proposed ECCR system compared with the traditional fermentation of red sorghum in Queensland, Australia, to determine its suitability as a CCU pathway. The scope involves all flows associated with CO2 capture, conversion, separation of products, and energy supply. A cradle to gate approach is used for the comparison of both processes, given that the produced ethanol is identical and the use and disposal life phases can be disregarded. However, the flows and emissions of the use and disposal stages of all other associated processes are considered. The functional unit is 1 kg of ethanol 95% m/m, as the product of simple distillation considering the azeotrope with water.44
The benchmark process is based on a plant of the same size, location, and operational characteristics as Dalby Biorefinery (DB), the largest bioethanol producer in the state, producing approximately 76 ML per annum of bioethanol through the fermentation of red sorghum. The process involves all flows involved in the agriculture, feedstock, and conversion systems associated with the traditional production of bioethanol.45
The proposed ECCR system comprises a direct air capture (DAC) unit, an electrolyser stack, an adsorption unit to separate the gas products, and a distillation unit to separate the liquid products. Fig. 2 shows a block diagram of the process and system boundaries. The plant and its associated process consider Queensland or Australian conditions. The next subsections and corresponding ESI† provide a description of each unit.
 Fig. 2  Process flow chart and system boundaries of the electrocatalytically captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) system. 
The specific electrolyser used in this model has a substantial co-production of ethylene, which is a highly attractive chemical with a large market. Ethylene, traditionally produced through petrochemicals, is used as a building block for a wide range of materials mainly used in packaging and end consumer markets.46 Therefore, the design of the entire system was developed with the purpose of recovering both ethanol and ethylene in high purity.
Air comes in the DAC unit, supplying CO2 to the gas chamber of the electrolyser stack. The reactions to products happen in both gas chamber and the cathode. Ethylene leaves as a gas and is separated in the adsorption unit, separating it from the excess CO2 that is recirculated back to the electrolyser. On the liquid side, the electrolyte in the cathode is sent to the distillation unit, where the electrolyte and CO2 are separated and recirculated to the electrolyser, and the ethanol is recovered.
As it is inherent in most CCU systems, coproduction within the system boundary needs to be solved to ensure a fair comparison to the reference system.47 The method selected was system expansion by substitution. The associated flows and impacts of the traditional method of producing ethylene via cracking of ethane were used as credit to the impacts of the proposed CCU system. More information on this process can be found in Section S1.5.† Being mathematically identical to standard system expansion, this method allows maintaining the original functional unit for comparison.

2.1.1 Direct air capture unit. 
The CO2 is provided by DAC, as it facilitates a fair comparison with the benchmark agricultural process by using atmospheric CO2 in both cases. The DAC process modelled is based on the process described by Keith et al.,48 which is a design of Carbon Engineering Ltd. for a plant that captures approximately 1 Mt-CO2 per year. It uses calcium looping with an aqueous potassium hydroxide and potassium carbonate solution in the air contactor to deliver captured CO2.
Liu et al.49 developed an LCA based on the same plant. While the original design uses natural gas for the plant energy requirements, one of the scenarios in this assessment includes the use of an electric calciner. We employ this same scenario and its adapted material and energy flows for the model in this paper. More information specific to this model is described in Section S1.3,† while all the details of the process description can be found in the two referenced studies.


2.1.2 Electrolyser stack. 
The design and performance of the electrolyser used in this model are based on the gas diffusion flow cell reactor developed by Wang et al.17 Apart from its high yield towards C2+ products and the highest reported ethanol production rate, it uses inexpensive materials for the catalyst and operates under ambient conditions. This reduces complexity and capital costs, allowing scale-up and stack manufacturing processes.50
The electrolyser model uses the reported faradaic efficiencies (FE) for ethanol and ethylene and assumes the remainder as hydrogen, disregarding the trace amounts of the other C1 and C2+ products for simplicity in the separation process. However, the rates of reaction and mass balance of CO2 do consider the exact FE of each reported chemical, considering its standard deviation. The ambient operating conditions of this electrolyser avoid the need for auxiliary energy and allow intermittent operation if required.51Table 1 summarises the main parameters, characteristics, and performance of the electrolyser. Section S2.1† provides more information on the modelling, reactions, and rigorous carbonate equilibria calculation. Other details regarding the specific mechanism of the gas diffusion layer, the catalyst, or the flow cell reactor design can be found elsewhere.17,18,52,53
Table 1 Characteristics of the electrolyser




Parameter
Amount





Operating conditions



Temperature [°C]
25


Pressure [atm]
1






Faradaic efficiencies



Ethanol [%]
53


Ethylene [%]
38


Hydrogen [%]
9


KOH electrolyte concentration [M]
1


Current density [mA cm−2]
300






Cathode



Material
34% N/C–Cu



E
CO2RR [V vs. RHE]
−0.68


Energy efficiency [%]
31.2






Anode



Material
Ni foam


Full cell efficiency [%]
16.2




The electrolyte is recirculated through the cathode and anode, respectively, allowing a continuous reduced flow to the distillation system. The use of pumps and their energy requirements are considered in the assessment. The oxygen produced in the anode is assumed to vent in the recirculation of the electrolyte.
The proposed ECCR system was designed to produce the same output as the benchmark process. Thus, the area of the cathode was scaled to that of an advanced large-scale alkaline electrolyser, such as the one assessed by Koj et al.54 The entire electrolyser unit was then scaled-out to meet the required ethanol output by stacking assembled electrolysers in a modular configuration working in parallel. For ease of transport and versatile installation, the electrolyser stacks were made to fit in a regular 40 ft transoceanic container.55 The scaling of the required material and energy requirements for the assembled electrolyser and electrolyser stack are described in Section S1.2.†


2.1.3 Adsorption system. 
The separation of ethylene (C2H4) from the gaseous products is accomplished with a vacuum swing adsorption (VSA) unit composed of a dual bed packed with activated carbon. The selection of the adsorber is based on the experiments by Zandvoort et al.,56 showing an affinity for ethylene at lower concentrations in CO2/C2H4 streams. This process was preferred against other separation techniques, such as low-temperature distillation, because of the increased energy requirements and complexity due to the azeotrope between CO2 and C2H4.57 The adsorption system is a simplified VSA model based on Maring and Webley,58 using adsorption isotherms of a dual-site Langmuir model fitted for activated carbon by the experimental data of Reich et al.59 The rigorous modelling of this adsorption system is outside of the scope of this paper.
A high purity ethylene product (99.9%) with a recovery of 88% is obtained by applying a pressure swing between 0.2 bara and 1.2 bara at ambient temperature through a 13.4 minute cycle. The stream entering the adsorption unit is modelled as a binary mixture, disregarding the hydrogen (H2) found in low quantities that is not adsorbed by activated carbon. However, the mass balance still accounts for its fraction in the mix. H2 is not considered a valuable co-product in the inventory as it could overestimate the benefits of the model. The resulting stream going back to recirculation to the electrolyser is composed of 99.9% CO2. It is assumed that potential trace impurities do not affect the performance of the electrolyser. Because of the dynamic work of the streams in the dual bed, shown in Fig. S1,† the bed can separate ethylene receiving a continuous input stream from the electrolyser. More information on the modelling of this system can be found in Section S2.2.†


2.1.4 Distillation system. 
Ethanol is recovered through an innovative separation system, consisting of a stripping column, heat pump, flash separator, and split pressure distillation unit. The separation of ethanol is not simple because of the presence of dissolved CO2 in the stream, increasing substantially the energy required to condense ethanol after simple distillation. Therefore, the separation was designed in steps. Overall, a hierarchical methodology to process synthesis was followed: first focusing on reactions, then on separations and recycles, and then on heat integration.60 The model was simulated in Aspen Plus v10 with a thermo package configured for carbonate electrolyte with a reactive chemical absorption system.61 A complete heat integration employing pinch analysis was developed to minimise energy requirements of the plant. The process flow diagram of the simulation is shown in Fig. 3 and the properties of the main streams in the process are given in Table 2. The full stream summary is found in Table S24.†
 Fig. 3  Process flow diagram of the distillation unit simulation. 
Table 2 Properties of main streams in distillation simulation




Stream
1
4
5
29
30
32




Temperature [°C]
30.0
99.8
105.8
30.0
30.0
50.0


Pressure [bar]
2.6
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.8
2.5


Mass flowrate [kg s−1]
14.7
7.5
7.2
12.2
0.3
2.2




The stripper removes most of the ethanol from the electrolyte, which is the largest component in volume. After a series of heat exchangers, the flash drum separates the lightest component, CO2, and recycles it to the electrolyser in high purity. Then the ethanol–water separation is conducted using a split pressure distillation system, which comprises two distillation columns operating at different pressures – low pressure on top and high pressure in the bottom. This configuration allows using the reboiler of the low-pressure column as the condenser of the high-pressure column, reducing the utility steam and energy requirements by approximately 40% compared to using a single column. Bleeds in the three-phase condensers of both columns remove small amounts of gaseous CO2 and recirculate them upstream of the condenser. Ethanol is then condensed and recovered at the required concentration. Water is recovered from both columns and mixed with the water full of ions separated at the stripper to also be recycled as electrolyte for the cathode and anode. These recycle streams greatly reduce the amount of make-up water, electrolyte, and CO2 required for the electrolyser.
The heat integration of this separation process decreased the electricity required, achieving an energy efficiency of 92%. A critical part of the heat integration was the addition of the heat pump after the stripper. This allows the overhead vapour to be used to provide the heat for reboiling the stripper. This configuration provides a coefficient of performance of 8.6 when considering the heat requirements saved from the condenser and the electricity penalty for the heat pump. The heat requirements of the high-pressure column are assumed to come from low pressure steam (5 bar) from an electric boiler with 95% efficiency.62 Therefore, all the energy requirements of the distillation unit are met with electricity. A detailed explanation of the modelling and simulation involved for the distillation system can be found in Section S2.3.†

2.2 Life cycle inventory and scenarios
The data for the inventories were compiled from different sources and procedures including primary data through personal communication, literature review, LCA harmonisation, process simulations, and life cycle databases. Every inventory includes material, energy and processing, infrastructure, and transport requirements, as well as direct emissions to air, water, and soil and waste outputs to treatment (and co-production when applicable). The detailed inventories, lifetimes, and assumptions of each subsystem are categorised in Section S1.† Background processes were taken from the AusLCI database, using ecoinvent processes as a proxy when processes specific to Australia or Queensland were unavailable. Commissioning and decommissioning impacts of systems, although generally disregarded for being relatively insignificant,28 are included in this assessment for completion.

2.2.1 ECCR system. 

Table 3 shows a summary of the inventory to produce the functional unit, 1 kg of ethanol at 95% m/m. The requirements of captured CO2 and softened water (for reaction in the electrolyser) consider the recirculation streams from the adsorption and distillation systems. Section S3† shows the material and energy flows in the entire ECCR system and its carbon balance. The cooling water specified in the inventory is only the make-up water needed in the cooling tower system. The energy requirements are specified for different components of each subsystem.
Table 3 Inventory of ethanol production via the electrocatalytic captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) system




Parameter
Amount





Functional unit output



Ethanol production, by ECCR system [kg]
1






Co-production output (avoided products)



Ethylene, at the plant [kg]
0.416






Material requirements



Captured CO2 [kg]
3.123


Water, completely softened [kg]
2.028


Cooling water [m3]
8.51 × 10−4






Infrastructure requirements



Electrolyser stack [unit]
7.91 × 10−10


Adsorption system [unit]
7.91 × 10−10


Distillation system [unit]
5.00 × 10−10






Energy and processing requirements



Electricity, ethylene separation (adsorption system) [kW h]
0.455


Electricity, compression (pre-adsorption recirculation) [kW h]
0.555


Heat, steam (distillation system) [MJ]
3.416


Electricity, cooling water (distillation system) [kW h]
0.003


Electricity, air cooling (distillation system) [kW h]
0.004


Electricity, compressors + pumps (distillation system) [kW h]
0.207


Electricity (electrolyser) [kW h]
27.066


Electricity (electrolyte pumps) [kW h]
0.879






Waste and emissions



Water to wastewater treatment [m3]
1.70 × 10−4




The infrastructure requirements consider the equipment of each subsystem and the land occupation associated with it. For the electrolyser stack, it considers the space corresponding to the containers. For the adsorption system, a proxy of an air separation facility process was used with the size scaled to the corresponding output. For the distillation system, an ethanol fermentation plant process was used as a proxy, assuming 60% of the entire plant as a conservative value to consider the distillation columns in the system. The amount of water to wastewater treatment is the blowdown of the cooling tower.


2.2.2 Reference production system. 

Fig. 4 shows the system boundary of the reference sorghum bioethanol system. The agriculture and feedstock subsystems refer to all flows and emissions necessary for growing, transporting, and providing the sorghum grain to the plant. The conversion process to bioethanol at Dalby Biorefinery (DB) involves milling sorghum grain to a fine powder, followed by saccharification, fermentation, distillation, and dehydration through molecular sieves up to 99.5% v/v industrial grade ethanol.63 The stillage remaining after distillation is dehydrated and sold as dry distiller's grains with solubles (DDGS), which is used as animal feed with high protein content.34
 Fig. 4  System boundaries of the reference sorghum bioethanol system. 
The base inventory for the reference system was taken from an existing process in the AusLCI database based on DB-specific parameters. The multifunctionality of the reference was also solved through system expansion by substitution. Two potential substitutes for such feed were selected: cottonseed meal and soybean meal. These are by-products themselves of crops grown in the area of study, with a high fibre and protein content similar to DDGS. They are obtained through the main process of extracting oil from each respective crop. The equivalence to fulfil the same function of DDGS was based on protein content, as is the common practice for feed substitution.64 The amount of DDGS in the reference sorghum system is 0.892 kg DDGS per kg ethanol. The equivalent quantity for each substitute was proportionately calculated according to the quality of the substitute feed products shown in Table 4. The inventories of both substitutes were adapted from LCI databases. More information on these inventories can be found in Section S1.6.† The final modelled process was modified to more closely reflect the current operation of DB and Queensland conditions.65
Table 4 Protein quality for sorghum dry distiller's grains with solubles (DDGS), cottonseed meal, and soybean meal




Feed product
Dry matter (% DM)
Protein content (% DM)
Reference




Sorghum DDGS
90
34

68



Cottonseed meal
92
45

69



Soybean meal
88
53

70






Table 5 shows the summarised inventory for sorghum bioethanol production including the substitute of co-production of either soybean meal or cottonseed meal. Sorghum is a low-yield crop available throughout the year but affected in yield by seasonal conditions and droughts.66 Given a lack of data specific to DB, the origin of the sorghum feedstock was assumed to come in equal proportion from three different locations: the Darling Downs area, the Western Downs and northwest slopes and plains, and the northern zone of New South Wales. All of them are in close proximity to the plant and represent a diversity of feed throughout the year. Transport distances were averaged according to these areas.
Table 5 Inventory for reference sorghum bioethanol production




Parameter
Amount





Functional unit output



Ethanol production, by the sorghum system [kg]
1






Co-production output (avoided products)



Soybean meal (substitute for DDGS) [kg] or
0.555


Cottonseed meal (substitute for DDGS) [kg]
0.648






Material requirements



Sorghum grain, Western Downs [kg]
1.055


Sorghum grain, Northern zone NSW [kg]
1.055


Sorghum grain, Darling Downs, QLD [kg]
1.055


Lubricating oil [kg]
2.31 × 10−4


Water, Darling Downs [kg]
7.296


Water, completely softened [kg]
0.015


Chlorine, liquid [kg]
6.43 × 10−6


Sodium chloride, powder [kg]
8.03 × 10−5


Sulfuric acid [kg]
0.027






Energy and processing requirements



Heat, natural gas, in the industrial furnace [MJ]
9.482


Electricity, QLD
0.334






Infrastructure requirements



Occupation, industrial area [m2a]
0.087


Ethanol fermentation plant [unit]
8.33 × 10−10






Transport requirements



Truck, 40 t [tkm]
0.633


Pipeline, natural gas [tkm]
0.036






Waste and emissions



Carbon dioxide, biogenic [kg]
0.955


Disposal, solid waste [kg]
6.43 × 10−5


Disposal, used mineral oil [kg]
6.43 × 10−5


Water to wastewater treatment [m3]
1.54 × 10−5




Heat requirements at DB are met with natural gas received directly at the plant through the Dalby Gas Pipeline, a connection from the Dalby Compressor Station in the Roma to Brisbane gas pipeline.67 Electricity needed is assumed to be taken from the grid. The operations at DB are typical of global bioethanol production based on crops. However, the energy requirements for the usual dehydration of ethanol in the plant were removed from the scope to maintain the functional unit. Material and energy requirements and waste treatments associated with yeast harvesting and propagation are not considered. The infrastructure requirements use the ecoinvent process for an ethanol fermentation plant scaled to the output of DB, while the occupation area of the plant is specific to DB. Section S1.6† includes more information on the elaboration of the inventory and its assumptions.


2.2.3 Electricity input scenarios. 
Since the ECCR system – mainly from the operation of the electrolyser – is energy-intensive, the source of the electricity used is critical to its overall impact. Three scenarios were created (high, mid, and low) according to the carbon intensity of the generated grid electricity, as shown in Table 6. The breakdown of the fuel mix in each scenario was taken from the forecasted large-scale electricity generation in Queensland for 2021, 2030, and 2050 in the latest Integrated System Plan by the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO).71 As official projections reach 2041, the generation data for 2050 were extrapolated. The mid scenario has a large-scale renewable energy (RE) share of 49.8%, which is consistent with Queensland's RE target of 50% by 2030.72 The RE share for the low scenario is 96.5%, compatible with large-scale generation in the national net-zero emission target for 2050.73 Section S1.7† shows the inventory to model high and medium voltage electricity using the grid mix scenarios.
Table 6 Electricity scenarios according to the carbon intensity of the grid by fuel breakdown. CCGT: combined cycle gas turbine; OCGT: open cycle gas turbine




Source
Scenarios


High
Mid
Low




Black coal
84.5%
47.0%
0.0%


OCGT
0.0%
0.2%
0.1%


CCGT
2.0%
3.0%
3.3%


Hydro
1.2%
1.1%
0.2%


Solar
8.4%
15.8%
38.6%


Wind
3.9%
32.9%
57.8%



Total

100.0%
100.0%
100.0%


Renewable share
13.5%
49.8%
96.5%


Carbon intensity [kg CO2-e per kW h]
0.858
0.500
0.039





2.3 Life cycle impact assessment
The choice of impact categories in the life cycle impact assessment is based on the recommendations by the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA)74 and the National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL)75 for CCU processes. The CML-IA methodology (2016, version 4.7)76 was used, as per the LCA guidelines for CCU,42 for the following impact potentials: global warming 100 year horizon (GWP), acidification (AP), eutrophication (EP), abiotic depletion (fossil fuels) (ADP), ozone layer depletion (ODP), and photochemical ozone creation (POCP). The ReCiPe methodology (midpoint, Hierarchist, 2016, version 1.03)77 was used for particulate matter formation potential (PMFP), water consumption (WC), and land use (LU).
According to the GHG accounting guidelines of the International Energy Agency (IEA),78 captured CO2 from biogenic and atmospheric sources shall count as negative emissions in the inventory. Therefore, the carbon neutrality assumption for atmospheric and biogenic CO2 of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)79 was not employed in this assessment. This comparative analysis intends to measure the flows of CO2 removed from the atmosphere, regardless of their source. Therefore, the GWP accounts for the intakes and emissions of atmospheric and biogenic CO2 in the flows associated with the DAC unit, fermentation, and the lifetime of the sorghum. It should be noted that the actual impact on climate change is not necessarily negative, but only a representation of the difference in carbon flows between the two systems.
3. Results

Fig. 5 shows the potential impacts of producing the functional unit in all impact categories for the three electricity cases of the ECCR and the sorghum reference systems using both substitute feed products.
 Fig. 5  Potential environmental impacts in all categories of the electrocatalytic captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) system in the high, mid, and low carbon intensity electricity scenarios and the reference system of sorghum bioethanol using cottonseed meal (Cot) or Soybean meal (Soy) as the substitute for the coproduction of dry distiller's grains with solubles (DDGS). 
Each plot is broken down in four segments with different colours. Energy represents all the energy requirements for each system. For sorghum bioethanol, it is the heat and electricity needed in the plant. For the ECCR, it is the electricity required for the electrolyser, adsorption and distillation units. Feedstock for the sorghum bioethanol is naturally sorghum with all its associated impacts. For the ECCR, it is all the embodied emissions and energy requirements in the captured CO2 from the DAC unit. The plant category involves both commissioning and decommissioning and all the flows for the operation of the plant. Finally, grey is the ethylene credit for the ECCR system and the DDGS credit for the reference from its respective coproduction.
The ethylene credit is most evident in the abiotic depletion potential of fossil fuels (ADP), creating a marked difference between the systems. It is important to note that the ECCR does not have an actual negative flow, but is only represented as such because of the credit of ethylene. By using system expansion without substitution, the impact associated with ethylene would simply be added to the reference sorghum system. However, even when not considering the ethylene credit, the ADP of the ECCR is still lower in every scenario compared to the reference system. The largest contribution of the sorghum bioethanol comes from the use of natural gas (58%) for its heat requirements, followed by the use of urea (22%) for the sorghum, which needs ammonia from steam reforming and fossil fuels. For the ECCR, the largest contribution comes from the natural gas use in combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) electricity generation (40–49%).
In three of the nine impact categories, the ECCR system in any scenario has a lower impact than the reference sorghum bioethanol cases. In contrast, the impact of the reference is lower than any ECCR scenario in two categories. Global warming potential (GWP), eutrophication potential (EP), acidification potential (AP), and fine particulate matter formation (FPMF) are categories where only the ECCR low-CI scenario has a lower impact than the reference. In these four impacts, the energy supply of the ECCR has the largest contribution. Therefore, increasing the RE share of the electricity supplied decreases its impact until it is lower than the reference. For the reference system, the life cycle of the sorghum feedstock is the main contribution to most of the examined impact categories.
FPMF for the ECCR shows a direct influence on the fuel mix used. In the high-CI scenario, electricity from black coal is virtually the sole contribution to the impact (99%). In the low-CI scenario, most of the impact comes from wind turbine construction and its required market for copper (57%) and solar electricity generation and its need for the iron–nickel–chromium alloy (35%). The impact of the reference system comes mainly from the burning of the sorghum residue (61%) and the manufacture of urea (8%) and monoammonium phosphate (6%) as fertiliser.
The energy used in the ECCR is critical in reducing its associated impact. With respect to AP, the generation of electricity from black coal contributes to almost 98% of the high-CI scenario. The mining of copper for wind turbines and network connections contributes 55% of the impact in the low-CI scenario, followed by the use of nickel in the receiver system of solar electricity generation. Similarly, black coal accounts for 96% of the impact in the high-CI scenario of EP. Sulfidic tailing associated with the copper for wind turbine networks contributes 1% in the high-CI scenario to over 56% in the low-CI scenario. In the reference system, the manufacture and leaching of chemicals in fertilisers for sorghum account for 93% and 94% of AP and EP, respectively.
The GWP of the ECCR system is mainly driven by the use of black coal in the electricity grid, substantially reduced by the captured CO2 of the DAC unit and the ethylene credit. Feedstock decreases in magnitude through the electricity scenarios because of the lower CI of the energy required to capture CO2. The GWP of bioethanol sorghum coming from energy use is offset by the CO2 captured by the crop during its lifetime. As the electricity mix changes, there seems to be a breakeven between the mid and low-CI scenarios.
To explore this pattern further, Fig. 6 shows the GWP or carbon footprint of producing the functional unit via the ECCR system (dark blue line) and via the sorghum reference with the cottonseed meal substitute (light green line) and soybean meal (dark green line) by varying the CI of the electricity used. The grid electricity scenarios are shown in the three green circles with a corresponding H, M, and L for the high, mid, and low-CI scenarios, respectively. The breakeven is visible in the intersection, indicating that the ECCR system and the sorghum bioethanol reference have the same carbon footprint when the electricity used for the ECCR is 63 and 62 gCO2e per kW h when using cottonseed meal and soybean meal as the DDGS substitute, respectively.
 Fig. 6  Carbon footprint of ethanol production by the electrocatalytic captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) system (dark blue line) and by the sorghum reference with the cottonseed meal substitute (dark green line) and soybean meal (light green line) with electricity of different sources and carbon intensity. 
These results imply that the ECCR system requires an electricity supply with a significantly lower carbon footprint than the current Queensland grid. However, at the present time, using any source of energy that has a CI lower than that value will make ethanol production via the ECCR system more competitive than via sorghum fermentation. The other points in the plot show the carbon footprint of ethanol production when using electricity from a single fuel type, according to its fuel emission intensity. This indicates that using a high contribution of renewable energy or employing solely one of these renewable sources provides a benefit from a global warming perspective.
The slope of the curves represents the global warming sensitivity of each process to the CI of the electricity used. The carbon footprint of the ECCR process is very sensitive to changes in the fuel mix of the energy, while sorghum bioethanol has a marginal change. This is not unexpected given the lower relative use of electricity in the reference system. While the reference process could use an electric boiler instead of natural gas for its heat requirements, this is unlikely in DB because of the installed pipeline delivering natural gas straight to the biorefinery. Regardless, Fig. S4† shows the carbon footprint sensitivity analysis for all three processes: ECCR, sorghum (electric), and sorghum (natural gas), using the average of cottonseed meal and soybean meal for the reference. It shows that the breakeven of the all-electric reference with the ECCR system is at 47 gCO2e per kW h, which is 25% lower than the breakeven with the current natural gas-powered reference. From a GWP perspective, it would only be beneficial to use an electric boiler for the sorghum bioethanol process if the CI of the electricity supplied is lower than 229 gCO2e per kW h.
Considering the POCP, the impact of the ECCR low-CI scenario is comparable to the reference when using cottonseed meal, but it is 60% higher than the reference when using soybean meal as the substitute. The marked difference of the impact of the two reference cases is a consequence of increased C2H4e emissions associated with hexane used in the solvent extraction process of soybean oil.80 In the high-CI scenario, most of the impact of the ECCR derives from the use of black coal in the electricity grid (94%). In the low-CI scenario, the mining for necessary metals for wind and solar electricity generation has the highest contribution, such as copper (24%), sinter iron (18%) for reinforced steel (24%), and nickel (12%).
ODP is the only category where the plant components have the highest contribution, making the ECCR system have a significantly higher impact than the reference. The use of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) in the cathode and assembled electrolyser represents 94–95% of the impact. This will be investigated in detail in the sensitivity analysis. For the reference system, the use of herbicides (11% of POCP and 68% of ODP) and urea (12% of POCP and 6% of ODP) plays a major role. Besides hexane in the soybean meal substitute, monoammonium phosphate has the highest contribution in POCP (15%), and diesel for pumping water for irrigated sorghum and for the transport of feedstock accounts for an extra 7% in POCP and 13% in ODP.
Finally, the ECCR system in all scenarios has a considerably lower impact in water consumption (WC) and land use (LU) than the bioethanol reference. WC is an impact category of great importance because water is critical in the area of study and the bio-based benchmark requires large amounts of water. The ECCR system in its worst-case scenario uses approximately 12% of the water needed for the sorghum bioethanol reference in any co-production substitute case. Its consumption relies mainly on the grid's use of black coal (38%) in the high-CI scenario, and on softened water for capturing CO2 (43%) in the low-CI scenario. For the reference system, water consumption relies almost entirely on the irrigation for the irrigated sorghum. Since cottonseed meal utilises a fraction of cotton grown by irrigation, a small credit reduces the impact by 2% compared to the reference when using soybean meal. For this same reason, the land use associated with soybean meal using only dryland soybean is greater, providing a credit that reduces the impact by 16% compared to the reference when using cottonseed meal.
A sensitivity analysis was performed to explore the effects of using different combinations of sorghum sources for bioethanol production. Fig. 7 shows the difference of WC, LU, and GWP for the production of 1 kg of sorghum bioethanol production using equal parts of the three selected regions (3 regions), equal parts of sorghum of dryland regions (dryland), and only irrigated sorghum (irrigated), with the worst and best-case scenarios for the ECCR. The dryland sources (Darling and Western Downs) have very similar impacts and were used in equal fraction within a single sensitivity analysis scenario. The average of employing cottonseed meal and soybean meal was used for the DDGS credit of the reference.
 Fig. 7  Sensitivity analysis for water consumption, land use, and global warming using different sorghum sources. 
While the water use of dryland sorghum bioethanol becomes competitive with the best-case scenario of the ECCR, the land use increases by 30% from the 3-region case, requiring 36–67 times the land necessary for the ECCR system. In comparison, the ECCR in any scenario requires only 2–4% of the land necessary for dryland and 3-region bioethanol, respectively. Using only dryland sorghum has an improvement (7%) on GWP. When using only irrigated sorghum, the land use is more than halved, but the GWP increases by 50% and the WC is increased almost three-fold.
For the effect of using renewable energy directly for the sorghum process in the other impact categories besides GWP, it should be evident that the improvement would only be marginal given the substantially higher impact associated with sorghum itself rather than the energy used. Fig. S5† shows the potential impact in all categories for the ECCR and reference system (using an average of cottonseed and soybean meal for the DDGS substitution) for all electricity scenarios, including the reference using entirely electricity in the low-CI scenario. Although rarely performed, conducting a sensitivity analysis on the benchmark is important to better understand the process and trust its integrity as the standard for comparison in the assessment.81
3.1 Electrolyser sensitivity analysis
As the electrocatalytic process is an early-stage technology, a sensitivity analysis is helpful in identifying the environmental hotspots in the electrolyser itself. Fig. 8 shows the relative contribution of the main subcomponents of the electrolyser. While the assembly has a high relative contribution to several impacts (mainly from the steel used in the casing), the only categories where the electrolyser has a contribution above 1% of the entire ethanol production are ODP, POCP, AP, and FPMF. The use of PTFE in the cathode and in the assembly constitutes most of the impact in ODP, while the use of nickel in the anode represents the highest contribution in the other three categories. Potential improvements could be achieved by using alternative materials for the electrodes. For the anode, using a different electrode with a lower overpotential for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) would also reduce the energy requirements of the system82 and their associated impacts on POCP, FPMF, and AP.
 Fig. 8  Relative contribution of the subcomponents of the electrolyser (assembly, cathode, anode, and electrolyte) to the examined environmental impact categories. 
In the cathode preparation, a PTFE membrane is used to sputter the N–C/Cu catalyst. While a substitute material could be used, only reducing the thickness of this membrane could present substantial benefits. As described in its inventory in Section S1.2.2,† the inventory assumes the average thickness of the specific commercial product used in Wang et al.17 to calculate its required mass. A sensitivity analysis on using a membrane thickness within a commercial range is shown in Fig. S6.† If the thickness of the PTFE spacer in the assembly is reduced to 0.5 mm, the PTFE membrane thickness of the layer in the cathode would need to be 45 μm to match the ODP of the reference system. Future improvements in current density would also reduce the electrolyser footprint proportionally and the associated ODP from the use of PTFE.
Additionally, a sensitivity analysis was performed to gauge the effect of the lifetime of the cathode in all environmental impacts. The lifetime of the catalyst in this model was assumed to be 5000 hours, as a conservative average stack lifetime of large-scale polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, which have a considerably shorter lifespan than alkaline systems.83 The results of this sensitivity analysis, depicted in Fig. S7 and S8,† show that the impact categories except ODP are insensitive to the cathode lifetime between 500 and 60000 hours. However, ODP increases by 75% if the lifespan is decreased by 50% and increases by 677% if the lifespan reduces by an order of magnitude. It also shows that the ECCR in the high-CI scenario offers a benefit in ADP, LU, and WC at any value of the examined range of cathode lifetimes. The ECCR in the low-CI scenario demonstrates a benefit in the rest of the categories with the exception of ODP and POCP, which require the aforesaid changes of PTFE layer thickness reduction and avoiding the use of soybean meal as the DDGS substitute to make the impact comparable to the reference.
4. Discussion
This assessment maintains the analysis at midpoint impact categories to reduce the uncertainty of the results. Given the low technology readiness level (TRL) of the process and the associated uncertainty in the data, extending the assessment to endpoint categories would reduce the reliability of the comparison. Moreover, normalisation was not performed because the quality of normalisation data for Australia does not cover the entire range of chemicals involved, potentially providing misleading results.84 Nevertheless, the purpose of this assessment is to provide a direct comparison of the proposed CCU pathway against the reference process.
The carbon footprint of ethanol via ECCR requires electricity with a CI lower than 62–63 gCO2e per kW h to be more competitive than the reference. While the current CI of Queensland and the average CI of Australia overall are high (711 gCO2e per kW h), in Tasmania (35 gCO2e per kW h),85 this process would already have a substantial advantage compared to sorghum bioethanol. To put things into perspective, other countries such as France with 43 gCO2e per kW h (ref. 86) or British Columbia in Canada with 19 gCO2e per kW h (ref. 87) could produce ethanol via ECCR competitively without requiring an agriculture subsystem and its associated water consumption and land use.
Therefore, this system offers an opportunity for regions where growing crops is limited or where a source of renewable energy is readily available. Since the ECCR only needs captured CO2 as feedstock, it can be positioned anywhere and scaled to the necessary magnitude. The cost of feedstock for bioethanol represents 78–84% of its gross cost,88 which could present problems if the price of crops fluctuates. Additionally, 1st and 2nd generation feedstocks may be tied to a growing season and would require storage to be used all year round. Storage of certain feedstocks can be challenging or affect their fermentation quality.89 Using only CO2 as feedstock in the ECCR system has the potential to reduce the uncertainty in the production costs for ethanol. As Saunders et al.90 concluded, avoiding the need of agricultural land and associated impacts with cultivation may offer a long-term solution to sustainable bioenergy generation.
With the rise of RE generation in specialised zones throughout the country,71 this ECCR system could be positioned next to a renewable energy generation source and act as a renewable energy vector for surplus energy. Apart from its modularity, the ECCR has a fast response time, making it suitable for intermittent renewable sources.51 The storage and distribution of this energy using existing infrastructure for carbon-based fuels offers a benefit in isolated areas in Queensland and Australia overall. This has the potential to connect decentralised supply and demand points, increasing the flexibility of the energy system in the country and the security of the fuel supply chain.91
As mentioned in the methodology, DAC was used in the assessment to provide a fair comparison against the reference system with both processes capturing CO2 directly from the atmosphere. The use of DAC for captured CO2 allows the system to be located in isolated areas with available renewable resources and inefficient transmission networks.49 However, the CO2 used could be obtained from a source with a higher initial concentration, requiring less energy to supply it to the electrolyser under the necessary conditions. Besides flue gasses from fossil fuel power generation, waste emissions from manufacturing processes such as ammonia production from natural gas or cement production can be a source of high purity CO2 at low cost.92 Even the emissions of the fermentation in bioethanol production could be the source of CO2,93 opening the opportunity for an integration between the two studied processes in this assessment for an increased ethanol production.
The credit of the ethylene is meaningful in determining the impact of the overall ECCR system. As its inventory in the ESI† details, the industry reference process for the avoided ethylene represents the current practice by Qenos in olefins production near the area of study. However, future developments in cleaner practices such as using electric furnaces for cracking ethane for ethylene production will impact directly the credit associated with the ECCR system. Being reliant on the nature of the energy supplied, the credit would decrease proportionally through the electricity generation scenarios. Although electric cracking furnaces are still in the development phase,94 this reinforces the need to update assessments to ensure that they provide a reliable representation of reality.
The electrolyser and proposed product separation system were scaled-up to meet a commercially relevant output. While this modular scaled-out design provides flexibility to fit to any desired magnitude in market demand,95 it may become restrictive from an economic and engineering consistency perspective.96 Future developments on the design of the electrolyser or electrodes could increase the current density of the cathode. This would reduce the size and material requirements and decrease the energy requirements for the CO2 conversion, having a significant reduction in the overall impact of the ethanol production. In the practical scaling of the electrolyser, different improvements will need to be developed to ensure catalyst stability since it is the biggest challenge in scaling up to an industrial-scale.30
Additional data on the stable efficiency of the electrolyser are required. If the performance of the same continuous electrolyte is maintained at a longer period, the concentration of ethanol in the stream towards the distillation unit would be higher and the associated separation energy requirements would be lower. It is also important to demonstrate the lifetime of the catalyst at a commercial scale. While the sensitivity analysis identified only mild environmental effects of a reduced lifetime, the ECCR system is unlikely to be economically viable with a catalyst lifetime below the order of thousands of hours.25 Considerable experimentation is still needed to test the limits of the performance of the electrolyser.
5. Conclusions
The present LCA confirms that ethanol production by the electrocatalytic reduction of captured CO2 has the potential to be a sustainable pathway for CCU compared to the traditional process of sorghum fermentation. At the current configuration, its abiotic depletion of fossil fuels, land use, and water consumption have a reduced impact compared to the reference. A reduced impact on global warming, eutrophication, acidification, and fine particulate matter formation is conditional to the renewable share of the energy supplied. A comparable impact to the reference is achieved in photochemical ozone creation when cottonseed meal is considered as the DDGS substitute, and in ozone layer depletion when the thickness of the PTFE layer used in the cathode is decreased. The carbon footprint of ethanol production through ECCR becomes competitive when the energy supplied to the system has a carbon intensity of 62–63 gCO2e per kW h or lower.
The system is a promising non-food-based, versatile, and modular process that presents a clear advantage on land use and water consumption. Using CO2 as feedstock, the ECCR can be located where agricultural resources are limited, becoming a sustainable alternative to existing bio-based ethanol production. Given its modular configuration, it can be scaled to any necessary magnitude. Additionally, when positioned in remote areas where renewable energy sources are available, it can be used as an energy vector for surplus energy, leveraging existing infrastructure for storage and distribution of carbon-based fuels. Avoiding the need of agricultural subsystems, the ECCR can also offer a sustainable and long-term solution to biofuel generation.
Future research and scale-up testing is required to validate the potential benefits identified. Ethanol production through the electrocatalytic reduction of captured CO2 has a low TRL and has not been analysed outside the laboratory scale. Any future developments that increase the current density will have significant benefits in reducing the impacts associated with the manufacture of the stack. However, this type of assessment is useful to perform a screening analysis that estimates pertinent impacts and identifies potential areas of improvement at an early stage. The methodology presented in this paper is especially useful when considering a bio-based reference, which is not the norm in CCU assessments. This analysis was able to quantify the impact of the energy used in the system and prospective modifications to reduce environmental impacts. Moreover, it confirms that the ECCR system has the potential to produce ethanol sustainably at a reduced impact in different environmental categories whilst offering the associated benefits of a CCU technology.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the following people for their expert advice in different sections of the modelling of this assessment: Niklas von der Assen, Doug MacFarlane, Paul Webley, Xue Wang, Edward Sargent, Joel Ager, Timothy Grant, and Keith Sharp. We would also like to show our gratitude to Monash University for providing the resources to elaborate this work. The icons used in Fig. 6 and S4† were taken from opensource websites http://icons8.com and http://cleanpng.com.
References

          S. L. Bruce, Masters thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  2013 .
S. A. Jambo, R. Abdulla, S. H. Mohd Azhar, H. Marbawi, J. A. Gansau and P. Ravindra, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 65, 756–769 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Pierobon, X. Cheng, P. J. Graham, B. Nguyen, E. G. Karakolis and D. Sinton, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 13–38 RSC .

          OECD/FAO, OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2019-2028, OECD Publishing, Paris/FAO, Rome,  2019, p. 326 Search PubMed .
T. Searchinger, R. Heimlich, R. A. Houghton, F. Dong, A. Elobeid, J. Fabiosa, S. Tokgoz, D. Hayes and T. H. Yu, Science, 2008, 319, 1238–1240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vohra, J. Manwar, R. Manmode, S. Padgilwar and S. Patil, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 573–584 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, D. Jiang, J. Fu, M. Hao and T. Peng, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 351–366 RSC .
D. Rajagopal, S. E. Sexton, D. Roland-Holst and D. Zilberman, Environ. Res. Lett., 2007, 2(4) DOI:10.1088/1748-9326/2/4/044004 .
N. S. Spinner, J. A. Vega and W. E. Mustain, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 19–28 RSC .
A. Mustafa, B. G. Lougou, Y. Shuai, Z. Wang, S. Razzaq, J. Zhao and H. Tan, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4352–4369 RSC .
P. Amos, H. Louis, K. Adesina Adegoke, E. A. Eno, A. O. Udochukwu and T. Odey Magub, Asian J. Nanosci. Mater., 2018, 1, 183–224 Search PubMed .
R. J. Lim, M. Xie, M. A. Sk, J.-M. Lee, A. Fisher, X. Wang and K. H. Lim, Catal. Today, 2014, 233, 169–180 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
J. Wu, P. P. Sharma, B. H. Harris and X. D. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ren, B. S. H. Ang and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8239–8247 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, R. Peng, D. K. Hensley, P. V. Bonnesen, L. Liang, Z. Wu, H. M. Meyer, M. Chi, C. Ma, B. G. Sumpter and A. J. Rondinone, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 6055–6061 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Wang, F. P. García de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, A. Ozden, Y. C. Li, D. H. Nam, J. Li, Y. S. Liu, J. Wicks, Z. Chen, M. Chi, B. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Tam, J. Y. Howe, A. Proppe, P. Todorović, F. Li, T. T. Zhuang, C. M. Gabardo, A. R. Kirmani, C. McCallum, S. F. Hung, Y. Lum, M. Luo, Y. Min, A. Xu, C. P. O'Brien, B. Stephen, B. Sun, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 478–486 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. Pelayo García De Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Weekes, D. A. Salvatore, A. Reyes, A. Huang and C. P. Berlinguette, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 910–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, J. F. Khosrowabadi Kotyk and S. W. Sheehan, Chem, 2018, 4, 2571–2586 CAS .
H. Li and C. Oloman, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 36, 1105–1115 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li and C. Oloman, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 1107–1117 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Agarwal, Y. Zhai, D. Hill and N. Sridhar, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1301–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364 DOI:10.1126/science.aav3506 .
A. Dominguez-Ramos, B. Singh, X. Zhang, E. G. Hertwich and A. Irabien, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 104, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
C. Oloman and H. Li, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 385–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos and A. Irabien, Sustainable Production and Consumption, 2019, 18, 72–82 CrossRef .
S. Nabil, S. McCoy and M. G. Kibria, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 867–880 RSC .
T. Burdyny and W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1442–1453 RSC .

          J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, A Review of Catalysts for the Electroreduction of Carbon Dioxide to Produce Low-Carbon Fuels,  2014, vol. 43 Search PubMed .
D. Rojas Sanchez, A. F. A. Hoadley and K. R. Khalilpour, Sustainable Production and Consumption, 2019, 20, 15–28 CrossRef .

          State of Queensland, Liquid Fuel Supply Act 1984,  2017 Search PubMed .

          State of Queensland, Queensland Biofutures 10-Year Roadmap and Action Plan,  2016 Search PubMed .

          W. L. Bryden, P. H. Selle, D. J. Cadogan, X. Li, N. D. Muller, D. R. Jordan, M. J. Gidley and W. D. Hamilton, A Review of the Nutritive Value of Sorghum for Broilers,  2009 Search PubMed .

          Grains Research and Development Corporation, Sorghum,  2016 Search PubMed .

          S. Peters and S. Ward, Efficient Costs of New Entrant Ethanol Producers,  2016, vol. 23 Search PubMed .
J. W. Ager and A. A. Lapkin, Science, 2018, 360, 707–708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Tan, K. B. Lee, H. Song and J. Oh, Joule, 2020, 4, 1104–1120 CrossRef CAS .
N. von der Assen, P. Voll, M. Peters and A. Bardow, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7982–7994 RSC .

          International Standards Organisation (ISO), ISO 14040: Environmental Management - Life Cycle Assessment - Principles and Framework,  2006 Search PubMed .

          International Standards Organisation (ISO), ISO 14044: Environmental Management - Life Cycle Assessment - Requirements and Guidelines,  2006 Search PubMed .

          A. W. Zimmermann, L. Müller, Y. Wang, T. Langhorst, J. Wunderlich, A. Marxen, K. Armstrong, G. Buchner, A. Kätelhön, M. Bachmann, A. Sternberg, S. Michailos, S. McCord, A. V. Zaragoza, H. Naims, L. Cremonese, T. Strunge, G. Faber, C. Mangin, B. Olfe-Kräutlein, P. Styring, R. Schomäcker, A. Bardow and V. Sick, Techno-Economic Assessment & Life Cycle Assessment Guidelines for CO2 Utilization (Version 1.1),  2020, p. 185 Search PubMed .
G. Wernet, C. Bauer, B. Steubing, J. Reinhard, E. Moreno-Ruiz and B. Weidema, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2016, 21, 1218–1230 CrossRef .
J. W. G. Turner, A. G. J. Lewis, S. Akehurst, C. J. Brace, S. Verhelst, J. Vancoillie, L. Sileghem, F. Leach and P. P. Edwards, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part D, 2018, 232, 36–56 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Farrell and R. Santella, Australia: Biofuels Annual 2018, Canberra,  2019 Search PubMed .

          IHS Markit, Ethylene: Chemical Economics Handbook,  2020 Search PubMed .

          A. Zimmerman, J. Wunderlich, G. Buchner, L. Müller, K. Armstrong, S. Michailos, A. Marxen, H. Naims, F. Mason, G. Stokes and E. Williams, Techno-Economic Assessment & Life-Cycle Assessment Guidelines for CO2 Utilization,  2018 Search PubMed .
D. W. Keith, G. Holmes, D. St. Angelo and K. Heidel, Joule, 2018, 2, 1573–1594 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Liu, N. K. Sandhu, S. T. McCoy and J. A. Bergerson, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 3129–3142 RSC .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 30470–30492 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 2165–2177 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Zhuang, Y. Pang, Z. Q. Liang, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. S. Tan, J. Li, C. T. Dinh, P. De Luna, P. L. Hsieh, T. Burdyny, H. H. Li, M. Liu, Y. Wang, F. Li, A. Proppe, A. Johnston, D. H. Nam, Z. Y. Wu, Y. R. Zheng, A. H. Ip, H. Tan, L. J. Chen, S. H. Yu, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 946–951 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Wang, T.-T. Zhuang, C.-T. Dinh, J. Li, D.-H. Nam, F. Li, C.-W. Huang, C.-S. Tan, Z. Chen, M. Chi, C. M. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, P. Todorović, A. Proppe, Y. Pang, A. R. Kirmani, Y. Wang, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, B. Scheffel, A. Xu, S.-C. Lo, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5186 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. C. Koj, A. Schreiber, P. Zapp and P. Marcuello, Life Cycle Assessment of Improved High Pressure Alkaline Electrolysis,  2015, vol. 75 Search PubMed .

          DTU GreenHydrogen.dk and AU Siemens, HyProvide Large-Scale Alkaline Electrolyser (MW),  2016 Search PubMed .
I. van Zandvoort, E. J. Ras, R. de Graaf and R. Krishna, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 241, 116706 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mollerup, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1975, 71, 2351 RSC .
B. J. Maring and P. A. Webley, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2013, 15, 16–31 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reich, W. T. Ziegler and K. A. Rogers, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 1980, 19, 336–344 CrossRef CAS .
R. Smith and B. Linnhoff, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 1988, 66, 195–228 CAS .

          T. Harkin, Doctoral thesis, Monash University,  2012 .

          CIBO, Energy Efficiency and Industrial Boiler Efficiency - an Industrial Perspective,  2003 Search PubMed .

          United Petroleum, Safety Data Sheet (LQA78) for industrial grade ethanol,  2020 Search PubMed .

          K. Jonasson and B. Sanden, Time and Scale Aspects in Life Cycle Assessment of Emerging Technologies : Case Study on Alternative Transport Fuels, Environmental systems analysis,  2004 Search PubMed .

          Queensland Government, Dalby Biorefinery Ltd,  2017 Search PubMed .

          R. A. Perez-Maldonado and H. D. Rodrigues, Nutritional Characteristics of Sorghums from Queensland and New South Wales for Chicken Meat Production,  2009 Search PubMed .

          United Petroleum, Dalby Gas Pipeline, https://www.unitedpetroleum.com.au/dalby-bio-refinery/dalby-gas-pipeline/, accessed 24 October 2020 Search PubMed.

          V. Heuze, G. Tran, S. Giger-Reverdin, D. Bastianelli and F. Lebas, Sorghum by-products, https://www.feedipedia.org/node/752, accessed 19 November 2020 Search PubMed.

          V. Heuze, G. Tran, P. Hassoun, D. Bastianelli and F. Lebas, Cottonseed meal,  2019 Search PubMed .

          V. Heuze, G. Tran and S. Kaushik, Soybean meal, https://www.feedipedia.org/node/674, accessed 19 February 2021 Search PubMed.

          Australian Energy Market Operator, 2020 Integrated System Plan,  2020 Search PubMed .

          Queensland Renewable Energy Expert Panel, Credible Pathways to a 50% Renewable Energy Target for Queensland,  2016 Search PubMed .

          J. Rogelj, D. Shindell, K. Jiang, S. Fifita, P. Forster, V. Ginzburg, C. Handa, H. Kheshgi, S. Kobayashi, E. Kriegler, L. Mundaca, R. Séférian and M. V. Vilariño, IPCC Spec. Rep. Glob. Warm. 1.5 °C,  2018, p. 82 Search PubMed .
Edge Environment and Lifecycles, Rep. Aust. Renew. Energy Agency, 2016 Search PubMed .

          T. Skone, M. Mutcheck, M. Krynock, G. Cooney, A. Pegallapati, S. Rai, J. Chou, D. Carlson, M. Jamieson, A. Venkatesh, J. Littlefield, G. G. Zaimes, S. Roman-white and E. Dale, Carbon Dioxide Utilization Life Cycle Analysis Guidance for the U.S. DOE Office of Fossil Energy,  2019 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Guinée, M. Gorrée, R. Heijungs, G. Huppes, R. Kleijn, A. de Koning, L. van Oers, A. Wegener Sleeswijk, S. Suh, H. A. Udo de Haes, H. de Bruijn, R. van Duin and M. A. J. Huijbregts, Handbook on Life Cycle Assessment. Operational Guide to the ISO Standards. I: LCA in Perspective. IIa: Guide. IIb: Operational Annex. III: Scientific Background, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,  2002 Search PubMed .

          M. A. Huijbregts, Z. J. N. N. Steinmann, P. M. F. M. F. Elshout, G. Stam, F. Verones, M. D. M. D. Vieira, M. Zijp and R. van Zelm, ReCiPe 2016: A harmonized life cycle impact assessment method at midpoint and enpoint level - Report 1 : characterization, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment,  2016 Search PubMed .

          IEAGHG, Greenhouse Gas Emissions Accounting for CO2 Capture and Utilisation (CCU) Technologies - Synthesis of Research Findings,  2018 Search PubMed .

          IPCC, 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Geneva, Switzerland,  2006 Search PubMed .

          N. T. Dunford, in Food and Industrial Bioproducts and Bioprocessing, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2012, pp. 115–143 Search PubMed .
N. von der Assen, J. Jung and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2721 RSC .
T. Haas, R. Krause, R. Weber, M. Demler and G. Schmid, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .

          D. J. Myers, X. Wang, N. Kariuki, S. DeCrane, T. Nowicki, S. Arisetty, R. Subbaraman, R. Ahluwalia, J. A. Gilbert, B. Puchala, E. Holby, D. Morgan, S. C. Ball, J. Sharman, B. Theobald, G. A. Hards, M. Gummalla, S. Z. Yang and B. Han, Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Lifetime Limitations: the Role of Electrocatalyst Degradation,  2012 Search PubMed .
T. Grant, C. Anderson and B. Hooper, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2014, 28, 35–44 CrossRef CAS .

          Australian Energy Market Operator, Carbon Dioxide Equivalent Intensity Index,  2020 Search PubMed .

          AIB, European Residual Mixes 2019,  2020 Search PubMed .

          Environment and Climate Change Canada, National Inventory Report 1990–2019: Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks in Canada,  2021 Search PubMed .

          Geoscience Australia and BREE, Australian Energy Resource Assessment, Canberra, 2nd edn,  2014 Search PubMed .
L. O. Pordesimo, B. R. Hames, S. Sokhansanj and W. C. Edens, Biomass Bioenergy, 2005, 28, 366–374 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Saunders, M. Izydorczyk and D. B. Levin, in Economic Effects of Biofuel Production, ed. M. A. Dos Santos Bernardes, InTech, 1st edn,  2011 Search PubMed .
Z. Abdin, A. Zafaranloo, A. Rafiee, W. Merida, W. Lipinski and K. R. Khalilpour, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 120, 109620 CrossRef .
D. García-Gusano, D. Garraín, I. Herrera, H. Cabal and Y. Lechón, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 104, 328–338 CrossRef .
L. J. Müller, A. Kätelhön, S. Bringezu, S. McCoy, S. Suh, R. Edwards, V. Sick, S. Kaiser, R. Cuéllar-Franca, A. El Khamlichi, J. H. Lee, N. Von Der Assen and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2979–2992 RSC .

          G. Ondrey, Dow and Shell team up to develop electric-cracking technology, Chem. Eng.,  2020 Search PubMed.

          D. J. Brennan, in CHISA 2002, ed. I. Wichterle, Czech Society of Chemical Engineering,  2002 Search PubMed .
A. Gavriilidis, P. Angeli, E. Cao, K. K. Yeong and Y. S. S. Wan, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2002, 80, 3–30 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se01462eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Comparison of ethanol production via electrocatalytic captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) and via the reference process of crop fermentation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Process flow chart and system boundaries of the electrocatalytically captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) system.	 


Operating conditions

Temperature [°C]	25
Pressure [atm]	1


Faradaic efficiencies

Ethanol [%]	53
Ethylene [%]	38
Hydrogen [%]	9
KOH electrolyte concentration [M]	1
Current density [mA cm−2]	300


Cathode

Material	34% N/C–Cu

E
CO2RR [V vs. RHE]	−0.68
Energy efficiency [%]	31.2


Anode

Material	Ni foam
Full cell efficiency [%]	16.2

 	Fig. 3  Process flow diagram of the distillation unit simulation.	 

Temperature [°C]	30.0	99.8	105.8	30.0	30.0	50.0
Pressure [bar]	2.6	1.1	1.2	1.2	1.8	2.5
Mass flowrate [kg s−1]	14.7	7.5	7.2	12.2	0.3	2.2


Functional unit output

Ethanol production, by ECCR system [kg]	1


Co-production output (avoided products)

Ethylene, at the plant [kg]	0.416


Material requirements

Captured CO2 [kg]	3.123
Water, completely softened [kg]	2.028
Cooling water [m3]	8.51 × 10−4


Infrastructure requirements

Electrolyser stack [unit]	7.91 × 10−10
Adsorption system [unit]	7.91 × 10−10
Distillation system [unit]	5.00 × 10−10


Energy and processing requirements

Electricity, ethylene separation (adsorption system) [kW h]	0.455
Electricity, compression (pre-adsorption recirculation) [kW h]	0.555
Heat, steam (distillation system) [MJ]	3.416
Electricity, cooling water (distillation system) [kW h]	0.003
Electricity, air cooling (distillation system) [kW h]	0.004
Electricity, compressors + pumps (distillation system) [kW h]	0.207
Electricity (electrolyser) [kW h]	27.066
Electricity (electrolyte pumps) [kW h]	0.879


Waste and emissions

Water to wastewater treatment [m3]	1.70 × 10−4

 	Fig. 4  System boundaries of the reference sorghum bioethanol system.	 

Sorghum DDGS	90	34	
68

Cottonseed meal	92	45	
69

Soybean meal	88	53	
70



Functional unit output

Ethanol production, by the sorghum system [kg]	1


Co-production output (avoided products)

Soybean meal (substitute for DDGS) [kg] or	0.555
Cottonseed meal (substitute for DDGS) [kg]	0.648


Material requirements

Sorghum grain, Western Downs [kg]	1.055
Sorghum grain, Northern zone NSW [kg]	1.055
Sorghum grain, Darling Downs, QLD [kg]	1.055
Lubricating oil [kg]	2.31 × 10−4
Water, Darling Downs [kg]	7.296
Water, completely softened [kg]	0.015
Chlorine, liquid [kg]	6.43 × 10−6
Sodium chloride, powder [kg]	8.03 × 10−5
Sulfuric acid [kg]	0.027


Energy and processing requirements

Heat, natural gas, in the industrial furnace [MJ]	9.482
Electricity, QLD	0.334


Infrastructure requirements

Occupation, industrial area [m2a]	0.087
Ethanol fermentation plant [unit]	8.33 × 10−10


Transport requirements

Truck, 40 t [tkm]	0.633
Pipeline, natural gas [tkm]	0.036


Waste and emissions

Carbon dioxide, biogenic [kg]	0.955
Disposal, solid waste [kg]	6.43 × 10−5
Disposal, used mineral oil [kg]	6.43 × 10−5
Water to wastewater treatment [m3]	1.54 × 10−5


Black coal	84.5%	47.0%	0.0%
OCGT	0.0%	0.2%	0.1%
CCGT	2.0%	3.0%	3.3%
Hydro	1.2%	1.1%	0.2%
Solar	8.4%	15.8%	38.6%
Wind	3.9%	32.9%	57.8%

Total
	100.0%	100.0%	100.0%
Renewable share	13.5%	49.8%	96.5%
Carbon intensity [kg CO2-e per kW h]	0.858	0.500	0.039

 	Fig. 5  Potential environmental impacts in all categories of the electrocatalytic captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) system in the high, mid, and low carbon intensity electricity scenarios and the reference system of sorghum bioethanol using cottonseed meal (Cot) or Soybean meal (Soy) as the substitute for the coproduction of dry distiller's grains with solubles (DDGS).	 

 	Fig. 6  Carbon footprint of ethanol production by the electrocatalytic captured CO2 reduction (ECCR) system (dark blue line) and by the sorghum reference with the cottonseed meal substitute (dark green line) and soybean meal (light green line) with electricity of different sources and carbon intensity.	 

 	Fig. 7  Sensitivity analysis for water consumption, land use, and global warming using different sorghum sources.	 

 	Fig. 8  Relative contribution of the subcomponents of the electrolyser (assembly, cathode, anode, and electrolyte) to the examined environmental impact categories.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1se01462e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
