Pathways to electrochemical solar-hydrogen technologies  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE03639F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE03639F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2768-2783Pathways to electrochemical solar-hydrogen technologies

        
          
            Shane 
            Ardo
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Fernandez Rivas
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Miguel A. 
            Modestino
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Verena 
            Schulze Greiving
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Fatwa F. 
            Abdi
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Esther 
            Alarcon Llado
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Vincent 
            Artero
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Katherine 
            Ayers
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            Corsin 
            Battaglia
          
        
      i, 
      
        
          
            Jan-Philipp 
            Becker
          
        
      j, 
      
        
          
            Dmytro 
            Bederak
          
        
      k, 
      
        
          
            Alan 
            Berger
          
        
      l, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Buda
          
        
      m, 
      
        
          
            Enrico 
            Chinello
          
        
      n, 
      
        
          
            Bernard 
            Dam
          
        
      o, 
      
        
          
            Valerio 
            Di Palma
          
        
      p, 
      
        
          
            Tomas 
            Edvinsson
          
        
      q, 
      
        
          
            Katsushi 
            Fujii
          
        
      r, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Gardeniers
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hans 
            Geerlings
          
        
      o, 
      
        
          
            S. Mohammad 
            H. Hashemi
          
        
      s, 
      
        
          
            Sophia 
            Haussener
          
        
      t, 
      
        
          
            Frances 
            Houle
          
        
      u, 
      
        
          
            Jurriaan 
            Huskens
          
        
      v, 
      
        
          
            Brian D. 
            James
          
        
      w, 
      
        
          
            Kornelia 
            Konrad
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Akihiko 
            Kudo
          
        
      x, 
      
        
          
            Pramod Patil 
            Kunturu
          
        
      v, 
      
        
          
            Detlef 
            Lohse
          
        
      y, 
      
        
          
            Bastian 
            Mei
          
        
      z, 
      
        
          
            Eric L. 
            Miller
          
        
      aa, 
      
        
          
            Gary F. 
            Moore
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiri 
            Muller
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Katherine L. 
            Orchard
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Timothy E. 
            Rosser
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Fadl H. 
            Saadi
          
        
      ae, 
      
        
          
            Jan-Willem 
            Schüttauf
          
        
      af, 
      
        
          
            Brian 
            Seger
          
        
      ag, 
      
        
          
            Stafford W. 
            Sheehan
          
        
      ah, 
      
        
          
            Wilson A. 
            Smith
          
        
      o, 
      
        
          
            Joshua 
            Spurgeon
          
        
      ai, 
      
        
          
            Maureen H. 
            Tang
          
        
      aj, 
      
        
          
            Roel 
            van de Krol
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Peter C. K. 
            Vesborg
          
        
      ag and 

        
          
            Pieter 
            Westerik
          
        
      b
aUniversity of California Irvine, Department of Chemistry, and Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Irvine, California 92697, USA. E-mail: ardo@uci.edu
bUniversity of Twente, MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, Mesoscale Chemical Systems Group, Enschede, The Netherlands. E-mail: d.fernandezrivas@utwente.nl
cNew York University, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Brooklyn, New York 11201, USA. E-mail: modestino@nyu.edu
dUniversity of Twente, Department of Science, Technology and Policy Studies, Enschede, The Netherlands. E-mail: verena.schulzegreiving@gmail.com
eHelmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, Institute for Solar Fuels, Berlin, Germany
fAmolf Institute, Center for Nanophotonics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
gUniversité Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, Laboratoire de Chimie et Biologie des Métaux, Grenoble, France
hProton OnSite, Wallingford, Connecticut 06492, USA
iEmpa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Dübendorf, Switzerland
jForschungszentrum Jülich, IEK-5 Photovoltaik, Jülich, Germany
kUniversity of Groningen, Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, Nijenborgh 4, 9747AG Groningen, The Netherlands
lAir Products and Chemicals, Inc., Allentown, Pennsylvania 18195-1501, USA
mUniversity of Leiden, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden, The Netherlands
nÉcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Laboratory of Applied Photonics Devices (LAPD), Lausanne, Switzerland
oDelft University of Technology, Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage (MECS), Department of Chemical Engineering, Van der Maasweg 9, 2629 HZ Delft, The Netherlands
pEindhoven University of Technology, Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
qUppsala University, Department of Engineering Sciences – Solid State Physics, Uppsala, Sweden
rUniversity of Kitakyushu, Institute of Environmental Science and Technology, Wakamatsu-ku, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan
sÉcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Optics Laboratory (LO), Lausanne, Switzerland
tÉcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Laboratory of Renewable Energy Science and Engineering (LRESE), Lausanne, Switzerland
uJoint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis and Chemical Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
vUniversity of Twente, MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, Molecular Nanofabrication Group, Enschede, The Netherlands
wStrategic Analysis Inc., Arlington, Virginia 22203, USA
xTokyo University of Science, Faculty of Science, Department of Applied Chemistry, Tokyo 162-8601, Japan
yUniversity of Twente, MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, Physics of Fluids Group, Enschede, The Netherlands
zUniversity of Twente, MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, Photocatalytic Synthesis Group, Enschede, The Netherlands
aaU.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE), Fuel Cell Technologies Office, EE-3F, 1000 Independence Ave., SW, Washington, DC 20585, USA
abArizona State University, School of Molecular Sciences, Biodesign Center for Applied Structural Discovery (CASD), Tempe, Arizona 85287-1604, USA
acInstitutt for Energiteknikk, Kjeller, Norway
adUniversity of Cambridge, Department of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK
aeCalifornia Institute of Technology, Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Pasadena, California 91125, USA
afSwiss Center for Electronics and Microtechnology (CSEM), PV Center, Neuchâtel, Switzerland
agTechnical University of Denmark (DTU), Department of Physics, Lyngby, Denmark
ahCatalytic Innovations, Fall River, Massachusetts 02723, USA
aiUniversity of Louisville, Conn Center for Renewable Energy Research, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA
ajDrexel University, Chemical and Biological Engineering, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
Received 
      25th December 2017
    , Accepted 18th June 2018First published on 19th June 2018AbstractSolar-powered electrochemical production of hydrogen through water electrolysis is an active and important research endeavor. However, technologies and roadmaps for implementation of this process do not exist. In this perspective paper, we describe potential pathways for solar-hydrogen technologies into the marketplace in the form of photoelectrochemical or photovoltaic-driven electrolysis devices and systems. We detail technical approaches for device and system architectures, economic drivers, societal perceptions, political impacts, technological challenges, and research opportunities. Implementation scenarios are broken down into short-term and long-term markets, and a specific technology roadmap is defined. In the short term, the only plausible economical option will be photovoltaic-driven electrolysis systems for niche applications. In the long term, electrochemical solar-hydrogen technologies could be deployed more broadly in energy markets but will require advances in the technology, significant cost reductions, and/or policy changes. Ultimately, a transition to a society that significantly relies on solar-hydrogen technologies will benefit from continued creativity and influence from the scientific community.

Broader context
Penetration of solar-powered technologies in the energy market is accelerating and they promise to become clean and cost-competitive alternatives to traditional fossil-based sources of energy. However, despite their rapid deployment, adoption of solar-powered technologies is hindered by the intermittent nature of sunlight. Electrochemical solar-hydrogen technologies are promising solutions to this challenge, because they are capable of capturing and storing solar energy in the form of an environmentally friendly fuel. Throughout the past five decades, the scientific community has developed the foundation for the realization of practical solar-hydrogen generators, yet clear strategies for their deployment have not been reported. This article condenses the perspectives of ∼50 basic scientists, engineers, and social scientists, from academia, government, and industry, and reports on high-potential pathways for commercialization opportunities of solar-hydrogen technologies. By doing so, the article identifies key barriers for the deployment of these technologies both in the short term and long term, and also provides a balanced analysis of advantages and drawbacks of various designs. The insights provided in this perspective paper intend to contribute to defining new directions for research in the solar fuels field, and to enable future solar-hydrogen ventures that capitalize on technical advances from the scientific community.

1. Introduction
Solar-powered technologies for the electrochemical production of hydrogen through water electrolysis are of significant immediate interest. These so-called “solar hydrogen” technologies are able to capture solar energy and efficiently store it as hydrogen for widespread use when demand is high, uniquely for stationary applications, as a mobile transportation fuel, and as a reducing agent for various chemical transformations. This application space complements others covered by alternative technologies that capture solar energy and generate electricity (e.g. photovoltaics) or heat (e.g. solar-thermal systems). Over the past decade, several large research programs around the globe have been implemented with the aim of accelerating the development of the science and technology of solar-hydrogen devices: The Swedish Consortium for Artificial Photosynthesis, the NSF Center for Chemical Innovation in Solar Fuels, the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, The Korean Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, the Institute for Solar Fuels at the Helmholtz Center in Berlin, the Japan Technological Research Association of Artificial Photosynthetic Chemical Process, The VILLUM Center for the Science of Sustainable Fuels and Chemicals in Denmark, the Center for Multiscale Catalytic Energy Conversion and the Towards BioSolar Cells program in The Netherlands, the PEC House and Solar Hydrogen Integrated Nanoelectrolysis Project (SHINE) in Switzerland, and the UK Solar Fuels Network, among others. These large-scale programs, in conjunction with the efforts of small teams of researchers worldwide, have contributed to a clearer understanding of the requirements and challenges of solar-hydrogen technologies,1–10 placing us in an appropriate position to perform an informed assessment on the feasibility of their future deployment. On June 13–17, 2016, fifty-two participants from 10 countries and 32 different organizations with expertise in multiple areas of solar hydrogen gathered at the Lorentz Center in Leiden, The Netherlands (http://www.lorentzcenter.nl/). Participants represented leading research institutions, the industrial sector, social scientists evaluating the societal impact and perception of solar-hydrogen technologies, and delegates from several governments. Attendees with this breadth in expertise and experience in solar hydrogen, and broad topic discussions, made this workshop unique. Over the five days of the workshop multiple topics were discussed and debated, including the state-of-the-art and limitations of materials, device architectures, early-stage market opportunities, and a roadmap for the implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies into large-scale energy markets. Several coupled considerations were examined for successful implementation of solar-hydrogen devices: (1) technical constraints for the robust and stable long-term operation of the system, (2) economic viability and environmental sustainability, and (3) societal impacts and political drivers. The most important outcome from the workshop was a specific technology roadmap for solar hydrogen devices, which had not existed previously.
The minimum requirement for a practical solar-hydrogen system is that it uses sunlight to convert water to a hydrogen stream that contains oxygen at a concentration below the flammability limit.11,12 Here we only consider devices and systems that generate H2via proton/electron-transfer redox reactions driven by gradients in electrochemical potential formed by non-thermal photovoltaic action resulting from sunlight absorption. While this includes processes such as solar photovoltaic action coupled to electrolyzers, photoelectrochemistry, photocatalysis, and molecular approaches, we recognize that other processes are possible as well (e.g., using light to drive thermochemical hydrogen generation). For clarity and simplicity, we classify device architectures into two broad categories as described in Fig. 1 and Table 1: photovoltaic-driven electrolysis (PV-electrolysis) and photo-electrochemistry (PEC).13–15
 Fig. 1  Scheme representing PV-electrolysis and PEC device concepts, including current relative level of use, projected cost, required amount of raw materials, and current relative level of technology readiness. For more details, see Table 1. 
Table 1 PV-electrolysis versus PEC systems. Overview of general concepts, and comparison of unique characteristics, technological considerations, economic challenges and socio-political factors for each device type






PV-electrolysis systems
PEC systems





a Based on laboratory-scale device demonstrations capable of producing nearly pure H2.





General concept
Over large areas, sunlight is used to convert water to a stream of hydrogen that contains an oxygen concentration below the flammability limit


Terminology
Components: light absorbers, electrocatalysts, ion-exchange membranes, electrolytes, etc.


Devices: PV, PEC, electrolyzer, light absorber in electrolyte with co-catalysts, etc.


Unique aspects
Light absorption component (PV) physically separated macroscopically from water splitting component (electrolyzer)
Light absorption and water splitting components are integrated in one region


Technological options
Distributed
Centralized
Centralized


Hydrogen production is independent of energy generation (different sources, electricity grid)
Hydrogen production occurs at the site of energy generation; requires hydrogen transport
Design concept exclusively allows centralized operation


Technology readiness
Advanced stage
Early stage, and exploratory for nano-/micro-structured, and particulate/molecular components


Maximum demonstrated solar-to-hydrogen efficiencya
30% for >48 h16
10% for >40 h17


Economic challenges
Competition with conventional sources of non-renewable energy (fossil fuel, nuclear), battery-backed renewable energy, and hydrogen generated by other means (methane reforming) in terms of cost, availability, and accessibility


Socio-political factors
Investments are not always stable (e.g. elections, political agendas, influential special interest groups); events affect public and political perception, perceived relevance and public acceptance (e.g., oil spill, nuclear disaster, hydrogen explosion, decreasing energy prices, environmental benefits, societal push for renewable or more sustainable energy solutions)




The first category contains devices consisting of at least two separate components, with the light absorption component (PV) physically separated from the water-splitting/electrolysis component (electrolyzer). These types of devices are the most mature and benefit from modularity, allowing individual components to be optimized for the integrated operation. However, this modularity also often necessitates use of two encapsulation and support structures. For the other category of PEC devices, the light absorption and water splitting components are co-located or assembled into a single component and the light absorber is directly influenced by the properties of the electrolyte, potentially simplifying the device architecture. In this context, PEC devices include those based on photoelectrodes where two half reactions can be spatially separated by a membrane and particles suspended in an electrolyte where the half reactions cannot be separated.13,18 PEC devices are less mature, and therefore less technology readied than PV-electrolysis devices, yet we do not define a quantitative technology readiness level for either technology because of differing global metrics. In its place, we refer to “Low technology readiness” for technologies that are far from commercialization, and “High technology readiness” for technologies that are already commercialized or beyond the large prototype stage, and evaluated in their intended environment. A technology may be assigned a high level of technology readiness at the device or system level, while advanced components for improved performance may still be at a low technology readiness level.
In this perspective paper, we discuss potential pathways for solar-hydrogen technologies, as depicted in Fig. 2. The first section describes general considerations for solar-hydrogen technologies, including technical approaches for device and system architectures, economic challenges, and societal and political impacts. The second section describes pathways for implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies including, specifically, markets for short-term implementation (≤10 years) of combined PV-electrolysis devices and systems, together with technological challenges and research opportunities. For long-term implementation, potential pathways for both combined PV-electrolysis devices and systems, as well as PEC devices, are considered together with other important societal, economic, and political drivers, as well as technological requirements.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of a pathway and timeline for solar H2 technologies and interrelated aspects discussed in this article. 
2. General considerations
2.1. Technical options
When evaluating the device architecture categories (PV-electrolysis or PEC), it is instructive to classify the design strategy. One classification is whether a technology is considered distributed or centralized. Within this article, Distributed approaches are defined as those that rely on the collection of sunlight by discrete solar-module installations followed by transport of energy to electrolyzer units at a different and possibly distant location. Centralized approaches are defined as solar installations that directly drive the water-splitting processes. Based on this technology classification, for a given hydrogen production goal, both Centralized and Distributed approaches could be implemented as either large-scale production facilities placed in one single location or as a collection of small-scale facilities dispersed geographically. PV-electrolysis designs can be classified as either distributed or centralized while the inherent integrated nature of PEC designs necessitates that they are only centralized. Agnostic to the classification of the PV-electrolysis or PEC designs is the requirement that they must operate with fluctuating energy inputs, because of the intermittency of solar irradiation. Moreover, because larger sizes result in greater economic benefits, the PV component, electrolyzer component, and PEC designs can be implemented on very large scales.
The distributed PV-electrolysis design strategy can take advantage of electricity grids for the required electronic transport, and by doing so the electrolyzer can also utilize energy from various sources (e.g. wind, fossil fuels), therefore avoiding fluctuations in electrolyzer operation due to the intermittency of solar irradiation.19 By having the option to transport charge instead of hydrogen over large distances, hydrogen transportation from centralized sunny locations to consumer centers is not necessary. Distributed approaches require implementation of power electronics to enable electricity transmission from PV installations to the electricity grid (e.g. DC–DC converters, AC–DC inverters) and subsequently to the electrolyzers.20 Power electronics add to the cost of the system and decrease system efficiency, while transmitting electricity through the grid results in additional costs that are defined by the electricity markets. A specific option for distributed approaches is the implementation of alternative electricity grids that are exclusively used for PV-electrolysis, possibly operated under direct current, like those envisioned in Europe and China and only requiring DC–DC converters.21,22 If new infrastructure is needed for these DC grids, this approach requires a large upfront capital investment but saves operational expenses related to electricity grid transmission costs and management.
In contrast to the distributed PV-electrolysis design strategy, an advantage of centralized PV-electrolysis implementation is the ability to optimize the PV array operation for the electrolysis needs. This also enables operation with minimal DC–DC or AC–DC power conversion, which can result in cost reductions and efficiency improvements. The main disadvantage of centralized solar-hydrogen facilities is the need to cover large land mass areas with PVs, electrolyzers, or PEC devices and then transport the generated fuel to its point of use.
In the case of PEC approaches, by definition the light absorption and water splitting components operate at the same centralized location, and thus PEC has similar benefits and deficiencies as centralized PV-electrolysis. However, PV-electrolysis devices have a higher technology readiness level than PEC devices.23,24 PV panels and electrolyzers are already established in the market and are continually optimized as independent installations. PEC devices are still in the early stage of development and could enter the market in the medium-to-long term (>10 years) (Fig. 2). In the medium-term, the technologies most likely to succeed are those that leverage semiconductor manufacturing techniques to fabricate planar photoelectrodes. In the long term, advanced structural designs may be cost-effective where the PEC units are micro-/nano-structured, inexpensive flexible substrates are used, or particles or molecules are suspended or dissolved in liquid electrolytes. Complex PEC structures may ultimately enhance performance of solar-hydrogen devices, including light absorption, catalysis, and mass transport.25,26 Suspensions could benefit from economic advantages associated with low-cost plastic reactors that do not require electrical wiring or framing, which are necessary to physically support heavy electrically conductive substrates.27
2.2. Economic challenges
In comparison to the technical options, the economic feasibility requirements are broader and depend on the ultimate application of the technology. Applications in the energy sector provide opportunities for the largest and most impactful implementations of solar-hydrogen technologies. The scale of these markets is massive (>28000 Terawatt hours (TW h) per year in the US alone). In the energy sector, solar-hydrogen technologies can be used for direct energy generation, as a fuel for transportation, or for temporary storage and ultimate electricity production. To date, hydrogen's direct contribution to energy markets is almost negligible and most hydrogen is produced from non-renewable energy sources. Small-scale uses of hydrogen include demonstrations of grid-level energy storage, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles, and crude oil refining.28,29 The multiple orders-of-magnitude difference between the current scale of the energy markets and the hydrogen market represents a clear opportunity for solar-hydrogen technologies. For solar-hydrogen devices to be deployable at the energy-market scale, however, the conditions of cost competitiveness and availability must be satisfied. Specifically, solar-hydrogen technologies must be scalable so that collectively they have the potential to supply a significant fraction of the future global hydrogen needs (likely hundreds of GW) at a competitive price point on a “per kW h” basis. In terms of the active components of the technology, the scalability requirement is related to the current and projected ease of accessibility and processability of the materials.30,31 While noble-metal catalysts that are currently implemented in state-of-the-art electrolyzers allow production of systems at a scale approaching GW year−1, research on the development of improved utilization of precious metals and use of non-precious-metal electrocatalysts and low-cost light absorbers and ancillaries, such as transparent-conductive oxides and protective coatings, could enable production at larger scales.32 This is a classic trade-off between cost and efficiency; the challenge is to optimize these aspects to improve the desired metric ($ per kW h or $ per kg H2). This cost metric needs to account for not only the cost of the device and its balance-of-system costs, but also the costs associated with the operation and maintenance (O&M) of the technology. O&M costs may include, for example, energy costs associated with feeding water to reaction sites, cleaning of the system, gas collection, compression, and transportation to distribution centers, each which are likely to cost more in integrated systems that operate at low current densities and therefore occupy large areas.
The bottom line for cost-competitiveness in the hydrogen market, where hydrogen is used not only for energy purposes but also for chemical processing such as petroleum refining and ammonia and methanol production, is that solar hydrogen will need to compete ultimately with hydrogen from fossil fuels (i.e. usually produced from methane reforming and coal gasification routes, which tend to be situated in close proximity to points of utilization, such as ammonia production plants, thus reducing transportation costs). In the broader energy markets, the cost of energy produced via solar-hydrogen routes will need to compete with energy produced from other sources, (e.g. fossil, nuclear, hydroelectric, wind). These non-solar energy sources define the baseline cost that determines the viability of solar-hydrogen technologies. At early stages of technological development, smaller-scale applications may benefit from use of solar hydrogen when the characteristics of the technology pose an advantage over other technologies. Below, a series of potentially viable market opportunities where solar hydrogen could be impactful in the short term (i.e. within the next 10 years) are presented, and a critical assessment of the requirements for inclusion in large-scale energy markets in the long-term is made. For completeness, “cost” includes not only the monetary value of energy, but also any other value that society assigns to the externalities associated with different energy production mechanisms (e.g. CO2 emissions, nuclear disasters, ecological damage).33 In anticipation of the future global energy markets, the costs of externalities are incompletely internalized by either energy producers or energy consumers, and instead the monetary value of their impact is shared over many entities that may not have been involved in the energy-generation process or may not have derived any benefit from the energy use. Although new successful applications of solar-hydrogen technologies will need to stand alone without heavily relying on regulation, advanced energy policies could incorporate the costs of externalities via various market mechanisms (e.g. carbon taxes, emission limits, incentives).34 In practice, this could render polluting or risky technologies costlier on a monetary basis than safe renewable energy technologies, such as solar hydrogen.
2.3. Societal and political impacts
In addition to technical and economic challenges, other unknown or emerging societal and political events will influence the deployment of solar-hydrogen technologies. Building an adequate physical infrastructure (e.g., pipelines, fuel stations, two-way electricity grids) could favor the deployment of particular new technologies, including solar hydrogen. On the other hand, events such as oil spills, nuclear disasters, or hydrogen explosions can change public perception and the political agenda of specific governments, and therefore the funding scheme. The Fukushima nuclear accident in 2011, for example, received intense media coverage and led to demonstrations against nuclear power in Germany.35 Growing public concern and resistance resulted in requests for more transparency and into a drastic change of the German national policy toward more renewable energy.36,37 The awareness and perception of risks and advantages of a new technology can thus influence the acceptance of the public for new technological or infrastructural changes that are crucial for its deployment. As social studies show, safety and price are the main concerns for public acceptance of hydrogen technologies.38 However, the general attitude of people towards technologies and the types of information they are given also greatly influences their opinion about hydrogen technologies.39,40
In addition to public acceptance, political decisions can have an impact on technological development. In 1990 for example, the California Air Resources Board obliged major car manufacturers to bring zero emission vehicles to the market by 2003, which led to an increase in funding for research and development activities and pushed the development of new technologies in this field.41 The political agenda in several countries support emerging technologies via funding schemes, e.g. in large programs on renewable energy. For example, Norway will ban the sale of fossil fuel cars by 2025.42 Political and public attention around a particular topic thus help to mobilize research funding and relevant actors, while unfulfilled research promises can lead to a shift to other technological options. Hydrogen-based technologies for example have already seen major ups and downs in political and public attention in the past.43,44 Specific to solar-hydrogen technologies is that they must also compete with other research activities not only in the field of renewable energy but also with technologies that promise to reduce energy consumption or net CO2 emissions. The scientific community will likely have more influence on the opinion of policy-makers if applied research goals are focused on realistic research targets that can be delivered in a timely fashion and that satisfy society's evolving expectations. Of course, realistic research targets are mostly based on pre-existing long-term fundamental research products.45 Understanding how to continue to fund fundamental research, while yielding tangible deliverables that have social impact, constitutes a challenge for all stakeholders in the hydrogen technology sector.
3. Identifying pathways for implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies
A pathway for inclusion of solar-hydrogen technologies in energy markets likely requires successful incorporation in early-stage markets. In this section, we describe and critically assess short-term opportunities (≤10 years) for solar-hydrogen technologies and identify criteria for penetration of solar-hydrogen systems into large-scale energy markets in the long term, where it becomes critical for the technology to be socio-economically, politically, and technically beneficial.
3.1. Short-term implementation (10 year timeframe)
This subsection describes short-term markets and technological opportunities that could lead to favorable economic conditions for entry-scale implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies, specifically focusing on the more mature PV-electrolysis devices.

3.1.1. Market opportunities. 
Although solar-hydrogen technologies use sunlight and water to generate hydrogen directly, under current market conditions they must compete with hydrogen generated from methane reforming or from grid-powered electrolysis. As long as fossil fuels remain as the predominant source of grid-level electricity, hydrogen produced by either of these non-solar routes has a substantial CO2 footprint, and therefore, has clear environmental costs. Moreover, while hydrogen can be obtained inexpensively from methane reforming at large-scale plants, its use in the transportation sector could be hampered by the additional costs and added emissions from delivery to consumer locations. In addition, reformer-produced H2 must have carbon species (e.g., CO, CO2, CH4), as well as trace sulfur in natural gas, removed from the reaction products at an additional cost. While generating H2 from a pure water feedstock does not require removal of carbonaceous reaction products, residual water must be removed from H2 generated by either reforming or electrolysis. Given these process-specific requirements, application areas where solar-hydrogen technologies could potentially succeed in the near-term should aim to exploit (a) environmental aspects of the production processes, (b) generation of hydrogen close to the point of utilization, and (c) purity of the produced hydrogen. This would aid in the competitiveness of the technology in cost-inelastic markets that require high-purity hydrogen, decentralized production near the point of application, and low environmental impacts that solar-based technologies can provide. Broadly speaking, plausible early-stage application fields can be divided in to seven distinct areas that are depicted in Fig. 3: (i) grid-level energy storage, (ii) local or isolated permanent energy systems, (iii) transportation, (iv) as a precursor for the production of high-margin products, (v) the military industry, (vi) the space industry, and (vii) the agricultural sector.
 Fig. 3  Short-term (10 year timeframe) application fields that are likely to provide the most promising utilization routes. The chronological ordering of these application fields is based on projected timelines for practical implementation. 
i. Grid-level energy storage. 
While more challenging to break into, large markets are also of interest for solar-hydrogen technologies because even small impacts would result in large installations. Grid-level energy storage applications are advantageous because distributed solar-hydrogen technologies benefit from backing by the electricity grid. Therefore, challenges due to intermittency can be mitigated, at the expense of requiring some level of AC–DC and DC–AC conversion. For this proposed application field, both photovoltaic installations and electrolyzers that are coupled to a fuel cell or are regenerative (i.e. they serve the dual role of electrolyzer and fuel cell) would be connected to the electricity grid. The most cost-effective use strategy would be to generate hydrogen during periods of high solar insolation, when electricity prices are low due to a large supply of electricity generated from sunlight, and in certain locations with very high penetration of photovoltaics or other renewables, so low that the electricity is nearly free. The hydrogen would then be temporarily stored until solar insolation is poor and other sources of renewable electricity are scarce. The low supply of clean electricity would mean that electricity prices would be dictated by baseload power and would be high. Solar hydrogen could capitalize on these electricity prices by generating electricity through reacting hydrogen and oxygen from the air electrochemically in a fuel cell or by combustion in a turbine. Given the current relative high prices of electrolysis units and large energy losses incurred during both generation of hydrogen from water and recombination of hydrogen and oxygen, grid-level energy storage would be a difficult market to access and build a profitable business case.46,47 Under current market conditions, batteries are economically more viable for short-term energy storage due to their high round-trip efficiencies. Despite their own challenges, batteries would serve in the same role as hydrogen in grid-level energy storage, where, in general, most storage requirements are on the scale of days.48–50 Additionally, gas peaker plants that operate on methane combustion are able to rapidly adapt to different electricity production levels, and can be used to smooth intermittent energy produced by solar or wind power installations both for short-term and long-term energy storage needs.51 In summary, the current alternatives (i.e. battery energy storage and natural gas fired power generation) tend to be more cost effective than solar-hydrogen technologies and therefore, it is unlikely that grid-level energy-storage solutions based on solar-hydrogen technologies will be economically viable in the short term, although even small impacts represent large opportunities.
ii. Local or isolated permanent energy systems. 
Communities without grid access, including those on small islands, could benefit from localized, independent energy systems where the implementation of renewable energy sources may be advantageous. As such, solar-hydrogen technologies could play a key role in these energy solutions, especially when these communities or military bases receive high solar insolation. These implementations would also likely benefit from a local electricity microgrid that contains photovoltaics and energy-storage systems. As described above, battery economics favor short-term energy storage while electrolyzers coupled to use as a fuel cell compare favorably to batteries for larger periods of storage.52 Unlike grid-level energy storage, which is backed by enormous baseload power that can adjust to seasonal variability, isolated permanent electrolysis units would serve the purpose of buffering long-term fluctuations in photovoltaic output (i.e. weeks to seasons). This time frame and scale are not practical for battery energy storage due to slow self-discharge, which becomes significant over long timescales, and unit size, because battery mass scales proportionally with energy needs.53 The distribution of batteries and hydrogen storage units would depend on seasonal fluctuations in locale-specific resources. For example, desert locations would require fewer electrolysis units due to small seasonal fluctuations in solar insolation, while temperate regions would require larger and/or more electrolysis units due to more seasonal variability in the solar resource.
iii. Transportation. 
In the short term, solar-hydrogen technologies can directly impact the transportation sector. Hydrogen can be mixed into natural gas pipelines to provide some of the available energy during combustion, even in internal combustion engines.54 In addition, small fleets of hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles (HFCVs) recently entered the market, and they have been allocated in local communities with hydrogen fueling capabilities. Early adopters of HFCVs are predominantly environmentally conscious and technologically knowledgeable individuals with the appropriate economical means. Currently, the vast majority of hydrogen available for fueling is produced via CO2-emitting methane reforming. This method is implemented because the cost of hydrogen production from a centralized methane reforming plant, while variable, is lower than via electrolysis methods. Also, large capital investments are required for compression, storage, and dispensing in hydrogen fueling stations which deters the additional investment required to produce renewable hydrogen locally. Nonetheless, given the low supply of hydrogen fuel, the price charged at hydrogen fueling stations must be significantly higher than the cost to produce and distribute hydrogen. A non-negligible subset of the population would be willing to pay a premium for hydrogen from clean sources, just as a subset of the population is willing to pay for a HFCV.
Public transportation represents a logical opportunity for implementation of HFCVs and use of solar-hydrogen technologies to generate hydrogen fuel. Already some example demonstration projects have been implemented in the US, Germany, Switzerland, Japan, among others.55–59 These projects are easier to implement than infrastructure changes required for personal HFCVs, because vehicles for public transportation have predetermined and limited routes, and require access to fueling stations in close proximity to their service route. Depots for public transportation vehicles can even be co-located with solar-hydrogen technologies so that the solar-hydrogen light absorbers can shade the vehicles from sunlight, thus keeping the vehicles cooler when not in use and ultimately saving on air conditioning needs. Furthermore, public transportation is often government regulated, and therefore a direct and rapid pathway to implementation may exist due to pressures from clean-energy policy. For similar reasons, long-distance shipping and transportation may benefit from HFCVs and solar-hydrogen technologies.
Nations in the process of developing their energy infrastructure represent opportunities for implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies, notably for HFCV car rentals in cities of the future. In these planned cities, it may make sense to locate fueling stations along the outer edge of each city, where there is more space available for large area photovoltaic installations and electrolyzers. In this scenario, people could use predominantly public transportation or battery-electric vehicles within the confines of the city, and HFCV rental cars for longer-distance travel to places outside the city, including for transportation to other cities. Car rental agencies would be located on the outer edge of the city and near the fueling stations. The ability to design a city with co-location of solar-hydrogen technologies (e.g. photovoltaic farms and electrolyzer plants), hydrogen fueling stations, and HFCV car rental agencies at the nexus of the city and open land, provides a unique opportunity for the design of synergistic infrastructure that optimizes the benefits of each technology. This is common practice in chemical plant design, where co-location of multiple plants that utilize equipment and use products from one plant in another process is often economical. Moreover, as in the case of personal HFCVs, consumers could influence development of synergistic infrastructures for solar-hydrogen technologies, if tourism is a big market.
iv. High-margin products. 
Hydrogen is a chemical feedstock widely used in the electronics, food, pharmaceutical, cosmetics, lubricants, and chemical industries. For example, hydrogen is used to change the rheological and sensory properties of foods through hydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids and many lipids. For many of these applications high purity hydrogen is required, with no trace of the typical contaminants found in hydrogen produced by methane reforming, which is a niche that could be filled by solar hydrogen generated via electrolysis. Additionally, the cost of hydrogen in the final product is often negligible, in part due to the small volumes that are required, and small differences in the price of hydrogen do not affect the cost structure of these industries. Because purity is the dominant factor, these high-margin products are produced most economically via electrolysis. Moreover, implementing solar-hydrogen technologies in these industries will allow them to market their products to environmentally conscious consumers, especially for food and cosmetics. All of these characteristics of high-margin products make the short-term implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies potentially viable. Other high-margin chemicals include those produced on large scales in chemical plants, many of which can be made electrochemically, and several of which constitute rather large markets. If instead of electrolyzing water, solar-hydrogen generation could be coupled to another oxidation reaction, such as chloride oxidation to chlorine gas or perchlorate salts, that would increase the economic incentive to produce solar hydrogen.61,120
v. Military industry. 
Military applications provide another specialized market entry point for solar-hydrogen technologies. Small-scale, easily deployable, portable, and robust microgrid energy systems are of interest to deployed troops in isolated locations. Larger installations could supply power for grid-independent bases, which are therefore less vulnerable to cybersecurity hacks or attacks on the electrical grid. Again, for remote and isolated applications, reliability, mass, and volume are often more important than the cost of the technology. In addition, remote generation of hydrogen is beneficial to power fuel cells for aeromedical evacuations, which enable longer flight times compared to those powered by batteries. Similar to use for respiration during space exploration, the generation of medical grade oxygen from water splitting is also of importance for military hospital installations and any people who are involved in remote projects and expeditions.
vi. Space industry. 
Specialized applications in the space industry might also be a viable entry point for solar-hydrogen technologies. The cost of devices to generate hydrogen and oxygen are of minor importance, while the most important factors are reliability and the mass and volume of the systems, including feedstocks. For space applications, this is because enormous amounts of fuel are required to transport payloads and therefore the mass of the fuel, and oxidant for return missions, dominate the cost of space missions. Onboard generation of fuel by reaction of H2 with CO2 and, for prolonged and distant space missions (e.g. between Earth and Mars), generation of an oxidant (O2) to release the energy stored in the fuel in space and create thrust would result in a much lighter payload and therefore, a lower mission cost. For this reason, lightweight and flexible designs for on-demand energy production and storage are extremely beneficial strategies. Moreover, recycling water and electrolyzing it for direct onboard oxygen generation for respiration is a common approach used in space applications, and driving the process with sunlight affords a reliable, low-mass option for energy generation and storage. Lightweight solar panels consisting of thin films of III–V materials deposited on Kapton supports are already used in space applications, and lightweight designs for solar-hydrogen technologies have also recently been proposed.16,60 For these applications, it is even more critical that devices operate at the highest possible efficiency, and that is why the highest-performing photovoltaics are preferred over low-cost alternatives. In addition, the solar spectrum differs between space and earth, and terrestrial size constraints for deployed devices are often relaxed for implementations in space where vast regions are unoccupied, as long as the devices can be effectively bundled for delivery.
vii. Agriculture sector. 
More than half of the 50 million tons of hydrogen produced annually is used for the production of ammonia via the Haber–Bosch process, and more than half of the ammonia is used for the production of nitrogen-based fertilizers. Without these fertilizers, we would not be able to grow enough food to sustain a population of 7 billion people. While the massive scales of the Haber–Bosch process and fertilizer production make early-stage implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies unlikely, the sheer size of this market means that even small contributions from solar-hydrogen technologies will constitute substantial implementations that will further aid near-term deployment.
While the seven sectors mentioned above represent possible entry points for implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies, advances in the component technologies themselves could impact other industries involved in the electrochemical production of alternative commodity chemicals to hydrogen (e.g. chloralkali, zinc production, aluminum production)61,120 or electrochemical wastewater treatment.62 These industries enjoy higher margins than the energy industry and already use electrochemical methods for large-scale production,63 which could facilitate early-stage implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies.


3.1.2. Technological implementation. 
The technology readiness of solar-hydrogen technologies is low; the readiness of the specific subset of PEC solar-hydrogen technologies is even lower. Generally, for applications where cost is a significant market driver, the cost of the PV-electrolysis device would be the most important factor. Because >90% of the PV market consists of solar cells made from monocrystalline or multi-crystalline silicon,64 they are likely to be the most appropriate light absorbers to implement, although other commercially available light absorbers could compete with silicon based on the application. Cadmium telluride and copper indium gallium selenide photovoltaics represent viable options that are likely to result in solar-hydrogen costs in a similar range to those achievable using silicon photovoltaics.65 In most cases, PV modules based on III–V semiconductors are currently not economically viable for terrestrial applications, but are predominant in space applications where their efficiency and thin lightweight designs offset their capital cost. There are also active research programs aimed at lowering the cost of III–V solar cells and PEC devices while maintaining their conversion efficiency, thus enabling their use in conventional flat-plate and low-concentration applications.66–68
In terms of electrolysis technologies likely to be implemented in the short term there are two prominent commercial options: alkaline electrolyzers and proton-exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyzers. Despite the fact that solid oxide electrolyzers are not discussed in this article, the conclusions and discussion also generally apply to this class of water-splitting devices.
Liquid electrolyte alkaline electrolyzers have been deployed commercially for more than 100 years.69,70 Because of this, they have already been developed and implemented on larger scales than PEM electrolyzers, but they require additional attention and safety considerations due to the use of a strongly corrosive liquid alkaline electrolyte and the need for tightly balanced pressures of H2 and O2. Alkaline electrolyzers also tend to be less efficient than the acidic PEM electrolyzers at a given current density. This is due to the larger overpotential required for the alkaline-stable Ni-based electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution and the larger ohmic losses caused by the lower conductivity of the electrolyte and the larger inter-electrode gap. Alkaline electrolyzers are also less amenable to changes in their operation conditions, because they usually implement porous separators between the electrodes with higher gas permeability and hence high crossover rates. Contrarily, PEM electrolyzers implement highly selective gas-separating ion-exchange membranes.
PEM electrolyzers are the state-of-the-art for most small-scale hydrogen generation applications. They implement ion-conducting polymer membranes as solid acid electrolytes that are selective for cations, allowing proton transport from the site of water oxidation to the site of hydrogen generation. Use of a solid electrolyte and liquid deionized water as a feedstock is much less of a safety concern than the corrosive liquid electrolytes needed in alkaline electrolyzers. Yet, because PEM electrocatalysts are in direct contact with the solid electrolyte membrane, which is acidic and corrosive, the only efficient catalyst materials that remain bound and stable are those based on noble metals (e.g. Pt and IrOx are the state-of-the-art). While the terrestrial scarcity of noble metals could preclude the implementation of PEM electrolyzers on large TW scales, their implementation at early stages on GW scales is not expected to be limited by the availability of specific raw materials. In comparison to alkaline electrolyzers, PEM electrolyzers are in many ways more amenable to PV-electrolysis devices. The use of state-of-the-art electrocatalysts in PEM electrolyzers allows for more efficient operation. Moreover, PEM electrolyzers operate more effectively under conditions of fluctuating power input, particularly when intermittent solar insolation drives electrolysis consistently outputting a pressurized hydrogen product up to 30 bar.71 While PEM electrolyzers do have significant technical advantages over alkaline electrolyzers, they still tend to be more costly (currently costing ∼1.2 USD per W)72 partly because of lower production volumes and limited system sizes, with the largest planned systems being on the order of several MW.73,74 As the production volume of PEM electrolyzers increases, it is likely that their costs will continue to decrease due to economies of scale and technological advances.


3.1.3. Science and technology opportunities. 
There are significant challenges for the implementation of PV-electrolysis devices, mainly arising from complications caused by the PV-driven intermittent use of electrolyzers. These challenges can at least in part be mitigated using today's electrolyzer technologies if electronic buffering mechanisms are in place to maintain operation above a threshold and therefore avoid large amounts of gas crossover and formation of explosive gas mixtures.12 Buffering approaches include incorporation of an array of batteries or capacitors, or utilization of grid electricity, where available. An alternative to buffering is removal of the hydrogen and oxygen reaction products from the reaction chambers during periods of slow operation, for example, by flushing the system with water, or to implement other engineering approaches to avoid the formation of explosive gas mixtures.75 Additionally, electrical circuits of photovoltaic arrays and AC-driven peripheral components (e.g. pumps, fans and control systems) could be re-designed to directly drive water electrolyzers without the need for power electronics (i.e. maximum power trackers or DC–DC converters).16,76 If electricity buffers, product removal, and power electronics could be avoided, a scenario that seems reasonable within the next decade, solar-hydrogen technologies will be simplified, therefore ensuring smooth operation and ultimately driving down their cost.

3.2. Long-term deployment in energy markets
The opportunities identified in the short term could help solar-hydrogen technologies enter energy markets and build the foundation for more widespread implementation in the long term. This subsection first describes societal and policy changes, as well as technological opportunities that could lead to favorable economic conditions for larger-scale implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies. Long-term pathways for both PV-electrolysis and PEC devices are discussed.

3.2.1. Societal, economic, and policy changes and drivers. 
Environmental challenges associated with burning large quantities of fossil fuels to generate energy have triggered a strong interest in implementation of renewable-energy systems.77,78 As a testimony to this, the number of energy-conversion installations driven by sunlight or wind has experienced exponential growth over the past decade. In the case of solar energy, this growth is directly apparent from the enormous increase in the production capacity of photovoltaics, which has resulted in significant reductions in their cost.79 On the production side, government incentives facilitated this market increase by providing strong investment that led to the rapid increase in production. An increase in demand was propelled by policy drivers that aimed to curtail use of non-renewable energy sources. For example, China, India, and even smaller size countries all have policies to promote renewable energy technologies. Further policy drivers such as controls on CO2 emissions as well as incentives for clean-energy technologies will help increase penetration of renewables into the energy markets and raise awareness for the need to realize accessible, reliable, and affordable energy supplies. The Paris Climate Agreement helped set the stage for this development.80 The Dutch government, for example, targets 40% renewable energy by 2030 and a >80% reduction in CO2 emissions by 2050.81 Societal aspects can also trigger the large-scale adoption of clean energy technologies. Changes to the environment, violent and more frequent natural disasters, and local pollution can favor the adoption of clean technologies on the basis of world energy and global transportation scenarios created by the World Energy Council.82 Additionally, investment in education and in accessible and accurate information regarding environmental effects of various energy sources can help shape society's perceptions of the energy markets. Ultimately, these changes in public perception can decisively lead to the enactment of long-lasting clean energy policies.83,84
Changes in energy markets can also favor clean technologies. Market failures in the gas and oil sector (e.g. drop in demand, decrease in production, curtailments) can lead to spikes in energy prices, therefore indirectly improving the economic viability of alternative renewable-energy sources. Additionally, market and ecological factors could lead to the collapse of large-scale fossil fuel suppliers, therefore necessitating the development and broad deployment of clean-energy technologies.85,86 To date, the growth of the photovoltaic sector has been facilitated by the ability to integrate solar-energy-conversion devices into our current electricity transmission and distribution infrastructure. A larger penetration of photovoltaics into the energy markets will result in changes in the operation of the electricity grid. Energy storage mechanisms will have to be implemented to bridge the time gap between production periods and consumer demands. Under conditions of direct storage and use, an electricity grid may not even be required. This will further motivate the decoupling of photovoltaic installations from the grid, favoring options like centralized solar-hydrogen facilities for the production of transportation fuels and for long-term energy storage needs. Similarly, as outdated and unreliable grid structures continue to age, new energy-efficient systems such as microgrids emerge, which are in general more compatible with renewable technologies over traditional large-scale power plants.87,88 Moreover, as government incentives for photovoltaics phase out, soft costs must continue to decrease to maintain PV competitive with fossil sources of electricity.


3.2.2. Science and technology opportunities. 
In the long-term, solar hydrogen generated by both PV-electrolysis and PEC routes could play a significant role in the energy market. The socio-economic and policy drivers mentioned above would facilitate the use of solar-hydrogen technologies as a competitive energy-storage option. At the same time, significant scientific and technological barriers need to be overcome in order for the technologies to succeed in a highly competitive market. Despite some demonstrations of functioning devices, the long-term stable operation of efficient and cost-effective devices has not yet been proven for PEC routes. Possible technology development pathways are presented below for the two families of devices that, if successful, could lead to viable solar-hydrogen systems.

3.3. Pathways for PV-electrolysis
To a large extent, PV-electrolysis advances can be commercialized by independently optimizing each of the constituent components10 (i.e. the PV module, the cell stack materials, and the electrolyzer design). However, the ultimate goal of a practical system coupling the two components must be kept in mind while performing this independent optimization. Although at a first glance this statement might seem obvious and non-constraining, there is a significant number of peripheral components (mainly power electronics) that are incorporated into PV installations and electrolysis units to couple their operation with the electrical grid. These components account for a non-trivial fraction of the overall capital costs of the equipment, and furthermore poor integration will result in efficiency decreases on the order of at least 10%, with ∼5% losses on each of the two AC–DC conversion steps, and even larger losses at low power output. While under some circumstances PV-electrolysis will operate in conjunction with the grid to maximize the utilization of the electrolyzer unit, lean alternatives with fewer peripheral components and a more integrated operation will likely be preferred as the technology progresses and electrolyzers become more capable of operating with fluctuating loads. This integrated PV-electrolysis approach would not require that power electronics be incorporated in current electrolyzers systems, as PV arrays may be designed to directly power electrolyzer units with the appropriate DC characteristics. The reduced balance-of-system costs of integrated PV-electrolysis devices and the higher efficiencies achievable due to short transmission distances could favor their implementation in the long term, assuming that no new durability challenges emerge during intermittent or fluctuating operation.5,7,8 In the short term the value proposition of on-site or wastewater-derived solar-hydrogen generation can be realized in niche markets. Those gains would need to compensate for the economic losses from the low utilization of the electrolyzer units if powered exclusively with solar energy.
In the photovoltaic space, it is likely that silicon will continue to be the most promising technology in the short to medium term (<30 years). Laboratory-based examples of silicon PVs directly coupled to electrolyzers have demonstrated efficiencies for hydrogen production in excess of 14%.76 Following a pathway of reasonable improvements, silicon PVs could be implemented in solar-hydrogen devices to attain efficiencies of up to 18%. These advances involve improvements in surface passivation of Si, introduction of back contacting techniques in the cell fabrication, and small improvements in the quality of the crystalline silicon solar cells. Achieving even higher efficiencies using single silicon PVs would be difficult. On the cost side, only small reductions are expected from silicon manufacturing, as the prices have already decreased significantly (currently at <USD 0.5 W−1) and gains from economies of scale will saturate. Alternative materials for PVs including cadmium telluride, copper indium gallium selenide, hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites, III–V semiconductors, or tandem architectures could be disruptive to the PV space.16,89 However, currently these alternative-material PVs are significantly disadvantaged with respect to Si PVs.65,90 There are many factors that limit the practicality of each alternative PV material, such as stability, toxicity, efficiency, and durability, but ultimately each of these technologies suffers from the same limiting factor for large-scale viability: economic competitiveness. Advances that improve PV scalability, cost, stability, and performance for these materials classes will be needed before they have a significant impact on solar-hydrogen devices. Lastly, inexpensive optical concentration or light management schemes and heat and mass transfer optimizations that enhance efficiency and materials utilization of PV-electrolysis over PV or electrolyzers alone, could improve the viability of PV-electrolysis devices.
Although the contribution of the electrolyzer to the projected costs of a PV-electrolysis system is minor, an improved efficiency of this component means that less PV cells are needed to produce the same amount of hydrogen, so that the hydrogen can become significantly cheaper. While the PV industry has grown aggressively in the recent past, and current yearly installation levels approach a 85 GW capacity,91 the electrolyzer industry lags behind in terms of installations by more than two orders-of-magnitude. The production scale of the electrolyzer industry will need to approach levels comparable to the PV sector, and as this happens, significant cost gains for both technologies are expected. Porous transport layers and bipolar plates are important from cost, stability, and efficiency perspectives. Their optimization enables higher current densities and lower catalyst loadings. Improvements in the performance and stability of catalysts layers and membranes are also needed. In particular, as the scale of production increases, it will be important to develop earth-abundant electrocatalysts with comparable performance to the noble-metal electrocatalysts used in current PEM electrolyzers. In addition to standard cation-exchange-membrane-based electrolyzers, membrane-free systems have seen significant advances due to their tolerance for impurities in water feedstock and potentially lower upfront capital costs.92–95 Moreover, the development of anion-exchange membranes can enable implementation of alkaline polymer-electrolyte-membrane electrolyzers that use high-performing and earth-abundant Ni-based catalysts.96,97 These membranes must exhibit long-term stability and avoid excessive gas crossover even at lower sunlight-driven rates.
In addition to economies of scale, cost reductions in electrolyzers may arise from lowering the capital cost requirements of the system (currently at ∼1/3 of the total cost), or by reducing costs associated with the electricity feedstock required for their operation. Solar-to-hydrogen efficiency improvements will directly affect electricity feedstock expenses, as less electricity will be needed for a given rate of solar-hydrogen production. Important sources of efficiency improvements in current PEM electrolyzers may come from reduction of ionic resistance in the membrane, improvement in electrocatalyst activity, and mitigation of mass transport limitations in catalyst and porous transport layers.98 If efficiency improvements lead to larger operating current densities, electrolyzer units could be designed with smaller footprints for a given production level, thus reducing their capital costs. Additionally, the feedstock costs could be reduced if the electrical grid is circumvented in a direct PV-electrolysis configuration. In this configuration, the costs associated with electricity transmission and distribution through the grid would be eliminated. Opportunities exist for defining application-specific guidelines for membranes used for direct PV-electrolysis. Research and development of membranes for direct PV-electrolysis configurations include identifying those with lower gas permeability and optimal ion transport and mechanical properties, information on the molecular and morphological characteristics of membranes during mass transport processes, and ion-conducting membranes that can operate under intermittent electrolysis conditions. These fundamental science developments can lead to advances in the long term that ultimately may brighten the economic prospects of PV-electrolysis technologies.
3.4. Pathways for PEC
Even if all the advancements in component performance and cost of coupled PV-electrolysis systems are achieved, the nature of their design will require significant cost reduction of the auxiliary components in order for them to be cost-competitive with other hydrogen production pathways. This is similar to the case of current PV plants where the cost of the PV does not dominate system cost. Such cost reductions might not even be possible given the inherent system architecture of coupled PV-electrolysis systems. For this reason, PEC systems could provide an opportunity for this necessary cost reduction, given that their design can be completely different than PV-electrolysis systems and therefore could lead to disruptive and significant cost reduction. Opening up the design space to a broader set of architectures can only have a positive impact on the potential to identify a cost-optimal option. One example is systems based on photocatalyst particles.4,99,100 However, to date, large-scale deployment of PEC-based solar-hydrogen technologies appears to be disadvantaged with respect to PV-electrolysis approaches. PEC devices are significantly less developed, and their efficiencies are generally worse than for coupled PV-electrolysis devices.101 Moreover, they suffer from poor stability due to the requirement that light-absorbing materials must be in contact or close proximity with often caustic electrolytes. Despite great efforts to develop protection strategies, this challenge remains largely unsolved and precludes deployment of PEC technologies.101 One important development challenge is the scale: for PEC devices to reach the same rate of H2 output as PV-electrolysis technologies the projected electrochemically active H2 production area would have to be at least ∼50 times larger.5,14 These large electrochemical areas would lead to significant challenges in the handling of reaction products due to the low current density at the photoelectrode surface, but could result in higher operating efficiencies and less stringent catalytic requirements. Enabling large-scale efficient PEC devices requires advances in materials durability and the ability to control at the atomic-level reproducible materials engineering across macroscopic areas.102 From a topological viewpoint, PEC devices are a subset of PV-electrolysis devices where the electrocatalytic components are co-located with the light absorbers, and in fact can then be the same material. However, viable implementation pathways for PEC architectures will require the discovery of a PEC system that can perform solar water-splitting at a cost per kg of H2 that is equal to or lower than available PV-electrolysis systems, and as a consequence, PEC devices cannot be based on components that could also be used to fabricate a PV-electrolysis device with equivalent or higher economic benefits. If this goal is not achieved, long-term solar-hydrogen technologies will tend toward PV-electrolysis architectures. In a PV-electrolysis configuration, each of the device components (i.e. the light-absorber and water-splitting units) can be independently engineered so that the overall device is optimized, often with the aid of power electronics. Furthermore, there are significant fundamental advantages to decoupling the light-absorption and water-splitting functions in solar-hydrogen devices, which arise from increased flexibility in device design, optimization, and operation. For example, in a PEC configuration, the light absorbers will require innovative electrode designs to minimize shading due to optical absorption and scattering by the electrocatalysts and to facilitate gas evolution and mitigate occlusion of electrocatalytic sites, for example, due to evolved bubbles that can attenuate mass transfer and illumination of the light absorber.103
It has been argued that economic benefits for PEC devices arise from the component integration aspects of light absorbers with electrolysis technologies, no peripheral electronics, the possibility of achieving higher efficiencies when the reactions take place at semiconductor–liquid junctions due to fewer ohmic losses, and the ease of forming a high-quality junction.101 While the first two potential advantages have not been demonstrated, there are several additional advances that could facilitate implementation of PEC devices. Understanding at a fundamental level the interfacial interactions between light absorbers, electrocatalysts, and electrolytes might lead to improved solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies and better stability. Also, continuing to use chemical engineering principles to develop design rules and demonstrations of integrated devices and solar-hydrogen production plants would provide realistic prospects on the economic and environmental viability of PEC approaches.8,26,104–112 Furthermore, developing engineering solutions for the mass-production of promising PEC materials will be needed to achieve large-scale hydrogen production.113 Specifically, to the case of so-called photocatalyst particle-based PEC devices, selective catalysis approaches will need to be developed to preferentially drive the water-splitting reaction,114,115 while avoiding undesirable recombination reactions of the products.100,116,121 In addition, avoiding the formation of explosive hydrogen streams will require development of new separation materials and engineering schemes, including flow-cell designs that introduce improved mechanisms of gas separation and collection,104,117 especially over large areas.
4. Conclusions and perspectives
This article presented a broad perspective on pathways for the implementation of solar-hydrogen technologies. Several niche market opportunities were identified for solar hydrogen implementation in the short term (≤10 years). In this time frame, it is anticipated that PV-electrolysis systems will be the only approach that could be implemented for such applications and still be economical. In the long term, solar-hydrogen technologies could be deployed more broadly in the energy markets. For that to happen, hydrogen produced via solar routes might need to be competitive against other energy carriers, such as fossil fuels. This is a daunting challenge, as the cost of energy from fossil sources has been historically low, even though extremely volatile, and it suggests that hydrogen production costs today would need to sum to less than $2 per kg hydrogen.118 Despite the scale of the challenge, solar-hydrogen technologies provide a promising path to clean alternative fuels, and if externalities from fossil fuel utilization were internalized, the prospects for solar-hydrogen fuel implementation would be greatly enhanced. Implementing PV-electrolysis units manufactured using currently available commercial devices would lead to costs of hydrogen that exceed this target cost value by at least a factor of three.7 Therefore, achieving that cost target with PV-electrolysis devices would require significant technology advances, cost reductions, and possibly also political/policy measures, such as a CO2 tax. Currently, one high-impact research focus is to advance electrolysis that is directly driven by PV installations. Under this mode of operation, electrolyzers will need to accommodate the natural intermittency of solar irradiation, in a stable way over lifetimes comparable to current PV technologies. This approach would result in significant capital cost reductions due to elimination of power electronics required in existing systems, and would increase overall efficiency, at the expense of a reduced capacity factor of the electrolyzer. Important long-term goals include the ability to operate PV-electrolysis devices using inexpensive and efficient electrocatalysts. This will require the development of new catalytic materials that are stable under acidic electrolytes or anion-exchange membranes with significantly improved stability. PEC routes present even larger challenges but have a significantly more disruptive potential. For a PEC system to be implemented, it would have to perform at least equally as well as available PV-electrolysis alternative systems on economic grounds. Additionally, if the components used for the fabrication of such a PEC device could be utilized in a PV-electrolysis arrangement, the integrated PEC architecture would need to be economically preferable to an alternative PV-electrolysis arrangement and also show advantages in terms of sustainability even though it is less flexible in design, optimization, and operation. Understanding fundamental science aspects and developing reactor engineering design guidelines can help to achieve these goals.
Even if the scientific community achieves all of the advances in PV-electrolysis or PEC devices outlined in this report, it is uncertain whether solar-hydrogen technologies will be competitive in large-scale energy markets in the long term. This will depend on a variety of factors that include, but are not limited to, system efficiencies, materials cost, balance-of-system costs, lifetime, externalities, social acceptance, and price of energy or hydrogen from alternative sources. The possible impact of some of these factors have been described in more detail in recent DOE reports.119 Economic policy mechanisms to account for the environmental effects of CO2 emissions can help facilitate this prospect. As a worldwide community, we should emphasize the development of CO2-free, sustainable energy technologies at comparable cost than today's CO2-heavy alternatives. While scientific curiosity should never be hindered by economic considerations, cost can and should be considered at a stage when more applied research programs or policy decisions need to be designed. There has been tremendous progress in the fundamental understanding of solar-hydrogen systems in the past decades and the interdisciplinary knowledge accumulated can be implemented in new electrochemical processes, wastewater treatment, or applications for which the purity or sustainability of the hydrogen is more important than the price, with greater prospects for profitability, sustainability, and societal impact. The creativity of the scientific community and its ability to pivot into new promising application areas will have a decisive effect on the future societal and environmental impacts of solar-hydrogen technologies.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Lorentz Center for hosting this workshop and all attendees of the workshop for their invaluable input, vision for solar and/or hydrogen technologies, and candid discussions. We are also grateful to other participants who voluntarily are not co-authors on this manuscript: Peter Achterberg, Sjoerd Bakker, Paulien Herder, Lai-Hung Lai, Eric McFarland, Christophe Moser, Rianne Post, and Martijn Van den Berge. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of any of their funding agencies. SA thanks the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Fuel Cell Technologies Incubator Program under Award No. DE-EE0006963 for support. DFR acknowledges support by The Netherlands Centre for Multiscale Catalytic Energy Conversion (MCEC), an NWO Gravitation programme funded by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science of the government of The Netherlands. MAM acknowledges the support of New York University, Tandon School of Engineering through his startup grant. VSG and KK acknowledge support by the Dutch NanoNextNL programme funded by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs. Part of the material on photoelectrochemical systems presented in the workshop is based upon work performed by the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, a DOE Energy Innovation Hub, supported through the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Award Number DE-SC0004993, which provides support for FH. VA thanks the European Commission's Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 306398 (FP7-IDEAS-ERS, Project PhotocatH2ode) and Labex Program (ArCANE, ANR-11-LABX-0003-01). TR acknowledges the UK Solar Fuels Network for his travel bursary. The contributions of DFR and HG were carried out within the research programme of BioSolar Cells, co-financed by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs. PW and HG acknowledge the support by the Foundation for Fundamental Research on Matter (FOM, Project No. 13CO12-1), which is part of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). SG is funded through research grant number 9455 from the VILLUM FONDEN. SMHH thanks Nano-Tera Initiative (Grant no. 20NA21-145936) for financial support. MHT acknowledges NSF-CBET-1602886. FB acknowledges financial support from the research programme of BioSolar Cells, co-financed by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs (project C4.E3). DB acknowledges the financial support of Dieptestrategie program from Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials. SH acknowledges support by the Swiss National Science Foundation through the Starting Grant SCOUTS (grant #155876). The views and opinions of the author(s) expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 616–619 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
C. A. Rodriguez, M. A. Modestino, D. Psaltis and C. Moser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3828–3835 RSC .
P. Zhai, S. Haussener, J. Ager, R. Sathre, K. Walczak, J. Greenblatt and T. McKone, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2380–2389 RSC .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
M. Dumortier, S. Tembhurne and S. Haussener, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3614–3628 RSC .
A. Facchini, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17129 CrossRef .
S. W. Sheehan, E. R. Cave, K. P. Kuhl, N. Flanders, A. L. Smeigh and D. T. Co, Chem, 2017, 3, 3–7 Search PubMed .
V. Schröder, B. Emonts, H. Janßen and H. P. Schulze, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2004, 27, 847–851 CrossRef .
S. A. Grigoriev, V. I. Porembskiy, S. V. Korobtsev, V. N. Fateev, F. Auprêtre and P. Millet, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 2721–2728 CrossRef .
A. C. Nielander, M. R. Shaner, K. M. Papadantonakis, S. A. Francis and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 16–25 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjallstrom, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2056–2070 RSC .
M. A. Modestino and S. Haussener, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2015, 6, 13–34 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13237 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 407–414 CrossRef .
J. M. Vindel and J. Polo, Atmos. Res., 2014, 143, 313–327 CrossRef .
N. G. Kulkarni and V. B. Virulkar, Energy Power Eng., 2016, 8, 17 Search PubMed .
China powers ahead with a new direct-current infrastructure, https://www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2017/01/daily-chart-14 (accessed 12/20/2017).
C. Macilwain, Nature, 2010, 468, 624–625 CrossRef PubMed .

US DRIVE, Hydrogen Production Technical Team Roadmap, U.S. Department of Energy, 2013.

Fuel Cell Technologies Office. Multi-year Research, Development, and Demonstration Plan, U.S. Department of Energy. Energy, Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office, 2012.
K. Walczak, Y. Chen, C. Karp, J. W. Beeman, M. Shaner, J. Spurgeon, I. D. Sharp, X. Amashukeli, W. West, J. Jin, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 544–551 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Modestino, S. M. H. Hashemi and S. Haussener, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1533–1551 RSC .
M. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Shen, J. Jiang and L. Sun, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1641–1663 RSC .
M. Götz, J. Lefebvre, F. Mörs, A. McDaniel Koch, F. Graf, S. Bajohr, R. Reimert and T. Kolb, Renewable Energy, 2016, 85, 1371–1390 CrossRef .
R. Chaubey, S. Sahu, O. O. James and S. Maity, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 23, 443–462 CrossRef .
P. C. K. Vesborg and T. F. Jaramillo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7933–7947 RSC .
E. Kemppainen, A. Bodin, B. Sebok, T. Pedersen, B. Seger, B. Mei, D. Bae, P. C. K. Vesborg, J. Halme, O. Hansen, P. D. Lund and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2991–2999 RSC .
E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 846–854 RSC .
T. E. McKone, W. W. Nazaroff, P. Berck, M. Auffhammer, T. Lipman, M. S. Torn, E. Masanet, A. Lobscheid, N. Santero, U. Mishra, A. Barrett, M. Bomberg, K. Fingerman, C. Scown, B. Strogen and A. Horvath, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 1751–1756 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Seidel, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2016, 21, 337–348 CrossRef .

          N. Goebel, Hundreds of thousands protest against nuclear energy across Germany, http://www.dw.com/en/hundreds-of-thousands-protest-against-nuclear-energy-across-germany/a-14945340 (accessed 07/14/2017).
B. B. F. Wittneben, Environ. Sci. Policy, 2012, 15, 1–3 CrossRef .

          L. Grossi, S. Heim and M. Waterson, A vision of the European energy future? The impact of the German response to the Fukushima earthquake,  2014 Search PubMed .
S. J. Cherryman, S. King, F. R. Hawkes, R. Dinsdale and D. L. Hawkes, Public Underst. Sci., 2008, 17, 397–410 CrossRef .
P. Achterberg, Public Underst. Sci., 2014, 23, 445–453 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ricci, G. Newsholme, P. Bellaby and R. Flynn, Int. J. Energy Sect. Manage., 2007, 1, 34–50 CrossRef .
California Environmental Protection Agency, Air Resources Board. Zero, https://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/zevprog/zevregs/zevregs.htm (accessed 07/14/2017).

          J. Staufenberg, Norway to ‘completely ban petrol powered cars by 2025’, http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/climate-change/norway-to-ban-the-sale-of-all-fossil-fuel-based-cars-by-2025-and-replace-with-electric-vehicles-a7065616.html (accessed 12/20/2017).
S. Bakker, H. van Lente and R. Engels, Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manage., 2012, 24, 421–434 CrossRef .
N. Melton, J. Axsen and D. Sperling, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef .
M. Ahmadpoor and B. F. Jones, Science, 2017, 357, 583–587 CrossRef PubMed .

          B. Pivovar, H2 at scale: Deeply decarbonizing our Energy System, https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/htac_apr16_10_pivovar.pdf (accessed 07/14/2017).
DOE-EERE, H2@Scale Program, https://energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/h2-scale (accessed 07/14/2017).
M. A. Pellow, C. J. M. Emmott, C. J. Barnhart and S. M. Benson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1938–1952 RSC .
T. Nguyen and R. F. Savinell, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2010, 19, 54–56 CrossRef .
J. O. G. Posada, A. J. R. Rennie, S. P. Villar, V. L. Martins, J. Marinaccio, A. Barnes, C. F. Glover, D. A. Worsley and P. J. Hall, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 68, 1174–1182 CrossRef .

          E. Verdolini, F. Vona and D. Popp, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 22454.
J. Newman, P. G. Hoertz, C. A. Bonino and J. A. Trainham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1722–A1729 CrossRef .
M. Beaudin, H. Zareipour, A. Schellenberglabe and W. Rosehart, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2010, 14, 302–314 CrossRef .
In a national first, UCI injects renewable hydrogen into campus power supply, https://news.uci.edu/2016/12/06/in-a-national-first-uci-injects-renewable-hydrogen-into-campus-power-supply/, (accessed 11/13/2017).
A. Sgobbi, W. Nijs, R. De Miglio, A. Chiodi, M. Gargiulo and C. Thiel, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 19–35 CrossRef .

          E. Baldassari, Greening the commute: AC Transit to nearly double hydrogen fuel cell fleet, http://www.eastbaytimes.com/2017/02/14/greening-the-commute-ac-transit-to-nearly-double-hydrogen-fuel-cell-fleet/, (accessed 12/20/2017).

          L. Eudy and K. Chandler, American Fuel Cell Bus Project: First Analysis Report, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Transit Administration, 2013.
Clean Hydrogen In European Cities Project, http://chic-project.eu/, (accessed 07/17/2017).

          R. Harding and K. Inagaki, Japan gambles on Toyota's hydrogen powered car, https://www.ft.com/content/328df346-10cb-11e7-a88c-50ba212dce4d?mhq5j=e1 (accessed 02/15/2018).
Addressing the Mars ISRU Challenge: Production of Oxygen and Fuel from CO2 using Sunlight, Keck Institute for Space Studies Final Report, http://kiss.caltech.edu/workshops/isru/isru.html (accessed 07/17/2017).
B. Mei, G. Mul and B. Seger, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1600035 CrossRef .
C. Chen, A. J. Bloomfield and S. W. Sheehan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 3560–3567 CrossRef .

          D. Pletcher and F. C. Walsh, Industrial electrochemistry, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .

          I. Fraunhofer, Photovoltaic Report, https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/ise/de/documents/publications/studies/Photovoltaics-Report.pdf.
C. Battaglia, A. Cuevas and S. De Wolf, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1552–1576 RSC .

          A. Zakutayev, Opportunities in Novel Thin Films Inorganic PV Materials, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/20161018-sunup-zakutayev-thin-film.pdf (accessed 11/13/2017).
EFRC, Center for Next Generation of Materials Design: An Energy Frontier Research Center, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/20161018-sunup-zakutayev-thin-film.pdf (accessed 11/13/2017).
A. L. Greenaway, J. W. Boucher, S. Z. Oener, C. J. Funch and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2270–2282 CrossRef .

          N. Guillet and P. Millet, Hydrogen Production, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2015, pp. 117–166,  DOI:10.1002/9783527676507.ch4 .
D. M. F. Santos, C. A. C. Sequeira and J. L. Figueiredo, Quim. Nova, 2013, 36, 1176–1193 CrossRef .
K. E. Ayers, E. B. Anderson, C. Capuano, B. Carter, L. Dalton, G. Hanlon, J. Manco and M. Niedzwiecki, ECS Trans., 2010, 33, 3–15 Search PubMed .

          W. Colella, B. D. James, J. Moton, G. Saur and T. Ramsden, Techno-economic Analysis of PEM Electrolysis for Hydrogen Production, https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/08/f18/fcto_2014_electrolytic_h2_wkshp_colella1.pdf (accessed 11/13/2017).

          A. Wilson, J. Marcinkoski and D. Papaeorgopoulos, Fuel Cell System Cost, https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/16020_fuel_cell_system_cost_2016.pdf (accessed 11/13/2017).
M. Kopp, D. Coleman, C. Stiller, K. Scheffer, J. Aichinger and B. Scheppat, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 13311–13320 CrossRef .

          V. Fateev, S. A. Grigoriev, P. Millet, S. V. Korobtsev, V. I. Porembskiy, M. Pepic, C. Etievant and C. Puyenchet, Hydrogen Safety Aspects Related to High Pressure PEM Water Electrolysis, https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/safety_biblio/ichs2007/2.1.73.pdf (accessed 11/11/2017).
J.-W. Schüttauf, M. A. Modestino, E. Chinello, D. Lambelet, A. Delfino, D. Dominé, A. Faes, M. Despeisse, J. Bailat, D. Psaltis, C. Moser and C. Ballif, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1177–F1181 CrossRef .
T. A. Faunce, W. Lubitz, A. W. Rutherford, D. MacFarlane, G. F. Moore, P. Yang, D. G. Nocera, T. A. Moore, D. H. Gregory, S. Fukuzumi, K. B. Yoon, F. A. Armstrong, M. R. Wasielewski and S. Styring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 695–698 RSC .
T. Faunce, S. Styring, M. R. Wasielewski, G. W. Brudvig, A. W. Rutherford, J. Messinger, A. F. Lee, C. L. Hill, H. deGroot, M. Fontecave, D. R. MacFarlane, B. Hankamer, D. G. Nocera, D. M. Tiede, H. Dau, W. Hillier, L. Wang and R. Amal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1074–1076 RSC .
N. M. Haegel, R. Margolis, T. Buonassisi, D. Feldman, A. Froitzheim, R. Garabedian, M. Green, S. Glunz, H.-M. Henning, B. Holder, I. Kaizuka, B. Kroposki, K. Matsubara, S. Niki, K. Sakurai, R. A. Schindler, W. Tumas, E. R. Weber, G. Wilson, M. Woodhouse and S. Kurtz, Science, 2017, 356, 141–143 CrossRef PubMed .
G. P. Peters, R. M. Andrew, J. G. Canadell, S. Fuss, R. B. Jackson, J. I. Korsbakken, C. Le Quéré and N. Nakicenovic, Nat. Clim. Change, 2017, 7, 118–122 CrossRef .

          A. Hof, C. Brink, A. M. Beltran and M. d. Elzen, Greenhouse gas emission reduction targets for 2030. Conditions for an EU target of 40%, PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, 2012.
WEC, Global Transport Scenarios 20150, https://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/wec_transport_scenarios_2050.pdf (accessed 11/13/2017).
M. M. E. Moula, J. Maula, M. Hamdy, T. Fang, N. Jung and R. Lahdelma, Int. J. Sustainable Built Environ., 2013, 2, 89–98 CrossRef .
L. C. Stokes, Energy Policy, 2013, 56, 490–500 CrossRef .

          D. Barstow, D. Rohde and S. Saul, Deepwater Horizon's Final Hours, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/26/us/26spill.html?pagewanted=all (accessed 12/20/2017).

          C. Krauss, Oil Prices: What to Make of the Volatility, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/business/energy-environment/oil-prices.html (accessed 12/20/2017).
A. H. Fathima and K. Palanisamy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 45, 431–446 CrossRef .

          P. Denholm, K. Clark and M. O’Connell, On the Path to SunShot: Emerging Issues and Challenges in Integrating High Levels of Solar into the Electrical Generation and Transmission System, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,  2016 Search PubMed .
W. J. Chang, K.-H. Lee, H. Ha, K. Jin, G. Kim, S.-T. Hwang, H.-m. Lee, S.-W. Ahn, W. Yoon, H. Seo, J. S. Hong, Y. K. Go, J.-I. Ha and K. T. Nam, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 1009–1018 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2007, 18, 15–19 CrossRef .

          J. Hill, GTM Forecasting More Than 85 Gigawatts of Solar PV to be Installed in 2017, https://cleantechnica.com/2017/04/05/gtm-forecasting-85-gw-solar-pv-installed-2017/, (accessed 11/14/2017).
S. M. H. Hashemi, M. A. Modestino and D. Psaltis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2003–2009 RSC .
D. V. Esposito, Joule, 2017, 1, 651–658 CrossRef .
G. D. O'Neil, C. D. Christian, D. E. Brown and D. V. Esposito, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F3012–F3019 CrossRef .
M. I. Gillespie, F. van der Merwe and R. J. Kriek, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 228–235 CrossRef .
G. Merle, M. Wessling and K. Nijmeijer, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 377, 1–35 CrossRef .
J. R. Varcoe, P. Atanassov, D. R. Dekel, A. M. Herring, M. A. Hickner, P. A. Kohl, A. R. Kucernak, W. E. Mustain, K. Nijmeijer and K. Scott, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3135–3191 RSC .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Fabian, S. Hu, N. Singh, F. A. Houle, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen, F. E. Osterloh and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2825–2850 RSC .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811–2824 RSC .
D. Mersch, C.-Y. Lee, J. Z. Zhang, K. Brinkert, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8541–8549 CrossRef PubMed .
P. van der Linde, Á. Moreno Soto, P. Peñas-López, J. Rodríguez-Rodríguez, D. Lohse, H. Gardeniers, D. van der Meer and D. Fernández Rivas, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 12873–12886 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Haussener, C. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9922 RSC .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3605–3618 RSC .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 RSC .
M. Dumortier and S. Haussener, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3069–3082 RSC .
C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber, S. Ardo, A. Berger, Y. Chen, R. Coridan, K. T. Fountaine, S. Haussener, S. Hu, R. Liu, N. S. Lewis, M. A. Modestino, M. M. Shaner, M. R. Singh, J. C. Stevens, K. Sun and K. Walczak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12974–12988 CrossRef PubMed .
L. C. Seitz, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck and T. F. Jaramillo, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1372–1385 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Singh, K. Papadantonakis, C. Xiang and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2760–2767 RSC .
M. R. Singh, C. Xiang and N. S. Lewis, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 458–466 RSC .
R. Sathre, C. D. Scown, W. R. Morrow, J. C. Stevens, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager, K. Walczak, F. A. Houle and J. B. Greenblatt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3264–3278 RSC .
R. Sathre, J. B. Greenblatt, K. Walczak, I. D. Sharp, J. C. Stevens, J. W. Ager and F. A. Houle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 803–819 RSC .
D. W. Wakerley and E. Reisner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2283–2295 RSC .
N. Kaeffer, A. Morozan and V. Artero, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 13707–13713 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7806–7809 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Modestino, K. A. Walczak, A. Berger, C. M. Evans, S. Haussener, C. Koval, J. S. Newman, J. W. Ager and R. A. Segalman, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 297–301 RSC .

          E. L. Miller, Hydrogen Production and Delivery Program, https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/review17/pd000_miller_2017_o.pdf (accessed 11/14/2017).
U.S. DOE Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office, Fuel Cell Technologies Office, Multi-Year Research, Development, and Demonstration Plan 2015, https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2015/06/f23/fcto_myrdd_production.pdf (accessed 06/04/2018).
C. Palmer, F. Saadi and E. W. McFarland, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7003–7009 CrossRef .
R. Bala Chandran, S. Breen, Y. Shao, S. Ardo and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 115–135 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Broader context
Penetration of solar-powered technologies in the energy market is accelerating and they promise to become clean and cost-competitive alternatives to traditional fossil-based sources of energy. However, despite their rapid deployment, adoption of solar-powered technologies is hindered by the intermittent nature of sunlight. Electrochemical solar-hydrogen technologies are promising solutions to this challenge, because they are capable of capturing and storing solar energy in the form of an environmentally friendly fuel. Throughout the past five decades, the scientific community has developed the foundation for the realization of practical solar-hydrogen generators, yet clear strategies for their deployment have not been reported. This article condenses the perspectives of ∼50 basic scientists, engineers, and social scientists, from academia, government, and industry, and reports on high-potential pathways for commercialization opportunities of solar-hydrogen technologies. By doing so, the article identifies key barriers for the deployment of these technologies both in the short term and long term, and also provides a balanced analysis of advantages and drawbacks of various designs. The insights provided in this perspective paper intend to contribute to defining new directions for research in the solar fuels field, and to enable future solar-hydrogen ventures that capitalize on technical advances from the scientific community.


 	Fig. 1  Scheme representing PV-electrolysis and PEC device concepts, including current relative level of use, projected cost, required amount of raw materials, and current relative level of technology readiness. For more details, see Table 1.	 


General concept	Over large areas, sunlight is used to convert water to a stream of hydrogen that contains an oxygen concentration below the flammability limit
Terminology	Components: light absorbers, electrocatalysts, ion-exchange membranes, electrolytes, etc.
Devices: PV, PEC, electrolyzer, light absorber in electrolyte with co-catalysts, etc.
Unique aspects	Light absorption component (PV) physically separated macroscopically from water splitting component (electrolyzer)	Light absorption and water splitting components are integrated in one region
Technological options	Distributed	Centralized	Centralized
Hydrogen production is independent of energy generation (different sources, electricity grid)	Hydrogen production occurs at the site of energy generation; requires hydrogen transport	Design concept exclusively allows centralized operation
Technology readiness	Advanced stage	Early stage, and exploratory for nano-/micro-structured, and particulate/molecular components
Maximum demonstrated solar-to-hydrogen efficiencya	30% for >48 h16	10% for >40 h17
Economic challenges	Competition with conventional sources of non-renewable energy (fossil fuel, nuclear), battery-backed renewable energy, and hydrogen generated by other means (methane reforming) in terms of cost, availability, and accessibility
Socio-political factors	Investments are not always stable (e.g. elections, political agendas, influential special interest groups); events affect public and political perception, perceived relevance and public acceptance (e.g., oil spill, nuclear disaster, hydrogen explosion, decreasing energy prices, environmental benefits, societal push for renewable or more sustainable energy solutions)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of a pathway and timeline for solar H2 technologies and interrelated aspects discussed in this article.	 

 	Fig. 3  Short-term (10 year timeframe) application fields that are likely to provide the most promising utilization routes. The chronological ordering of these application fields is based on projected timelines for practical implementation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
