Earth-abundant stable elemental semiconductor red phosphorus-based hybrids for environmental remediation and energy storage applications  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6RA06145A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6RA06145A
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 44616-44629Earth-abundant stable elemental semiconductor red phosphorus-based hybrids for environmental remediation and energy storage applications
Sajid Ali Ansari

*a, 
Ziyauddin Khan

b, 
Mohammad Omaish Ansari

c and 
Moo Hwan Cho

*a
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan-si, Gyeongbuk 712-749, South Korea. E-mail: sajidansari@ynu.ac.kr; mhcho@ynu.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-53-810-463;   Tel: +82-53-810-2517
bSchool of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), UNIST-gil 50, Ulsan, Republic of Korea
cCentre of Nanotechnology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
Received 
8th March 2016
, Accepted 12th April 2016First published on 5th May 2016AbstractThe photocatalytic generation of hydrogen and the photodegradation of organic dyes in wastewater using solar light, preferably visible light, have attracted considerable interest because they are clean, low-cost, and environmentally friendly processes. On the other hand, the major drawbacks with traditional photocatalysts are their limited light absorption ability and wide band gap. Therefore, several studies have focused on elemental semiconductor photocatalysts such as red phosphorus (RP) because of its narrow band gap, high absorption ability for the incident solar spectrum, low cost, earth abundance, and easy accessibility, showing great potential for use in numerous industrial applications. The development of RP and its heterojunctions provides promising candidates for utilizing the largest part of the solar energy spectrum. In addition to the photoinduced properties of RP-based nanocomposites, RP-based nanocomposite materials have recently been considered to be good and advanced anodes for lithium- and sodium-ion batteries because of the high theoretical capacity of RP (2596 mA h g−1). The present review briefly introduces the recent advances in the development of various strategies for constructing efficient RP-based hybrid structures that are responsive to visible light, followed by a description of the utilization of RP and its composites as electrode materials in lithium- and sodium-ion batteries. Finally, a summary and viewpoint are also presented to highlight future work on the development of high-storage RP-based electrodes and visible-light photocatalysts.Sajid Ali AnsariSajid Ali Ansari received his MS in 2012 from Zakir Husain College of Engineering and Technology, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India and his PhD in 2015 from the School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, South Korea under the guidance of Professor Moo Hwan Cho. Currently, he is working as a Research Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, South Korea. His research area includes the synthesis of metal nanoparticles and nanocomposites using electrochemically active biofilms, band gap engineering of semiconductor metal oxide nanoparticles for visible-light photocatalysis, and the design and development of electrode materials for supercapacitor and microbial fuel cell applications.Ziyauddin KhanZiyauddin Khan received his Master's degree from Aligarh Muslim University in 2007 and his PhD from the Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, India in 2012. Thereafter, he worked at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Mumbai as a post-doctoral visiting scientist and then joined, as a post-doctoral research associate, Prof. Hyunhyub Ko's research group at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Korea. His past research focused on synthesis of efficient photocatalytic materials by semiconductor coupling method for hydrogen generation by solar water splitting. His current research interest focuses on the synthesis and design of electrode materials for energy storage applications such as sodium ion battery, sodium-air battery and supercapacitors.Mohammad Omaish AnsariMohammad Omaish Ansari received his PhD in Applied Chemistry from Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh under the guidance of Professor Faiz Mohammad. Later he worked as a Research Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, South Korea. Currently he is working as an Assistant Professor in the Centre of Nanotechnology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. His research area includes the fabrication of conducting and non-conducting polymer-based composites, the design and development of electrode materials for microbial fuel cells, band gap engineering of semiconductor metal oxide nanoparticles for visible-light-driven photocatalysis, sensor fabrication for the detection of volatile organic compounds and the synthesis of graphene and graphene-based nanocomposites.Moo Hwan ChoMoo Hwan Cho is a Professor at School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, South Korea. He earned his MS in Chemical engineering from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in 1980 and received his PhD from Dept. of Chemical & Biochemical Engineering, Rutgers University, USA in 1988. His current research is focused on metal nanoparticles, nanocomposites synthesis, band gap engineering of semiconductor metal oxide nanoparticles for visible light-driven photocatalysis using green method, design and development of electrode materials for supercapacitor and microbial fuel cells, sensor fabrication for detection of volatile organic compounds and synthesis of graphene and graphene based nanocomposite.
Introduction
Currently, the depletion of the world's fossil fuel reserves and rising environmental pollution are major issues of concern. To compensate for the depletion of natural resources and increasing pollution, new materials that can solve these global environmental challenges are needed.1 In the search for renewable energy sources, hydrogen, as an energy carrier for facilitating sustainable energy systems, has drawn the attention of scientists worldwide.2–4 The ease of the production of hydrogen from a range of sources such as semiconducting materials, natural gas, heavy oil, methanol, biomass, coal, and the solar wind, as well as its high energy density (117.61 MJ kg−1) and eco-friendly nature, has triggered research in the field of the solar-light-induced generation of hydrogen and the photodegradation of toxic organic pollutants.5–9 Semiconductor materials have scavenging activities and, via the use of an efficient semiconducting photocatalyst,10,11 sunlight can be converted into chemical energy to enable a wide range of environmental and energy applications12 such as the evolution of hydrogen by water splitting, conversion of CO2 into hydrocarbon fuels, photocatalytic degradation of pollutants, and disinfection of water.13–17
Photocatalytic materials for water splitting that are active up to 600 nm irradiation (i.e., a band gap of <2.0 eV) or even longer wavelengths for the highly efficient harvesting of visible photons of solar energy generally consist of composite materials that consist of either noble metals such as silver, gold, Pt, etc., or polymeric materials.18 Unfortunately, the leaching of these constituent materials is a problem. Hence, there is a need for environmentally benign, efficient and ideal visible-light-harvesting photocatalysts that will not release toxic materials during their lifetime.19–23 This can be achieved by replacing traditional doped, polymeric or metal-based semiconductor photocatalysts with non-metal-based earth-abundant elemental photocatalysts such as sulfur, boron and red phosphorus (RP).24–26
Compared with conventional metal-based photocatalysts, metal-free elemental photocatalysts, i.e., sulfur, boron or RP, have the unique advantages of low cost, abundance and easy availability, which provide great potential for practical applications. On the other hand, the study of elemental photocatalysts is still in its infancy and achieving high efficiency is a great challenge.27–31 Owing to its high abundance (i.e., ∼0.1% of the earth's crust), the chemistry of phosphorus has attracted enormous attention since its discovery.32 Phosphorus exists in several allotropic forms: white, black and RP are the three main allotropes.33–35 Among these, RP is the most abundant and is stable under ambient conditions owing to its polymeric structure, non-toxicity and ease of availability. RP has potential applications in daily life and industry, such as igniters, flame retardants, smoke signals, and chemical analysis. Recently, RP, as an important elemental semiconductor photocatalyst, has been investigated widely in the fields of visible-light-driven hydrogen production and pollutant degradation. Over the past few years, several efforts have been made to design highly active visible-light photocatalysts using RP by different methodologies such as hydrothermal treatment, mechanical methods and precipitation processes. Wang et al.19 prepared RP films using an autoclave and a vacuum deposition method and reported that they could constantly generate H2 from water under visible-light irradiation. Shen et al.28 prepared RP heterostructures with black P by a simple ball milling method for visible-light photocatalysis. Therefore, the fabrication of RP by different methodologies extends the light absorption of RP to a wide range of the solar spectrum and enhances its photocatalytic efficiency.
In addition to the generation of energy from earth-abundant non-metals, portable and convenient devices for the storage of the generated energy are needed. Therefore, the search for an inexpensive and efficient method of energy storage is a great challenge.36–38 The use of RP heterostructures for this purpose has the added advantages of environmental cleanliness and the green production of hydrogen using a wide spectrum of solar energy. Several studies have already been reported that used RP and RP-based hybrids as effective anodes for sodium- and lithium-ion batteries.39–47 Recently, RP-based materials have been considered to be highly capacitive and attractive anode materials compared with conventional anodes because of the high theoretical capacity of RP (2596 mA h g−1), which is almost seven times higher than that of graphite (372 mA h g−1). Owing to this high theoretical capacity of RP, it can react easily with lithium and sodium via a three-electron transfer reaction to form Li3P and Na3P when used as the anode in sodium- and lithium-ion batteries. On the other hand, the cycling stability, reversibility and coulombic efficiency of RP are relatively poor because of its low intrinsic electronic conductivity and large volume expansion. Therefore, to avoid these two obstacles, a variety of carbon materials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes have been used to modify the texture of RP and increase the conductivity of the materials. For example, Song et al.44 prepared an anode for a sodium-ion battery by modifying RP with graphene, whereas Yu et al.47 modified RP using a graphene nanosheet for a lithium-ion battery. Ramireddy et al.48 also modified RP with carbon and further studied its lithium- and sodium-ion storage performance. Therefore, a composite of RP with other conductive materials increases the conductivity of the material, which further improves its electrochemical performance.
The wide applicability of RP in diverse areas has attracted enormous interest in the scientific community. Therefore, considerable work on the photocatalytic properties and energy applications of RP has been reported. This paper reviews the current developments in the state of the art, a mechanistic view and future applications of elemental RP as a photocatalyst and an energy storage material. The different strategies used to enhance the photocatalytic properties of RP, such as the hydrogen evolution reaction, degradation of organic pollutants and inactivation of bacteria, have been discussed. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first report that features the fabrication routes, a mechanistic view and the future scope of the photocatalytic behavior and energy storage properties of RP-based hybrids. For convenience, this discussion is divided into several sections depending on the composite material and its properties.
Why RP has potential as a photocatalyst and supplementary material for energy storage
Based on the above discussion, it is clear that inexpensive earth-abundant RP has great potential for a range of photocatalysts and anode materials; thus, research in this area has grown exponentially. The major advantages of RP compared with other materials are its high stability, low cost and non-toxicity. The suitable band gap of RP (∼1.4–2.0 eV) meets the requirements for the water splitting reaction. The narrow band gap and suitable positions of the valence band and conduction band in RP are suitable for driving the water splitting reaction, along with its ability to inhibit the recombination of photogenerated electrons per holes. In addition to its good photocatalytic properties, it also possesses a high theoretical capacity of 2596 mA h g−1, which has made it an attractive alternative electrode material for various energy devices (Scheme 1).45
 Scheme 1  Schematic of the contents of this review. 
Phase and photoexcitation mechanism of RP under photoirradiation
RP has a more compact and network-like structure, in which all atoms are linked together, which makes it more stable than white phosphorus. Upon heating, white phosphorus slowly recrystallizes into RP, which also confirms its high stability.49 A possible structure of RP under normal conditions is its polymeric structure, in which many P4 tetrahedra are joined covalently to each other (Fig. 1). The strong covalent bonds between the tetrahedra in RP and the polymeric structure are responsible for its lower volatility, higher chemical stability and less reactivity than the other allotropes of phosphorus such as white and black phosphorus. Density functional theory computations using the coordination data of Hittorf's phosphorus revealed a slab that exposed the (001) and (00) facets and the charge density isosurfaces of the highest valence band and lowest conduction band.
 Fig. 1  General polymeric structure of red phosphorus. 
Based on the well-established fundamental principles of semiconductor photochemistry, the photocatalysis process basically depends on the light absorption ability, band gap and charge separation efficiency of photogenerated electron–hole pairs of materials. From the viewpoint of the band gap energy, traditional semiconductor photocatalysts that are based on metal oxides generally absorb only UV light because of their wide band gap (∼3.2 eV), which corresponds to only ∼4% of the solar spectrum; hence, a large part of the solar spectrum remains unutilized. Elemental RP is active over a wide visible range because of its small band gap (∼1.42–2.0 eV), and is now in high demand owing to its ability to use the full solar spectrum. Materials with small band gaps are suitable for the photodegradation of organic pollutants and the overall water splitting reaction under visible-light irradiation. The general mechanism of photoexcitation and electron transfer in elemental semiconductor RP photocatalysts can be divided into three processes (Fig. 2a). Firstly, photoexcitation of valence band (VB) electrons to the conduction band (CB) of the semiconductors occurs under photoirradiation. Secondly, the photoexcited electrons and holes are then transported to the surface of the semiconductor and, lastly, these transferred photoelectrons react with surface-adsorbed oxygen to form superoxide radical anions.50 The photogenerated holes react with surface-adsorbed hydroxyl ions to form highly reactive hydroxyl radicals, which are responsible for the degradation of pollutants. For a highly efficient photocatalytic process, in addition to the above mentioned phenomena, suitable positions of the VB and CB for the commencement of the two half-reactions, i.e., oxidation and reduction, as well as the band gap, are also important parameters for the selection of efficient photocatalysts (Fig. 2b). The following reactions occur over RP for the degradation of pollutants and formation of hydrogen from water under photoirradiation.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the photoexcitation mechanism in RP for the degradation of pollutants and formation of hydrogen from water under photoirradiation. 
General reactions that occur over RP for the degradation of pollutants under photoirradiation
RP + hν (visible light) → e− + h+
e− + O2 → O2˙−
h+ + OH− → ˙OH
O2˙− + H2O → H2O2
H2O2 → 2˙OH
˙OH + organic pollutants → degradation of pollutants
General reactions that occur over RP for the formation of hydrogen from water under photoirradiation
RP + irradiation (hν) → h+ (VB of RP) + e− (CB of RP)
h+ + sacrificial reagents → desired product
e− + H2O → H2 + OH−
General charging and discharging mechanism in batteries
Rechargeable lithium/sodium-ion batteries are devices that store energy via a series of electrochemical reactions that occur on an electrode surface.51,52 Fig. 3 presents a schematic illustration of various parts of a battery and the charging–discharging steps during the electrochemical process. The electrochemical cell consists of a metal anode (lithium or sodium), an organic electrolyte and a graphite cathode. In rechargeable batteries, two redox processes occur simultaneously inside the electrochemical cell.53–57 The first step is charging, in which the positive electrode is oxidized to produce electrons and the negative electrode is reduced by accepting these electrons, thus completing the redox reaction.39 The generated ions move to the positive electrode through the electrolyte, where the electrolyte acts as a simple buffer for the internal flow of ions between the electrodes. The electrons travel to the positive electrode through the external electrical circuit and constitute the flow of current in the external circuit, thereby generating an electrical current. The following set of reactions occur during the charging–discharging process in a battery.39
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram showing the general mechanism of the charging and discharging processes in a battery. 
Charging process
Anodic reaction2Li → 2Li+ + 2e− (oxidation, loss of electrons)
Cathodic reactionS + 2Li+ + 2e−→ Li2S (reduction, gain of electrons)
Discharging process2Li + S → Li2S (overall electrochemical reaction)
Recent developments and different synthetic strategies for enhancing the visible-light photocatalytic activity of RP
Autoclave treatment is one of the favored green methodologies for the synthesis of nanoparticles and catalysts with different morphologies and crystal structures. The different morphologies display different surface areas and different ways of intercalating constituents, which give them unique properties. Wang et al.19 utilized a simple autoclave methodology to fabricate metal-free elemental RP that was responsive to visible light. In a typical process, an aqueous dispersion of commercial RP was placed in an autoclave and heated to 200 °C for 12 h. The resulting crystallized RP was modified further by doping with various amounts of platinum nanoparticles. The platinum-doped RP exhibited a monoclinic phase of RP (JCPDS card no. 44-0906), which was well established by its structural XRD characterization. UV/visible diffuse absorption studies revealed a significant blue shift in the absorption edge (700–680 nm), which was due to disorder in the structure. Therefore, autoclave treatment is a suitable technique for producing different defects such as stress in the lattice, which may give RP or RP-based composites unique properties. Studies of the photocatalytic formation of hydrogen that were evaluated via a self-designed xenon photoirradiation system showed that crystalline RP produced hydrogen at a rate of 0.08 μmol h−1, which is almost double the rate of hydrogen production by amorphous RP under similar conditions. This enhanced photocatalytic production of hydrogen by crystalline RP was attributed to its larger BET surface area (39 m2 g−1) and more crystalline nature compared with amorphous RP (18 m2 g−1). The production of hydrogen increased further upon loading the surface with Pt nanoparticles of different sizes (5–90 nm) under photoirradiation. Pt at small loadings (1–3 wt%) acted as a co-catalyst by reducing the activation potential of hydrogen formation and suppressing the recombination of photogenerated electron/hole pairs during the gas evolution reaction. The proposed mechanism further explains the increase in the evolution of hydrogen over RP under photoirradiation. Under photoirradiation, electrons are excited from the VB to the CB of RP, leaving behind holes. These excited electrons are injected further onto the surface of the Pt particles. The Pt particles act as a co-catalyst and upon the addition of 1% Pt a 12-fold increase in activity was observed. These electrons further reduced H2O on the Pt surface to generate H2.19
In a similar continuation of the above work, hierarchical RP/YPO4 hollow microsphere composites were investigated for the photocatalytic production of hydrogen under photoirradiation. The composites (which consisted of crystalline YPO4 nanosheets and amorphous RP) were prepared by a reaction between amorphous RP and an aqueous solution of YCl3 via a hydrothermal method. The formation of microspheres increased the surface area considerably, which was beneficial for the catalytic properties. A study of light absorption showed that after adding RP the composite photocatalyst displayed an absorption edge near the visible region (700 nm) and could be excited easily to produce photogenerated electron/hole pairs under photoirradiation. A series of samples with different molar ratios of RP to YPO4 showed that a composite with 55 wt% YPO4 provided 6 times higher photocatalytic production of hydrogen than bare RP. This enhanced effect was attributed to the charge transfer mechanism in the RP/YPO4 composite photocatalyst and the band position of YPO4. The conduction and valence bands of YPO4 are more negative than the reduction and oxidation levels for H2O. Therefore, owing to the narrow band structures of RP, under photoirradiation photogenerated electrons were transferred to the CB band of RP and holes from the VB of RP were transferred to the VB of YPO4 in the RP/YPO4 composite. The charge transfer of photogenerated electron/hole pairs in RP/YPO4 was responsible for increasing the rate of hydrogen formation under photoirradiation.30
Another methodology, namely, the coupling of RP with graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) in an inert atmosphere at 380 °C resulted in the efficient formation of hydrogen under a 500 W xenon arc lamp. For the photocatalytic H2 evolution reaction, the RP/g-C3N4 heterojunction was modified further by Pt (0.5 wt%) via an in situ photodeposition method. Large g-C3N4 nanosheets with a thickness of several tens of nanometers wrapped on the surface of RP helped form a heterojunction between RP and g-C3N4 and increase charge transfer. A study of absorption by RP/g-C3N4 heterostructures revealed a mixed absorption edge due to RP (700 nm) and g-C3N4 (460 nm). The RP/g-C3N4 heterojunction with 5 wt% g-C3N4 loaded on the surface of RP displayed a significant increase in the rate of photocatalytic formation of hydrogen compared with those of pure RP and pure g-C3N4. From the H2 evolution reaction on the RP/g-C3N4 heterojunction, it was concluded that thermal annealing and different wt% loadings of g-C3N4 on RP leads to strong interfacial interactions. Therefore, the effective separation of photogenerated electrons and holes occurs, which leads to enhanced photocatalytic activities. The proposed mechanism suggests that owing to the value of the CB edge of g-C3N4 (−1.2 V vs. NHE) being more negative than that of RP (−0.25 V vs. NHE), under photoirradiation generated electrons from the CB of g-C3N4 are transferred to RP through the interface. The increase in the photocatalytic evolution of H2 was also explained as above. Owing to the difference between the VB edge potentials of RP and g-C3N4, photogenerated holes from RP move towards the surface of g-C3N4. These photoinduced charge carriers are responsible for the increase in H2 production under photoirradiation.20
In another development in the field of RP-based composites for the H2 evolution reaction, a RP composite modified with Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles exhibited higher photocatalytic formation of H2 than Pt-modified RP under similar conditions. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of a series of Ni(OH)2-loaded RP composites with an optimized loading of Ni(OH)2, which were prepared by a precipitation method at room temperature, revealed the successful deposition of Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles on the surface of RP. Comparative UV-vis diffuse reflectance studies revealed a significant increase in absorption above 700 nm for RP, which is typical intrinsic behavior. In addition, the band gap of RP was calculated to be 1.8 eV, which is also in accordance with the reported values. In contrast, the composite material showed that upon the deposition of Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles the absorption band edge extended further to 600–800 nm. RP displayed a negligible rate of formation of H2 owing to the rapid recombination of photogenerated electron/hole pairs. On the other hand, after the addition of a small amount of Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles, the rate of formation of H2 increased, reaching a maximum at a Ni(OH)2 content of 0.5 wt% and decreased with further increase in the loading of Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles. An excess of Ni(OH)2 leads to the shielding of (or a decrease in) the surface active sites of RP, which suppresses the contact of sacrificial agents with RP, hence decreasing the catalytic activity. This shows that the specific content of Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles that gives rise to optimal catalytic properties in the composite system is ∼0.5 wt%. The remarkable enhancement in the photocatalytic activity of the RP/Ni(OH)2 heterostructure was attributed to the CB potential of Ni2+/Ni (−0.23 V vs. SHE, pH = 0) being less negative compared with the CB potential of RP (−0.25 V vs. SHE, pH = 0), which are both more negative than the reduction potential of H+/H2 (0 V vs. SHE, pH = 0). Therefore, under photoirradiation photogenerated electrons from the CB of RP are transferred to Ni(OH)2, which reduces H+, and photoinduced holes in the VB of RP help oxidize the sacrificial reagents. The excess electrons on the Ni(OH)2 surface lead to the partial reduction of Ni(OH)2 to metallic Ni atoms. The presence of Ni(OH)2 and conducting metallic Ni in the RP/Ni(OH)2 composite facilitate the migration and separation of photoinduced charge carriers and subsequently increase the recombination lifetime of the photoinduced electrons and holes, consequently increasing the rate of formation of H2 under photoirradiation.21
Recently, the production of highly visible-light-active metal-free elemental RP using a simple mechanical process was reported.58 Noble-metal-free, highly visible-light-active elemental RP was prepared by mechanical ball milling, which is a reproducible and low-cost synthesis process (Fig. 4a). The light absorption properties of commercial RP and milled RP showed that both commercial and milled RP displayed wide visible-light absorption in the solar spectrum, which highlights their potential applications in visible-light photocatalysis (Fig. 4b). Ground RP exhibited a higher absorption edge in the visible region compared with commercial RP. This shift in the absorbance edge of milled RP in the visible region is expected to improve its photocatalytic activity under visible-light irradiation, which suggests an improvement in its structure. The effects of the ball milling time and structural improvement on the photocatalytic activity of RP under visible-light photoirradiation were examined using rhodamine B (RhB) as a test organic pollutant. The corresponding degradation graph clearly shows that RP milled for 36 h exhibited a much higher degradation rate, which was approximately 6 times higher than that of commercial RP (Fig. 4c). The significant enhancement in the photocatalytic activity of milled RP was examined by analysis of its surface area, because mechanical grinding reduces the particle size of RP and increases its surface area. The improvements in the visible-light absorption and photocatalytic activity of milled RP were attributed to the generation and separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and their migration to surface reaction sites under visible-light irradiation. The superior visible-light photocatalytic activity of RP milled for 36 h might be due to the crystalline nature of the milled RP, which promotes the absorption of visible light and the generation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs over the surface of RP-36h (Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  (a) Proposed schematic of the mechanical grinding of RP in a ball mill, (b) UV-visible diffuse absorbance spectra of unmilled RP (RP-0h) and RP milled for different times (RP-12h, RP-24h, RP-36h, and RP-48h), (c) logarithmic changes in the concentration (ln(C/C0)) of RhB degraded by RP-0h, RP-12h, RP-24h, RP-36h, and RP-48h as a function of the visible-light photoirradiation time, and (d) proposed photocatalytic mechanism for the photodegradation of RhB by RP under visible-light photoirradiation.58 
Nanostructured crystalline phosphorus fibers recently developed by Shen et al.22 exhibited efficient visible-light-induced photocatalytic applications. Phosphorus fibers with a size of ∼150–200 μm were synthesized by chemical vapor deposition from commercial RP at a pressure of ∼0.03 to 0.09 MPa on an appropriate substrate in a quartz capsule to avoid the sublimation of RP. After gradual cooling of the quartz tube, fibrous phosphorus of micron size was obtained on the surface of a silicon/silicon nanowire wafer. Lattice matching between RP and the substrate acted as a potential key factor for its controllable growth into a fibrous morphology. These crystalline phosphorus fibers exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity compared with a phosphorus rod. Comparative degradation of a model dye (rhodamine B) under visible-light irradiation showed degradation of ∼46.4% and 28.8% by the crystalline phosphorus fibers and phosphorus rod, respectively, after 6 h of photoirradiation. The fact that the rate constant for the crystalline fibers was ∼1.6 times higher compared with that for phosphorus sub-micron rods was attributed to the wide visible-light absorption ability and different crystalline phase of the former. In addition, the layered structure of the crystalline phosphorus fibers also favored the separation of photoinduced electrons and holes, thereby enhancing the photocatalytic activity under visible-light irradiation.22
RP also exhibited promising applications in the field of photocatalytic disinfection. Little success has been achieved with RP for bacterial inactivation under the full solar spectrum of visible light. A simple treatment of aqueous commercial RP by hydrothermal treatment at 200 °C resulted in an active disinfectant agent for Escherichia coli under a handmade solar-light setup with an intensity of 193 mW cm−2. The hydrothermal treatment lowered the band gap to 1.42 eV, which appears to be the factor that contributes most to its potential applications in the visible-light region (Fig. 5a).23 The work showed a high rate of cell loss of 2 × 107 colony-forming units in 90 min with 100 mg L−1 RP under visible-light irradiation, which was in contrast to a control experiment in the dark, further confirming the importance of light and RP (Fig. 5b). The proposed photocatalytic mechanism under photoirradiation suggests that E. coli was inactivated due to degradation of the bacterial cell envelope by the reactive oxidative species generated from RP under visible-light irradiation (Fig. 5c). Firstly, the reactive oxidative species oxidized the cell membrane-associated protein and adenosine triphosphate; thus, the bacterial energy metabolism became insufficient to maintain the potential of the cell membrane. Therefore, the permeability of the cell membrane became high, which caused the leakage and decay of proteins and deoxyribonucleic acid, leading to cell death (Table 1).23
 Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis DRS spectrum, (b) kinetics of photocatalytic inactivation under xenon lamp and sunlight irradiation in the presence of RP, and (c) illustration summarizing the proposed bactericidal mechanism of RP under visible light: RP quickly generates reactive oxygen species, which subsequently inhibit the bacterial surface metabolism and oxidize intracellular components. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.) 
Table 1 Overview of the various fabrication processes for the preparation of different RP-based photocatalysts




Type of photocatalyst
Co-catalyst
Preparation method
Visible-light application
Reference




RP
 
Autoclave treatment
Hydrogen formation
19


Phosphorus fibers
 
Chemical vapour deposition
Rhodamine B dye degradation
22


Hierarchical RP–YPO4 hollow microspheres
YPO4
Hydrothermal method
Hydrogen formation
30


RP–graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) composite
 
Annealing method
Hydrogen formation and hydrocarbon fuel (CH4)
20


Ni(OH)2–RP
Pt
Precipitation method
Hydrogen evolution
21


Black P–RP heterostructure
 
Mechanical ball milling
Rhodamine B dye degradation
28


RP
 
Autoclave treatment
Bacterial inactivation (Escherichia coli)
23


RP–BiPO4
 
Hydrothermal method
Methylene blue degradation
11




Recent update on RP-based nanocomposites as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries
In addition to the conversion of solar energy for sustainable environment-friendly development, light-weight, low-cost and high-capacity energy storage materials will be a major issue for future applications. Recently, considerable research has been carried out on the development of effective energy storage materials such as sodium-ion batteries (SIBs). SIBs are considered an alternative to lithium-ion batteries because of the low cost and high abundance of sodium compared with lithium. Among the materials reported for SIBs, RP is a very promising candidate as an energy storage material because of its high theoretical capacity (∼2600 mA h g−1).
Mechanical ball milling is an easy, green and effective technique for the formation of composites of RP with other constituent materials. Yu et al.,47 who prepared RP–graphene nanosheet (RP–GN) hybrids with mass ratios of commercial RP to GN of 7:3 and stacks milled at 400 rpm for 1000 min under an argon atmosphere, reported that the initial ratios of the constituents had a large impact on the properties of the final composite. To compare their properties and efficiency, they prepared different composites of RP with other carbonaceous materials, i.e., RP–carbon composites, phosphorus and graphene stacks, separately under similar experimental conditions. The high shear stress caused by high-speed ball milling resulted in exfoliation of the graphene stacks into a few layered structures, which gave a highly electronically conducting matrix of graphene nanosheets with small particle sizes of RP. Ball milling also affected the morphology of the materials. Continuous milling resulted in exfoliation of the graphene nanosheets, which easily hybridized with the small particles of RP to form a three-dimensional hybrid structure of RP–GN. The highly exfoliated GN with RP exhibited high conductivity because of its few layered structures and helped increase the overall conductivity of the hybrids because it maintained good contact between the electrode and the charge collector during the charging/discharging process. Owing to the above texture, a RP–GN hybrid electrode exhibited a high capacity of 2517 mA h g−1 with ∼60% retention after 300 cycles. The increased capacity and good stability were attributed to the 3D integrated network structure and P–O–C bonds, which were the main reasons for the good cycling retention and maintaining the electrical connection between the phosphorus and the conductive matrix, respectively.47
RP exhibited promising features for the modification of original lithium-ion batteries for high electrochemical performance. Xiao et al.41 suggested a suitable application of RP in improving the electrochemical performance of advanced lithium-ion batteries. Nanosized RP obtained by a high-energy ball milling process in an aqueous solution of polyvinylpyrrolidone with subsequent sonication was used to fabricate RP–TiO2 nanocomposites. The subsequent addition of a solution of isopropyl titanate to the nanosized RP resulted in the attachment of TiO2 particles to the nanosized RP, which was then filtered and dried. The electrochemical performance of bare TiO2 and the RP–TiO2 nanocomposites was examined to evaluate their lithium insertion/extraction capacity for lithium-ion batteries. The studies showed that the combined properties of RP and amorphous TiO2 not only provided an increased reversible capacity but also maintained the structural stability, exhibiting remarkable electrochemical performance (369 mA h g−1, 100 cycles). This unique designed structure of RP–TiO2 with increased structural stability could offer promising features for anodic materials with high electrochemical performance for advanced lithium-ion batteries (Table 2).41
The P–O–C bonds formed during the mechanical process helped maintain contact between the phosphorus and carbon nanotubes for charge transfer, which became an important parameter for an analysis of the exact electrochemical behavior of the materials during electrochemical analysis (Fig. 6a). A special class of polymer binder was also used to fabricate the electrode for cycling stability, as shown in Fig. 6b and c. The electrode was initially fabricated via a normal conventional method, after which it was integrated further using a solution of sodium carboxymethylcellulose–citric acid. The citric acid functioned as a cross-linker to form a 3D network upon drying the electrode at 150 °C for 2 h. The electrode modified with the cross-linked polymer binder, i.e., sodium carboxymethylcellulose–citric acid, exhibited higher capacity and coulombic efficiency than the sodium carboxymethylcellulose binder (2134.7 mA h g−1 vs. 2113.3 mA h g−1, 84.7% vs. 81.7%). The formation of such good contact bonding between the materials helped retain ∼91% of the capacity at 2134 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 6  (a) Cross-linked polymer binder formed by the thermally induced condensation of sodium carboxymethylcellulose and citric acid (c-NaCMC-CA) and the interaction between the P-CNT hybrid and the c-NaCMC-CA binder; (b) cycling stability and (c) coulombic efficiency of P-CNT mixture/NaCMC, P-CNT hybrid/NaCMC, and P-CNT hybrid/c-NaCMC-CA electrodes at a current rate of 260 mA g−1 for activation and then at 520 mA g−1 in subsequent cycles. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.) 
The vaporization/adsorption method for the preparation of RP–carbon nanocomposites is also a favored methodology because the technique may lead to the uniform intermingling of the constituent materials, hence producing composite materials with enhanced properties. Wang et al.42 prepared RP-carbon nanocomposites using a simple vaporization/adsorption method and reported a high lithium storage capacity as an anode material in lithium-ion batteries. The synthesis methodology involved optimized ratios of RP and porous carbon in a small beaker placed on the bottom of a stainless-steel vessel, which was sealed and heated to 450 °C for 3 h. The resulting RP-carbon nanocomposite exhibited increased charge/discharge and reversible capacity (up to 800 mA h g−1) with high stability and coulombic efficiency. The electronically conductive behavior of porous carbon and the capacitive nature of RP played an important role in achieving high energy density of anode materials in lithium-ion batteries.42 A similar methodology adopted by Wang et al.46 gave an amorphous RP-active carbon (RP–AC) composite for further high-performance lithium-ion batteries. In a typical description of the synthesis methodology, commercially available activated carbon was spread over an upside-down crucible top, whereas commercially available RP was placed in the bottom of a ceramic crucible, and the system was sealed in a stainless-steel vessel under an argon atmosphere. The entire assembly was heated to 500 °C for 4 h followed by 300 °C for 20 h. After the reaction was complete, the entire assembly was cooled to room temperature and the RP-AC composite was obtained was washed several times with ethanol and deionized water to remove surface impurities. The electrochemical results showed that the RP–AC composite exhibited a high capacity of ∼1550 mA h g−1 with capacity retention of ∼83.6% after 50 cycles. The RP–AC composite delivered good cycling stability and coulombic efficiency (∼97.5%). This improvement was attributed to the presence of nanosized RP and its homogeneous dispersion over the conductive AC substrate.
A combination of electrospinning followed by the carbonization of porous carbon nanofibers (PCNFs) resulted in RP being embedded in the pores of the PCNFs. Li et al.58,59 demonstrated a flexible free-standing electrode by encapsulating crystalline RP in porous carbon nanofibers (PCNFs) using the above-mentioned process. The PCNFs that were synthesized by electrospinning were subjected to further carbonization in a sealed glass vessel containing RP and PCNFs at a temperature of 450 °C for 2 h. The transformation process was completed by slow cooling to 260 °C and subsequent washing with carbon disulfide to remove white phosphorus from the surface. The as-prepared free-standing film of the RP–PCNFs composite, when used directly as the working electrode for an analysis of its lithium ion storage performance, exhibited a high reversible capacity of ∼2030 mA h g−1 based on the mass of RP after 100 cycles at 0.1C, whereas when cycled at 11C it displayed a high capacity of 380 mA h g−1 for 10 cycles based on the mass of RP. Even at a rate of 1C, this composite could deliver a superior capacity of 1042 mA h g−1 based on the content of RP after 100 cycles. The enhanced performance was attributed to the special structural design of the RP–PCNFs composite, in which RP embedded in the pores of the PCNFs prevented capacity loss during the cycling tests, whereas the PCNFs matrix provided good conductivity, mechanical strength and rapid mobility of the charge carriers between the electrode and the charge collector.59
Recent update on RP-based composites as an anode material for sodium-ion batteries
In addition to the lithium-ion battery applications of the RP-based composite, Kim et al.43 examined the RP–carbon composite as an anode material for sodium-ion batteries, which was synthesized by a simple and facile mechanical ball milling process using RP powder and super P carbon as the starting materials. The electrochemical results for the anode material showed that the RP–carbon composite exhibited an excellent reversible capacity of 1890 mA h g−1, which is the highest value reported among the various anode materials in sodium-ion batteries. The anode material displayed good stability and, from the cycling stability results, only a negligible change in the performance of the RP–carbon electrode was observed after 30 continuous cycles. In addition, the rate capability and appropriate redox potential exhibited by the RP–carbon composite were also ideal for anode applications in sodium-ion batteries.43 Song et al.44 further showed that replacing super P carbon with graphene led to a further enhancement in the electrochemical properties. The optimized weight ratio of commercial RP to graphene stacks of 7:3, when ground for 16 h at 400 rpm under an argon atmosphere (Fig. 7a), brought about the reduction of RP to the nanoscale and its binding to exfoliated graphene. The structural characterization by XRD was well matched with the reported planes, whereas the broad XRD peaks indicated the amorphous nature of graphene in the RP–graphene hybrid (Fig. 7b). The high-energy shear force that developed during the mechanical milling process reduced the large particles of RP to the nanoscale along with the exfoliation of graphene into nanosheets. The exfoliated graphene was then bound to the surfaces of the phosphorus particles during mechanical mixing, thereby yielding a phosphorus/graphene nanosheet hybrid. The simultaneous exfoliation and reduction in size resulted in the perfect bonding of graphene to RP, and the RP–graphene nanosheet hybrid exhibited significantly high specific capacity (∼2077 mA h g−1) with ∼95% retention and ∼99% coulombic efficiency after the first cycle (Fig. 7c). This improved electrochemical performance of the RP–graphene nanosheet was attributed to the good chemical contact between RP and the graphene nanosheet, in which the graphene nanosheet acted as a conductive matrix to increase the electrical conductivity of the hybrid and helped maintain electrical contact with phosphorus during the large volume changes.44
 Fig. 7  (a) Proposed schematic diagram of the synthesis of the RP–graphene nanosheets hybrid, (b) XRD patterns of bare RP, graphene stacks and the phosphorus/graphene nanosheets hybrid, (c) cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the phosphorus/graphene hybrid anode at a current rate of 260 mA g−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.) 
In another substitute for the ball milling process employed by Li et al., crystalline RP–carbon nanotube composites (RP–CNT) were successfully fabricated by simple hand grinding in an agate mortar.45 A variety of RP–CNT and RP–carbon black composites were produced at different weight ratios of the constituents (Fig. 8a). Similarly to the bonding observed in the case of ball milling, a high-resolution transmission electron microscopy image also suggested that the carbon nanotubes were present in the form of multilayers of graphene on the phosphorus surface (Fig. 8b). The application of the RP–CNT composites as an anode material in sodium-ion batteries is promising owing to the similar features that were observed, as in the case of RP–graphene nanosheets obtained by ball milling. The charge/discharge results for bare RP initially showed a discharge capacity of ∼1600 mA h g−1 with an irreversible electrochemical performance, whereas a RP–CNT composite electrode displayed enhanced performance with an initial discharge capacity of ∼2210 mA h g−1. Therefore, compared with bare RP, the RP–CNT composite electrode exhibited a ∼40% higher charge/discharge capacity (Fig. 8c). A cycling stability test also suggested that the RP–CNT composite electrode had good cycling stability for up to 10 cycles. The enhanced performance of the RP–CNT composite electrode in reversible sodium-ion storage is due to the combined characteristics of CNTs and RP. The CNTs facilitated the wrapping of RP and increased the buffer space between the RP particles during the volume expansion of the particles. The conductive nature of the CNTs not only provided pathways for electron transport between the RP particles, but also helped increase the conductance between RP and the current collector.45
 Fig. 8  (a) Proposed function of CNTs during volume expansion, (b) HRTEM image of the RP–CNT composite, and (c) charge–discharge curves of RP and the RP–CNT composite at a current rate of 143 mA g−1 from 0 to 1.5 V. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.) 
Zhu et al.40 produced a RP composite with single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) by a vaporization–condensation method, which displayed a large sodium storage capacity. The RP–single-walled carbon nanotube (RP-SWCNT) composite, which had a uniform distribution of RP between tangled bundles of SWCNTs, was fabricated using a modified vaporization–condensation method. High-temperature treatment at 600 °C of a glass tube filled with RP and SWCNTs under vacuum conditions and further cooling to room temperature resulted in the perfect intercalation of the constituent materials with each other. RP vapor condensed between bundles of SWCNTs, resulting in a RP–single-walled carbon nanotube composite, as shown schematically in Fig. 9a.40
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of the RP-SWCNT composite and (b) cycling performance of the RP-SWCNT composite at 2000 mA g−1 with its desodiation capacities at the 25th, 50th, 75th,…, 2000th cycle. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.) 
The as-prepared RP–SWCNT composite exhibited excellent electrochemical behavior for sodium storage with high reversible capacity, fast sodiation–desodiation capability, and high electrochemical performance at a range of current densities. Excellent long-term cycling performance with a capacity retention of ∼80% after 2000 sodiation–desodiation cycles was observed (Fig. 9b). The high performance displayed by RP–SWCNT was attributed to the uniform mixing and good contact between RP and SWCNT, which helped increase the conductivity of the hybrid and suppress charge transfer resistance at the surface of the RP–SWCNT electrode. These results clearly show that the as-prepared RP–SWCNT composite prepared by the vaporization–condensation method is a very promising anode for SIBs.40
Application overview
Potential applications in photocatalysis
Owing to its reduced band gap (∼1.4 to 2 eV) and effective absorption properties over a wide spectrum of solar energy, RP is considered a good candidate for a wide range of environmental and energy-related applications such as the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants and production of hydrogen (Fig. 10). Owing to its small band gap, it can utilize ∼48% of visible light and ∼44% of near-infrared light, which makes it suitable for replacing traditional photocatalysts. Because of its narrow band gap, RP is easily photoexcited by applying a small amount of energy, thereby generating highly energetic oxidative and reductive species. Therefore, RP-based nanocomposites have a large number of applications in the degradation of various types of dye pollutants used in the textile and food industries. Shen et al.22 reported that sub-micron single-crystalline phosphorus fibers/microfibers obtained in a capsule via a chemical vapor deposition method displayed much higher photocatalytic activity for decomposing RhB under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). The high photocatalytic activity was attributed to the wider visible-light absorption of crystalline fibrous phosphorus, which originated from its different crystalline phases and electronic structures. The layered structure of fibrous phosphorus also favored the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. In a further extension of their work,28 heterostructures of black P and RP prepared by a simple ball milling method exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity for the degradation of RhB under visible-light irradiation compared with cadmium sulfide nanoparticles. The results showed that the ratio of black P to RP had a significant effect on the photocatalytic properties, and the optimized ratios gave the best photocatalytic efficiency. Similarly, Zong et al.11 reported that RP–bismuth(III) orthophosphate composites prepared by a hydrothermal method displayed improved photocatalytic efficiency for decomposing the dye pollutant methylene blue under visible-light illumination.
 Fig. 10  Possible applications of RP-based nanocomposite materials in various fields. 
Hydrogen evolution reaction
In addition to the degradation of pollutants, RP also has suitable CB and VB positions, which favor the charge transfer phenomenon during the water splitting reaction.19 The band structure (∼1.4–2.0 eV band gap) of elemental RP calculated with the help of density functional theory predicts that the reduction of water by RP under irradiation is energetically possible (Table 2).
Table 2 Overview of various fabrication processes for the preparation of different RP-based anode materials for lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries




Material
Preparation method
Application
Reference




RP–TiO2 composites
High-energy ball milling
Lithium-ion batteries
41


RP–single-walled carbon nanotube composite
Annealing method
Anode for sodium-ion batteries
40


RP–graphene hybrid
Mechanical ball milling method
Anode for sodium-ion batteries
44


RP–carbon composite
Ball milling method
Anode for sodium-ion batteries
43


RP–porous carbon composite
Heating method
Lithium-ion batteries
60


RP–carbon nanotube composite
Mechanical ball milling
Reversible sodium-ion storage
45


RP–carbon nanotube composite
Mechanical ball milling
Advanced sodium-ion battery anode
37


RP–carbon nanocomposite
Mechanical ball milling
Anodes for lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries
48


RP–graphene nanosheet
Mechanical ball milling
Anodes for lithium-ion batteries
47


RP–carbon composite
Mechanical ball milling
Anodes for sodium-ion batteries
43


RP–active carbon
Vaporization–adsorption method
Anode for lithium-ion batteries
46


RP–porous carbon nanofibers
Vaporization–adsorption transformation
Anode for lithium-ion batteries
59


RP–porous carbon nanofibers
Mechanical ball milling
Anode for lithium-ion batteries
42


RP–TiO2 composites
Mechanical ball milling
Anode for lithium-ion batteries
41


Carbon@RP
Mechanical ball milling
Anode for sodium-ion batteries
38




Wang et al.19 reported that owing to the small band gap of RP, it possessed high photocatalytic activity for the production of hydrogen under visible-light irradiation. Amorphous RP upon crystallization exhibited an increased surface area and consequently enhanced photocatalytic activity due to a decrease in the number of electron–hole trapping centers. The activity further increased upon the addition of platinum nanoparticles as a co-catalyst and underwent an approximately 12-fold increase upon the addition of 1% platinum nanoparticles to RP.30
In addition, RP modified with yttrium(III) phosphate microspheres (doped with 53 wt% YPO4) exhibited up to 6-fold higher activity than bare RP for the hydrogen evolution reaction under visible-light irradiation. The transfer of photogenerated holes from RP to the valence band of yttrium(III) phosphate in a RP–yttrium(III) phosphate composite and the consequent separation of the photogenerated carriers, thereby eliminating the recombination process, were the main contributing factors to the enhanced activity.
Yuan et al.20 reported that a small amount of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) on the surface of RP, which consequently produced a RP/g-C3N4 heterojunction, led to a considerable improvement in the photocatalytic activity for the production of H2 and conversion of CO2 into CH4. Dang et al.21 also reported that RP modified with Ni(OH)2 obtained via a precipitation method exhibited ∼1.12 times higher photocatalytic activity for the evolution of H2 than Pt-deposited RP under visible-light irradiation. The enhanced photocatalytic activity in these cases was also facilitated by the effective separation of charges, which thereby limited the recombination process, as explained above.
Photocatalyst for bacterial inactivation
In addition to the decomposition and removal of organic pollutants from water, the removal of pathogenic microorganisms from drinking water using visible-light-active photocatalysts has attracted considerable interest for the control of several waterborne diseases, such as SARS, Ebola virus, avian influenzas, and pneumonia. Pioneer work by Xia et al.23 reported that RP acts as a highly efficient photocatalyst for the inactivation of Escherichia coli K-12 under the full spectrum of visible light, even sunlight. The efficient inactivation of E. coli was achieved using 100 mg L−1 RP, with which a cell loss of 2 × 107 colony-forming units mL−1 was achieved within 90 min under visible-light irradiation. In contrast to membranolysis, which is induced by other disinfectants such as chlorine and ozone, the disinfectant effect was mainly attributed to the formation of cis–syn cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in the genomic DNA of the organisms. Therefore, UV-induced lesions inhibited the normal replication of the genome, resulting in the inactivation of the microorganisms.
Supplementary material for lithium- and sodium-ion batteries
Furthermore, RP-based nanocomposites are some of the most attractive anode materials for lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries because of their high theoretical capacity (∼2600 mA h g−1), low cost, due to the abundant supply, and high chemical stability. This high capacity makes RP-based nanocomposites good and promising materials that are expected to provide power sources for portable electronic devices and vehicles in the near future. Song et al.44 showed that a RP-graphene nanosheet hybrid obtained via facile ball milling displayed a high reversible sodium-ion storage capacity of ∼2077 mA h g−1 with excellent cycling stability (∼1700 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles) and high coulombic efficiency (>98%). Similarly, Li et al.45 substituted graphene by CNT and utilized a simple hand grinding technique to prepare a RP–CNTs composite. The RP–CNTs composite exhibited a reversible sodium-ion storage capacity of ∼1675 mA h g−1 for sodium-ion batteries with a capacity retention of ∼76.6% after 10 cycles. Using carbon, Wang et al.60 fabricated a RP-carbon composite with a high lithium-ion storage capacity of ∼800 mA h g−1 at a rate of 100 mA g−1 for battery applications with high coulombic efficiency. Another study of carbon-based composites48 reported that a RP–carbon nanocomposite possessed high initial capacities of approximately ∼1700 and ∼1300 mA h g−1 in lithium and sodium half-cells, respectively. Graphene and CNT interacted with the phosphorus particles by chemical bonding, thereby increasing the electrical conductivity. These carbon materials behaved as a conductive matrix to maintain electrical contact with phosphorus, which dramatically improved the electrochemical performance.
In addition to carbon material-based RP composites, a few studies have reported the applicability of utilizing metal oxides for lithium- and sodium-ion batteries. Xiao et al.41 found that a RP–TiO2 composite exhibited increased lithium ion storage capacity. TiO2 acted like concrete to prevent RP from escaping the electrode, whereas RP played the role of steel, which could increase the electrochemical capacity of the composite. The unique reinforced concrete structure provided a novel strategy for the fabrication of a highly electrochemically active RP–TiO2 composite with a storage capacity of ∼369 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles as well as an acceptable rate capacity of ∼202 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 1 A g−1. Wang et al.46 reported that a RP–active carbon composite prepared via a vaporization–adsorption method delivered an excellent lithium-ion storage capacity of ∼1550 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of ∼83.6% after 50 cycles. The detailed applications of the RP-based materials have been discussed in various parts of this review.
Summary and perspective
Semiconductor-induced photocatalysis is a promising environmentally friendly method for converting solar energy into chemical energy. Many studies have focused on the development of a new class of photocatalysts that absorb the largest part of solar energy and can be further utilized for various applications, because most semiconductors absorb only ∼4% of the solar spectrum. Therefore, recent studies have searched for highly visible-light-active photocatalysts that can cover ∼43% of the solar energy spectrum. Recently, the wide visible-light absorption and narrow band gap of elemental red phosphorus have prompted researchers to develop effective red phosphorus-based photocatalysts with significantly improved catalytic activity for the formation of hydrogen and degradation of organic pollutants. Recently, many researchers have developed RP-based nanocomposite materials for environmental remediation. In addition, the development of a RP-based hybrid structure has made substantial contributions towards the preparation of effective and efficient electrode materials for energy storage, especially lithium-ion and/or sodium-ion battery applications.
This review discussed a few recent studies on the synthesis of red phosphorus-based hybrids, along with their improved photocatalytic activity under visible light. This review also focused on recent developments in red phosphorus-based materials for battery research, such as in lithium-ion and/or sodium-ion batteries. After the first report on RP-based photocatalysis in 2012, elemental RP-based photocatalysts have appeared as a new generation of photocatalysts because of their high visible-light absorption ability owing to their narrow band gap. Another important reason for using RP for the production of hydrogen is that the band edge of RP is energetically suitable for the water splitting reaction under visible-light irradiation, which is also proven by theoretical calculations using DFT. Although RP is highly visible-light-active, its photocatalytic activity is low because of a high recombination rate of photogenerated electrons and holes. Therefore, several studies have focused on improving the photocatalytic activity of RP using various co-catalysts such as g-C3N4, YPO4, Ni(OH)2, Pt, and black phosphorus-based hybrid materials. The role of these co-catalysts in improving the photocatalytic activity of RP has been discussed. The addition of these co-catalysts facilitated the mobility of charge carriers and enhanced the photocatalytic activity of RP; for example, a 12-fold increase in the catalytic activity of RP was achieved by a 1 wt% loading of Pt. Similarly, RP loaded with 53 wt% YPO4 was 6 times more active than RP for the photocatalytic formation of hydrogen. Furthermore, considerable efforts have been made to fabricate RP-based composites as novel electrode materials for battery applications because of the increasing demand for energy storage applications. However, most energy storage electrode materials used in batteries are based on inorganic materials, which were prepared from the limited mineral resources of lithium and/or sodium ions. Therefore, earth-abundant materials such as RP are used for the preparation of lithium and/or sodium storage electrodes. Owing to the significantly higher storage performance of RP-based hybrid electrodes, this naturally abundant material will find other applications. Recently, many studies have reported a highest storage capacity of up to the range of 2077 mA h g−1 for RP-based composite materials owing to their highest theoretical storage capacity (∼2600 mA h g−1). Although RP-based composite materials are advanced electrode materials for energy storage applications, a few challenges associated with these materials such as the low electrical conductivity of pristine RP and large changes in volume during charging/discharging have hindered further applications for practical purposes. This is because a material with low electrical conductivity can be polarized easily and a change in volume during the charging/discharging process causes the loss of contact between the electrode and the current collector, which leads to a decline in the effective capacity of the materials. Therefore, more research will be needed on how to increase the electrical conductivity and prevent changes in volume during lithiation/delithiation and/or sodiation/desodiation. In summary, various types of conductive materials can be used to increase the conductivity of the active materials or hybrids and a small trial methodology was used to obtain the desired structure of RP-based composite materials.
AcknowledgementsThis study was supported by the Priority Research Centers Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2014R1A6A1031189) and by the Basic Science Research Program (Grant No. 2015R1D1A3A03018029) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education.
Notes and referencesX. Chen, L. Liu and F. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1861–1885 RSC .X. Pan, M. Yang, X. Fu, N. Zhang and Y. Xu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3601–3614 RSC .R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2011, 294, 269–271 Search PubMed .R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, H. Irie and T. Ohwaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9824–9852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, S. Kalathil, A. Nisar, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9238–9246 RSC .M. M. Khan, S. A. Ansari, D. Pradhan, M. O. Ansari, D. H. Han, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 637–644 CAS .S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, M. O. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 162–170 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, M. O. Ansari and M. H. Cho, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 4708–4715 RSC .X. Dong and F. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23642–23652 CAS .H. Xu, S. Ouyang, L. Liu, P. Reunchan, N. Umezawa and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12642–12661 CAS .S. Zong, W. Wei, H. Cui, Z. Jiang, X. Lü, M. Zhang and J. Xie, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2015, 19, 361–367 CrossRef CAS .S. Wang, L. Zhao, L. Bai, J. Yan, Q. Jiang and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7439–7445 CAS .Q. Guo, C. Zhou, Z. Ma, Z. Ren, H. Fan and X. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016 10.1039/C5CS00448A .I. Chauhan, S. Aggrawal, Chandravati and P. Mohanty, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 83036–83055 RSC .T. Wang, X. Yan, S. Zhao, B. Lin, C. Xue, G. Yang, S. Ding, B. Yang, C. Ma, G. Yang and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15611–15619 CAS .Y. Lv, L. Yu, H. Huang, H. Liu and Y. Feng, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 488, 314–319 CrossRef CAS .H. Uk Lee, S. C. Lee, J. Won, B. C. Son, S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Y. Park, H. S. Kim, Y. C. Lee and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8691–8696 CrossRef PubMed .T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .F. Wang, W. K. H. Ng, J. C. Yu, H. Zhu, C. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 499–414 Search PubMed .Y. P. Yuan, S. W. Cao, Y. S. Liao, L. S. Yin and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 164–168 CrossRef CAS .H. Dang, X. Dong, Y. Dong, H. Fanb and Y. Qiu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 44823–44826 RSC .Z. Shen, Z. F. Hu, W. Wang, Y. Li, S.-F. Lee, D. K. L. Chan, T. Gu and J. C. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14163–14167 RSC .D. Xia, Z. Shen, G. Huang, W. Wang, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49(10), 6264–6273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Liu, P. Niu, L. Yin and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9070–9073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Yang, Y. Dai and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(51), 18985–18994 CAS .N. O. Gopal, H. H. Lo, T.-F. Ke, C. H. Lee, C. C. Chou, J. D. Wu, S. C. Sheu and S. C. Ke, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16191–16197 CAS .H. Dang, X. Dong, Y. Dong, H. Fanb and Y. Qiu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 44823–44826 RSC .Z. Shen, S. Sun, W. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Liu and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3285–3288 CAS .Z. Shena, Z. F. Hu, W. Wang, Y. Li, S.-F. Lee, D. K. L. Chan, T. Gu and J. C. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14163–14167 RSC .F. Wang, C. Li, Y. Li and J. C. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 119–120, 267–272 CrossRef CAS .G. Liu, P. Niu and H. M. Cheng, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 885–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. E. C. Corbridge, Phosphorus Chemistry, Biochemistry and Technology, CRC Press, 6th edn,  2013 Search PubMed .H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732–2743 RSC .M. Ruck, D. Hoppe, B. Wahl, P. Simon, Y. Wang and G. Seifert, Angew. Chem., 2005, 44, 7616–7619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Hittorf, Ann. Phys. Chem., 1865, 126, 193 CrossRef .J. Qian, D. Qiao, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8931–8933 RSC .J. Song, Z. Yu, M. L. Gordin, X. Li, H. Peng and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(12), 11933–11941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Wu, H. Yao, Y. Yin and Y. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24221–24225 CAS .A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S. Chung, C. Zu and Y. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhu, Y. Wen, X. Fan, T. Gao, F. Han, C. Luo, S. Liou and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(3), 3254–3264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Xiao, Y. Xia, Y. Gan, H. Huang, C. Liang, X. Tao, L. Xub and W. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 60914–60919 RSC .L. Wang, X. He, J. Li, W. Sun, J. Gao, J. Guo and C. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 9168–9171 CrossRef .Y. Kim, Y. Park, A. Choi, N.-S. Choi, J. Kim, J. Lee, J. H. Ryu, S. M. Oh and K. T. Lee, Adv. Mat., 2013, 25, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Song, Z. Yu, M. L. Gordin, S. Hu, R. Yi, D. Tang, T. Walter, M. Regula, D. Choi, X. Li, A. Manivannan and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(11), 6329–6335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Li, S. L. Chou, J. Wang, H. Liu and S. Dou, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5480–5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, L. Tian, Z. Yao, F. Li, S. Li and S. Ye, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 163, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yu, J. Song, M. L. Gordin, R. Yi, D. Tang and D. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1400020 Search PubMed .T. Ramireddy, T. Xing, M. M. Rahman, Y. Chen, Q. Dutercq, D. Gunzelmann and A. M. Glushenkov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5572–5584 CAS .V. V. Brazhkin and A. Ju Zerr, J. Mater. Sci., 1992, 27, 2677–2681 CrossRef CAS .Z. Khan, T. R. Chetia and M. Qureshi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3543–3550 RSC .T. Song and U. Paik, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14–31 CAS .B. Senthilkumar, Z. Khan, S. Park, K. Kim, H. Ko and Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21553–21561 CAS .T. Song, Y. Jeon, M. Samal, H. Han, H. Park, J. Ha, D. K. Yi, J. Choi, H. Chang, Y. Choid and U. Paik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9028–9033 CAS .P. Roy and S. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2454–2484 CAS .M. H. Han, E. Gonzalo, G. Singha and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 81–102 CAS .N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(23), 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Ponrouch, D. Monti, A. Boschin, B. Steen, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacín, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22–42 CAS .S. A. Ansari and M. S. Ansari, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3921–3928 RSC .W. Li, Z. Yang, Y. Jiang, Z. Yu, L. Gu and Y. Yu, Carbon, 2014, 78, 455–462 CrossRef CAS .L. Wang, X. He, J. Li, W. Sun, J. Gao, J. Guo and C. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9034–9037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Sajid Ali Ansari	Sajid Ali Ansari received his MS in 2012 from Zakir Husain College of Engineering and Technology, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India and his PhD in 2015 from the School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, South Korea under the guidance of Professor Moo Hwan Cho. Currently, he is working as a Research Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, South Korea. His research area includes the synthesis of metal nanoparticles and nanocomposites using electrochemically active biofilms, band gap engineering of semiconductor metal oxide nanoparticles for visible-light photocatalysis, and the design and development of electrode materials for supercapacitor and microbial fuel cell applications.
Ziyauddin Khan	Ziyauddin Khan received his Master's degree from Aligarh Muslim University in 2007 and his PhD from the Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, India in 2012. Thereafter, he worked at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Mumbai as a post-doctoral visiting scientist and then joined, as a post-doctoral research associate, Prof. Hyunhyub Ko's research group at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Korea. His past research focused on synthesis of efficient photocatalytic materials by semiconductor coupling method for hydrogen generation by solar water splitting. His current research interest focuses on the synthesis and design of electrode materials for energy storage applications such as sodium ion battery, sodium-air battery and supercapacitors.
Mohammad Omaish Ansari	Mohammad Omaish Ansari received his PhD in Applied Chemistry from Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh under the guidance of Professor Faiz Mohammad. Later he worked as a Research Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, South Korea. Currently he is working as an Assistant Professor in the Centre of Nanotechnology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. His research area includes the fabrication of conducting and non-conducting polymer-based composites, the design and development of electrode materials for microbial fuel cells, band gap engineering of semiconductor metal oxide nanoparticles for visible-light-driven photocatalysis, sensor fabrication for the detection of volatile organic compounds and the synthesis of graphene and graphene-based nanocomposites.
Moo Hwan Cho	Moo Hwan Cho is a Professor at School of Chemical Engineering, Yeungnam University, South Korea. He earned his MS in Chemical engineering from Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in 1980 and received his PhD from Dept. of Chemical & Biochemical Engineering, Rutgers University, USA in 1988. His current research is focused on metal nanoparticles, nanocomposites synthesis, band gap engineering of semiconductor metal oxide nanoparticles for visible light-driven photocatalysis using green method, design and development of electrode materials for supercapacitor and microbial fuel cells, sensor fabrication for detection of volatile organic compounds and synthesis of graphene and graphene based nanocomposite.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic of the contents of this review.	 

 	Fig. 1  General polymeric structure of red phosphorus.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the photoexcitation mechanism in RP for the degradation of pollutants and formation of hydrogen from water under photoirradiation.	 
RP + hν (visible light) → e− + h+
e− + O2 → O2˙−
h+ + OH− → ˙OH
O2˙− + H2O → H2O2
H2O2 → 2˙OH
˙OH + organic pollutants → degradation of pollutants
RP + irradiation (hν) → h+ (VB of RP) + e− (CB of RP)
h+ + sacrificial reagents → desired product
e− + H2O → H2 + OH−

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram showing the general mechanism of the charging and discharging processes in a battery.	 
2Li → 2Li+ + 2e− (oxidation, loss of electrons)
S + 2Li+ + 2e−→ Li2S (reduction, gain of electrons)
2Li + S → Li2S (overall electrochemical reaction)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Proposed schematic of the mechanical grinding of RP in a ball mill, (b) UV-visible diffuse absorbance spectra of unmilled RP (RP-0h) and RP milled for different times (RP-12h, RP-24h, RP-36h, and RP-48h), (c) logarithmic changes in the concentration (ln(C/C0)) of RhB degraded by RP-0h, RP-12h, RP-24h, RP-36h, and RP-48h as a function of the visible-light photoirradiation time, and (d) proposed photocatalytic mechanism for the photodegradation of RhB by RP under visible-light photoirradiation.58	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis DRS spectrum, (b) kinetics of photocatalytic inactivation under xenon lamp and sunlight irradiation in the presence of RP, and (c) illustration summarizing the proposed bactericidal mechanism of RP under visible light: RP quickly generates reactive oxygen species, which subsequently inhibit the bacterial surface metabolism and oxidize intracellular components. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.)	 

RP	 	Autoclave treatment	Hydrogen formation	19
Phosphorus fibers	 	Chemical vapour deposition	Rhodamine B dye degradation	22
Hierarchical RP–YPO4 hollow microspheres	YPO4	Hydrothermal method	Hydrogen formation	30
RP–graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) composite	 	Annealing method	Hydrogen formation and hydrocarbon fuel (CH4)	20
Ni(OH)2–RP	Pt	Precipitation method	Hydrogen evolution	21
Black P–RP heterostructure	 	Mechanical ball milling	Rhodamine B dye degradation	28
RP	 	Autoclave treatment	Bacterial inactivation (Escherichia coli)	23
RP–BiPO4	 	Hydrothermal method	Methylene blue degradation	11

 	Fig. 6  (a) Cross-linked polymer binder formed by the thermally induced condensation of sodium carboxymethylcellulose and citric acid (c-NaCMC-CA) and the interaction between the P-CNT hybrid and the c-NaCMC-CA binder; (b) cycling stability and (c) coulombic efficiency of P-CNT mixture/NaCMC, P-CNT hybrid/NaCMC, and P-CNT hybrid/c-NaCMC-CA electrodes at a current rate of 260 mA g−1 for activation and then at 520 mA g−1 in subsequent cycles. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Proposed schematic diagram of the synthesis of the RP–graphene nanosheets hybrid, (b) XRD patterns of bare RP, graphene stacks and the phosphorus/graphene nanosheets hybrid, (c) cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the phosphorus/graphene hybrid anode at a current rate of 260 mA g−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Proposed function of CNTs during volume expansion, (b) HRTEM image of the RP–CNT composite, and (c) charge–discharge curves of RP and the RP–CNT composite at a current rate of 143 mA g−1 from 0 to 1.5 V. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of the RP-SWCNT composite and (b) cycling performance of the RP-SWCNT composite at 2000 mA g−1 with its desodiation capacities at the 25th, 50th, 75th,…, 2000th cycle. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  Possible applications of RP-based nanocomposite materials in various fields.	 

RP–TiO2 composites	High-energy ball milling	Lithium-ion batteries	41
RP–single-walled carbon nanotube composite	Annealing method	Anode for sodium-ion batteries	40
RP–graphene hybrid	Mechanical ball milling method	Anode for sodium-ion batteries	44
RP–carbon composite	Ball milling method	Anode for sodium-ion batteries	43
RP–porous carbon composite	Heating method	Lithium-ion batteries	60
RP–carbon nanotube composite	Mechanical ball milling	Reversible sodium-ion storage	45
RP–carbon nanotube composite	Mechanical ball milling	Advanced sodium-ion battery anode	37
RP–carbon nanocomposite	Mechanical ball milling	Anodes for lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries	48
RP–graphene nanosheet	Mechanical ball milling	Anodes for lithium-ion batteries	47
RP–carbon composite	Mechanical ball milling	Anodes for sodium-ion batteries	43
RP–active carbon	Vaporization–adsorption method	Anode for lithium-ion batteries	46
RP–porous carbon nanofibers	Vaporization–adsorption transformation	Anode for lithium-ion batteries	59
RP–porous carbon nanofibers	Mechanical ball milling	Anode for lithium-ion batteries	42
RP–TiO2 composites	Mechanical ball milling	Anode for lithium-ion batteries	41
Carbon@RP	Mechanical ball milling	Anode for sodium-ion batteries	38

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
