Layer-by-layer assembled composite films of side-functionalized poly(3-hexylthiophene) and CdSe nanocrystals : electrochemical, spectroelectrochemical ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B803029D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B803029D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 4027-4035Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLayer-by-layer assembled composite films of side-functionalized poly(3-hexylthiophene) and CdSe nanocrystals: electrochemical, spectroelectrochemical and photovoltaic properties

        
          
            Julia 
            De Girolamo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Reiss
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Malgorzata 
            Zagorska
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Remi 
            De Bettignies
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Severine 
            Bailly
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jean-Yves 
            Mevellec
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Serge 
            Lefrant
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jean-Pierre 
            Travers
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Adam 
            Pron
          
        
      *a
aINAC/SPrAM (UMR 5819 CEA-CNRS-Univ. J. Fourier-Grenoble I), Laboratoire d’Electronique Moléculaire Organique et Hybride, CEA Grenoble, 17 Rue des Martyrs, 38054, Grenoble Cedex 9, France. E-mail: peter.reiss@cea.fr; adam.pron@cea.fr
bFaculty of Chemistry, Warsaw University of Technology, Noakowskiego 3, 00 664, Warszawa, Poland
cCEA/DRT/LITEN/DTS/LCS, INES-RDI, Laboratoire des Composants Solaires 50 avenue du Lac Léman BP 332, 73377, Le Bourget du Lac, France
dInstitut des Matériaux Jean Rouxel, 2 Rue de la Houssinière, B.P.32229, 44322, Nantes Cedex 3, France
Received 
      21st February 2008
    , Accepted 15th April 2008First published on 29th May 2008AbstractRegioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) containing one diaminopyrimidine side group per ten repeat units (P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT) can form molecular composites with 1-(6-mercaptohexyl)thymine capped CdSe nanocrystals (CdSe(MHT)) viahydrogen bonds directed molecular recognition. Here we report complementary spectroscopic, electrochemical and spectroelectrochemical investigations of both the functionalized poly(thiophene) and its composite with the nanocrystals, the latter being fabricated using the layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition technique. UV-Vis-NIR and Raman spectroelectrochemical investigations unequivocally show that the onset of the first anodic peak in the cyclic voltammogram of the copolymer can be attributed to the oxidation of the π-conjugated backbone in the polymer chains. For this reason, it is possible to determine the width and the position of its band gap (corresponding to the π–π* transition) by UV-Vis spectroscopy combined with cyclic voltammetry. These studies show that the polymer exhibits a slightly larger band gap with the HOMO level insignificantly lower in energy (by 0.03 eV) as compared to the case of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) of comparable degree of polymerization. Hydrogen bond interactions of the polymer with CdSe(MHT) in the molecular composite result in a hypsochromic shift of the band corresponding to the π–π* transition from 504 nm to 488 nm. This can be taken as a spectroscopic manifestation of the conformational changes induced by shortening of the conjugation length. The observed spectral modifications are consistent with electrochemically determined lowering of the polymer HOMO level (from −4.91 eV in the pure polymer to −4.99 eV in the composite). Cyclic voltammetry studies supported by spectroelectrochemistry also show that the redox stability of CdSe(MHT) in the molecular composite with P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT is lower than that determined for stearate-capped nanocrystals. Their irreversible oxidation starts at E = +0.7 V vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+i.e. at potentials by ca. 0.3 V lower than the oxidation of stearate stabilized CdSe nanocrystals of the same size. We show that—despite these modifications—the alignment of the HOMO and LUMO levels of the composite components remains appropriate for its use in hybrid solar cells, which is demonstrated by the photovoltaic effect observed for the LbL-processed composite sandwiched between two electrodes.
Introduction
Regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene), later abbreviated as R-P3HT, has found several applications in organic and molecular electronics, mainly as an active component of organic field effect transistors (FETs)1 and photovoltaic cells (PCs).2 R-P3HT offers several advantages in this type of applications such as facile solution processibility, appropriate redox properties and high mobility of charge carriers.3 Preparation of R-P3HT based electronic devices is however a delicate matter since their performance depends on several macromolecular and supramolecular parameters of this polymer such as the molecular weight and its distribution, the crystallinity index, the type of supramolecular organization etc., to name the most important.4 Thus, all these parameters must be strictly controlled. Application of R-P3HT in organic–inorganic hybrid devices such as bulk heterojunction-type PCs containing II–VI semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) as electron acceptors is even more difficult since both components of such hybrids have a strong tendency to phase separate.5 This is caused by the fact that the interactions between R-P3HT macromolecules are stronger than those between NCs’ stabilizing ligands and the polymer chains.
One of the possible approaches aimed on impeding this uncontrolled phase segregation is to induce stronger interactions between both constituents of the organic–inorganic hybrid through molecular recognition phenomena. This concept was successfully tested in the preparation of molecular composites of diaminotriazine-functionalized polystyrene with thymine-capped gold nanoparticles where molecular recognition viahydrogen bonds between the complementary functional groups assured the uniform distribution of the inorganic component within the polymer matrix.6 The same approach can also be used for the preparation of layers of self-assembled semiconductor NCs on appropriate electrodes7 or for selective immobilization of metal NCs on functionalized substrates.8 On the contrary, only very recently the molecular recognition concept has been extended to the preparation of organic–inorganic hybrids of semiconducting polymers and NCs.9 In our previous paper,9 we described the synthesis of a functionalized polymer strongly interacting with CdSe NCs’ surface ligands while retaining the most crucial characteristics of R-P3HT in terms of chain regularity, redox, optical and electrical transport properties. In particular, we have demonstrated that regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) containing one diaminopyrimidine side group per ten repeat units (abbreviated as P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT), can form a supramolecular association with 1-(6-mercaptohexyl)thymine capped CdSe NCs (CdSe(MHT)) viahydrogen bond directed molecular recognition between the diaminopyrimidine and thymine groups. Here we describe in detail the redox and spectroelectrochemical properties of this new polymer and its molecular composite with thymine-capped CdSe NCs, the latter being fabricated using a new processing technique, namely the layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition.
The applied preparation strategy broadens the range of electrochemically active materials suitable for applications in optoelectronic and electrochemical devices, especially in cases where strict control of their physicochemical properties is of crucial importance. One of these applications is the use of the hybrid films as active layers in organic/inorganic solar cells. Thus, in addition to a detailed study of the physicochemical properties of the new composite we report preliminary tests of its use in organic/inorganic photovoltaic cells. This type of application has been stimulated by morphological studies of the LbL composite, which show that the polymer and NCs’ phases form a quasi-interpenetrating network rather than a multilayer structure, i.e. the favorable morphology for their application in solar cells relying on the bulk heterojunction concept.
Experimental

Polymer and NCs’ synthesis
P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT) was prepared by post-polymerization functionalization of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene-co-3-(6-bromohexyl)thiophene) (P3HT-co-P3(Br)HT) with 2,4-diamino-6-hydroxypyrimidine. The crude polymer was fractionated into fractions of reduced polydispersity using a Soxhlet apparatus with an experimentally established sequence of solvents. The fraction used for electrochemical and spectroelectrochemical investigations showed the average polymerization degree DPn = 71, the polydispersity index PDI = 1.74 (relative to polystyrene standards) and the ratio of P3HT to P3(ODAP)HT units = 9:1 (determined from the integration of 1H NMR diagnostic peaks).

          CdSe NCs functionalized with 1-(6-mercaptohexyl)thymine (CdSe(MHT)) were prepared from 5.8 nm stearate-capped CdSe NCs via ligand exchange.
The detailed description of the polymer synthesis, NCs’ preparation and ligand exchange can be found in the electronic supporting information of ref. 9.
Layer-by-layer (LbL) processing of the (P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT)–CdSe(MHT) composite
Two separate solutions were prepared, namely 2.31 g L−1 of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT in chloroform and 0.47 g L−1 of CdSe(MHT) in a MeOH–DMF 1:10 mixed solvent. The indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate was first immersed in the polymer solution for 2 min, then rinsed with chloroform and dried. In the next step the substrate covered with the first polymer layer was immersed in the NCs’ solution for 5 min, then washed with chloroform to remove DMF and MeOH and dried. This procedure of the bi-layer deposition was repeated until the desired film thickness was achieved. After each deposition, the UV-Vis spectrum was registered to monitor the film growth. The final film thickness was determined using a profilometer.
Characterization techniques

Raman spectra were obtained using a FT Raman Bruker RFS 100 spectrometer with the near-IR excitation line (1064 nm), UV-Vis-NIR spectra were measured on a Cary 5000 (Varian) spectrometer (wavelength range 300–2000 nm). In the electrochemical and spectroelectrochemical studies either an Autolab potentiostat (Eco Chemie) or a PAR 273 potentiostat were used. For the cyclic voltammetry and Raman spectroelectrochemical measurements, thin films of the polymer studied were deposited on a platinum electrode by casting from chloroform solution whereas for the UV-Vis-NIR spectroelectrochemical investigations they were deposited on an ITO electrode. Cyclic voltammetry and UV-Vis-NIR spectroelectrochemical investigations of the polymer-semiconductor NCs composite were carried out for its thin layers deposited on an ITO electrode using the layer-by-layer (LbL) technique (vide supra). All electrochemical and spectroelectrochemical studies were carried out either in 0.1 M Bu4NPF6–acetonitrile or in 0.1 M Bu4NBF4–acetonitrile electrolyte with a Pt counter electrode and an Ag/0.1 M Ag+ reference electrode.
Photovoltaic cell fabrication and characterization
Cr–Au contacts were taken on partially covered ITO-coated glass substrates. The active layer was then deposited viaLbL onto the substrate until an absorbance of 0.5 at 490 nm was achieved in the UV-Vis absorption spectrum. LiF (1 nm) and the Al electrode (100 nm) were then thermally evaporated on the active layer through a shadow mask. The active surface of the device was 28 mm2. The current–voltage characteristics of photovoltaic cells were measured on a Keithley SMU 2400 unit using 100 mW cm2 air-mass (AM1.5) simulated white light produced by a Steuernagel Solar Constant 575 solar simulator. A monocrystalline silicon solar cell was used as a reference cell.
Results and discussion
The chemical structures of the polymer studied and the functionalized NCs are shown in Chart 1.
 Chart 1  Molecular recognition between 1-(6-mercaptohexyl)thymine capped CdSe NCs (CdSe(MHT) and poly(3-hexylthiophene) containing one ODAP group per ten repeat units (P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT). 
Before studying the redox and spectroelectrochemical properties of the molecular composite of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT and 1-(6-mercaptohexyl)thymine-capped CdSe NCs, we have investigated for comparative reasons the basic properties of its polymeric component. The applicability of a given electroactive polymer in organic electronics or electrochemical devices is determined, to a first approximation, by the width and the position of its band gap. This information can be extracted from appropriately designed spectroscopic and electrochemical investigations. However, in the analysis of the spectroscopic data obtained for electroactive polymers, several factors of macromolecular and supramolecular nature must be considered. It is known that for poly(thiophene) derivatives the width of the gap and, by consequence, the position of the π–π* absorption band, are strongly dependent on the degree of the chain regioregularity and on the polymer molecular mass. For regioregular poly(alkylthiophene)s, with increasing degree of polymerization (DPn), this band is being bathochromically shifted and its vibrational structure becomes more pronounced.10Fig. 1 shows the solid state UV-Vis spectrum of a thin film of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT. A clear vibrational structure is also observed in the spectrum of this polymer showing DPn = 71. The positions of the 0–0, 0–1 and 0–2 transitions, determined by the second derivative analysis (d2A/dλ2), are 602 nm, 562 nm and 516 nm, respectively. In particular, the 0–0 band is only slightly hypsochromically shifted with respect to the position of the corresponding band in R-P3HT of comparable degree of polymerization (DPn = 68), which is peaked at 608 nm.11 In poly(thiophene) derivatives the energy of the 0–0 transition, i.e. the transition from the ground state to the relaxed excited state, is inversely proportional to the conjugation length. Thus, a rather small shift (6 nm) of this transition in P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT with respect to the case of R-P3HT of comparable DPn clearly indicates that the introduction of diaminopyrimidine groups through alkylene spacers does not influence the band gap of the polymer to a large extent at least at the 9:1 ratio of the co-mers.
 Fig. 1  
UV-Vis spectrum of a thin solid film P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (DPn = 71, co-mers ratio 9:1). 
The next step in the characterization of a new polymer potentially applicable in organic or hybrid organic–inorganic electronics is the determination of its redox properties. This can be done using electrochemical techniques such as, for example, cyclic voltammetry. The voltammogram of a thin layer of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT deposited on a platinum electrode is shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  
Cyclic voltammogram of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (DPn = 71, co-mers ratio 9:1). Electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NPF6–acetonitrile; potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+; scan rate 50 mV s−1. The inset shows the anodic peak current as a function of the scan rate. 
The redox properties of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT are somehow modified with respect to the case of R-P3HT. In a typical cyclic voltammogram two anodic peaks can be seen at E1 = 0.28 V and at E2 = 0.79 V. These peaks are shifted towards higher potentials by 50 mV and 210 mV, respectively, as compared to the corresponding peaks in R-P3HT of comparable degree of polymerization (DPn = 68), studied in the same electrolyte. The peak currents vary linearly with the scan rate which is characteristic of electrochemical processes occurring at active sites immobilized on the electrode whose rate is determined by the charge transfer. The voltammetric response of the polymer studied, as far as the position of the peaks and their shape are concerned, resembles that observed by Emge and Bäuerle12 for a conjugated polymer obtained by oxidative polymerization of alkoxydiaminopyrimidine-functionalized bithiophene.
The position of the HOMO level with respect to the vacuum level is crucial for essentially all applications of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT in organic and hybrid electronics. This information can be extracted from the onset of the first anodic peak corresponding to the polymer p-doping, determined as the intersection of the baseline and the tangent to the first oxidation wave.13 Correcting the obtained value with respect to the potential of the ferrocene/ferricinium (Fc/Fc+) redox couple, measured in the same electrolytic solution, we obtain Eox = 0.11 V vs.Fc/Fc+ for the onset of the p-type doping which corresponds to the following value of the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT HOMO level:13EHOMO = −(0.11 eV + 4.80 eV) = −4.91 eVConsistent with the UV-Vis spectroscopic studies (vide supra), this value is slightly lower than that measured for R-P3HT of comparable molecular mass (DPn = 68) showing EHOMO = −4.88 eV.11
The electrochemical redox properties of poly(thiophene)s are very important for several reasons. First, the potential range of their electrochemical activity usually does not overlap with that of the semiconductor NCs’ activity. Thus, in hybrid materials consisting of electroactive polymers and NCs, the former can be selectively switched between the undoped and doped states, enabling the formation of either semiconductor–semiconductor or conductor–semiconductor molecular junctions. Second, the electrochemical switching is accompanied by profound spectral changes, which can be exploited in several types of electrochromic or sensing devices. Third, spectroelectrochemical investigations, carried out in a quasi-static way, i.e. by increasing the electrode potential in small increments with a wait time at each step until the equilibrium is reached, frequently lead to a more precise determination of the HOMO (or LUMO) levels as compared to the cyclic voltammetry studies. Fourth, spectroelectrochemical investigations are vital not only in view of potential applications of the obtained composite in opto-electronic devices but also for the elucidation of the mechanism of the redox processes, since voltammetric techniques are of phenomenological nature.
Oxidative doping of conjugated polymers gives rise to very characteristic spectral changes, consisting of continuous bleaching of the band originating from the π–π* transition in the conjugated polymer backbone with the simultaneous growth of two new bands in the less energetic part of the spectrum, characteristic of the formation of charge carriers (polarons/bipolarons) during the doping reaction.10 In other words, as soon as the electron density of the π-conjugated systems starts to change due to the doping, these three aforementioned spectral changes must appear. Electrochemical processes which do not involve the oxidation of the conjugated backbone do not influence the π–π* band.14
In Fig. 3 the UV-Vis-NIR spectra of a thin film of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT, registered for increasing electrode polarization, are compared. At the open circuit potential (Eoc = −0.26 V), a spectrum characteristic of the neutral (undoped) form of the polymer is registered, which does not change up to E = 0.1 V. At this potential, which is only slightly lower than the onset of the anodic current in the cyclic voltammogram, the expected doping induced decrease of the π–π* band intensity starts to occur. At E = +0.75 V this band is almost completely bleached. Note that the first doping induced band grows in intensity up to E = +0.65 V, then its intensity begins to decrease. This change is characteristic of the transformation from the bipolaronic state to the metallic one.15 The observed spectroelectrochemical behaviour unequivocally shows that the electrochemical activity, manifested in the cyclic voltammetry by the first anodic peak (cf.Fig. 2), is entirely associated with the polymer doping. No evidence of the oxidation of the diaminopyrimidine side groups, at this potential range, can be found.
 Fig. 3  
UV-Vis-NIR spectra of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (DPn = 71, co-mers ratio 9:1) registered for increasing electrode potentials. Electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NBF4–acetonitrile; potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+. 
The oxidative doping, inducing the appearance of new bands in the NIR part of the spectrum, must also lead to significant changes in the Raman spectra caused by the changes in the force constants originating from lowering the population of the π electrons and their redistribution. In Fig. 4, Raman spectra of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT, registered at increasing electrode potentials are compared. First we notice that only bands originating from the 2,5-thienylene units are present, no peaks attributable to diaminopyrimidine side groups can be seen. The spectra registered in the absence and in the presence of the electrolyte are identical and characteristic of the neutral form of the polymer.16 The latter is not unexpected, taking into account the value of the open circuit potential (Eoc = −0.26 V). The principal peak at 1447 cm−1 corresponds to Cα–Cβ symmetric stretching vibrations in the 2,5-thienylene ring. This band is accompanied by a significantly weaker band at 1514 cm−1 attributed to Cα–Cβ antisymmetric stretchings. Two other important bands must be pointed out: at 1380 cm−1 (Cβ–Cβ stretchings) and at 1184 cm−1 (Cα–Cα interring stretchings).16,17 The oxidative doping in the potential range corresponding to the first anodic peak in the cyclic voltammogram is manifested by a shift of the Cα–Cβ symmetric and antisymmetric stretching bands toward lower wavenumbers. This shift increases with increasing electrode potential. Simultaneously, the bands originating from the interring stretching grow in intensity with respect to those corresponding to the intraring stretchings. This behaviour is in general very similar to that observed for R-P3HT. However, some differences between the spectroelectrochemical behaviour of both polymers should be pointed out. The Raman spectrum of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT quickly decreases in intensity at potentials covering the first oxidation wave. In fact, no Raman spectrum can be registered for E > 0.5 V, i.e. for potentials of the second oxidation wave. This is surprising, since R-P3HT gives clear spectra at potentials of both oxidation waves due the fact that the absorbance at λ = 1064 nm increases with increasing oxidation giving rise to improved resonance conditions.
 Fig. 4  
Raman spectra (λex = 1064 nm) of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (DPn = 71, co-mers ratio 9:1) registered for increasing electrode potentials. Electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NBF4–acetonitrile, potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+. 
To summarize this part of the paper, the above described investigations unequivocally indicate that P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT mimics the majority of the redox, spectroscopic and spectroelectrochemical properties of R-P3HT although some differences, for example in the Raman spectroelectrochemical behaviour, exist. Therefore, P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT is a very good candidate for the preparation of organic–inorganic molecular hybrids with CdSe NCs. In addition, the presence of diaminopyrimidine groups facilitates the formation of ordered supramolecular associations with semiconductors NCs, provided that the NCs are functionalized with surface ligands containing complementary groups capable of formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds with the ODAP groups, for example thymine groups.
Direct solution processing of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) molecular composites is difficult because of the lack of a common solvent for its NC and polymeric constituents.9 Both components exhibit however specific features which facilitate the use of “layer-by-layer” (LbL) techniques in the processing of their molecular composite. The LbL technique has become increasingly popular in the past two decades. Initially developed LbL techniques exploited the electrostatic interactions as the self-assembly driving force,18 however several other interactions can be used for this purpose like hydrogen bond interactions19 or various types of molecular recognition phenomena.20 These are especially suitable for electroactive polymers because they allow for the use of organic solvents as processing media.
The LbL technique is based on alternating depositions of the two components of the assembly from two different solutions. After each deposition, the new layer is carefully rinsed in order to remove the excess of the matter deposited, followed by its drying. In the case of the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) composite, its molecular level processing, using the LbL technique, implies the recognition between the thymine function of the NC ligand and the diaminopyrimidine group of the polymer substituent as schematically represented in Chart 1. This interaction is unequivocally proven by a set of three experiments:
(i) No LbL assembly is formed with thymine-functionalized NCs CdSe(MHT) and R-P3HT, i.e. the analogue of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT not containing diaminopyrimidine groups.
(ii) Similarly no LbL assembly is observed for P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT and CdSe NCs capped with initial surface ligands (stearate).
(iii) Alternate depositions of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT and CdSe(MHT) result in the formation of polymer/NCs bilayers assembled by hydrogen bond interactions.
It should also be noted that the first layer consisting of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT can be deposited on ITO or other substrates such as glass or silicon oxide without any substrate surface pre-treatment or modification. This good adherence is associated with the presence of the ODAP groups since R-P3HT deposited under identical conditions does not form adhering layers.
The thickness of the molecular composite films, deposited on the ITO electrode using the LbL technique, can conveniently be controlled by measuring the absorbance at two diagnostic wavelengths, characteristic of the polymer and the NCs, respectively. In Fig. 5, the UV-Vis spectrum of the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT monolayer deposited on an ITO electrode is compared with the spectrum of the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) bilayer obtained by consecutive deposition of the NCs layer on the polymer layer. Spectral features of both components can be distinguished in the spectrum of the composite. In particular at 622 nm a clear band attributed to the 5.8 nm CdSe NCs’ excitonic peak can be seen. The presence of NCs is also manifested by an increase of the absorbance in the higher energy (lower wavelength) spectral region (<450 nm). The spectrum of the molecular composite cannot however be treated as a simple superposition of the spectra of its components. In the spectrum of the bilayer, the maximum of the π–π* transition band of the polymer is hypsochromically shifted with respect to the analogous band in the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT monolayer by 16 nm, i.e. from 504 nm to 488 nm. This means that the specific directional interactions, viahydrogen bonds, between the ODAP groups of the polymer and the MHT functions of the NCs lead to conformational changes in the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT macromolecules, which become less planar and by consequence less conjugated. It should also be noted that these spectral changes are observed only for the first bilayer. For consecutive bilayers no further evolution either in the position of the polymer π–π* band or in the shape of the spectrum can be observed.
 Fig. 5  
UV-Vis spectra of a P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT monolayer and a P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) bilayer, obtained by consecutive deposition of a CdSe(MHT) NCs (diameter 5.8 nm) layer on the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT monolayer from 1:10 methanol–DMF solution (0.47 mg mL−1). 
Thus, the spectroscopically manifested interactions discussed above widen the polymer band gap. In view of possible applications of the composite in hybrid electronics, it is also important to verify their effect on the position of the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT and CdSe(MHT) HOMO levels.
As it has already been stated (vide supra), the band structure of pure P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT can by determined by combining cyclic voltammetry (the position of the HOMO level) and UV-Vis spectroscopy (the width of the band gap, giving access to the value of the LUMO level). By the same set of experiments the positions of the HOMO and LUMO levels of the NCs can be determined, provided that their surface ligands are electrochemically inactive in the potential range of the NCs electroactivity. This is the case for stearate- or TOPO-capped CdSe NCs, which have been previously studied.21 Following these procedures, we have experimentally determined the energetic levels of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT and of stearate-capped CdSe NCs, which are compared in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Relative position of the HOMO and LUMO levels of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT and of stearate-capped CdSe NCs of 5.8 nm. 
Unfortunately, the determination of the NCs’ HOMO level in CdSe(MHT) is complicated by the electrochemical activity of the MHT ligand. Fig. 7 shows the voltammogram of a few micrometers thick layer of CdSe(MHT), deposited on a platinum electrode. In addition to the expected anodic and cathodic waves, corresponding to the NCs oxidation and reduction, respectively, a new anodic peak with a maximum at 0.73 V can be seen. This peak is attributed to the oxidation of the thiol ligands since it is not present in the voltammogram of stearate- and TOPO-capped NCs. Its strong overlap with the onset of the NCs’ oxidation wave makes the precise determination of their HOMO level impossible.
 Fig. 7  
Cyclic voltammogram of a CdSe(MHT) layer on a platinum electrode, recorded first in the reduction mode and then in the oxidation mode. Scan rate 50 mV s−1; electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NPF6–acetonitrile, potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+. 
As already mentioned, the interactions between P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT and CdSe(MHT) in the molecular composite lead to a widening of the gap of the polymer. They also influence the position of its HOMO level. In Fig. 8 representative cyclic voltammograms, obtained for a thin P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) film, consisting of 18 bilayers are shown (the absorbance at λ = 490 nm is 0.32).
 Fig. 8  (a) Cyclic voltammogram of a thin film consisting of 18 P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) bilayers (NCs’ diameter 5.8 nm). (b) Three consecutive cyclic voltammograms registered for the same film. The vertex potentials are 0.75 V for the first scan and 1.5 V for the second and third scan. Scan rate 50 mV s−1; electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NBF4–acetonitrile, potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+. 
These voltammograms reflect the complexity of the electrochemical behavior of the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) composite, in which three electrochemically active components are present. The voltammogram recorded in the potential range from −0.2 V to +0.75 V differs from that of the pure polymer—only one broad anodic peak can be distinguished. This peak must embrace the contributions from the oxidative doping of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT and from the oxidation of the MHT ligands (compare Fig. 2, 7 and 8). The onset of this wave corresponds to the onset of the polymer p-doping. Consistent with the UV-Vis spectroscopic data, it is shifted towards higher potentials with respect to the case of pure P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (0.27 V vs. 0.19 V). This shift by 0.08 V indicates the lowering of the polymer HOMO level from −4.91 eV in the pure polymer to −4.99 in the molecular composite.
It should also be noted that in the composite the anodic wave, comprising the polymer oxidative doping and the ligand oxidative destruction, overlaps with the onset of a peak of a higher intensity. Extension of the vertex potential to 1.5 V in the second scan reveals this broad anodic peak which has no cathodic counterpart. The irreversibility of this oxidation process is confirmed by the third scan which demonstrates that the composite has lost its electrochemical activity (cf.Fig. 8(b)). There are two contributions to this irreversible oxidation of the composite: oxidation of the NCs and so-called “overoxidation” of the polymer, which leads to an irreversible destruction of its conjugated π-bonding system.22 Again, as in the case of CdSe(MHT), the overlap of the peaks corresponding to polymer doping, ligand oxidative destruction, polymer overoxidation and NC oxidation does not allow for the precise determination of the NCs’ HOMO level. Although its exact position cannot be determined, it is certainly placed below the HOMO level of the polymer since the oxidation of the composite starts by the reversible p-doping of its polymeric part at lower potentials and then, at higher potentials, is followed by the oxidative destruction of the ligands and finally by the oxidation of the NCs.
The redox stability of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) is of crucial importance for essentially all applications of this composite, including optoelectronic and electrochromic devices. The cyclic voltammetry investigations seem to indicate a rather limited redox stability of CdSe(MHT), both pure and in the composite, caused by destructive oxidation of the ligand. We have studied this problem in detail using UV-Vis-NIR spectroelectrochemistry. In Fig. 9 the spectra of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT), recorded for increasing electrode potentials are compared. In the spectrum obtained at E = −0.23 V spectroscopic features of both components of the composite are visible. In particular, the band with a maximum at 496 nm is characteristic of the neutral state of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (the π–π* transition band). The excitonic peak of the NCs at 620 nm strongly overlaps with the polymer π–π* band, causing its asymmetric broadening on the less energetic side.
 Fig. 9  
UV-Vis-NIR spectra of a solid film of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) consisting of 10 bilayers (NCs diameter 5.8 nm), registered for increasing electrode potentials; electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NPF6–acetonitrile; potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+. 
The presence of a monotonically increasing absorbance tail, extending from ca. 400 nm towards lower wavelengths, is also consistent with the presence of the NCs. In accordance with the cyclic voltammetry studies, the oxidation of the composite starts by p-doping of its polymeric part, which is manifested by the continuous bleaching of the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT π–π* band with increasing electrode potential and concomitant growth of two bands in the NIR part of the spectrum, ascribed to polaron/bipolaron states created during the doping.16 As a result of the decrease of the polymer π–π* band intensity, the excitonic peak of the NCs becomes more pronounced with increasing potential. No spectroscopic signs of oxidation of either NCs or their ligands can be seen up to E = +0.60 V. Above this potential both spectroscopic features of the NCs (the absorption tail and the excitonic peak) disappear. Further increase of the potential to E = +0.75 V leads to rather small spectral changes. Subsequent reduction of the composite at E = −0.2 V results in a recovery of the polymer π–π* band but no spectral features attributable to the NCs reappear (spectrum not shown). This means that in the potential range studied, the polymeric part of the composite undergoes a reversible oxidation (p-type doping), whereas CdSe(MHT) are irreversibly oxidized, at potentials exceeding E = 0.7 V. Therefore, the limiting potential of their redox stability in the composite (E = 0.7 V vs.Ag/0.1 Ag+) is lower by ca. 0.3 V as compared to the limiting potential determined for NCs of the same size, which contain electrochemically inactive stearate or TOPO ligands. Thus, the spectroelectrochemical results strongly corroborate the conclusions drawn from the cyclic voltammetry studies.
In the final part of this paper, we present preliminary results on the application of the obtained hybrid films as active layer in organic/inorganic solar cells. One prerequisite for these devices, relying on the bulk heterojunction concept, is the formation of a quasi-interpenetrated network of the electron donor (conjugated polymer) and the electron acceptor (in our case semiconductor NCs), resulting in efficient percolation pathways for charge carriers transport to the electrodes. Although, to a first approximation, the LbL processing should lead to a multilayer morphology, which is not appropriate for the photovoltaic applications, in reality different and more complex morphologies can be obtained, depending of the degree of the surface coverage in each deposition step. This is indeed the case for the LbL deposition of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) (vide infra).
With the goal to determine the surface coverage by the NCs, we have characterized by SEM a silicon substrate after deposition of the first polymer/NC bilayer (Fig. 10). The NCs are clearly identifiable as small white grains. By means of numerical image treatment the surface coverage has been estimated as 30–35%.
 Fig. 10  
SEM image of a single bilayer of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT), deposited on a silicon substrate (left), binarization of the image used to determine the surface coverage (right). 
The incomplete surface coverage is also confirmed for films containing a larger number of bilayers: the thicknesses determined with a profilometer were systematically inferior to the expected values. To give an example, 50 nm were measured for a film consisting of 10 bilayers, with the NC diameter already being 5.8 nm. This discrepancy can only be explained by the incomplete surface coverage of the NCs’ layers. The interstices between the NCs of the first layer can be subsequently filled with polymer and/or NCs of the subsequent layers. Evidently, this type of material’s assembly leads to a heterostructure resembling much more a 3D interpenetrated network than a multilayered one. Concluding this section, morphological studies of hybrid films containing a large number of polymer/NC bilayers clearly indicate that an interpenetrated network of the NC and the polymer phase was obtained. The LbL technique yields films of tunable thickness (by the number of bilayers). As a result, they respond to the requirements for use as active layers in photovoltaic devices in the bulk heterojunction configuration, discussed in following paragraph.

Fig. 11 shows the characteristic current–voltage curves of a test cell composed of 25 bilayers of polymer/NCs (NCs’ diameter = 5.8 nm, film thickness 138 nm) recorded in the dark and under illumination. Although a measurable photovoltaic effect was detected, the power conversion efficiency was low: 0.015% for an open circuit voltage of Voc = 0.82 V, a short-current density of Jsc = 6.5 × 10−5 A cm−2, and a fill factor of 0.28. These values are not unexpected taking into account literature results for hybrid solar cells containing spherical CdSe NCs of similar size. Using for example pyridine-capped 5.5 nm CdSe NCs in blends with P3HT yielded a power conversion efficiency of 0.05% under AM 1.5 conditions,23 5 nm NCs in blends with MEH-PPV resulted in 0.1%.5a Our preliminary results constitute a clear proof of the new concept for the applicability of LbL-deposited hybrid materials in molecular electronics, which consist of organic and inorganic semiconductors self-assembled viahydrogen bonding directed molecular recognition.
 Fig. 11  
I–V characteristics of a film constituted of 25 bilayers of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) (dashed line: in the dark; solid line: under illumination). 
Aiming at the improvement of the device performance, the proposed sequential deposition method allows for the independent optimization of a large number of experimental parameters (e.g. number of bilayers, NCs’ surface coverage, NCs’ size). Furthermore, as can be judged from related literature,5 device improvements can also be expected through optimization of the NCs’ composition, shape and surface chemistry, post-processing annealing of the active layer, deposition under inert atmosphere, to list the principal parameters. Finally, a further technological advantage of the proposed process, relying on the LbL technique, is the drastically reduced materials consumption with respect to the conventional spin-coating deposition method.
Conclusion
To summarize, we have investigated the redox and spectroelectrochemical properties of a poly(alkylthiophene) derivative containing diaminopyrimidine side groups as well as of its molecular composites with 1-(6-mercaptohexyl)thymine-capped CdSe semiconductor NCs, assembled in form of a thin film by means of the layer-by-layer technique. Although both components of the composite mutually influence their HOMO levels and the width of the band gaps, the resulting band alignment remains appropriate for the charge separation at the nanocrystals/polymer interface. However, direct application of these materials in photovoltaic devices requires further investigation.
Acknowledgements
One of the authors (MZ) acknowledges partial financial support from Warsaw University of Technology. This work was supported by the French Agence Nationale pour la Recherche (project NANORGYSOL).
References

  (a) A. Salleo, Mater. Today, 2007, 3, 38–45 CrossRef ; 
  (b) R. J. Kline and M. D. McGehee, Polym. Rev., 2006, 46, 27–45 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1296–1323 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef ; 
  (b) G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CAS ; 
  (c) M. Reyes-Reyes, K. Kim and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083506 CrossRef .

  (a) R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu and J. M. J. Frechet, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1519–1522 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. M. J. Frechet and M. Toney, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3312–3319 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Zen, J. pflaum, S. Hirschmann, W. Zhuang, F. Jaiser, U. Asawapirom, J. P. Rabe, U. Scherf and D. Neher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 757–764 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zen, M. Saphiannikova, D. Neher, J. Grenzer, S. Grigorian, U. Pietsch, U. Asawapirom, S. Janietz, U. Scherf, I. Lieberwirth and G. Wegner, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2162–2171 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. C. Greenham, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B, 1996, 54, 17628–17637 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. Sun, H. J. Snaith, A. S. Dhoot, S. Westenhoff and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 014914 CrossRef ; 
  (d) J. S. Liu, T. Tanaka, K. Sivula, A. P. Alivisatos and J. M. J. Frechet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6550–6551 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. K. Boal, F. Ilhan, J. E. DeRouchey, T. Thurn-Albrecht, T. P. Russell and V. M. Rotello, Nature, 2000, 404, 746–748 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) U. Drechsler, B. Erdogan and V. M. Rotello, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 5570–5579 CrossRef CAS .
R. Baron, C. H. Huang, D. M. Bassani, A. Onopriyenko, M. Zayats and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4010–4015 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. van den Brom, I. Arfaoui, T. Cren, B. Hessen, T. T. M. Palstra, J. T. M. De Hosson and P. Rudolf, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2045–2052 CrossRef .
J. De Girolamo, P. Reiss and A. Pron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14681–14688 CrossRef CAS .
M. Trznadel, A. Pron, M. Zagorska, R. Chrzaszcz and J. Pielichowski, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 5051–5058 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Verilhac, R. Pokrop, G. LeBlevennec, I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, K. Buga, M. Zagorska, S. Sadki and A. Pron, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13305–13309 CrossRef CAS .
A. Emge and P. Bäuerle, Synth. Met., 1999, 102, 1370–1373 CrossRef CAS .
I. Polec, A. Henckens, L. Goris, M. Nicolas, M. A. Loi, P. J. Adriaensens, L. Lutsen, J. V. Manca, D. Vanderzande and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2003, 41, 1034–1045 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dufour, P. Rannou, J. P. Travers, A. Pron, M. Zagorska, G. Korc, I. Kulszewicz-Bajer, S. Quillard and S. Lefrant, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 6112–6120 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Chung, J. H. Kaufman, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudls, Phys. Rev. B, 1984, 30, 702–710 CrossRef CAS .
G. Louarn, M. Trznadel, J. P. Buisson, J. Laska, A. Pron, M. Lapkowski and S. Lefrant, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 12532–12539 CrossRef CAS .
M. Trznadel, M. Zagórska, M. Lapkowski, G. Louarn, S. Lefrant and A. Pron, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 8, 1387–1393 Search PubMed .
G. Decher and J. D. Hong, Makromol. Chem., Macromol. Symp., 1991, 46, 321–327 Search PubMed .
L. Y. Wang, S. X. Cui, Z. Q. Wang, X. Zhang, M. Jiang, L. F. Chi and H. Fuchs, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 10490–10494 CrossRef CAS .
W. Müller, H. Ringsdorf, E. Rump, G. Wildburg, X. Zhang, L. Angermaier, W. Knoll, M. Liley and J. Spinke, Science, 1993, 262, 1706–1708 CrossRef CAS .
C. Querner, P. Reiss, S. Sadki, M. Zagorska and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 3204–3209 RSC .
B. Krische and M. Zagorska, Synth. Met., 1989, 28, C257–C262 CrossRef .
S.-H. Choi, H. Song, I. K. Park, J.-H. Yum, S.-S. Kim, S. Lee and Y.-E. Sung, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 179, 135–141 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2008
Table Content:

 	Chart 1  Molecular recognition between 1-(6-mercaptohexyl)thymine capped CdSe NCs (CdSe(MHT) and poly(3-hexylthiophene) containing one ODAP group per ten repeat units (P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT).	 

 	Fig. 1  
UV-Vis spectrum of a thin solid film P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (DPn = 71, co-mers ratio 9:1).	 

 	Fig. 2  
Cyclic voltammogram of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (DPn = 71, co-mers ratio 9:1). Electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NPF6–acetonitrile; potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+; scan rate 50 mV s−1. The inset shows the anodic peak current as a function of the scan rate.	 
EHOMO = −(0.11 eV + 4.80 eV) = −4.91 eV

 	Fig. 3  
UV-Vis-NIR spectra of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (DPn = 71, co-mers ratio 9:1) registered for increasing electrode potentials. Electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NBF4–acetonitrile; potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+.	 

 	Fig. 4  
Raman spectra (λex = 1064 nm) of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT (DPn = 71, co-mers ratio 9:1) registered for increasing electrode potentials. Electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NBF4–acetonitrile, potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+.	 

 	Fig. 5  
UV-Vis spectra of a P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT monolayer and a P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) bilayer, obtained by consecutive deposition of a CdSe(MHT) NCs (diameter 5.8 nm) layer on the P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT monolayer from 1:10 methanol–DMF solution (0.47 mg mL−1).	 

 	Fig. 6  Relative position of the HOMO and LUMO levels of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT and of stearate-capped CdSe NCs of 5.8 nm.	 

 	Fig. 7  
Cyclic voltammogram of a CdSe(MHT) layer on a platinum electrode, recorded first in the reduction mode and then in the oxidation mode. Scan rate 50 mV s−1; electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NPF6–acetonitrile, potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cyclic voltammogram of a thin film consisting of 18 P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) bilayers (NCs’ diameter 5.8 nm). (b) Three consecutive cyclic voltammograms registered for the same film. The vertex potentials are 0.75 V for the first scan and 1.5 V for the second and third scan. Scan rate 50 mV s−1; electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NBF4–acetonitrile, potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+.	 

 	Fig. 9  
UV-Vis-NIR spectra of a solid film of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) consisting of 10 bilayers (NCs diameter 5.8 nm), registered for increasing electrode potentials; electrolyte 0.1 M Bu4NPF6–acetonitrile; potential vs.Ag/0.1 M Ag+.	 

 	Fig. 10  
SEM image of a single bilayer of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT), deposited on a silicon substrate (left), binarization of the image used to determine the surface coverage (right).	 

 	Fig. 11  
I–V characteristics of a film constituted of 25 bilayers of P3HT-co-P3(ODAP)HT–CdSe(MHT) (dashed line: in the dark; solid line: under illumination).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2008
