The emergence of solar thermal utilization: solar-driven steam generation  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA01361B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01361B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7691-7709The emergence of solar thermal utilization: solar-driven steam generation

        
          
            Ziyang 
            Deng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianhua 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Miao
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chengyan 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Peng
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lixian 
            Sun
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Sakae 
            Tanemura
          
        
      ac
aGuangxi Key Laboratory of Information Material, Guangxi Collaborative Innovation Center of Structure and Property for New Energy and Materials, School of Material Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin, 541004, P. R. China. E-mail: miaolei@guet.edu.cn
bGraduate School of Engineering, Nagoya University Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan
cJapan Fine Ceramic Center, 2-4-1 Mutsuno, Atsuta-ku, Nagoya 456-8587, Japan
Received 
      13th February 2017
    , Accepted 25th March 2017First published on 25th March 2017AbstractSolar-driven steam generation not only has a long history of application demand, but is also a new research topic due to the progress in nano-material science. Conventional solar-driven steam generation suffers from low efficiency and high cost in practical applications. A new type of steam generation system based on plasmonic absorption of nano-materials with a good cost-efficiency balance has emerged in the last few years. For the first time, studies on various plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems are summarized and discussed in this review based on the types of materials used. Throughout this article, the basic concept, classification, mechanism and development of plasmonic solar-steam generation systems, as well as the factors that influence these novel systems, are clearly presented. This review provides unique insight into this rapidly developing field and sheds light on the potential of research into plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems.Ziyang DengZiyang Deng is now pursuing his Master's degree at Guilin University of Electronic Technology in China. He received his Bachelor's degree at Chongqing Jiaotong University in 2010. His main research interest lies in fabrication and photothermal application of plasmonic materials.Jianhua ZhouJianhua Zhou obtained his Ph.D. from Nanjing University of Aeronautics & Astronautics. He is now a research assistant at Guilin University of Electronic Technology in China. His research interests are in material development for energy conversion and utilization, spectrally solar selective absorbing coatings, and aerogels.Lei MiaoDr Lei Miao received a Ph.D. degree from Nagoya Institute of Technology (NITtech.), Japan. She became a professor in Guilin University of Electronic Technology after she worked in Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), where he was awarded CAS 100 talent program. Dr Miao won Science and Technology Award of Guangxi Provence of 2016, Guangdong Provence of 2013. She was ever appointed as a research associate professor in NITtech., a deputy research leader in Japan Fine Ceramics Centre during 2004-2008. Her current research focuses on synthesis, mechanism and application of energy conversion materials.Chengyan LiuDr Chengyan Liu received his Ph.D. from University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2013. He is now a research assistant at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Electronic Technology. His research focus is the synthesis and mechanism of thermoelectric materials, including chalcogenides and half-Heusler alloys.Ying PengYing Peng is now a Ph.D. student in materials science at Nagoya University. He received his B.Sc. in mechanical design manufacturing and automation from the Guilin University of Electronic Technology in 2004. During his studies, he earned an Engineering Diploma, the Student Development Awards and GuangXi Outstanding Graduates. In 2010, he got his M.Sc. in Electronic measurement and instruments at Guilin University of Electronic Technology. His research interests include the design, fabrication, and modeling of flexible thermoelectric devices.Lixian SunDr Li-Xian Sun became a Dean and Professor in the Guilin University of Electronic Technology in 2012 after he worked at the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), where he was granted an award under the CAS 100 talent program. He graduated from Hunan University with a BSc in 1984, an MSc in 1987 and a PhD in 1994. He received the Humboldt Foundation award from 1995 to 1996. He held NEDO, STA, and AIST fellowships at the National Institute of AIST Tsukuba Center (Japan) from 1996 to 2001. He is currently focusing on research into energy storage materials and thermochemistry mechanisms.
1. Introduction
Faced with the problems of environmental pollution and energy shortage, energy generation, conversion and utilization in a clean, low-cost, highly efficient way is an important issue for society. At present, it is critically essential for human beings to find other kinds of renewable energy, for instance, wind energy,1 solar energy,2,3 tidal energy,4 geothermal energy5,6 and so on, which can take the place of fossil energy, including coal and oil, as well as shale gas. Solar energy, a promising source of universal, green, clean and sustainable energy, has attracted intensive attention from related scientific and social communities.7 What is more, it has been widely employed in many applications, such as hydrogen production,8 power generation,9–14 photovoltaic cells,14–16 photocatalysis,17–19 water purification20 and water desalination.21
With the escalation of the population, fresh water has become an important topic for the sustainable development of human beings. Evaporation of water, the procedure of phase change, is a common natural phenomenon and plays a significant role in the biological world22 and industry23,24 for producing fresh water. In nature, evaporation or transpiration can help plants to adjust their body temperature to keep the temperature in a reasonable range, and it also contributes to mineral substance and water transportation. In addition, steam produced by evaporation is involved in most of the worldwide electricity generation.10–25
In industrial applications, steam can be obtained through two routes. The first route is heating bulk water for steam generation in a steam engine by burning coal or other biological residues, which causes environmental pollution. In the second route, which is known as solar-driven steam generation, water is warmed up to the boiling state by concentrating sunlight using a lot of optical devices, leading to high cost with low efficiency. Over the last few decades, many efforts have been made by scientists all over the world to exploit, develop and optimize solar-driven steam generation systems in a green and effective way. In recent years, a novel solar-driven steam generation system has been developed by scientists, provisionally named as a plasmonic solar-driven steam generation system (or PSSG system for simplicity), since plasmonic photothermal materials are applied in it. Due to the highly effective light-to-heat conversion of plasmonic photothermal materials, PSSG systems have great potential for application in the future.
In this review, the state-of-the-art and new types of solar-driven steam generation system are comparatively studied. First of all, the conventional solar-driven steam generation systems are briefly reviewed, in which the heating of bulk water by the collectors occurs in a boiler or in tubes. Then, we mainly discuss PSSG systems. The current achievements for various PSSG systems based on the types of materials used and the steam generation mechanism, as well as the efficiency calculations for these PSSG systems, are reviewed in detail. Next, some parameters that can influence the performance of PSSG systems are also proposed. Finally, this review is concluded with a discussion on the future prospects of PSSG systems.
2. Conventional solar-driven steam generation systems
Solar-driven steam generation is an important application of solar thermal utilization. So far, conventional solar-driven steam generation systems have mostly been used for electricity generation, and are also known as concentrating solar power (CSP) systems. After being reflected or concentrated by the collectors, the sunlight can be converted into thermal energy in the CSP system. After this, the thermal energy can be used to generate electrical power via a steam turbine that is applied to steam generation with different elevated temperatures or pressures. As shown in Fig. 1, four primary CSP systems are commercially available, including parabolic trough collectors (PTCs), solar power towers (SPTs), linear Fresnel reflectors (LFRs) and the parabolic dish system (PDS).26
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the four kinds of concentrating solar thermal power technology: (A) STP; (B) PTC; (C) LFR; (D) PDS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. © OECD/IEA 2010 Technology Roadmap: Concentrating Solar Power, IEA Publishing. Licence: http://www.iea.org/t%26c. 
The SPT system is made up of four different parts, containing an endotherm system, a heat exchanging system, a heat storage system, and a power generation system. The temperature of the system can reach a high value, therefore it is able to effectively convert heat into electricity and reduce the cost of thermal storage. In the PTC system, a metal tube is enveloped by a glass tube and the vacuum or air between the two tubes is used to reduce the heat transfer. The tubes are located in the focus line of the condensers and their temperature can reach as high as 400 °C. For LFR technology, the receivers and reflectors are fixed parts that can effectively reduce the cost of the whole system. However, the conversion efficiency is lower than that of the PTC and SPT systems. Differently, there are numerous reflected mirrors that bring the light to a common focus and a tracking system to track the sunlight for continuous electricity generation, so that sunlight can be absolutely absorbed in the PDS.
In the last few decades, to improve the photothermal performance of the CSP system, selective absorption coatings have been employed on the vacuum tube in the solar collectors, resulting in the enhancement of light absorption in the solar spectrum from visible light to the near infrared (NIR) region and a reduction of the thermal radiation loss in the far-infrared light region.27 However, the total conversion efficiency of these solar selective coatings is limited by the effectiveness of the process of heat transfer to the working fluid.28
Although the CSP system can be utilized for steam generation, it also suffers from some drawbacks. For instance, enormous investment of space for the reflecting mirrors is indispensable in the CSP system for plant installation, and thus it is inconvenient and not suitable for household use. In such a situation, developing a new, compact and highly cost-efficient solar-driven steam generation system is necessary.
3. Plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems
Over the past few years, a new type of solar-driven steam generation system, which applies plasmonic materials in the solar-driven steam generation system, has been developed. In PSSG systems, the plasmonic materials act as light-to-heat convertors and induce rapid water evaporation within just a few seconds upon illumination under different environmental conditions, which is faster than conventional solar-driven steam generation systems because of the fast energy release via electron relaxation.
3.1 Basic concept of plasmons
In solid-state physic, plasmonic oscillation is one of the results of interactions between light and matter. A material with a negative real and a small positive imaginary dielectric constant has the opportunity to exhibit collective plasmonic resonance. When irradiated by an electromagnetic wave, the free electrons collectively oscillate on the surface of the metal. Plasmons are a kind of quasi-particle, just like magnons and phonons, and plasmons are also a quantitative description of plasma oscillation.
As presented in Fig. 2, there are two plasmonic models: surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), which are also called propagating surface plasmons (PSPs), and localized surface plasmons (LSPs). In the former model, the plasmons are able to travel across the surface in the x–y plane of the metal–dielectric interface for tens or hundreds of microns and decay to a depth of about 200 nm. In the latter model, according to the Drude–Lorentz model in solid-state physics, conduction band electrons in the metal can be treated as free electrons, while positive ions are just located in fixed positions. Both of them have the same amount of charge in the metal, so they are called plasma as a whole. Due to the interaction between incident light and the free electrons in the metal nanoparticles, which are much smaller than the wavelength of the incident light, the displacement of electrons driven by the electromagnetic field and polarization take place in the volume of the metal nanoparticles. The net charges locating on the surface of the particles act as the restoring force leading to collective dipolar oscillation of electrons with a certain frequency, which is termed as the resonance frequency.29–31
 Fig. 2  Illustration of the two plasmonic models: (A) localized surface plasmons (LSPs); (B) surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs). Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Influence of the maximum absorption wavelength of the plasmonic materials
Thanks to the recent success in the fields of nanoscience and nanotechnology, nanostructures31–47 and integrated nanodevices48–50 can be fabricated and studied for practical applications more easily. At present, many physicists, chemists, biologists and material scientists have been attracted by the amazing and interesting properties of plasmonic materials, such as light scattering, light absorption, local field enhancement,51,52 and the dependence of the plasmon absorption maximum on the nature, size, shape, composition, and arrangement of the material and the surrounding dielectric environment.53 Light is absorbed and scattered by the plasmonic nanoparticles, which can be measured by ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy. After irradiation by the incident light, nonradiative decay in the nanoparticles will lead to photothermal conversion, which makes plasmonic nanoparticles an excellent material for simultaneous therapy and imaging.54–56 Because of the sensitivity of the resonance wavelength, plasmonic nanoparticles can also be used in the field of bio-sensing.57,58 At the same time, electron–hole separation driven by a local electromagnetic field enhancement causes the excitation of more electrons and holes contributing to catalytic reactions,59,60 and plasmonic nanoparticles are also effective for surface-enhanced Raman scattering.61,62
As mentioned above, the resonance wavelength is a complicated function of the nature, size and shape of the metal, and the surrounding dielectric environment. For example, the maximum absorption wavelength for Ag nanospheres is about 360 nm,63 while for Au nanospheres, the wavelength is red-shifted and is about 520 nm.64 The effect of size on the absorption wavelength is also obvious in Fig. 3. Gold nanoparticles have a larger size and the absorption wavelength is shifted toward a larger wavelength.65 At the same time, in anisotropic nanoparticles, the plasmon resonance band splits into several peaks because of the electron oscillation along different axes. For gold nanoparticles with a rod shape, there are two resonance bands. Basically, the wavelength of the shorter transverse axis is around 520 nm related to the maximum absorption of the Au nanospheres and the higher wavelength peak belongs to the longitudinal axis, which is sensitive to the aspect ratio (length/width) of the nanorods ranging from visible to NIR spectra.41,66 The different structures of the nanoparticles could result in different maximum absorption wavelengths. The absorption wavelength of the core–shell structure is strongly determined by the nature of the core and shell materials, and also the relative thickness of the core and the shell. By changing the thickness of the dielectric core and metallic shell, the optical resonance can be placed throughout the visible or infrared spectral regions. A dielectric core was introduced by Halas' group to manipulate the resonant wavelength of a core–shell structure.67 They theoretically calculated the optical properties of the core–shell material, which had an SiO2 core with a gold shell, and the metal core–shell structure was successfully fabricated concurrently. Core–shell structures enable the optical properties of plasmonic materials to be designed. Besides the nature, size, shape and structure of the materials, the surrounding dielectric medium also affects the resonant peak. Underwood et al. revealed that the refractive index of the solution had an influence on the color of gold colloids, corresponding to the maximum absorption wavelength of the nanoparticles.68
 Fig. 3  Size and structural effects on the maximum absorption wavelength of plasmonic materials. (A) Optical properties in solution of gold nanoparticles with diameters of 19 nm, 25 nm and 53 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2000, American Chemical Society. (B) Theoretically calculated optical resonances of metal core–shell structures (silica core, gold shell) with a range of core radius/shell thickness ratios. (C) Calculation of the optical resonance wavelength versus core radius/shell thickness ratio for metal core–shell structures (silica core, gold shell). Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 1998, Elsevier. 
In this review, we pay more attention to the photothermal properties of plasmonic materials. When the frequency of light matches the resonant frequency of the nanoparticles, optical absorption will strongly occur and the thermal energy will dissipate into the surrounding medium through nonradiative energy dissipation. Firstly, after absorbing the incoming light, a pulse of hot electrons will be created. The nonthermal electron distribution relaxes and the hot electron pulse is cooled rapidly via electron–electron scattering. Then, collision with the metal lattice leads to an increase in the temperature of the lattice through electron–photon coupling within several picoseconds. Finally, heat transfer from the lattice of nanoparticles to the surroundings occurs within 100 picoseconds via photon–photon interaction. The increase in the temperature of the nanoparticles mostly reaches thousands of Kelvin.64,69 This characteristic can be extensively utilized in cancer treatment, tumor therapy and bubble formation for surgery, and is also suitable for steam generation.
3.3 Classification of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems
As we mentioned above, the construction of conventional solar-driven steam generation systems requires a large amount of capital investment, including optical devices and land space. It is clear that further enhancement of the conversion efficiency is required to develop solar-driven steam generation systems. In recent years, PSSG systems have been proposed and successfully utilized in some experiments through the efforts of researchers, and PSSG is a promising technology because of its good cost-efficiency balance.
According to the location of the light-to-heat conversion materials in the liquid, PSSG systems can be classified into two categories (Fig. 4). The first kind is a suspending system where small particles are dispersed in a working fluid, which is widely known as a nanofluid.70–72 This is also called a volumetric system. The second one is a floating system, where a particle or composite assembly is floating on the surface of a working fluid. Similarly, this is also known as an interfacial system. Upon illumination, the plasmonic materials in the PSSG system absorb the incident light and convert the solar energy into thermal energy because of their photothermal properties. When the water directly contacts the plasmonic materials, thermal energy will rapidly transfer from the plasmonic materials to the water and steam generation occurs on the surface of the plasmonic material. However, there are still different mechanisms of steam generation for the different types of PSSG system.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems. (A) A suspending system; (B) a floating system. 
3.4 Steam generation mechanism and efficiency calculation of PSSG systems
At present, the steam generation process is still in dispute for suspending systems. Halas and co-workers suggested that steam generation occurred through the emergence of nanobubbles which moved to the liquid–gas interface to release the vapor due to their buoyancy.73–75 The lumped capacitance model and particle heat model established by Chen's group revealed that a global temperature rise in the fluid medium was a significant mechanism in steam generation.76 At the same time, Wen and co-workers claimed that steam generation resulted from local heating effects leading to the temperature of the water increasing up to the boiling point.77
However, for floating systems, the light-to-heat convertors are located at the liquid–gas interface. Under solar illumination, the sunlight is absorbed by the materials and then converted into heat leading to the appearance of a hot-zone on the surface of the material. After this, water is transported into the hot zone for steam generation through the capillary effect of the porous materials, and then vapor is released.
Before introducing the two kinds of PSSG system, we will focus on the efficiency of this system. Taking the floating PSSG system as an example, as shown in Fig. 5, solar energy is absorbed by the light-absorbing layer and this will be balanced by heat losses due to conduction, convection, thermal radiation and evaporation. Radiative heat loss will occur between the upper surface of the absorbing layer and the surrounding environment if the temperature of the absorber is higher than the ambient temperature. Solar energy loss via convection is caused by the upper and lower surface of the absorber. Thus, we should point out that the light-to-heat conversion efficiency of a PSSG system can be used to assess the performance of the system, and the efficiency has been defined by Chen et al.76 as the following equation (1)where ṁ is the mass flux, hLV denotes the latent heat of vaporization for water at 1 atm, Copt is the optical concentration and q denotes the nominal direct solar irradiation (1 kW m−2).
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the analysed physical evaporation system for the floating system. 
In 2011, plasmonic materials were applied in a solar-driven steam generation system by Wang et al.78 and experiments on both a floating and a suspending system were conducted. For the suspending system, the combination of the working fluid and the nanoparticles as a whole was regarded as a nanofluid. Nanofluids were first used as a direct absorption collector by Taylor et al.70,79–82 because of their excellent solar harvesting properties and high thermal conductivity. The suspending nanoparticles can obviously change the rheological and thermal properties of different kinds of working fluids. In Wang's work, floating Fe3O4/C particles were employed as the light-absorbing material and the performance of steam generation in this new type of PSSG system was better than that of conventional steam generation systems. Compared with the volumetric system, the floating PSSG system exhibited an increase in the water surface temperature and a higher water evaporation rate, when the sunlight was perpendicularly projected onto the plasmonic material. The steam generation rate of the floating system was 2.3 L m−2 h−1 for 5.5 h, which was faster than that of the dispersed Fe3O4/C system (only about 1.26 L m−2 h−1) at a sunlight intensity of 1355 W m−2 when about 115 g m−2 of Fe3O4/C was dispersed in 3.5% salt water. This was mainly because the water surface temperature increased in the interfacial system. The existence of Fe3O4 nanoparticles contributed to the retrieval of the plasmonic materials dispersed in the water, which made the composite suitable for industrial applications. Wang's work was the origin of the suspending system and the floating system for plasmonic materials for steam generation systems. In the following two sections, we review the up-to-date progress in the PSSG systems in recent years.
3.5 Suspending PSSG systems
Different kinds of plasmonic materials have been employed by scientists for steam generation, such as carbon-based materials, metal nanoparticles, heavily doped semiconductors and ceramics. Now, we look back at the improvement of suspending PSSG systems based on the types of plasmonic materials used.

3.5.1 Metallic plasmonic materials. 
Au/SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles with broadband absorption in the optical spectrum were introduced into a suspending PSSG system by Halas and co-workers.73,74 The solar steam generation performances of the Au/SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles and N115 carbon particles in ice water were comparatively studied. In the experiment, the gold core–shell structure showed a faster steam generation rate and a higher water temperature due to the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect and the high thermal conductivity of the metallic nanoparticles. Steam was generated in just a few seconds because of the high solar concentrations in both systems. Due to parasitic heat loss and the high optical concentration, only a 24% photothermal conversion efficiency at a solar concentration of 1000 kW m−2 was obtained. The PSSG system was utilized to distil a water–ethanol mixture. In the process of the non-equilibrium phase change, the ultimate distillate contained a higher percentage of ethanol than the predicted value in the water–ethanol azeotrope. Halas et al. also put forward two sterilization models for applications. The first one was a closed-loop system, which was so compact and flexible that it could be used for medical sterilization in remote regimes. The second one was a stand-alone open-loop system for human or animal waste sterilization (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Temperature evolution of solar steam generation. (A) Temperature vs. time for water containing dispersed Au core–shell structures ((i) liquid; (ii) vapor) and water without nanoparticles ((iii) liquid; (iv) vapor) under solar exposure (the Au nanoparticle concentration was sufficient to produce an optical density of unity). (B) Photograph of the system used to determine the temperature evolution of solar steam generation: (a) transparent vessel isolated with a vacuum jacket to reduce thermal losses, (b) two thermocouples for sensing the solution and the steam temperature, (c) pressure sensor, and (d) 1/16-in nozzle. Reproduced from ref. 74. This article was published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The influence of different sizes of gold nanoparticles with diameters of 10 nm, 50 nm and 100 nm in a PSSG system was discussed by Deng and co-workers.83 The 10 nm gold nanoparticles exhibited a better performance than the other ones, because they were just absorption centers and not scattering centers. To reduce the usage of gold nanoparticles, 200 nm polystyrene nanoparticles were employed as the scattering centers and the system still had a high steam generation rate. The total efficiency of the PSSG system with a mixture of 10 nm gold nanoparticles and 200 nm polystyrene nanoparticles was about 58.9% under a 532 nm green laser with a power density of 35.36 W cm−2.


3.5.2 Carbon-based plasmonic materials. 
Compared to metallic plasmonic materials, carbon-based materials are cheap and also have excellent light-to-heat conversion properties, which can be widely used in our daily life. Thus, Chen's group conducted a comparative experiment between graphite carbon black, carbon black and graphene in a suspending solar-driven steam generation system.76 The graphite carbon black with only 0.5 wt% had the best performance under solar illumination of 10 kW m−2. The conversion efficiency of the graphite carbon black was 57% and 69% with and without consideration of the optical loss. The transient experiment, in the performance of the evaporation test, revealed that the system could rapidly respond to a change in the solar illumination angle (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the experimental steam generation system and micrographs of graphitized carbon black, carbon black and graphene nanoparticles. (A) Schematic of the solar vapor generation device. (B) Image of the nanofluid container showing the aerogel insulation, black nanofluid, and thermocouple feed through. Scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of (C) graphitized carbon black, (D) carbon black and (E) graphene nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Wu and co-workers developed a solar-driven steam generation system with reduced graphene oxide decorated with magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles.84 In a 3.5% NaCl solution, the conversion efficiency reached 70% for solar illumination of 1 kW m−2 and the steam generation rate was 1.12 L m−2 h−1. In real experiments, the light-absorbing materials produced fresh water, and could also be recycled by introducing an external electromagnetic field. In this article, it was indicated that the system could be utilized for the treatment of heavy metal pollution.


3.5.3 Ceramic plasmonic materials. 
Beyond metallic plasmonic materials and carbon-based materials, there are some alternative materials for solar steam generation. It was reported by Nagao et al. via theoretical and experimental studies of the Mie resonance that silicon nanoparticles are a kind of light-absorbing material.85 The extinction spectrum of the silicon nanoparticles was broad ranging from the ultraviolet (UV) to NIR region. In a comparative study of pure water and different concentrations of silicon suspension under a solar simulator at 0.8 kW m−2, it was found that 0.01 v% of silicon nanoparticles gave the highest steam generation rate with a conversion efficiency of about 55%, which was two times higher than the conversion efficiency of pure water. TiN is a commercialized solar thermal conversion coating material for solar heating of water but it has never been studied in a suspending system for solar-driven steam generation. Furthermore, in Nagao's work, it was also proposed that titanium nitride was a new type of photothermal material.86 TiN nanoparticles exhibited better performance in steam generation in a comparative study of TiN, carbon and gold suspensions due to its lossy plasmonic resonance, which was in agreement with theoretical calculations. In addition to TiN nanoparticles, Nagao's group has advised that carbides and borides are candidates for solar heating applications.


3.5.4 Composite materials. 
Rabinal et al. prepared a graphene–Ag composite through the reduction of graphene oxide and Ag+ simultaneously via sodium borohydride in a water bath for 5 h.87 The composite material had a broadband absorption in the solar spectrum, because of the coupling between the Ag nanoparticles and the reduced graphene oxide. Although the conversion efficiency of the photothermal composite was still low, because of the abundance and scalable mass production of carbon materials and silver, it is still effective for use in solar-driven steam generation for practical applications.
Ag/Au bimetallic hollow mesoporous plasmonic nanoshells were fabricated by Modestino et al. via a combination of nanomasking and incomplete galvanic replacement.88 (Fig. 8) The 5 nm hollow, mesoporous, plasmonic nanoshells had the highest conversion efficiency under solar simulator irradiation with a power density of 11 kW m−2. By considering the ratio of the total energy of vaporization produced by the nanoshells to the total energy they actually consumed, the conversion efficiency reached about 69% due to the multiple nucleation sites for steam generation. It was revealed that decreasing the shell thickness enhanced the optical absorption and the rate of steam generation. Meanwhile, the ligands of the outer surface boundary tuned the thermal conductivity of the nanoshells, so they also had an influence on the steam generation rate (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Schematic of the process of solar steam generation by bimetallic hollow mesoporous plasmonic nanoshells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 

3.6 Floating PSSG systems
As is mentioned above, for volumetric solar-driven steam generation systems, the bulk working liquid is heated up to the boiling point, which results in a low steam generation efficiency because of the heat loss via thermal radiation from the bulk water. Therefore, the integration of light-absorbing materials into a layer floating on the surface of the water can improve the conversion efficiency by localizing the heat to avoid parasitic heat loss to the water underneath. Similarly, we can also classify floating PSSG systems depending on the types of plasmonic materials.

3.6.1 Metallic plasmonic materials. 
Flexible thin-film black gold membranes were fabricated by Bae et al. via a bottom-up self-assembly approach, involving a combination of anodization, wet etching and sputtering methods.89 As a result, for the structure with three multilayers, the steam generation rate reached 0.67 kg m−2 h−1 for intensity of 1 kW m−2 and the conversion efficiency was in the range of 42–57% (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagrams and structure of a thin-film black gold membrane. (A) Schematic illustration of the method used to fabricate the black gold membranes by employing a pore-widening process starting from hexagonal AAO templates; (B and C) SEM images of the black gold membrane – (B) top view and (C) bird's eye view (52° tilted) – and the ordered hexagonal array of the AAO template (B, inset). Scale bars, 2 mm (B and C) and 500 nm (inset). (D and E) Optical photographs displaying the laser beam path reflected by (D) a silver mirror and (E) a black gold membrane; the inset of (E) is a photo of a membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
Inspired by biological systems, a self-assembly procedure was utilized by Deng and co-workers to create a 3 cm gold nanoparticle thin film with a wider absorption spectrum across the full visible region than the narrow band absorption of a gold suspension.90 The thin film was placed at the liquid–air interface to reduce the dissipation loss by heat convection. In the experiment, the steam generation rate was about 0.4 mg s−1 with a 523 nm laser at a power density of 10.18 W cm−2 after 10 min of illumination. On account of the heat loss by heat transfer to the underlying water, the efficiency of the system was only about 44%, but this is still more than twice as high as the efficiency of the gold suspension system. The long length of the nanobubbles travelling to the surface of the water showed that the Au film reached a steady state faster than the Au suspension (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Structure and absorption spectra of the Au film, and the steam generation experiment. (a) Schematic illustration of efficient evaporation of liquid assisted by a floating plasmonic film of gold nanoparticles self-assembled at the air–water interface. (b) A photograph of a floating film with a diameter >3 cm at the air–water interface. (c) SEM images of the self-assembled film of gold nanoparticles at low and high magnification. (d) Absorption spectra of the film of gold nanoparticles and an aqueous solution of gold nanoparticles. (e) Evaporation process monitored using a balance and an infrared radiation camera. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2014, Wiley. 
Due to energy dissipation via heat conduction to the non-evaporative portion of the working fluid and the poor mechanical stability of the Au film, the same group further fabricated a double-layer structure where an Au film acted as the light-to-heat convertor and airlaid paper was used as a supporting and adiabatic layer.91 Owing to the existence of the paper layer, high absorption of the incident light through multiscattering, the replenishment of the underlying water by capillary force within the paper and a large evaporation area for steam escape were realized. However, the paper also contributed to heat localization because of its lower thermal conductivity than that of water. After sunlight illumination for 15 min at a power density of 4.5 kW m−2, the steam generation rate was about 1.71 mg s−1 and the light-to-heat conversion efficiency reached 77.8%, while the conversion efficiency of the Au film without the underling paper was only 47.8%. It was reported that the paper-based gold film could also be used in solar desalination systems, exhibiting better performance than the commercial black aluminium foil.
Highly efficient, broadband plasmonic absorbers were prepared by Zhu et al. through physical vapor deposition (PVD) of Au ions onto the surface of an anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) membrane.92 After the PVD process, a thin layer of gold nanoparticles was formed and some close-packed gold nanoparticles were condensed on the surface of the inner pores of the AAO membrane. The conversion efficiency of the self-assembled structure was about 90% after solar simulator illumination at a power density of 4 kW m−2, because of its high light absorption, plasmonic hot spot-enabled local heating and porous structure for continuous steam generation (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Schematic, processes, and photographs of plasmonic absorbers. (A) Schematic of an ideal plasmonic absorber. (B) Self-assembly of gold nanoparticles on nanoporous templates to form plasmonic absorbers. (C) Digital camera images of a 1-inch-diameter bare nanoporous template sample and a 90 nm-thick Au/nanoporous template sample (observed from the template side). Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Singamaneni and co-workers integrated Au nanoparticles with biofoams to create plasmonic foams.93 These materials had multifunctional applications for sensing, actuation, energy harvesting and catalysis, and also triggered vapor release. In solar steam generation experiments, the conversion efficiency was conservatively about 76.3% without considering the reflection, surface radiation and chamber loss under the irradiation of an 808 nm laser at a power density of 5.1 W cm−2. They suggested that the high efficiency of the system was due to the following four factors: (1) the facile tunability of the LSPR wavelength; (2) the extremely high density of Au nanorods, which facilitates multiple light scattering and efficient light absorption; (3) the low thermal conductivity of the plasmonic aerogel in the wet state, which minimizes heat transfer from the plasmonic aerogel at the surface to the bulk water; and (4) the highly open porous network of the plasmonic aerogel, which enables rapid mass transport of water from the bulk body to the evaporative surface (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Plasmonic biofoams based on bacterial nanocellulose or reconstituted silkworm silk. (A) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication of plasmonic foams (the two photographs at the bottom right show the aerogel before and after the dense loading of Au nanorods). SEM images of (B) the cross-section of the bacterial nanocellulose aerogel showing the nonwoven three-dimensional network of cellulose nanofibrils with a highly open microporous structure (inset: the corresponding high magnification SEM image showing individual nanofibers), (C) the cross-section of the plasmonic aerogel depicting the preserved highly open porous structure, which ensured the accessibility of the plasmonic nanostructures and (D) the corresponding high-resolution image of the plasmonic aerogel cross-section revealing the dense and uniform adsorption of Au nanorods on the nanofibers of the aerogel (the inset shows individual fibers decorated with Au nanorods). (E) Extinction spectra of the Au nanorod solution and plasmonic aerogel comprising two distinct bands corresponding to the transverse (low wavelength) and longitudinal (high wavelength) LSPR. The extinction spectra depict the well-preserved ensemble optical properties of the nanostructures with no indication of aggregation. SEM images of silk-based plasmonic aerogels showing (F) the microcellular morphology with an open porous structure and (G and H) the corresponding higher-magnification images showing the uniform adsorption of Au nanorods on the silk surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Besides gold nanoparticles, Zhu's group further employed aluminium nanoparticles as the photothermal conversion material.94 Three-dimensional aluminium nanoparticles were self-assembled and deposited onto an AAO membrane via the PVD method. Almost all of the aluminium ions were deposited onto the surface of the AAO membrane; however, some of them penetrated into the inner channels of the AAO membrane to form close-packed aluminium nanoparticles. This aluminium-based plasmonic nanostructure had a broad spectral absorption because of the random size of the aluminium nanoparticles, a changing dielectric environment due to the oxidation of the aluminium nanoparticles, and reduced surface reflection and increased multi-scattering due to the porous structure of the AAO membrane. In experiments, the steam generation rate with the three-dimensional self-assembled aluminium nanoparticles reached about 5.7 kg m−2 h−1 and the photothermal conversion efficiency was 88.4% under illumination at 4 kW m−2 and 91% at 6 kW m−2, respectively. At the same time, this structure was useful for desalination of different kinds of metal ions.
Copper is also a candidate for photothermal materials because of its plasmonic properties. Cauliflower-shaped hierarchical surface nanostructures on a copper surface were fabricated by Zhong et al. using a femtosecond laser, and exhibited effective absorption in the solar spectrum ranging from the UV to NIR region.95 The copper material was placed at the bottom of the water. Upon illumination with a solar power density of 1 kW m−2, the conversion efficiency was about 62% better than that of the system employing a blue coating due to the effective absorption of the material. This copper nanostructure film could be widely used in industrial applications because of the easy femtosecond laser fabrication method (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  (A)–(D) Photographs, (E)–(H) SEM images, and (I)–(L) three-dimensional laser confocal microscopy images of the four kinds of micro–nanostructures fabricated on a Cu surface using a femtosecond laser. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For plasmonic materials, after absorbing photons, localized heat generation and near field enhancement will occur, both of which are sufficient for improving the catalytic efficiency of the chemical reaction. Deng et al. designed a bifunctional three-layer structure combining an AAO substrate, an Au film for photothermal conversion and TiO2 islands for photocatalysis.96 The AAO substrate was used as a supporting layer and a heat insulation layer. Steam generation could be achieved by the plasmonic Au film and the TiO2 nanoparticles gave rise to optical degradation of organic pollutants. The presence of the Au film not only caused steam generation, but at the same time also enhanced the photocatalysis because of its near-field enhancement and the Schottky junctions contributing to electron–hole separation. The combination of solar-driven steam generation and photocatalysis could utilize solar energy in a more effective way (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Bifunctional membrane consisting of an AAO substrate, an Au film for photothermal conversion and TiO2 isolated islands for photocatalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Similar to the AAO-based Au film–TiO2 composite, Deng's group also improved a fresh water generation system by replacing the AAO substrate with airlaid paper and the Au film with reduced graphene oxide. Due to its easy fabrication and low cost, this type of solar-driven steam generation system can be widely used in reality.97
In addition, SiO2/Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanocomposites, in which the TiO2 nanoparticles absorb high energy photons for photocatalytic hydrogen generation and the Ag nanoparticles absorb low energy photons for steam generation via photothermal effects, have been used for photocatalysis and solar steam generation.98 At the same time, the SiO2 nanoparticles act as a barrier to avoid heat dissipation and protect the Ag nanoparticles from oxidation. This nanostructure not only fully utilized the solar spectrum, but also generated green energy and freshwater simultaneously. The spatial confinement of the heat generated by the Ag core boosted the hydrogen generation by the photocatalytic water splitting effect of the TiO2 nanoparticles. A prototype reactor was also designed, in which the nanocomposite was placed in an insulated quartz tube. Sunlight was absorbed by the materials after being reflected by the parabolic trough concentrator. There were two outlets in the tubes. One was used for hydrogen release and the other one was used for condensing the steam. In outdoor experiments, the hydrogen generation rate was about 13.3 mmol g−1 h−1, while the freshwater production rate was approximately 2.2 L m−2 per day. The performance of the reactor suggested that this PSSG system offers synergistic capabilities of distillate production and clean fuel generation (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Schematic of the prototype reactor with graphs of time-dependent measurements. (A) Solar intensity and temperature, (B) hydrogen generation, and (C) volume of the condensate (top) and chlorine concentration (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.6.2 Carbon-based materials. 
After introducing a magnetic nanocomposite into a solar-driven steam generation system, Wang et al. utilized hollow carbon beads floating on the surface of water for steam generation, because of their lightweight, hydrophobic properties and photothermal conversion in the NIR region.99 In the case where 714 g m−2 of hollow carbon beads was used, the steam generation rate of the floating system reached 1.28 L m−2 h−1, which was around 237% times higher than that of pure water under 1 kW m−2 solar illumination. They also explored the effect of size on the steam generation. It was noted that if the amount of particles was large, small size hollow beads (1.5 mm in diameter) had a lower evaporation area for steam escape, so large size (3 mm in diameter) hollow beads were suitable for practical use. However, with a smaller amount of particles, the large size nanoparticles had a larger steam generation rate than the small size ones, due to the total effective area of the small particles being larger than that of the large particles.
A double-layer structure combining exfoliated graphite and carbon foam was employed by Chen et al. in a solar-driven steam generation system, which was favorable for reducing the heat conduction to the underlying water.100 They systematically studied the benefit of the existence of the insulating layer and came up with a formula to calculate the performance of the solar-driven steam generation system. The conversion efficiency of the double-layer system was elevated from 64% at 1 kW m−2 up to 85% at 10 kW m−2 (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Double-layer structure. (A) A representative structure for localization of heat; the cross section of the structure and the temperature distribution. (B) The double-layer structure that consists of carbon foam (10 mm thick) supporting an exfoliated graphite layer (5 mm thick). Both layers are hydrophilic to promote the capillary rise of water to the surface. (C) A picture of the enhanced steam generation by the double-layer structure under solar illumination of 10 kW m−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
Recently, in order to produce high pressure steam, Ghasemi's group developed an artificially-networked-structure with flexibility in a floating PSSG system.101 The components included polydimethylsiloxane and brine solution, exfoliated graphite and scarifying aluminium foam. In the solar steam generation experiment, the heat was localized at the top layer of the water and it was suggested that this novel structure could generate high pressure (525 kPa) and high temperature steam (100 to 156 °C) because of the excellent water transportation and low thermal conductivity properties of the three-dimensional artificial material under solar illumination of 50 kW m−1, which has promising prospects for application in industry (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Schematic diagram of an artificially-networked-structure and the steam generation experiment. (A) Schematic illustration of an artificially-networked-structure with flexibility for ambient/high pressure solar steam generation. (B) The components for the development of this structure and the final material structure are shown. The components include polydimethylsiloxane and brine solution, exfoliated graphite, and scarifying aluminium foam. (C) The bulk of the fluid is cold and the steam is generated at the surface of this structure at both ambient and high pressures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zhu and co-workers employed a graphene oxide film with excellent photothermal properties placed on a polystyrene foam with low thermal conductivity to avoid direct contact with the bulk and to suppress heat loss.102 Also a cellulose coating was wrapped over the foam and acted as a two-dimensional water transportation pathway via capillary force. Upon illumination at a power density of 1 kW m−1, a conversion efficiency of up to 80% was achieved without additional optical and thermal concentration (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagrams and a process flow chart. (A) Schematic diagram of conventional solar steam generation with direct water contact. (B) Schematic diagram of solar desalination devices with suppressed heat loss and a two-dimensional water supply. (C) Flowchart of the fabrication of the solar desalination devices: polystyrene foam, cellulose coating, and graphene oxide film on the top surface. (D) (Left) A physical map of the polystyrene foam (thermal insulator), (middle) cellulose (two-dimensional water path) wrapped over the surface of the polystyrene foam, and (right) graphene oxide film (absorber) on the top surface. Reproduced from ref. 102. This article was published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
Three-dimensional porous nitrogen-doped graphene, having excellent broadband absorption, low heat capacity, low heat conductivity and micrometer-sized pores, was used in an interfacial system.103 In the experiment, the steam generation rate was 1.50 kg m−2 h−1 for nitrogen-doped porous graphene annealed at a temperature of 950 °C with a 1–2 micrometer pore size under a solar intensity of 1 kW m−1 and the conversion efficiency was up to 80%. A temperature jump was also obvious for the graphene sample, which was grown at a chemical vapor deposition temperature of 950 °C, at the water–graphene interface. This was because bubbles were formed at the interface as thermal insulation, which did not allow vapor escape. The experimental result also revealed that a pore size in nanometers resulted in better performance than a pore size in micrometers because of the viscosity, which was dominant in water transportation.


3.6.3 Organic materials. 
An interfacial solar-driven steam generation system based on a polypyrrole (PPy) coating on stainless steel meshes with hydrophobic treatment by fluoroalkylsilane modification was developed by Wang's group.104 The organic material (PPy) acted as the photothermal material, while the stainless steel was the supporter. The hydrophobic modification contributed to the material floating on the surface of the water. Upon light illumination at 1 kW m−2, the steam generation rate was 0.92 kg m−2 h−1 for 2 h via 2.6 μm-thick PPy with 500 mesh. The conversion efficiency of the system was about 58%, which was higher than that of pure water. At the same time, the hydrophobic material was self-healing under light irradiation via self-migration of the fluoroalkylsilane, indicating that the membrane could be used in actual applications.


3.6.4 Semiconductor materials. 
Copper sulfide (Cu2−xS) is a new type of photothermal material. Wang and co-workers put forward a shape-controlling synthesis method to prepare different shapes of Cu7S4 nanocrystals.45 Because of its excellent absorption performance in the NIR region, a Cu7S4 nanocrystal film placed on the surface of water exhibited a 77.1% energy conversion efficiency under an infrared lamp for 15 min at a power density of 1.006 kW m−2.
In order to reduce the whole cost of the solar-driven steam generation system due to the existence of the optical concentration device, Chen's group designed a system containing three components: a commercial selective absorber coating on a copper dish with high solar absorbance and low thermal emissivity, polystyrene foam for heat insulation and transparent bubble wrap on the absorber for reduction of the convective heat loss.105 To obtain a high steam temperature without optical concentration, some evaporative slots, which were smaller than the absorbing area, were cut into the selective absorber for thermal concentration. Here, the thermal concentration was the ratio of the evaporation area to the solar absorption area. The channels in the body of the foam were filled with hydrophilic cotton for water transportation via capillary force. Also, some sheets of cotton fabric were also located above the wick to increase the evaporation area. Because of this special device structure, under 1 kW m−2 solar irradiation, a steam temperature of 100 °C could be achieved when the thermal concentration was about 200. In a laboratory experiment, they also found that at a higher thermal concentration, there was a higher steam temperature but a lower photothermal conversion efficiency due to reduction of the evaporation area. This one sun, ambient steam generation system was low cost and could be sufficient to give a high water evaporation rate or a high steam temperature by tailoring the evaporative slots in the absorber (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  One sun, ambient steam (OAS) generator. (A) The selective absorber consisting of commercially available cermet-coated copper substrate. (B) The insulation foam served to float the entire structure on a body of water, and limited the thermal conduction and radiation to the cold water underneath. The dark fabric in the center hides a fabric wick, which tunnels through the foam to the underlying water. The fabric draws water through the foam. The clear container surrounding the foam held water, and had a cap to prevent extraneous evaporation. (C) The three layers of the OAS, from top to bottom: bubble wrap, selective absorber and thermally insulating foam. (D) The evaporation slot, which revealed the dark fabric underneath. The fabric served to deliver water, but also increased the evaporation area. The inset showed where the evaporation slot was cut. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 


3.6.5 Composite materials. 
Recently, reduced a graphene oxide–sodium alginate–carbon nanotube aerogel with 92% absorption in the solar spectrum and low thermal conductivity was prepared by Zhu's group.106 The reduced graphene oxide–sodium alginate–carbon nanotube aerogel had the highest steam generation rate (1.622 kg m−2 h−1) among the samples under solar illumination at 1 kW m−2 for 1 h and the conversion efficiency achieved was 83%.

4. Factors influencing plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems
In the last few years, many related research studies have made efforts to study and develop solar-driven steam generation systems. From the photothermal conversion efficiency formula, a highly efficient system can generate a lot of steam by absorbing a small amount of solar energy in a short time.
Generally speaking, for floating systems, there are three dominant factors to make the system efficient. (1) Materials with optical broadband absorption and high photothermal properties. Materials exhibiting broadband absorption can capture more sunlight and then convert the sunlight into heat. (2) Heat management. In order to reduce heat loss from the absorber to the underlying water via heat conduction and convection, it is necessary to set an insulation layer between the absorber and the bulk water, so that the heat is localized in the material. At the same time, absorbers with low thermal emissivity can be applied to reduce the heat loss via thermal radiation. (3) Channels for water transportation and steam escape. For single-layer floating systems, the water is in direct contact with the absorber. However, for multilayer interfacial systems, due to the presence of an insulator between the conversion materials and the water, the water can't be transported to the hot zone directly. Therefore, a hydrophilic material is necessary for water transportation. The surface chemistry of a multilayer structure was also studied by Deng et al.107 They found that different kinds of wettability of the top surface didn't have an impact on steam generation. However, the surface chemistry of the bottom layer played an important role in steam generation. A hydrophilic bottom layer was superior to a hydrophobic one in terms of water transportation. Reasonably designing the thickness of the layers can reduce costs. Also, a large surface area contributes to steam escape.
For suspending systems, it's necessary for the materials to respond to broadband absorption in the solar spectrum. At the same time, it was reported that suspending systems, which have both small and large sizes of nanoparticles, can trap light efficiently.83 According to the Mie theory, light will be absolutely absorbed arising from the multiscattering through the nanoparticles whose diameters are comparable to the wavelength of the incident light. The concentration of the nanoparticles is also a key factor for the system. Under identical conditions of the power density of the incident light, if the concentration is low, the photothermal conversion efficiency will increase with an increase in the concentration. But if the concentration is more than the critical value, it will lead to the suspending system turning into a floating system, resulting from the light being confined in the upper layer of the nanofluids. A large concentration of the materials will also cause waste of resources and an increase in cost.
Each laboratory has a home-made steam generation system with its own conditions. However, different power densities of irradiation, different heights of the nanofluids and whether insulting materials surround the container or not, a different steam generation rate would be obatained. As we know, the rate of evaporation will get faster with an increase in the power density of the irradiation. High pressure and high temperature steam generation was obtained by Ghasemi and co-workers via high optical concentration. Nevertheless, it should be pointed out that a higher intensity of illumination may not lead to higher efficiency of the system.101 In the study conducted by Halas' group, the power density was about 1000 kW m−2 focused by a Fresnel lens and steam could be produced in an ice water mixture in 10 seconds, but the total conversion efficiency was just 24%.73 For suspending systems with different heights of the working fluids, the path length of the nanobubbles from their formation site to the liquid–air interface is quite different.73,74 With a long path length, the nanobubbles will waste more energy during transportation through the liquid, which will cause the collapse of the nanobubbles and an obviously longer time for steam generation. Insulating materials surrounding the container are used to avoid heat loss of the nanofluids in the volumetric system via convection and thermal radiation to the ambient environment. In addition, there are many kinds of standards and units to indicate the rate of steam generation. The efficiency reported in each study only represents the experimental result under specific conditions, and the results can't be compared with each other through a universal standard (Tables 1 and 2).
Table 1 Essential parameters for suspending solar-driven steam generation systems




Materials
Particle size
Light source
Power density
Time period
Mass loss or evaporation rate
Efficiency
Ref.




Fe3O4/C nanoparticles
500 nm
Solar simulator
1335 W m−2


1.26 L m−2 h−1


Wang et al.78


SiO2–Au core–shell structure
20 nm
Natural sunlight
1000 kW m−2




24%
Halas et al.73


Mixture of 10 nm gold nanoparticles and 200 nm polystyrene nanoparticles
100 nm
532 nm laser
35.36 W m−2




58.9%
Deng et al.83


Graphite carbon black


Solar simulator
10 kW m−2




69%
Chen et al.76


Fe3O4 and reduced graphene oxide composite
16 nm
Solar simulator
1 kW m−2


1.12 L m−2 h−1
70%
Wu et al.84


0.1 v% silicon nanoparticles
100 nm
Solar simulator
0.8 kW m−2
1200 s
150 mg
55%
Nagao et al.85


0.1 v% titanium nitride nanoparticles
30 nm
Solar simulator
0.8 kW m−2
1200 s
240 mg


Nagao et al.86


Graphene–Ag nanoparticles
50.4 ± 0.9 nm
Solar simulator








Rabinal et al.87


Ag/Au hollow mesoporous plasmonic nanoshells
209 ± 3.5 nm
Solar simulator
11 kW m−2
10 min
3.6 mg min−1
69%
Modestino et al.88




Table 2 Essential parameters for floating solar-driven steam generation systems




Materials
Particle size
Porosity
Pore size (diameter)
Surface chemistry
Light source
Power density
Time period
Mass loss or evaporation rate
Efficiency
Ref.




Fe3O4/C nanoparticles






Hydrophobic
Solar simulator
1335 W m−2
5.5 h
2.3 L m−2 h−1


Wang et al.78


Black gold membranes






Hydrophilic
Solar simulator
1 kW m−2


0.47 kg m−2 h−1
26%
Bae et al.89


Gold nanoparticle film
18 nm
40%




523 nm laser
10.18 W cm−2
10 min
0.4 mg s−1
44%
Deng et al.90


Paper-based gold film
17.4 ± 0.3 nm






Solar simulator
4.5 kW m−2
15 min
1.71 mg s−1
77.8%
Deng et al.91


Au–anodic aluminium oxide membrane
90 nm
59%
365 nm


Solar simulator
4 kW m−2
1 h
5.2 kg m−2 h−1
90%
Zhu et al.92


Au nanoparticle biofoams
13 nm
98%
20–100 nm


808 nm laser
5.1 W cm−2




76.3%
Singamaneni et al.93


Al–anodic aluminium oxide membrane




300 nm


Solar simulator
4 kW m−2
1 h
5.7 kg m−2 h−1
88.4%
Zhu et al.94


Cauliflower-shaped hierarchical copper nanostructures








Solar simulator
1 kW m−2
2 h


62%
Zhong et al.95


Hollow carbon beads
1.5 mm




Hydrophobic
Solar simulator
1 kW m−2
1 h
1.28 L m−2 h−1


Wang et al.99


Exfoliated graphite and carbon foam




300–600
Hydrophilic
Solar simulator
1 kW m−2
1 h
1.2 kg m−2 h−1
64%
Chen et al.100


Modified exfoliated graphite foam


53%
2–100 μm
Hydrophilic
Solar simulator








Ghasemi et al.101


Nitrogen-doped porous graphene




1–2 μm
Hydrophilic
Solar simulator
1 kW m−2
1 h
1.50 kg m−2 h−1
80%
Chen et al.103


Polypyrrole coating on stainless steel






Hydrophilic
Solar simulator
1 kW m−2
2 h
0.92 kg m−2 h−1
58%
Wang et al.104


Cu7S4 nanocrystal film








Infrared lamp
1.006 kW m−2
15 min
425.7 ± 8.8 mg
77.1%
Wang et al.45


Reduced graphene oxide–sodium alginate–carbon nanotube aerogel






Hydrophilic
Solar simulator
1 kW m−2
1 h
1.622 kg m−2 h−1
83%
Zhu et al.106




5. Conclusion and future prospects
In this review, we provide a comprehensive summary of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems. Remarkable progress has been made in the field of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation in the last few years. Compared to conventional solar-driven steam generation systems, these novel systems have great potential for future applications because of their low cost and high efficiency. In order to expand the application fields of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems, multifunctional systems can be developed not only for steam generation, but also for the degradation of organic compounds or the removal of heavy metal ions via synergistic effects.
At the same time, since the development of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems is still in its early stages, there are still some challenges and opportunities for scientists to improve and promote the performance of new types of system (Fig. 20). The major topics are summarized as follows:
 Fig. 20  Illustration of the classification, the physical processes affecting the conversion efficiency and the future prospects of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation. 
(1) In suspending PSSG systems, the nanoparticles should be recycled for reutilization under actual application conditions.
(2) Taking into account the heat loss pathways, heat loss via thermal radiation in floating PSSG systems is high for most photothermal materials, resulting in low efficiency, so it is necessary to employ convertors with low emissivity.
(3) Steam can also be regarded as a thermal storage material and the rational design of PSSG systems to collect large amounts of fresh water and thermal energy simultaneously is a big problem.
(4) Innovative and optimum structures in steam generation systems can achieve higher conversion efficiency with lower cost or multifunctional applications.
(5) The stability and low-cost synthesis of nanomaterials for mass production are obstacles for their practical application.
(6) The impacts of humidity and temperature on PSSG systems have not been studied. In daily life, a lower humidity and a higher temperature give rise to steam generation.
In the future, we believe that improvements in the performance and real applications of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems are on the near horizon.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51572049, 51602068) and Guangxi Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 2015GXNSFFA139002).
References
I. Okumus and A. Dinler, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 123, 362–371 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, J. Song, L. Pan, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Zou, W. Mi, X. Zhang and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 646–656 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. E. Vandenbosch and Z. Ma, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 494–502 CrossRef CAS .
C. Garrett and P. Cummins, J. Waterw. Port Coast. Ocean Eng., 2004, 130, 114–118 CrossRef .
I. B. Fridleifsson, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2001, 5, 299–312 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Fridleifsson, Geothermics, 2003, 32, 379–388 CrossRef .
C. A. Gueymard, Sol. Energy, 2004, 76, 423–453 CrossRef .
A. Steinfeld, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 603–615 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tina, S. Gagliano and S. Raiti, Sol. Energy, 2006, 80, 578–588 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Montes, A. Abánades and J. M. Martínez-Val, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 679–689 CrossRef .
D. Mills, Sol. Energy, 2004, 76, 19–31 CrossRef .
C. Li, M. Zhang, L. Miao, J. Zhou, Y. Kang, C. A. J. Fisher, K. Ohno, Y. Shen and H. Lin, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 86, 944–951 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, L. Miao, Y. Kang, S. Tanemura, C. A. J. Fisher, G. Xu, X. Chen and Z. Guang, Appl. Energy, 2013, 109, 51–59 CrossRef .
N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12631–12632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Axaopoulos and E. D. Fylladitakis, Energ. Build., 2013, 65, 488–496 CrossRef .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, 6271 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Yu and S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, A. Das, L. Bui, H. Zhou, D. P. Curran and M. Rueping, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1823–1829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bahnemann, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 445–459 CrossRef CAS .
J. Koschikowski, M. Wieghaus and M. Rommel, Desalination, 2003, 156, 295–304 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hammarlund, G. E. Nilsson, P. A. Oberg and G. Sedin, Acta Paediatr., 1980, 69, 385–392 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Tiwari, H. N. Singh and R. Tripathi, Sol. Energy, 2003, 75, 367–373 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Kabeel and S. A. El-Agouz, Desalination, 2011, 276, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mekhilef, R. Saidur and A. Safari, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1777–1790 CrossRef .

          A. International Energy, SourceOCDE Energie,  2010, vol. 2010, pp. 1–49 Search PubMed .

          C. E. Kennedy and H. Price, ASME 2005 International Solar Energy Conference,  2005, pp. 749–755 Search PubMed .
T. P. Otanicar, P. E. Phelan, R. S. Prasher, G. Rosengarten and R. A. Taylor, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2010, 2, 033102 CrossRef .
Y. N. Xia and N. J. Halas, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Rider, K. Ostrikov and S. A. Furman, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2012, 66, 63–65 CrossRef .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Haynes and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 5599–5611 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hashimoto, D. Werner and T. Uwada, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 28–54 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lin, M. Chang, H. Huang, C. Chen, R. Sun, B. Liao, Y. F. C. Chau, C. N. Hsiao, M. H. Shiao and F. G. Tseng, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 192, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, H. Yang, W. Wang, J. Li and H. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6068–6069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Carbone and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 449–493 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Cortie and A. M. McDonagh, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3713–3735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Nadagouda, T. F. Speth and R. S. Varma, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 469–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ghosh and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2373–2433 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ye, L. Jin, H. Caglayan, J. Chen, G. Xing, C. Zheng, V. Doan-Nguyen, Y. Kang, N. Engheta, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murry, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2804–2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Niu and G. Xu, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 586–605 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, P. Zhao and D. Astruc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2014, 53, 1756–1789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mori, P. Verma, R. Hayashi, K. Fuku and H. Yamashita, Chemistry, 2015, 21, 11885–11893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, C. Yan, Z. Xue, W. Yu, Y. Xie and T. Wang, Small, 2016, 12, 5320–5328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. G. Liu, W. Shen and S. Gurunathan, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2016, 17, 1534 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Nogami, J. Shi, H. Chen, G. Ma and S. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 081110 CrossRef .
I. J. Majoros, T. P. Thomas, C. B. Mehta and J. R. Baker, J. Med. Chem., 2005, 48, 5892–5899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Collin, A. Zettl, H. Bando, A. Thess and R. E. Smalley, Science, 1997, 278, 100–103 CrossRef .
P. Sharma, N. Kaushik, H. Kimura, Y. Saotome and A. Inoue, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 339–346 Search PubMed .
S. A. Maier and H. A. Atwater, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 011101 CrossRef .
M. K. Hedayati, F. Faupel and M. Elbahri, Materials, 2014, 7, 1221–1248 CrossRef .
L. M. Liz-Marzan, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 32–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Laser. Med. Sci., 2008, 23, 217–228 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Lee and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19220–19225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 41, 1578–1586 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Haes and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10596–10604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Chen, R. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Kim, K. M. Twaddle, L. M. Cermak, W. Jang, J. Yun and H. Byun, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 498, 20–29 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, T. Zhu and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1296–1304 RSC .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4212–4217 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Brown, D. G. Walter and M. J. Natan, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 306–313 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 409–453 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Oldenburg, R. D. Averitt, S. L. Westcott and N. J. Halas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 243–247 CrossRef CAS .
S. Underwood and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 3427–3430 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 257–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xuan and W. Roetzel, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2000, 43, 3701–3707 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mahian, A. Kianifar, S. A. Kalogirou, I. Pop and S. Wongwises, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2013, 57, 582–594 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Eggers and S. Kabelac, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2016, 106, 1114–1126 CrossRef CAS .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, C. Feronti, A. D. Neumann, A. Dong, K. Schell, B. Lu, E. Kim, M. Quinn, S. Thompson, N. Grady, P. Nordlander, M. Oden and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 11677–11681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fang, Y. Zhen, O. Neumann, A. Polman, F. J. Garcia de Abajo, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1736–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ni, N. Miljkovic, H. Ghasemi, X. Huang, S. V. Boriskina, C. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Xu, M. M. Rahman, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 290–301 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, G. Lin, L. Bai, A. Zeiny and D. Wen, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 397–406 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, J. Yao, B. A. Horri, K. Wang, Y. Wu, D. Li and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4074–4078 CAS .
R. A. Taylor, P. E. Phelan, T. P. Otanicar, C. A. Walker, M. Nguyen, S. Trimble and R. Prasher, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2011, 3, 1–8 Search PubMed .
R. A. Taylor, P. E. Phelan, T. P. Otanicar, R. Adrian and R. Prasher, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 225 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lee, P. E. Phelan, L. Dai, R. Prasher, A. Gunawan and R. A. Taylor, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 151908 CrossRef .
V. Khullar, H. Tyagi, P. E. Phelan, T. P. Otanicar, H. Singh and R. A. Taylor, J. Nanotechnol. Eng. Med., 2013, 3, 031003 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, H. Duan, S. Yu, Y. Zhang, J. He, X. Quan, P. Tao, W. Shang, J. Wu, C. Song and T. Deng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, G. Ou, N. Wang and H. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9194–9199 CAS .
S. Ishii, R. P. Sugavaneshwar, K. Chen, T. Dao and T. Nagao, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 640 CrossRef .
S. Ishii, R. P. Sugavaneshwar and T. Nagao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2343–2348 CAS .
B. Sharma and M. K. Rabinal, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 690, 57–62 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zielinski, J. W. Choi, T. L. Grange, M. Modestino, S. M. Hashemi, Y. Pu, S. Birkhold, J. A. Hubbell and D. Psaltis, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2159–2167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bae, G. Kang, S. K. Cho, W. Park, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Tao, Q. Shen, N. Yi, F. Zhang, Q. Liu, C. Song, D. Zhang, W. Shang and T. Deng, Small, 2014, 10, 3234–3239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2768–2774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, D. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Gan, Z. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 Search PubMed .
L. Tian, J. Luan, K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepalli, M. K. Gupta, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 609–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fan, H. Wu, M. Zhong, H. Zhang, B. Bai and G. Jin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14617–14624 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Lou, M. Ni, C. Song, J. Wu, N. P. Dasgupta, P. Tao, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 772–779 CAS .
J. Lou, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Zhao, C. Song, J. Wu, N. Dasgupta, W. Zhang, D. Zhang, P. Tao, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14628–14636 CAS .
M. Gao, P. K. N. Connor and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3151–3160 CAS .
Y. Zeng, K. Wang, J. Yao and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 116, 704–709 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CAS .
S. M. Sajadi, N. Farokhnia, P. Irajizad, M. Hasnain and H. Ghasemi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4700–4705 CAS .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, J. Han, T. Fujita, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4302–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16126 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604031 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, Y. Liu, X. Quan, P. Tao, W. Shang, J. Wu, C. Song and T. Deng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13600 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Ziyang Deng	Ziyang Deng is now pursuing his Master's degree at Guilin University of Electronic Technology in China. He received his Bachelor's degree at Chongqing Jiaotong University in 2010. His main research interest lies in fabrication and photothermal application of plasmonic materials.
Jianhua Zhou	Jianhua Zhou obtained his Ph.D. from Nanjing University of Aeronautics & Astronautics. He is now a research assistant at Guilin University of Electronic Technology in China. His research interests are in material development for energy conversion and utilization, spectrally solar selective absorbing coatings, and aerogels.
Lei Miao	Dr Lei Miao received a Ph.D. degree from Nagoya Institute of Technology (NITtech.), Japan. She became a professor in Guilin University of Electronic Technology after she worked in Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), where he was awarded CAS 100 talent program. Dr Miao won Science and Technology Award of Guangxi Provence of 2016, Guangdong Provence of 2013. She was ever appointed as a research associate professor in NITtech., a deputy research leader in Japan Fine Ceramics Centre during 2004-2008. Her current research focuses on synthesis, mechanism and application of energy conversion materials.
Chengyan Liu	Dr Chengyan Liu received his Ph.D. from University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2013. He is now a research assistant at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Electronic Technology. His research focus is the synthesis and mechanism of thermoelectric materials, including chalcogenides and half-Heusler alloys.
Ying Peng	Ying Peng is now a Ph.D. student in materials science at Nagoya University. He received his B.Sc. in mechanical design manufacturing and automation from the Guilin University of Electronic Technology in 2004. During his studies, he earned an Engineering Diploma, the Student Development Awards and GuangXi Outstanding Graduates. In 2010, he got his M.Sc. in Electronic measurement and instruments at Guilin University of Electronic Technology. His research interests include the design, fabrication, and modeling of flexible thermoelectric devices.
Lixian Sun	Dr Li-Xian Sun became a Dean and Professor in the Guilin University of Electronic Technology in 2012 after he worked at the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), where he was granted an award under the CAS 100 talent program. He graduated from Hunan University with a BSc in 1984, an MSc in 1987 and a PhD in 1994. He received the Humboldt Foundation award from 1995 to 1996. He held NEDO, STA, and AIST fellowships at the National Institute of AIST Tsukuba Center (Japan) from 1996 to 2001. He is currently focusing on research into energy storage materials and thermochemistry mechanisms.

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the four kinds of concentrating solar thermal power technology: (A) STP; (B) PTC; (C) LFR; (D) PDS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. © OECD/IEA 2010 Technology Roadmap: Concentrating Solar Power, IEA Publishing. Licence: http://www.iea.org/t%26c.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of the two plasmonic models: (A) localized surface plasmons (LSPs); (B) surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs). Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Size and structural effects on the maximum absorption wavelength of plasmonic materials. (A) Optical properties in solution of gold nanoparticles with diameters of 19 nm, 25 nm and 53 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2000, American Chemical Society. (B) Theoretically calculated optical resonances of metal core–shell structures (silica core, gold shell) with a range of core radius/shell thickness ratios. (C) Calculation of the optical resonance wavelength versus core radius/shell thickness ratio for metal core–shell structures (silica core, gold shell). Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 1998, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation systems. (A) A suspending system; (B) a floating system.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the analysed physical evaporation system for the floating system.	 

 	Fig. 6  Temperature evolution of solar steam generation. (A) Temperature vs. time for water containing dispersed Au core–shell structures ((i) liquid; (ii) vapor) and water without nanoparticles ((iii) liquid; (iv) vapor) under solar exposure (the Au nanoparticle concentration was sufficient to produce an optical density of unity). (B) Photograph of the system used to determine the temperature evolution of solar steam generation: (a) transparent vessel isolated with a vacuum jacket to reduce thermal losses, (b) two thermocouples for sensing the solution and the steam temperature, (c) pressure sensor, and (d) 1/16-in nozzle. Reproduced from ref. 74. This article was published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the experimental steam generation system and micrographs of graphitized carbon black, carbon black and graphene nanoparticles. (A) Schematic of the solar vapor generation device. (B) Image of the nanofluid container showing the aerogel insulation, black nanofluid, and thermocouple feed through. Scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of (C) graphitized carbon black, (D) carbon black and (E) graphene nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of the process of solar steam generation by bimetallic hollow mesoporous plasmonic nanoshells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagrams and structure of a thin-film black gold membrane. (A) Schematic illustration of the method used to fabricate the black gold membranes by employing a pore-widening process starting from hexagonal AAO templates; (B and C) SEM images of the black gold membrane – (B) top view and (C) bird's eye view (52° tilted) – and the ordered hexagonal array of the AAO template (B, inset). Scale bars, 2 mm (B and C) and 500 nm (inset). (D and E) Optical photographs displaying the laser beam path reflected by (D) a silver mirror and (E) a black gold membrane; the inset of (E) is a photo of a membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure and absorption spectra of the Au film, and the steam generation experiment. (a) Schematic illustration of efficient evaporation of liquid assisted by a floating plasmonic film of gold nanoparticles self-assembled at the air–water interface. (b) A photograph of a floating film with a diameter >3 cm at the air–water interface. (c) SEM images of the self-assembled film of gold nanoparticles at low and high magnification. (d) Absorption spectra of the film of gold nanoparticles and an aqueous solution of gold nanoparticles. (e) Evaporation process monitored using a balance and an infrared radiation camera. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2014, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic, processes, and photographs of plasmonic absorbers. (A) Schematic of an ideal plasmonic absorber. (B) Self-assembly of gold nanoparticles on nanoporous templates to form plasmonic absorbers. (C) Digital camera images of a 1-inch-diameter bare nanoporous template sample and a 90 nm-thick Au/nanoporous template sample (observed from the template side). Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 12  Plasmonic biofoams based on bacterial nanocellulose or reconstituted silkworm silk. (A) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication of plasmonic foams (the two photographs at the bottom right show the aerogel before and after the dense loading of Au nanorods). SEM images of (B) the cross-section of the bacterial nanocellulose aerogel showing the nonwoven three-dimensional network of cellulose nanofibrils with a highly open microporous structure (inset: the corresponding high magnification SEM image showing individual nanofibers), (C) the cross-section of the plasmonic aerogel depicting the preserved highly open porous structure, which ensured the accessibility of the plasmonic nanostructures and (D) the corresponding high-resolution image of the plasmonic aerogel cross-section revealing the dense and uniform adsorption of Au nanorods on the nanofibers of the aerogel (the inset shows individual fibers decorated with Au nanorods). (E) Extinction spectra of the Au nanorod solution and plasmonic aerogel comprising two distinct bands corresponding to the transverse (low wavelength) and longitudinal (high wavelength) LSPR. The extinction spectra depict the well-preserved ensemble optical properties of the nanostructures with no indication of aggregation. SEM images of silk-based plasmonic aerogels showing (F) the microcellular morphology with an open porous structure and (G and H) the corresponding higher-magnification images showing the uniform adsorption of Au nanorods on the silk surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A)–(D) Photographs, (E)–(H) SEM images, and (I)–(L) three-dimensional laser confocal microscopy images of the four kinds of micro–nanostructures fabricated on a Cu surface using a femtosecond laser. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Bifunctional membrane consisting of an AAO substrate, an Au film for photothermal conversion and TiO2 isolated islands for photocatalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of the prototype reactor with graphs of time-dependent measurements. (A) Solar intensity and temperature, (B) hydrogen generation, and (C) volume of the condensate (top) and chlorine concentration (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Double-layer structure. (A) A representative structure for localization of heat; the cross section of the structure and the temperature distribution. (B) The double-layer structure that consists of carbon foam (10 mm thick) supporting an exfoliated graphite layer (5 mm thick). Both layers are hydrophilic to promote the capillary rise of water to the surface. (C) A picture of the enhanced steam generation by the double-layer structure under solar illumination of 10 kW m−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic diagram of an artificially-networked-structure and the steam generation experiment. (A) Schematic illustration of an artificially-networked-structure with flexibility for ambient/high pressure solar steam generation. (B) The components for the development of this structure and the final material structure are shown. The components include polydimethylsiloxane and brine solution, exfoliated graphite, and scarifying aluminium foam. (C) The bulk of the fluid is cold and the steam is generated at the surface of this structure at both ambient and high pressures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagrams and a process flow chart. (A) Schematic diagram of conventional solar steam generation with direct water contact. (B) Schematic diagram of solar desalination devices with suppressed heat loss and a two-dimensional water supply. (C) Flowchart of the fabrication of the solar desalination devices: polystyrene foam, cellulose coating, and graphene oxide film on the top surface. (D) (Left) A physical map of the polystyrene foam (thermal insulator), (middle) cellulose (two-dimensional water path) wrapped over the surface of the polystyrene foam, and (right) graphene oxide film (absorber) on the top surface. Reproduced from ref. 102. This article was published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 19  One sun, ambient steam (OAS) generator. (A) The selective absorber consisting of commercially available cermet-coated copper substrate. (B) The insulation foam served to float the entire structure on a body of water, and limited the thermal conduction and radiation to the cold water underneath. The dark fabric in the center hides a fabric wick, which tunnels through the foam to the underlying water. The fabric draws water through the foam. The clear container surrounding the foam held water, and had a cap to prevent extraneous evaporation. (C) The three layers of the OAS, from top to bottom: bubble wrap, selective absorber and thermally insulating foam. (D) The evaporation slot, which revealed the dark fabric underneath. The fabric served to deliver water, but also increased the evaporation area. The inset showed where the evaporation slot was cut. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

Fe3O4/C nanoparticles	500 nm	Solar simulator	1335 W m−2	
	1.26 L m−2 h−1	
	Wang et al.78
SiO2–Au core–shell structure	20 nm	Natural sunlight	1000 kW m−2	
	
	24%	Halas et al.73
Mixture of 10 nm gold nanoparticles and 200 nm polystyrene nanoparticles	100 nm	532 nm laser	35.36 W m−2	
	
	58.9%	Deng et al.83
Graphite carbon black	
	Solar simulator	10 kW m−2	
	
	69%	Chen et al.76
Fe3O4 and reduced graphene oxide composite	16 nm	Solar simulator	1 kW m−2	
	1.12 L m−2 h−1	70%	Wu et al.84
0.1 v% silicon nanoparticles	100 nm	Solar simulator	0.8 kW m−2	1200 s	150 mg	55%	Nagao et al.85
0.1 v% titanium nitride nanoparticles	30 nm	Solar simulator	0.8 kW m−2	1200 s	240 mg	
	Nagao et al.86
Graphene–Ag nanoparticles	50.4 ± 0.9 nm	Solar simulator	
	
	
	
	Rabinal et al.87
Ag/Au hollow mesoporous plasmonic nanoshells	209 ± 3.5 nm	Solar simulator	11 kW m−2	10 min	3.6 mg min−1	69%	Modestino et al.88

Fe3O4/C nanoparticles	
	
	
	Hydrophobic	Solar simulator	1335 W m−2	5.5 h	2.3 L m−2 h−1	
	Wang et al.78
Black gold membranes	
	
	
	Hydrophilic	Solar simulator	1 kW m−2	
	0.47 kg m−2 h−1	26%	Bae et al.89
Gold nanoparticle film	18 nm	40%	
	
	523 nm laser	10.18 W cm−2	10 min	0.4 mg s−1	44%	Deng et al.90
Paper-based gold film	17.4 ± 0.3 nm	
	
	
	Solar simulator	4.5 kW m−2	15 min	1.71 mg s−1	77.8%	Deng et al.91
Au–anodic aluminium oxide membrane	90 nm	59%	365 nm	
	Solar simulator	4 kW m−2	1 h	5.2 kg m−2 h−1	90%	Zhu et al.92
Au nanoparticle biofoams	13 nm	98%	20–100 nm	
	808 nm laser	5.1 W cm−2	
	
	76.3%	Singamaneni et al.93
Al–anodic aluminium oxide membrane	
	
	300 nm	
	Solar simulator	4 kW m−2	1 h	5.7 kg m−2 h−1	88.4%	Zhu et al.94
Cauliflower-shaped hierarchical copper nanostructures	
	
	
	
	Solar simulator	1 kW m−2	2 h	
	62%	Zhong et al.95
Hollow carbon beads	1.5 mm	
	
	Hydrophobic	Solar simulator	1 kW m−2	1 h	1.28 L m−2 h−1	
	Wang et al.99
Exfoliated graphite and carbon foam	
	
	300–600	Hydrophilic	Solar simulator	1 kW m−2	1 h	1.2 kg m−2 h−1	64%	Chen et al.100
Modified exfoliated graphite foam	
	53%	2–100 μm	Hydrophilic	Solar simulator	
	
	
	
	Ghasemi et al.101
Nitrogen-doped porous graphene	
	
	1–2 μm	Hydrophilic	Solar simulator	1 kW m−2	1 h	1.50 kg m−2 h−1	80%	Chen et al.103
Polypyrrole coating on stainless steel	
	
	
	Hydrophilic	Solar simulator	1 kW m−2	2 h	0.92 kg m−2 h−1	58%	Wang et al.104
Cu7S4 nanocrystal film	
	
	
	
	Infrared lamp	1.006 kW m−2	15 min	425.7 ± 8.8 mg	77.1%	Wang et al.45
Reduced graphene oxide–sodium alginate–carbon nanotube aerogel	
	
	
	Hydrophilic	Solar simulator	1 kW m−2	1 h	1.622 kg m−2 h−1	83%	Zhu et al.106

 	Fig. 20  Illustration of the classification, the physical processes affecting the conversion efficiency and the future prospects of plasmonic solar-driven steam generation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
